---
reference_id: "DOI:10.1186/s13071-023-05861-7"
title: "The Pampa del Indio project: sustainable vector control and long-term declines in the prevalence and abundance of Triatoma infestans infected with Trypanosoma cruzi in the Argentine Chaco"
authors:
- Ricardo Esteban Gürtler
- Gustavo Fabián Enriquez
- María Sol Gaspe
- Natalia Paula Macchiaverna
- María del Pilar Fernández
- Lucía Inés Rodríguez-Planes
- Yael Mariana Provecho
- Marta Victoria Cardinal
journal: "Parasites &amp; Vectors"
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13071-023-05861-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Pampa del Indio project: sustainable vector control and long-term declines in the prevalence and abundance of Triatoma infestans infected with Trypanosoma cruzi in the Argentine Chaco
**Authors:** Ricardo Esteban Gürtler, Gustavo Fabián Enriquez, María Sol Gaspe, Natalia Paula Macchiaverna, María del Pilar Fernández, Lucía Inés Rodríguez-Planes, Yael Mariana Provecho, Marta Victoria Cardinal
**Journal:** Parasites &amp; Vectors (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13071-023-05861-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-023-05861-7)

## Content

Abstract
Background
The Gran Chaco region is a major hotspot of Chagas disease. We implemented a 9-year program aimed at suppressing house infestation with Triatoma infestans and stopping vector-borne transmission to creole and indigenous (Qom) residents across Pampa del Indio municipality (Argentine Chaco). The aim of the present study was to assess the intervention effects on parasite-based transmission indices and the spatial distribution of the parasite, and test whether house-level variations in triatomine infection with Trypanosoma cruzi declined postintervention and were influenced by household ethnicity, persistent infestation linked to pyrethroid resistance and other determinants of bug infection.

Methods
This longitudinal study assessed house infestation and bug infection with T. cruzi before and after spraying houses with pyrethroids and implemented systematic surveillance-and-response  measures across four operational areas over the period 2007–2016. Live triatomines were individually examined for infection by optical microscopy or kinetoplast DNA (kDNA)-PCR and declared to be infected with T. cruzi when assessed positive by either method.

Results
The prevalence of infection with T. cruzi was 19.4% among 6397 T. infestans examined. Infection ranged widely among the study areas (12.5–26.0%), household ethnicity (15.3–26.9%), bug ecotopes (1.8–27.2%) and developmental stages (5.9–27.6%), and decreased from 24.1% (baseline) to 0.9% (endpoint). Using random-intercept multiple logistic regression, the relative odds of bug infection strongly decreased as the intervention period progressed, and increased with baseline domestic infestation and bug stage and in Qom households. The abundance of infected bugs and the proportion of houses with ≥ 1 infected bug remained depressed postintervention and were more informative of area-wide risk status than the prevalence of bug infection. Global spatial analysis revealed sharp changes in the aggregation of bug infection after the attack phase. Baseline domestic infestation and baseline bug infection strongly predicted the future occurrence of bug infection, as did persistent domestic infestation in the area with multiple pyrethroid-resistant foci. Only 19% of houses had a baseline domestic infestation and 56% had ever had ≥ 1 infected bug.

Conclusions
Persistent bug infection postintervention was closely associated with persistent foci generated by pyrethroid resistance. Postintervention parasite-based indices closely agreed with human serosurveys at the study endpoint, suggesting transmission blockage. The program identified households and population subgroups for targeted interventions and opened new opportunities for risk prioritization and sustainable vector control and disease prevention.

Graphical abstract
