---
reference_id: "DOI:10.1186/s13071-024-06366-7"
title: Slow recovery rates and spatial aggregation of Triatoma infestans populations in an area with high pyrethroid resistance in the Argentine Chaco
authors:
- María Carla Cecere
- María Sol Gaspe
- Natalia Paula Macchiaverna
- Gustavo Fabián Enriquez
- Alejandra Alvedro
- Mariano Alberto Laiño
- Julián Antonio Alvarado-Otegui
- Marta Victoria Cardinal
- Ricardo Esteban Gürtler
journal: "Parasites &amp; Vectors"
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13071-024-06366-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Slow recovery rates and spatial aggregation of Triatoma infestans populations in an area with high pyrethroid resistance in the Argentine Chaco
**Authors:** María Carla Cecere, María Sol Gaspe, Natalia Paula Macchiaverna, Gustavo Fabián Enriquez, Alejandra Alvedro, Mariano Alberto Laiño, Julián Antonio Alvarado-Otegui, Marta Victoria Cardinal, Ricardo Esteban Gürtler
**Journal:** Parasites &amp; Vectors (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13071-024-06366-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-024-06366-7)

## Content

Abstract
Background
The emergence of pyrethroid resistance has threatened the elimination of Triatoma infestans from the Gran Chaco ecoregion. We investigated the status and spatial distribution of house infestation with T. infestans and its main determinants in Castelli, a municipality of the Argentine Chaco with record levels of triatomine pyrethroid resistance, persistent infestation over 2005–2014, and limited or no control actions over 2015–2020.

Methods
We conducted a 2-year longitudinal survey to assess triatomine infestation by timed manual searches in a well-defined rural section of Castelli including 14 villages and 234 inhabited houses in 2018 (baseline) and 2020, collected housing and sociodemographic data by on-site inspection and a tailored questionnaire, and synthetized these data into three indices generated by multiple correspondence analysis.

Results
The overall prevalence of house infestation in 2018 (33.8%) and 2020 (31.6%) virtually matched the historical estimates for the period 2005–2014 (33.7%) under recurrent pyrethroid sprays. While mean peridomestic infestation remained the same (26.4–26.7%) between 2018 and 2020, domestic infestation slightly decreased from 12.2 to 8.3%. Key triatomine habitats were storerooms, domiciles, kitchens, and structures occupied by chickens. Local spatial analysis showed significant aggregation of infestation and bug abundance in five villages, four of which had very high pyrethroid resistance approximately over 2010–2013, suggesting persistent infestations over space-time. House bug abundance within the hotspots consistently exceeded the estimates recorded in other villages. Multiple regression analysis revealed that the presence and relative abundance of T. infestans in domiciles were strongly and negatively associated with indices for household preventive practices (pesticide use) and housing quality. Questionnaire-derived information showed extensive use of pyrethroids associated with livestock raising and concomitant spillover treatment of dogs and (peri) domestic premises.

Conclusions
Triatoma infestans populations in an area with high pyrethroid resistance showed slow recovery and propagation rates despite limited or marginal control actions over a 5-year period. Consistent with these patterns, independent experiments confirmed the lower fitness of pyrethroid-resistant triatomines in Castelli compared with susceptible conspecifics. Targeting hotspots and pyrethroid-resistant foci with appropriate house modification measures and judicious application of alternative insecticides with adequate toxicity profiles are needed to suppress resistant triatomine populations and prevent their eventual regional spread.

Graphical Abstract
