---
reference_id: "GEO:GSE281593"
title: "Systems Biology-Based Assessment of Immune Responses to Whole Cell and Acellular Pertussis Vaccines: Rationale, Methodology and Enrollment Procedures for Omics Workflows"
content_type: summary
---

# Systems Biology-Based Assessment of Immune Responses to Whole Cell and Acellular Pertussis Vaccines: Rationale, Methodology and Enrollment Procedures for Omics Workflows

## Content

Given the local and systemic adverse reactions associated with whole cell pertussis vaccines combined with diphtheria and tetanus toxoids (DTP), acellular pertussis vaccines combined with the same toxoids (DTaP) were developed in the 1990s. In comparison to DTP, DTaP vaccines demonstrated reduced reactogenicity and equivalent or improved immunogenicity and efficacy. However, there has been a resurgence of pertussis disease, particularly in DTaP-vaccinated children, suggesting that immunity wanes more quickly with DTaP vaccination. To elucidate the differences in immune responses to DTP and DTaP vaccines, we employed a systems biology-based strategy to compare global changes in gene expression following primary vaccination with either DTP or DTaP. We used RNA-Seq and ribosome profiling (RP) to identify transcriptional and translational signatures, respectively, in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) collected from 50 infant recipients of DTP or DTaP at two time-points (baseline (pre-vaccination at Day 1) and either Day 2 or 8 post-vaccination). We also used standard serologic methods to assess immunogenicity and correlated these results with the transcriptional and translational signatures. Here, we provide a detailed description of the rationale, experimental design, methodology and enrollment procedures used. Given the technical complexity of our approach, our objective is to fill knowledge gaps, describe key quality metrics, and support future publications. In brief, we recovered 4-12 million PBMCs (average 8.9 million) with 99% viability per 2.5 mL blood sample, enabling excellent nucleic acid recovery yields for preparation of high-quality sequencing libraries. In turn, these generated RNA-Seq and RP datasets with sufficient genome coverage, breadth, and depth to enable differential gene expression analyses, demonstrating the validity of our approach to study pertussis vaccine immunology specifically, and its utility to characterize mechanisms of the human immune response to vaccination generally.