---
reference_id: "GEO:GSE277340"
title: Transcriptomic Profiling Reveals the Role of Hedgehog Signaling as a Biomarker and in the Pathogenesis of Ménétrier’s Disease
content_type: summary
---

# Transcriptomic Profiling Reveals the Role of Hedgehog Signaling as a Biomarker and in the Pathogenesis of Ménétrier’s Disease

## Content

Both Ménétrier’s disease (MD) and juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) are rare premalignant conditions that can lead to gastric cancer. MD is an acquired disease without known causative mutations that is characterized by increased expression of an EGF receptor (EGFR) ligand, transforming growth factor-alpha (TGFα), in the stomach. JPS is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is caused by BMPR1A or SMAD4 mutations. Although there are distinct clinico-pathological features that differ between the two diseases, they also share similar features that often lead to misdiagnosis. To identify diagnostic markers for MD and to better understand the pathogenesis of the disease, we performed transcriptomic profiling of stomach tissues from normal (NL), MD, and JPS patients. Comparative analysis between MD and JPS revealed both common and differential gene signatures. Common gene signatures included estrogen receptor signaling, integrin signaling, mTOR signaling, and others, which may be responsible for histopathological similarities. Among differential gene signatures, we found that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is upregulated in MD and confirmed that protein expression of Hh signaling downstream targets, GLI1 (glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1) and HHIP (Hedgehog-interacting protein), is higher in MD than in JPS, particularly in foveolar cells by immunohistochemistry. We also showed that treatment with an Hh pathway inhibitor partially rescued the histopathological phenotypes in an MD mouse model. This study provides valuable insights into the potential mechanisms underlying the similar clinico-pathological features observed in MD and JPS. We also identified GLI1 and HHIP as diagnostic markers that can help to distinguish MD from JPS. Furthermore, Hh signaling was shown to play an important role in the pathogenesis of MD and can function as a potential therapeutic target.