---
reference_id: "GEO:GSE140019"
title: Adaptation of pathogenic Leptospira to oxidative stress
content_type: summary
---

# Adaptation of pathogenic Leptospira to oxidative stress

## Content

Pathogenic Leptospira spp. are the causative agents of the zoonotic disease leptospirosis. During infection, Leptospira are confronted with deadly reactive oxygen species (ROS). Withstanding ROS produced by the host innate immunity is an important strategy evolved by pathogenic Leptospira for persisting in and colonizing hosts. The peroxide stress regulator, PerR, represses genes involved in ROS defenses in L. interrogans. We have performed RNA sequencing in WT and perR mutant strains to characterize the L. interrogans adaptive response to hydrogen peroxide. We showed that Leptospira solicit three main peroxidase machineries (catalase, cytochrome C peroxidase and peroxiredoxin) and heme to adapt to peroxide stress as well as canonical chaperones of the heat shock response, and DNA repair. Determining the PerR regulon allowed to identify the PerR-dependent mechanisms of the peroxide adaptive response and has revealed a regulatory network involving other transcriptional regulators, two-component systems and sigma factors as well as non-coding RNAs that putatively orchestrate, in concert with PerR, this adaptive response. Our findings provide comprehensive insight into the mechanisms required by pathogenic Leptospira to overcome infection-related oxidants. This will participate in framing future hypothesis-driven studies to identify and decipher novel virulence mechanisms.