---
reference_id: "PMID:34970513"
title: "Results From the WAGR Syndrome Patient Registry: Characterization of WAGR Spectrum and Recommendations for Care Management."
authors:
- Duffy KA
- Trout KL
- Gunckle JM
- Krantz SM
- Morris J
- Kalish JM
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.733018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Results From the WAGR Syndrome Patient Registry: Characterization of WAGR Spectrum and Recommendations for Care Management.
**Authors:** Duffy KA, Trout KL, Gunckle JM, Krantz SM, Morris J, Kalish JM
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2021.733018](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2021.733018)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Dec 14;9:733018. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.733018.
eCollection  2021.

Results From the WAGR Syndrome Patient Registry: Characterization of WAGR 
Spectrum and Recommendations for Care Management.

Duffy KA(1), Trout KL(2), Gunckle JM(2), Krantz SM(2), Morris J(2), Kalish 
JM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(2)International WAGR Syndrome Association, Montgomery Village, MD, United 
States.
(3)Department of Genetics and Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.

WAGR syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by Wilms tumor, Aniridia, 
Genitourinary anomalies, and Range of developmental delays. In addition to the 
classic features, patients affected by WAGR syndrome can develop obesity and 
kidney failure, and a wide variety of non-classical manifestations have also 
been described. This suggests that a broader phenotypic spectrum beyond the 
classic syndrome exists and here we demonstrate that spectrum using data from 
the WAGR Syndrome Patient Registry. In the present study, we collected 
information from 91 individuals enrolled in the registry to explore 
self-reported health issues in this patient population. A wide variety of common 
clinical issues not classically associated with the disorder were found, 
prompting the redefinition from WAGR syndrome to WAGR spectrum disorder to 
incorporate the phenotypic variations that occur. A comprehensive care 
management approach is needed to address the wide range of clinical issues and 
we propose a care model for patients affected by WAGR spectrum disorder. Further 
research is needed to solidify the breath of the phenotype and confirm the 
observations in this study to advance individualized patient care in this 
population.

Copyright © 2021 Duffy, Trout, Gunckle, Krantz, Morris and Kalish.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.733018
PMCID: PMC8712693
PMID: 34970513

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.