---
reference_id: "PMID:24268655"
title: Mutations in endothelin 1 cause recessive auriculocondylar syndrome and dominant isolated question-mark ears.
authors:
- Gordon CT
- Petit F
- Kroisel PM
- Jakobsen L
- Zechi-Ceide RM
- Oufadem M
- Bole-Feysot C
- Pruvost S
- Masson C
- Tores F
- Hieu T
- Nitschké P
- Lindholm P
- Pellerin P
- Guion-Almeida ML
- Kokitsu-Nakata NM
- Vendramini-Pittoli S
- Munnich A
- Lyonnet S
- Holder-Espinasse M
- Amiel J
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.023
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Ear/abnormalities
- "Ear Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Endothelin-1/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Sequence Alignment
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in endothelin 1 cause recessive auriculocondylar syndrome and dominant isolated question-mark ears.
**Authors:** Gordon CT, Petit F, Kroisel PM, Jakobsen L, Zechi-Ceide RM, Oufadem M, Bole-Feysot C, Pruvost S, Masson C, Tores F, Hieu T, Nitschké P, Lindholm P, Pellerin P, Guion-Almeida ML, Kokitsu-Nakata NM, Vendramini-Pittoli S, Munnich A, Lyonnet S, Holder-Espinasse M, Amiel J
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.023)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Dec 5;93(6):1118-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.023.
Epub  2013 Nov 21.

Mutations in endothelin 1 cause recessive auriculocondylar syndrome and dominant 
isolated question-mark ears.

Gordon CT(1), Petit F, Kroisel PM, Jakobsen L, Zechi-Ceide RM, Oufadem M, 
Bole-Feysot C, Pruvost S, Masson C, Tores F, Hieu T, Nitschké P, Lindholm P, 
Pellerin P, Guion-Almeida ML, Kokitsu-Nakata NM, Vendramini-Pittoli S, Munnich 
A, Lyonnet S, Holder-Espinasse M, Amiel J.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U781, Hôpital 
Necker - Enfants Malades, 75015 Paris, France; Université Paris Descartes - 
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, 75015 Paris, France. Electronic address: 
chris.gordon@inserm.fr.

Auriculocondylar syndrome (ACS) is a rare craniofacial disorder with mandibular 
hypoplasia and question-mark ears (QMEs) as major features. QMEs, consisting of 
a specific defect at the lobe-helix junction, can also occur as an isolated 
anomaly. Studies in animal models have indicated the essential role of 
endothelin 1 (EDN1) signaling through the endothelin receptor type A (EDNRA) in 
patterning the mandibular portion of the first pharyngeal arch. Mutations in the 
genes coding for phospholipase C, beta 4 (PLCB4) and guanine nucleotide binding 
protein (G protein), alpha inhibiting activity polypeptide 3 (GNAI3), predicted 
to function as signal transducers downstream of EDNRA, have recently been 
reported in ACS. By whole-exome sequencing (WES), we identified a homozygous 
substitution in a furin cleavage site of the EDN1 proprotein in ACS-affected 
siblings born to consanguineous parents. WES of two cases with vertical 
transmission of isolated QMEs revealed a stop mutation in EDN1 in one family and 
a missense substitution of a highly conserved residue in the mature EDN1 peptide 
in the other. Targeted sequencing of EDN1 in an ACS individual with related 
parents identified a fourth, homozygous mutation falling close to the site of 
cleavage by endothelin-converting enzyme. The different modes of inheritance 
suggest that the degree of residual EDN1 activity differs depending on the 
mutation. These findings provide further support for the hypothesis that ACS and 
QMEs are uniquely caused by disruption of the EDN1-EDNRA signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.023
PMCID: PMC3853412
PMID: 24268655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]