---
reference_id: "PMID:26586021"
title: "High exposure to inorganic arsenic by food: the need for risk reduction."
authors:
- Gundert-Remy U
- Damm G
- Foth H
- Freyberger A
- Gebel T
- Golka K
- Röhl C
- Schupp T
- Wollin KM
- Hengstler JG
journal: Arch Toxicol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00204-015-1627-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High exposure to inorganic arsenic by food: the need for risk reduction.
**Authors:** Gundert-Remy U, Damm G, Foth H, Freyberger A, Gebel T, Golka K, Röhl C, Schupp T, Wollin KM, Hengstler JG
**Journal:** Arch Toxicol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00204-015-1627-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-015-1627-1)

## Content

1. Arch Toxicol. 2015 Dec;89(12):2219-27. doi: 10.1007/s00204-015-1627-1. Epub
2015  Nov 19.

High exposure to inorganic arsenic by food: the need for risk reduction.

Gundert-Remy U(1), Damm G(2), Foth H(3), Freyberger A(4), Gebel T(5), Golka 
K(6), Röhl C(7), Schupp T(8), Wollin KM(9), Hengstler JG(10).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Charité, 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. ursula.gundert-remy@charite.de.
(2)Department for General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, Campus Virchow 
Clinic, Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute of Environmental Toxicology, University of Halle, Halle/Saale, 
Germany.
(4)Global Early Development - Toxicology, Bayer Pharma AG, Wuppertal, Germany.
(5)Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Dortmund, Germany.
(6)Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human, Factors (IfADo), 
University of Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany.
(7)Institute for Toxicology und Pharmacology, Christian-Albrechts-University 
Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(8)University of Applied Science, Muenster, Steinfurt, Germany.
(9)Lower Saxony Governmental Institute of Public Health, Hannover, Germany.
(10)Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human, Factors (IfADo), 
University of Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany. Graf@ifado.de.

Comment in
    Arch Toxicol. 2015 Dec;89(12):2455-7. doi: 10.1007/s00204-015-1640-4.

Arsenic is a human carcinogen that occurs ubiquitously in soil and water. Based 
on epidemiological studies, a benchmark dose (lower/higher bound estimate) 
between 0.3 and 8 μg/kg bw/day was estimated to cause a 1 % increased risk of 
lung, skin and bladder cancer. A recently published study by EFSA on dietary 
exposure to inorganic arsenic in the European population reported 95th 
percentiles (lower bound min to upper bound max) for different age groups in the 
same range as the benchmark dose. For toddlers, a highly exposed group, the 
highest values ranged between 0.61 and 2.09 µg arsenic/kg bw/day. For all other 
age classes, the margin of exposure is also small. This scenario calls for 
regulatory action to reduce arsenic exposure. One priority measure should be to 
reduce arsenic in food categories that contribute most to exposure. In the EFSA 
study the food categories 'milk and dairy products,' 'drinking water' and 'food 
for infants' represent major sources of inorganic arsenic for infants and also 
rice is an important source. Long-term strategies are required to reduce 
inorganic arsenic in these food groups. The reduced consumption of rice and rice 
products which has been recommended may be helpful for a minority of individuals 
consuming unusually high amounts of rice. However, it is only of limited value 
for the general European population, because the food categories 'grain-based 
processed products (non rice-based)' or 'milk and dairy products' contribute 
more to the exposure with inorganic arsenic than the food category 'rice.' A 
balanced regulatory activity focusing on the most relevant food categories is 
required. In conclusion, exposure to inorganic arsenic represents a risk to the 
health of the European population, particularly to young children. Regulatory 
measures to reduce exposure are urgently required.

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-015-1627-1
PMID: 26586021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]