---
reference_id: "PMID:37827512"
title: "Distinctive Amplitude-Integrated EEG Ictal Pattern and Targeted Therapy with Carbamazepine in KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 Neonatal Epilepsy: A Case Series."
authors:
- Vilan A
- Grangeia A
- Ribeiro JM
- Cilio MR
- de Vries LS
journal: Neuropediatrics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1055/a-2190-9521
keywords:
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Infant
- Pregnancy
- Female
- Humans
- Retrospective Studies
- Epilepsy
- Carbamazepine/therapeutic use
- "Seizures/drug therapy, genetics, diagnosis"
- Electroencephalography
- KCNQ2 Potassium Channel/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinctive Amplitude-Integrated EEG Ictal Pattern and Targeted Therapy with Carbamazepine in KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 Neonatal Epilepsy: A Case Series.
**Authors:** Vilan A, Grangeia A, Ribeiro JM, Cilio MR, de Vries LS
**Journal:** Neuropediatrics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-2190-9521](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2190-9521)

## Content

1. Neuropediatrics. 2024 Feb;55(1):32-41. doi: 10.1055/a-2190-9521. Epub 2023 Oct
 12.

Distinctive Amplitude-Integrated EEG Ictal Pattern and Targeted Therapy with 
Carbamazepine in KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 Neonatal Epilepsy: A Case Series.

Vilan A(1), Grangeia A(2), Ribeiro JM(3), Cilio MR(4), de Vries LS(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, Centro Hospitalar São João, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Department of Genetics, Centro Hospitalar São João, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(3)Laboratory of Clinical Neurophysiology, Department of Neurology, Centro 
Hospitalar Vila Nova de Gaia e Espinho, Porto, Portugal.
(4)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Catholic 
University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Department of Neonatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Carbamazepine (CBZ) is effective in treating KCNQ2/3-related 
seizures, which may present with a distinctive amplitude-integrated 
electroencephalography (aEEG) pattern.
OBJECTIVE: To assess how improved recognition of the distinctive aEEG ictal 
pattern associated with KCNQ2/3 variants has enabled early and effective 
targeted therapy with CBZ.
METHODS: Retrospective descriptive study of five neonates with KCNQ2/3 
pathogenic gene variants admitted at a level 3 neonatal intensive care unit 
(NICU) over an 8-year period.
RESULTS: The distinctive ictal aEEG pattern was recognized in four neonates 
after an average of 61.5 hours (minimum 12 hours, maximum 120 hours) from the 
first electroclinical seizure and prompted the use of CBZ that was effective in 
all. The two most recently diagnosed patients could avoid polytherapy as they 
received CBZ as the first and second antiseizure medication, respectively. Three 
out of five patients with continuous normal voltage (CNV), sleep-wake cycling 
(SWC), and shorter postictal suppression had normal neurodevelopmental outcome. 
Regarding the remaining two infants, one was not trialed with CBZ and had a high 
seizure burden, both presented with a prolonged postictal suppression, no SWC, 
and had moderate-to-severe developmental delay. Genetic results became available 
after the neonatal period in all but one of the infants, who had a prenatal 
diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Recognition of the distinctive ictal aEEG pattern in the NICU 
allowed early and effective targeted therapy with CBZ in four neonates, well 
before genetic results became available. Furthermore, a CNV background pattern 
with SWC and short postictal suppression were associated with normal 
developmental outcomes.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-2190-9521
PMID: 37827512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.