---
reference_id: "PMID:7874169"
title: A common mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 gene in Pfeiffer syndrome.
authors:
- Muenke M
- Schell U
- Hehr A
- Robin NH
- Losken HW
- Schinzel A
- Pulleyn LJ
- Rutland P
- Reardon W
- Malcolm S
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1038/ng1194-269
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A common mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 gene in Pfeiffer syndrome.
**Authors:** Muenke M, Schell U, Hehr A, Robin NH, Losken HW, Schinzel A, Pulleyn LJ, Rutland P, Reardon W, Malcolm S
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1194-269](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1194-269)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1994 Nov;8(3):269-74. doi: 10.1038/ng1194-269.

A common mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 gene in Pfeiffer 
syndrome.

Muenke M(1), Schell U, Hehr A, Robin NH, Losken HW, Schinzel A, Pulleyn LJ, 
Rutland P, Reardon W, Malcolm S, et al.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

Pfeiffer syndrome (PS) is one of the classic autosomal dominant craniosynostosis 
syndromes with craniofacial anomalies and characteristic broad thumbs and big 
toes. We have previously mapped one of the genes for PS to the centromeric 
region of chromosome 8 by linkage analysis. Here we present evidence that 
mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR1) gene, which maps to 
8p, cause one form of familial Pfeiffer syndrome. A C to G transversion in exon 
5, predicting a proline to arginine substitution in the putative extracellular 
domain, was identified in all affected members of five unrelated PS families but 
not in any unaffected individuals. FGFR1 therefore becomes the third fibroblast 
growth factor receptor to be associated with an autosomal dominant skeletal 
disorder.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1194-269
PMID: 7874169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]