---
reference_id: "PMID:30452922"
title: "Activation of Autophagy, Observed in Liver Tissues From Patients With Wilson Disease and From ATP7B-Deficient Animals, Protects Hepatocytes From Copper-Induced Apoptosis."
authors:
- Polishchuk EV
- Merolla A
- Lichtmannegger J
- Romano A
- Indrieri A
- Ilyechova EY
- Concilli M
- De Cegli R
- Crispino R
- Mariniello M
- Petruzzelli R
- Ranucci G
- Iorio R
- Pietrocola F
- Einer C
- Borchard S
- Zibert A
- Schmidt HH
- Di Schiavi E
- Puchkova LV
- Franco B
- Kroemer G
- Zischka H
- Polishchuk RS
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2018.11.032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activation of Autophagy, Observed in Liver Tissues From Patients With Wilson Disease and From ATP7B-Deficient Animals, Protects Hepatocytes From Copper-Induced Apoptosis.
**Authors:** Polishchuk EV, Merolla A, Lichtmannegger J, Romano A, Indrieri A, Ilyechova EY, Concilli M, De Cegli R, Crispino R, Mariniello M, Petruzzelli R, Ranucci G, Iorio R, Pietrocola F, Einer C, Borchard S, Zibert A, Schmidt HH, Di Schiavi E, Puchkova LV, Franco B, Kroemer G, Zischka H, Polishchuk RS
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2018.11.032](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2018.11.032)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2019 Mar;156(4):1173-1189.e5. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2018.11.032. Epub 2018 Nov 17.

Activation of Autophagy, Observed in Liver Tissues From Patients With Wilson 
Disease and From ATP7B-Deficient Animals, Protects Hepatocytes From 
Copper-Induced Apoptosis.

Polishchuk EV(1), Merolla A(2), Lichtmannegger J(3), Romano A(2), Indrieri A(4), 
Ilyechova EY(5), Concilli M(2), De Cegli R(2), Crispino R(2), Mariniello M(2), 
Petruzzelli R(2), Ranucci G(6), Iorio R(7), Pietrocola F(8), Einer C(3), 
Borchard S(3), Zibert A(9), Schmidt HH(9), Di Schiavi E(10), Puchkova LV(11), 
Franco B(4), Kroemer G(12), Zischka H(13), Polishchuk RS(14).

Author information:
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy; 
ITMO University, St. Petersburg, Russia; Institute of Biosciences and 
Bioresources CNR, Italy.
(2)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy.
(3)Institute of Molecular Toxicology and Pharmacology, Helmholtz Center Munich, 
German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.
(4)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy; 
Department of Translational Medical Science, "Federico II" University of Naples, 
Naples, Italy.
(5)ITMO University, St. Petersburg, Russia; Department of Molecular Genetics, 
Institute of Experimental Medicine, St. Petersburg, Russia.
(6)Division of Metabolism, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(7)Department of Translational Medical Science, "Federico II" University of 
Naples, Naples, Italy.
(8)Equipe 11 labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Centre de Recherche 
des Cordeliers, Paris, France; Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche 
Médicale, UMR1138, Equipe labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Paris, 
France; Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France; 
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France; Cell Biology and Metabolomics 
Platforms, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France.
(9)Klinik für Transplantationsmedizin, Universitätsklinikum Münster, Münster, 
Germany.
(10)Institute of Biosciences and Bioresources CNR, Italy.
(11)ITMO University, St. Petersburg, Russia.
(12)Equipe 11 labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Centre de Recherche 
des Cordeliers, Paris, France; Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche 
Médicale, UMR1138, Equipe labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Paris, 
France; Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France; 
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France; Cell Biology and Metabolomics 
Platforms, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France; Pôle de Biologie, 
Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris, France; Department of Women's 
and Children's Health, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(13)Institute of Molecular Toxicology and Pharmacology, Helmholtz Center Munich, 
German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany; Institute 
of Toxicology and Environmental Hygiene, Technical University Munich, Munich, 
Germany.
(14)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Naples, 
Italy. Electronic address: mpolish@tigem.it.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Wilson disease (WD) is an inherited disorder of copper 
metabolism that leads to copper accumulation and toxicity in the liver and 
brain. It is caused by mutations in the adenosine triphosphatase copper 
transporting β gene (ATP7B), which encodes a protein that transports copper from 
hepatocytes into the bile. We studied ATP7B-deficient cells and animals to 
identify strategies to decrease copper toxicity in patients with WD.
METHODS: We used RNA-seq to compare gene expression patterns between wild-type 
and ATP7B-knockout HepG2 cells exposed to copper. We collected blood and liver 
tissues from Atp7b-/- and Atp7b+/- (control) rats (LPP) and mice; some mice were 
given 5 daily injections of an autophagy inhibitor (spautin-1) or vehicle. We 
obtained liver biopsies from 2 patients with WD in Italy and liver tissues from 
patients without WD (control). Liver tissues were analyzed by 
immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence, cell viability, apoptosis assays, and 
electron and confocal microscopy. Proteins were knocked down in cell lines using 
small interfering RNAs. Levels of copper were measured in cell lysates, blood 
samples, liver homogenates, and subcellular fractions by spectroscopy.
RESULTS: After exposure to copper, ATP7B-knockout cells had significant 
increases in the expression of 103 genes that regulate autophagy (including 
MAP1LC3A, known as LC3) compared with wild-type cells. Electron and confocal 
microscopy visualized more autophagic structures in the cytoplasm of 
ATP7B-knockout cells than wild-type cells after copper exposure. Hepatocytes in 
liver tissues from patients with WD and from Atp7b-/- mice and rats (but not 
controls) had multiple autophagosomes. In ATP7B-knockout cells, mammalian target 
of rapamycin (mTOR) had decreased activity and was dissociated from lysosomes; 
this resulted in translocation of the mTOR substrate transcription factor EB to 
the nucleus and activation of autophagy-related genes. In wild-type HepG2 cells 
(but not ATP7B-knockout cells), exposure to copper and amino acids induced 
recruitment of mTOR to lysosomes. Pharmacologic inhibitors of autophagy or 
knockdown of autophagy proteins ATG7 and ATG13 induced and accelerated the death 
of ATP7B-knockout HepG2 cells compared with wild-type cells. Autophagy protected 
ATP7B-knockout cells from copper-induced death.
CONCLUSION: ATP7B-deficient hepatocytes, such as in those in patients with WD, 
activate autophagy in response to copper overload to prevent copper-induced 
apoptosis. Agents designed to activate this autophagic pathway might decrease 
copper toxicity in patients with WD.

Copyright © 2019 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2018.11.032
PMID: 30452922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]