---
reference_id: "PMID:35928164"
title: Homology-based reconstruction of regulatory networks for bacterial and archaeal genomes.
authors:
- Romero L
- Contreras-Riquelme S
- Lira M
- Martin AJM
- Perez-Rueda E
journal: Front Microbiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.923105
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homology-based reconstruction of regulatory networks for bacterial and archaeal genomes.
**Authors:** Romero L, Contreras-Riquelme S, Lira M, Martin AJM, Perez-Rueda E
**Journal:** Front Microbiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmicb.2022.923105](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.923105)

## Content

1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Jul 19;13:923105. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.923105. 
eCollection 2022.

Homology-based reconstruction of regulatory networks for bacterial and archaeal 
genomes.

Romero L(1), Contreras-Riquelme S(2), Lira M(3), Martin AJM(2), Perez-Rueda 
E(4).

Author information:
(1)Licenciatura en Ciencias Genomicas, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 
Cuernavaca, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Biología de Redes, Centro de Genómica y Bioinformática, 
Facultad Ciencias, Ingeniería y Tecnología, Universidad Mayor, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Cómputo Académico, Facultad de Ciencias - UMDI-Sisal, Sede Parque Científico 
y Tecnológico de Yucatán, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mérida, 
Mexico.
(4)Instituto de Investigaciones en Matemáticas Aplicadas y en Sistemas, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Unidad Académica Yucatán, Mérida, 
Mexico.

Gene regulation is a key process for all microorganisms, as it allows them to 
adapt to different environmental stimuli. However, despite the relevance of gene 
expression control, for only a handful of organisms is there related information 
about genome regulation. In this work, we inferred the gene regulatory networks 
(GRNs) of bacterial and archaeal genomes by comparisons with six organisms with 
well-known regulatory interactions. The references we used are: Escherichia coli 
K-12 MG1655, Bacillus subtilis 168, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa PAO1, Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar typhimurium LT2, 
and Staphylococcus aureus N315. To this end, the inferences were achieved in two 
steps. First, the six model organisms were contrasted in an all-vs-all 
comparison of known interactions based on Transcription Factor (TF)-Target Gene 
(TG) orthology relationships and Transcription Unit (TU) assignments. In the 
second step, we used a guilt-by-association approach to infer the GRNs for 
12,230 bacterial and 649 archaeal genomes based on TF-TG orthology relationships 
of the six bacterial models determined in the first step. Finally, we discuss 
examples to show the most relevant results obtained from these inferences. A web 
server with all the predicted GRNs is available at 
https://regulatorynetworks.unam.mx/ or http://132.247.46.6/.

Copyright © 2022 Romero, Contreras-Riquelme, Lira, Martin and Perez-Rueda.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.923105
PMCID: PMC9344073
PMID: 35928164

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.