---
reference_id: "PMID:17070814"
title: "Irritable bowel syndrome: a review on the role of intestinal protozoa and the importance of their detection and diagnosis."
authors:
- Stark D
- van Hal S
- Marriott D
- Ellis J
- Harkness J
journal: Int J Parasitol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2006.09.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Irritable bowel syndrome: a review on the role of intestinal protozoa and the importance of their detection and diagnosis.
**Authors:** Stark D, van Hal S, Marriott D, Ellis J, Harkness J
**Journal:** Int J Parasitol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijpara.2006.09.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpara.2006.09.009)

## Content

1. Int J Parasitol. 2007 Jan;37(1):11-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2006.09.009. Epub
 2006 Oct 12.

Irritable bowel syndrome: a review on the role of intestinal protozoa and the 
importance of their detection and diagnosis.

Stark D(1), van Hal S, Marriott D, Ellis J, Harkness J.

Author information:
(1)St. Vincent's Hospital, Department of Microbiology, Victoria St., 
Darlinghurst, NSW2010, Sydney, Australia. dstark@stvincents.com.au

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional gastrointestinal disorder in 
which abdominal pain is associated with a defect or a change in bowel habits. 
Gut inflammation is one of the proposed mechanisms of pathogenesis. Recent 
studies have described a possible role for protozoan parasites, such as 
Blastocystis hominis and Dientamoeba fragilis, in the etiology of IBS. 
Dientamoeba fragilis is known to cause IBS-like symptoms and has a propensity to 
cause chronic infections but its diagnosis relies on microscopy of stained 
smears, which many laboratories do not perform, thereby leading to the 
misdiagnosis of dientamoebiasis as IBS. The role of B. hominis as an etiological 
agent of IBS is inconclusive, due to contradictory reports and the controversial 
nature of B. hominis as a human pathogen. Although Entamoeba histolytica 
infections occur predominately in developing regions of the world, clinical 
diagnosis of amebiasis is often difficult because symptoms of patients with IBS 
may closely mimic those patients with non-dysenteric amoebic colitis. Clinical 
manifestations of Giardia intestinalis infection also vary from asymptomatic 
carriage to acute and chronic diarrhoea with abdominal pain. These IBS-like 
symptoms can be continuous, intermittent, sporadic or recurrent, sometimes 
lasting years without correct diagnosis. It is essential that all patients with 
IBS undergo routine parasitological investigations in order to rule out the 
presence of protozoan parasites as the causative agents of the clinical signs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2006.09.009
PMID: 17070814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]