---
reference_id: "PMID:26724878"
title: Reconstruction of Large Facial Defects after Delayed Mohs Surgery for Skin Cancer.
authors:
- Wollina U
journal: Acta Dermatovenerol Croat
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reconstruction of Large Facial Defects after Delayed Mohs Surgery for Skin Cancer.
**Authors:** Wollina U
**Journal:** Acta Dermatovenerol Croat (2015)

## Content

1. Acta Dermatovenerol Croat. 2015;23(4):265-9.

Reconstruction of Large Facial Defects after Delayed Mohs Surgery for Skin 
Cancer.

Wollina U(1).

Author information:
(1)Prof. Uwe Wollina, MD, Department of Dermatology and Allergology, 
Dresden-Friedrichstadt Academic Teaching Hospital, Friedrichstrasse 41, 01067 
Dresden, Germany; wollina-uw@khdf.de.

The face is a common localization for skin malignancies. Mohs surgery or delayed 
Mohs surgery are considered the gold standard of treatment despite new drug 
developments. We analyzed our patient files over a three-year period. Only large 
facial defects ≥3 cm in diameter after complete tumor removal were considered. 
Twenty patients (9 men and 11 women) were found, with a mean age of 83.6 years. 
The following tumor entities were responsible for large defects: basal and 
squamous cell carcinoma, melanoma, Merkel cell carcinoma, atypical 
fibroxanthoma, and cutaneous angiosarcoma. Surgery was performed in all cases 
using regional or local anesthesia. Defect repair was done using linear sutures 
(n=1), skin grafts (n=1), and flaps (n=18). The various types of repair are 
illustrated in this review, advantages and limitations of each type of repair 
are discussed. Patient satisfaction was high. Complications or adverse events 
were rare. The need for repair of large facial defects after tumor surgery is 
not uncommon. Careful planning and the use of a number of techniques allows a 
tailored approach for each patient.

PMID: 26724878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]