---
reference_id: "PMID:33467927"
title: "Monitoring hepatitis B by using point-of-care testing: biomarkers, current technologies, and perspectives."
authors:
- Rong X
- Ailing F
- Xiaodong L
- Jie H
- Min L
journal: Expert Rev Mol Diagn
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/14737159.2021.1876565
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monitoring hepatitis B by using point-of-care testing: biomarkers, current technologies, and perspectives.
**Authors:** Rong X, Ailing F, Xiaodong L, Jie H, Min L
**Journal:** Expert Rev Mol Diagn (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737159.2021.1876565](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737159.2021.1876565)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2021 Feb;21(2):195-211. doi: 
10.1080/14737159.2021.1876565. Epub 2021 Feb 8.

Monitoring hepatitis B by using point-of-care testing: biomarkers, current 
technologies, and perspectives.

Rong X(1), Ailing F(1), Xiaodong L(1), Jie H(2), Min L(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physics & Optoelectronics Technology, Baoji University of Arts 
and Sciences, Baoji, China.
(2)Suzhou DiYinAn Biotech Co., Ltd. & Suzhou Innovation Center for Life Science 
and Technology, Suzhou, China.
(3)The Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of 
Education, School of Life Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 
Xi'an, China.

Introduction: Liver diseases caused by hepatitis B virus (HBV) are pandemic 
infectious diseases that seriously endanger human health, conventional diagnosis 
methods can not meet the requirements in resource-limited areas. The point of 
acre detection methods can easily resolve those problems. Herein, we review the 
most recent advances in POC-based hepatitis B detection methods and present some 
recommendations for future development. It aims to provide ideas for future 
research.Areas covered: Epidemiological data on Hepatitis B, conventional 
diagnostic methods for hepatitis B detection, some latest point of care 
detection methods for hepatitis B detection and list out the recommendations for 
future development.Expert opinion: This manuscript summarized traditional 
biomarkers of different hepatitis B stages and recent-developed POCT platforms 
(including microfluidic platforms and lateral-flow strips) and discuss the 
challenges associated with their use. Some emerging biomarkers that can be used 
in hepatitis B diagnosis are also listed. This manuscript has certain guiding 
significance to the development of hepatitis B detection.

DOI: 10.1080/14737159.2021.1876565
PMID: 33467927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]