---
reference_id: "PMID:37512494"
title: Inborn Errors of Purine Salvage and Catabolism.
authors:
- Camici M
- Garcia-Gil M
- Allegrini S
- Pesi R
- Bernardini G
- Micheli V
- Tozzi MG
journal: Metabolites
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/metabo13070787
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inborn Errors of Purine Salvage and Catabolism.
**Authors:** Camici M, Garcia-Gil M, Allegrini S, Pesi R, Bernardini G, Micheli V, Tozzi MG
**Journal:** Metabolites (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/metabo13070787](https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo13070787)

## Content

1. Metabolites. 2023 Jun 24;13(7):787. doi: 10.3390/metabo13070787.

Inborn Errors of Purine Salvage and Catabolism.

Camici M(1), Garcia-Gil M(2)(3)(4), Allegrini S(1)(3)(4), Pesi R(1), Bernardini 
G(5), Micheli V(5)(6), Tozzi MG(1).

Author information:
(1)Unità di Biochimica, Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Pisa, Via San 
Zeno 51, 56127 Pisa, Italy.
(2)Unità di Fisiologia Generale, Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Pisa, 
Via San Zeno 31, 56127 Pisa, Italy.
(3)CISUP, Centro per l'Integrazione Della Strumentazione Dell'Università di 
Pisa, 56127 Pisa, Italy.
(4)Centro di Ricerca Interdipartimentale Nutrafood "Nutraceuticals and Food for 
Health", Università di Pisa, 56126 Pisa, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie, Chimica e Farmacia, Università di Siena, Via 
A. Moro 2, 53100 Siena, Italy.
(6)LND Famiglie Italiane ODV-Via Giovanetti 15-20, 16149 Genova, Italy.

Cellular purine nucleotides derive mainly from de novo synthesis or nucleic acid 
turnover and, only marginally, from dietary intake. They are subjected to 
catabolism, eventually forming uric acid in humans, while bases and nucleosides 
may be converted back to nucleotides through the salvage pathways. Inborn errors 
of the purine salvage pathway and catabolism have been described by several 
researchers and are usually referred to as rare diseases. Since purine compounds 
play a fundamental role, it is not surprising that their dysmetabolism is 
accompanied by devastating symptoms. Nevertheless, some of these manifestations 
are unexpected and, so far, have no explanation or therapy. Herein, we describe 
several known inborn errors of purine metabolism, highlighting their unexplained 
pathological aspects. Our intent is to offer new points of view on this topic 
and suggest diagnostic tools that may possibly indicate to clinicians that the 
inborn errors of purine metabolism may not be very rare diseases after all.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo13070787
PMCID: PMC10383617
PMID: 37512494

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.