---
reference_id: "PMID:40276561"
title: Disease profile in a cohort of Brazilian patients diagnosed with alpha-mannosidosis.
authors:
- Poswar FO
- Alves TS
- de Carvalho DR
- van der Linden H Jr
- Lourenço CM
- Horovitz DDG
- Barth A
- Mendes CSC
- Martins AM
- Giugliani R
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101220
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease profile in a cohort of Brazilian patients diagnosed with alpha-mannosidosis.
**Authors:** Poswar FO, Alves TS, de Carvalho DR, van der Linden H Jr, Lourenço CM, Horovitz DDG, Barth A, Mendes CSC, Martins AM, Giugliani R
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101220](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101220)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2025 Apr 11;43:101220. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101220.
eCollection 2025 Jun.

Disease profile in a cohort of Brazilian patients diagnosed with
alpha-mannosidosis.

Poswar FO(1)(2), Alves TS(1)(3), de Carvalho DR(4), van der Linden H Jr(5),
Lourenço CM(6), Horovitz DDG(7), Barth A(7), Mendes CSC(8), Martins AM(8),
Giugliani R(1)(2)(3)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Service, HCPA, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(2)Postgraduate Program in Genetics and Molecular Biology, UFRGS, Porto Alegre,
Brazil.
(3)Postgraduate Program in Child and Adolescent Health, UFRGS, Porto Alegre,
Brazil.
(4)Genetics Unit, SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasilia, Brazil.
(5)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Neurological Institute of Goiânia,
Goiânia, Brazil.
(6)Medical School, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil.
(7)Medical Genetics Center, Fernandes Figueira Institute, FIOCRUZ, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
(8)IGEIM, UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil.
(9)INAGEMP, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(10)Dasa Genômica, São Paulo, Brazil.
(11)Casa dos Raros, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

Alpha-mannosidosis (AM) is an ultrarare multisystemic disorder caused by
alpha-mannosidase deficiency. This is the first comprehensive report on AM in
Brazil, analyzing clinical and laboratory data from 14 patients diagnosed
between 2001 and 2021. We summarize the patient diagnostic journey in the
country, including the most common presenting symptoms, the time from disease
onset to diagnosis and discuss other disease manifestations. Our findings may
improve the disease awareness and understanding in the country.

© 2025 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101220
PMCID: PMC12018040
PMID: 40276561

Conflict of interest statement: None.
