---
reference_id: "PMID:21139063"
title: Predicting spontaneous clearance of acute hepatitis C virus in a large cohort of HIV-1-infected men.
authors:
- Thomson EC
- Fleming VM
- Main J
- Klenerman P
- Weber J
- Eliahoo J
- Smith J
- McClure MO
- Karayiannis P
journal: Gut
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1136/gut.2010.217166
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adult
- Alanine Transaminase/blood
- Bilirubin/blood
- CD4 Lymphocyte Count
- Disease Progression
- Epidemiologic Methods
- "HIV Infections/complications, transmission"
- HIV-1
- "Hepacivirus/classification, genetics, isolation & purification"
- "Hepatitis C/complications, immunology, transmission, virology"
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/immunology, virology"
- "Homosexuality, Male"
- Humans
- Male
- Phylogeny
- Prognosis
- "Remission, Spontaneous"
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Viral Load
- "Viremia/immunology, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predicting spontaneous clearance of acute hepatitis C virus in a large cohort of HIV-1-infected men.
**Authors:** Thomson EC, Fleming VM, Main J, Klenerman P, Weber J, Eliahoo J, Smith J, McClure MO, Karayiannis P
**Journal:** Gut (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gut.2010.217166](https://doi.org/10.1136/gut.2010.217166)

## Content

1. Gut. 2011 Jun;60(6):837-45. doi: 10.1136/gut.2010.217166. Epub 2010 Dec 7.

Predicting spontaneous clearance of acute hepatitis C virus in a large cohort of
HIV-1-infected men.

Thomson EC(1), Fleming VM, Main J, Klenerman P, Weber J, Eliahoo J, Smith J,
McClure MO, Karayiannis P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology, Wright-Fleming Institute, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, London, UK. e.thomson@imperial.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: An epidemic of acute hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in
HIV-positive men-who-have-sex-with-men (MSM) is emerging in Europe, Australia
and the USA. The aim of this study was to characterise the natural history of
primary HCV in this setting and to assess host and viral factors which predict
spontaneous clearance.
METHODS: This prospective longitudinal cohort study was carried out in 112
HIV-positive patients who were followed in a single centre (the St Mary's Acute
HCV Cohort). Plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were obtained
at monthly intervals for 3 months and at 3-monthly intervals thereafter for a
median of 45 months (IQR = 29-69 months). The primary end point was spontaneous
clearance of HCV. Cox regression was used to assess the impact of clinical and
virological variables on outcome, including liver function, CD4 count, rate of
HCV RNA decline, T cell response and clonal sequence evolution within the HCV E2
envelope gene.
RESULTS: 15% of patients cleared HCV spontaneously, while 85% progressed towards
chronicity. The latter group included a significant proportion of 'fluctuating'
progressors (37.5%), in whom a fall followed by a rise (>1 log₁₀) in viraemia
was observed. This was associated with superinfection with new HCV strains and
partially effective T cell responses. Spontaneous clearance was strongly
associated with a 2.2 log₁₀ viral load drop within 100 days of infection (HR =
1.78; p < 0.0001), elevated bilirubin (≥ 40 μmol/l; HR = 5.04; p = 0.006),
elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT; ≥ 1000 IU/ml; HR = 2.62; p = 0.048) and
baseline CD4 count ≥ 650 × 10⁶/l (HR = 2.66; p = 0.045), and only occurred in
patients with genotype 1 infection. Evolution to spontaneous clearance occurred
in patients with low viral diversity in the presence of an early multispecific T
cell response.
CONCLUSIONS: Spontaneous clearance of acute HCV in HIV-positive men can be
predicted by a rapid decline in viral load, high CD4 count, elevated bilirubin
and ALT, and is associated with low viral diversity and strong T cell responses.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.2010.217166
PMCID: PMC3095479
PMID: 21139063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.
