---
reference_id: "PMID:29931346"
title: "TNNT1 nemaline myopathy: natural history and therapeutic frontier."
authors:
- Fox MD
- Carson VJ
- Feng HZ
- Lawlor MW
- Gray JT
- Brigatti KW
- Jin JP
- Strauss KA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy233
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TNNT1 nemaline myopathy: natural history and therapeutic frontier.
**Authors:** Fox MD, Carson VJ, Feng HZ, Lawlor MW, Gray JT, Brigatti KW, Jin JP, Strauss KA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddy233](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddy233)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Sep 15;27(18):3272-3282. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy233.

TNNT1 nemaline myopathy: natural history and therapeutic frontier.

Fox MD(1)(2)(3), Carson VJ(1), Feng HZ(4), Lawlor MW(5), Gray JT(6), Brigatti 
KW(1), Jin JP(4), Strauss KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Special Children, Strasburg, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Diagnostic Referral Division, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, 
Wilmington, DE, USA.
(4)Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, 
MI, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Neuroscience Research 
Center, The Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(6)Audentes Therapeutics, San Francisco, CA, USA.

We describe the natural history of 'Amish' nemaline myopathy (ANM), an 
infantile-onset, lethal disease linked to a pathogenic c.505G>T nonsense 
mutation of TNNT1, which encodes the slow fiber isoform of troponin T (TNNT1; 
a.k.a. TnT). The TNNT1 c.505G>T allele has a carrier frequency of 6.5% within 
Old Order Amish settlements of North America. We collected natural history data 
for 106 ANM patients born between 1923 and 2017. Over the last two decades, mean 
age of molecular diagnosis was 16 ± 27 days. TNNT1 c.505G>T homozygotes were 
normal weight at birth but failed to thrive by age 9 months. Presenting neonatal 
signs were axial hypotonia, hip and shoulder stiffness, and tremors, followed by 
progressive muscle weakness, atrophy and contractures. Affected children 
developed thoracic rigidity, pectus carinatum and restrictive lung disease 
during infancy, and all succumbed to respiratory failure by 6 years of age 
(median survival 18 months, range 0.2-66 months). Muscle histology from two 
affected children showed marked fiber size variation owing to both Type 1 
myofiber smallness (hypotrophy) and Type 2 fiber hypertrophy, with evidence of 
nemaline rods, myofibrillar disarray and vacuolar pathology in both fiber types. 
The truncated slow TNNT1 (TnT) fragment (p.Glu180Ter) was undetectable in ANM 
muscle, reflecting its rapid proteolysis and clearance from sarcoplasm. Similar 
functional and histological phenotypes were observed in other human cohorts and 
two transgenic murine models (Tnnt1-/- and Tnnt1 c.505G>T). These findings have 
implications for emerging molecular therapies, including the suitably of TNNT1 
gene replacement for newborns with ANM or other TNNT1-associated myopathies.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy233
PMCID: PMC6121192
PMID: 29931346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]