---
reference_id: "PMID:38758383"
title: "Diagnosis, monitoring, and management of axial spondyloarthritis."
authors:
- Zimba O
- Kocyigit BF
- Korkosz M
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-024-05615-3
keywords:
- Humans
- "Axial Spondyloarthritis/therapy, diagnosis"
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/therapeutic use"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis, monitoring, and management of axial spondyloarthritis.
**Authors:** Zimba O, Kocyigit BF, Korkosz M
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-024-05615-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-024-05615-3)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2024 Aug;44(8):1395-1407. doi: 10.1007/s00296-024-05615-3. Epub
 2024 May 17.

Diagnosis, monitoring, and management of axial spondyloarthritis.

Zimba O(1)(2)(3), Kocyigit BF(4), Korkosz M(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Immunology and Internal Medicine, University 
Hospital in Krakow, Krakow, Poland.
(2)National Institute of Geriatrics, Rheumatology and Rehabilitation, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine N2, Danylo Halytsky Lviv National Medical 
University, Lviv, Ukraine.
(4)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Health 
Sciences, Adana City Research and Training Hospital, Adana, Türkiye.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Immunology and Internal Medicine, University 
Hospital in Krakow, Krakow, Poland. mariusz.korkosz@uj.edu.pl.
(6)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Jagiellonian University Medical 
College, Jakubowskiego 2 Str., 30-688, Kraków, Poland. 
mariusz.korkosz@uj.edu.pl.

Axial spondyloarthritis (axSpA) is a chronic condition predominantly affecting 
the spine and sacroiliac joints. This article provides an in-depth overview of 
the current approaches to diagnosing, monitoring, and managing axSpA, including 
insights into developing terminology and diagnostic difficulties. A substantial 
portion of the debate focuses on the challenging diagnostic procedure, noting 
the difficulty of detecting axSpA early, particularly before the appearance of 
radiologic structural changes. Despite normal laboratory parameters, more than 
half of axSpA patients experience symptoms. X-ray and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) are essential for evaluating structural damage and inflammation. MRI can 
be beneficial when there is no visible structural damage on X-ray as it can help 
unravel bone marrow edema (BME) as a sign of ongoing inflammation. The 
management covers both non-pharmacological and pharmacological approaches. 
Lifestyle modifications, physical activity, and patient education are essential 
components of the management. Pharmacological therapy, including nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and biologic disease-modifying anti-rheumatic 
drugs (bDMARDs), are explored, emphasizing individualized treatment. To 
effectively manage axSpA, a comprehensive and well-coordinated approach is 
necessary, emphasizing the significance of a multidisciplinary team. Telehealth 
applications play a growing role in axSpA management, notably in reducing 
diagnostic delays and facilitating remote monitoring. In conclusion, this 
article underlines diagnostic complexities and emphasizes the changing strategy 
of axSpA treatment. The nuanced understanding offered here is designed to guide 
clinicians, researchers, and healthcare providers toward a more comprehensive 
approach to axSpA diagnosis and care.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-024-05615-3
PMCID: PMC11222196
PMID: 38758383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conficts of interest.