---
reference_id: "PMID:34956216"
title: "Angioedema Without Wheals: Challenges in Laboratorial Diagnosis."
authors:
- Grumach AS
- Veronez CL
- Csuka D
- Farkas H
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.785736
keywords:
- "Angioedema/blood, diagnosis, immunology"
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/blood, diagnosis, genetics, immunology"
- "Biomarkers/blood, metabolism"
- "Bradykinin/blood, immunology, metabolism"
- "Complement C1 Inhibitor Protein/analysis, genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Diagnostic Errors/prevention & control"
- Dried Blood Spot Testing/methods
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Factor XII/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Plasminogen/genetics
- Recurrence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angioedema Without Wheals: Challenges in Laboratorial Diagnosis.
**Authors:** Grumach AS, Veronez CL, Csuka D, Farkas H
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.785736](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.785736)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 Dec 8;12:785736. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.785736.
eCollection  2021.

Angioedema Without Wheals: Challenges in Laboratorial Diagnosis.

Grumach AS(1), Veronez CL(2)(3), Csuka D(4), Farkas H(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Immunology, Faculdade de Medicina, Centro Universitario Faculdade de 
Medicina ABC (FMABC), Santo Andre, Brazil.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Department of Medicine, 
University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, United States.
(3)Research Service, San Diego Veterans Affairs Healthcare, San Diego, CA, 
United States.
(4)Hungarian Angioedema Center of Reference and Excellence, Department of 
Internal Medicine and Haematology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

Angioedema is a prevailing symptom in different diseases, frequently occurring 
in the presence of urticaria. Recurrent angioedema without urticaria (AE) can be 
hereditary (HAE) and acquired (AAE), and several subtypes can be distinguished, 
although clinical presentation is quite similar in some of them. They present 
with subcutaneous and mucosal swellings, affecting extremities, face, genitals, 
bowels, and upper airways. AE is commonly misdiagnosed due to restricted access 
and availability of appropriate laboratorial tests. HAE with C1 inhibitor defect 
is associated with quantitative and/or functional deficiency. Although 
bradykinin-mediated disease results mainly from disturbance in the 
kallikrein-kinin system, traditionally complement evaluation has been used for 
diagnosis. Diagnosis is established by nephelometry, turbidimetry, or radial 
immunodiffusion for quantitative measurement of C1 inhibitor, and chromogenic 
assay or ELISA has been used for functional C1-INH analysis. Wrong handling of 
the samples can lead to misdiagnosis and, consequently, mistaken inappropriate 
approaches. Dried blood spot (DBS) tests have been used for decades in newborn 
screening for certain metabolic diseases, and there has been growing interest in 
their use for other congenital conditions. Recently, DBS is now proposed as an 
efficient tool to diagnose HAE with C1 inhibitor deficiency, and its use would 
improve the access to outbound areas and family members. Regarding HAE with 
normal C1 inhibitor, complement assays' results are normal and the genetic 
sequencing of target genes, such as exon 9 of F12 and PLG, is the only available 
method. New methods to measure cleaved high-molecular-weight kininogen and 
activated plasma kallikrein have emerged as potential biochemical tests to 
identify bradykinin-mediated angioedema. Validated biomarkers of 
kallikrein-kinin system activation could be helpful in differentiating 
mechanisms of angioedema. Our aim is to focus on the capability to differentiate 
histaminergic AE from bradykinin-mediated AE. In addition, we will describe the 
challenges developing specific tests like direct bradykinin measurements. The 
need for quality tests to improve the diagnosis is well represented by the 
variability of results in functional assays.

Copyright © 2021 Grumach, Veronez, Csuka and Farkas.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.785736
PMCID: PMC8694242
PMID: 34956216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a 
past co-authorship with the author AG.