---
reference_id: "PMID:35728139"
title: "Surgical management of Graves' disease: historical context and single institution experience."
authors:
- Russell MJ
- Young S
- Martin R
- Harman R
journal: N Z Med J
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical management of Graves' disease: historical context and single institution experience.
**Authors:** Russell MJ, Young S, Martin R, Harman R
**Journal:** N Z Med J (2022)

## Content

1. N Z Med J. 2022 Feb 4;135(1549):43-49.

Surgical management of Graves' disease: historical context and single 
institution experience.

Russell MJ(1), Young S(2), Martin R(3), Harman R(4).

Author information:
(1)FRACS, Breast and Endocrine Surgery Fellow, Department of General Surgery, 
Waitematā DHB, Auckland.
(2)FRACP, Endocrinologist, Department of Medicine, Waitemata DHB, Auckland.
(3)FRACS, Cutaneous Surgical Oncologist, Head and Neck and General Surgeon, 
Department of General Surgery, Waitematā DHB, Auckland.
(4)FRACS, Breast, Endocrine, Laparoscopic and Melanoma Surgeon, Department of 
General Surgery, Waitematā DHB, Auckland.

AIM: To describe indications and outcomes of total thyroidectomy for Graves' 
disease in a large New Zealand endocrine surgery unit, and to compare these 
results to international studies.
METHODS: We analysed a prospectively collected database to describe the 
indications and outcomes of surgery for Graves' disease between December 2001 
and January 2021.
RESULTS: Among 64 patients who underwent total thyroidectomy at our tertiary 
centre for Graves' hyperthyroidism, Graves' ophthalmopathy and patient 
preference/aversion to radioactive iodine were the most common indications for 
surgery. Total thyroidectomy resulted in long-term control of thyrotoxicosis in 
all patients. There were no incidences of recurrent laryngeal nerve injury. One 
patient (1.6%) suffered permanent hypoparathyroidism.
CONCLUSION: Total thyroidectomy is a safe and effective treatment for Graves' 
disease. In our population, total thyroidectomy functions as a second-line 
treatment for Graves' disease.

PMID: 35728139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Nil.