---
reference_id: "PMID:23573386"
title: Molecular Analysis of a Case of Thanatophoric Dysplasia Reveals Two de novo FGFR3 Missense Mutations located in cis.
authors:
- Marquis-Nicholson R
- Aftimos S
- Love DR
journal: Sultan Qaboos Univ Med J
year: '2013'
doi: 10.12816/0003199
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Analysis of a Case of Thanatophoric Dysplasia Reveals Two de novo FGFR3 Missense Mutations located in cis.
**Authors:** Marquis-Nicholson R, Aftimos S, Love DR
**Journal:** Sultan Qaboos Univ Med J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.12816/0003199](https://doi.org/10.12816/0003199)

## Content

1. Sultan Qaboos Univ Med J. 2013 Feb;13(1):80-7. doi: 10.12816/0003199. Epub
2013  Feb 27.

Molecular Analysis of a Case of Thanatophoric Dysplasia Reveals Two de novo
FGFR3 Missense Mutations located in cis.

Marquis-Nicholson R(1), Aftimos S, Love DR.

Author information:
(1)Diagnostic Genetics, LabPLUS, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand;

OBJECTIVES: Thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) is the most common form of lethal
skeletal dysplasia. It is primarily an autosomal dominant disorder and is
characterised by macrocephaly, a narrow thorax, short ribs, brachydactyly, and
hypotonia. In addition to these core phenotypic features, TD type I involves
micromelia with bowed femurs, while TD type II is characterised by micromelia
with straight femurs and a moderate to severe clover-leaf deformity of the
skull. Mutations in the FGFR3 gene are responsible for all cases of TD reported
to date. The objective of the study here was to delineate further the mutational
spectrum responsible for TD.
METHODS: Conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR), allele-specific PCR, and
sequence analysis were used to identify FGFR3 gene mutations in a fetus with a
lethal skeletal dysplasia consistent with TD, which was detected during a
routine antenatal ultrasound examination.
RESULTS: In this report we describe the identification of two de novo missense
mutations in cis in the FGFR3 gene (p.Asn540Lys and p.Val555Met) in a fetus
displaying phenotypic features consistent with TD.
CONCLUSION: This is the second description of a case of TD occurring as a result
of double missense FGFR3 gene mutations, suggesting that the spectrum of
mutations involved in the pathogenesis of TD may be broader than previously
recognised.

DOI: 10.12816/0003199
PMCID: PMC3616804
PMID: 23573386
