---
reference_id: "PMID:34415995"
title: Single-cell imaging of T cell immunotherapy responses in vivo.
authors:
- Yan C
- Yang Q
- Zhang S
- Millar DG
- Alpert EJ
- Do D
- Veloso A
- Brunson DC
- Drapkin BJ
- Stanzione M
- Scarfò I
- Moore JC
- Iyer S
- Qin Q
- Wei Y
- McCarthy KM
- Rawls JF
- Dyson NJ
- Cobbold M
- Maus MV
- Langenau DM
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1084/jem.20210314
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- "Animals, Genetically Modified"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- ErbB Receptors/immunology
- Female
- Humans
- Immunotherapy/methods
- "Immunotherapy, Adoptive"
- Interleukin Receptor Common gamma Subunit/genetics
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred Strains"
- Phthalazines/pharmacology
- Piperazines/pharmacology
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/pathology, therapy"
- Single-Cell Analysis/methods
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Temozolomide/pharmacology
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays/methods
- Zebrafish/genetics
- Zebrafish Proteins/genetics
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell imaging of T cell immunotherapy responses in vivo.
**Authors:** Yan C, Yang Q, Zhang S, Millar DG, Alpert EJ, Do D, Veloso A, Brunson DC, Drapkin BJ, Stanzione M, Scarfò I, Moore JC, Iyer S, Qin Q, Wei Y, McCarthy KM, Rawls JF, Dyson NJ, Cobbold M, Maus MV, Langenau DM
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.20210314](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210314)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2021 Oct 4;218(10):e20210314. doi: 10.1084/jem.20210314. Epub 2021
Aug 20.

Single-cell imaging of T cell immunotherapy responses in vivo.

Yan C(1)(2)(3)(4), Yang Q(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhang S(2), Millar DG(2), Alpert
EJ(1)(2)(3)(4), Do D(1)(2)(3)(4), Veloso A(1)(2)(3)(4), Brunson DC(1)(2)(3)(4),
Drapkin BJ(2), Stanzione M(2), Scarfò I(2), Moore JC(1)(2)(3)(4), Iyer
S(1)(2)(3)(4), Qin Q(1)(2)(3)(4), Wei Y(1)(2)(3)(4), McCarthy KM(1)(2)(3)(4),
Rawls JF(5), Dyson NJ(2), Cobbold M(2)(6), Maus MV(2), Langenau DM(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pathology Unit, Massachusetts General Research Institute,
Charlestown, MA.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School,
Charlestown, MA.
(3)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.
(4)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, NC.
(6)Early Oncology R&D, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD.

T cell immunotherapies have revolutionized treatment for a subset of cancers.
Yet, a major hurdle has been the lack of facile and predicative preclinical
animal models that permit dynamic visualization of T cell immune responses at
single-cell resolution in vivo. Here, optically clear immunocompromised
zebrafish were engrafted with fluorescent-labeled human cancers along with
chimeric antigen receptor T (CAR T) cells, bispecific T cell engagers (BiTEs),
and antibody peptide epitope conjugates (APECs), allowing real-time single-cell
visualization of T cell-based immunotherapies in vivo. This work uncovered
important differences in the kinetics of T cell infiltration, tumor cell
engagement, and killing between these immunotherapies and established early
endpoint analysis to predict therapy responses. We also established
EGFR-targeted immunotherapies as a powerful approach to kill rhabdomyosarcoma
muscle cancers, providing strong preclinical rationale for assessing a wider
array of T cell immunotherapies in this disease.

© 2021 Yan et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20210314
PMCID: PMC8383813
PMID: 34415995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: D.G. Millar reported personal fees
from Revitope Inc. during the conduct of the study and personal fees from
Revitope Inc. outside the submitted work; in addition, D.G. Millar had a patent
to WO2012123755A1 licensed "Revitope Inc." and owns stock in Revitope Inc. B.J.
Drapkin reported personal fees from AstraZeneca outside the submitted work. M.
Cobbold reported "other" from Revitope Oncology outside the submitted work; in
addition, M. Cobbold had a patent to WO 2012/123755 issued "Revitope Oncology";
and is currently an employee of Astrazeneca. M.V. Maus is an inventor on patents
related to adoptive cell therapies, held by Massachusetts General Hospital and
University of Pennsylvania (some licensed to Novartis). M.V. Maus holds equity
in TCR2, Century Therapeutics, and Neximmune, and has served as a consultant for
multiple companies involved in cell therapies. In addition, M.V. Maus is a
consultant for Adaptimmune, Agenus, Allogene, Arcellx, Astellas, AstraZeneca,
Atara, Bayer, BMS, Cabaletta Bio (SAB), Cellectis (SAB), CRISPR therapeutics,
In8bio (SAB), Innovakine, Intellia, GSK, Kite Pharma, Micromedicine, Neximmune,
Novartis, TCR2 (SAB), Tmunity, Torque, and WindMIL (SAB); has grant/research
support from CRISPR therapeutics, Kite Pharma, Servier, and Novartis; is a
stockholder of Century Therapeutics, TCR2, and Ichnos; and is a member of board
of directors for Ichnos Sciences. D.M. Langenau reported a patent pending on use
of immune deficient zebrafish for xenograft transplantation studies. No other
disclosures were reported.
