---
reference_id: "PMID:37348676"
title: "46,XX aromatase deficiency: A single-center experience with the varied spectrum and recurrent variants, and a systematic review of hormonal parameters."
authors:
- Yami Channaiah C
- Memon SS
- Sarathi V
- Lila AR
- Barnabas R
- Raghav D
- Bhandare VV
- Arya S
- Thakkar H
- Patil VA
- Karlekar M
- Kunwar A
- Bandgar T
journal: Ann Endocrinol (Paris)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ando.2023.05.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 46,XX aromatase deficiency: A single-center experience with the varied spectrum and recurrent variants, and a systematic review of hormonal parameters.
**Authors:** Yami Channaiah C, Memon SS, Sarathi V, Lila AR, Barnabas R, Raghav D, Bhandare VV, Arya S, Thakkar H, Patil VA, Karlekar M, Kunwar A, Bandgar T
**Journal:** Ann Endocrinol (Paris) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ando.2023.05.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ando.2023.05.010)

## Content

1. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2024 Feb;85(1):48-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ando.2023.05.010.
 Epub 2023 Jun 20.

46,XX aromatase deficiency: A single-center experience with the varied spectrum 
and recurrent variants, and a systematic review of hormonal parameters.

Yami Channaiah C(1), Memon SS(1), Sarathi V(2), Lila AR(3), Barnabas R(1), 
Raghav D(4), Bhandare VV(5), Arya S(1), Thakkar H(6), Patil VA(1), Karlekar 
M(1), Kunwar A(4), Bandgar T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Seth GS Medical College and KEM Hospital, Parel, 
400012 Mumbai, India.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Vydehi Institute of Medical Sciences and 
Research Centre, 560066 Bengaluru, India.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Seth GS Medical College and KEM Hospital, Parel, 
400012 Mumbai, India. Electronic address: anuraglila@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay, Powai, Mumbai, India.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Shivaji University, Kholhapur, India.
(6)Department of Radiology, Seth GS Medical College and KEM Hospital, Parel, 
Mumbai, India.

BACKGROUND: Aromatase deficiency is a rare disorder, with only a few cases 
reported in India. We describe a single-center experience in western India, with 
a systematic review of genetically proven 46,XX aromatase deficiency patients to 
evaluate hormonal parameters.
METHODS: Retrospective review of case records, collating phenotypic and 
genotypic data and molecular modeling. Systematic review of 46,XX aromatase 
deficiency, analyzing data on gonadotropins, estrogen and androgens.
RESULTS: In the seven patients from our center, presentation was frequent in 
childhood or adolescence (4/7: delayed puberty or hyperandrogenism), with 
maternal virilization (4/7), predominance of Prader III/IV (5/7), and initial 
rearing as females (6/7). Three patients had hypoplastic ovaries. One patient 
had spontaneous regular menses. We report three novel (p.Arg115Pro, p.Arg192Pro, 
and c.145+1_145+4delins) and two recurrent variants (p.Val370Met, and 
c.145+1_145+4delins) in western and northern India, respectively. On systematic 
review (n=43), gonadotropins were elevated (FSH>LH) across ages (except preterm 
infants), androgens were elevated in about one-third of cases during childhood 
and puberty, and estradiol was lower than in controls in mini-puberty and 
puberty. Spontaneous thelarche and streak ovaries were significantly more 
frequent in patients with non-truncating and truncating variants, respectively.
CONCLUSION: We report uncommon presentations with possible founder variants, and 
highlight hormonal parameters across ages. Serum FSH levels were elevated except 
in preterms, and can be used as a diagnostic marker.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ando.2023.05.010
PMID: 37348676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]