---
reference_id: "PMID:20004040"
title: Are adenosquamous lung carcinomas a simple mix of adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas, or more complex at the molecular level?
authors:
- Bastide K
- Ugolin N
- Levalois C
- Bernaudin JF
- Chevillard S
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.11.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Are adenosquamous lung carcinomas a simple mix of adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas, or more complex at the molecular level?
**Authors:** Bastide K, Ugolin N, Levalois C, Bernaudin JF, Chevillard S
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.11.001)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2010 Apr;68(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.11.001. Epub 2009
 Dec 8.

Are adenosquamous lung carcinomas a simple mix of adenocarcinomas and squamous 
cell carcinomas, or more complex at the molecular level?

Bastide K(1), Ugolin N, Levalois C, Bernaudin JF, Chevillard S.

Author information:
(1)CEA, DSV, IRCM, SREIT, Laboratoire de Cancérologie Expérimentale, BP6, 
Fontenay-aux-Roses Cedex F-92265, France. kristell.bastide@cea.fr

Adenocarcinomas (AC), squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) and adenosquamous 
carcinomas (ASC) are three histological subtypes of non-small-cell lung 
carcinomas (NSCLC). ASC are morphologically mixed tumours that contain the two 
cell components AC and SCC. To understand if they are a "simple" mix of AC and 
SCC or if they present molecular specificities, as compared with the molecular 
characterization of both components, we performed a comparative transcriptome 
analysis on a series of nine ASC, five AC and five SCC induced in rats by radon 
exposure. We found that 72, 40 and 39 genes were differentially expressed when 
comparing AC_SCC, ASC_SCC and AC_ASC, respectively. Moreover, when classifying 
the three histological subtypes, using genes that discriminated AC and SCC, we 
observed that all ASC were classified as intermediate between the AC and SCC, 
some being closer to AC, others to SCC. These results indicated that, regarding 
gene expression, ASC could be considered as a mix of AC and SCC, both in various 
proportions. However, they also exhibit molecular specificities since we found 
specific genes discriminating ASC_SCC and AC_ASC. In conclusion, the ASC mixed 
lung tumours are more complex than simple mixes of AC and SCC components. 
Neuroendocrine differentiation and ERK proliferation pathways seemed 
preferentially deregulated in ASC compared to AC and SCC respectively, pathways 
that are worthy of being explored because they could partially explain the high 
clinical aggressiveness of ASC.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.11.001
PMID: 20004040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]