---
reference_id: "PMID:30504335"
title: "Inherited hemolytic anemia: a possessive beginner's guide."
authors:
- Mohandas N
journal: Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1182/asheducation-2018.1.377
keywords:
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Congenital/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Elliptocytosis, Hereditary/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Erythrocyte Membrane/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Hydrops Fetalis/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Risk Factors
- "Spherocytosis, Hereditary/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Thrombosis/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited hemolytic anemia: a possessive beginner's guide.
**Authors:** Mohandas N
**Journal:** Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1182/asheducation-2018.1.377](https://doi.org/10.1182/asheducation-2018.1.377)

## Content

1. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2018 Nov 30;2018(1):377-381. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2018.1.377.

Inherited hemolytic anemia: a possessive beginner's guide.

Mohandas N(1).

Author information:
(1)New York Blood Center, New York, NY.

Significant advances have been made in diagnosis and clinical management of
inherited red cell membrane disorders that result in hemolytic anemia. Membrane
structural defects lead to hereditary spherocytosis (HS) and hereditary
elliptocytosis (HE), whereas altered membrane transport function accounts for
hereditary xerocytosis (HX) and hereditary overhydrated stomatocytosis (OHS).
The degrees of membrane loss and resultant increases in cell sphericity
determine the severity of anemia in HS and HE, and splenectomy leads to
amelioration of anemia by increasing the circulatory red cell life span.
Alterations in cell volume as a result of disordered membrane cation
permeability account for reduced life span red cells in HX and OHS. Importantly,
splenectomy is not beneficial in these 2 membrane transport disorders and is not
recommended because it is ineffective and may lead to an increased risk of
life-threatening thrombosis. Rational approaches are now available for the
diagnosis and management of these inherited red cell disorders, and these will
be discussed in this review.

© 2018 by The American Society of Hematology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/asheducation-2018.1.377
PMCID: PMC6245988
PMID: 30504335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The author
declares no competing financial interests.
