---
reference_id: "PMID:29150902"
title: Wieacker-Wolff syndrome with associated cleft palate in a female case.
authors:
- Godfrey ND
- Dowlatshahi S
- Martin MM
- Rothkopf DM
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38527
keywords:
- "Apraxias/diagnosis, genetics"
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- "Cleft Palate/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Contracture/diagnosis, genetics"
- Facies
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/diagnosis, genetics"
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- "Muscular Atrophy/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins
- "Ophthalmoplegia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wieacker-Wolff syndrome with associated cleft palate in a female case.
**Authors:** Godfrey ND, Dowlatshahi S, Martin MM, Rothkopf DM
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38527](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38527)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Jan;176(1):167-170. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38527. Epub
2017  Nov 17.

Wieacker-Wolff syndrome with associated cleft palate in a female case.

Godfrey ND(1), Dowlatshahi S(1), Martin MM(2)(3), Rothkopf DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Plastic Surgery, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester, Massachusetts.
(2)Division of Genetics, University of Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester,
Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics, UC Davis Medical Center,
Sacramento, California.

Wieacker-Wolff syndrome is a rare congenital syndrome with few reported cases in
the current literature. It is traditionally described in males as an X-linked
recessive disorder associated with congenital contractures of the feet,
progressive neurologic muscular atrophy, and intellectual delay caused by ZC4H2
mutations. The purpose of this paper is to present a female individual with a
classic phenotype and cleft palate, a previously undescribed finding in this
syndrome. Recent reports have demonstrated that females are rarely severely
affected and phenotypic expression is difficult to predict [Zanzottera et al.
(); American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A 173A: 1358-1363]. This case
supports the unpredictability of Wieacker-Wolff syndrome severity and prompts
future questions regarding female mutations and phenotypic expression.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38527
PMID: 29150902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
