---
reference_id: "PMID:24830047"
title: Autosomal Dominant TRPV4-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- McCray BA
- Schindler A
- Hoover-Fong JE
- Sumner CJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal Dominant TRPV4-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, McCray BA, Schindler A, Hoover-Fong JE, Sumner CJ

## Content

1. Autosomal Dominant TRPV4-Related Disorders.

McCray BA(1), Schindler A(2), Hoover-Fong JE(3), Sumner CJ(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2014 May 15 [updated 2025 Dec 4].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan
(2)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Neurogenetics 
Branch, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(3)Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland
(4)Departments of Neurology, Neuroscience, and Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The autosomal dominant TRPV4-related disorders include 
two principal types: neuromuscular disorders and skeletal dysplasias. Affected 
individuals typically have either neuromuscular or skeletal manifestations, 
although overlapping phenotypes can occur. There is a wide range of phenotypic 
severity. In the mildest of the autosomal dominant TRPV4-related disorders life 
span is normal; in the most severe it is shortened. The three clinically 
recognized autosomal dominant neuromuscular disorders are Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
disease type 2C, scapuloperoneal spinal muscular atrophy, and congenital distal 
spinal muscular atrophy. Clinical overlap between these phenotypes does occur. 
These neuromuscular disorders are characterized by a motor-predominant, 
non-length-dependent peripheral neuropathy or motor neuronopathy with a wide 
range in age of onset, from congenital to late adult. Additional common features 
include laryngeal dysfunction (i.e., vocal fold paresis causing voice change 
and/or inspiratory stridor), diaphragm weakness (orthopnea), scoliosis, 
bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, and joint contractures. The five autosomal 
dominant skeletal dysplasias are (from mildest to most severe) familial digital 
arthropathy with brachydactyly, brachyolmia, spondylometaphyseal dysplasia 
(Kozlowski type), spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (Maroteaux type), and 
metatropic dysplasia. All TRPV4-related skeletal dysplasias are characterized by 
brachydactyly; the four most severe forms have short stature that varies from 
mild to severe with progressive spinal deformity and involvement of the long 
bones and pelvis.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of an autosomal dominant TRPV4-related disorder 
is established in a proband who has characteristic clinical and neurophysiologic 
findings, radiographic findings in the skeletal dysplasias, and a heterozygous 
TRPV4 pathogenic variant identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is focused on symptom 
management. Affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a 
multidisciplinary team that may include neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic 
surgeons, otologists/audiologists, laryngologists, pulmonologists, geneticists, 
and physical and occupational therapists. This multidisciplinary team will 
determine the best treatment options for supportive care, prevention of obesity, 
and management of pain and depression. For neuromuscular disorders, additional 
treatment includes special shoes with good ankle support, shoe orthotics, 
ankle-foot orthoses / knee-ankle-foot orthoses, surgery for severe foot 
deformities, mobility devices, and exercise as tolerated; management of 
kyphoscoliosis per orthopedist; management of tethered spinal cord per 
neurosurgeon; laryngeal surgery for vocal cord paresis (in some individuals, 
vocal fold lateralization or tracheostomy); speech therapy; and respiratory 
therapy including noninvasive ventilatory support as needed. For skeletal 
dysplasias, additional treatment includes physical therapy/exercise and heel 
cord stretching to maintain function; surgical intervention when kyphoscoliosis 
compromises pulmonary function and/or causes pain and/or when upper cervical 
spine instability and/or cervical myelopathy are present. Surveillance: For 
neuromuscular disorders, annual neurologic examination, physical therapy 
assessment, otolaryngology evaluation of laryngeal function, dynamic breathing 
chest radiograph, pulmonary function tests, sleep study, hearing assessment, and 
musculoskeletal evaluation; assessment of weight, height, and weight-for-height 
or body composition to diagnose obesity at each visit. For skeletal dysplasias, 
annual evaluation for joint pain and scoliosis; assessment for odontoid 
hypoplasia before a child reaches school age and before surgical procedures 
involving general anesthesia; annual hearing assessment; and assessment of 
weight, height, and weight-for-height at each visit. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: Obesity, as it makes walking more difficult. For neuromuscular disorders, 
avoid diabetes and neurotoxic medications; upper respiratory tract infections 
can cause vocal fold swelling and worsen upper airway obstruction. For skeletal 
dysplasias, avoid extreme neck flexion and extension (in those with odontoid 
hypoplasia); activities that place undue stress on the spine and weight-bearing 
joints. Pregnancy management: Ideally a woman with an autosomal dominant 
TRPV4-related disorder would seek consultation from a high-risk obstetrician or 
maternal-fetal medicine specialist to evaluate risk associated with pregnancy 
and delivery.
GENETIC COUNSELING: By definition, autosomal dominant TRPV4-related disorders 
are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Because the most severe 
TRPV4-related skeletal phenotypes can be lethal in childhood (or in utero), 
children with these phenotypes typically have a de novo pathogenic variant and 
unaffected parents. Individuals with less severe skeletal phenotypes or 
neuromuscular phenotypes often have the disorder as the result of a TRPV4 
pathogenic variant inherited from a heterozygous parent (de novo pathogenic 
variants have also been described in individuals with these phenotypes). Each 
child of an individual with an autosomal dominant TRPV4-related disorder has a 
50% chance of inheriting the TRPV4 pathogenic variant. Specific phenotype, age 
of onset, and disease severity cannot be accurately predicted because of reduced 
penetrance and highly variable expressivity. However, in general, a child who 
inherits a TRPV4 pathogenic variant associated with neuromuscular disease or 
skeletal dysplasia from an affected parent is likely to have a similar overall 
phenotype as the parent, although the age of onset and severity may be quite 
distinct. Once the TRPV4 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 24830047