---
reference_id: "PMID:19092804"
title: Crypt stem cells as the cells-of-origin of intestinal cancer.
authors:
- Barker N
- Ridgway RA
- van Es JH
- van de Wetering M
- Begthel H
- van den Born M
- Danenberg E
- Clarke AR
- Sansom OJ
- Clevers H
journal: Nature
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/nature07602
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crypt stem cells as the cells-of-origin of intestinal cancer.
**Authors:** Barker N, Ridgway RA, van Es JH, van de Wetering M, Begthel H, van den Born M, Danenberg E, Clarke AR, Sansom OJ, Clevers H
**Journal:** Nature (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature07602](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07602)

## Content

1. Nature. 2009 Jan 29;457(7229):608-11. doi: 10.1038/nature07602. Epub 2008 Dec 
17.

Crypt stem cells as the cells-of-origin of intestinal cancer.

Barker N(1), Ridgway RA, van Es JH, van de Wetering M, Begthel H, van den Born 
M, Danenberg E, Clarke AR, Sansom OJ, Clevers H.

Author information:
(1)Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, 
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT Utrecht & University Medical Centre Utrecht, Netherlands.

Intestinal cancer is initiated by Wnt-pathway-activating mutations in genes such 
as adenomatous polyposis coli (APC). As in most cancers, the cell of origin has 
remained elusive. In a previously established Lgr5 (leucine-rich-repeat 
containing G-protein-coupled receptor 5) knockin mouse model, a 
tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase is expressed in long-lived intestinal stem 
cells. Here we show that deletion of Apc in these stem cells leads to their 
transformation within days. Transformed stem cells remain located at crypt 
bottoms, while fuelling a growing microadenoma. These microadenomas show 
unimpeded growth and develop into macroscopic adenomas within 3-5weeks. The 
distribution of Lgr5(+) cells within stem-cell-derived adenomas indicates that a 
stem cell/progenitor cell hierarchy is maintained in early neoplastic lesions. 
When Apc is deleted in short-lived transit-amplifying cells using a different 
cre mouse, the growth of the induced microadenomas rapidly stalls. Even after 
30weeks, large adenomas are very rare in these mice. We conclude that 
stem-cell-specific loss of Apc results in progressively growing neoplasia.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07602
PMID: 19092804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]