---
reference_id: "PMID:20513108"
title: Sensory ataxic neuropathy with dysarthria and ophthalmoparesis (SANDO) in late life due to compound heterozygous POLG mutations.
authors:
- Weiss MD
- Saneto RP
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/mus.21636
keywords:
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Ataxia/genetics, pathology"
- DNA Polymerase gamma
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- DNA-Directed DNA Polymerase/genetics
- Diplopia/genetics
- "Dysarthria/genetics, pathology"
- Eyelid Diseases/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- "Muscular Atrophy/genetics, pathology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Ophthalmoplegia/genetics, pathology"
- "Ophthalmoplegia, Chronic Progressive External/genetics, pathology"
- Sequence Deletion
- Voice Disorders/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sensory ataxic neuropathy with dysarthria and ophthalmoparesis (SANDO) in late life due to compound heterozygous POLG mutations.
**Authors:** Weiss MD, Saneto RP
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.21636](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.21636)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2010 Jun;41(6):882-5. doi: 10.1002/mus.21636.

Sensory ataxic neuropathy with dysarthria and ophthalmoparesis (SANDO) in late 
life due to compound heterozygous POLG mutations.

Weiss MD(1), Saneto RP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Washington Medical Center, Box 356115, 
1959 NE Pacific Street, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. mdweiss@u.washington.edu

Missense mutations in the gene for polymerase gamma 1 (POLG1) cause a number of 
phenotypically heterogeneous mitochondrial diseases, most commonly progressive 
external ophthalmoplegia, and are characterized by the accumulation of multiple, 
large-scale deletions of mitochondrial DNA. The triad of sensory ataxic 
neuropathy, dysarthria, and ophthalmoparesis (SANDO) has been demonstrated in a 
small subset of patients with POLG1 mutations. We report a sporadic case of an 
80-year-old compound heterozygote man who presented with SANDO and was found to 
have three known pathogenic mutations in the POLG1 gene 
(p.T251I/p.P587L/p.G848S). To our knowledge, none of these mutations have been 
demonstrated previously in SANDO. This patient's late presentation illustrates 
that a mitochondrial disorder should be considered regardless of age if the 
clinical symptoms warrant.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.21636
PMID: 20513108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]