---
reference_id: "PMID:31727160"
title: A systematic review of natural killer cells profile and cytotoxic function in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome.
authors:
- Eaton-Fitch N
- du Preez S
- Cabanas H
- Staines D
- Marshall-Gradisnik S
journal: Syst Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13643-019-1202-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review of natural killer cells profile and cytotoxic function in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome.
**Authors:** Eaton-Fitch N, du Preez S, Cabanas H, Staines D, Marshall-Gradisnik S
**Journal:** Syst Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13643-019-1202-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-019-1202-6)

## Content

1. Syst Rev. 2019 Nov 14;8(1):279. doi: 10.1186/s13643-019-1202-6.

A systematic review of natural killer cells profile and cytotoxic function in 
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome.

Eaton-Fitch N(1)(2), du Preez S(3)(4), Cabanas H(3)(5), Staines D(3)(5), 
Marshall-Gradisnik S(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Neuroimmunology and Emerging Diseases, Menzies Health 
Institute, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia. ncned@griffith.edu.au.
(2)School of Medical Science, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia. 
ncned@griffith.edu.au.
(3)National Centre for Neuroimmunology and Emerging Diseases, Menzies Health 
Institute, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia.
(4)School of Medicine, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia.
(5)School of Medical Science, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Compromised natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxic function is a 
well-documented and consistent feature of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Other outcomes evaluated in NK cells of ME/CFS 
patients, however, remain equivocal. The aim of this study was to conduct a 
systematic review of the literature regarding NK cell phenotype, receptor 
expression, cytokine production and cytotoxicity in ME/CFS patients and 
determine the appropriateness as a model for ME/CFS.
METHODS: Medline (EBSCOHost), Scopus, EMBASE and PubMed databases were 
systematically searched to source relevant papers published between 1994 and 
March 2018. This review included studies examining NK cells' features in ME/CFS 
patients compared with HC following administration of specific inclusion and 
exclusion criteria. Secondary outcomes included genetic analysis in isolated NK 
cells or quality of life assessment. Quality assessment was completed using the 
Downs and Black checklist in addition to The Joanna Briggs Institute checklist.
RESULTS: Seventeen eligible publications were included in this review. All 
studies were observational case control studies. Of these, 11 investigated NK 
cell cytotoxicity, 14 investigated NK cell phenotype and receptor profiles, 
three examined NK cell cytokine production, six investigated NK cell lytic 
protein levels and four investigated NK cell degranulation. Impaired NK cell 
cytotoxicity remained the most consistent immunological report across all 
publications. Other outcomes investigated differed between studies.
CONCLUSION: A consistent finding among all papers included in this review was 
impaired NK cell cytotoxicity, suggesting that it is a reliable and appropriate 
cellular model for continued research in ME/CFS patients. Aberrations in NK cell 
lytic protein levels were also reported. Although additional research is 
recommended, current research provides a foundation for subsequent 
investigations. It is possible that NK cell abnormalities can be used to 
characterise a subset of ME/CFS due to the heterogeneity of both the illness 
itself and findings between studies investigating specific features of NK 
function.

DOI: 10.1186/s13643-019-1202-6
PMCID: PMC6857215
PMID: 31727160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The lead author affirms that this manuscript is an accurate, honest and 
transparent account of the study undertaken and reported, with no aspects being 
omitted and any discrepancies explained. The reporting of this work is compliant 
with PRISMA guidelines.