---
reference_id: "PMID:10533025"
title: "Caudal dysgenesis in staged human embryos: Carnegie stages 16-23."
authors:
- Padmanabhan R
- Naruse I
- Shiota K
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1999'
doi: "10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19991119)87:2<115::aid-ajmg2>3.0.co;2-1"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Caudal dysgenesis in staged human embryos: Carnegie stages 16-23.
**Authors:** Padmanabhan R, Naruse I, Shiota K
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19991119)87:2<115::aid-ajmg2>3.0.co;2-1](https://doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19991119)87:2<115::aid-ajmg2>3.0.co;2-1)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1999 Nov 19;87(2):115-27. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19991119)87:2<115::aid-ajmg2>3.0.co;2-1.

Caudal dysgenesis in staged human embryos: Carnegie stages 16-23.

Padmanabhan R(1), Naruse I, Shiota K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, UAE University, Al Ain, United 
Arab Emirates. padmanabhanr@uaeu.ac.ae

The severity of expression of malformations of the median axis in the caudal 
region of human embryos is highly variable and ranges from caudal dysgenesis and 
sirenomelia to simple sacral hypoplasia. Several forms of sacral dysgenesis may 
be discovered later in life. This shows that caudal malformations of relatively 
lesser severity should occur at a greater frequency than actually reported. In 
the present study we looked at the morphology and histology of some human 
embryos with caudal dysgenesis. Several developmental alterations of the median 
axis were observed. These included significant reduction in the craniofacial 
mesenchyme characterized by hypoplasia of the pharyngeal arches, palatal 
shelves, and agenesis or hypoplasia of the auricular hillocks at the rostral 
end, absence of the caudal trunk from midsacral to all coccygeal segments, 
vertebral fusion or agenesis, defective development of the primary and secondary 
neural tubes, rectal and urinary tract dysgenesis, and deficiency, malrotation, 
and deficiency of the limbs at the caudal end. Hindlimb malformations included 
bilateral agenesis (one case), meromelia, and various forms of abnormal 
rotation, but no instances of sirenomelia were present. Radial dysgenesis has 
been reported to be associated with caudal dyplasia in the literature, however, 
we observed agenesis of the ulna in one and of the fibula in another embryo. 
There was an impressive association between limb malformations and body wall 
defects. The histological studies demonstrated caudal vascular deficiency and 
hemorrhagic lesions in the limbs of the dysplastic embryos. The data suggest 
that these polytopic field defects arise very early in development possibly as 
result of disturbances to fundamental developmental events that share common 
molecular and cellular mechanisms.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19991119)87:2<115::aid-ajmg2>3.0.co;2-1
PMID: 10533025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]