---
reference_id: "PMID:39907599"
title: "Acquired RUFY1-RET rearrangement as a mechanism of resistance to lorlatinib in a patient with CD74-ROS1 rearranged non-small cell lung cancer: A case report."
authors:
- Wu JL
- Iams WT
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2025'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.28682
keywords:
- Humans
- Aminopyridines
- "Antigens, Differentiation, B-Lymphocyte/genetics"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Gene Rearrangement
- Lactams/therapeutic use
- "Lactams, Macrocyclic/therapeutic use"
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- Retinoblastoma Binding Proteins/genetics
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class II
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acquired RUFY1-RET rearrangement as a mechanism of resistance to lorlatinib in a patient with CD74-ROS1 rearranged non-small cell lung cancer: A case report.
**Authors:** Wu JL, Iams WT
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2025)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.28682](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.28682)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2025 Feb 5;16:39-42. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.28682.

Acquired RUFY1-RET rearrangement as a mechanism of resistance to lorlatinib in a
patient with CD74-ROS1 rearranged non-small cell lung cancer: A case report.

Wu JL(1), Iams WT(2).

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(2)Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

ROS1 and RET fusions are targetable mutations that occur in a subset of patients
with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). ROS1 and RET have been understood to be
independent oncogenic drivers which do not co-occur with other common tyrosine
kinase receptor mutations except in the acquired resistance setting. Here we
present a case of a patient with stage IV CD-74-ROS1 fusion NSCLC discovered
initially with RNA next generation sequencing (NGS) who acquired resistance to
lorlatinib after 6 months on therapy through a novel RUFY1-RET fusion, detected
only through RNA NGS. Combination therapy targeting RET and ROS1 using
pralsetinib and lorlatinib achieved a partial response with limited durability
of only four months. This is the first reported case of a RET fusion as a
potential mechanism of resistance to lorlatinib, it identifies a novel RET
fusion partner, and it emphasizes the importance of testing for acquired
resistance mutations with both DNA and RNA at the time of progression in
patients with targetable oncogenic drivers.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.28682
PMCID: PMC11798477
PMID: 39907599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Author Disclosures: WTI
has served as a consultant for AstraZeneca, Sanofi, Genentech, Jazz Pharma, G1
Therapeutics, Mirati, Takeda, Janssen, Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, OncLive,
Clinical Care Options, Chardan, Outcomes Insights, Cello Health, and Curio
Science.
