---
reference_id: "PMID:26306834"
title: Degree of Cajal-Retzius Cell Mislocalization Correlates with the Severity of Structural Brain Defects in Mouse Models of Dystroglycanopathy.
authors:
- Booler HS
- Williams JL
- Hopkinson M
- Brown SC
journal: Brain Pathol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/bpa.12306
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain/pathology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Genotype
- Mice
- N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferases/genetics
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Neurons/pathology
- Pentosyltransferases
- Phenotype
- Proteins/genetics
- Reelin Protein
- Transferases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Degree of Cajal-Retzius Cell Mislocalization Correlates with the Severity of Structural Brain Defects in Mouse Models of Dystroglycanopathy.
**Authors:** Booler HS, Williams JL, Hopkinson M, Brown SC
**Journal:** Brain Pathol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bpa.12306](https://doi.org/10.1111/bpa.12306)

## Content

1. Brain Pathol. 2016 Jul;26(4):465-78. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12306. Epub 2015 Oct 12.

Degree of Cajal-Retzius Cell Mislocalization Correlates with the Severity of
Structural Brain Defects in Mouse Models of Dystroglycanopathy.

Booler HS(1), Williams JL(1), Hopkinson M(1), Brown SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Royal Veterinary College,
London, UK.

The secondary dystroglycanopathies are characterized by the hypoglycosylation of
alpha dystroglycan, and are associated with mutations in at least 18 genes that
act on the glycosylation of this cell surface receptor rather than the Dag1 gene
itself. At the severe end of the disease spectrum, there are substantial
structural brain defects, the most striking of which is often cobblestone
lissencephaly. The aim of this study was to determine the gene-specific aspects
of the dystroglycanopathy brain phenotype through a detailed investigation of
the structural brain defects present at birth in three mouse models of
dystroglycanopathy-the FKRP(KD) , which has an 80% reduction in Fkrp transcript
levels; the Pomgnt1null , which carries a deletion of exons 7-16 of the Pomgnt1
gene; and the Large(myd) mouse, which carries a deletion of exons 5-7 of the
Large gene. We show a rostrocaudal and mediolateral gradient in the severity of
brain lesions in FKRP(KD) , and to a lesser extent Pomgnt1null mice.
Furthermore, the mislocalization of Cajal-Retzius cells is correlated with the
gradient of these lesions and the severity of the brain phenotype in these
models. Overall these observations implicate gene-specific differences in the
pathogenesis of brain lesions in this group of disorders.

© 2015 International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.12306
PMCID: PMC8029081
PMID: 26306834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
