---
reference_id: "PMID:30024379"
title: Inhibiting the integrated stress response pathway prevents aberrant chondrocyte differentiation thereby alleviating chondrodysplasia.
authors:
- Wang C
- Tan Z
- Niu B
- Tsang KY
- Tai A
- Chan WCW
- Lo RLK
- Leung KKH
- Dung NWF
- Itoh N
- Zhang MQ
- Chan D
- Cheah KSE
journal: Elife
year: '2018'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.37673
keywords:
- "Acetamides/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Activating Transcription Factor 4/metabolism
- Animals
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- Base Sequence
- Cell Differentiation/drug effects
- Cell Survival/drug effects
- "Chondrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Chondrogenesis
- "Cyclohexylamines/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress/drug effects
- Eukaryotic Initiation Factor-2/metabolism
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/metabolism
- "Growth Plate/abnormalities, drug effects, pathology"
- Hypertrophy
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Models, Biological"
- Osteochondrodysplasias/pathology
- Phenotype
- SOX9 Transcription Factor/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- "Stress, Physiological/drug effects"
- Transcription Factor CHOP/metabolism
- Transcriptome/genetics
- Unfolded Protein Response/drug effects
- eIF-2 Kinase/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibiting the integrated stress response pathway prevents aberrant chondrocyte differentiation thereby alleviating chondrodysplasia.
**Authors:** Wang C, Tan Z, Niu B, Tsang KY, Tai A, Chan WCW, Lo RLK, Leung KKH, Dung NWF, Itoh N, Zhang MQ, Chan D, Cheah KSE
**Journal:** Elife (2018)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.37673](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37673)

## Content

1. Elife. 2018 Jul 19;7:e37673. doi: 10.7554/eLife.37673.

Inhibiting the integrated stress response pathway prevents aberrant chondrocyte 
differentiation thereby alleviating chondrodysplasia.

Wang C(#)(1), Tan Z(#)(1), Niu B(1), Tsang KY(1), Tai A(1), Chan WCW(1), Lo 
RLK(1), Leung KKH(1), Dung NWF(1), Itoh N(2), Zhang MQ(3)(4), Chan D(1), Cheah 
KSE(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Kyoto, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Center for Systems Biology, The University 
of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, United States.
(4)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Synthetic and Systems 
Biology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The integrated stress response (ISR) is activated by diverse forms of cellular 
stress, including endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and is associated with 
diseases. However, the molecular mechanism(s) whereby the ISR impacts on 
differentiation is incompletely understood. Here, we exploited a mouse model of 
Metaphyseal Chondrodysplasia type Schmid (MCDS) to provide insight into the 
impact of the ISR on cell fate. We show the protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase 
(PERK) pathway that mediates preferential synthesis of ATF4 and CHOP, dominates 
in causing dysplasia by reverting chondrocyte differentiation via ATF4-directed 
transactivation of Sox9. Chondrocyte survival is enabled, cell autonomously, by 
CHOP and dual CHOP-ATF4 transactivation of Fgf21. Treatment of mutant mice with 
a chemical inhibitor of PERK signaling prevents the differentiation defects and 
ameliorates chondrodysplasia. By preventing aberrant differentiation, titrated 
inhibition of the ISR emerges as a rationale therapeutic strategy for 
stress-induced skeletal disorders.

© 2018, Wang et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.37673
PMCID: PMC6053305
PMID: 30024379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CW, ZT, BN, KT, AT, WC, RL, KL, ND, NI, MZ, DC, 
KC No competing interests declared