---
reference_id: PMID:31322716
title: "Duane's Retraction Syndrome in a Cohort of South African Children: A 20-Year Clinic-Based Review."
authors:
- Steyn A
- Grötte R
- Tinley C
journal: J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3928/01913913-20190416-01
keywords:
- Age Distribution
- "Child, Preschool"
- Duane Retraction Syndrome/ethnology
- Ethnicity
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Forecasting
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Sex Distribution
- South Africa/epidemiology
- "Tertiary Care Centers/statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Duane's Retraction Syndrome in a Cohort of South African Children: A 20-Year Clinic-Based Review.
**Authors:** Steyn A, Grötte R, Tinley C
**Journal:** J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3928/01913913-20190416-01](https://doi.org/10.3928/01913913-20190416-01)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 2019 Jul 1;56(4):248-253. doi: 
10.3928/01913913-20190416-01.

Duane's Retraction Syndrome in a Cohort of South African Children: A 20-Year 
Clinic-Based Review.

Steyn A, Grötte R, Tinley C.

PURPOSE: To describe the clinical features of Duane's retraction syndrome in a 
cohort of South African children and to analyze the differences between ethnic 
groups.
METHODS: A retrospective case series of 120 patients seen between 1997 and 2017 
at a tertiary referral center in Cape Town, South Africa.
RESULTS: Type 2 Duane's retraction syndrome was most common in black children 
(54%), whereas type 1 was predominant in mixed race (68%) and white (94%) 
children. In this cohort, 63% of black children with Duane's retraction syndrome 
were boys, whereas 69% of white children and 59% of mixed race children were 
girls. Left eye involvement was the most common in all ethnic groups (44%), 
followed by right eye (41%) and bilateral (14%) involvement. The average age at 
presentation was 34.2 months (range: 1 to 144 months). Strabismus in primary 
position was present in 57 patients (46%), of whom 39% had esotropia and 61% had 
exotropia. A deviation in the primary position was more common in black (71%) 
children than in mixed race (39%) or white (41%) children. Ametropia was found 
in 94 patients (79%), amblyopia was present in 15 patients (13%), and 41 
patients (34%) underwent surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to provide robust data on the profile of 
pediatric Duane's retraction syndrome in the three main ethnic groups in South 
Africa, and it showed clear ethnic differences. Among black children, boys are 
affected more often, the proportion with type 2 Duane's retraction syndrome is 
more frequent, and surgery is required more often. Among white and mixed race 
children, girls are affected more often and type 1 Duane's retraction syndrome 
is predominant. [J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 2019;56(4):248-253.].

Copyright 2019, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/01913913-20190416-01
PMID: 31322716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]