---
reference_id: "PMID:37653429"
title: Wolbachia wMel strain-mediated effects on dengue virus vertical transmission from Aedes aegypti to their offspring.
authors:
- Duong Thi Hue K
- da Silva Goncalves D
- Tran Thuy V
- Thi Vo L
- Le Thi D
- Vu Tuyet N
- Nguyen Thi G
- Huynh Thi Xuan T
- Nguyen Minh N
- Nguyen Thanh P
- Yacoub S
- Simmons CP
journal: Parasit Vectors
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13071-023-05921-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wolbachia wMel strain-mediated effects on dengue virus vertical transmission from Aedes aegypti to their offspring.
**Authors:** Duong Thi Hue K, da Silva Goncalves D, Tran Thuy V, Thi Vo L, Le Thi D, Vu Tuyet N, Nguyen Thi G, Huynh Thi Xuan T, Nguyen Minh N, Nguyen Thanh P, Yacoub S, Simmons CP
**Journal:** Parasit Vectors (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13071-023-05921-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-023-05921-y)

## Content

1. Parasit Vectors. 2023 Aug 31;16(1):308. doi: 10.1186/s13071-023-05921-y.

Wolbachia wMel strain-mediated effects on dengue virus vertical transmission 
from Aedes aegypti to their offspring.

Duong Thi Hue K(1), da Silva Goncalves D(2), Tran Thuy V(2), Thi Vo L(2), Le Thi 
D(2), Vu Tuyet N(2), Nguyen Thi G(2), Huynh Thi Xuan T(2), Nguyen Minh N(2), 
Nguyen Thanh P(3), Yacoub S(2)(4), Simmons CP(5).

Author information:
(1)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Wellcome Trust Africa Asia 
Programme, District 5, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. kiendth@oucru.org.
(2)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Wellcome Trust Africa Asia 
Programme, District 5, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
(3)Hospital for Tropical Diseases, District 5, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
(4)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(5)Institute for Vector Borne Disease, Monash University, Clayton Campus, 
Melbourne, VIC, 3168, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Dengue virus serotypes (DENV-1 to -4) can be transmitted vertically 
in Aedes aegpti mosquitoes. Whether infection with the wMel strain of the 
endosymbiont Wolbachia can reduce the incidence of vertical transmission of DENV 
from infected females to their offspring is not well understood.
METHODS: A laboratory colony of Vietnamese Ae. aegypti, both with and without 
wMel infection, were infected with DENV-1 by intrathoracic injection (IT) to 
estimate the rate of vertical transmission (VT) of the virus. VT in the 
DENV-infected mosquitoes was calculated via the infection rate estimation from 
mosquito pool data using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE).
RESULTS: In 6047 F1 Vietnamese wild-type Ae. aegypti, the MLE of DENV-1 
infection was 1.49 per 1000 mosquitoes (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.73-2.74). 
In 5500 wMel-infected Ae. aegypti, the MLE infection rate was 0 (95% CI 0-0.69). 
The VT rates between mosquito lines showed a statistically significant 
difference.
CONCLUSIONS: The results reinforce the view that VT is a rare event in wild-type 
mosquitoes and that infection with wMel is effective in reducing VT.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-023-05921-y
PMCID: PMC10472731
PMID: 37653429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.