---
reference_id: "PMID:38103162"
title: "Autoinflammatory Keratinization Diseases-The Concept, Pathophysiology, and Clinical Implications."
authors:
- Blicharz L
- Czuwara J
- Rudnicka L
- Torrelo A
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-023-08971-3
keywords:
- Humans
- "Psoriasis/genetics, pathology"
- Inflammation/genetics
- Mutation
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Keratosis
- Guanylate Cyclase/genetics
- Membrane Proteins
- CARD Signaling Adaptor Proteins/genetics
- Interleukins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoinflammatory Keratinization Diseases-The Concept, Pathophysiology, and Clinical Implications.
**Authors:** Blicharz L, Czuwara J, Rudnicka L, Torrelo A
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-023-08971-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-023-08971-3)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2023 Dec;65(3):377-402. doi:
10.1007/s12016-023-08971-3. Epub 2023 Dec 16.

Autoinflammatory Keratinization Diseases-The Concept, Pathophysiology, and
Clinical Implications.

Blicharz L(1), Czuwara J(2), Rudnicka L(1), Torrelo A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Warsaw, 02-008, Warsaw,
Poland.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Warsaw, 02-008, Warsaw,
Poland. joanna.czuwara@wum.edu.pl.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University Children's Hospital Niño Jesús, 28009,
Madrid, Spain. atorrelo@aedv.es.

Recent advances in medical genetics elucidated the background of diseases
characterized by superficial dermal and epidermal inflammation with resultant
aberrant keratosis. This led to introducing the term autoinflammatory
keratinization diseases encompassing entities in which monogenic mutations cause
spontaneous activation of the innate immunity and subsequent disruption of the
keratinization process. Originally, autoinflammatory keratinization diseases
were attributed to pathogenic variants of CARD14 (generalized pustular psoriasis
with concomitant psoriasis vulgaris, palmoplantar pustulosis, type V pityriasis
rubra pilaris), IL36RN (generalized pustular psoriasis without concomitant
psoriasis vulgaris, impetigo herpetiformis, acrodermatitis continua of
Hallopeau), NLRP1 (familial forms of keratosis lichenoides chronica), and genes
of the mevalonate pathway, i.e., MVK, PMVK, MVD, and FDPS (porokeratosis). Since
then, endotypes underlying novel entities matching the concept of
autoinflammatory keratinization diseases have been discovered (mutations of
JAK1, POMP, and EGFR). This review describes the concept and pathophysiology of
autoinflammatory keratinization diseases and outlines the characteristic
clinical features of the associated entities. Furthermore, a novel term for
NLRP1-associated autoinflammatory disease with epithelial dyskeratosis (NADED)
describing the spectrum of autoinflammatory keratinization diseases secondary to
NLRP1 mutations is proposed.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-023-08971-3
PMCID: PMC10847199
PMID: 38103162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
