---
reference_id: "PMID:32408299"
title: "Splenic Rhythms and Postprandial Dynamics in Physiology, Portal Hypertension, and Functional Hyposplenism: A Review."
authors:
- Weinzirl J
- Garnitschnig L
- Scheffers T
- Andrae L
- Heusser P
journal: Digestion
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1159/000507346
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Splenic Rhythms and Postprandial Dynamics in Physiology, Portal Hypertension, and Functional Hyposplenism: A Review.
**Authors:** Weinzirl J, Garnitschnig L, Scheffers T, Andrae L, Heusser P
**Journal:** Digestion (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000507346](https://doi.org/10.1159/000507346)

## Content

1. Digestion. 2021;102(3):326-334. doi: 10.1159/000507346. Epub 2020 May 14.

Splenic Rhythms and Postprandial Dynamics in Physiology, Portal Hypertension, 
and Functional Hyposplenism: A Review.

Weinzirl J(1), Garnitschnig L(2), Scheffers T(2), Andrae L(3), Heusser P(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Integrative Medicine, Faculty of Health, Witten/Herdecke 
University, Herdecke, Germany, johannes.weinzirl@uni-wh.de.
(2)Institute for Integrative Medicine, Faculty of Health, Witten/Herdecke 
University, Herdecke, Germany.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Community Hospital Herdecke, Herdecke, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Before the discovery of immunological and haematological functions 
of the spleen, it had for centuries been considered to be a digestive organ of 
variable size with a role in the portal vein system and nutritional metabolism. 
In the 19th and 20th centuries, volume changes in the spleen related to 
nutrition were studied using plethysmographic measurements. Rhythmical and 
regulatory functions of the spleen were demonstrated in the haemodynamics of the 
splanchnic region and were described as a "hepatolienal pendulum," a "Windkessel 
function," or a "pressure compensation." These studies were mainly published in 
German-speaking countries and have not, as far as is known, been discussed in 
the English-speaking world so far.
SUMMARY: This review explores the historical development of the rhythmical 
regulatory function of the spleen in the splanchnic region. Older studies and 
results are followed up in the modern literature, wherever possible, up to the 
present. The clinical relevance is illustrated with portal hypertension (with 
congestive or hyperdynamic splenomegaly), coeliac disease, and chronic 
inflammatory bowel diseases (with functional hyposplenism). Key Message: The 
spleen's rhythmical regulatory function in nutrition is based on an autonomous 
rhythm comprising cycles of contractions and dilations of the spleen of around 1 
min. These cycles can be influenced by sympathetically mediated single 
contractions with a release of pooled blood or by portal vein congestion. After 
food ingestion, the spleen responds either with contraction according to a 
vasomotor reaction or postprandial congestion with significant increases in 
volume. The spleen's rhythmical function is lost in the clinical picture of 
portal hypertension or in coeliac disease and chronic inflammatory bowel 
diseases. In the aforementioned gastrointestinal diseases, we recommend taking 
more account of the haemodynamics between the spleen, liver, and intestine. New 
innovative techniques for recording splenograms are required which, besides 
elastographic measurements of spleen stiffness, could offer an important tool 
for early detection, diagnosis, and therapeutic evaluation.

© 2020 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000507346
PMID: 32408299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]