---
reference_id: "PMID:24680886"
title: Progesterone antagonist therapy in a Pelizaeus-Merzbacher mouse model.
authors:
- Prukop T
- Epplen DB
- Nientiedt T
- Wichert SP
- Fledrich R
- Stassart RM
- Rossner MJ
- Edgar JM
- Werner HB
- Nave KA
- Sereda MW
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.03.001
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Estrenes/pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects
- "Hormone Antagonists/pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Myelin Proteolipid Protein/genetics
- Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease/drug therapy
- Phenotype
- "Progesterone/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Fluorocarbons
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progesterone antagonist therapy in a Pelizaeus-Merzbacher mouse model.
**Authors:** Prukop T, Epplen DB, Nientiedt T, Wichert SP, Fledrich R, Stassart RM, Rossner MJ, Edgar JM, Werner HB, Nave KA, Sereda MW
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.03.001)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Apr 3;94(4):533-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.03.001. Epub
 2014 Mar 27.

Progesterone antagonist therapy in a Pelizaeus-Merzbacher mouse model.

Prukop T(1), Epplen DB(1), Nientiedt T(1), Wichert SP(2), Fledrich R(1), 
Stassart RM(3), Rossner MJ(2), Edgar JM(1), Werner HB(1), Nave KA(1), Sereda 
MW(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurogenetics, Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
37075 Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurogenetics, Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
37075 Göttingen, Germany; Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University München, 80336 München, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurogenetics, Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
37075 Göttingen, Germany; Institute of Neuropathology, University Medical Center 
Göttingen, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurogenetics, Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
37075 Göttingen, Germany; Clinic of Clinical Neurophysiology, University Medical 
Center Göttingen, 37075 Göttingen, Germany. Electronic address: 
sereda@em.mpg.de.

Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is a severe hypomyelinating disease, 
characterized by ataxia, intellectual disability, epilepsy, and premature death. 
In the majority of cases, PMD is caused by duplication of PLP1 that is expressed 
in myelinating oligodendrocytes. Despite detailed knowledge of PLP1, there is 
presently no curative therapy for PMD. We used a Plp1 transgenic PMD mouse model 
to test the therapeutic effect of Lonaprisan, an antagonist of the nuclear 
progesterone receptor, in lowering Plp1 mRNA overexpression. We applied 
placebo-controlled Lonaprisan therapy to PMD mice for 10 weeks and performed the 
grid slip analysis to assess the clinical phenotype. Additionally, mRNA 
expression and protein accumulation as well as histological analysis of the 
central nervous system were performed. Although Plp1 mRNA levels are increased 
1.8-fold in PMD mice compared to wild-type controls, daily Lonaprisan treatment 
reduced overexpression at the RNA level to about 1.5-fold, which was sufficient 
to significantly improve the poor motor phenotype. Electron microscopy confirmed 
a 25% increase in the number of myelinated axons in the corticospinal tract when 
compared to untreated PMD mice. Microarray analysis revealed the upregulation of 
proapoptotic genes in PMD mice that could be partially rescued by Lonaprisan 
treatment, which also reduced microgliosis, astrogliosis, and lymphocyte 
infiltration.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.03.001
PMCID: PMC3980417
PMID: 24680886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]