---
reference_id: "PMID:20301617"
title: Familial Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Zhang K
- Astigarraga I
- Bryceson Y
- Lehmberg K
- Machowicz R
- Marsh R
- Sieni E
- Wang Z
- Nichols KE
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Zhang K, Astigarraga I, Bryceson Y, Lehmberg K, Machowicz R, Marsh R, Sieni E, Wang Z, Nichols KE

## Content

1. Familial Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis.

Zhang K(1), Astigarraga I(2), Bryceson Y(3), Lehmberg K(4), Machowicz R(5), 
Marsh R(6), Sieni E(7), Wang Z(8), Nichols KE(9).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2006 Mar 22 [updated 2024 Jun 6].

Author information:
(1)Mount Sinai Genomics;, Sema4, New York, New York
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario Cruces, Osakidetza, IIS 
Biocruces Bizkaia, UPV/EHU, Barakaldo, Spain
(3)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
(4)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Division of Pediatric Stem 
Cell Transplantation and Immunology, University Medical Center Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany
(5)Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
(6)Cincinnati Children's Hospital;, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio
(7)Meyer Children's University Hospital, Florence, Italy
(8)Department of Hematology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China
(9)Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (fHLH), 
defined as the presence of biallelic pathogenic variants in one of four genes 
(PRF1, STX11, STXBP2, or UNC13D), is an immune deficiency characterized by the 
overactivation and excessive proliferation of T lymphocytes and macrophages, 
leading to infiltration and damage of organs including the bone marrow, liver, 
spleen, and brain. Familial HLH usually presents as an acute illness with 
prolonged and high fever, cytopenias, and hepatosplenomegaly. Rash and 
lymphadenopathy are less common. Individuals with fHLH may also exhibit liver 
dysfunction and neurologic abnormalities. Although manifestations of fHLH are 
usually evident within the first months or years of life and may develop in 
utero, symptomatic presentation can occur throughout childhood and into 
adulthood. Median survival in untreated infants with fHLH who develop active 
disease is less than two months after onset of manifestations; progressive 
manifestations of fHLH, organ dysfunction, invasive infection, and bleeding 
account for the majority of deaths. However, the use of newer chemoimmunotherapy 
protocols followed by allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) 
has improved survival.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of fHLH is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings by identification of either biallelic pathogenic variants in 
one of four genes (PRF1, STX11, STXBP2, or UNC13D) or (rarely) a 
gain-of-function heterozygous variant in STXBP2.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Treatment regimens focus on use of 
chemoimmunotherapy to treat active disease followed by allogeneic HSCT, the only 
curative therapy. Etoposide-containing regimens such as HLH-94 and HLH-2004, 
followed by allogeneic HSCT, are typically used. A regimen that includes 
anti-interferon-gamma antibody (emapalumab) is FDA approved for the treatment of 
children and adults with relapsed or refractory HLH or intolerance of 
conventional therapies. Supportive care: Management should be coordinated by or 
in consultation with a multidisciplinary team with expertise in fHLH, including 
specialists in hematology/oncology, bone marrow and stem cell transplantation, 
immunology, rheumatology, infectious diseases, critical care, neurology, 
nephrology, pathology, and medical genetics. Supportive care that should 
accompany treatment with chemoimmunotherapy and allogenic HSCT includes 
antibiotics or antiviral agents to treat or prevent infections, and 
antipyretics, intravenous fluids, electrolyte replacement, transfusion of packed 
red blood cells and platelets, infusions of immunoglobulin, fresh frozen plasma, 
and/or cryoprecipitate. Surveillance: Individuals responding to treatment and 
HSCT are technically not at risk for other organ system involvement; thus, 
surveillance focuses on potential complications of fHLH while fHLH is active, 
such as bleeding, hypotension, respiratory distress, neurologic complications, 
malnutrition, infection, liver, or other organ failure. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: Live vaccines; exposure to infections; acetaminophen in persons with 
liver failure; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in persons with 
thrombocytopenia; areas of construction or soil manipulation (which increase the 
risk for fungal infection in individuals with neutropenia); transfusion of 
non-irradiated blood products in individuals undergoing chemoimmunotherapy 
and/or allogeneic HSCT. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to 
identify – before symptoms occur –those at-risk sibs who have the 
family-specific pathogenic variants so that they can be monitored and preemptive 
HSCT considered (particularly during febrile episodes) for development of 
manifestations of active disease. Any manifestations of possible active disease 
should prompt more detailed evaluation and referral to a clinician with 
expertise in fHLH.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Familial HLH is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. 
(Autosomal dominant inheritance of STXBP2-fHLH is suggested by rare reports of 
symptomatic individuals with heterozygous gain-of-function variants. Autosomal 
dominant inheritance will not be discussed further in this section.) If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for an fHLH-causing pathogenic variant, 
each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of inheriting biallelic 
pathogenic variants, a 50% chance of inheriting one pathogenic variant and being 
an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the familial 
fHLH-causing pathogenic variants. Once the fHLH-causing pathogenic variants have 
been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301617