---
reference_id: "PMID:38081365"
title: Effects of tetrathiomolybdate on copper metabolism in healthy volunteers and in patients with Wilson disease.
authors:
- Kirk FT
- Munk DE
- Swenson ES
- Quicquaro AM
- Vendelbo MH
- Larsen A
- Schilsky ML
- Ott P
- Sandahl TD
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.11.023
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Copper/metabolism
- Positron Emission Tomography Computed Tomography
- Healthy Volunteers
- Chelating Agents/pharmacology
- Choline
- Molybdenum
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of tetrathiomolybdate on copper metabolism in healthy volunteers and in patients with Wilson disease.
**Authors:** Kirk FT, Munk DE, Swenson ES, Quicquaro AM, Vendelbo MH, Larsen A, Schilsky ML, Ott P, Sandahl TD
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2023.11.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2023.11.023)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2024 Apr;80(4):586-595. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.11.023. Epub 2023
Dec 10.

Effects of tetrathiomolybdate on copper metabolism in healthy volunteers and in
patients with Wilson disease.

Kirk FT(1), Munk DE(2), Swenson ES(3), Quicquaro AM(3), Vendelbo MH(4), Larsen
A(5), Schilsky ML(6), Ott P(2), Sandahl TD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus, Denmark. Electronic address: frkirk@rm.dk.
(2)Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Alexion, AstraZeneca Rare Disease, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine & PET-center, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus, Denmark; Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(6)Department of Medicine, Section of Digestive Diseases, and Department of
Surgery, Section of Transplant and Immunology, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In Wilson disease (WD), copper accumulates in the liver and
brain causing disease. Bis-choline tetrathiomolybdate (TTM) is a potent copper
chelator that may be associated with a lower risk of inducing paradoxical
neurological worsening than conventional therapy for neurologic WD. To better
understand the mode of action of TTM, we investigated its effects on copper
absorption and biliary excretion.
METHODS: In a double-blind randomized setting, hepatic 64Cu activity was
examined after orally administered 64Cu by PET/CT in 16 healthy volunteers
before and after seven days of TTM treatment (15 mg/d) or placebo. Oral 64Cu was
administered one hour after the final TTM dose. Changes in hepatic 64Cu activity
reflected changes in intestinal 64Cu uptake. Additionally, in four patients with
WD, the distribution of 64Cu in venous blood, liver, gallbladder, kidney, and
brain was followed after i.v. 64Cu dosing for up to 68 hours before and after
seven days of TTM (15 mg/day), using PET/MRI. Increased gallbladder 64Cu
activity was taken as evidence of increased biliary 64Cu excretion.
RESULTS: In healthy volunteers, TTM reduced intestinal 64Cu uptake by 82% 15
hours after the oral 64Cu dose. In patients with WD, gallbladder 64Cu activity
was negligible before and after TTM, while TTM effectively retained 64Cu in the
blood, significantly reduced hepatic 64Cu activity at all time-points and
significantly reduced cerebral 64Cu activity two hours after the intravenous
64Cu dose.
CONCLUSIONS: While we did not show an increase in biliary excretion of 64Cu
following TTM administration, we demonstrated that TTM effectively inhibited
most intestinal 64Cu uptake and retained 64Cu in the blood stream, limiting the
exposure of organs like the liver and brain to 64Cu.
IMPACT AND IMPLICATIONS: Bis-choline tetrathiomolybdate (TTM) is an
investigational copper chelator being developed for the treatment of Wilson
disease. In animal models of Wilson disease, TTM has been shown to facilitate
biliary copper excretion. In the present human study, TTM surprisingly did not
facilitate biliary copper excretion but instead reduced intestinal copper uptake
to a clinically significant degree. Our study builds on our understanding of
human copper metabolism and the mechanism of action of TTM.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.11.023
PMID: 38081365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
