---
reference_id: "PMID:37713976"
title: Longitudinal Characterization of the Clinical Course of Intermediate-Severe Salla Disease.
authors:
- Chapleau A
- Mirchi A
- Tran LT
- Poulin C
- Bernard G
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.08.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Longitudinal Characterization of the Clinical Course of Intermediate-Severe Salla Disease.
**Authors:** Chapleau A, Mirchi A, Tran LT, Poulin C, Bernard G
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.08.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.08.013)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2023 Nov;148:133-137. doi:
10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.08.013.  Epub 2023 Aug 19.

Longitudinal Characterization of the Clinical Course of Intermediate-Severe 
Salla Disease.

Chapleau A(1), Mirchi A(2), Tran LT(1), Poulin C(3), Bernard G(4).

Author information:
(1)Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, Montréal, Canada; Department of Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montréal, Canada.
(2)Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, Montréal, Canada; Department of Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montréal, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, 
McGill University, Montréal, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montréal, 
Canada; Department of Pediatrics, McGill University, Montréal, Canada.
(4)Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, Montréal, Canada; Department of Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montréal, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, 
McGill University, Montréal, Canada; Department of Human Genetics, McGill 
University, Montréal, Canada; Division of Medical Genetics, Department of 
Specialized Medicine, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Canada. 
Electronic address: genevieve.bernard@mcgill.ca.

BACKGROUND: Biallelic pathogenic variants in SLC17A5 cause three forms of free 
sialic acid storage disease categorized based on severity from least to most 
severe: Salla disease, intermediate-severe Salla disease, and infantile free 
sialic acid storage disease. Intermediate-severe Salla disease is the most 
recently described form. Here, we report a longitudinal characterization of 
intermediate-severe Salla disease progression in two sisters carrying the 
following biallelic variants in SLC17A5: c.406A>G (p.Lys136Glu) and c.819+1G>A.
METHODS: A retrospective review of medical records was performed. A 
developmental questionnaire was completed to obtain further clinical 
information. For functional characterization of the predicted splice site 
variant, RNA was extracted from patient blood samples and sequenced.
RESULTS: Disease onset occurred within the first six months of life in both 
patients. Early childhood development was delayed with achievement of some 
milestones followed by a developmental plateau in late childhood. After this, 
both patients began a slow and progressive neurological regression in 
adolescence. Functional studies confirmed the pathogenicity of the c.819+1G>A 
variant, resulting in a frameshift and deletion of exon 6.
CONCLUSIONS: We present a detailed study describing the clinical course of 
intermediate-severe Salla disease with over 15 to 20 years of evolution and 
demonstrate the pathogenicity of the c.819+1G>A splice site variant.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.08.013
PMID: 37713976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no relevant conflicts of interest. Dr. Bernard is/was a consultant for 
Passage Bio Inc (2020-2021) and Ionis (2019). She is/was a site investigator for 
the Alexander's disease trial of Ionis (2021-present), Metachromatic 
leukodystrophy of Shire/Takeda (2020-2021), Krabbe and GM1 gene therapy trials 
of Passage Bio (2021-present), GM1 natural history study of Passage Bio 
(2021-present), and adrenoleukodystrophy/hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
natural history study of Bluebird Bio (2019) and a site subinvestigator for the 
MPS II gene therapy trial of Regenxbio (2021-present) and the MPS II clinical 
trial of Denali (2022-present). She has received unrestricted educational grants 
from Takeda (2021-2022).