---
reference_id: "PMID:34899143"
title: Clinical and Molecular Update on the Fourth Reported Family with Hamamy Syndrome.
authors:
- Mégarbané A
- Hana S
- Mégarbané H
- Castro C
- Baulande S
- Criqui A
- Roëckel-Trevisiol N
- Dagher C
- Al-Ali MT
- Desvignes JP
- Mahfoud D
- El-Hayek S
- Delague V
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1159/000517253
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Molecular Update on the Fourth Reported Family with Hamamy Syndrome.
**Authors:** Mégarbané A, Hana S, Mégarbané H, Castro C, Baulande S, Criqui A, Roëckel-Trevisiol N, Dagher C, Al-Ali MT, Desvignes JP, Mahfoud D, El-Hayek S, Delague V
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000517253](https://doi.org/10.1159/000517253)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2021 Oct;12(6):342-350. doi: 10.1159/000517253. Epub 2021 Aug
31.

Clinical and Molecular Update on the Fourth Reported Family with Hamamy
Syndrome.

Mégarbané A(1)(2), Hana S(3), Mégarbané H(4), Castro C(5), Baulande S(6), Criqui
A(6), Roëckel-Trevisiol N(5), Dagher C(1), Al-Ali MT(3), Desvignes JP(5),
Mahfoud D(7), El-Hayek S(3), Delague V(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Gilbert and Rose-Marie Ghagoury School of
Medicine, Lebanese American University, Byblos, Lebanon.
(2)Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France.
(3)Centre for Arab Genomic Studies, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Balamand University, Saint George Hospital,
Beirut, Lebanon.
(5)Aix Marseille Univ, Inserm, MMG, U 1251, Marseille, France.
(6)Génopole Campus 2, PartnerChip, Evry, France.
(7)Department of Radiology, Gilbert and Rose-Marie Ghagoury School of Medicine,
Lebanese American University, Byblos, Lebanon.

We report on 2 cousins, a girl and a boy, born to first-cousin Lebanese parents
with Hamamy syndrome, exhibiting developmental delay, intellectual disability,
severe telecanthus, abnormal ears, dentinogenesis imperfecta, and bone
fragility. Whole-exome sequencing studies performed on the 2 affected
individuals and one obligate carrier revealed the presence of a homozygous
c.503G>A (p.Arg168His) missense mutation in IRX5 in both sibs, not reported in
any other family. Review of the literature and differential diagnoses are
discussed.

Copyright © 2021 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000517253
PMCID: PMC8613633
PMID: 34899143

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
report.
