---
reference_id: "PMID:39351233"
title: Varicella-zoster virus recapitulates its immune evasive behaviour in matured hiPSC-derived neurospheroids.
authors:
- Govaerts J
- Van Breedam E
- De Beuckeleer S
- Goethals C
- "D'Incal CP"
- Di Stefano J
- Van Calster S
- Buyle-Huybrecht T
- Boeren M
- De Reu H
- Paludan SR
- Thiry M
- Lebrun M
- Sadzot-Delvaux C
- Motaln H
- Rogelj B
- Van Weyenbergh J
- De Vos WH
- Vanden Berghe W
- Ogunjimi B
- Delputte P
- Ponsaerts P
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1458967
keywords:
- Humans
- "Herpesvirus 3, Human/immunology"
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/immunology, virology"
- "Immunity, Innate"
- "Neurons/immunology, virology"
- "Varicella Zoster Virus Infection/immunology, virology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Interferon Type I/metabolism, immunology"
- Immune Evasion
- "Cytokines/metabolism, immunology"
- "Astrocytes/immunology, virology, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella-zoster virus recapitulates its immune evasive behaviour in matured hiPSC-derived neurospheroids.
**Authors:** Govaerts J, Van Breedam E, De Beuckeleer S, Goethals C, D'Incal CP, Di Stefano J, Van Calster S, Buyle-Huybrecht T, Boeren M, De Reu H, Paludan SR, Thiry M, Lebrun M, Sadzot-Delvaux C, Motaln H, Rogelj B, Van Weyenbergh J, De Vos WH, Vanden Berghe W, Ogunjimi B, Delputte P, Ponsaerts P
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1458967](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1458967)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Sep 16;15:1458967. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1458967.
eCollection 2024.

Varicella-zoster virus recapitulates its immune evasive behaviour in matured
hiPSC-derived neurospheroids.

Govaerts J(1)(2)(3), Van Breedam E(1), De Beuckeleer S(1)(4)(5), Goethals C(1),
D'Incal CP(6), Di Stefano J(1), Van Calster S(1), Buyle-Huybrecht T(1)(2)(3),
Boeren M(1)(2)(3), De Reu H(1)(7), Paludan SR(8), Thiry M(9), Lebrun M(10),
Sadzot-Delvaux C(10), Motaln H(11), Rogelj B(11)(12), Van Weyenbergh J(13), De
Vos WH(4)(5), Vanden Berghe W(6), Ogunjimi B(3)(14)(15)(16), Delputte P(2)(17),
Ponsaerts P(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Hematology (LEH), Vaccine and Infectious Disease
Institute (Vaxinfectio), University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Microbiology, Parasitology and Hygiene (LMPH), University of
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)Antwerp Center for Translational Immunology and Virology (ACTIV), Vaccine and
Infectious Disease Institute (Vaxinfectio), University of Antwerp, Antwerp,
Belgium.
(4)Laboratory of Cell Biology and Histology, Antwerp Center for Advanced
Microscopy, Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk,
Belgium.
(5)µNEURO Research Centre of Excellence, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk,
Belgium.
(6)Cell Death Signaling - Epigenetics Lab, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(7)Flow Cytometry and Cell Sorting Core Facility (FACSUA), University of
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(8)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(9)Laboratory of Cell and Tissue Biology, GIGA-Neurosciences, Cell Biology L3,
University of Liège, Liege, Belgium.
(10)Laboratory of Virology and Immunology, GIGA-Infection, Inflammation and
Immunity, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(11)Department of Biotechnology, Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(12)Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(13)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Laboratory of
Clinical and Epidemiological Virology, Rega Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
(14)Antwerp Unit for Data Analysis and Computation in Immunology and Sequencing
(AUDACIS), Antwerp, Belgium.
(15)Centre for Health Economics Research and Modelling Infectious Diseases
(CHERMID), Vaccine and Infectious Disease Institute (Vaxinfectio), University of
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(16)Department of Paediatrics, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(17)Infla-Med, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) encephalitis and meningitis are potential central
nervous system (CNS) complications following primary VZV infection or
reactivation. With Type-I interferon (IFN) signalling being an important first
line cellular defence mechanism against VZV infection by the peripheral tissues,
we here investigated the triggering of innate immune responses in a human
neural-like environment. For this, we established and characterised 5-month
matured hiPSC-derived neurospheroids (NSPHs) containing neurons and astrocytes.
Subsequently, NSPHs were infected with reporter strains of VZV (VZVeGFP-ORF23)
or Sendai virus (SeVeGFP), with the latter serving as an immune-activating
positive control. Live cell and immunocytochemical analyses demonstrated
VZVeGFP-ORF23 infection throughout the NSPHs, while SeVeGFP infection was
limited to the outer NSPH border. Next, NanoString digital transcriptomics
revealed that SeVeGFP-infected NSPHs activated a clear Type-I IFN response,
while this was not the case in VZVeGFP-ORF23-infected NSPHs. Moreover, the
latter displayed a strong suppression of genes related to IFN signalling and
antigen presentation, as further demonstrated by suppression of IL-6 and CXCL10
production, failure to upregulate Type-I IFN activated anti-viral proteins (Mx1,
IFIT2 and ISG15), as well as reduced expression of CD74, a key-protein in the
MHC class II antigen presentation pathway. Finally, even though
VZVeGFP-ORF23-infection seems to be immunologically ignored in NSPHs, its
presence does result in the formation of stress granules upon long-term
infection, as well as disruption of cellular integrity within the infected
NSPHs. Concluding, in this study we demonstrate that 5-month matured
hiPSC-derived NSPHs display functional innate immune reactivity towards SeV
infection, and have the capacity to recapitulate the strong immune evasive
behaviour towards VZV.

Copyright © 2024 Govaerts, Van Breedam, De Beuckeleer, Goethals, D’Incal, Di
Stefano, Van Calster, Buyle-Huybrecht, Boeren, De Reu, Paludan, Thiry, Lebrun,
Sadzot-Delvaux, Motaln, Rogelj, Van Weyenbergh, De Vos, Vanden Berghe, Ogunjimi,
Delputte and Ponsaerts.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1458967
PMCID: PMC11439716
PMID: 39351233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
