---
reference_id: "PMID:33631966"
title: Diagnosis and treatment of idiopathic intracranial hypertension.
authors:
- Raoof N
- Hoffmann J
journal: Cephalalgia
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/0333102421997093
keywords:
- Acetazolamide/therapeutic use
- Analgesics/therapeutic use
- "Headache/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Headache Disorders
- Humans
- Intracranial Hypertension
- Migraine Disorders
- "Papilledema/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Pseudotumor Cerebri/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Vision Disorders/complications, therapy"
- Weight Reduction Programs
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Diagnosis and treatment of idiopathic intracranial hypertension.
**Authors:** Raoof N, Hoffmann J
**Journal:** Cephalalgia (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0333102421997093](https://doi.org/10.1177/0333102421997093)

## Content

1. Cephalalgia. 2021 Apr;41(4):472-478. doi: 10.1177/0333102421997093. Epub 2021 
Feb 25.

Diagnosis and treatment of idiopathic intracranial hypertension.

Raoof N(1)(2), Hoffmann J(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Strabismus and Neuro-ophthalmology, Moorfields Eye 
Hospital, London, UK.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Royal London Hospital, Barts Health NHS Trust, 
London, UK.
(3)Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology 
and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(4)NIHR-Wellcome Trust King's Clinical Research Facility/SLaM Biomedical 
Research Centre, King's College Hospital, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To review and discuss the clinical presentation and treatment of 
idiopathic intracranial hypertension.
DISCUSSION: Visual alterations and headache are the two main symptoms of 
idiopathic intracranial hypertension, although additional features including 
cranial nerve palsies, cognitive deficits, olfactory deficits and tinnitus are 
not uncommon. The headache associated with idiopathic intracranial hypertension 
frequently has a migrainous phenotype. The underlying cause of the disorder has 
not yet been elucidated. Several hypotheses have been postulated but none of 
them can explain the full clinical picture. Therapeutic options remain limited, 
focusing mainly on reduction in body weight and the reduction of CSF production 
with carbonic anhydrase inhibitors.
CONCLUSION: The accurate diagnosis of idiopathic intracranial hypertension is 
essential as visual deterioration due to papilledema may be irreversible. Given 
its phenotypic similarity and frequent overlap with chronic migraine it is 
essential to consider idiopathic intracranial hypertension in the diagnostic 
workup of chronic headache; in particular, when considering its increasing 
prevalence. Understanding in detail the pathophysiological mechanisms behind the 
associated headache would also allow study of current and future therapeutic 
options in a structured way.

DOI: 10.1177/0333102421997093
PMCID: PMC8020303
PMID: 33631966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
authors declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: NR does not report 
a conflict of interest. JH has received honoraria for serving on advisory 
boards, consulting activities and/or for presentations from Allergan, Autonomic 
Technologies Inc, Cannovex BV, Chordate Medical AB, Eli Lilly, Hormosan Pharma, 
Lundbeck, Novartis, Sanofi and Teva. He has received personal fees for 
medico-legal work as well as from Sage Publishing, Springer Healthcare and 
Quintessence Publishing. He has received research support from Bristol Myers 
Squibb. None of these activities and honoraria are related to the submitted 
work.

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) is caused by an elevation of intracranial
pressure (ICP). The condition mainly affects obese young women of childbearing
age. Its prevalence ranges between 0.5 and 2 per 100,000 of the general population
and is expected to increase further given the worldwide increase in obesity (1). The underlying cause
of the disease, as well as the gender preference and its pathophysiological
relation to obesity, remain largely unknown. Several mechanisms have been proposed
as the underlying cause of IIH, such as an overproduction of cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF), outflow obstruction, elevated pressure in the venous sinuses and more
recently a dysfunction in the glymphatic pathway as well as hormonal alterations.
Given that none of these theories can explain the entire clinical picture,
therapeutic approaches rely mainly on weight reduction and the decrease of CSF
production with carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (2). As increasing evidence suggests that
a CSF overproduction is unlikely to be the driving factor behind IIH, treatment
with acetazolamide is likely to target a consequence, rather than the cause of
this disorder.

The two most prominent symptoms of IIH are progressive visual deterioration resulting
from papilledema and chronic headache, although additional symptoms including
cranial nerve palsies, cognitive deficits, tinnitus and olfactory dysfunction are
frequently also part of the clinical presentation. While the visual dysfunction is
known to largely result from a pressure-induced papilledema, the origin of the
IIH-related headache is less clear and therapeutic approaches are less
investigated.

IIH-related headache is defined in the Headache Classification of the International
Headache Society (ICHD-3) (3). While the ICHD has had an enormous impact on advancing the
understanding and treatment options of many headache disorders, as it allowed the
creation of homogenous patient groups resulting in improved diagnostic accuracy
and more effective clinical trials, ICHD has had less of an impact in IIH-related
headache. The reason is a rather unspecific definition of IIH-related headache
resulting from its highly variable clinical presentation that may frequently mimic
or overlap with primary headaches, in particular migraine (4). As a result, while the understanding
of IIH is advancing, unfortunately this is not so much the case in IIH-related
headache.

The aim of this review is to discuss the most prominent visual symptoms and
IIH-associated headache as well as the potential therapeutic options that exist to
treat these two features of IIH.

Transient visual obscurations (TVOs) refer to loss or clouding of the vision in
one or both eyes, lasting for a minute or less. The cause has been suggested
to be raised ICP at the optic nerve causing transient ischemia of the optic
nerve head (5).
While not specific for raised ICP, a questionnaire-based study of 50
patients with IIH and 100 controls reported that while this symptom was
reported by both patients and controls (68% of IIH patients versus 21% of
controls, odds ratio 8 (95% CI 3.7–17.1)), daily occurrence of these
symptoms was much more common in IIH patients with an odds ratio of 66.7 (CI
60–550) (6).
Postural changes were described as a provoking factor in 50% of cases.
Similarly, 68% of 165 patients enrolled in the IIH Treatment Trial (IIHTT)
reported TVOs, with a median of one episode per day (7). These studies suggest daily
TVOs are useful clinical indicators of raised intracranial pressure and
therefore also IIH.

Diplopia is another symptom encountered in patients with IIH. The IIHTT reports
that 18% of their cohort experienced diplopia, but the nature of the
diplopia is not further characterised in this study (7). Guiseffi et al. report a
higher incidence of diplopia in patients with IIH at 38%, but again the
nature of this is not stated. Sixth nerve palsy is thought to be the most
common cause of diplopia in patients with IIH, with one study reporting 14
cases in a cohort of 101 patients (8). These patients describe
horizontal diplopia that is binocular in nature (closure of either eye
eliminates the diplopia). The long course of the sixth nerve, including the
relationship to the apex of the petrous temporal bone as well as its
ascending course between the pons and clivus to enter Dorello’s canal, have
been given as reasons for the vulnerability of the sixth nerve to being both
compressed and stretched as a consequence of raised intracranial pressure.
Third and fourth cranial nerve palsies have been described in patients with
IIH, but are rarer. Patients can describe a non-specific visual blurring as
“double vision”, but a report of binocular diplopia should alert a clinician
to the possibility of a disturbance in ocular motility associated with
raised ICP.

Visual loss in IIH can manifest as loss in visual field or loss of visual
acuity. An enlarged blind spot is well recognised as a common early visual
field defect in raised ICP. In a cohort of 82 patients, where the majority
had Frisen grade 2 papilledema, 80% of visual fields showed an enlarged
blind spot while 72% had a nasal defect (9). The IIHTT describes similar
co-existent visual fields defects in their baseline population, with an
enlarged blind spot and inferior partial arcuate defects as the commonest
changes in this cohort with mild disease (10). Loss of visual acuity is
generally accepted to be a feature of advanced disease, although fulminant
IIH (severe visual loss within 4 weeks from symptoms onset) is a
well-recognised, albeit rare, form of the condition that clinicians must be
alert to as it requires prompt surgical intervention to prevent marked
permanent visual deficits (11). However, there is evidence
from two large studies that visual acuity can be affected even in relatively
mild disease. Pollack et al. report that 17% of eyes had a visual acuity of
0.2 logMAR or worse, while in the IIHTT 29% of study eyes had a visual
acuity worse than 20/20 (equivalent to 0.0 logMAR) despite accounting for
the patients’ refractive error. Taken together, these findings broadly
suggest that visual field assessment may be more sensitive than visual
acuity assessment in detecting visual deficits in IIH. This is supported by
Rowe et al. in a study of 35 patients with IIH, who documented an abnormal
visual field assessment in 103 of 110 tests (94%) but abnormal visual acuity
in 36 tests (33%), giving a value of f = 0.0047 (F-test) (12). It should be
stated, however, that this was a smaller study based on 35 patients, a
significant proportion of whom showed more severe disease (approximately 25%
of patients showed moderate visual field loss on Goldmann visual field
testing).

Papilledema is encountered in almost all patients with IIH and is therefore a
key feature in assessing patients suspected of having this condition. A
large retrospective study of 353 patients with IIH identified only 20
patients who presented without papilledema (5.7%) (13). It is important for
clinicians to be aware that while mostly bilateral, papilledema may be
asymmetrical. Indeed, the IIHTT found that 7% of patients had a difference
of 2 Frisen grades or more in the papilledema grading between the two eyes
(7). When
assessing an optic nerve for the likelihood of papilledema, the presence of
spontaneous venous pulsations has traditionally been considered to exclude
the possibility of raised ICP. However, a study by Wong et al. reports that
SVP were visible in 12 of 20 IIH patients with mild papilledema, five of
whom had an opening pressure on lumbar puncture of  > 30 cmH2O
(14).
Although this represents a subgroup analysis and is limited by the small
sample size, this study serves as a reminder that the presence of SVP does
not invariably rule out raised ICP. If untreated, papilledema can result in
optic atrophy in patients with IIH, although the associated visual deficits
mean the diagnosis is often easy to make at this late stage.

As described above, chronic headache is another key symptom of IIH. Headache
represents the most common reason for IIH patients to seek medical advice as
it has a profound impact on the patient’s quality of life (15,16). While the
definition of IIH-related headache of the International Headache Society is
relatively unspecific (3), it frequently has a migrainous phenotype (7,17–20). Therefore, the
differentiation between chronic migraine and IIH-related headache may be
challenging (4,21). This is complicated even further due to the fact that in
many IIH-patients, headache persists in the long-term despite a
normalisation of CSF pressure (22,23). The IIHTT and other studies
revealed that there is no correlation between CSF pressure and headache
presence or intensity (7,17,24). The transient improvement after lumbar puncture is not
exclusive to IIH-related headache, as it is also observed in other chronic
headaches (24).
When IIH-related headaches have a migrainous phenotype, the accompanying
symptoms such as nausea, photophobia and phonophobia also tend to improve
after lumbar puncture (25). For these reasons, a lumbar puncture-induced transient
improvement of headache and accompanying symptoms does not allow the
pathophysiological origin of IIH-related headache to be distinguished. It is
clear that attributing it simply to the direct effect of elevated CSF
pressure falls short as a plausible explanation, at least in the majority of
IIH patients. Understanding the pathomechanism of IIH-related headache,
including the involved neuronal networks and molecular mediators, would
allow us to understand and reliably distinguish whether, in an individual
patient, IIH-related headache is its own entity or if it is the result of a
CSF pressure-induced aggravation of a pre-existing migraine, or if it may
even unmask a migraine that had been previously been clinically inapparent.
This differentiation may also allow understanding of why headache persists
in some patients after normalisation of CSF pressure while it does not in
others. It may be speculated that the subgroup of patients in which headache
persists despite normalisation of CSF pressure may in fact have an
additional migrainous biology, which may be the driving force behind
headache chronification and maintenance of post-IIH headache. Unfortunately,
to date there is no structured clinical study that answers this question in
detail although this knowledge would be essential for the therapeutic
management of IIH-related headache. When assessing the efficacy of a
specific medication for the treatment of IIH, in contrast to the improvement
in papilledema and visual function, the effect on IIH-related headache is
much more difficult to assess given the complexity around the origin of
IIH-related headache and its frequent overlap with chronic migraine.

As stated in the IIH Guidelines (26,27), the main principles of
management can be summarised as i) treatment of the underlying disease, ii)
protection of vision, and iii) minimisation of the headache morbidity.

While the cornerstone of treating the underlying disease is weight loss,
acetazolamide is typically used to lower ICP in most cases of IIH, relieving
pressure on the optic nerves and allowing time for weight loss to occur.
Acetazolamide inhibits carbonic anhydrase, thereby reducing production of
CSF by the choroid plexus. The IIHTT was a randomised, multicentre,
double-blinded trial designed to investigate the efficacy of acetazolamide
(up to the dose of 4 g) versus placebo in IIH patients with mild visual loss
(2). To
date, it remains the only randomised-controlled trial for the
pharmacological treatment of IIH. All patients were also on a low-sodium
weight reduction diet. Perimetric mean deviation (PMD), a measure of global
field loss, was used as the primary outcome variable in this study. This is
the mean deviation from age-corrected normal values, with larger negative
values indicating greater visual loss. Individuals receiving acetazolamide
had a greater improvement in mean PMD compared with those receiving placebo
at 6 months, with a statistically significant difference of 0.71 dB (95% CI,
0 to 1.43 dB; p = 0.050). There was also a statistically
significant improvement in mean papilledema grade (acetazolamide: −1.31,
from 2.76 to 1.45; placebo: −0.61, from 2.76 to 2.15; treatment effect,
−0.70; 95% CI, −0.99 to −0.41; p < 0.001). Of note, both
groups also lost weight, although the group receiving acetazolamide lost
more weight than those receiving placebo (−7.50 kg vs. −3.45 kg;
p < 0.001). Headache severity was assessed using
the six-item Headache Impact Test (HIT-6), but no significant treatment
effects were noted in this study. At 6 months, headaches were reported by
69% of the acetazolamide group versus 68% of participants in the placebo
group (p = 0.80). One other randomised open-label study of
acetazolamide versus no acetazolamide has been conducted but had only 25
patients in each arm and is therefore not sufficiently powered (28).

Topiramate is gaining increasing popularity as a therapeutic option for IIH, in
light of its actions as an anti-migraine and appetite suppression agent, as
well as its ability to inhibit carbonic anhydrase (1). To date, there are no
controlled studies into the role of topiramate, although one open-label
study comparing topiramate and acetazolamide has been conducted (29), in which 41
patients with IIH were alternately assigned to receiving either
acetazolamide (1000–1500 mg per day) or topiramate (100–150 mg per day). One
patient had rapidly worsening vision and dropped out of the topiramate group
after 1 week to undergo CSF diversion surgery. Visual field grading was used
to assess patients 3, 6 and 12 months after treatment. In both groups, there
was a statistically significant difference in visual field grading at 12
months when compared with the initial visual field. There was no
statistically significant difference between the two arms at 12 months,
however.

For the management of IIH-related headache it has to be considered that a
migrainous phenotype is the most common presentation of IIH-related
headache. From a headache perspective, these patients may be treated with a
migraine preventive (26,27). In general, when selecting an appropriate migraine
preventive for these patients, the use of medications that may induce weight
gain should be only be used with caution. In the context of IIH, beyond its
efficacy as a migraine preventive, topiramate inhibits carbonic anhydrase
thereby reducing CSF pressure, as outlined above, and frequently causes
weight loss. Therefore, topiramate would be particularly attractive as it
would target IIH-related headache while at the same time reducing CSF
pressure. However, it has to be taken into consideration that topiramate may
induce cognitive side effects and depression, two common comorbidities in
IIH. In these patients, its use should be considered with caution.

When managing headache in IIH, the overuse of acute medication (pain killers)
should be assessed as this is a common observation in IIH patients (17,23). While there
is no clinical study proving that medication overuse aggravates IIH-related
headache, given the current mechanistic understanding of medication overuse
in the context of migraine, and the fact that IIH-related headache commonly
presents with a migrainous phenotype or comorbid migraine, it is likely that
medication overuse may play a role in the chronification of IIH-related
headache.

Surgical management of IIH is required when there is a rapid or progressive
decline in visual function (26,27). Surgical treatments include
CSF shunting (including ventriculoperitoneal (VP), lumboperitoneal (LP),
ventriculojugular and vetriculoatrial shunts), venous sinus stenting and
optic nerve sheath fenestration (ONSF). The treatment offered is often
dependent on the local expertise available. These should occur in
conjunction with weight loss.

The scientific literature around CSF diversion neurosurgery remains
limited by the fact that it is mainly observational and often based on
case series. A randomised-controlled trial comparing medical
management alone to medical management plus either CSF diversion
surgery or ONSF was abandoned due to low enrolment, with only 16 of a
planned 180 patients recruited (30). One large
meta-analysis looking at surgical management of refractory IIH
included 435 patients who had undergone CSF shunting (31). This
report did not consider the type of shunt that was placed but reported
that papilledema improved in 70% of patients (107/153), with an
improvement in visual acuity in 54% of patients post-shunt (104/193).
The paucity of visual data for over half the cases included in this
meta-analysis is surprising, given the primary aim of this
intervention should be to protect vision. Similarly, there was
improvement in headache in 80% of patients, although there was only
information on headache available for 287 of the total 435 cases.
However, 43% of patients required more than one surgical procedure,
with 428 additional surgical procedures performed in 154 of the total
435 patients. The commonest reason for a repeat procedure was shunt
obstruction (41%). They report that the rate of major complications
(shunt infection, tonsillar herniation, subdural hematoma, and CSF
fistula) was 7.6% (33/435), while minor complications (including
abdominal pain, shunt disconnection, valve dysfunction and
low-pressure headache) occurred in 32.9% (143/435). More recent
advances in shunt technology may contribute to lower shunt failure and
complication rates in the future. However, it is important to stress
that CSF diversion surgery is not generally a recommended treatment
for headaches in the absence of visual involvement (26,27). A
relatively large single centre retrospective study of 50 patients
undergoing CSF diversion surgery for IIH describes that headache
remained a problem for 56% of these patients, with 42% requiring
medication for headache management post-shunt (32).

As with CSF diversion surgery, the literature around ONSF in IIH is
largely retrospective, with small sample sizes. Different mechanisms
through ONSF exerts its action have been proposed, including dural
fistula formation (33) or scarring of the subarachnoid space acting as a
barrier to the transmission of intracranial pressure to the optic
nerve (34).
It is often considered in patients with asymmetrical papilledema and
traditionally has been used in patients where headache is a less
prominent feature. It is considered to be associated with fewer
serious complications than CSF diversion surgery, particularly
life-threatening problems. In their meta-analysis, Satti et al.
included 1153 eyes of 712 patients with IIH who had undergone ONSF,
with a mean follow-up of 21 months (compared with 41 months in the CSF
diversion group) (31). They found that visual acuity improved in 59%
(152/257 eyes), a similar figure to that reported for the CSF
diversion group, with 95% of eyes either showing either an improvement
or stable visual function post-ONSF. Papilledema improved in 80%
(76/95 patients). While some improvement in headache can be seen in
patients following ONSF, the proportion of patients who experience
this is less than with CSF diversion surgery at 44%. The rate of major
complications following ONSF was found to be 1.5% based on this group
and included retinal artery occlusions, retrobulbar haemorrhage,
traumatic optic neuropathy, and manifest strabismus. The rate of minor
complications was 16.4%, and included transient double vision,
anisocoria, conjunctival problems/cysts and optic nerve haemorrhages.
A failure rate of 14.9% was found. It has been observed that
unilateral ONSF can cause an improvement in the grade of papilledema
seen in both eyes, although the mechanism for this is not certain
(35).
Patients with ONSF require ongoing monitoring as visual worsening is
possible even after a period of visual stability, at a rate that could
be as high as 45% at 3 years (27).

Many patients with IIH can be observed to have stenoses in the cerebral
venous sinuses. While these may be constitutional, the possibility of
raised intracranial pressure causing sinus compression remains and
venous sinus stenting has been used in this scenario with some
success. Satti et al. included 136 patients in their meta-analysis who
had undergone venous sinus stenting for refractory IIH, with a mean
follow up time of 22.9 months (31). This intervention
appears to be very effective, with improvement in papilledema seen in
97% of patients (104/108 patients). Headache improvement was reported
in 83% (101/121 patients). Complications were seen in 7.4% (10/136
cases), the most serious being related to vessel perforation and acute
subdural haemorrhage, stent migration and thrombosis. It was found
that 14/136 patients needed a repeat procedure (10.3%), with eight
patients requiring a stent to be placed at or near the original
treatment site for a restenosis. However, as Mollan et al. state in
the IIH Consensus guidelines, long-term data concerning safety and
efficacy is lacking (27). They also comment that
there is a lack of data regarding the role of venous sinus stenting in
patients with rapidly worsening vision. The advice is that this
treatment should be reserved for carefully selected patients, with
clear evidence of an elevated pressure gradient across a stenosis.


The main features of IIH are chronic headache and progressive
visual disturbances, although other features including
cognitive deficits, cranial nerve palsies, olfactory
disturbances and tinnitus are not uncommon.Visual disturbances include visual loss, transient visual
obscurations resulting from CSF pressure-induced
papilledema and diplopia due to cranial nerve palsies.The pathophysiological basis has not been fully elucidated.
Therefore, treatment strategies focus on the reduction of
body weight and inhibition of CSF production with carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors.IIH-related headache often has a migrainous phenotype and may
persist even if CSF pressure has been normalised. In this
context, acetazolamide is the only substance that has been
investigated in a randomised-controlled trial. If headache
has a migrainous phenotype, migraine preventives may be
used.


The main features of IIH are chronic headache and progressive
visual disturbances, although other features including
cognitive deficits, cranial nerve palsies, olfactory
disturbances and tinnitus are not uncommon.

Visual disturbances include visual loss, transient visual
obscurations resulting from CSF pressure-induced
papilledema and diplopia due to cranial nerve palsies.

The pathophysiological basis has not been fully elucidated.
Therefore, treatment strategies focus on the reduction of
body weight and inhibition of CSF production with carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors.

IIH-related headache often has a migrainous phenotype and may
persist even if CSF pressure has been normalised. In this
context, acetazolamide is the only substance that has been
investigated in a randomised-controlled trial. If headache
has a migrainous phenotype, migraine preventives may be
used.