---
reference_id: "PMID:16638546"
title: Surgical repair of total anomalous pulmonary venous connection.
authors:
- Kanter KR
journal: Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1053/j.pcsu.2006.02.015
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anastomosis, Surgical/adverse effects"
- "Cardiac Surgical Procedures/adverse effects, methods"
- Child
- "Circulatory Arrest, Deep Hypothermia Induced"
- Heart Atria/surgery
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/surgery"
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/etiology, therapy"
- Infant
- "Pulmonary Veins/abnormalities, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical repair of total anomalous pulmonary venous connection.
**Authors:** Kanter KR
**Journal:** Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.pcsu.2006.02.015](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.pcsu.2006.02.015)

## Content

1. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2006:40-4. doi: 
10.1053/j.pcsu.2006.02.015.

Surgical repair of total anomalous pulmonary venous connection.

Kanter KR(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Emory University 
School of Medicine and Children's Healthcare of Atlanta at Egleston, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA. kkanter@emory.edu

The diagnosis of total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) is made 
when all four pulmonary veins drain anomalously to the right atrium or to a 
tributary of the systemic veins. It constitutes between 1% and 1.5% of all 
children with congenital heart disease and can be categorized by the site of 
drainage into the systemic circulation (supracardiac, 45%; infracardiac, 25%; 
cardiac, 25%; mixed, 5%). The clinical presentation is different if the 
pulmonary venous drainage is unobstructed (heart failure, mild cyanosis) or 
obstructed (respiratory failure, severe heart failure). Surgical management 
depends on the anatomic type. Obstructed TAPVC requires urgent surgical 
intervention, whereas unobstructed TAPVC can be dealt with electively; although 
this is usually operated on once the diagnosis is made. Postoperative pulmonary 
artery hypertension can be problematic. Recent surgical results with isolated 
TAPVC have improved, with operative mortality consistently at less than 10%. A 
particularly challenging group of patients are those with single ventricle 
physiology and TAPVC with high operative mortality and poor long-term survival.

DOI: 10.1053/j.pcsu.2006.02.015
PMID: 16638546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]