---
reference_id: "PMID:34927719"
title: "The epidemiology of epidermolysis bullosa in England and Wales: data from the national epidermolysis bullosa database."
authors:
- Petrof G
- Papanikolaou M
- Martinez AE
- Mellerio JE
- McGrath JA
- Bardhan A
- Harper N
- Heagerty A
- Ogboli M
- Chiswell C
- Moss C
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.20958
keywords:
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa, Junctional"
- Humans
- Infant
- Retrospective Studies
- State Medicine
- Wales/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The epidemiology of epidermolysis bullosa in England and Wales: data from the national epidermolysis bullosa database.
**Authors:** Petrof G, Papanikolaou M, Martinez AE, Mellerio JE, McGrath JA, Bardhan A, Harper N, Heagerty A, Ogboli M, Chiswell C, Moss C
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.20958](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.20958)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2022 May;186(5):843-848. doi: 10.1111/bjd.20958. Epub 2022 Mar 
31.

The epidemiology of epidermolysis bullosa in England and Wales: data from the 
national epidermolysis bullosa database.

Petrof G(1), Papanikolaou M(2), Martinez AE(1), Mellerio JE(2)(3), McGrath 
JA(2)(3), Bardhan A(4)(5), Harper N(4), Heagerty A(4)(5), Ogboli M(6), Chiswell 
C(7), Moss C(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK.
(2)St John's Institute of Dermatology, King's College London, London, UK.
(3)St John's Institute of Dermatology, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, UK.
(4)Dermatology Department, Solihull Hospital, University Hospitals Birmingham 
NHS Foundation Trust, Solihull, UK.
(5)University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(6)Dermatology Department, Birmingham Women's and Children's NHS Foundation 
Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(7)Department of Public Health, Birmingham Women's and Children's NHS Foundation 
Trust, Birmingham, UK.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2022 May;186(5):765-766. doi: 10.1111/bjd.21295.

BACKGROUND: The National Health Service (NHS) epidermolysis bullosa (EB) 
service, established in 2002, offers comprehensive, free care to all patients in 
England and Wales.
OBJECTIVES: To quantify prevalence, incidence and mortality of EB in England and 
Wales.
METHODS: Demographic data for patients in England and Wales were collected on a 
secure electronic database, prospectively from January 2002 to April 2021 and 
retrospectively for cases prior to 2002. Vital status was verified using central 
NHS data.
RESULTS: By March 2021, 2594 individuals were registered, of whom 2361 were 
living, which yielded a prevalence of 34·8 per million of the population for all 
EB types [EB simplex (EBS) 17 per million, dystrophic EB (DEB) 10·7 per million, 
junctional EB (JEB) 1 per million and Kindler EB 0·3 per million]. We recorded 
1200 babies with EB born since 2002. The average incidence per million live 
births for EBS, DEB, JEB and Kindler EB was 32·5, 26·1, 8·9 and 0·9, 
respectively (total incidence for all types of EB was 67·8 per million). Birth 
rates fell progressively over the 19-year period for JEB-severe (JEB-S) 
(r = -0·56) and recessive DEB-severe (r = -0·44) and also for milder types of 
EB. We observed longer survival in JEB-S over the 19-year period (r2  = 0·18) 
with a median survival of 12·7 months over the past 5 years.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we provide the first accurate epidemiological data 
for EB in England and Wales. We believe the observed reduction in birth 
incidence of severe types of EB reflects an uptake of genetic counselling 
advice, whereas the reduction in milder types may be due to delayed 
presentation. A potential small trend towards longer survival of babies with 
JEB-S may reflect improved multidisciplinary care.

© 2022 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.20958
PMID: 34927719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]