---
reference_id: "PMID:36713280"
title: "Iron Man: Non-HFE Hemochromatosis Without Significant Fibrosis."
authors:
- Chaudhry H
- Sohal A
- Petrosyan A
- Laput G
- Roytman M
- Prajapati D
journal: ACG Case Rep J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.14309/crj.0000000000000982
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Iron Man: Non-HFE Hemochromatosis Without Significant Fibrosis.
**Authors:** Chaudhry H, Sohal A, Petrosyan A, Laput G, Roytman M, Prajapati D
**Journal:** ACG Case Rep J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.14309/crj.0000000000000982](https://doi.org/10.14309/crj.0000000000000982)

## Content

1. ACG Case Rep J. 2023 Jan 25;10(1):e00982. doi: 10.14309/crj.0000000000000982. 
eCollection 2023 Jan.

Iron Man: Non-HFE Hemochromatosis Without Significant Fibrosis.

Chaudhry H(1), Sohal A(1), Petrosyan A(1), Laput G(2), Roytman M(2), Prajapati 
D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, 
Fresno, CA.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of California, San 
Francisco, Fresno, CA.

Hemochromatosis is a genetic disorder marked by abnormally high levels of 
intestinal iron absorption leading to severe end-organ damage. It is classically 
associated with HFE gene mutations, including C282Y and H63D, but in recent 
years, many non-HFE mutations along with novel variants have been discovered, 
particularly among non-Whites. We describe a case of an elderly Japanese patient 
who was evaluated for markedly elevated ferritin found to have hemochromatosis, 
with no hepatic fibrosis while being negative for HFE and common non-HFE gene 
mutations.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf of The 
American College of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.14309/crj.0000000000000982
PMCID: PMC9875996
PMID: 36713280