---
reference_id: PMID:21826736
title: Mutations in SERPINF1 cause osteogenesis imperfecta type VI.
authors:
- Homan EP
- Rauch F
- Grafe I
- Lietman C
- Doll JA
- Dawson B
- Bertin T
- Napierala D
- Morello R
- Gibbs R
- White L
- Miki R
- Cohn DH
- Crawford S
- Travers R
- Glorieux FH
- Lee B
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.487
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Nerve Growth Factors/genetics
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics
- Pedigree
- Reproducibility of Results
- Serpins/genetics
- Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in SERPINF1 cause osteogenesis imperfecta type VI.
**Authors:** Homan EP, Rauch F, Grafe I, Lietman C, Doll JA, Dawson B, Bertin T, Napierala D, Morello R, Gibbs R, White L, Miki R, Cohn DH, Crawford S, Travers R, Glorieux FH, Lee B
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.487](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.487)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Dec;26(12):2798-803. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.487.

Mutations in SERPINF1 cause osteogenesis imperfecta type VI.

Homan EP(1), Rauch F, Grafe I, Lietman C, Doll JA, Dawson B, Bertin T, Napierala 
D, Morello R, Gibbs R, White L, Miki R, Cohn DH, Crawford S, Travers R, Glorieux 
FH, Lee B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.

Comment in
    J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Dec;26(12):2795-7. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.540.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a spectrum of genetic disorders characterized by 
bone fragility. It is caused by dominant mutations affecting the synthesis 
and/or structure of type I procollagen or by recessively inherited mutations in 
genes responsible for the posttranslational processing/trafficking of type I 
procollagen. Recessive OI type VI is unique among OI types in that it is 
characterized by an increased amount of unmineralized osteoid, thereby 
suggesting a distinct disease mechanism. In a large consanguineous family with 
OI type VI, we performed homozygosity mapping and next-generation sequencing of 
the candidate gene region to isolate and identify the causative gene. We 
describe loss of function mutations in serpin peptidase inhibitor, clade F, 
member 1 (SERPINF1) in two affected members of this family and in an additional 
unrelated patient with OI type VI. SERPINF1 encodes pigment epithelium-derived 
factor. Hence, loss of pigment epithelium-derived factor function constitutes a 
novel mechanism for OI and shows its involvement in bone mineralization.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.487
PMCID: PMC3214246
PMID: 21826736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]