---
reference_id: "PMID:32275123"
title: Phenotypic expansion of Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome and further evidence for genotype-phenotype correlations.
authors:
- Rech ME
- McCarthy JM
- Chen CA
- Edmond JC
- Shah VS
- Bosch DGM
- Berry GT
- Williams L
- Madan-Khetarpal S
- Niyazov D
- Shaw-Smith C
- Kovar EM
- Lupo PJ
- Schaaf CP
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61580
keywords:
- COUP Transcription Factor I/genetics
- "Codon, Nonsense/genetics"
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation/genetics
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- "Optic Atrophies, Hereditary/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Point Mutation/genetics
- "Seizures/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic expansion of Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome and further evidence for genotype-phenotype correlations.
**Authors:** Rech ME, McCarthy JM, Chen CA, Edmond JC, Shah VS, Bosch DGM, Berry GT, Williams L, Madan-Khetarpal S, Niyazov D, Shaw-Smith C, Kovar EM, Lupo PJ, Schaaf CP
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61580](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61580)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2020 Jun;182(6):1426-1437. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61580. Epub 
2020 Apr 10.

Phenotypic expansion of Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome and further 
evidence for genotype-phenotype correlations.

Rech ME(1)(2), McCarthy JM(1)(2), Chen CA(1)(2), Edmond JC(3)(4)(5), Shah 
VS(4)(5), Bosch DGM(6), Berry GT(7), Williams L(8), Madan-Khetarpal S(8), 
Niyazov D(9), Shaw-Smith C(10), Kovar EM(11), Lupo PJ(11), Schaaf CP(1)(2)(12).

Author information:
(1)Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute at Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Dell Medical School, University of Texas at 
Austin, Austin, Texas, USA.
(4)Division of Ophthalmology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(6)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(7)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research 
Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Ochsner Health System and University of Queensland, 
New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
(10)Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation 
Trust, Exeter, UK.
(11)Section of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(12)Heidelberg University, Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany.

Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf Optic Atrophy Syndrome (BBSOAS) is an autosomal dominant 
neurodevelopmental disorder caused by loss-of-function variants in NR2F1 and 
characterized by visual impairment, developmental delay, and intellectual 
disability. Here we report 18 new cases, provide additional clinical information 
for 9 previously reported individuals, and review an additional 27 published 
cases to present a total of 54 patients. Among these are 22 individuals with 
point mutations or in-frame deletions in the DNA-binding domain (DBD), and 32 
individuals with other types of variants including whole-gene deletions, 
nonsense and frameshift variants, and point mutations outside the DBD. We 
corroborate previously described clinical characteristics including 
developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder 
diagnoses/features thereof, cognitive/behavioral anomalies, hypotonia, feeding 
difficulties, abnormal brain MRI findings, and seizures. We also confirm a 
vision phenotype that includes optic nerve hypoplasia, optic atrophy, and 
cortical visual impairment. Additionally, we expand the vision phenotype to 
include alacrima and manifest latent nystagmus (fusional maldevelopment), and we 
broaden the behavioral phenotypic spectrum to include a love of music, an 
unusually good long-term memory, sleep difficulties, a high pain tolerance, and 
touch sensitivity. Furthermore, we provide additional evidence for 
genotype-phenotype correlations, specifically supporting a more severe phenotype 
associated with DBD variants.

© 2020 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61580
PMID: 32275123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]