---
reference_id: "PMID:21152017"
title: Genistein improves neuropathology and corrects behaviour in a mouse model of neurodegenerative metabolic disease.
authors:
- Malinowska M
- Wilkinson FL
- Langford-Smith KJ
- Langford-Smith A
- Brown JR
- Crawford BE
- Vanier MT
- Grynkiewicz G
- Wynn RF
- Wraith JE
- Wegrzyn G
- Bigger BW
journal: PLoS One
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014192
keywords:
- Animals
- Blood-Brain Barrier
- Brain/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genistein/pharmacology
- Heparan Sulfate/chemistry
- Heterozygote
- Immunohistochemistry/methods
- Liver/metabolism
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Mucopolysaccharidosis III/metabolism
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genistein improves neuropathology and corrects behaviour in a mouse model of neurodegenerative metabolic disease.
**Authors:** Malinowska M, Wilkinson FL, Langford-Smith KJ, Langford-Smith A, Brown JR, Crawford BE, Vanier MT, Grynkiewicz G, Wynn RF, Wraith JE, Wegrzyn G, Bigger BW
**Journal:** PLoS One (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0014192](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0014192)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 1;5(12):e14192. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014192.

Genistein improves neuropathology and corrects behaviour in a mouse model of
neurodegenerative metabolic disease.

Malinowska M(1), Wilkinson FL, Langford-Smith KJ, Langford-Smith A, Brown JR,
Crawford BE, Vanier MT, Grynkiewicz G, Wynn RF, Wraith JE, Wegrzyn G, Bigger BW.

Author information:
(1)Mucopolysaccharidosis Stem Cell Research Group, Biomedicine, Faculty of
Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Neurodegenerative metabolic disorders such as mucopolysaccharidosis
IIIB (MPSIIIB or Sanfilippo disease) accumulate undegraded substrates in the
brain and are often unresponsive to enzyme replacement treatments due to the
impermeability of the blood brain barrier to enzyme. MPSIIIB is characterised by
behavioural difficulties, cognitive and later motor decline, with death in the
second decade of life. Most of these neurodegenerative lysosomal storage
diseases lack effective treatments. We recently described significant reductions
of accumulated heparan sulphate substrate in liver of a mouse model of MPSIIIB
using the tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We report here that high doses of genistein
aglycone, given continuously over a 9 month period to MPSIIIB mice,
significantly reduce lysosomal storage, heparan sulphate substrate and
neuroinflammation in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus, resulting in
correction of the behavioural defects observed. Improvements in synaptic vesicle
protein expression and secondary storage in the cerebral cortex were also
observed.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Genistein may prove useful as a substrate reduction
agent to delay clinical onset of MPSIIIB and, due to its multimodal action, may
provide a treatment adjunct for several other neurodegenerative metabolic
diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014192
PMCID: PMC2995736
PMID: 21152017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Jillian R. Brown and Brett
E. Crawford are affiliated to Zacharon Pharmaceuticals Inc. It could be
reasonably perceived by an outside party that Zacharon Parmaceuticals could have
interfered with objective analysis of the data they produced. However, all
samples from the University of Manchester were blinded before sending to
Zacharon Pharmaceuticals for biochemical analysis. Therefore Zacharon
Pharmaceuticals had no control over the interpretation of the data produced.
This does not alter the authors' adherence to the PLoS policy on data sharing.
