---
reference_id: "PMID:36661317"
title: "NLRP3, the inflammasome and COVID-19 infection."
authors:
- Yin M
- Marrone L
- Peace CG
- "O'Neill LAJ"
journal: QJM
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcad011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NLRP3, the inflammasome and COVID-19 infection.
**Authors:** Yin M, Marrone L, Peace CG, O'Neill LAJ
**Journal:** QJM (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/qjmed/hcad011](https://doi.org/10.1093/qjmed/hcad011)

## Content

1. QJM. 2023 Jul 28;116(7):502-507. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcad011.

NLRP3, the inflammasome and COVID-19 infection.

Yin M(1), Marrone L(2)(3), Peace CG(1), O'Neill LAJ(1).

Author information:
(1)From the School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences 
Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples 80145, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche (DMMBM), 
"Federico II" University of Naples, Naples 80131, Italy.

Severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is characterized by respiratory 
failure, shock or multiorgan dysfunction, often accompanied by systemic 
hyperinflammation and dysregulated cytokine release. These features are linked 
to the intense and rapid stimulation of the innate immune response. The NACHT, 
LRR and PYD domains-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome is a central 
player in inflammatory macrophage activation which via caspase-1 activation 
leads to the release of the mature forms of the proinflammatory cytokines 
interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-18, and via cleavage of Gasdermin D pyroptosis, an 
inflammatory form of cell death. Here, we discuss the role of NLRP3 activation 
in COVID-19 and clinical trials currently underway to target NLRP3 to treat 
severe COVID-19.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Association of Physicians. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/hcad011
PMCID: PMC10382191
PMID: 36661317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]