---
reference_id: "PMID:30782609"
title: Genetic drivers of oncogenic pathways in molecular subgroups of peripheral T-cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Heavican TB
- Bouska A
- Yu J
- Lone W
- Amador C
- Gong Q
- Zhang W
- Li Y
- Dave BJ
- Nairismägi ML
- Greiner TC
- Vose J
- Weisenburger DD
- Lachel C
- Wang C
- Fu K
- Stevens JM
- Lim ST
- Ong CK
- Gascoyne RD
- Missiaglia E
- Lemonnier F
- Haioun C
- Hartmann S
- Pedersen MB
- Laginestra MA
- Wilcox RA
- Teh BT
- Yoshida N
- Ohshima K
- Seto M
- Rosenwald A
- Ott G
- Campo E
- Rimsza LM
- Jaffe ES
- Braziel RM
- "d'Amore F"
- Inghirami G
- Bertoni F
- de Leval L
- Gaulard P
- Staudt LM
- McKeithan TW
- Pileri S
- Chan WC
- Iqbal J
journal: Blood
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-09-872549
keywords:
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Female
- GATA3 Transcription Factor/genetics
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Immunoblastic Lymphadenopathy/genetics
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Peripheral/classification, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Oncogenes
- T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics
- T-bet Transcription Factor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic drivers of oncogenic pathways in molecular subgroups of peripheral T-cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Heavican TB, Bouska A, Yu J, Lone W, Amador C, Gong Q, Zhang W, Li Y, Dave BJ, Nairismägi ML, Greiner TC, Vose J, Weisenburger DD, Lachel C, Wang C, Fu K, Stevens JM, Lim ST, Ong CK, Gascoyne RD, Missiaglia E, Lemonnier F, Haioun C, Hartmann S, Pedersen MB, Laginestra MA, Wilcox RA, Teh BT, Yoshida N, Ohshima K, Seto M, Rosenwald A, Ott G, Campo E, Rimsza LM, Jaffe ES, Braziel RM, d'Amore F, Inghirami G, Bertoni F, de Leval L, Gaulard P, Staudt LM, McKeithan TW, Pileri S, Chan WC, Iqbal J
**Journal:** Blood (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2018-09-872549](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2018-09-872549)

## Content

1. Blood. 2019 Apr 11;133(15):1664-1676. doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-09-872549. Epub
2019 Feb 19.

Genetic drivers of oncogenic pathways in molecular subgroups of peripheral
T-cell lymphoma.

Heavican TB(1), Bouska A(1), Yu J(1), Lone W(1), Amador C(1), Gong Q(2), Zhang
W(1), Li Y(2), Dave BJ(1)(3), Nairismägi ML(4), Greiner TC(1), Vose J(5),
Weisenburger DD(2), Lachel C(5), Wang C(1)(2), Fu K(1), Stevens JM(3), Lim
ST(4), Ong CK(4), Gascoyne RD(6), Missiaglia E(7), Lemonnier F(8), Haioun C(8),
Hartmann S(9), Pedersen MB(10), Laginestra MA(11), Wilcox RA(12), Teh BT(4),
Yoshida N(13), Ohshima K(13), Seto M(13), Rosenwald A(14), Ott G(15), Campo
E(16), Rimsza LM(17), Jaffe ES(18), Braziel RM(19), d'Amore F(10), Inghirami
G(20), Bertoni F(21), de Leval L(7), Gaulard P(8), Staudt LM(22), McKeithan
TW(2), Pileri S(11), Chan WC(2), Iqbal J(1).

Author information:
(1)Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE.
(2)Department of Pathology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA.
(3)Human Genetics Laboratory, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE.
(4)Division of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, NE.
(6)Center for Lymphoid Cancer, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.
(7)Institute of Pathology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(8)Département de Pathologie, Université Paris-Est, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, INSERM
U955, Créteil, France.
(9)Senckenberg Institute of Pathology, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.
(10)Department of Hematology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(11)European Institute of Oncology, Milan/Bologna University School of Medicine,
Bologna, Italy.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Rogel Cancer Center,
Ann Arbor, MI.
(13)Department of Pathology, Kurume University School of Medicine, Fukuoka,
Japan.
(14)Institute of Pathology, University of Wuerzburg and Comprehensive Cancer
Center Mainfranken, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(15)Department of Clinical Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus and Dr. Margarete
Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany.
(16)Hematopathology Unit, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain.
(17)Department of Pathology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
(18)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(19)Oregon Health Sciences Center, Portland, OR.
(20)Department of Pathology and NYU Cancer Center, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, NY.
(21)Università della Svizzera Italiana, Istituto Oncologico di Ricerca,
Bellinzona, Switzerland; and.
(22)Metabolism Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) is a group of complex clinicopathological
entities, often associated with an aggressive clinical course.
Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) and PTCL-not otherwise specified
(PTCL-NOS) are the 2 most frequent categories, accounting for >50% of PTCLs.
Gene expression profiling (GEP) defined molecular signatures for AITL and
delineated biological and prognostic subgroups within PTCL-NOS (PTCL-GATA3 and
PTCL-TBX21). Genomic copy number (CN) analysis and targeted sequencing of these
molecular subgroups revealed unique CN abnormalities (CNAs) and oncogenic
pathways, indicating distinct oncogenic evolution. PTCL-GATA3 exhibited greater
genomic complexity that was characterized by frequent loss or mutation of tumor
suppressor genes targeting the CDKN2A /B-TP53 axis and PTEN-PI3K pathways.
Co-occurring gains/amplifications of STAT3 and MYC occurred in PTCL-GATA3.
Several CNAs, in particular loss of CDKN2A, exhibited prognostic significance in
PTCL-NOS as a single entity and in the PTCL-GATA3 subgroup. The PTCL-TBX21
subgroup had fewer CNAs, primarily targeting cytotoxic effector genes, and was
enriched in mutations of genes regulating DNA methylation. CNAs affecting
metabolic processes regulating RNA/protein degradation and T-cell receptor
signaling were common in both subgroups. AITL showed lower genomic complexity
compared with other PTCL entities, with frequent co-occurring gains of
chromosome 5 (chr5) and chr21 that were significantly associated with IDH2 R172
mutation. CN losses were enriched in genes regulating PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling in
cases without IDH2 mutation. Overall, we demonstrated that novel GEP-defined
PTCL subgroups likely evolve by distinct genetic pathways and provided
biological rationale for therapies that may be investigated in future clinical
trials.

© 2019 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2018-09-872549
PMCID: PMC6460420
PMID: 30782609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors
declare no competing financial interests.
