---
reference_id: "PMID:3692477"
title: Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis and elliptocytosis in a Caucasian family. Transmission of the same molecular defect in spectrin through three generations with different clinical expression.
authors:
- Lecomte MC
- Dhermy D
- Garbarz M
- Feo C
- Gautero H
- Bournier O
- Picat C
- Chaveroche I
- Galand C
- Boivin P
journal: Hum Genet
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1007/BF00291420
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Congenital/complications, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Elliptocytosis, Hereditary/complications, genetics"
- Erythrocyte Deformability
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Spectrin/genetics
- White People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis and elliptocytosis in a Caucasian family. Transmission of the same molecular defect in spectrin through three generations with different clinical expression.
**Authors:** Lecomte MC, Dhermy D, Garbarz M, Feo C, Gautero H, Bournier O, Picat C, Chaveroche I, Galand C, Boivin P
**Journal:** Hum Genet (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00291420](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00291420)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 1987 Dec;77(4):329-34. doi: 10.1007/BF00291420.

Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis and elliptocytosis in a Caucasian family.
Transmission of the same molecular defect in spectrin through three generations
with different clinical expression.

Lecomte MC(1), Dhermy D, Garbarz M, Feo C, Gautero H, Bournier O, Picat C,
Chaveroche I, Galand C, Boivin P.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Recherches d'Enzymologie des Cellules Sanguines (INSERM U 160),
Hôpital Beaujon, Clichy, France.

Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis (HPP) is a severe hemolytic anemia characterized
by a material instability of the red cell membrane leading to cell
fragmentation. This fragility may be correlated with functional and structural
defects of spectrin. Most HPP patients have been black. We now report three HPP
patients from a Caucasian family, the proposita and her two maternal uncles. The
proposita's mother and daughter presented mild type I hereditary elliptocytosis
(HE), while the proposita's father was clinically and hematologically normal.
Our studies revealed a defective ability of spectrin to self-associate,
resulting in an excess of spectrin dimer in 4 degrees C extracts in the three
HPP patients and to a similar extent in HE relatives. Limited tryptic digestion
of spectrin showed a molecular variant in the alpha I domain as expressed by a
decreased amount of 80,000-dalton peptide with a concomitant increase in the
74,000-dalton peptide. Investigations in the proposita's father revealed no
abnormalities of the erythrocyte membrane. The co-transmission of HPP and HE
phenotypes in the same lineage might suggest variability in the clinical
expression of the same molecular defect and lead us to discuss the hypothesis of
a double heterozygosity in HPP patients.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00291420
PMID: 3692477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
