---
reference_id: "PMID:39497417"
title: Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of CSNK2A1-associated Okur-Chung neurodevelopmental syndrome.
authors:
- Ramadesikan S
- Showpnil IA
- Marhabaie M
- Daley A
- Varga EA
- Gurusamy U
- Pastore MT
- Sites ER
- Manickam M
- Bartholomew DW
- Hunter JM
- White P
- Wilson RK
- Stottmann RW
- Koboldt DC
journal: HGG Adv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100379
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Phenotype
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Casein Kinase II/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Microcephaly/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Infant
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of CSNK2A1-associated Okur-Chung neurodevelopmental syndrome.
**Authors:** Ramadesikan S, Showpnil IA, Marhabaie M, Daley A, Varga EA, Gurusamy U, Pastore MT, Sites ER, Manickam M, Bartholomew DW, Hunter JM, White P, Wilson RK, Stottmann RW, Koboldt DC
**Journal:** HGG Adv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100379](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100379)

## Content

1. HGG Adv. 2025 Jan 9;6(1):100379. doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100379. Epub 2024
Nov  4.

Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of CSNK2A1-associated Okur-Chung
neurodevelopmental syndrome.

Ramadesikan S(1), Showpnil IA(2), Marhabaie M(2), Daley A(2), Varga EA(2),
Gurusamy U(2), Pastore MT(3), Sites ER(4), Manickam M(3), Bartholomew DW(3),
Hunter JM(5), White P(5), Wilson RK(5), Stottmann RW(5), Koboldt DC(6).

Author information:
(1)Steve and Cindy Rasmussen Institute for Genomic Medicine, The Research
Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA. Electronic
address: swetha.ramadesikan@nationwidechildrens.org.
(2)Steve and Cindy Rasmussen Institute for Genomic Medicine, The Research
Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children's Hospital,
Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University College
of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA.
(4)Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children's Hospital,
Columbus, OH, USA.
(5)Steve and Cindy Rasmussen Institute for Genomic Medicine, The Research
Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA; Department of
Pediatrics, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA.
(6)Steve and Cindy Rasmussen Institute for Genomic Medicine, The Research
Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA; Department of
Pediatrics, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA.
Electronic address: daniel.koboldt@nationwidechildrens.org.

De novo variants in CSNK2A1 cause autosomal dominant Okur-Chung
neurodevelopmental syndrome (OCNDS). OCNDS has an evolving clinical phenotype
predominantly characterized by intellectual disability, global delays,
dysmorphic features, and immunological manifestations. Microcephaly, defined as
a small head circumference, is not widely recognized as a classical clinical
presentation. Here, we describe four individuals from three unrelated families
who shared several clinical features characteristic of an underlying syndromic
neurodevelopmental condition. Trio clinical exome and research genome sequencing
revealed that all affected individuals had heterozygous pathogenic missense
variants in CSNK2A1. Two variants (c.468T>A p.Asp156Glu and c.149A>G p.Tyr50Cys)
were de novo and previously reported, but the third variant (c.137G>T
p.Gly46Val) is novel and segregated in two affected individuals in a family.
This adds to growing evidence of inherited disease-causing variants in CSNK2A1,
an observation reported only twice previously. A detailed phenotypic analysis of
our cohort together with those individuals reported in the literature revealed
that OCNDS individuals, on average, have a smaller head circumference with
one-third presenting with microcephaly. We also show that the incidence of
microcephaly is significantly correlated with the location of the variant in the
encoded protein. Our findings suggest that small head circumference is a common
but under-recognized feature of OCNDS, which may not be apparent at birth.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100379
PMCID: PMC11621934
PMID: 39497417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
