---
reference_id: "PMID:25893250"
title: PITX2 Loss-of-Function Mutation Contributes to Congenital Endocardial Cushion Defect and Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.
authors:
- Zhao CM
- Peng LY
- Li L
- Liu XY
- Wang J
- Zhang XL
- Yuan F
- Li RG
- Qiu XB
- Yang YQ
journal: PLoS One
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124409
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PITX2 Loss-of-Function Mutation Contributes to Congenital Endocardial Cushion Defect and Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.
**Authors:** Zhao CM, Peng LY, Li L, Liu XY, Wang J, Zhang XL, Yuan F, Li RG, Qiu XB, Yang YQ
**Journal:** PLoS One (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0124409](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0124409)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 20;10(4):e0124409. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124409. 
eCollection 2015.

PITX2 Loss-of-Function Mutation Contributes to Congenital Endocardial Cushion 
Defect and Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.

Zhao CM(1), Peng LY(2), Li L(2), Liu XY(3), Wang J(4), Zhang XL(5), Yuan F(6), 
Li RG(6), Qiu XB(6), Yang YQ(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China; Division of Medical Genetics, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai, China.
(7)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai, China; Department of Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, 
Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; 
Department of Central Laboratory, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai, China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD), the most common type of birth defect, is still 
the leading non-infectious cause of infant morbidity and mortality in humans. 
Aggregating evidence demonstrates that genetic defects are involved in the 
pathogenesis of CHD. However, CHD is genetically heterogeneous and the genetic 
components underpinning CHD in an overwhelming majority of patients remain 
unclear. In the present study, the coding exons and flanking introns of the 
PITX2 gene, which encodes a paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 
2essential for cardiovascular morphogenesis as well as maxillary facial 
development, was sequenced in 196 unrelated patients with CHD and subsequently 
in the mutation carrier's family members available. As a result, a novel 
heterozygous PITX2 mutation, p.Q102X for PITX2a, or p.Q148X for PITX2b, or 
p.Q155X for PITX2c, was identified in a family with endocardial cushion defect 
(ECD) and Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS). Genetic analysis of the pedigree 
showed that the nonsense mutation co-segregated with ECD and ARS transmitted in 
an autosomal dominant pattern with complete penetrance. The mutation was absent 
in 800 control chromosomes from an ethnically matched population. Functional 
analysis by using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system revealed that the 
mutant PITX2 had no transcriptional activity and that the mutation eliminated 
synergistic transcriptional activation between PITX2 and NKX2.5, another 
transcription factor pivotal for cardiogenesis. To our knowledge, this is the 
first report on the association of PITX2 loss-of-function mutation with 
increased susceptibility to ECD and ARS. The findings provide novel insight into 
the molecular mechanisms underpinning ECD and ARS, suggesting the potential 
implications for the antenatal prophylaxis and personalized treatment of CHD and 
ARS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124409
PMCID: PMC4404345
PMID: 25893250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.