---
reference_id: "PMID:16885207"
title: Recent advances in social skills training for schizophrenia.
authors:
- Kopelowicz A
- Liberman RP
- Zarate R
journal: Schizophr Bull
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbl023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent advances in social skills training for schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Kopelowicz A, Liberman RP, Zarate R
**Journal:** Schizophr Bull (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/schbul/sbl023](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbl023)

## Content

1. Schizophr Bull. 2006 Oct;32 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S12-23. doi:
10.1093/schbul/sbl023.  Epub 2006 Aug 2.

Recent advances in social skills training for schizophrenia.

Kopelowicz A(1), Liberman RP, Zarate R.

Author information:
(1)San Fernando Mental Health Center, 10605 Balboa Boulevard, Suite 100, Granada 
Hills, CA 91344, USA. akopel@ucla.edu.

Social skills training consists of learning activities utilizing behavioral 
techniques that enable persons with schizophrenia and other disabling mental 
disorders to acquire interpersonal disease management and independent living 
skills for improved functioning in their communities. A large and growing body 
of research supports the efficacy and effectiveness of social skills training 
for schizophrenia. When the type and frequency of training is linked to the 
phase of the disorder, patients can learn and retain a wide variety of social 
and independent living skills. Generalization of the skills for use in everyday 
life occurs when patients are provided with opportunities, encouragement, and 
reinforcement for practicing the skills in relevant situations. Recent advances 
in skills training include special adaptations and applications for improved 
generalization of training into the community, short-term stays in psychiatric 
inpatient units, dually diagnosed substance abusing mentally ill, minority 
groups, amplifying supported employment, treatment refractory schizophrenia, 
older adults, overcoming cognitive deficits, and negative symptoms as well as 
the inclusion of social skills training as part of multidimensional treatment 
and rehabilitation programs.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbl023
PMCID: PMC2632540
PMID: 16885207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]