---
reference_id: "PMID:27576232"
title: "Respiratory Conditions Update: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease."
authors:
- Karel DJ
journal: FP Essent
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory Conditions Update: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
**Authors:** Karel DJ
**Journal:** FP Essent (2016)

## Content

1. FP Essent. 2016 Sep;448:20-8.

Respiratory Conditions Update: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Karel DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical University of South Carolina Montgomery Center for Family Medicine, 
155 Academy Ave, Greenwood, SC 29646.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is defined as persistent airflow 
limitation due to irritant-induced chronic inflammation. A postbronchodilator 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second to forced vital capacity (FEV1/FVC) ratio 
of 0.7 or less is diagnostic in a patient with dyspnea, chronic cough or sputum 
production, and a history of irritant exposure. Tobacco smoking is the most 
significant etiology, and smoking cessation is the only intervention shown to 
slow disease progression. Long-acting beta2-agonists and long-acting muscarinic 
antagonists are first-line treatments for patients with persistently symptomatic 
COPD with an FEV1 of 80% or less of predicted. When COPD is uncontrolled with a 
long-acting bronchodilator, combination therapy with a long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist-long-acting beta2-agonist or long-acting beta2-agonist-inhaled 
corticosteroid should be prescribed. Patients with COPD and reduced exercise 
tolerance should undergo pulmonary rehabilitation and be evaluated for 
supplemental oxygen therapy. Other treatment options for persistently 
symptomatic COPD include inhaler triple therapy (ie, long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist, long-acting beta2-agonist, inhaled corticosteroid), 
phosphodiesterase type 4 inhibitors, oxygen, and surgical interventions.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required 
for reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.

PMID: 27576232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]