---
reference_id: "PMID:30939167"
title: "Panniculitis and vitiligo occurring during BRAF and MEK inhibitors combination in advanced melanoma patients: Potential predictive role of treatment efficacy."
authors:
- Consoli F
- Manganoni AM
- Grisanti S
- Petrelli F
- Venturini M
- Rangoni G
- Guarneri F
- Incardona P
- Vermi W
- Calzavara Pinton PG
- Berruti A
journal: PLoS One
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214884
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols
- Female
- Humans
- "Imidazoles/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/drug effects
- Male
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Oximes/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Panniculitis/chemically induced, pathology"
- Progression-Free Survival
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Pyridones/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Pyrimidinones/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vitiligo/chemically induced, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Panniculitis and vitiligo occurring during BRAF and MEK inhibitors combination in advanced melanoma patients: Potential predictive role of treatment efficacy.
**Authors:** Consoli F, Manganoni AM, Grisanti S, Petrelli F, Venturini M, Rangoni G, Guarneri F, Incardona P, Vermi W, Calzavara Pinton PG, Berruti A
**Journal:** PLoS One (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0214884](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0214884)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2019 Apr 2;14(4):e0214884. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214884.
eCollection 2019.

Panniculitis and vitiligo occurring during BRAF and MEK inhibitors combination
in advanced melanoma patients: Potential predictive role of treatment efficacy.

Consoli F(1), Manganoni AM(2), Grisanti S(1), Petrelli F(3), Venturini M(2),
Rangoni G(1), Guarneri F(4), Incardona P(5), Vermi W(6), Calzavara Pinton PG(2),
Berruti A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Specialties, Radiological Sciences, and
Public Health, Medical Oncology, University of Brescia at ASST-Spedali Civili,
Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Brescia at ASST-Spedali Civili,
Brescia, Italy.
(3)Oncology Unit, ASST Bergamo Ovest, Treviglio, Italy.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, ASST-Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Unit of Pathology, ASST-Spedali Civili,
Brescia, Italy.
(6)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Section of Pathology,
School of Medicine, University of Brescia at ASST-Spedali Civili, Brescia,
Italy.

Panniculitis and vitiligo-like lesions have been recently identified as rare
cutaneous side effects of the combination of BRAF and MEK inhibitors, a standard
of care in metastatic and locally advanced BRAF V600 mutated melanoma. An
immune-mediated mechanism has been advocated in the pathogenesis of these skin
lesions. Herein we retrospectively reviewed our institutional experience with
the aim to explore the association between the occurrence of panniculitis and
vitiligo-like lesions during combination therapy with dabrafenib (D) and
trametinib (T) and outcome of advanced melanoma patients. Among 52 consecutive
BRAF V600 mutated melanoma patients submitted to DT in our center, 12 (23%)
developed immune related skin lesions (IRSLs): 8 panniculitis and 4 vitiligo.
Patients with IRSLs diagnosis obtained a better disease response (83% versus
25%) (p = 0.001) than their counterpart and had a longer progression free
survival and overall survival. The association of IRSLs and lower risk of
disease progression (HR 0.19; CI 95% 0.04-0.90; p = 0.043) was confirmed after
adjusting for major prognostic factors in multivariate analysis. IRSLs might
represent an easy predictive surrogate marker for treatment response and
favourable outcome in melanoma patients submitted to DT combination therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214884
PMCID: PMC6445428
PMID: 30939167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared that no competing interests
exist.
