---
reference_id: "PMID:34607912"
title: "Neurosarcoidosis: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Treatment."
authors:
- Bradshaw MJ
- Pawate S
- Koth LL
- Cho TA
- Gelfand JM
journal: Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000001084
keywords:
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurosarcoidosis: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Treatment.
**Authors:** Bradshaw MJ, Pawate S, Koth LL, Cho TA, Gelfand JM
**Journal:** Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXI.0000000000001084](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXI.0000000000001084)

## Content

1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2021 Oct 4;8(6):e1084. doi:
10.1212/NXI.0000000000001084. Print 2021 Nov.

Neurosarcoidosis: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Treatment.

Bradshaw MJ(1), Pawate S(2), Koth LL(2), Cho TA(2), Gelfand JM(2).

Author information:
(1)From the University of Washington and Billings Clinic, (M.J.B.); Vanderbilt
University Medical Center (S.P.), Nashville, TN; Division of Pulmonary and
Critical Care (L.L.K.), Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco; Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine;
Univeristy of Iowa (T.A.C.), Iowa City; Department of Neurology (J.M.G.),
Division of Neuroimmunology and Glial Biology, University of California, San
Francisco. bradshaw.michaelj@gmail.com jeffrey.gelfand@ucsf.edu.
(2)From the University of Washington and Billings Clinic, (M.J.B.); Vanderbilt
University Medical Center (S.P.), Nashville, TN; Division of Pulmonary and
Critical Care (L.L.K.), Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco; Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine;
Univeristy of Iowa (T.A.C.), Iowa City; Department of Neurology (J.M.G.),
Division of Neuroimmunology and Glial Biology, University of California, San
Francisco.

Although often regarded as a protean illness with myriad clinical and imaging
manifestations, neurosarcoidosis typically presents as recognizable syndromes
that can be approached in a rational, systematic fashion. Understanding of
neurosarcoidosis has progressed significantly in recent years, including updated
diagnostic criteria and advances in treatment. The diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis
is established by the clinical syndrome, imaging and histopathological findings,
and exclusion of other causes. Mounting evidence supports the use of tumor
necrosis factor inhibitors as an important addition to the therapeutic
armamentarium, along with glucocorticoids and steroid-sparing cytotoxic
immunosuppressants. In this narrative review, we summarize recent advances in
the diagnosis and treatment of neurosarcoidosis.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000001084
PMCID: PMC8495503
PMID: 34607912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
