---
reference_id: "PMID:31143934"
title: "Allele-specific silencing as treatment for gene duplication disorders: proof-of-principle in autosomal dominant leukodystrophy."
authors:
- Giorgio E
- Lorenzati M
- Rivetti di Val Cervo P
- Brussino A
- Cernigoj M
- Della Sala E
- Bartoletti Stella A
- Ferrero M
- Caiazzo M
- Capellari S
- Cortelli P
- Conti L
- Cattaneo E
- Buffo A
- Brusco A
journal: Brain
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awz139
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Case-Control Studies
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Fibroblasts/drug effects
- Gene Duplication/drug effects
- Gene Silencing
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/drug therapy"
- Genetic Vectors
- Humans
- Lamin Type B/metabolism
- Lentivirus
- Neurons/metabolism
- Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease/drug therapy
- "RNA, Small Interfering/therapeutic use"
- Rats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Allele-specific silencing as treatment for gene duplication disorders: proof-of-principle in autosomal dominant leukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Giorgio E, Lorenzati M, Rivetti di Val Cervo P, Brussino A, Cernigoj M, Della Sala E, Bartoletti Stella A, Ferrero M, Caiazzo M, Capellari S, Cortelli P, Conti L, Cattaneo E, Buffo A, Brusco A
**Journal:** Brain (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awz139](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awz139)

## Content

1. Brain. 2019 Jul 1;142(7):1905-1920. doi: 10.1093/brain/awz139.

Allele-specific silencing as treatment for gene duplication disorders: 
proof-of-principle in autosomal dominant leukodystrophy.

Giorgio E(1), Lorenzati M(2), Rivetti di Val Cervo P(3), Brussino A(1), Cernigoj 
M(3), Della Sala E(1), Bartoletti Stella A(4), Ferrero M(1), Caiazzo M(5)(6), 
Capellari S(4)(7), Cortelli P(4)(7), Conti L(8), Cattaneo E(3)(9), Buffo A(2), 
Brusco A(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)University of Torino, Department of Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy.
(2)University of Torino, Department of Neuroscience Rita Levi Montalcini and 
Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri Ottolenghi (NICO), Orbassano, Torino, Italy.
(3)University of Milan, Department of Biosciences, Laboratory of Stem Cell 
Biology and Pharmacology of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Milan, Italy.
(4)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Bellaria Hospital, 
Bologna, Italy.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences 
(UIPS), Utrecht University, Universiteitsweg 99, CG, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of 
Naples 'Federico II', Naples, Italy.
(7)University of Bologna, Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, 
Bologna, Italy.
(8)University of Trento, Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), Laboratory of 
Computational Oncology, Trento, Italy.
(9)National Institute of Molecular Genetics (INGM) Romeo and Enrica Invernizzi, 
Milano, Italy.
(10)Città della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Medical Genetics 
Unit, Torino, Italy.

Allele-specific silencing by RNA interference (ASP-siRNA) holds promise as a 
therapeutic strategy for downregulating a single mutant allele with minimal 
suppression of the corresponding wild-type allele. This approach has been 
effectively used to target autosomal dominant mutations and single nucleotide 
polymorphisms linked with aberrantly expanded trinucleotide repeats. Here, we 
propose ASP-siRNA as a preferable choice to target duplicated disease genes, 
avoiding potentially harmful excessive downregulation. As a proof-of-concept, we 
studied autosomal dominant adult-onset demyelinating leukodystrophy (ADLD) due 
to lamin B1 (LMNB1) duplication, a hereditary, progressive and fatal disorder 
affecting myelin in the CNS. Using a reporter system, we screened the most 
efficient ASP-siRNAs preferentially targeting one of the alleles at rs1051644 
(average minor allele frequency: 0.45) located in the 3' untranslated region of 
the gene. We identified four siRNAs with a high efficacy and allele-specificity, 
which were tested in ADLD patient-derived fibroblasts. Three of the small 
interfering RNAs were highly selective for the target allele and restored both 
LMNB1 mRNA and protein levels close to control levels. Furthermore, small 
interfering RNA treatment abrogates the ADLD-specific phenotypes in fibroblasts 
and in two disease-relevant cellular models: murine oligodendrocytes 
overexpressing human LMNB1, and neurons directly reprogrammed from patients' 
fibroblasts. In conclusion, we demonstrated that ASP-silencing by RNA 
interference is a suitable and promising therapeutic option for ADLD. Moreover, 
our results have a broad translational value extending to several pathological 
conditions linked to gene-gain in copy number variations.

© The Author(s) (2019). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awz139
PMID: 31143934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]