---
reference_id: "PMID:28032013"
title: Molecular mechanisms underlying Spinocerebellar Ataxia 17 (SCA17) pathogenesis.
authors:
- Yang S
- Li XJ
- Li S
journal: Rare Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1080/21675511.2016.1223580
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular mechanisms underlying Spinocerebellar Ataxia 17 (SCA17) pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Yang S, Li XJ, Li S
**Journal:** Rare Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21675511.2016.1223580](https://doi.org/10.1080/21675511.2016.1223580)

## Content

1. Rare Dis. 2016 Aug 12;4(1):e1223580. doi: 10.1080/21675511.2016.1223580. 
eCollection 2016.

Molecular mechanisms underlying Spinocerebellar Ataxia 17 (SCA17) pathogenesis.

Yang S(1), Li XJ(2), Li S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine , Atlanta, 
GA, USA.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
GA, USA; State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of 
Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Erratum for
    Addendum to: S Yang, et al. Age-dependent decrease in chaperone activity 
impairs MANF expression, leading to Purkinje cell degeneration in inducible 
SCA17 mice. Neuron 2014, 81(2): 349-365; 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.12.002.

Spinocerebellar ataxia 17 (SCA17) belongs to the family of 9 genetically 
inherited, late-onset neurodegenerative diseases, which are caused by 
polyglutamine (polyQ) expansion in different proteins. In SCA17, the polyQ 
expansion occurs in the TATA box binding protein (TBP), which functions as a 
general transcription factor. Patients with SCA17 suffer from a broad array of 
motor and non-motor defects, and their life expectancy is normally within 20 y 
after the initial appearance of symptoms. Currently there is no effective 
treatment, but remarkable efforts have been devoted to tackle this devastating 
disorder. In this review, we will summarize our current knowledge about the 
molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of SCA17, with a primary focus 
on transcriptional dysregulations. We believe that impaired transcriptional 
activities caused by mutant TBP with polyQ expansion is a major form of toxicity 
contributing to SCA17 pathogenesis, and rectifying the altered level of 
downstream transcripts represents a promising therapeutic approach for the 
treatment of SCA17.

DOI: 10.1080/21675511.2016.1223580
PMCID: PMC5154381
PMID: 28032013