---
reference_id: "PMID:26735972"
title: "A Clinical, Neuropathological and Genetic Study of Homozygous A467T POLG-Related Mitochondrial Disease."
authors:
- Rajakulendran S
- Pitceathly RD
- Taanman JW
- Costello H
- Sweeney MG
- Woodward CE
- Jaunmuktane Z
- Holton JL
- Jacques TS
- Harding BN
- Fratter C
- Hanna MG
- Rahman S
journal: PLoS One
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145500
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Brain/pathology
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Polymerase gamma
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/chemistry, genetics"
- DNA-Directed DNA Polymerase/genetics
- "Diffuse Cerebral Sclerosis of Schilder/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Genotype
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Liver/pathology
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Mitochondrial Myopathies/genetics, pathology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Clinical, Neuropathological and Genetic Study of Homozygous A467T POLG-Related Mitochondrial Disease.
**Authors:** Rajakulendran S, Pitceathly RD, Taanman JW, Costello H, Sweeney MG, Woodward CE, Jaunmuktane Z, Holton JL, Jacques TS, Harding BN, Fratter C, Hanna MG, Rahman S
**Journal:** PLoS One (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0145500](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145500)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 6;11(1):e0145500. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145500. 
eCollection 2016.

A Clinical, Neuropathological and Genetic Study of Homozygous A467T POLG-Related 
Mitochondrial Disease.

Rajakulendran S(1), Pitceathly RD(2), Taanman JW(3), Costello H(4), Sweeney 
MG(5), Woodward CE(5), Jaunmuktane Z(6), Holton JL(6), Jacques TS(7), Harding 
BN(8), Fratter C(9), Hanna MG(1), Rahman S(4)(10).

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Neurology and National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery and the MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, Queen Square, London 
WC1N 3BG, United Kingdom.
(2)UCL Institute of Neurology and National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, United Kingdom and Department of 
Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London SE5 8AF, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, UCL Institute of Neurology, London NW3 
2PF, United Kingdom.
(4)Mitochondrial Research Group, Genetics and Genomic Medicine, UCL Institute of 
Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Neurogenetics, UCL Institute of Neurology and National Hospital 
for Neurology, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, United Kingdom.
(6)Division of Neuropathology, UCL Institute of Neurology and National Hospital 
for Neurology, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, United Kingdom.
(7)Developmental Biology and Cancer Programme, UCL Institute of Child Health and 
Department of Histopathology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children 
Foundation Trust, London WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.
(8)Division of Neuropathology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(9)Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratories, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Churchill Hospital, Oxford OX3 7LE, United Kingdom.
(10)Metabolic Unit, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London WC1N 3JH, United 
Kingdom.

Mutations in the nuclear gene POLG (encoding the catalytic subunit of DNA 
polymerase gamma) are an important cause of mitochondrial disease. The most 
common POLG mutation, A467T, appears to exhibit considerable phenotypic 
heterogeneity. The mechanism by which this single genetic defect results in such 
clinical diversity remains unclear. In this study we evaluate the clinical, 
neuropathological and mitochondrial genetic features of four unrelated patients 
with homozygous A467T mutations. One patient presented with the severe and 
lethal Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome, which was confirmed on neuropathology, and 
was found to have a depletion of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Of the remaining 
three patients, one presented with mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic 
acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS), one with a phenotype in the Myoclonic 
Epilepsy, Myopathy and Sensory Ataxia (MEMSA) spectrum and one with Sensory 
Ataxic Neuropathy, Dysarthria and Ophthalmoplegia (SANDO). All three had 
secondary accumulation of multiple mtDNA deletions. Complete sequence analysis 
of muscle mtDNA using the MitoChip resequencing chip in all four cases 
demonstrated significant variation in mtDNA, including a pathogenic MT-ND5 
mutation in one patient. These data highlight the variable and overlapping 
clinical and neuropathological phenotypes and downstream molecular defects 
caused by the A467T mutation, which may result from factors such as the mtDNA 
genetic background, nuclear genetic modifiers and environmental stressors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145500
PMCID: PMC4703200
PMID: 26735972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.