---
reference_id: "PMID:20227758"
title: "Mipomersen, an apolipoprotein B synthesis inhibitor, for lowering of LDL cholesterol concentrations in patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial."
authors:
- Raal FJ
- Santos RD
- Blom DJ
- Marais AD
- Charng MJ
- Cromwell WC
- Lachmann RH
- Gaudet D
- Tan JL
- Chasan-Taber S
- Tribble DL
- Flaim JD
- Crooke ST
journal: Lancet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60284-X
keywords:
- Adult
- Alanine Transaminase/metabolism
- "Anticholesteremic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Apolipoprotein B-100/antagonists & inhibitors, biosynthesis"
- "Cholesterol, LDL/blood"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II/blood, drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Lipids/analysis
- Liver/metabolism
- Male
- "Oligonucleotides/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mipomersen, an apolipoprotein B synthesis inhibitor, for lowering of LDL cholesterol concentrations in patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
**Authors:** Raal FJ, Santos RD, Blom DJ, Marais AD, Charng MJ, Cromwell WC, Lachmann RH, Gaudet D, Tan JL, Chasan-Taber S, Tribble DL, Flaim JD, Crooke ST
**Journal:** Lancet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60284-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60284-X)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2010 Mar 20;375(9719):998-1006. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60284-X.

Mipomersen, an apolipoprotein B synthesis inhibitor, for lowering of LDL 
cholesterol concentrations in patients with homozygous familial 
hypercholesterolaemia: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Raal FJ(1), Santos RD, Blom DJ, Marais AD, Charng MJ, Cromwell WC, Lachmann RH, 
Gaudet D, Tan JL, Chasan-Taber S, Tribble DL, Flaim JD, Crooke ST.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South 
Africa. frederick.raal@wits.ac.za

Comment in
    Lancet. 2010 Mar 20;375(9719):959-61. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60364-9.
    Lancet. 2013 Apr 6;381(9873):1182. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60797-7.

BACKGROUND: Homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia is a rare genetic disorder 
in which both LDL-receptor alleles are defective, resulting in very high 
concentrations of LDL cholesterol in plasma and premature coronary artery 
disease. This study investigated whether an antisense inhibitor of 
apolipoprotein B synthesis, mipomersen, is effective and safe as an adjunctive 
agent to lower LDL cholesterol concentrations in patients with this disease.
METHODS: This randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 study was 
undertaken in nine lipid clinics in seven countries. Patients aged 12 years and 
older with clinical diagnosis or genetic confirmation of homozygous familial 
hypercholesterolaemia, who were already receiving the maximum tolerated dose of 
a lipid-lowering drug, were randomly assigned to mipomersen 200 mg 
subcutaneously every week or placebo for 26 weeks. Randomisation was computer 
generated and stratified by weight (<50 kg vs >/=50 kg) in a centralised blocked 
randomisation, implemented with a computerised interactive voice response 
system. All clinical, medical, and pharmacy personnel, and patients were masked 
to treatment allocation. The primary endpoint was percentage change in LDL 
cholesterol concentration from baseline. Analysis was by intention to treat. 
This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00607373.
FINDINGS: 34 patients were assigned to mipomersen and 17 to placebo; data for 
all patients were analysed. 45 patients completed the 26-week treatment period 
(28 mipomersen, 17 placebo). Mean concentrations of LDL cholesterol at baseline 
were 11.4 mmol/L (SD 3.6) in the mipomersen group and 10.4 mmol/L (3.7) in the 
placebo group. The mean percentage change in LDL cholesterol concentration was 
significantly greater with mipomersen (-24.7%, 95% CI -31.6 to -17.7) than with 
placebo (-3.3%, -12.1 to 5.5; p=0.0003). The most common adverse events were 
injection-site reactions (26 [76%] patients in mipomersen group vs four [24%] in 
placebo group). Four (12%) patients in the mipomersen group but none in the 
placebo group had increases in concentrations of alanine aminotransferase of 
three times or more the upper limit of normal.
INTERPRETATION: Inhibition of apolipoprotein B synthesis by mipomersen 
represents a novel, effective therapy to reduce LDL cholesterol concentrations 
in patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia who are already 
receiving lipid-lowering drugs, including high-dose statins.
FUNDING: ISIS Pharmaceuticals and Genzyme Corporation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60284-X
PMID: 20227758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]