---
reference_id: "PMID:36397853"
title: "Clinical whole-exome sequencing analysis reveals a novel missense COL11A1 mutation resulting in an 18-week Iranian male aborted fetus with Fibrochondrogenesis 1: A case report."
authors:
- Mirtavoos-Mahyari H
- Ajami S
- Mehrtash A
- Marashiyan SM
- Bahreini F
- Sheikhy K
- Ghanbari S
- Ardeshirdavani A
journal: Clin Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ccr3.6574
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical whole-exome sequencing analysis reveals a novel missense COL11A1 mutation resulting in an 18-week Iranian male aborted fetus with Fibrochondrogenesis 1: A case report.
**Authors:** Mirtavoos-Mahyari H, Ajami S, Mehrtash A, Marashiyan SM, Bahreini F, Sheikhy K, Ghanbari S, Ardeshirdavani A
**Journal:** Clin Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ccr3.6574](https://doi.org/10.1002/ccr3.6574)

## Content

1. Clin Case Rep. 2022 Nov 15;10(11):e6574. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.6574. eCollection 
2022 Nov.

Clinical whole-exome sequencing analysis reveals a novel missense COL11A1 
mutation resulting in an 18-week Iranian male aborted fetus with 
Fibrochondrogenesis 1: A case report.

Mirtavoos-Mahyari H(1), Ajami S(2), Mehrtash A(3), Marashiyan SM(4), Bahreini 
F(5), Sheikhy K(6), Ghanbari S(7), Ardeshirdavani A(3).

Author information:
(1)Lung Transplantation Research Center (LTRC), National Research Institute of 
Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases (NRITLD) Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences Tehran Iran.
(2)Medical Genetics Department Omid Fertility Clinic Tehran Iran.
(3)Cimorgh Medical IT Solutions Tehran Iran.
(4)Department of Medical Nanotechnology, School of Advanced Technologies in 
Medicine Tehran University of Medical Sciences Tehran Iran.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences Tarbiat Modares 
University Tehran Iran.
(6)Tracheal Diseases Research Center (TDRC), National Research Institute of 
Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases (NRITLD) Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences Tehran Iran.
(7)Molecular Genetics Department, Biological Sciences Faculty Tarbiat Modares 
University Tehran Iran.

Fibrochondrogenesis 1, an autosomal recessive syndrome, is a rare disease that 
causes short-limbed skeletal dysplasia. Mutations in the gene encoding the α1 
chain of type XI collagen (COL11A1) are seen to be the main cause of this 
disease. We present an 18-week Iranian male aborted fetus with 
Fibrochondrogenesis 1 from consanguineous parents. Whole-exome sequencing 
revealed a novel missense variant from G to A in exon 45 of 68 in the COL11A1 
gene (NM_080629.2: c.3440G > A, [p.G1147E, g.103404625]). The mutation was 
confirmed by Sanger sequencing and further, MutationTaster predicted this 
variant to be disease-causing. Bioinformatic analysis suggests that this variant 
is highly conserved in both nucleotide and protein levels, suggesting that it 
has an important function in the proper role of COL11A1 protein. In silico 
analysis suggests that this mutation alters the COL11A1 protein structure 
through a Glycine to Glutamic acid substitution.

© 2022 The Authors. Clinical Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ccr3.6574
PMCID: PMC9664532
PMID: 36397853

Conflict of interest statement: Amin Ardeshirdavani discloses that he is an 
equity shareholder of Cimorgh Medical IT Solution. Other authors declare no 
potential conflict of interests.