---
reference_id: "PMID:37725702"
title: "Secondary Breast Angiosarcoma After a Primary Diagnosis of Breast Cancer: A Retrospective Analysis of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Database."
authors:
- Chau B
- Loggers ET
- Cranmer LD
- Mogal H
- Sharib JM
- Kim EY
- Schaub SK
- Paulson KG
- Linden HM
- Specht JM
- Kim JN
- Javid SH
- Wagner MJ
journal: Am J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/COC.0000000000001045
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Breast Neoplasms/epidemiology, therapy, pathology"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/epidemiology, therapy, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Mastectomy, Segmental"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secondary Breast Angiosarcoma After a Primary Diagnosis of Breast Cancer: A Retrospective Analysis of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Database.
**Authors:** Chau B, Loggers ET, Cranmer LD, Mogal H, Sharib JM, Kim EY, Schaub SK, Paulson KG, Linden HM, Specht JM, Kim JN, Javid SH, Wagner MJ
**Journal:** Am J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/COC.0000000000001045](https://doi.org/10.1097/COC.0000000000001045)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Oncol. 2023 Dec 1;46(12):567-571. doi: 10.1097/COC.0000000000001045.
 Epub 2023 Sep 19.

Secondary Breast Angiosarcoma After a Primary Diagnosis of Breast Cancer: A
Retrospective Analysis of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
Database.

Chau B(1)(2), Loggers ET(1)(2), Cranmer LD(1)(2), Mogal H(2)(3), Sharib
JM(2)(3), Kim EY(4)(3), Schaub SK(4)(3), Paulson KG(5), Linden HM(1)(3), Specht
JM(1)(3), Kim JN(4)(3), Javid SH(2)(3), Wagner MJ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology.
(2)Department of Surgery.
(3)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Washington.
(5)Medical Oncology, Providence-Swedish Cancer Institute, Seattle, WA.

OBJECTIVES: Angiosarcoma is a rare complication of breast-conserving therapy.
This study evaluated the change in incidence between 1992 and 2016 of secondary
breast angiosarcoma (SBA) in patients with a history of breast cancer and the
impact of management strategies for the original breast carcinoma on
angiosarcoma treatment.
METHODS: Breast cancer and angiosarcoma cases were abstracted from the
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Result (SEER) database. SBAs were defined as
angiosarcomas located in the breast occurring after a prior breast cancer
diagnosis. Primary breast angiosarcomas (PBAs) were defined as an angiosarcoma
diagnosis listed as "one primary only." Incidence rates were estimated using a
proportion of the US total population. Survival was analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier
method, and Cox proportional hazard models were used to assess the association
of clinicopathologic characteristics on overall survival.
RESULTS: Between 1992 and 2016, 193 cases of SBA were reported in the SEER
dataset in patients with a prior history of breast cancer. The incidence of
breast angiosarcoma in patients with a prior diagnosis of breast cancer
increased 3-fold from about 10 cases per 100,000 person-years to about 30 cases
per 100,000 person-years over this same period ( P =0.0037). For treatment of
SBA (n=193), almost all (95%) had surgery. Nine percent received radiation
(compared with 35% of patients with PBA, P <0.001) and 23% received chemotherapy
(vs. 45% for PBA, P =0.11).
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate an increasing incidence of SBA over the study
period. These data can help inform shared decision-making for optimal management
of locoregional breast cancer and raise awareness of secondary angiosarcoma.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/COC.0000000000001045
PMCID: PMC10841185
PMID: 37725702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: E.T.L.—Clinical trial funding from BioAtla,
Ayala, and SpringWorks. L.D.C.—Clinical trial funding from Eli Lilly, AADi,
BluePrint Medicine, Iterion, Gradalis, Philogen, Advenchen Laboratories, and CBA
Pharma. Honoraria or has served on advisory boards for Daaichi Sankyo.
M.J.W.—Clinical trial support from Deciphera, Adaptimmune, GSK, Athenex, Foghorn
Therapeutics, Shaqsi, Presage Biosciences, Inhibrx, and Incyte. Consulting fees
from Adaptimmune, Epizyme, Aadi, and Deciphera. H.M.L.—Research funding from
Tolmar, EliLilly, GE Healthcare, Sanofi, and Zymeworks. Consulting for GE
Healthcare, Novartis, Sanofi, and Eli Lilly. J.M.S.—Research funding from
Celcuity, Genentech, Xencor, Pfizer, SeaGen, Merck, Carisma, and Lyell.
Consultant/advisory boards: A2 Biotherapeutics, Volastra Therapeutics, GE
Healthcare, Sensei Therapeutics, and GlaxoSmithKline. The remaining authors
declare no conflicts of interest.
