---
reference_id: "PMID:16876668"
title: Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Blennow K
- de Leon MJ
- Zetterberg H
journal: Lancet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69113-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Blennow K, de Leon MJ, Zetterberg H
**Journal:** Lancet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69113-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69113-7)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2006 Jul 29;368(9533):387-403. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69113-7.

Alzheimer's disease.

Blennow K(1), de Leon MJ, Zetterberg H.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgren's University Hospital, Mölndal, Sweden. 
kaj.blennow@neuro.gu.se

Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause of dementia. Research advances have 
enabled detailed understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of the hallmarks of 
the disease--ie, plaques, composed of amyloid beta (Abeta), and tangles, 
composed of hyperphosphorylated tau. However, as our knowledge increases so does 
our appreciation for the pathogenic complexity of the disorder. Familial 
Alzheimer's disease is a very rare autosomal dominant disease with early onset, 
caused by mutations in the amyloid precursor protein and presenilin genes, both 
linked to Abeta metabolism. By contrast with familial disease, sporadic 
Alzheimer's disease is very common with more than 15 million people affected 
worldwide. The cause of the sporadic form of the disease is unknown, probably 
because the disease is heterogeneous, caused by ageing in concert with a complex 
interaction of both genetic and environmental risk factors. This seminar reviews 
the key aspects of the disease, including epidemiology, genetics, pathogenesis, 
diagnosis, and treatment, as well as recent developments and controversies.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69113-7
PMID: 16876668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]