---
reference_id: "PMID:36528236"
title: Charting co-mutation patterns associated with actionable drivers in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
authors:
- Kendre G
- Murugesan K
- Brummer T
- Segatto O
- Saborowski A
- Vogel A
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2022.11.030
keywords:
- Humans
- Retrospective Studies
- Precision Medicine
- Cholangiocarcinoma/pathology
- Mutation
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "Bile Ducts, Intrahepatic/pathology"
- Bile Duct Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Charting co-mutation patterns associated with actionable drivers in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Kendre G, Murugesan K, Brummer T, Segatto O, Saborowski A, Vogel A
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2022.11.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2022.11.030)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2023 Mar;78(3):614-626. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2022.11.030. Epub 2022 
Dec 15.

Charting co-mutation patterns associated with actionable drivers in intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma.

Kendre G(1), Murugesan K(2), Brummer T(3), Segatto O(4), Saborowski A(5), Vogel 
A(6).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical 
School, Carl-Neuberg-Straße 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(2)Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, ZBMZ, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Freiburg, 79104, Freiburg, Germany; German Cancer Consortium 
(DKTK), Partner Site Freiburg and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120, 
Heidelberg, Germany; Comprehensive Cancer Center Freiburg (CCCF), Medical 
Center, University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
79106, Freiburg, Germany; Center for Biological Signalling Studies BIOSS, 
University of Freiburg, 79104, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Translational Oncology Research Unit, IRCCS Regina Elena National Cancer 
Institute, Rome, Italy.
(5)Dept. of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical 
School, Carl-Neuberg-Straße 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address: 
saborowski.anna@mh-hannover.de.
(6)Dept. of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical 
School, Carl-Neuberg-Straße 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address: 
Vogel.Arndt@mh-hannover.de.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In recent years, intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA) has 
evolved as a "role model" for precision oncology in gastrointestinal cancers. 
However, its rarity, paired with its genomic heterogeneity, challenges the 
development and evolution of targeted therapies. Interrogating large datasets 
drives better understanding of the characteristics of molecular subgroups of 
rare cancers and enables the identification of genomic patterns that remain 
unrecognized in smaller cohorts.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of 6,130 patients diagnosed with 
iCCA from the FoundationCORE database who received diagnostic panel sequencing 
on the FoundationOne platform. Short variants/fusion-rearrangements and copy 
number alterations in >300 tumor-associated genes were evaluated, and the tumor 
mutational burden (TMB) as well as the microsatellite instability (MSI) status 
were available for the majority of the cohort.
RESULTS: We provide a highly representative cartography of the genomic landscape 
of iCCA and outline the co-mutational spectra of seven therapeutically relevant 
oncogenic driver genes: IDH1/2, FGFR2, ERBB2, BRAF, MDM2, BRCA1/2, MET and 
KRASG12C. We observed a negative selection of RTK/RAS/ERK pathway 
co-alterations, and an enrichment of epigenetic modifiers such as ARID1A and 
BAP1 in patients with IDH1/2 and FGFR2 alterations. RNF43 as well as KMT2D 
occurred with high frequency in MSIhigh and TMBhigh tumors.
CONCLUSION: Detailed knowledge of the most prevalent genomic constellations is 
key to the development of effective treatment strategies for iCCA. Our study 
provides a valuable resource that could be used to assess the feasibility of 
clinical trials and subgroup analyses, spurs the development of translationally 
relevant preclinical models, and serves as a knowledge base to predict potential 
mechanisms of resistance to targeted therapies in genomically defined subgroups.
IMPACT AND IMPLICATIONS: Due to the high frequency of targetable alterations, 
molecular diagnostics is recommended in patients with biliary tract cancers, and 
especially in those with iCCA. The identification of an actionable lesion, 
however, does not guarantee therapeutic success, and the co-mutational spectrum 
may act as a critical modifier of drug response. Using a large dataset of 
comprehensive panel sequencing results from 6,130 patients with iCCA, we provide 
a detailed analysis of the co-mutational spectrum of the most frequent druggable 
genetic alterations, which is meant to serve as a reference to establish 
genetically relevant preclinical models, develop hypothesis-driven combination 
therapies and identify recurrent genetic profiles.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2022.11.030
PMID: 36528236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]