---
reference_id: "PMID:34687376"
title: Stroke Prevention in Cervical Artery Dissection.
authors:
- Gill R
- Biller J
journal: Curr Cardiol Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s11886-021-01603-2
keywords:
- Adult
- Anticoagulants/therapeutic use
- Arteries
- Dissection
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Stroke/etiology, prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stroke Prevention in Cervical Artery Dissection.
**Authors:** Gill R, Biller J
**Journal:** Curr Cardiol Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11886-021-01603-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11886-021-01603-2)

## Content

1. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2021 Oct 23;23(12):182. doi: 10.1007/s11886-021-01603-2.

Stroke Prevention in Cervical Artery Dissection.

Gill R(1), Biller J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Loyola University Chicago, Stritch School of
Medicine, Maywood, IL, 560153, USA. rick.gill@lumc.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Loyola University Chicago, Stritch School of
Medicine, Maywood, IL, 560153, USA.

Erratum in
    Curr Cardiol Rep. 2022 Jan;24(1):65. doi: 10.1007/s11886-022-01633-4.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cervical artery dissection (CAD) is rare, yet it is a common
cause of stroke in young and middle-aged adults. Historically, some senior
clinicians favored anticoagulation in the prevention of stroke due to CAD.
Choosing the optimal antithrombotic treatment with either antiplatelet (AP) or
anticoagulant (AC) medications remains a challenge. This paper will review the
clinical features and imaging of CAD, and the acute treatment and prevention of
stroke due to CAD.
RECENT FINDINGS: Until 2015, there were no prospective randomized trials in the
optimal antithrombotic management of CAD. The Cervical Artery Dissection in
Stroke Study (CADISS) trial found that treatment with AC did not lower the risk
of subsequent stroke or death at 3 months when compared to AP agents. This led
to a paradigm shift in national guidelines. In 2021, The Biomarkers and
Antithrombotic Treatment in of Cervical Artery Dissection (TREAT-CAD) trial
however did not confirm the non-inferiority of AP therapy in stroke prevention
due to CAD. The optimal antithrombotic management for stroke prevention in CAD
remains uncertain, while the superiority of anticoagulation has not been
established, nor has the non-inferiority of AP agents. The future direction of
research should consider early preventative treatment, dual treatment with AP
agents, direct oral AC medications, and aggregation of data from existing
randomized trials.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11886-021-01603-2
PMID: 34687376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
