---
reference_id: "PMID:32389595"
title: "Survival Outcomes After Initial Treatment for Anal Adenocarcinoma: A Population-Based Cohort Study."
authors:
- Park H
journal: Clin Colorectal Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.clcc.2020.04.001
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/diagnosis, mortality, secondary, therapy"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Anal Canal/pathology, surgery"
- "Anus Neoplasms/diagnosis, mortality, pathology, therapy"
- "Chemoradiotherapy, Adjuvant/statistics & numerical data"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/epidemiology"
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Proctectomy/statistics & numerical data"
- Retrospective Studies
- "SEER Program/statistics & numerical data"
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Survival Outcomes After Initial Treatment for Anal Adenocarcinoma: A Population-Based Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Park H
**Journal:** Clin Colorectal Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clcc.2020.04.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clcc.2020.04.001)

## Content

1. Clin Colorectal Cancer. 2020 Sep;19(3):e75-e82. doi:
10.1016/j.clcc.2020.04.001.  Epub 2020 Apr 13.

Survival Outcomes After Initial Treatment for Anal Adenocarcinoma: A 
Population-Based Cohort Study.

Park H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dankook University Hospital, Dankook 
University College of Medicine, Cheonan, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
hj0714.park@dkuh.co.kr.

BACKGROUND: Anal adenocarcinoma (AA) is reported to represent 5% to 10% of all 
anal cancer. Currently there is no evidence-based treatment of AA. We 
investigated clinical outcomes after treatment regimens in patients with AA and 
used the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) registry to examine 
the outcome.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We searched for patients diagnosed with histologically 
confirmed adenocarcinoma of the anal canal with stage I to III disease between 
2010 and 2016 using SEER∗Stat software.
RESULTS: A total of 393 patients treated from 2010 to 2016 for AA were 
identified. Patients were divided into 5 groups according to treatment: 68 
patients (17.3%) receiving radiotherapy (RT) and chemotherapy (CTx), 16 patients 
(4.1%) receiving RT or CTx, 108 patients (27.5%) receiving surgery alone, 137 
patients (34.8%) receiving preoperative RT or CTx with surgery, and 64 patients 
(16.3%) receiving postoperative RT or CTx with surgery. The 3-year 
cause-specific survival (CSS) rates were 63.9% in the RT and CTx group, 35.7% in 
the RT or CTx group, 77.7% in the surgery-alone group, 80.3% in the preoperative 
RT or CTx group, and 65.8% in the postoperative group (P < .001). Preoperative 
RT or CTx was associated with improved CSS on multivariate analysis (P = .024). 
The 3-year CSS rates for those who received surgery and those who did not 
receive surgery were 81.5% and 87.5% for stage I disease, and 74.4% and 57.3% 
for stage II/III disease.
CONCLUSION: Preoperative treatment with surgical resection may maximize the 
survival outcome. Although chemoradiotherapy alone may be sufficient for early 
stages of disease, patients with advanced disease should be treated with a 
combination of surgical resection and chemoradiotherapy. Future studies are 
required to determine the appropriate treatment strategies in AA.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clcc.2020.04.001
PMID: 32389595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]