---
reference_id: "PMID:11085766"
title: "Whipple's disease."
authors:
- Ratnaike RN
journal: Postgrad Med J
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1136/pmj.76.902.760
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple's disease.
**Authors:** Ratnaike RN
**Journal:** Postgrad Med J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1136/pmj.76.902.760](https://doi.org/10.1136/pmj.76.902.760)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med J. 2000 Dec;76(902):760-6. doi: 10.1136/pmj.76.902.760.

Whipple's disease.

Ratnaike RN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Woodville, South 
Australia 5011, Australia.

Whipple's disease is a systemic bacterial infection and the common though not 
invariable manifestations are diarrhoea, weight loss, abdominal pain, and 
arthralgia. Arthritis or arthralgia may be the only presenting symptom, 
predating other manifestations by years. Virtually all organs in the body may be 
affected, with protean clinical manifestations. Various immunological 
abnormalities, some of which may be epiphenomena, are described. The causative 
organism is Tropheryma whippelii. The disease is uncommon though lethal if not 
treated. Recent data suggest the disease occurs in an older age group than 
previously described. The characteristic histopathological features are found 
most often in the small intestine. These are variable villous atrophy and 
distension of the normal villous architecture by an infiltrate of foamy 
macrophages with a coarsely granular cytoplasm, which stain a brilliant magenta 
colour with PAS. These pathognomonic PAS positive macrophages may also be 
present in the peripheral and mesenteric lymph nodes and various other organs. 
The histological differential diagnoses include histoplasmosis and Mycobacterium 
avium-intercellulare complex. The clinical diagnosis of Whipple's disease may be 
elusive, especially if gastrointestinal symptoms are not present. A unique sign 
of CNS involvement, if present, is oculofacial-skeletal myorhythmia or 
oculomasticatory myorhythmia, both diagnostic of Whipple's disease. A small 
bowel biopsy is often diagnostic, though in about 30% of patients no abnormality 
is present. In patients with only CNS involvement, a stereotactic brain biopsy 
can be done under local anaesthetic. A recent important diagnostic test is 
polymerase chain reaction of the 16S ribosomal RNA of Tropheryma whippelii. 
Whipple's disease is potentially fatal but responds dramatically to antibiotic 
treatment. In this review the current recommended treatments are presented. The 
response to treatment should be monitored closely, as relapses are common. CNS 
involvement requires more vigorous treatment because there is a high rate of 
recurrence after apparently successful treatment.

DOI: 10.1136/pmj.76.902.760
PMCID: PMC1741844
PMID: 11085766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]