---
reference_id: "PMID:39986401"
title: "Temporal, regional, and demographic differences among antimicrobial-resistant domestic Campylobacter jejuni human infections across the United States, 2013-2019."
authors:
- Sodagari HR
- Sohail MN
- Varga C
journal: Int J Antimicrob Agents
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2025.107467
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Temporal, regional, and demographic differences among antimicrobial-resistant domestic Campylobacter jejuni human infections across the United States, 2013-2019.
**Authors:** Sodagari HR, Sohail MN, Varga C
**Journal:** Int J Antimicrob Agents (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2025.107467](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2025.107467)

## Content

1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2025 May;65(5):107467. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2025.107467. Epub 2025 Feb 20.

Temporal, regional, and demographic differences among antimicrobial-resistant 
domestic Campylobacter jejuni human infections across the United States, 
2013-2019.

Sodagari HR(1), Sohail MN(1), Varga C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA; Carl R. Woese Institute for 
Genomic Biology, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA. 
Electronic address: cvarga@illinois.edu.

Human infections with antimicrobial-resistant Campylobacter jejuni increase 
morbidity, mortality, hospitalization, and treatment costs. Resistance to 
antimicrobials recommended to treat campylobacteriosis has increased in the 
United States, despite the mitigating efforts of public health authorities. This 
study analyzed publicly available antimicrobial resistance (AMR) monitoring data 
collected by the National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System (NARMS) to 
assess temporal, regional, and demographic differences in AMR among domestically 
acquired C. jejuni infections across the United States between 2013 and 2019. 
Mann-Kendall tests evaluated trends in AMR throughout the study period. Poisson 
regression models assessed differences in resistance to each antimicrobial class 
among the years, age groups, and regions. Among the 7624 C. jejuni isolates, 
high resistance was identified against tetracyclines (n = 3504; 45.96%; 95% CI = 
44.84-47.09), and quinolones (n = 2093; 27.45%; 95% CI = 26.45-28.47). An 
increasing trend in resistance to quinolones (P = 0.07) and a decreasing trend 
for tetracyclines (P = 0.036) were identified. The rate of isolates that showed 
resistance to all antimicrobial classes except tetracyclines was significantly 
higher in the state of Connecticut. Resistance rates for all antimicrobials 
except aminoglycosides were higher among the 20-39 year age group. Regions and 
age groups with the greatest AMR rates were identified, which warrants further 
studies to identify individual and area-level risk factors. To mitigate the 
burden of antimicrobial-resistant C. jejuni infections, health authorities 
should focus on regions and age groups with the highest risk.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2025.107467
PMID: 39986401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]