---
reference_id: "PMID:25107911"
title: Unprenylated RhoA contributes to IL-1β hypersecretion in mevalonate kinase deficiency model through stimulation of Rac1 activity.
authors:
- van der Burgh R
- Pervolaraki K
- Turkenburg M
- Waterham HR
- Frenkel J
- Boes M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.571810
keywords:
- Cell Line
- Humans
- "Interleukin-1beta/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mevalonate Kinase Deficiency/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Prenylation
- "rac1 GTP-Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "rhoA GTP-Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unprenylated RhoA contributes to IL-1β hypersecretion in mevalonate kinase deficiency model through stimulation of Rac1 activity.
**Authors:** van der Burgh R, Pervolaraki K, Turkenburg M, Waterham HR, Frenkel J, Boes M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.571810](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.571810)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 3;289(40):27757-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.571810. Epub 
2014 Aug 8.

Unprenylated RhoA contributes to IL-1β hypersecretion in mevalonate kinase 
deficiency model through stimulation of Rac1 activity.

van der Burgh R(1), Pervolaraki K(1), Turkenburg M(2), Waterham HR(2), Frenkel 
J(1), Boes M(3).

Author information:
(1)From Department of Pediatric Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 3584 EA, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands and.
(2)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Department of Clinical Chemistry, 
Amsterdam Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 1100 DE, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(3)From Department of Pediatric Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 3584 EA, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands and mboes@umcutrecht.nl.

Protein prenylation is a post-translational modification whereby non-sterol 
isoprenoid lipid chains are added, thereby modifying the molecular partners with 
which proteins interact. The autoinflammatory disease mevalonate kinase 
deficiency (MKD) is characterized by a severe reduction in protein prenylation. 
A major class of proteins that are affected are small GTPases, including Rac1 
and RhoA. It is not clear how protein prenylation of small GTPases relates to 
GTP hydrolysis activity and downstream signaling. Here, we investigated the 
contribution of RhoA prenylation to the biochemical pathways that underlie 
MKD-associated IL-1β hypersecretion using human cell cultures, Rac1 and RhoA 
protein variants, and pharmacological inhibitors. We found that when 
unprenylated, the GTP-bound levels of RhoA decrease, causing a reduction in 
GTPase activity and increased protein kinase B (PKB) phosphorylation. Cells 
expressing unprenylated RhoA produce increased levels of interleukin 1β mRNA. Of 
other phenotypic cellular changes seen in MKD, increased mitochondrial potential 
and mitochondrial elongation, only mitochondrial elongation was observed. 
Finally, we show that pharmacological inactivation of RhoA boosts Rac1 activity, 
a small GTPase whose activity was earlier implied in MKD pathogenesis. Together, 
our data show that RhoA plays a pivotal role in MKD pathogenesis through 
Rac1/PKB signaling toward interleukin 1β production and elucidate the effects of 
protein prenylation in monocytes.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.571810
PMCID: PMC4183811
PMID: 25107911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]