---
reference_id: "PMID:26012135"
title: "[Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome]."
authors:
- Gajić TM
- Vujović S
- Ivović M
- Marina LV
- Arizanović Z
- Raković D
- Micić D
journal: Srp Arh Celok Lek
year: '2015'
keywords:
- "Androgen-Insensitivity Syndrome/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Karyotyping
- Male
- Multidetector Computed Tomography
- "Receptors, Androgen/blood"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome].
**Authors:** Gajić TM, Vujović S, Ivović M, Marina LV, Arizanović Z, Raković D, Micić D
**Journal:** Srp Arh Celok Lek (2015)

## Content

1. Srp Arh Celok Lek. 2015 Mar-Apr;143(3-4):214-8.

[Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome].

[Article in Serbian]

Gajić TM, Vujović S, Ivović M, Marina LV, Arizanović Z, Raković D, Micić D.

SUMMARY INTRODUCTION: Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) belongs to disorders
of sex development, resulting from complete or partial resistance to the
biological actions of androgens in persons who are genetically males (XY) with
normally developed testes and age-appropriate for males of serum testosterone
concentration.
CASE OUTLINE: A 21-year-old female patient was admitted at our Clinic further
evaluation and treatment of testicular feminization syndrome, which was
diagnosed at the age of 16 years.The patient had never menstruated. On physical
examination, her external genitalia and breast development appeared as
completely normal feminine structures but pubic and axillary hair was absent.
Cytogenetic analysis showed a 46 XY karyotype. The values of sex hormones were
as in adult males. The multi-sliced computed tomography (MSCT) showed structures
on both sides of the pelvic region, suggestive of testes. Bilateral orchiectomy
was performed. Hormone replacement therapy was prescribed after gonadectomy.
Vaginal dilatation was advised to avoid dyspareunia.
CONCLUSION: The diagnosis of complete androgen insensitivity is based on
clinical findigs, hormonal analysis karyotype, visualization methods and genetic
analysis. Bilateral gonadectomy is generally recommended in early adulthood to
avoid the risk of testicular malignancy. Vaginal length may be short requiring
dilatation in an effort to avoid dyspareunia. Vaginal surgery is rarely
indicated for the creation of a functional vagina.

PMID: 26012135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
