---
reference_id: "PMID:20471184"
title: Rapid disease progression with delay in treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Mohammed N
- Kestin LL
- Grills IS
- Battu M
- Fitch DL
- Wong CY
- Margolis JH
- Chmielewski GW
- Welsh RJ
journal: Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.11.029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapid disease progression with delay in treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Mohammed N, Kestin LL, Grills IS, Battu M, Fitch DL, Wong CY, Margolis JH, Chmielewski GW, Welsh RJ
**Journal:** Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.11.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.11.029)

## Content

1. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011 Feb 1;79(2):466-72. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.11.029. Epub 2010 May 13.

Rapid disease progression with delay in treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer.

Mohammed N(1), Kestin LL, Grills IS, Battu M, Fitch DL, Wong CY, Margolis JH, 
Chmielewski GW, Welsh RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, William Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, MI 
48073, USA.

PURPOSE: To assess rate of disease progression from diagnosis to initiation of 
treatment for Stage I-IIIB non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Forty patients with NSCLC underwent at least two sets of 
computed tomography (CT) and 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography 
(PET) scans at various time intervals before treatment. Progression was defined 
as development of any new lymph node involvement, site of disease, or stage 
change.
RESULTS: Median time interval between first and second CT scans was 13.4 weeks, 
and between first and second PET scans was 9.0 weeks. Median initial primary 
maximum tumor dimension (MTD) was 3.5 cm (0.6-8.5 cm) with a median standardized 
uptake value (SUV) of 13.0 (1.7-38.5). The median MTD increased by a median of 
1.0 cm (mean, 1.6 cm) between scans for a median relative MTD increase of 35% 
(mean, 59%). Nineteen patients (48%) progressed between scans. Rate of any 
progression was 13%, 31%, and 46% at 4, 8, and 16 weeks, respectively. Upstaging 
occurred in 3%, 13%, and 21% at these intervals. Distant metastasis became 
evident in 3%, 13%, and 13% after 4, 8, and 16 weeks, respectively. T and N 
stage were associated with progression, whereas histology, grade, sex, age, and 
maximum SUV were not. At 3 years, overall survival for Stage III patients with 
vs. without progression was 18% vs. 67%, p = 0.05.
CONCLUSIONS: With NSCLC, treatment delay can lead to disease progression. 
Diagnosis, staging, and treatment initiation should be expedited. After 4-8 
weeks of delay, complete restaging should be strongly considered.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.11.029
PMID: 20471184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]