---
reference_id: "PMID:39214134"
title: "Endocrinological features and epileptic encephalopathy in COX deficiency due to SCO1 mutations: case series and review of literature."
authors:
- Barbato A
- Gori G
- Sacchini M
- Pochiero F
- Bargiacchi S
- Traficante G
- Palazzo V
- Tiberi L
- Bianchini C
- Mei D
- Parrini E
- Pisano T
- Procopio E
- Guerrini R
- Peron A
- Stagi S
journal: Endocr Connect
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1530/EC-24-0221
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endocrinological features and epileptic encephalopathy in COX deficiency due to SCO1 mutations: case series and review of literature.
**Authors:** Barbato A, Gori G, Sacchini M, Pochiero F, Bargiacchi S, Traficante G, Palazzo V, Tiberi L, Bianchini C, Mei D, Parrini E, Pisano T, Procopio E, Guerrini R, Peron A, Stagi S
**Journal:** Endocr Connect (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EC-24-0221](https://doi.org/10.1530/EC-24-0221)

## Content

1. Endocr Connect. 2024 Sep 28;13(10):e240221. doi: 10.1530/EC-24-0221. Print
2024  Oct 1.

Endocrinological features and epileptic encephalopathy in COX deficiency due to 
SCO1 mutations: case series and review of literature.

Barbato A(1)(2), Gori G(3), Sacchini M(4), Pochiero F(4), Bargiacchi S(3), 
Traficante G(3), Palazzo V(3), Tiberi L(3), Bianchini C(5), Mei D(5), Parrini 
E(5), Pisano T(5), Procopio E(4), Guerrini R(5)(6), Peron A(3)(7), Stagi 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Auxo-endocrinology Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(3)Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, Florence, Italy.
(4)Metabolic and Muscular Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, Florence, 
Italy.
(5)Pediatric Neurology and Neurogenetics Unit and Laboratories, Meyer Children's 
Hospital IRCCS, Florence, Italy.
(6)NEUROFARBA Department, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(7)Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical Sciences "Mario Serio", 
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

CONTEXT: Cytochrome C oxidase (COX) is the fourth component of the respiratory 
chain and is located within the internal membrane of mitochondria. COX 
deficiency causes an inherited mitochondrial disease with significant genetic 
and phenotypic heterogeneity. Four clinical subtypes have been identified, each 
with distinct phenotypes and genetic variants. Mitochondrial complex IV 
deficiency nuclear type 4 (MC4DN4) is a form of COX deficiency associated with 
pathogenic variants in the SCO1 gene.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We describe three patients with MC4DN4 with developmental and 
epileptic encephalopathy (DEE), hypopituitarism, and SCO1 pathogenic variants. 
These patients' phenotypes considerably differ from previously reported MC4DN4 
phenotypes as they associate DEE with progressive hypopituitarism and survival 
beyond the first months after birth. Pituitary deficiency in these patients 
progressively worsened and mainly involved growth hormone secretion and thyroid 
function.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings expand knowledge of phenotypic variability in MC4DN4 
and suggest that SCO1 is a candidate gene for genetic hypopituitarism and DEE.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Our paper describes three patients affected by MC4DN4 
with hypopituitarism and developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE), two 
features that have never been associated with this condition. In addition, we 
reviewed the clinical features of all previous cases of MC4DN4 to give the other 
clinicians a wide picture of the clinical phenotype of this genetic disease. We 
hope that the publication of our data may help others to identify this disease 
and consider the chance to analyze the SCO1 gene in cases of DEE associated with 
pituitary dysfunction. Our article contributes to expanding the spectrum of 
genetic hypopituitarism and proposes a model to explain an association between 
this condition, mitochondrial anomalies, and neurodevelopmental defects.

DOI: 10.1530/EC-24-0221
PMCID: PMC11466244
PMID: 39214134

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the study 
reported.