---
reference_id: "PMID:29729370"
title: Reduced protein expression of the phosphodiesterases PDE4A4 and PDE4A8 in AIP mutation positive somatotroph adenomas.
authors:
- Bizzi MF
- Pinheiro SVB
- Bolger GB
- Schweizer JROL
- Giannetti AV
- Dang MN
- Ribeiro-Oliveira A Jr
- Korbonits M
journal: Mol Cell Endocrinol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2018.04.014
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Cyclic Nucleotide Phosphodiesterases, Type 4/metabolism"
- Female
- "Growth Hormone-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma/enzymology, genetics"
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced protein expression of the phosphodiesterases PDE4A4 and PDE4A8 in AIP mutation positive somatotroph adenomas.
**Authors:** Bizzi MF, Pinheiro SVB, Bolger GB, Schweizer JROL, Giannetti AV, Dang MN, Ribeiro-Oliveira A Jr, Korbonits M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Endocrinol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mce.2018.04.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2018.04.014)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2018 Nov 15;476:103-109. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2018.04.014. 
Epub 2018 May 3.

Reduced protein expression of the phosphodiesterases PDE4A4 and PDE4A8 in AIP 
mutation positive somatotroph adenomas.

Bizzi MF(1), Pinheiro SVB(2), Bolger GB(3), Schweizer JROL(1), Giannetti AV(4), 
Dang MN(5), Ribeiro-Oliveira A Jr(6), Korbonits M(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte/Minas Gerais, 30130-100, Brazil.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte/Minas Gerais, 30130-100, Brazil.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 
35294, USA; Department of Pharmacology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, The Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte/Minas Gerais, 30130-100, Brazil.
(5)Centre for Endocrinology of Queen Mary, University of London, London EC1M 
6BQ, UK.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, The Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte/Minas Gerais, 30130-100, Brazil. Electronic address: 
antoniorojr@gmail.com.
(7)Centre for Endocrinology of Queen Mary, University of London, London EC1M 
6BQ, UK. Electronic address: m.korbonits@qmul.ac.uk.

Type 4 phosphodiesterases (PDE4s) of the large PDE enzyme superfamily have 
unique specificity for cAMP and may, therefore, be relevant for somatotroph 
tumorigenesis. Somatotroph adenomas typically overexpress PDEs probably as part 
of a compensatory mechanism to reduce cAMP levels. The rat PDE4A5 isoform (human 
homolog PDE4A4) interacts with the AIP protein, coded by a tumour suppressor 
gene mutated in a subgroup of familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPAs). 
PDE4A8 is the closest related isoform of PDE4A4. We aimed to evaluate the 
expression of both PDE4A4 and PDE4A8 in GH cells of AIP-mutated adenomas and 
compare their expression with that in GH cells from sporadic AIP-mutation 
negative GH-secreting adenomas, where we had shown previously that both PDE4A4 
and PDE4A8 isoforms had been over-expressed. Confocal immunofluorescence 
analysis showed that both PDE4A8 and PDE4A4 had lower expression in AIP-mutated 
somatotropinoma samples compared to sporadic GH-secreting tumours (P < 0.0001 
for both). Based on the association of low PDE4A4 and PDE4A8 expression with 
germline AIP-mutations positive samples we suggest that lack of AIP hinders the 
upregulation of PDE4A8 and PDE4A4 protein seen in sporadic somatotrophinomas. 
These data point to a unique disturbance of the cAMP-PDE pathway in AIP-mutation 
positive adenomas, which may help to explain their well-described poor response 
to somatostatin analogues.

Crown Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2018.04.014
PMID: 29729370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]