---
reference_id: "PMID:29212617"
title: Diagnostic Role of Anal Sphincter Relaxation Integral in High-Resolution Anorectal Manometry for Hirschsprung Disease in Infants.
authors:
- Wu JF
- Lu CH
- Yang CH
- Tsai IJ
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.10.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic Role of Anal Sphincter Relaxation Integral in High-Resolution Anorectal Manometry for Hirschsprung Disease in Infants.
**Authors:** Wu JF, Lu CH, Yang CH, Tsai IJ
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.10.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.10.017)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2018 Mar;194:136-141.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.10.017. Epub
2017  Dec 6.

Diagnostic Role of Anal Sphincter Relaxation Integral in High-Resolution 
Anorectal Manometry for Hirschsprung Disease in Infants.

Wu JF(1), Lu CH(2), Yang CH(3), Tsai IJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan. Electronic address: wjf@ntu.edu.tw.
(2)Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the possible diagnostic role of anal sphincter 
relaxation integral (ASRI) in high-resolution anorectal manometry (HRAM) for 
Hirschsprung disease.
STUDY DESIGN: We performed conventional anorectal manometry (ARM) in 24 infants 
(8 with Hirschsprung disease and 16 without Hirschsprung disease) and HRAM in 
another 21 infants (9 with Hirschsprung disease and 12 without Hirschsprung 
disease) before and after October 2014. All infants underwent rectal suction 
biopsy for confirmation of Hirschsprung disease. We quantified rectoanal 
inhibitory reflex (RAIR) adequacy by calculating the ASRI in HRAM study at 
pressure cutoffs of less than 10, 15, and 20 mm Hg (ASRI10, ASRI15, and ASRI20, 
respectively) and investigated the diagnostic utility.
RESULTS: Patients with Hirschsprung disease who underwent HRAM had significantly 
lower ASRI10, ASRI15, and ASRI20 values than did infants without Hirschsprung 
disease (P = .0002, .0002, and .0003, respectively), indicating significant 
difference in internal anal sphincter relaxation during RAIR test between these 
2 groups. ASRI10 exhibited a greater diagnostic accuracy, area under the curve, 
sensitivity, and specificity than did ASRI15 and ASRI20 for Hirschsprung 
disease. Moreover, the diagnostic accuracy of HRAM for Hirschsprung disease 
based on ASRI10 <7 mm Hg.s.cm was significantly greater than that of 
conventional ARM (P = .02).
CONCLUSIONS: ASRI10 may be indicative of the adequacy of RAIR by HRAM in 
infants, thus assisting the diagnosis of Hirschsprung disease. The diagnostic 
accuracy of HRAM (based on the ASRI10 value) is greater than that of 
conventional ARM for Hirschsprung disease. ASRI10 may be used in an automatic 
HRAM analysis system for the diagnosis of anorectal motility disorders.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.10.017
PMID: 29212617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]