---
reference_id: "PMID:35453731"
title: "Clinical Profile, Arrhythmias, and Adverse Cardiac Outcomes in Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophies: A Systematic Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Valenti AC
- Albini A
- Imberti JF
- Vitolo M
- Bonini N
- Lattanzi G
- Schnabel RB
- Boriani G
journal: Biology (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/biology11040530
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Profile, Arrhythmias, and Adverse Cardiac Outcomes in Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophies: A Systematic Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Valenti AC, Albini A, Imberti JF, Vitolo M, Bonini N, Lattanzi G, Schnabel RB, Boriani G
**Journal:** Biology (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biology11040530](https://doi.org/10.3390/biology11040530)

## Content

1. Biology (Basel). 2022 Mar 30;11(4):530. doi: 10.3390/biology11040530.

Clinical Profile, Arrhythmias, and Adverse Cardiac Outcomes in Emery-Dreifuss 
Muscular Dystrophies: A Systematic Review of the Literature.

Valenti AC(1), Albini A(1), Imberti JF(1)(2), Vitolo M(1)(2), Bonini N(1), 
Lattanzi G(3)(4), Schnabel RB(5)(6), Boriani G(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiology Division, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural Sciences, 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Policlinico di Modena, 41124 Modena, 
Italy.
(2)Clinical and Experimental Medicine PhD Program, University of Modena and 
Reggio Emilia, 41124 Modena, Italy.
(3)CNR Institute of Molecular Genetics "Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza", Unit of 
Bologna, 40136 Bologna, Italy.
(4)IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 Bologna, Italy.
(5)Department of Cardiology, University Heart and Vascular Center, 20246 
Hamburg, Germany.
(6)German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner Site 
Hamburg/Kiel/Luebeck, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

Cardiolaminopathies are a heterogeneous group of disorders which are due to 
mutations in the genes encoding for nuclear lamins or their binding proteins. 
The whole spectrum of cardiac manifestations encompasses atrial arrhythmias, 
conduction disturbances, progressive systolic dysfunction, and malignant 
ventricular arrhythmias. Despite the prognostic significance of cardiac 
involvement in this setting, the current recommendations lack strong evidence. 
The aim of our work was to systematically review the current data on the main 
cardiovascular outcomes in cardiolaminopathies. We searched PubMed/Embase for 
studies focusing on cardiovascular outcomes in LMNA mutation carriers (atrial 
arrhythmias, ventricular arrhythmias, sudden cardiac death, conduction 
disturbances, thromboembolic events, systolic dysfunction, heart 
transplantation, and all-cause and cardiovascular mortality). In total, 11 
studies were included (1070 patients, mean age between 26-45 years, with 
follow-up periods ranging from 2.5 years up to 45 ± 12). When available, data on 
the EMD-mutated population were separately reported (40 patients). The incidence 
rates (IR) were individually assessed for the outcomes of interest. The IR for 
atrial fibrillation/atrial flutter/atrial tachycardia ranged between 6.1 and 
13.9 events/100 pts-year. The IR of atrial standstill ranged between 0 and 2 
events/100 pts-year. The IR for malignant ventricular arrhythmias reached 10.2 
events/100 pts-year and 15.6 events/100 pts-year for appropriate implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) interventions. The IR for advanced conduction 
disturbances ranged between 3.2 and 7.7 events/100 pts-year. The IR of 
thromboembolic events reached up to 8.9 events/100 pts-year. Our results 
strengthen the need for periodic cardiological evaluation focusing on the early 
recognition of atrial arrhythmias, and possibly for the choice of preventive 
strategies for thromboembolic events. The frequent need for cardiac pacing due 
to advanced conduction disturbances should be counterbalanced with the high risk 
of malignant ventricular arrhythmias that would justify ICD over pacemaker 
implantation.

DOI: 10.3390/biology11040530
PMCID: PMC9031530
PMID: 35453731

Conflict of interest statement: G.B. received small speaker’s fees from 
Medtronic, Boston, Biotronik, Boehringer, and Bayer, outside of the submitted 
work. R.B.S. has received lecture fees and advisory board fees from BMS/Pfizer 
outside this work. The other authors declare no conflict of interest.