---
reference_id: "PMID:33464538"
title: Regulation of mGluR1 on the Expression of PKC and NMDAR in Aluminum-Exposed PC12 Cells.
authors:
- He C
- Zhao X
- Li H
- Wang F
- Zhang J
- Wang Y
- Han Y
- Yuan C
- Niu Q
journal: Neurotox Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12640-020-00319-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regulation of mGluR1 on the Expression of PKC and NMDAR in Aluminum-Exposed PC12 Cells.
**Authors:** He C, Zhao X, Li H, Wang F, Zhang J, Wang Y, Han Y, Yuan C, Niu Q
**Journal:** Neurotox Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12640-020-00319-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12640-020-00319-5)

## Content

1. Neurotox Res. 2021 Jun;39(3):634-644. doi: 10.1007/s12640-020-00319-5. Epub
2021  Jan 19.

Regulation of mGluR1 on the Expression of PKC and NMDAR in Aluminum-Exposed PC12 
Cells.

He C(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhao X(1), Li H(1), Wang F(1), Zhang J(1), Wang Y(1), Han 
Y(1), Yuan C(1), Niu Q(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational Health, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, 030001, Shanxi, China.
(2)Key Lab of Environmental Hazard & Health of Shanxi Province, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, 030001, Shanxi, China.
(3)Key Lab of Cellular Physiology of Education Ministry, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, 030001, Shanxi, China.
(4)Department of Anatomy, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, 030001, Shanxi, 
China.
(5)Department of Occupational Health, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, 030001, Shanxi, China. niuqiao55@163.com.
(6)Key Lab of Environmental Hazard & Health of Shanxi Province, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, 030001, Shanxi, China. niuqiao55@163.com.
(7)Key Lab of Cellular Physiology of Education Ministry, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, 030001, Shanxi, China. niuqiao55@163.com.

Aluminum demonstrates clear neurotoxicity and can cause Alzheimer's disease 
(AD)-like symptoms, including cognitive impairment. One toxic effect of aluminum 
is a decrease in synaptic plasticity, but the specific mechanism remains 
unclear. In this study, PC12 cells were treated with Al(mal)3 to construct a 
toxic cell model. (S)-3,5-Dihydroxyphenylglycine (DHPG), 
α-methyl-4-carboxyphenylglycine (MCPG), and mGluR1-siRNA were used to interfere 
with the expression of metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 1 (mGluR1). 
Polymerase chain reaction and western blotting were used to investigate the 
expression of mGluR1, protein kinase C (PKC), and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 
(NMDAR) subunits. ELISA was used to detect PKC enzyme activity. In PC12 cells, 
mRNA and protein expressions of PKC and NMDAR subunits were inhibited by 
Al(mal)3. Aluminum may further regulate the expression of NMDAR1 and NMDAR2B 
through mGluR1 to regulate PKC enzyme activity, thereby affecting learning and 
memory functions. Furthermore, the results implied that the mGluR1-PKC-NMDAR 
signaling pathway may predominately involve positive regulation. These findings 
provide new targets for studying the neurotoxic mechanism of aluminum.

DOI: 10.1007/s12640-020-00319-5
PMID: 33464538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]