---
reference_id: "PMID:36101818"
title: Glycosaminoglycan linkage region of urinary bikunin as a potentially useful biomarker for β3GalT6-deficient spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Nikpour M
- Noborn F
- Nilsson J
- Van Damme T
- Kaye O
- Syx D
- Malfait F
- Larson G
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12311
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycosaminoglycan linkage region of urinary bikunin as a potentially useful biomarker for β3GalT6-deficient spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Nikpour M, Noborn F, Nilsson J, Van Damme T, Kaye O, Syx D, Malfait F, Larson G
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmd2.12311](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmd2.12311)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2022 Jun 28;63(5):462-467. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12311. eCollection 2022
 Sep.

Glycosaminoglycan linkage region of urinary bikunin as a potentially useful 
biomarker for β3GalT6-deficient spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Nikpour M(1), Noborn F(1), Nilsson J(2), Van Damme T(3), Kaye O(4), Syx D(3), 
Malfait F(3), Larson G(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy University of 
Gothenburg Gothenburg Sweden.
(2)Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy University of Gothenburg 
Gothenburg Sweden.
(3)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Center for Medical Genetics Ghent 
University Hospital Ghent Belgium.
(4)Centre de Rheumatologie Liège Belgium.
(5)Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry Sahlgrenska University Hospital Gothenburg 
Sweden.

The spondylodysplastic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (spEDS) is caused by 
genetic defects in the B4GALT7 or B3GALT6 genes both deranging the biosynthesis 
of the glycosaminoglycan linkage region of chondroitin/dermatan sulfate and 
heparan sulfate proteoglycans. In this study, we have analyzed the linkage 
regions of urinary chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans of three siblings, 
diagnosed with spEDS and carrying biallelic pathogenic variants of the B3GALT6 
gene. Proteoglycans were digested with trypsin, glycopeptides enriched on 
anion-exchange columns, depolymerized with chondroitinase ABC, and analyzed by 
nLC-MS/MS. In urine of the unaffected mother, the dominating glycopeptide of 
bikunin/protein AMBP appeared as only one dominating (99.9%) peak with the 
canonical tetrasaccharide linkage region modification. In contrast, the samples 
of the three affected siblings contained two different glycopeptide peaks, 
corresponding to the canonical tetrasaccharide and to the non-canonical 
trisaccharide linkage region modifications in individual ratios of 61/38, 73/27, 
and 59/41. We propose that the relative distribution of glycosaminoglycan 
linkage regions of urinary bikunin glycopeptides may serve as a phenotypic 
biomarker in a diagnostic test but also as a biomarker to follow the effect of 
future therapies in affected individuals.

© 2022 The Authors. JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12311
PMCID: PMC9458601
PMID: 36101818

Conflict of interest statement: Mahnaz Nikpour, Fredrik Noborn, Jonas Nilsson, 
Tim Van Damme, Olivier Kaye, Delfien Syx, Fransiska Malfait, and Göran Larson 
all declare that they have no conflict of interest.