---
reference_id: "PMID:38062477"
title: Loss of the centrosomal protein ALMS1 alters lipid metabolism and the regulation of extracellular matrix-related processes.
authors:
- Bea-Mascato B
- Gómez-Castañeda E
- Sánchez-Corrales YE
- Castellano S
- Valverde D
journal: Biol Direct
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13062-023-00441-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Lipid Metabolism
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/metabolism"
- Proteome/metabolism
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/metabolism
- Proteomics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt
- Cell Cycle Proteins/metabolism
- "Alstrom Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of the centrosomal protein ALMS1 alters lipid metabolism and the regulation of extracellular matrix-related processes.
**Authors:** Bea-Mascato B, Gómez-Castañeda E, Sánchez-Corrales YE, Castellano S, Valverde D
**Journal:** Biol Direct (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13062-023-00441-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13062-023-00441-2)

## Content

1. Biol Direct. 2023 Dec 8;18(1):84. doi: 10.1186/s13062-023-00441-2.

Loss of the centrosomal protein ALMS1 alters lipid metabolism and the regulation
of extracellular matrix-related processes.

Bea-Mascato B(1)(2), Gómez-Castañeda E(3), Sánchez-Corrales YE(4), Castellano
S(4)(5), Valverde D(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)CINBIO Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Vigo, Campus As Lagoas-Marcosende
s/n, Vigo, 36310, Spain.
(2)Grupo de Investigación en Enfermedades Raras y Medicina Pediátrica, Instituto
de Investigación Sanitaria Galicia Sur (IIS Galicia Sur), SERGAS-UVIGO, Vigo,
Spain.
(3)Molecular and Cellular Immunology Section, Great Ormond Street Institute of
Child Health, University College London, London, UK.
(4)Genetics and Genomic Medicine Department, Great Ormond Street Institute of
Child Health, University College London, London, UK.
(5)Zayed Centre for Research into Rare Disease in Children, UCL Genomics,
University College London, London, UK.
(6)CINBIO Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Vigo, Campus As Lagoas-Marcosende
s/n, Vigo, 36310, Spain. dianaval@uvigo.es.
(7)Grupo de Investigación en Enfermedades Raras y Medicina Pediátrica, Instituto
de Investigación Sanitaria Galicia Sur (IIS Galicia Sur), SERGAS-UVIGO, Vigo,
Spain. dianaval@uvigo.es.

BACKGROUND: Alström syndrome (ALMS) is a rare autosomal recessive disease that
is associated with mutations in ALMS1 gene. The main clinical manifestations of
ALMS are retinal dystrophy, obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, dilated
cardiomyopathy and multi-organ fibrosis, characteristic in kidneys and liver.
Depletion of the protein encoded by ALMS1 has been associated with the
alteration of different processes regulated via the primary cilium, such as the
NOTCH or TGF-β signalling pathways. However, the cellular impact of these
deregulated pathways in the absence of ALMS1 remains unknown.
METHODS: In this study, we integrated RNA-seq and proteomic analysis to
determine the gene expression profile of hTERT-BJ-5ta ALMS1 knockout fibroblasts
after TGF-β stimulation. In addition, we studied alterations in cross-signalling
between the TGF-β pathway and the AKT pathway in this cell line.
RESULTS: We found that ALMS1 depletion affects the TGF-β pathway and its
cross-signalling with other pathways such as PI3K/AKT, EGFR1 or p53. In
addition, alterations associated with ALMS1 depletion clustered around the
processes of extracellular matrix regulation and lipid metabolism in both the
transcriptome and proteome. By studying the enriched pathways of common genes
differentially expressed in the transcriptome and proteome, collagen fibril
organisation, β-oxidation of fatty acids and eicosanoid metabolism emerged as
key processes altered by the absence of ALMS1. Finally, an overactivation of the
AKT pathway was determined in the absence of ALMS1 that could be explained by a
decrease in PTEN gene expression.
CONCLUSION: ALMS1 deficiency disrupts cross-signalling between the TGF-β pathway
and other dependent pathways in hTERT-BJ-5ta cells. Furthermore, altered
cross-signalling impacts the regulation of extracellular matrix-related
processes and fatty acid metabolism, and leads to over-activation of the AKT
pathway.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13062-023-00441-2
PMCID: PMC10704752
PMID: 38062477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
