---
reference_id: "PMID:28404095"
title: Type 3c (pancreatogenic) diabetes mellitus secondary to chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer.
authors:
- Hart PA
- Bellin MD
- Andersen DK
- Bradley D
- Cruz-Monserrate Z
- Forsmark CE
- Goodarzi MO
- Habtezion A
- Korc M
- Kudva YC
- Pandol SJ
- Yadav D
- Chari ST
- "Consortium for the Study of Chronic Pancreatitis, Diabetes, and Pancreatic Cancer(CPDPC)"
journal: Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S2468-1253(16)30106-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 3c (pancreatogenic) diabetes mellitus secondary to chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer.
**Authors:** Hart PA, Bellin MD, Andersen DK, Bradley D, Cruz-Monserrate Z, Forsmark CE, Goodarzi MO, Habtezion A, Korc M, Kudva YC, Pandol SJ, Yadav D, Chari ST, Consortium for the Study of Chronic Pancreatitis, Diabetes, and Pancreatic Cancer(CPDPC)
**Journal:** Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2468-1253(16)30106-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-1253(16)30106-6)

## Content

1. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016 Nov;1(3):226-237. doi: 
10.1016/S2468-1253(16)30106-6. Epub 2016 Oct 12.

Type 3c (pancreatogenic) diabetes mellitus secondary to chronic pancreatitis and 
pancreatic cancer.

Hart PA(1), Bellin MD(2), Andersen DK(3), Bradley D(4), Cruz-Monserrate Z(5), 
Forsmark CE(6), Goodarzi MO(7), Habtezion A(8), Korc M(9), Kudva YC(10), Pandol 
SJ(11), Yadav D(12), Chari ST(13); Consortium for the Study of Chronic 
Pancreatitis, Diabetes, and Pancreatic Cancer(CPDPC).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, The Ohio State 
University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA. Electronic address: 
philip.hart@osumc.edu.
(2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Schulze Diabetes Institute, 
University of Minnesota Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(3)Division of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition, National Institute of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, The Ohio State 
University, Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, The Ohio State 
University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(7)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Cedars-Sinai Medical 
Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(9)Departments of Medicine, Biochemistry, and Molecular Biology, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indiana University Simon Cancer Center, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA; Pancreatic Cancer Signature Center, Indiana University 
Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(10)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(11)Department of Veterans Affairs, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(12)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, University of 
Pittsburgh and UPMC Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Department of Medicine, 
University of Pittsburgh and UPMC Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(13)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.

Diabetes mellitus is a group of diseases defined by persistent hyperglycaemia. 
Type 2 diabetes, the most prevalent form, is characterised initially by impaired 
insulin sensitivity and subsequently by an inadequate compensatory insulin 
response. Diabetes can also develop as a direct consequence of other diseases, 
including diseases of the exocrine pancreas. Historically, diabetes due to 
diseases of the exocrine pancreas was described as pancreatogenic or 
pancreatogenous diabetes mellitus, but recent literature refers to it as type 3c 
diabetes. It is important to note that type 3c diabetes is not a single entity; 
it occurs because of a variety of exocrine pancreatic diseases with varying 
mechanisms of hyperglycaemia. The most commonly identified causes of type 3c 
diabetes are chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, 
haemochromatosis, cystic fibrosis, and previous pancreatic surgery. In this 
Review, we discuss the epidemiology, pathogenesis, and clinical relevance of 
type 3c diabetes secondary to chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma, and highlight several important knowledge gaps.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2468-1253(16)30106-6
PMCID: PMC5495015
PMID: 28404095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests MDB has received 
research support outside of the submitted work from Merck & Co, Medtronic, and 
Dompe pharmaceuticals. STC has received research support outside of the 
submitted work from Sandler Kenner Foundation, and non-financial support from 
Kenner Family Research Fund. PAH has received honoraria from Abbvie, as well as 
consulting fees from KC Specialty Therapeutic. SJP has received research support 
outside of the submitted work from Calcimedica, and has patents licensed, 
issued, and pending for intellectual property that is unrelated to the submitted 
work. DY is consulting for Abbvie and has received royalties for UpToDate 
publication. DKA, DB, ZC-M, CEF, MOG, AH, MK, and YCK declare no competing 
interests.