---
reference_id: "PMID:33463100"
title: Intravenous Immunoglobulin Therapy in Myocarditis.
authors:
- Mansourabadi AH
- Gol Mohammad Pour Afrakoti L
- Shahi A
- Shabanian R
- Amirzargar A
journal: Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.18502/ijaai.v19i4.4109
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravenous Immunoglobulin Therapy in Myocarditis.
**Authors:** Mansourabadi AH, Gol Mohammad Pour Afrakoti L, Shahi A, Shabanian R, Amirzargar A
**Journal:** Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.18502/ijaai.v19i4.4109](https://doi.org/10.18502/ijaai.v19i4.4109)

## Content

1. Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2020 Aug 25;19(4):323-336. doi: 
10.18502/ijaai.v19i4.4109.

Intravenous Immunoglobulin Therapy in Myocarditis.

Mansourabadi AH(1), Gol Mohammad Pour Afrakoti L(2), Shahi A(3), Shabanian R(4), 
Amirzargar A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. a.mansourabadi.67@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. ladan.gmp.93@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran AND Students Scientific Research Center, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. abbas.shahi2012@yahoo.com.
(4)3 Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Children's Medical Center Hospital, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 
rzshabanian@sina.tums.ac.ir.
(5)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Amiralizar@tums.ac.ir.

Myocarditis is an inflammatory disease of the myocardium with lymphocyte 
infiltration and myocyte necrosis leading to a wide range of clinical 
presentations including heart failure, arrhythmia, and cardiogenic shock. 
Infectious and noninfectious agents may trigger the disease. The fact that 
immunosuppressive drugs are useful in several kinds of autoimmune myocarditis is 
proof of the autoimmune mechanisms involved in the development of myocarditis. 
Pathogenic mechanisms in myocardial inflammation are including inflammasome 
activation followed by myocyte destruction, myocarditis, and pericarditis. 
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is a serum product made up of immunoglobulins, 
widely used in a variety of diseases. This product is effective in several 
immune-mediated pathologies. As well as the determined usage of IVIG in Kawasaki 
disease, IVIG may be useful in several kinds of heart failure including 
fulminant myocarditis, acute inflammatory cardiomyopathy, Giant Cell 
Myocarditis, and peripartum cardiomyopathy. Generally, IVIG is used in two 
different doses of low dose (200 to 400 mg/kg) and high dose (2 g/kg) regimen. 
The exact therapeutic effects of IVIG are not clear, however over the last 
decades, our knowledge about its mechanism of function has greatly enhanced. 
IVIG administration should be based on the accepted protocols of its 
transfusion. In this review article, we try to provide an overview of the 
different kinds of myocarditis, pathologic mechanisms and their common 
treatments and evaluation of the administration of IVIG in these diseases. 
Furthermore, we will review current protocols using IVIG in each disease 
individually.

DOI: 10.18502/ijaai.v19i4.4109
PMID: 33463100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]