---
reference_id: "PMID:35601121"
title: Family with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome in Indonesia.
authors:
- Parewangi ML
- Rusman RD
- Akil F
- Daud NAS
- Bachtiar R
- Kusuma SH
- Rifai A
- Tahir AS
- Miskad U
- Syarifuddin E
journal: JGH Open
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/jgh3.12736
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Family with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome in Indonesia.
**Authors:** Parewangi ML, Rusman RD, Akil F, Daud NAS, Bachtiar R, Kusuma SH, Rifai A, Tahir AS, Miskad U, Syarifuddin E
**Journal:** JGH Open (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jgh3.12736](https://doi.org/10.1002/jgh3.12736)

## Content

1. JGH Open. 2022 Apr 12;6(5):358-360. doi: 10.1002/jgh3.12736. eCollection 2022 
May.

Family with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome in Indonesia.

Parewangi ML(1), Rusman RD(2), Akil F(1), Daud NAS(1), Bachtiar R(1), Kusuma 
SH(1), Rifai A(1), Tahir AS(2), Miskad U(3), Syarifuddin E(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology-Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine Hasanuddin University Makassar Indonesia.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Hasanuddin University 
Makassar Indonesia.
(3)Department of Pathology Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine Hasanuddin University 
Makassar Indonesia.
(4)Division of Digestive, Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine Hasanuddin 
University Makassar Indonesia.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterised 
by mucocutaneous pigmentation, gastrointestinal polyps and an increased risk of 
gastrointestinal and other cancers. We report an Indonesian woman, aged 28, with 
black spots on her lips who had multiple polyps extending from the stomach to 
the rectum. Her father and a son also had mucocutaneous lesions but they did not 
undergo gastrointestinal investigations. All three had mutations in the 
serine/threonine kinase 11 gene (STK11).

© 2022 The Authors. JGH Open published by Journal of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology Foundation and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jgh3.12736
PMCID: PMC9120882
PMID: 35601121