---
reference_id: PMID:38791003
title: "Recent Advancements in Research on DNA Methylation and Testicular Germ Cell Tumors: Unveiling the Intricate Relationship."
authors:
- Nicu AT
- Ionel IP
- Stoica I
- Burlibasa L
- Jinga V
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12051041
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent Advancements in Research on DNA Methylation and Testicular Germ Cell Tumors: Unveiling the Intricate Relationship.
**Authors:** Nicu AT, Ionel IP, Stoica I, Burlibasa L, Jinga V
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines12051041](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines12051041)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2024 May 8;12(5):1041. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12051041.

Recent Advancements in Research on DNA Methylation and Testicular Germ Cell 
Tumors: Unveiling the Intricate Relationship.

Nicu AT(1), Ionel IP(2), Stoica I(1), Burlibasa L(1), Jinga V(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Department, Faculty of Biology, University of Bucharest, 030018 
Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Specific Disciplines, Faculty of Midwifery and Nursing, 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Carol Davila", 050474 Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Department of Urology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy "Carol Davila", 050474 Bucharest, Romania.
(4)The Academy of Romanian Scientists, 050044 Bucharest, Romania.

Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) are the most common type of testicular 
cancer, with a particularly high incidence in the 15-45-year age category. 
Although highly treatable, resistance to therapy sometimes occurs, with 
devastating consequences for the patients. Additionally, the young age at 
diagnosis and the treatment itself pose a great threat to patients' fertility. 
Despite extensive research concerning genetic and environmental risk factors, 
little is known about TGCT etiology. However, epigenetics has recently come into 
the spotlight as a major factor in TGCT initiation, progression, and even 
resistance to treatment. As such, recent studies have been focusing on 
epigenetic mechanisms, which have revealed their potential in the development of 
novel, non-invasive biomarkers. As the most studied epigenetic mechanism, DNA 
methylation was the first revelation in this particular field, and it continues 
to be a main target of investigations as research into its association with TGCT 
has contributed to a better understanding of this type of cancer and constantly 
reveals novel aspects that can be exploited through clinical applications. In 
addition to biomarker development, DNA methylation holds potential for 
developing novel treatments based on DNA methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTis) 
and may even be of interest for fertility management in cancer survivors. This 
manuscript is structured as a literature review, which comprehensively explores 
the pivotal role of DNA methylation in the pathogenesis, progression, and 
treatment resistance of TGCTs.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12051041
PMCID: PMC11117643
PMID: 38791003

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.