---
reference_id: "PMID:27662826"
title: "Associations between sarcoidosis clinical course and ANXA11 rs1049550 C/T, BTNL2 rs2076530 G/A, and HLA class I and II alleles."
authors:
- Morais A
- Lima B
- Alves H
- Melo N
- Mota PC
- Marques A
- Delgado L
journal: Clin Respir J
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/crj.12559
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Butyrophilins/genetics
- Female
- Gene Frequency/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- HLA-DRB1 Chains/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Portugal/epidemiology
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnostic imaging, ethnology, genetics"
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Associations between sarcoidosis clinical course and ANXA11 rs1049550 C/T, BTNL2 rs2076530 G/A, and HLA class I and II alleles.
**Authors:** Morais A, Lima B, Alves H, Melo N, Mota PC, Marques A, Delgado L
**Journal:** Clin Respir J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/crj.12559](https://doi.org/10.1111/crj.12559)

## Content

1. Clin Respir J. 2018 Feb;12(2):532-537. doi: 10.1111/crj.12559. Epub 2016 Oct
4.

Associations between sarcoidosis clinical course and ANXA11 rs1049550 C/T, BTNL2
rs2076530 G/A, and HLA class I and II alleles.

Morais A(1)(2), Lima B(3), Alves H(4), Melo N(1), Mota PC(1)(2)(3), Marques
A(1)(2), Delgado L(5).

Author information:
(1)Pneumology Department, Centro Hospitalar Sao Joao, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Portugal.
(3)Oficina de Bioestatistica, Ermesinde, Portugal.
(4)Unidade da Promoção da Saúde e Prevenção de Doenças Não Transmissiveis.
Instituto Nacional de Saude (INSA) Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Porto, Portugal.
(5)Immunology Lab, Basic & Clinical Immunology Unit, Faculty of Medicine, and
Center for Health Technology and Services Research (CINTESIS), University of
Porto, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: A genetic background may be responsible for the different clinical
courses in sarcoidosis. We analyzed associations between sarcoidosis clinical
course and HLA class I/II alleles and susceptibility gene SNPs ANXA11 rs1049550
C/T and BTNL2 rs2076530 G/A in a Portuguese population, investigating possible
gene-gene interactions.
METHODS: We studied 138 unrelated Caucasian sarcoidosis patients (78 women,
56.5%; mean age, 37.2 ± 12.1 years). Disease that persisted after 2 years was
considered chronic. Samples were genotyped for ANXA11 rs1049550 C/T and BTNL2
rs2076530 G/A SNPs using TaqMan Real-Time PCR Assays. HLA class I/II alleles
were typed using PCR sequence-specific primers.
RESULTS: Sixty-six patients experienced disease resolution and 72 (52%)
developed chronic disease. Comparison of rs1049550 and rs2076530 allele
frequencies showed no significant differences. Only the HLA DRB1*03 allele was
significantly associated with disease resolution (21.2% vs 4.9% for chronic
disease; RR = 0.35; P < .01 after Bonferroni correction). In the logistic
regression models evaluating the association between HLA alleles and chronic
sarcoidosis adjusted for rs1049550 and rs2076530, only DRB1*03 was significantly
associated with disease resolution. No significant interactions were found in
any of the logistic regression analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: In this population of Caucasian patients with sarcoidosis, only
DRB1*03 was associated with disease resolution after 2 years' follow-up, with no
significant interactions found for susceptibility gene SNPs ANXA11 rs1049550 or
BTNL2 rs2076530.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.12559
PMID: 27662826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
