---
reference_id: "PMID:20381006"
title: LRP4 mutations alter Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and cause limb and kidney malformations in Cenani-Lenz syndrome.
authors:
- Li Y
- Pawlik B
- Elcioglu N
- Aglan M
- Kayserili H
- Yigit G
- Percin F
- Goodman F
- Nürnberg G
- Cenani A
- Urquhart J
- Chung BD
- Ismail S
- Amr K
- Aslanger AD
- Becker C
- Netzer C
- Scambler P
- Eyaid W
- Hamamy H
- Clayton-Smith J
- Hennekam R
- Nürnberg P
- Herz J
- Temtamy SA
- Wollnik B
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.03.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LRP4 mutations alter Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and cause limb and kidney malformations in Cenani-Lenz syndrome.
**Authors:** Li Y, Pawlik B, Elcioglu N, Aglan M, Kayserili H, Yigit G, Percin F, Goodman F, Nürnberg G, Cenani A, Urquhart J, Chung BD, Ismail S, Amr K, Aslanger AD, Becker C, Netzer C, Scambler P, Eyaid W, Hamamy H, Clayton-Smith J, Hennekam R, Nürnberg P, Herz J, Temtamy SA, Wollnik B
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.03.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.03.004)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 May 14;86(5):696-706. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.03.004.
Epub  2010 Apr 8.

LRP4 mutations alter Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and cause limb and kidney 
malformations in Cenani-Lenz syndrome.

Li Y(1), Pawlik B, Elcioglu N, Aglan M, Kayserili H, Yigit G, Percin F, Goodman 
F, Nürnberg G, Cenani A, Urquhart J, Chung BD, Ismail S, Amr K, Aslanger AD, 
Becker C, Netzer C, Scambler P, Eyaid W, Hamamy H, Clayton-Smith J, Hennekam R, 
Nürnberg P, Herz J, Temtamy SA, Wollnik B.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany.

Cenani-Lenz syndrome (CLS) is an autosomal-recessive congenital disorder 
affecting distal limb development. It is characterized mainly by syndactyly 
and/or oligodactyly and is now shown to be commonly associated with kidney 
anomalies. We used a homozygosity-mapping approach to map the CLS1 locus to 
chromosome 11p11.2-q13.1. By sequencing candidate genes, we identified recessive 
LRP4 mutations in 12 families with CLS. LRP4 belongs to the low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) receptor-related proteins (LRPs), which are essential for 
various developmental processes. LRP4 is known to antagonize LRP6-mediated 
activation of canonical Wnt signaling, a function that is lost by the identified 
mutations. Our findings increase the spectrum of congenital anomalies associated 
with abnormal lipoprotein receptor-dependent signaling.

Copyright (c) 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.03.004
PMCID: PMC2869043
PMID: 20381006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]