---
reference_id: "PMID:23236289"
title: Recessive mutations in SPTBN2 implicate β-III spectrin in both cognitive and motor development.
authors:
- Lise S
- Clarkson Y
- Perkins E
- Kwasniewska A
- Sadighi Akha E
- Schnekenberg RP
- Suminaite D
- Hope J
- Baker I
- Gregory L
- Green A
- Allan C
- Lamble S
- Jayawant S
- Quaghebeur G
- Cader MZ
- Hughes S
- Armstrong RJ
- Kanapin A
- Rimmer A
- Lunter G
- Mathieson I
- Cazier JB
- Buck D
- Taylor JC
- Bentley D
- McVean G
- Donnelly P
- Knight SJ
- Jackson M
- Ragoussis J
- Németh AH
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003074
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- "Cerebellum/growth & development, pathology"
- Chromosome Mapping
- Cognition Disorders/genetics
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Purkinje Cells/pathology
- Spectrin/genetics
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive mutations in SPTBN2 implicate β-III spectrin in both cognitive and motor development.
**Authors:** Lise S, Clarkson Y, Perkins E, Kwasniewska A, Sadighi Akha E, Schnekenberg RP, Suminaite D, Hope J, Baker I, Gregory L, Green A, Allan C, Lamble S, Jayawant S, Quaghebeur G, Cader MZ, Hughes S, Armstrong RJ, Kanapin A, Rimmer A, Lunter G, Mathieson I, Cazier JB, Buck D, Taylor JC, Bentley D, McVean G, Donnelly P, Knight SJ, Jackson M, Ragoussis J, Németh AH
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1003074](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1003074)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(12):e1003074. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003074. Epub 2012
Dec 6.

Recessive mutations in SPTBN2 implicate β-III spectrin in both cognitive and
motor development.

Lise S(1), Clarkson Y, Perkins E, Kwasniewska A, Sadighi Akha E, Schnekenberg
RP, Suminaite D, Hope J, Baker I, Gregory L, Green A, Allan C, Lamble S,
Jayawant S, Quaghebeur G, Cader MZ, Hughes S, Armstrong RJ, Kanapin A, Rimmer A,
Lunter G, Mathieson I, Cazier JB, Buck D, Taylor JC, Bentley D, McVean G,
Donnelly P, Knight SJ, Jackson M, Ragoussis J, Németh AH.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom.

β-III spectrin is present in the brain and is known to be important in the
function of the cerebellum. Heterozygous mutations in SPTBN2, the gene encoding
β-III spectrin, cause Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 5 (SCA5), an adult-onset,
slowly progressive, autosomal-dominant pure cerebellar ataxia. SCA5 is sometimes
known as "Lincoln ataxia," because the largest known family is descended from
relatives of the United States President Abraham Lincoln. Using targeted capture
and next-generation sequencing, we identified a homozygous stop codon in SPTBN2
in a consanguineous family in which childhood developmental ataxia co-segregates
with cognitive impairment. The cognitive impairment could result from mutations
in a second gene, but further analysis using whole-genome sequencing combined
with SNP array analysis did not reveal any evidence of other mutations. We also
examined a mouse knockout of β-III spectrin in which ataxia and progressive
degeneration of cerebellar Purkinje cells has been previously reported and found
morphological abnormalities in neurons from prefrontal cortex and deficits in
object recognition tasks, consistent with the human cognitive phenotype. These
data provide the first evidence that β-III spectrin plays an important role in
cortical brain development and cognition, in addition to its function in the
cerebellum; and we conclude that cognitive impairment is an integral part of
this novel recessive ataxic syndrome, Spectrin-associated Autosomal Recessive
Cerebellar Ataxia type 1 (SPARCA1). In addition, the identification of SPARCA1
and normal heterozygous carriers of the stop codon in SPTBN2 provides insights
into the mechanism of molecular dominance in SCA5 and demonstrates that the
cell-specific repertoire of spectrin subunits underlies a novel group of
disorders, the neuronal spectrinopathies, which includes SCA5, SPARCA1, and a
form of West syndrome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003074
PMCID: PMC3516553
PMID: 23236289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
