---
reference_id: "PMID:38582917"
title: Cellular and molecular mechanisms of aspartoacylase and its role in Canavan disease.
authors:
- Grønbæk-Thygesen M
- Hartmann-Petersen R
journal: Cell Biosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13578-024-01224-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular and molecular mechanisms of aspartoacylase and its role in Canavan disease.
**Authors:** Grønbæk-Thygesen M, Hartmann-Petersen R
**Journal:** Cell Biosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13578-024-01224-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13578-024-01224-6)

## Content

1. Cell Biosci. 2024 Apr 6;14(1):45. doi: 10.1186/s13578-024-01224-6.

Cellular and molecular mechanisms of aspartoacylase and its role in Canavan
disease.

Grønbæk-Thygesen M(1), Hartmann-Petersen R(2).

Author information:
(1)The Linderstrøm-Lang Centre for Protein Science, Department of Biology,
University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200N, Copenhagen, Denmark.
martin.thygesen@bio.ku.dk.
(2)The Linderstrøm-Lang Centre for Protein Science, Department of Biology,
University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200N, Copenhagen, Denmark.
rhpetersen@bio.ku.dk.

Canavan disease is an autosomal recessive and lethal neurological disorder,
characterized by the spongy degeneration of the white matter in the brain. The
disease is caused by a deficiency of the cytosolic aspartoacylase (ASPA) enzyme,
which catalyzes the hydrolysis of N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA), an abundant brain
metabolite, into aspartate and acetate. On the physiological level, the
mechanism of pathogenicity remains somewhat obscure, with multiple, not mutually
exclusive, suggested hypotheses. At the molecular level, recent studies have
shown that most disease linked ASPA gene variants lead to a structural
destabilization and subsequent proteasomal degradation of the ASPA protein
variants, and accordingly Canavan disease should in general be considered a
protein misfolding disorder. Here, we comprehensively summarize the molecular
and cell biology of ASPA, with a particular focus on disease-linked gene
variants and the pathophysiology of Canavan disease. We highlight the importance
of high-throughput technologies and computational prediction tools for making
genotype-phenotype predictions as we await the results of ongoing trials with
gene therapy for Canavan disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13578-024-01224-6
PMCID: PMC10998430
PMID: 38582917

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests declared.
