---
reference_id: "PMID:40014299"
title: The common HAQ STING allele prevents clinical penetrance of COPA syndrome.
authors:
- Simchoni N
- Koide S
- Likhite M
- Kuchitsu Y
- Kadirvel S
- Law CS
- Elicker BM
- Kurra S
- Wong MM
- Yuan B
- Grossi A
- Laxer RM
- Volpi S
- Dissanayake D
- Taguchi T
- Beck DB
- Vogel TP
- Shum AK
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1084/jem.20242179
keywords:
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Alleles
- Penetrance
- Mutation/genetics
- Female
- Male
- Syndrome
- Signal Transduction
- STING Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The common HAQ STING allele prevents clinical penetrance of COPA syndrome.
**Authors:** Simchoni N, Koide S, Likhite M, Kuchitsu Y, Kadirvel S, Law CS, Elicker BM, Kurra S, Wong MM, Yuan B, Grossi A, Laxer RM, Volpi S, Dissanayake D, Taguchi T, Beck DB, Vogel TP, Shum AK
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.20242179](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20242179)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2025 Apr 7;222(4):e20242179. doi: 10.1084/jem.20242179. Epub 2025
Feb  27.

The common HAQ STING allele prevents clinical penetrance of COPA syndrome.

Simchoni N(1), Koide S(2), Likhite M(3), Kuchitsu Y(2), Kadirvel S(4), Law 
CS(1), Elicker BM(5), Kurra S(1), Wong MM(3), Yuan B(4)(6), Grossi A(7), Laxer 
RM(8)(9), Volpi S(10)(11), Dissanayake D(8), Taguchi T(2), Beck DB(3)(12), Vogel 
TP(13)(14), Shum AK(1)(15).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Integrative Life Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, 
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
(3)Center for Human Genetics and Genomics, NYU Grossman School of Medicine , New 
York, NY, USA.
(4)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine , Houston, TX, 
USA.
(5)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(7)Laboratorio Genetica e Genomica Delle Malattie Rare, Istituto Giannina 
Gaslini , Genoa, Italy.
(8)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Paediatrics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(9)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, St. Michael's Hospital, 
Toronto, Canada.
(10)Unità Operativa Complessa Reumatologia e Malattie Autoinfiammatorie, 
Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Istituto Giannina Gaslini , 
Genoa, Italy.
(11)Dipartimento Di Neuroscienze, Riabilitazione, Oftalmologia, Genetica e 
Scienze Materno-Infantili, Università Degli Studi Di Genova , Genoa, Italy.
(12)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, NYU Grossman School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(13)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(14)Center for Human Immunobiology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(15)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco , 
San Francisco, CA, USA.

COPA syndrome, an autosomal-dominant inborn error of immunity, is nonpenetrant 
in ∼20% of individuals, with no known mediators of protection. Recent studies 
implicate STING in the pathogenesis of COPA syndrome. We show that the common 
HAQ STING allele mediates complete clinical protection. We sequenced 35 
individuals with COPA mutations, 26 affected patients and 9 unaffected carriers, 
finding HAQ STING co-segregation with clinical nonpenetrance. Exome sequencing 
identified only the mutations comprising HAQ STING as variants shared by 
unaffected carriers and absent in patients. Experimentally, we found that HAQ 
STING acts dominantly to dampen COPA-dependent STING signaling. Expressing HAQ 
STING in patient cells rescued the molecular phenotype of COPA syndrome. Our 
study is the first report of a common and well-tolerated allele mediating 
complete clinical protection from a severe genetic disorder. Our findings 
redefine the diagnostic criteria for COPA syndrome, expose functional 
differences among STING alleles with broad scientific and clinical implications, 
and reveal a potential universal gene therapy approach for patients.

© 2025 Simchoni et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20242179
PMCID: PMC11867111
PMID: 40014299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: N. Simchoni reported a patent to 
HAQ STING gene therapy for COPA syndrome pending. C.S. Law reported a patent to 
HAQ STING gene therapy for COPA syndrome pending. M.M.-K. Wong reported owning 
GeneDx stock (105 shares). R.M. Laxer reported “other” from Eli Lilly, Sanofi, 
Novartis, Sobi, and Akros Pharma outside the submitted work. D.B. Beck reported 
personal fees from Sobi, Novartis, GSK, Alexion, and Genesis Therapeutics 
outside the submitted work. T.P. Vogel reported personal fees from SOBI, Pfizer, 
Moderna, and Novartis, and “other” from AstraZeneca outside the submitted work, 
and being a member of the scientific advisory board of the COPA Syndrome 
Foundation. A.K. Shum reported a patent to HAQ STING gene therapy for COPA 
syndrome pending. No other disclosures were reported.