---
reference_id: "PMID:19096086"
title: Phenotype-genotype correlation in antenatal and neonatal variants of Bartter syndrome.
authors:
- Brochard K
- Boyer O
- Blanchard A
- Loirat C
- Niaudet P
- Macher MA
- Deschenes G
- Bensman A
- Decramer S
- Cochat P
- Morin D
- Broux F
- Caillez M
- Guyot C
- Novo R
- Jeunemaître X
- Vargas-Poussou R
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfn689
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Africa, Central"
- "Africa, Northern"
- "Bartter Syndrome/ethnology, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- "Deafness/ethnology, genetics"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hyperkalemia/ethnology, genetics"
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- "Nephrocalcinosis/ethnology, genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying/genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Sodium-Potassium-Chloride Symporters/genetics
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 1"
- Turkey
- "White People/ethnology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotype-genotype correlation in antenatal and neonatal variants of Bartter syndrome.
**Authors:** Brochard K, Boyer O, Blanchard A, Loirat C, Niaudet P, Macher MA, Deschenes G, Bensman A, Decramer S, Cochat P, Morin D, Broux F, Caillez M, Guyot C, Novo R, Jeunemaître X, Vargas-Poussou R
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfn689](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfn689)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2009 May;24(5):1455-64. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfn689. Epub
 2008 Dec 18.

Phenotype-genotype correlation in antenatal and neonatal variants of Bartter 
syndrome.

Brochard K(1), Boyer O, Blanchard A, Loirat C, Niaudet P, Macher MA, Deschenes 
G, Bensman A, Decramer S, Cochat P, Morin D, Broux F, Caillez M, Guyot C, Novo 
R, Jeunemaître X, Vargas-Poussou R.

Author information:
(1)Hôpitaux de Toulouse, Université Paul Sabathier, Département de Pédiatrie, 
Centre de Référence des Maladies Rénales Rares, Toulouse F31000, France.

BACKGROUND: Ante/neonatal Bartter syndrome (BS) is a hereditary salt-losing 
tubulopathy due to mutations in genes encoding proteins involved in NaCl 
reabsorption in the thick ascending limb of Henle's loop. Our aim was to study 
the frequency, clinical characteristics and outcome of each genetic subtype.
METHODS: Charts of 42 children with mutations in KCNJ1 (n = 19), SLC12A1 (n = 
13) CLCNKB (n = 6) or BSND (n = 4) were retrospectively analysed. The median 
follow-up was 8.3 [0.4-18.0] years.
RESULTS: We describe 24 new mutations: 10 in KCNJ1, 11 in SLC12A1 and 3 in 
CLCNKB. The onset of polyhydramnios, birth term, height and weight were similar 
for all groups; three patients had no history of polyhydramnios or premature 
birth and had CLCNKB mutations according to a less severe renal sodium wasting. 
Contrasting with these data, patients with CLCNKB had the lowest potassium (P = 
0.006 versus KCNJ1 and P = 0.034 versus SLC12A1) and chloride plasma 
concentrations (P = 0.039 versus KCNJ1 and P = 0.024 versus SLC12A1) and the 
highest bicarbonataemia (P = 0.026 versus KCNJ1 and P = 0.014 versus SLC12A1). 
Deafness at diagnosis was constant in patients with BSND mutations; transient 
neonatal hyperkalaemia was present in two-thirds of the children with KCNJ1 
mutations. Nephrocalcinosis was constant in KCNJ1 and SLC12A1 but not in BSND 
and CLCNKB patients. In most cases, water/electrolyte supplementation + 
indomethacin led to catch-up growth. Three patients developed chronic renal 
failure: one with KCNJ1 mutations during the second decade of age and two with 
CLCNKB and BSND mutations and without nephrocalcinosis during the first year of 
life.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed in a large cohort of ante/ neonatal BS that deafness, 
transient hyperkalaemia and severe hypokalaemic hypochloraemic alkalosis 
orientate molecular investigations to BSND, KCNJ1 and CLCNKB genes, 
respectively. Chronic renal failure is a rare event, associated in this cohort 
with three genotypes and not always associated with nephrocalcinosis.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfn689
PMID: 19096086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]