---
reference_id: "PMID:37594574"
title: "Comparative analysis of surgical management approaches for hydatid liver cysts: conventional vs. minimally invasive techniques."
authors:
- Elmoghazy W
- Alqahtani J
- Kim SW
- Sulieman I
- Elaffandi A
- Khalaf H
journal: Langenbecks Arch Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00423-023-03043-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative analysis of surgical management approaches for hydatid liver cysts: conventional vs. minimally invasive techniques.
**Authors:** Elmoghazy W, Alqahtani J, Kim SW, Sulieman I, Elaffandi A, Khalaf H
**Journal:** Langenbecks Arch Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00423-023-03043-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00423-023-03043-8)

## Content

1. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2023 Aug 18;408(1):320. doi:
10.1007/s00423-023-03043-8.

Comparative analysis of surgical management approaches for hydatid liver cysts: 
conventional vs. minimally invasive techniques.

Elmoghazy W(1)(2), Alqahtani J(3), Kim SW(4), Sulieman I(3), Elaffandi A(3)(5), 
Khalaf H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Organ Transplant Section, Hamad Medical Corporation, 
P.O. Box 3050, Doha, Qatar. moghazyw@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Surgery, Sohag University, Sohag, Egypt. moghazyw@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Surgery, Organ Transplant Section, Hamad Medical Corporation, 
P.O. Box 3050, Doha, Qatar.
(4)Department of Medicine, Weill-Cornell Medical College, Doha, Qatar.
(5)Department of Surgery, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Cairo, 
Egypt.

INTRODUCTION: Hydatid liver disease is a prevalent condition in endemic areas, 
particularly in the Middle East and North Africa. The use of laparoscopy as a 
treatment option has gained popularity. However, there is still ongoing debate 
regarding the optimal approach for surgical management. In this study, we 
present our experience with the surgical treatment of hydatid liver disease 
comparing conventional and minimally invasive approaches, including laparoscopic 
and robotic options.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective review of patients who underwent surgery 
for hydatid liver disease at our institution. Data was collected on the 
patients' clinical presentations, cyst characteristics, surgical procedures 
performed, intraoperative findings, and postoperative complications.
RESULTS: A total of 98 hydatid liver cysts were surgically managed in 57 
patients. The mean age of the patients was 37.2 ± 10.2 years, with 38 (66.7%) 
being male. Among the patients, 14 (24.6%) underwent conventional surgery (6 
partial pericystectomy, 4 total pericystectomy, and 4 liver resection), 37 
(64.9%) underwent laparoscopic surgery (31 partial pericystectomy, 4 total 
pericystectomy, and 2 liver resection), and 6 (10.5%) underwent robotic surgery 
(6 partial pericystectomy). There were no significant differences between the 
conventional surgery and minimally invasive groups in terms of patient age, 
gender, cyst size, or number. However, laparotomy was associated with a higher 
number of total pericystectomy and liver resection procedures compared to the 
minimally invasive approach (P = 0.010). Nonetheless, the operation time and 
blood loss were comparable between both groups. Perioperative complications 
occurred in 19 (33.3%) patients, with 16 (84%) experiencing minor issues. Bile 
leak occurred in 8 (14%) patients, resolving spontaneously in 5 patients. There 
was no significant difference (P = 0.314) in the incidence of complications 
between the two groups. Conventional surgery, however, was associated with a 
significantly longer hospital stay (P = 0.034). During follow-up, there were no 
cases of mortality or cyst recurrence in our cohort.
CONCLUSION: Minimally invasive approaches for hydatid liver cysts offer 
advantages such as shorter hospitalization and potentially quicker recovery, 
making them valuable treatment options when accompanied by careful patient 
selection and adherence to proper surgical techniques.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00423-023-03043-8
PMCID: PMC10439030
PMID: 37594574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]