---
reference_id: "PMID:37205763"
title: Structure of the immunoregulatory sialidase NEU1.
authors:
- Gorelik A
- Illes K
- Mazhab-Jafari MT
- Nagar B
journal: Sci Adv
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adf8169
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Neuraminidase/chemistry
- Sialic Acids
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structure of the immunoregulatory sialidase NEU1.
**Authors:** Gorelik A, Illes K, Mazhab-Jafari MT, Nagar B
**Journal:** Sci Adv (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1126/sciadv.adf8169](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adf8169)

## Content

1. Sci Adv. 2023 May 19;9(20):eadf8169. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adf8169. Epub 2023
May  19.

Structure of the immunoregulatory sialidase NEU1.

Gorelik A(1), Illes K(1), Mazhab-Jafari MT(2)(3), Nagar B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

Sialic acids linked to glycoproteins and glycolipids are important mediators of 
cell and protein recognition events. These sugar residues are removed by 
neuraminidases (sialidases). Neuraminidase-1 (sialidase-1 or NEU1) is a 
ubiquitously expressed mammalian sialidase located in lysosomes and on the cell 
membrane. Because of its modulation of multiple signaling processes, it is a 
potential therapeutic target for cancers and immune disorders. Genetic defects 
in NEU1 or in its protective protein cathepsin A (PPCA, CTSA) cause the 
lysosomal storage diseases sialidosis and galactosialidosis. To further our 
understanding of this enzyme's function at the molecular level, we determined 
the three-dimensional structure of murine NEU1. The enzyme oligomerizes through 
two self-association interfaces and displays a wide substrate-binding cavity. A 
catalytic loop adopts an inactive conformation. We propose a mechanism of 
activation involving a conformational change in this loop upon binding to its 
protective protein. These findings may facilitate the development of selective 
inhibitor and agonist therapies.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adf8169
PMCID: PMC10198634
PMID: 37205763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]