---
reference_id: "PMID:30583831"
title: Juvenile hemochromatosis with multi-organ involvement diagnosed at autopsy.
authors:
- Mantilla-Hernández JC
- Amaya-Mujica J
journal: Rev Esp Patol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.patol.2018.08.005
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Autopsy
- Cardiomyopathies/pathology
- Endomyocardial Fibrosis/pathology
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- GPI-Linked Proteins/genetics
- "Hemochromatosis/congenital, genetics, pathology"
- Hemochromatosis Protein/genetics
- Humans
- Hypogonadism/pathology
- Liver/pathology
- Mutation
- Pancreas/pathology
- Pituitary Gland/pathology
- Submandibular Gland/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile hemochromatosis with multi-organ involvement diagnosed at autopsy.
**Authors:** Mantilla-Hernández JC, Amaya-Mujica J
**Journal:** Rev Esp Patol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.patol.2018.08.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patol.2018.08.005)

## Content

1. Rev Esp Patol. 2019 Jan-Mar;52(1):45-49. doi: 10.1016/j.patol.2018.08.005.
Epub  2018 Nov 2.

Juvenile hemochromatosis with multi-organ involvement diagnosed at autopsy.

Mantilla-Hernández JC(1), Amaya-Mujica J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Universidad Industrial de Santander, Bucaramanga, 
Colombia.
(2)Structural and Functional Pathology Research Group (PATOS-UIS), Department of 
Pathology, Universidad Industrial de Santander, Carrera 32 # 29-31, OR 68000212 
Bucaramanga, Colombia. Electronic address: cjamayamujica@gmail.com.

Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) includes various disorders in iron metabolism 
producing iron deposits in several organs. HH is classified according to the HFE 
gene mutation. HH type I is characterized by HFE gene mutation, while types II, 
III and IV are due to other conditions. Juvenile hemochromatosis (JH) is related 
to hemojuvelin mutation, which is a regulatory peptide of the hepcidin protein, 
which regulates iron absorption. We report a case of JH and offer a concise 
review of the literature. A 14-year-old girl, with no secondary sexual 
characteristics, presented with abdominal pain, cough and dyspnoea. Clinical 
examination revealed right lower lobe consolidation, pleural effusion, 
cardiomegaly and an ejection fraction of 20%, with no response to treatment. On 
autopsy she was seen to have pleural and pericardial effusion, dilated 
cardiomyopathy, liver cirrhosis and pancreatic fibrosis. Prussian blue stain 
showed iron overload in these organs. JH with hypogonadism, cardiomyopathy and 
cirrhosis was diagnosed.

Copyright © 2018 Sociedad Española de Anatomía Patológica. Publicado por 
Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.patol.2018.08.005
PMID: 30583831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]