---
reference_id: "PMID:38597067"
title: "Sympathetic overactivity, hypertension and cardiovascular disease: state of the art."
authors:
- Grassi G
- Drager LF
journal: Curr Med Res Opin
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/03007995.2024.2305248
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sympathetic overactivity, hypertension and cardiovascular disease: state of the art.
**Authors:** Grassi G, Drager LF
**Journal:** Curr Med Res Opin (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/03007995.2024.2305248](https://doi.org/10.1080/03007995.2024.2305248)

## Content

1. Curr Med Res Opin. 2024;40(sup1):5-13. doi: 10.1080/03007995.2024.2305248.
Epub  2024 Apr 10.

Sympathetic overactivity, hypertension and cardiovascular disease: state of the 
art.

Grassi G(1), Drager LF(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, Clinica Medica, University of 
Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.
(2)Hypertension Unit, Renal Division, University of São Paulo Medical School, 
Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Hypertension Unit, Heart Institute (InCor), University of Sao Paulo Medical 
School, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) remains the most prevalent cause of premature death 
worldwide. It had been suspected for decades that increased activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) might play a pathogenetic role in the 
development and progression of hypertension, heart failure (HF) and CVD. The use 
of microneurographic techniques to directly assess the SNS has allowed this 
field to advance considerably in recent years. We now have compelling evidence 
for a key role of sympathetic overactivity in the pathogenesis and progression 
of hypertension and associated hypertension-mediated organ damage (such as 
endothelial dysfunction, arterial stiffness and left ventricular hypertrophy), 
HF (with or without reduced left ventricular ejection fraction). Sympathetic 
overactivity also drives increased cardiovascular risk in the settings of 
obesity, metabolic syndrome, chronic kidney disease and obstructive sleep 
apnoea, among other conditions. Thus, sympathetic overactivity is an important 
factor that drives patients through the CVD continuum, from the early appearance 
of cardiovascular risk factors, to impairments of the structure and function of 
components of the heart and arteries, to established CVD, and ultimately to a 
life-threatening cardiovascular event. A deeper understanding of the role of 
sympathetic overactivity in the pathogenesis of CVD and HF will support the 
optimization of therapeutic interventions for these conditions.

DOI: 10.1080/03007995.2024.2305248
PMID: 38597067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]