---
reference_id: "PMID:37051256"
title: "Prader-Willi and Angelman Syndromes: Mechanisms and Management."
authors:
- Ma VK
- Mao R
- Toth JN
- Fulmer ML
- Egense AS
- Shankar SP
journal: Appl Clin Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2147/TACG.S372708
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prader-Willi and Angelman Syndromes: Mechanisms and Management.
**Authors:** Ma VK, Mao R, Toth JN, Fulmer ML, Egense AS, Shankar SP
**Journal:** Appl Clin Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2147/TACG.S372708](https://doi.org/10.2147/TACG.S372708)

## Content

1. Appl Clin Genet. 2023 Apr 6;16:41-52. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S372708. eCollection 
2023.

Prader-Willi and Angelman Syndromes: Mechanisms and Management.

Ma VK(1)(2), Mao R(3)(4), Toth JN(3), Fulmer ML(3)(4), Egense AS(1)(2), Shankar 
SP(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, 
USA.
(2)MIND Institute, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(3)Molecular Genetics and Genomics, ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, 
USA.

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and Angelman syndrome (AS) are genetic imprinting 
disorders resulting from absent or reduced expression of paternal or maternal 
genes in chromosome 15q11q13 region, respectively. The most common etiology is 
deletion of the maternal or paternal 15q11q13 region. Methylation is the first 
line for molecular diagnostic testing; MS-MLPA is the most sensitive test. The 
molecular subtype of PWS/AS provides more accurate recurrence risk information 
for parents and for the individual affected with the condition. Management 
should include a multidisciplinary team by various medical subspecialists and 
therapists. Developmental and behavioral management of PWS and AS in infancy and 
early childhood includes early intervention services and individualized 
education programs for school-aged children. Here, we compare and discuss the 
mechanisms, pathophysiology, clinical features, and management of the two 
imprinting disorders, PWS and AS.

© 2023 Ma et al.

DOI: 10.2147/TACG.S372708
PMCID: PMC10084876
PMID: 37051256

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. SP Shankar is Albert Rowe endowed chair in 
Genetics II & receives salary and research support. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.