---
reference_id: "PMID:19106433"
title: "Nephrotoxicity of cadmium & lead."
authors:
- Gonick HC
journal: Indian J Med Res
year: '2008'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nephrotoxicity of cadmium & lead.
**Authors:** Gonick HC
**Journal:** Indian J Med Res (2008)

## Content

1. Indian J Med Res. 2008 Oct;128(4):335-52.

Nephrotoxicity of cadmium & lead.

Gonick HC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, West Los Angeles Healthcare Center, Los Angeles, 
California 90073, USA. hgonick@ucla.edu

Cadmium and lead are divalent cations with a propensity to settle in the 
proximal tubule of the nephron, leading to nephrotoxicity. The 
pathophysiological results, however, tend to diverge. Cadmium in sufficient 
cumulative dosage leads to the production of the Fanconi syndrome, a generalized 
proximal tubular reabsorptive defect thought to be related to inhibition of both 
ATP production and Na-K-ATPase activity. On the other hand, lead accumulation in 
the proximal tubule leads to hyperuricaemia and gout, presumably by inhibiting 
uric acid secretion, and diminished glomerular filteration rate (GFR). Fanconi 
syndrome is seen unusually only in children and experimental animals. Cadmium 
nephrotoxicity is heralded by increased excretion of beta2-microglobulin, 
retinol binding protein and alpha1-microglobulin, indicative of decreased 
proximal tubule function. Beta2-microglobulinuria is not found in lead 
nephropathy. In lead nephropathy albuminuria is absent or minimal whereas in 
cadmium nephropathy albuminuria is variable. From the standpoint of pathology, 
both entities are characterized by tubulointerstitial disease and fibrosis, but 
only early lead nephropathy is characterized by the presence of proximal tubule 
nuclear inclusion bodies, due to the combination of lead with a lead 
binding-protein.

PMID: 19106433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]