---
reference_id: "PMID:9132977"
title: Sexual transmission of hepatitis B in Mwanza, Tanzania.
authors:
- Jacobs B
- Mayaud P
- Changalucha J
- Todd J
- Ka-Gina G
- Grosskurth H
- Berege ZA
journal: Sex Transm Dis
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1097/00007435-199703000-00001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sexual transmission of hepatitis B in Mwanza, Tanzania.
**Authors:** Jacobs B, Mayaud P, Changalucha J, Todd J, Ka-Gina G, Grosskurth H, Berege ZA
**Journal:** Sex Transm Dis (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00007435-199703000-00001](https://doi.org/10.1097/00007435-199703000-00001)

## Content

1. Sex Transm Dis. 1997 Mar;24(3):121-6. doi: 10.1097/00007435-199703000-00001.

Sexual transmission of hepatitis B in Mwanza, Tanzania.

Jacobs B(1), Mayaud P, Changalucha J, Todd J, Ka-Gina G, Grosskurth H, Berege 
ZA.

Author information:
(1)LIVOS Project, Mwanza, Tanzania.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is endemic and poses a grave public health 
problem in Africa where it is mainly transmitted from mother to baby or during 
childhood. Sexual transmission has also been suggested to play a role in East 
Africa, but this has never been properly demonstrated. Additional preventive 
strategies may be proposed if sexual transmission of HBV occurred in this region 
where HIV and other STDs are highly prevalent.
GOALS: To determine the prevalence of markers for hepatitis B virus (HBV)and 
other sexually transmitted diseases (STD) in routine blood samples taken from 
three populations in Mwanza, Tanzania, and to use the data collected to look at 
the association between hepatitis B and other STDs, including human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
STUDY DESIGN: Routine blood samples were collected from 1,025 patients attending 
a clinic for STDs, 253 voluntary blood donors from secondary schools, and 952 
blood donors who gave blood in a hospital specifically for a relative who needed 
a blood transfusion. All samples were tested for HIV by double enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and for syphilis using the Treponema pallidum 
hemagglutination (TPHA) and rapid plasma reagin (RPR) tests. Two markers for HBV 
were examined by the double ELISA method, the presence of the anti-hepatitis B 
core antigen (anti-HBc) and the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg).
RESULTS: There were high prevalences of HBV, syphilis, and HIV in relative 
donors and STD patients. Although HBV markers were more prevalent in men of 
increasing ages, syphilis and HIV markers were more prevalent in young women. 
Evidence of past infection with HBV (presence of anti-HBc) was associated with 
serologic markers of recent treponemal infection (both TPHA and RPR positive) in 
both sexes (men odds ratio [OR] = 1.91, P < 0.011; women OR = 2.34, P < 0.02) 
and with HIV in men (OR = 1.93, P < 0.003). Current infection with HBV (presence 
of HBsAg) was associated with recent syphilis in men (OR = 2.13, P < 0.006). In 
STD patients, current infection with HBV was associated with Trichomonas 
vaginalis in women (OR = 3.57, P < 0.002) and recent syphilis in men (OR = 3.46, 
P < 0.001). There was no further association between HBV markers and any other 
STD pathogen or any particular STD syndrome, nor was there any association 
between current HBV infection and HIV in both sexes. The population attributable 
fraction for sexual acquisition of hepatitis B is estimated at 7.2% in men and 
3.0% in women, based on the association between hepatitis B and syphilis.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that sexual acquisition of hepatitis B 
occurs at low levels in Mwanza, and that HBV can be prevented through 
enhancement of the current HIV/STD control activities, in addition to improved 
vaccination strategies.

PIP: To investigate the role of sexual transmission of hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
in East Africa, a cross-sectional serosurvey was conducted in 3 populations with 
potentially divergent exposure to sexually acquired pathogens. Included were 253 
voluntary blood donors (predominantly secondary school students), 952 relative 
blood donors, and 1025 patients with sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) from 
Mwanza, Tanzania. The overall prevalence of hepatitis B surface antigen 
(HBsAg)--a measure of current infection--was 9.9% in voluntary donors, 11.2% in 
relative donors, and 8.1% in STD patients, with a 2.2:1 carrier ratio of men to 
women. The prevalences of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), anti-hepatitis B 
core antigen (anti-HBc), and past or recent syphilis were significantly lower 
among voluntary donors than in the other 2 groups. Evidence of past infection 
with HBV (anti-HBc) was associated with recent syphilis in both men and women 
(odds ratios (ORs), 1.91 and 2.34, respectively) and with HIV in men (OR, 1.93). 
Current infection with HBV (HBsAg) was associated with recent syphilis in men 
(OR, 2.13). In STD patients, current HBV was associated with Trichomonas 
vaginalis in women (OR, 3.57) and recent syphilis in men (OR, 3.46). There was 
no significant association between HBV and gonorrhea. Based on the association 
between syphilis and HBV, the population attributable fraction for sexual 
acquisition of HBV is estimated at 7.2% in men and 3.0% in women. Overall, these 
findings suggest that the sexual acquisition of HBV occurs at low levels in 
Mwanza. Improved vaccination strategies, early detection and treatment of 
syphilis, and programs aimed at reducing HIV transmission should enhance the 
control of HBV.

DOI: 10.1097/00007435-199703000-00001
PMID: 9132977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]