---
reference_id: "PMID:26369989"
title: "Central nervous system abnormalities in Fanconi anaemia: patterns and frequency on magnetic resonance imaging."
authors:
- Stivaros SM
- Alston R
- Wright NB
- Chandler K
- Bonney D
- Wynn RF
- Will AM
- Punekar M
- Loughran S
- Kilday JP
- Schindler D
- Patel L
- Meyer S
journal: Br J Radiol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1259/bjr.20150088
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central nervous system abnormalities in Fanconi anaemia: patterns and frequency on magnetic resonance imaging.
**Authors:** Stivaros SM, Alston R, Wright NB, Chandler K, Bonney D, Wynn RF, Will AM, Punekar M, Loughran S, Kilday JP, Schindler D, Patel L, Meyer S
**Journal:** Br J Radiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1259/bjr.20150088](https://doi.org/10.1259/bjr.20150088)

## Content

1. Br J Radiol. 2015;88(1056):20150088. doi: 10.1259/bjr.20150088. Epub 2015 Sep 
15.

Central nervous system abnormalities in Fanconi anaemia: patterns and frequency 
on magnetic resonance imaging.

Stivaros SM(1)(2)(3), Alston R(4), Wright NB(2), Chandler K(5), Bonney D(6)(7), 
Wynn RF(7)(8), Will AM(6), Punekar M(9), Loughran S(10), Kilday JP(3)(7), 
Schindler D(11), Patel L(12), Meyer S(3)(7)(13).

Author information:
(1)1 Centre for Imaging Sciences, University of Manchester, Institute of 
Population Health, Manchester, UK.
(2)2 Academic Unit of Paediatric Radiology, Royal Manchester Children's 
Hospital, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(3)3 Children's Brain Tumour Research Network, University of Manchester, Royal 
Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(4)4 National Drug Evidence Centre (NDEC), Centre for Epidemiology, Institute of 
Population Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(5)5 Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester University 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Saint Mary's Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(6)6 Department of Paediatric Haematology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester, UK.
(7)7 Department of Paediatric Oncology and Haematology, Royal Manchester 
children's Hospital, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester Academic Health Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(8)8 Blood and Marrow Transplant Unit, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester, UK.
(9)9 Department of Haematology, Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Preston, UK.
(10)10 Academic Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, 
Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester, UK.
(11)11 University of Wuerzburg, Department of Human Genetics, Biozentrum, Am 
Hubland, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(12)12 University of Manchester and Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, 
Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(13)13 Academic Unit of Paediatric and Adolescent Oncology, University of 
Manchester, c/o Young Oncology Unit, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, 
Manchester, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Fanconi anaemia (FA) is an inherited disease associated with 
congenital and developmental abnormalities resulting from the disruption of a 
multigenic DNA damage response pathway. This study aimed to define the MRI 
appearances of the brain in patients with FA in correlation with their genetic 
and clinical features.
METHODS: A review of the brain MRI in 20 patients with FA was performed. 
Pituitary size and frequencies of the radiological findings of individuals with 
FA and age-matched controls were determined.
RESULTS: Abnormalities were identified in 18 (90%) patients with FA, the 
commonest being a small pituitary (68%, p < 0.01 females and p < 0.001 males). 
In five cases (25%, p = 0.02), the pituitary morphology was also abnormal. 
Posterior fossa abnormalities were seen in six cases (30%, p = 0.01) including 
Chiari I malformation (n = 3), Dandy-Walker variant (n = 2) and cerebellar 
atrophy (n = 2). Six patients (30%, p = 0.01) had morphological structural 
variation of the corpus callosum (CC).
CONCLUSION: The incidence of central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities in FA is 
higher than previously reported, with a midline predominance that points to 
impact in the early stages of CNS development. MRI brain imaging is important 
for endocrine assessment and pre-transplant evaluation and can make an important 
contribution to clinical decision-making.
ADVANCES IN KNOWLEDGE: The incidence of brain structural abnormalities in FA is 
higher than previously reported, with abnormalities of the posterior fossa, CC 
and pituitary being common. There is an association with gender and reduction in 
pituitary size which does not strongly correlate with biochemically evident 
endocrine abnormality.

DOI: 10.1259/bjr.20150088
PMCID: PMC4984929
PMID: 26369989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]