---
reference_id: "PMID:24853997"
title: Ocular findings in 87 adults with Ghent-1 verified Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Drolsum L
- Rand-Hendriksen S
- Paus B
- Geiran OR
- Semb SO
journal: Acta Ophthalmol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/aos.12448
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular findings in 87 adults with Ghent-1 verified Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Drolsum L, Rand-Hendriksen S, Paus B, Geiran OR, Semb SO
**Journal:** Acta Ophthalmol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/aos.12448](https://doi.org/10.1111/aos.12448)

## Content

1. Acta Ophthalmol. 2015 Feb;93(1):46-53. doi: 10.1111/aos.12448. Epub 2014 May
22.

Ocular findings in 87 adults with Ghent-1 verified Marfan syndrome.

Drolsum L(1), Rand-Hendriksen S, Paus B, Geiran OR, Semb SO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

PURPOSE: To study ocular characteristics in 87 patients with verified Marfan 
syndrome (MFS) based on the Ghent criteria from 1996 (Ghent-1).
METHODS: The position of the lens was noted by observing the eye in different 
gaze directions in maximal mydriasis during slit lamp examination. Ectopia 
lentis (EL) was classified as subluxated (dislocation slightly backwards) or 
luxated (vertical or horizontal displacement). Corneal curvature, axial length 
(AL), corneal diameter, central corneal thickness, anterior chamber depth, lens 
thickness, condition of the iris, intraocular pressure, spherical equivalent and 
visual acuity were also investigated.
RESULTS: EL was found in 108 eyes (62.1%). Of the 68 phakic eyes with EL, 43 
(63.2%) had subluxation. Mean AL was 24.80 ± 2.57 mm, and the AL was above 23.5 
mm in 65.3%. Mean keratometry (K) in phakic eyes was 41.79 ± 1.70 diopters (D), 
and the K value was <41.5D in 46.8%. Iris hypoplasia was found in 3.4%. Myopia 
above 3D occurred in 38.4% of the phakic eyes. Mean binocular logMAR was 0.10 ± 
0.32. Only five patients (5.7%) had a logMAR more than 0.5. These 5 patients had 
EL, and 4 of them were amblyopic.
CONCLUSION: In this strictly defined MFS group fulfilling the Ghent-1 criteria, 
the prevalence of EL was 62.1%. In many cases, the dislocation of the lens was 
subtle. On average, the corneas were flattened and the globe length was 
increased. Only a few patients were visually impaired. Children with MFS should 
have a thorough follow up to avoid amblyopia.

© 2014 The Authors. Acta Ophthalmologica published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation.

DOI: 10.1111/aos.12448
PMID: 24853997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]