---
reference_id: "PMID:34951506"
title: "Growth in Joubert syndrome: Growth curves and physical measurements with correlation to genotype and hepatorenal disease in 170 individuals."
authors:
- Knoll J
- Altintas B
- Gahl WA
- Parisi M
- Gunay-Aygun M
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62593
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth in Joubert syndrome: Growth curves and physical measurements with correlation to genotype and hepatorenal disease in 170 individuals.
**Authors:** Knoll J, Altintas B, Gahl WA, Parisi M, Gunay-Aygun M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62593](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62593)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2022 Mar;188(3):847-857. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62593. Epub
2021  Dec 24.

Growth in Joubert syndrome: Growth curves and physical measurements with 
correlation to genotype and hepatorenal disease in 170 individuals.

Knoll J(1)(2), Altintas B(3), Gahl WA(4), Parisi M(5), Gunay-Aygun M(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, 
The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(4)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Joubert syndrome (JS) is a genetically heterogenous disorder of nonmotile cilia 
with a characteristic "molar tooth sign" on axial brain imaging. Clinical 
features can include developmental delay, kidney failure, liver disease, and 
retinal dystrophy. Prospective growth and measurement data on 170 individuals 
with JS were collected, including parental measurements, birth measurements, and 
serial measures when available. Analysis of growth parameters in the context of 
hepatorenal disease, genotype, and other features was performed on 100 
individuals assessed at the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center. 
Individuals with JS had shorter stature despite normal growth velocity and were 
shorter than predicted for mid-parental height. Individuals were lighter in 
weight, resulting in a normal body mass index (BMI). Head circumference was 
larger, averaging 1.9 Z-scores above height. At birth, head circumference was 
proportional to length. Individuals with variants in CPLANE1 had a larger head 
circumference compared to other genotypes; individuals with evidence of liver 
disease had lower weight and BMI; and individuals with polydactyly had shorter 
height. Here we present growth curves and physical measurements for Joubert 
syndrome based on the largest collection of individuals with this disorder to 
aid in clinical management and diagnosis.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC. This article has been contributed to by US 
Government employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62593
PMID: 34951506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]