---
reference_id: "PMID:38228875"
title: A comparative study on riboflavin responsive multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenation deficiency due to variants in FLAD1 and ETFDH gene.
authors:
- Wen B
- Tang R
- Tang S
- Sun Y
- Xu J
- Zhao D
- Wang T
- Yan C
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-023-01216-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A comparative study on riboflavin responsive multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenation deficiency due to variants in FLAD1 and ETFDH gene.
**Authors:** Wen B, Tang R, Tang S, Sun Y, Xu J, Zhao D, Wang T, Yan C
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-023-01216-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-023-01216-3)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2024 Apr;69(3-4):125-131. doi: 10.1038/s10038-023-01216-3. Epub 
2024 Jan 17.

A comparative study on riboflavin responsive multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenation 
deficiency due to variants in FLAD1 and ETFDH gene.

Wen B(1), Tang R(2), Tang S(1), Sun Y(3), Xu J(1), Zhao D(1), Wang T(#)(4), Yan 
C(#)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Research Institute of Neuromuscular and 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, 
Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Liaocheng, 
Liaocheng, 252000, Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital (Qingdao), Shandong University, 
Qingdao, 266035, Shandong, China.
(4)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, 
250012, Shandong, China. olivelwang@sdu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Neurology and Research Institute of Neuromuscular and 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, 
Shandong, China. czyan@sdu.edu.cn.
(6)Brain Science Research Institute, Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, 
Shandong, China. czyan@sdu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Lipid storage myopathy (LSM) is a heterogeneous group of lipid metabolism 
disorders predominantly affecting skeletal muscle by triglyceride accumulation 
in muscle fibers. Riboflavin therapy has been shown to ameliorate symptoms in 
some LSM patients who are essentially concerned with multiple acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenation deficiency (MADD). It is proved that riboflavin responsive LSM 
caused by MADD is mainly due to ETFDH gene variant (ETFDH-RRMADD). We described 
here a case with riboflavin responsive LSM and MADD resulting from FLAD1 gene 
variants (c.1588 C > T p.Arg530Cys and c.1589 G > C p.Arg530Pro, FLAD1-RRMADD). 
And we compared our patient together with 9 FLAD1-RRMADD cases from literature 
to 106 ETFDH-RRMADD cases in our neuromuscular center on clinical history, 
laboratory investigations and pathological features. Furthermore, the 
transcriptomics study on FLAD1-RRMADD and ETFDH-RRMADD were carried out. On 
muscle pathology, both FLAD1-RRMADD and ETFDH-RRMADD were proved with lipid 
storage myopathy in which atypical ragged red fibers were more frequent in 
ETFDH-RRMADD, while fibers with faint COX staining were more common in 
FLAD1-RRMADD. Molecular study revealed that the expression of GDF15 gene in 
muscle and GDF15 protein in both serum and muscle was significantly increased in 
FLAD1-RRMADD and ETFDH-RRMADD groups. Our data revealed that FLAD1-RRMADD 
(p.Arg530) has similar clinical, biochemical, and fatty acid metabolism changes 
to ETFDH-RRMADD except for muscle pathological features.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Japan Society of Human 
Genetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-023-01216-3
PMID: 38228875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]