---
reference_id: "PMID:36883644"
title: Microglial activation in the frontal cortex predicts cognitive decline in frontotemporal dementia.
authors:
- Malpetti M
- Cope TE
- Street D
- Jones PS
- Hezemans FH
- Mak E
- Tsvetanov KA
- Rittman T
- Bevan-Jones WR
- Patterson K
- Passamonti L
- Fryer TD
- Hong YT
- Aigbirhio FI
- O'Brien JT
- Rowe JB
journal: Brain
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awad078
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microglial activation in the frontal cortex predicts cognitive decline in frontotemporal dementia.
**Authors:** Malpetti M, Cope TE, Street D, Jones PS, Hezemans FH, Mak E, Tsvetanov KA, Rittman T, Bevan-Jones WR, Patterson K, Passamonti L, Fryer TD, Hong YT, Aigbirhio FI, O'Brien JT, Rowe JB
**Journal:** Brain (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awad078](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awad078)

## Content

1. Brain. 2023 Aug 1;146(8):3221-3231. doi: 10.1093/brain/awad078.

Microglial activation in the frontal cortex predicts cognitive decline in 
frontotemporal dementia.

Malpetti M(1), Cope TE(1)(2), Street D(1), Jones PS(1), Hezemans FH(1)(2), Mak 
E(3), Tsvetanov KA(1), Rittman T(1), Bevan-Jones WR(3), Patterson K(1)(2), 
Passamonti L(1), Fryer TD(1)(4), Hong YT(1)(4), Aigbirhio FI(1)(4), O'Brien 
JT(3), Rowe JB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences and Cambridge University Hospitals NHS 
Trust, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK.
(2)Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge CB2 
7EF, UK.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(4)Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2023 May;19(5):258. doi: 10.1038/s41582-023-00804-3.

Frontotemporal dementia is clinically and neuropathologically heterogeneous, but 
neuroinflammation, atrophy and cognitive impairment occur in all of its 
principal syndromes. Across the clinical spectrum of frontotemporal dementia, we 
assess the predictive value of in vivo neuroimaging measures of microglial 
activation and grey-matter volume on the rate of future cognitive decline. We 
hypothesized that inflammation is detrimental to cognitive performance, in 
addition to the effect of atrophy. Thirty patients with a clinical diagnosis of 
frontotemporal dementia underwent a baseline multimodal imaging assessment, 
including [11C]PK11195 PET to index microglial activation and structural MRI to 
quantify grey-matter volume. Ten people had behavioural variant frontotemporal 
dementia, 10 had the semantic variant of primary progressive aphasia and 10 had 
the non-fluent agrammatic variant of primary progressive aphasia. Cognition was 
assessed at baseline and longitudinally with the revised Addenbrooke's Cognitive 
Examination, at an average of 7-month intervals (for an average of ∼2 years, up 
to ∼5 years). Regional [11C]PK11195 binding potential and grey-matter volume 
were determined, and these were averaged within four hypothesis-driven regions 
of interest: bilateral frontal and temporal lobes. Linear mixed-effect models 
were applied to the longitudinal cognitive test scores, with [11C]PK11195 
binding potentials and grey-matter volumes as predictors of cognitive 
performance, with age, education and baseline cognitive performance as 
covariates. Faster cognitive decline was associated with reduced baseline 
grey-matter volume and increased microglial activation in frontal regions, 
bilaterally. In frontal regions, microglial activation and grey-matter volume 
were negatively correlated, but provided independent information, with 
inflammation the stronger predictor of the rate of cognitive decline. When 
clinical diagnosis was included as a factor in the models, a significant 
predictive effect was found for [11C]PK11195 BPND in the left frontal lobe 
(-0.70, P = 0.01), but not for grey-matter volumes (P > 0.05), suggesting that 
inflammation severity in this region relates to cognitive decline regardless of 
clinical variant. The main results were validated by two-step prediction 
frequentist and Bayesian estimation of correlations, showing significant 
associations between the estimated rate of cognitive change (slope) and baseline 
microglial activation in the frontal lobe. These findings support preclinical 
models in which neuroinflammation (by microglial activation) accelerates the 
neurodegenerative disease trajectory. We highlight the potential for 
immunomodulatory treatment strategies in frontotemporal dementia, in which 
measures of microglial activation may also improve stratification for clinical 
trials.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awad078
PMCID: PMC10393407
PMID: 36883644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
report related to this work. Unrelated to this work, J.T.O. has received 
honoraria for work as DSMB chair or member for TauRx, Axon, Eisai and Novo 
Nordisk, and has acted as a consultant for Biogen and Roche, and has received 
research support from Alliance Medical and Merck. J.B.R. is a non-remunerated 
trustee of the Guarantors of Brain, Darwin College and the PSP Association (UK). 
He provides consultancy to Asceneuron, UCB, Astex, Curasen, Wave, SVHealth and 
has research grants from AZ-Medimmune, Janssen and Lilly as industry partners in 
the Dementias Platform UK.