---
reference_id: "PMID:36928817"
title: Preclinical models for prediction of immunotherapy outcomes and immune evasion mechanisms in genetically heterogeneous multiple myeloma.
authors:
- Larrayoz M
- Garcia-Barchino MJ
- Celay J
- Etxebeste A
- Jimenez M
- Perez C
- Ordoñez R
- Cobaleda C
- Botta C
- Fresquet V
- Roa S
- Goicoechea I
- Maia C
- Lasaga M
- Chesi M
- Bergsagel PL
- Larrayoz MJ
- Calasanz MJ
- Campos-Sanchez E
- Martinez-Cano J
- Panizo C
- Rodriguez-Otero P
- Vicent S
- Roncador G
- Gonzalez P
- Takahashi S
- Katz SG
- Walensky LD
- Ruppert SM
- Lasater EA
- Amann M
- Lozano T
- Llopiz D
- Sarobe P
- Lasarte JJ
- Planell N
- Gomez-Cabrero D
- Kudryashova O
- Kurilovich A
- Revuelta MV
- Cerchietti L
- Agirre X
- San Miguel J
- Paiva B
- Prosper F
- Martinez-Climent JA
journal: Nat Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-02178-3
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- "Multiple Myeloma/therapy, drug therapy"
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes
- Immune Evasion
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory"
- Immunotherapy/adverse effects
- Tumor Microenvironment/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preclinical models for prediction of immunotherapy outcomes and immune evasion mechanisms in genetically heterogeneous multiple myeloma.
**Authors:** Larrayoz M, Garcia-Barchino MJ, Celay J, Etxebeste A, Jimenez M, Perez C, Ordoñez R, Cobaleda C, Botta C, Fresquet V, Roa S, Goicoechea I, Maia C, Lasaga M, Chesi M, Bergsagel PL, Larrayoz MJ, Calasanz MJ, Campos-Sanchez E, Martinez-Cano J, Panizo C, Rodriguez-Otero P, Vicent S, Roncador G, Gonzalez P, Takahashi S, Katz SG, Walensky LD, Ruppert SM, Lasater EA, Amann M, Lozano T, Llopiz D, Sarobe P, Lasarte JJ, Planell N, Gomez-Cabrero D, Kudryashova O, Kurilovich A, Revuelta MV, Cerchietti L, Agirre X, San Miguel J, Paiva B, Prosper F, Martinez-Climent JA
**Journal:** Nat Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-022-02178-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-02178-3)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2023 Mar;29(3):632-645. doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-02178-3. Epub 2023
Mar  16.

Preclinical models for prediction of immunotherapy outcomes and immune evasion 
mechanisms in genetically heterogeneous multiple myeloma.

Larrayoz M(1), Garcia-Barchino MJ(1), Celay J(1), Etxebeste A(1), Jimenez M(1), 
Perez C(1), Ordoñez R(1), Cobaleda C(2), Botta C(1)(3), Fresquet V(1), Roa S(1), 
Goicoechea I(1), Maia C(1), Lasaga M(1), Chesi M(4), Bergsagel PL(4), Larrayoz 
MJ(1), Calasanz MJ(1), Campos-Sanchez E(2), Martinez-Cano J(2), Panizo C(5), 
Rodriguez-Otero P(5), Vicent S(6), Roncador G(7), Gonzalez P(7), Takahashi S(8), 
Katz SG(9), Walensky LD(10), Ruppert SM(11), Lasater EA(12), Amann M(13), Lozano 
T(14), Llopiz D(14), Sarobe P(14), Lasarte JJ(14), Planell N(15), Gomez-Cabrero 
D(15)(16), Kudryashova O(17), Kurilovich A(17), Revuelta MV(18), Cerchietti 
L(18), Agirre X(1), San Miguel J(1)(5), Paiva B(1)(5), Prosper F(1)(5), 
Martinez-Climent JA(19).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hemato-Oncology, Center for Applied Medical Research CIMA, Cancer 
Center University of Navarra (CCUN), Navarra Institute for Health Research 
(IDISNA), CIBERONC, Pamplona, Spain.
(2)Immune System Development and Function Unit, Centro de Biologia Molecular 
Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas/Universidad 
Autonoma, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Health Promotion, Mother and Child Care, Internal Medicine and 
Medical Specialties, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
(5)Department of Hematology, Clinica Universidad de Navarra, CCUN, IDISNA, 
CIBERONC, Pamplona, Spain.
(6)Program in Solid Tumors, Center for Applied Medical Research CIMA, University 
of Navarra, IDISNA, CIBERONC, Pamplona, Spain.
(7)Monoclonal Antibodies Unit, Biotechnology Program, Spanish National Cancer 
Research Centre CNIO, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.
(9)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Program in Cancer Chemical Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Oncology Biomarker Development, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(12)Department of Translational Oncology, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, 
USA.
(13)Roche Innovation Center Zurich, Roche Pharmaceutical Research and Early 
Development (pRED), Schlieren, Switzerland.
(14)Program of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Center for Applied Medical Research 
CIMA, University of Navarra, IDISNA, CIBEREHD, Pamplona, Spain.
(15)Translational Bioinformatics Unit, Navarra-Biomed, Public University of 
Navarra, IDISNA, Pamplona, Spain.
(16)Biological and Environmental Sciences & Engineering Division, King Abdullah 
University of Science & Technology, Thuwal, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(17)BostonGene, Waltham, MA, USA.
(18)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Weill 
Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(19)Division of Hemato-Oncology, Center for Applied Medical Research CIMA, 
Cancer Center University of Navarra (CCUN), Navarra Institute for Health 
Research (IDISNA), CIBERONC, Pamplona, Spain. jamcliment@unav.es.

The historical lack of preclinical models reflecting the genetic heterogeneity 
of multiple myeloma (MM) hampers the advance of therapeutic discoveries. To 
circumvent this limitation, we screened mice engineered to carry eight MM 
lesions (NF-κB, KRAS, MYC, TP53, BCL2, cyclin D1, MMSET/NSD2 and c-MAF) 
combinatorially activated in B lymphocytes following T cell-driven immunization. 
Fifteen genetically diverse models developed bone marrow (BM) tumors fulfilling 
MM pathogenesis. Integrative analyses of ∼500 mice and ∼1,000 patients revealed 
a common MAPK-MYC genetic pathway that accelerated time to progression from 
precursor states across genetically heterogeneous MM. MYC-dependent time to 
progression conditioned immune evasion mechanisms that remodeled the BM 
microenvironment differently. Rapid MYC-driven progressors exhibited a high 
number of activated/exhausted CD8+ T cells with reduced immunosuppressive 
regulatory T (Treg) cells, while late MYC acquisition in slow progressors was 
associated with lower CD8+ T cell infiltration and more abundant Treg cells. 
Single-cell transcriptomics and functional assays defined a high ratio of CD8+ T 
cells versus Treg cells as a predictor of response to immune checkpoint blockade 
(ICB). In clinical series, high CD8+ T/Treg cell ratios underlie early 
progression in untreated smoldering MM, and correlated with early relapse in 
newly diagnosed patients with MM under Len/Dex therapy. In ICB-refractory MM 
models, increasing CD8+ T cell cytotoxicity or depleting Treg cells reversed 
immunotherapy resistance and yielded prolonged MM control. Our experimental 
models enable the correlation of MM genetic and immunological traits with 
preclinical therapy responses, which may inform the next-generation 
immunotherapy trials.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-022-02178-3
PMCID: PMC10033443
PMID: 36928817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.C. has received honoraria from participation 
in advisory boards from Oncopeptides, Novartis, Janssen and Pfizer; and has 
licensed intellectual property through Mayo Clinical Ventures 2013-058 
‘Genetically engineered mouse model of MM without LoxP sites (Vk*MycCwoLoxP) and 
transplantable cell lines’. L.B. has received honoraria from participation in 
advisory boards from Oncopeptides, Novartis, Janssen and Pfizer; and has 
licensed intellectual property through Mayo Clinical Ventures 2013-058 
‘Genetically engineered mouse model of MM without LoxP sites (Vk*MycCwoLoxP) and 
transplantable cell lines’. P.R.-O. has received honoraria from advisory boards 
from Pfizer, BMS, Janssen, GSK, Kite, Sanofi and Oncopeptides; and honoraria 
from lectures from GSK, Janssen, BMS, Regeneron, Amgen and Oncopeptides. S.M.R. 
is an employee of Roche/Genentech. E.A.L. is an employee of Roche/Genentech. 
M.A. is an employee of Roche, and has patent applications on CD25 monoclonal 
antibody with relevance to this work: WO/2018/167104 and US20190284287 (filed by 
Cancer Research Technology Limited and Tusk Therapeutics). M.A. has shares in 
the companies to which the patent belongs. O.K. is an employee of BostonGene. 
J.S.M. is a consultant and an advisory board member for (on behalf of his 
Institution) Amgen, BMS, Celgene, Haemalogix, Janssen, MSD, Novartis, Takeda, 
Sanofi, Roche, Abbvie, GlaxoSmithKline, Regeneron, SecuraBio and Karyopharm. 
B.P. reports honoraria for lectures from and membership on advisory boards with 
Adaptive, Amgen, Becton Dickinson, Bristol Myers Squibb-Celgene, Janssen, Merck, 
Novartis, Roche, Sanofi and Takeda; unrestricted grants from Bristol Myers 
Squibb-Celgene, EngMab, Roche, Sanofi and Takeda; and consultancy for Bristol 
Myers Squibb-Celgene, Janssen, Sanofi and Takeda. J.A.M.-C. reports funding for 
research from Roche/Genentech, Bristol Myers Squibb-Celgene, Janssen, Priothera 
and Palleon. A patent on the generation and use of the mouse MM models as 
immunotherapy platforms, entitled ‘Genetically engineered animal models for 
multiple myeloma’ (application no. EP22382736.1) was filed on 27 July 2022. The 
remaining authors declare no competing interests.