---
reference_id: "PMID:36428981"
title: "HIF-1α Regulates Bone Homeostasis and Angiogenesis, Participating in the Occurrence of Bone Metabolic Diseases."
authors:
- Chen W
- Wu P
- Yu F
- Luo G
- Qing L
- Tang J
journal: Cells
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cells11223552
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HIF-1α Regulates Bone Homeostasis and Angiogenesis, Participating in the Occurrence of Bone Metabolic Diseases.
**Authors:** Chen W, Wu P, Yu F, Luo G, Qing L, Tang J
**Journal:** Cells (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells11223552](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11223552)

## Content

1. Cells. 2022 Nov 10;11(22):3552. doi: 10.3390/cells11223552.

HIF-1α Regulates Bone Homeostasis and Angiogenesis, Participating in the 
Occurrence of Bone Metabolic Diseases.

Chen W(1), Wu P(1), Yu F(1), Luo G(1), Qing L(1), Tang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Microsurgery & Reconstruction Research Center, Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Changsha 410008, China.

In the physiological condition, the skeletal system's bone resorption and 
formation are in dynamic balance, called bone homeostasis. However, bone 
homeostasis is destroyed under pathological conditions, leading to the 
occurrence of bone metabolism diseases. The expression of hypoxia-inducible 
factor-1α (HIF-1α) is regulated by oxygen concentration. It affects energy 
metabolism, which plays a vital role in preventing bone metabolic diseases. This 
review focuses on the HIF-1α pathway and describes in detail the possible 
mechanism of its involvement in the regulation of bone homeostasis and 
angiogenesis, as well as the current experimental studies on the use of HIF-1α 
in the prevention of bone metabolic diseases. HIF-1α/RANKL/Notch1 pathway 
bidirectionally regulates the differentiation of macrophages into osteoclasts 
under different conditions. In addition, HIF-1α is also regulated by many 
factors, including hypoxia, cofactor activity, non-coding RNA, trace elements, 
etc. As a pivotal pathway for coupling angiogenesis and osteogenesis, HIF-1α has 
been widely studied in bone metabolic diseases such as bone defect, 
osteoporosis, osteonecrosis of the femoral head, fracture, and nonunion. The 
wide application of biomaterials in bone metabolism also provides a reasonable 
basis for the experimental study of HIF-1α in preventing bone metabolic 
diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11223552
PMCID: PMC9688488
PMID: 36428981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.