---
reference_id: "PMID:31951187"
title: Characterization of the Clinical and Laboratory Features of Primary and Secondary Antiphospholipid Syndrome in a Cohort of Egyptian Patients.
authors:
- El-Moniem GA
- El-Garf K
- Sobhy N
- Elmaghraby S
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2174/1573397116666200116095734
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of the Clinical and Laboratory Features of Primary and Secondary Antiphospholipid Syndrome in a Cohort of Egyptian Patients.
**Authors:** El-Moniem GA, El-Garf K, Sobhy N, Elmaghraby S
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1573397116666200116095734](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573397116666200116095734)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rev. 2020;16(4):304-310. doi:
10.2174/1573397116666200116095734.

Characterization of the Clinical and Laboratory Features of Primary and 
Secondary Antiphospholipid Syndrome in a Cohort of Egyptian Patients.

El-Moniem GA(1), El-Garf K(1), Sobhy N(1), Elmaghraby S(1).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology and Rehabilitation Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo 
University, Cairo, Egypt.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinical and laboratory features of Antiphospholipid 
Syndrome (APS) in a cohort of Egyptian patients and compare between primary and 
secondary type on the basis of clinical and immunological pattern.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We reviewed the medical records of 148 antiphospholipid 
syndrome patients following in Rheumatology and Rehabilitation department, Cairo 
University. Clinical and immunological data were recorded; subsequently, our 
patients were compared based on the type of APS, patient's age and sex.
RESULTS: The cohort consisted of 148 patients, 135 females (91.2%) and 13 males 
(8.8%). The mean age at onset was 23.6 ±7.66 years. 28.4% of patients had 
primary while, 71.6% of patients had secondary APS. Patients with secondary APS 
presented more frequently with the following manifestations compared to patients 
with primary APS: systemic manifestations (56.6% versus 4.8%, P-value: 0.00), 
venous thrombosis (41.5% versus 19%, P-value: 0.009), cutaneous vasculitis 
(19.8% versus 4.8%, P-value: 0.023), thrombocytopenia (37.7% versus 11.9%, 
P-value: 0.002) and hemolytic anemia (28.3% versus 4.8%, P-value: 0.002). On the 
other hand, total obstetric manifestations were more common in primary APS 
(92.5% versus 75%, P-value: 0.007). Juvenile onset APS presented more frequently 
with systemic (68.8%, p-value: 0.02), neurological (62.5%, p-value: 0.01) and 
renal manifestations (31.3%, p-value: 0.005). No statistically significant 
difference was found between males and females in our cohort.
CONCLUSION: APS has broad spectrum manifestations, which may vary according to 
the patient's age at disease onset and association with other diseases. Further 
more, different ethnicities may show different presentations.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1573397116666200116095734
PMID: 31951187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]