---
reference_id: "PMID:20023287"
title: "Growth retardation, impaired triacylglycerol catabolism, hepatic steatosis, and lethal skin barrier defect in mice lacking comparative gene identification-58 (CGI-58)."
authors:
- Radner FP
- Streith IE
- Schoiswohl G
- Schweiger M
- Kumari M
- Eichmann TO
- Rechberger G
- Koefeler HC
- Eder S
- Schauer S
- Theussl HC
- Preiss-Landl K
- Lass A
- Zimmermann R
- Hoefler G
- Zechner R
- Haemmerle G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.081877
keywords:
- "1-Acylglycerol-3-Phosphate O-Acyltransferase/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Animals, Suckling/physiology"
- "Carboxylic Ester Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Fatty Liver/genetics, metabolism"
- Fetal Growth Retardation/physiopathology
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, physiology"
- Humans
- "Ichthyosis/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Lipase/genetics, metabolism"
- Liver/enzymology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Permeability
- "Skin/chemistry, pathology, physiopathology"
- Syndrome
- Triglycerides/metabolism
- Acyltransferases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth retardation, impaired triacylglycerol catabolism, hepatic steatosis, and lethal skin barrier defect in mice lacking comparative gene identification-58 (CGI-58).
**Authors:** Radner FP, Streith IE, Schoiswohl G, Schweiger M, Kumari M, Eichmann TO, Rechberger G, Koefeler HC, Eder S, Schauer S, Theussl HC, Preiss-Landl K, Lass A, Zimmermann R, Hoefler G, Zechner R, Haemmerle G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.081877](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.081877)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 5;285(10):7300-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.081877. Epub
2009  Dec 18.

Growth retardation, impaired triacylglycerol catabolism, hepatic steatosis, and 
lethal skin barrier defect in mice lacking comparative gene identification-58 
(CGI-58).

Radner FP(1), Streith IE, Schoiswohl G, Schweiger M, Kumari M, Eichmann TO, 
Rechberger G, Koefeler HC, Eder S, Schauer S, Theussl HC, Preiss-Landl K, Lass 
A, Zimmermann R, Hoefler G, Zechner R, Haemmerle G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, University of Graz, Heinrichstrasse 31, 
A-8010 Graz, Austria.

Comparative gene identification-58 (CGI-58), also designated as 
alpha/beta-hydrolase domain containing-5 (ABHD-5), is a lipid droplet-associated 
protein that activates adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) and acylates 
lysophosphatidic acid. Activation of ATGL initiates the hydrolytic catabolism of 
cellular triacylglycerol (TG) stores to glycerol and nonesterified fatty acids. 
Mutations in both ATGL and CGI-58 cause "neutral lipid storage disease" 
characterized by massive accumulation of TG in various tissues. The analysis of 
CGI-58-deficient (Cgi-58(-/-)) mice, presented in this study, reveals a dual 
function of CGI-58 in lipid metabolism. First, systemic TG accumulation and 
severe hepatic steatosis in newborn Cgi-58(-/-) mice establish a limiting role 
for CGI-58 in ATGL-mediated TG hydrolysis and supply of nonesterified fatty 
acids as energy substrate. Second, a severe skin permeability barrier defect 
uncovers an essential ATGL-independent role of CGI-58 in skin lipid metabolism. 
The neonatal lethal skin barrier defect is linked to an impaired hydrolysis of 
epidermal TG. As a consequence, sequestration of fatty acids in TG prevents the 
synthesis of acylceramides, which are essential lipid precursors for the 
formation of a functional skin permeability barrier. This mechanism may also 
underlie the pathogenesis of ichthyosis in neutral lipid storage disease 
patients lacking functional CGI-58.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.081877
PMCID: PMC2844178
PMID: 20023287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]