---
reference_id: "PMID:36060244"
title: Efficient and accurate diagnosis of otomycosis using an ensemble deep-learning model.
authors:
- Mao C
- Li A
- Hu J
- Wang P
- Peng D
- Wang J
- Sun Y
journal: Front Mol Biosci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.951432
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficient and accurate diagnosis of otomycosis using an ensemble deep-learning model.
**Authors:** Mao C, Li A, Hu J, Wang P, Peng D, Wang J, Sun Y
**Journal:** Front Mol Biosci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmolb.2022.951432](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmolb.2022.951432)

## Content

1. Front Mol Biosci. 2022 Aug 19;9:951432. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.951432. 
eCollection 2022.

Efficient and accurate diagnosis of otomycosis using an ensemble deep-learning 
model.

Mao C(1), Li A(2), Hu J(3), Wang P(4), Peng D(1), Wang J(5), Sun Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Jingzhou Hospital 
Affiliated to Yangtze University, Jingzhou, Hubei, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Jingzhou Hospital Affiliated to Yangtze University, 
Jingzhou, Hubei, China.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Jingzhou Hospital Affiliated to Yangtze 
University, Jingzhou, Hubei, China.
(4)Health Science Center, Yangtze University, Jingzhou, Hubei, China.
(5)Department of Information Engineering, Jingzhou University, Jingzhou, Hubei, 
China.

Otomycosis accounts for over 15% of cases of external otitis worldwide. It is 
common in humid regions and Chinese cultures with ear-cleaning custom. 
Aspergillus and Candida are the major pathogens causing long-term infection. 
Early endoscopic and microbiological examinations, performed by otologists and 
microbiologists, respectively, are important for the appropriate medical 
treatment of otomycosis. The deep-learning model is a novel automatic diagnostic 
program that provides quick and accurate diagnoses using a large database of 
images acquired in clinical settings. The aim of the present study was to 
introduce a machine-learning model to accurately and quickly diagnose otomycosis 
caused by Aspergillus and Candida. We propose a computer-aided decision-making 
system based on a deep-learning model comprising two subsystems: Java web 
application and image classification. The web application subsystem provides a 
user-friendly webpage to collect consulted images and display the calculation 
results. The image classification subsystem mainly trained neural network models 
for end-to-end data inference. The end user uploads a few images obtained with 
the ear endoscope, and the system returns the classification results to the user 
in the form of category probability values. To accurately diagnose otomycosis, 
we used otoendoscopic images and fungal culture secretion. Fungal fluorescence, 
culture, and DNA sequencing were performed to confirm the pathogens Aspergillus 
or Candida spp. In addition, impacted cerumen, external otitis, and normal 
external auditory canal endoscopic images were retained for reference. We merged 
these four types of images into an otoendoscopic image gallery. To achieve 
better accuracy and generalization abilities after model-training, we selected 
2,182 of approximately 4,000 ear endoscopic images as training samples and 475 
as validation samples. After selecting the deep neural network models, we tested 
the ResNet, SENet, and EfficientNet neural network models with different numbers 
of layers. Considering the accuracy and operation speed, we finally chose the 
EfficientNetB6 model, and the probability values of the four categories of 
otomycosis, impacted cerumen, external otitis, and normal cases were outputted. 
After multiple model training iterations, the average accuracy of the overall 
validation sample reached 92.42%. The results suggest that the system could be 
used as a reference for general practitioners to obtain more accurate diagnoses 
of otomycosis.

Copyright © 2022 Mao, Li, Hu, Wang, Peng, Wang and Sun.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.951432
PMCID: PMC9437247
PMID: 36060244

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.