---
reference_id: "PMID:7011638"
title: Management of postmenopausal bleeding.
authors:
- Merrill JA
journal: Clin Obstet Gynecol
year: '1981'
doi: 10.1097/00003081-198103000-00024
keywords:
- Biopsy
- Cytological Techniques
- Dilatation and Curettage
- "Endometrial Hyperplasia/complications, pathology"
- Endometrium
- Female
- Humans
- Menopause
- Recurrence
- "Uterine Hemorrhage/etiology, surgery, therapy"
- Uterus/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of postmenopausal bleeding.
**Authors:** Merrill JA
**Journal:** Clin Obstet Gynecol (1981)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00003081-198103000-00024](https://doi.org/10.1097/00003081-198103000-00024)

## Content

1. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 1981 Mar;24(1):285-99. doi: 
10.1097/00003081-198103000-00024.

Management of postmenopausal bleeding.

Merrill JA.

Postmenopausal genital bleeding is a symptom that requires thorough evaluation. 
In most cases the cause is benign. Nongenital and nonuterine causes will be 
found occasionally and should be managed accordingly. The principal thrust of 
management involves thorough history, examination, and interpretation of 
endometrial histology. The latter is especially necessary to exclude the most 
significant, but not most common, cause of postmenopausal bleeding, i.e., 
adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Estrogen therapy contributes to 
postmenopausal bleeding and is usually contraindicated in such cases. 
Endometrial hyperplasia is considered a precursor lesion to endometrial 
carcinoma, but the incidence of progression is not great. Thus a scheme of 
conservative management that relies on repeat histologic examination of the 
endometrium to determine the biologic potential of endometrial hyperplasia is 
recommended. Although hospital D&C of the uterus is the traditional accepted 
method of evaluating the endometrium, there are persuasive reasons to consider 
suction endometrial biopsy as an appropriate alternative in most patients 
presenting with postmenopausal bleeding.

DOI: 10.1097/00003081-198103000-00024
PMID: 7011638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]