---
reference_id: PMID:30543385
title: AP-4-Associated Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Alecu J
- Schierbaum L
- Ebrahimi-Fakhari D
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AP-4-Associated Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Alecu J, Schierbaum L, Ebrahimi-Fakhari D

## Content

1. AP-4-Associated Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia.

Alecu J(1), Schierbaum L(1), Ebrahimi-Fakhari D(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2018 Dec 13 [updated 2025 Feb 6].

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Program, Department of Neurology, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: AP-4-associated hereditary spastic paraplegia 
(AP-4-HSP) is a childhood-onset and complex form of hereditary spastic 
paraplegia. Spastic paraparesis is a universal feature in affected individuals. 
Manifestations typically begin before age one year, with infants presenting with 
hypotonia, mild postnatal microcephaly, and delayed developmental milestones. 
Seizures are common in early childhood, often starting as prolonged febrile 
seizures. As the disease progresses, older children have intellectual disability 
that is usually moderate to severe; most affected individuals communicate 
nonverbally. Neurobehavioral/psychiatric manifestations (e.g., impulsivity, 
hyperactivity, and inattention) are common. Hypotonia transitions to progressive 
lower-extremity weakness and spasticity, accompanied by pyramidal signs such as 
plantar extension, ankle clonus, and hyperreflexia. Although some children 
achieve independent ambulation, most eventually lose this ability and rely on 
mobility aids or wheelchairs. In adolescence or early adulthood, spasticity may 
affect the upper extremities in some individuals but is generally less severe 
and not significantly disabling. Complications in some individuals include 
contractures, foot deformities, and bladder and bowel dysfunction. Dysphagia may 
emerge in advanced stages of the disease.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of AP-4-HSP is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in AP4B1, AP4E1, AP4M1, or 
AP4S1 identified on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Supportive multidisciplinary care to 
improve quality of life, maximize function, and reduce complications is 
recommended. This ideally involves multidisciplinary care by specialists in 
relevant fields (including neurology, orthopedics/physiatry, physical therapy, 
occupational therapy, developmental pediatrics, and speech-language pathology) 
and clinical genetics. Surveillance: To monitor existing manifestations, the 
individual's response to supportive care, and the emergence of new 
manifestations, affected individuals should be evaluated periodically (i.e., 
every 6-12 months) by their multidisciplinary care specialists.
GENETIC COUNSELING: AP-4-HSP is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If 
both parents are known to be heterozygous for an AP4B1, AP4M1, AP4E1, or AP4S1 
pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% 
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 
25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the AP4B1, AP4M1, AP4E1, 
or AP4S1 pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, 
carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 30543385