---
reference_id: "PMID:20301553"
title: SYNE1 Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Beaudin M
- Gamache PL
- Gros-Louis F
- Dupré N
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SYNE1 Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Beaudin M, Gamache PL, Gros-Louis F, Dupré N

## Content

1. SYNE1 Deficiency.

Beaudin M(1), Gamache PL(1), Gros-Louis F(2), Dupré N(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2007 Feb 23 [updated 2018 Dec 6].

Author information:
(1)CHU de Québec Department of Medicine Faculty of Medicine Université Laval 
Québec, Canada
(2)Laval University Experimental Organogenesis Research Center/LOEX Division of 
Regenerative Medicine CHU de Québec Research Center Department of Surgery 
Faculty of Medicine Université Laval Québec, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SYNE1 deficiency comprises a phenotypic spectrum that 
ranges from autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia at the mild end to 
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) at the severe end. SYNE1-deficient 
cerebellar ataxia, the most commonly recognized manifestation of SYNE1 
deficiency to date, is a slowly progressive disorder typically beginning in 
adulthood (age range 6-45 years). While some individuals have a pure cerebellar 
syndrome (i.e., cerebellar ataxia, dysarthria, dysmetria, abnormalities in 
ocular saccades and smooth pursuit), many also have upper motor neuron 
dysfunction (spasticity, hyperreflexia, Babinski sign) and/or lower motor neuron 
dysfunction (amyotrophy, reduced reflexes, fasciculations). Most individuals 
develop features of the cerebellar cognitive and affective syndrome (i.e., 
significant deficits in attention, executive functioning, verbal working memory, 
and visuospatial/visuoconstructional skills). The two less common phenotypes are 
SYNE1-deficient childhood-onset multisystem disease (ataxia, upper and lower 
motor neuron dysfunction, muscle weakness and wasting, intellectual disability) 
and SYNE1-deficient arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (decreased fetal 
movements and severe neonatal hypotonia associated with multiple congenital 
joint contractures including clubfoot).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SYNE1 deficiency is established in a proband 
with suggestive findings and biallelic SYNE1 pathogenic variants identified by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: There is no specific treatment for 
SYNE1 deficiency. The goals of treatment are to maximize function and reduce 
complications. Each affected individual should be managed by a multidisciplinary 
team of relevant specialists including neurologists, occupational therapists, 
physical therapists, physiatrists, orthopedists, nutritionists, speech 
therapists, respiratory therapists, and psychologists depending on the clinical 
manifestations. Surveillance: Annual (or more often as needed) neurologic 
examination; assessment of mobility and self-help skills (as they relate to 
ataxia, spasticity, weakness), dysarthria, dysphagia, cognition, and psychiatric 
manifestations.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SYNE1 deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. The parents of an affected individual are obligate heterozygotes (i.e., 
carriers of one SYNE1 pathogenic variant). At conception, each sib of an 
affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an 
asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. 
Once the SYNE1 pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family 
member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives, prenatal diagnosis for a 
pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301553