---
reference_id: "PMID:30191258"
title: "Incorporating the patient perspective in the study of rare bone disease: insights from the osteogenesis imperfecta community."
authors:
- Swezey T
- Reeve BB
- Hart TS
- Floor MK
- Dollar CM
- Gillies AP
- Tosi LL
journal: Osteoporos Int
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00198-018-4690-7
keywords:
- Adult
- Aging
- Biomedical Research/methods
- Community-Based Participatory Research/methods
- Female
- "Fractures, Spontaneous/etiology, psychology"
- "Health Knowledge, Attitudes, Practice"
- "Hearing Loss/etiology, psychology"
- Humans
- Male
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications, psychology, rehabilitation"
- Patient Reported Outcome Measures
- Psychometrics
- Quality of Life
- "Rare Diseases/complications, psychology, rehabilitation"
- "Respiratory Tract Diseases/etiology, psychology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incorporating the patient perspective in the study of rare bone disease: insights from the osteogenesis imperfecta community.
**Authors:** Swezey T, Reeve BB, Hart TS, Floor MK, Dollar CM, Gillies AP, Tosi LL
**Journal:** Osteoporos Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00198-018-4690-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-018-4690-7)

## Content

1. Osteoporos Int. 2019 Feb;30(2):507-511. doi: 10.1007/s00198-018-4690-7. Epub 
2018 Sep 6.

Incorporating the patient perspective in the study of rare bone disease: 
insights from the osteogenesis imperfecta community.

Swezey T(1), Reeve BB(1), Hart TS(2), Floor MK(3), Dollar CM(3), Gillies AP(3), 
Tosi LL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health Sciences, Duke University School of Medicine, 
Durham, NC, USA.
(2)The Osteogenesis Imperfecta Foundation, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(3)Division of Orthopaedic Surgery and Sports Medicine, Children's National 
Health System, Washington, DC, USA.
(4)Division of Orthopaedic Surgery and Sports Medicine, Children's National 
Health System, Washington, DC, USA. ltosi@childrensnational.org.

There is limited research which examines health concerns of individuals with 
osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). Discussion groups with leaders of the adult OI 
community identified a broad range of medical priorities beyond fractures and 
brittle bones. Our work underscores the need to include patient-reported 
outcomes in rare bone disease research.
INTRODUCTION: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare genetic disorder affecting 
collagen protein leading to brittle bones and a number of other medical 
complications. To date, there is limited research which examines the life-long 
process of aging with this rare disease, much less the perspective of 
individuals with OI.
METHODS: In order to explore and prioritize health concerns that adults with OI 
feel have been inadequately addressed in health care and research, investigators 
held discussions with leaders from the global adult OI community. The meetings 
were held in August 2017 at the 13th International Conference on OI in Oslo, 
Norway as part of the preconference seminar "Patient Participation in OI 
Research". Investigators were part of the Brittle Bone Disease Consortium 
(BBDC), a multicenter research program devoted to the study of OI, and their 
focus was on patient-reported outcomes (PRO).
RESULTS: Participants noted that while fractures and brittle bones are the most 
common feature of OI, a number of body systems are under-studied in this 
disorder. They particularly emphasized breathing, hearing, and the effects of 
aging as primary concerns that researchers and physicians may not fully 
understand or address. Other areas included pain, gastrointestinal problems, 
mental health, nutrition, menopause/pregnancy, and basilar invagination. 
Participants also emphasized that they must be informed of study results. They 
underscored that outcome measures incorporated into future drug trials must look 
beyond fractures and consider the whole patient.
CONCLUSIONS: This work will help guide the incorporation of PROs into the next 
phase of the BBDC Natural History Study of OI and underscores the importance of 
including PROs in the study of rare diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-018-4690-7
PMCID: PMC6449303
PMID: 30191258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The stakeholder meeting plan was reviewed by the 
Children’s National Health System IRB and this research was determined to be 
exempt from IRB review. For this type of study, formal consent is not required. 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Tracy S. Hart serves as the CEO of the Osteogenesis 
Imperfeta Foundation. We do not believe that this represents a conflict of 
interest. As noted in her conflict of interest disclosure, Teresa Swezey 
received travel funds to attend the OI conference. Bryce B. Reeve, Marianne K. 
Floor, Christina M. Dollar, Austin P. Gillies, and Laura L. Tosi declare that 
they have no disclosures.