---
reference_id: "PMID:37117990"
title: "Quantitative Oculomotor Assessment in Hereditary Ataxia: Systematic Review and Consensus by the Ataxia Global Initiative Working Group on Digital-motor Biomarkers."
authors:
- Garces P
- Antoniades CA
- Sobanska A
- Kovacs N
- Ying SH
- Gupta AS
- Perlman S
- Szmulewicz DJ
- Pane C
- Németh AH
- Jardim LB
- Coarelli G
- Dankova M
- Traschütz A
- Tarnutzer AA
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-023-01559-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Biomarkers
- Consensus
- Eye Movements/physiology
- "Ocular Motility Disorders/diagnosis, physiopathology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantitative Oculomotor Assessment in Hereditary Ataxia: Systematic Review and Consensus by the Ataxia Global Initiative Working Group on Digital-motor Biomarkers.
**Authors:** Garces P, Antoniades CA, Sobanska A, Kovacs N, Ying SH, Gupta AS, Perlman S, Szmulewicz DJ, Pane C, Németh AH, Jardim LB, Coarelli G, Dankova M, Traschütz A, Tarnutzer AA
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-023-01559-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-023-01559-9)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2024 Jun;23(3):896-911. doi: 10.1007/s12311-023-01559-9. Epub 2023
 Apr 28.

Quantitative Oculomotor Assessment in Hereditary Ataxia: Systematic Review and 
Consensus by the Ataxia Global Initiative Working Group on Digital-motor 
Biomarkers.

Garces P(1), Antoniades CA(2), Sobanska A(3), Kovacs N(4), Ying SH(5), Gupta 
AS(6), Perlman S(7), Szmulewicz DJ(8)(9), Pane C(10), Németh AH(11)(12), Jardim 
LB(13)(14), Coarelli G(15)(16), Dankova M(17), Traschütz A(18)(19), Tarnutzer 
AA(20)(21).

Author information:
(1)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Neuroscience and Rare Diseases, 
Roche Innovation Center Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)NeuroMetrology Lab, Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Clinical 
Neurology, Medical Sciences Division, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.
(3)Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Pécs, Medical School, Pécs, Hungary.
(5)Department of Otology and Laryngology and Department of Neurology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(8)Balance Disorders and Ataxia Service, Royal Victoria Eye and Ear Hospital, 
East Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 3002, Australia.
(9)The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Parkville, Melbourne, 
VIC, 3052, Australia.
(10)Department of Neurosciences and Reproductive and Odontostomatological 
Sciences, University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(11)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(12)Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Oxford, UK.
(13)Departamento de Medicina Interna, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, 
Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(14)Serviço de Genética Médica/Centro de Pesquisa Clínica e Experimental, 
Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(15)Sorbonne Université, Institut du Cerveau - Paris Brain Institute - ICM, 
Inserm U1127, CNRS UMR7225, Paris, France.
(16)Department of Genetics, Neurogene National Reference Centre for Rare 
Diseases, Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Assistance Publique, Hôpitaux 
de Paris, Paris, France.
(17)Department of Neurology, Centre of Hereditary Ataxias, 2nd Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(18)Research Division "Translational Genomics of Neurodegenerative Diseases", 
Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research and Center of Neurology, University 
of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(19)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), University of Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(20)Neurology, Cantonal Hospital of Baden, 5404, Baden, Switzerland. 
alexander.tarnutzer@access.uzh.ch.
(21)Faculty of Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 
alexander.tarnutzer@access.uzh.ch.

Oculomotor deficits are common in hereditary ataxia, but disproportionally 
neglected in clinical ataxia scales and as outcome measures for interventional 
trials. Quantitative assessment of oculomotor function has become increasingly 
available and thus applicable in multicenter trials and offers the opportunity 
to capture severity and progression of oculomotor impairment in a sensitive and 
reliable manner. In this consensus paper of the Ataxia Global Initiative Working 
Group On Digital Oculomotor Biomarkers, based on a systematic literature review, 
we propose harmonized methodology and measurement parameters for the 
quantitative assessment of oculomotor function in natural-history studies and 
clinical trials in hereditary ataxia. MEDLINE was searched for articles 
reporting on oculomotor/vestibular properties in ataxia patients and a 
study-tailored quality-assessment was performed. One-hundred-and-seventeen 
articles reporting on subjects with genetically confirmed (n=1134) or suspected 
hereditary ataxia (n=198), and degenerative ataxias with sporadic presentation 
(n=480) were included and subject to data extraction. Based on robust 
discrimination from controls, correlation with disease-severity, sensitivity to 
change, and feasibility in international multicenter settings as prerequisite 
for clinical trials, we prioritize a core-set of five eye-movement types: (i) 
pursuit eye movements, (ii) saccadic eye movements, (iii) fixation, (iv) 
eccentric gaze holding, and (v) rotational vestibulo-ocular reflex. We provide 
detailed guidelines for their acquisition, and recommendations on the 
quantitative parameters to extract. Limitations include low study quality, 
heterogeneity in patient populations, and lack of longitudinal studies. 
Standardization of quantitative oculomotor assessments will facilitate their 
implementation, interpretation, and validation in clinical trials, and 
ultimately advance our understanding of the evolution of oculomotor network 
dysfunction in hereditary ataxias.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-023-01559-9
PMCID: PMC11102387
PMID: 37117990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PG is a full-time employee of F. Hoffmann–la 
Roche Ltd.