---
reference_id: "PMID:36210660"
title: "Broad Complex Tachycardia, Addison's disease, and Ascending Flacid Paralysis: An Interesting Case on Cardiology Floor."
authors:
- Ali N
journal: J Coll Physicians Surg Pak
year: '2022'
doi: 10.29271/jcpsp.2022.Supp2.S98
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Broad Complex Tachycardia, Addison's disease, and Ascending Flacid Paralysis: An Interesting Case on Cardiology Floor.
**Authors:** Ali N
**Journal:** J Coll Physicians Surg Pak (2022)
**DOI:** [10.29271/jcpsp.2022.Supp2.S98](https://doi.org/10.29271/jcpsp.2022.Supp2.S98)

## Content

1. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2022 Aug;32(8):S98-S100. doi: 
10.29271/jcpsp.2022.Supp2.S98.

Broad Complex Tachycardia, Addison's disease, and Ascending Flacid Paralysis: An 
Interesting Case on Cardiology Floor.

Ali N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Cardiac Center Bahawalpur, Tariqabad, Multan.

Broad complex tachycardia is a common presentation in the cardiology emergency 
room but is not always due to ventricular tachycardia, especially in a young 
patient who has other important medical illnesses and with no underlying cardiac 
illness. We present a case of a 40-year male who was admitted with complaints of 
palpitation associated with rapidly progressive weakness of lower limbs 
progressing to quadriparesis in about 10 hours. His clinical presentation was 
due to hyperkalemia and weakness due to Addison's disease. The patient was 
treated with drugs to lower potassium levels and steroids. His muscle power 
improved dramatically as potassium levels normalized and he recovered 
completely. Key Words: Acute flaccid paralysis, Hyperkalemia, Broad complex 
tachycardia.

DOI: 10.29271/jcpsp.2022.Supp2.S98
PMID: 36210660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]