---
reference_id: "PMID:33128155"
title: "Clinically isolated aortitis: imaging features and clinical outcomes: comparison with giant cell arteritis and giant cell aortitis."
authors:
- Aghayev A
- Bay CP
- Tedeschi S
- Monach PA
- Campia U
- Gerhard-Herman M
- Steigner ML
- Mitchell RN
- Docken WP
- DiCarli M
journal: Int J Cardiovasc Imaging
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10554-020-02087-x
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Aged
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- "Aortic Aneurysm/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Aortitis/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, pathology"
- Aortography
- Computed Tomography Angiography
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Dilatation, Pathologic"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Fluorodeoxyglucose F18
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, pathology"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Positron Emission Tomography Computed Tomography
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- Radiopharmaceuticals
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinically isolated aortitis: imaging features and clinical outcomes: comparison with giant cell arteritis and giant cell aortitis.
**Authors:** Aghayev A, Bay CP, Tedeschi S, Monach PA, Campia U, Gerhard-Herman M, Steigner ML, Mitchell RN, Docken WP, DiCarli M
**Journal:** Int J Cardiovasc Imaging (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10554-020-02087-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10554-020-02087-x)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2021 Apr;37(4):1433-1443. doi:
10.1007/s10554-020-02087-x. Epub 2020 Oct 30.

Clinically isolated aortitis: imaging features and clinical outcomes: comparison
with giant cell arteritis and giant cell aortitis.

Aghayev A(1), Bay CP(2), Tedeschi S(3), Monach PA(3), Campia U(4),
Gerhard-Herman M(4), Steigner ML(5), Mitchell RN(6), Docken WP(3), DiCarli M(7).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Imaging Program, Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
aaghayev@bwh.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Cardiovascular Imaging Program, Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Cardiovascular Imaging Program, Departments of Medicine and Radiology,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

(1) describe imaging features of CIA, (2) compare dilation rate and wall
thickening of aortic aneurysms in patients with CIA versus those with giant cell
arteritis/aortitis (GCA), (3) present clinical outcomes of CIA patients.
Retrospective search of electronic records from 2004 to 2018 yielded 71
patients, 52 of whom were female, with a mean age of 67.5 ± 9.0 years old, with
a new clinical diagnosis of cranial or extracranial GCA (GCA group), and giant
cell aortitis revealed by the aortic biopsy (CIA group). Comparisons between
groups were conducted using the Wilcoxon rank-sum and Fisher's exact tests.
Survival from the date of initial diagnosis to the end of data collection was
compared between the two groups through a log-rank test. CIA patients (n = 23;
32%) presented with cardiovascular symptoms, and none had systemic inflammatory
symptoms. Inflammatory markers were significantly higher among GCA patients than
among CIA patients (p < 0.0001). The CIA group demonstrated thoracic aortic
aneurysms without wall thickening. None of the GCA patients (n = 48; 68%) had
aneurysmal dilation in the aorta at the time of diagnosis. None of the four CIA
patients had FDG uptake in the aorta, while nine out of 13 GCA patients had FDG
uptake in the vessels. There was no statistically significant difference in the
survival between the two groups (p = 0.12). CIA patients presented with
cardiovascular symptoms and was characterized by aneurysm of the aorta without
the involvement of the infrarenal aortic segment. The role of FDG-PET/CT in CIA
is less certain, though none of the patients in this cohort had FDG uptake in
the vessels.

DOI: 10.1007/s10554-020-02087-x
PMID: 33128155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
