---
reference_id: "PMID:37558489"
title: Interneuron-Targeted Disruption of SYNGAP1 Alters Sensory Representations in the Neocortex and Impairs Sensory Learning.
authors:
- Zhao M
- Kwon SE
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1997-22.2023
keywords:
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- Neocortex/metabolism
- Interneurons/physiology
- Neurons/physiology
- Pyramidal Cells/metabolism
- Learning
- "ras GTPase-Activating Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interneuron-Targeted Disruption of SYNGAP1 Alters Sensory Representations in the Neocortex and Impairs Sensory Learning.
**Authors:** Zhao M, Kwon SE
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1997-22.2023](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1997-22.2023)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2023 Aug 30;43(35):6212-6226. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1997-22.2023.
 Epub 2023 Aug 9.

Interneuron-Targeted Disruption of SYNGAP1 Alters Sensory Representations in the 
Neocortex and Impairs Sensory Learning.

Zhao M(1), Kwon SE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109 sungeun1020@gmail.com.

SYNGAP1 haploinsufficiency in humans leads to severe neurodevelopmental 
disorders characterized by intellectual disability, autism, epilepsy, and 
sensory processing deficits. However, the circuit mechanisms underlying these 
disorders are not well understood. In mice, a decrease of SynGAP levels results 
in cognitive deficits by interfering with the development of excitatory 
glutamatergic connections. Recent evidence suggests that SynGAP also plays a 
crucial role in the development and function of GABAergic inhibitory 
interneurons. Nevertheless, it remains uncertain whether and to what extent the 
expression of SYNGAP1 in inhibitory interneurons contributes to cortical circuit 
function and related behaviors. The activity of cortical neurons has not been 
measured simultaneously with behavior. To address these gaps, we recorded from 
layer 2/3 neurons in the primary whisker somatosensory cortex (wS1) of mice 
while they learned to perform a whisker tactile detection task. Our results 
demonstrate that mice with interneuron-specific SYNGAP1 haploinsufficiency 
exhibit learning deficits characterized by heightened behavioral responses in 
the absence of relevant sensory input and premature responses to unrelated 
sensory stimuli not associated with reward acquisition. These behavioral 
deficits are accompanied by specific circuit abnormalities within wS1. 
Interneuron-specific SYNGAP1 haploinsufficiency increases detrimental neuronal 
correlations directly related to task performance and enhances responses to 
irrelevant sensory stimuli unrelated to the reward acquisition. In summary, our 
findings indicate that a reduction of SynGAP in inhibitory interneurons impairs 
sensory representation in the primary sensory cortex by disrupting neuronal 
correlations, which likely contributes to the observed cognitive deficits in 
mice with pan-neuronal SYNGAP1 haploinsufficiency.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT SYNGAP1 
haploinsufficiency leads to severe neurodevelopmental disorders. The exact 
nature of neural circuit dysfunction caused by SYNGAP1 haploinsufficiency 
remains poorly understood. SynGAP plays a critical role in the function of 
GABAergic inhibitory interneurons as well as glutamatergic pyramidal neurons in 
the neocortex. Whether and how decreasing SYNGAP1 level in inhibitory 
interneurons disrupts a behaviorally relevant circuit remains unclear. We 
measure neural activity and behavior in mice learning a perceptual task. Mice 
with interneuron-targeted disruption of SYNGAP1 display increased detrimental 
neuronal correlations and elevated responses to irrelevant sensory inputs, which 
are related to impaired task performance. These results show that cortical 
interneuron dysfunction contributes to sensory deficits in SYNGAP1 
haploinsufficiency with important implications for identifying therapeutic 
targets.

Copyright © 2023 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1997-22.2023
PMCID: PMC10476640
PMID: 37558489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.