---
reference_id: "PMID:37777625"
title: Association of the superior semicircular canal and tegmen tympani dehiscences and its relationship with the pneumatisation of the temporal bone.
authors:
- Whyte-Orozco J
- Cisneros-Gimeno AI
- García-Barrios A
- Lozano-Langarita ME
- Whyte-Orozco A
- Rubio-Aranda E
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-023-08243-y
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- "Ear, Middle"
- Temporal Bone/diagnostic imaging
- Semicircular Canals/diagnostic imaging
- Mastoid
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of the superior semicircular canal and tegmen tympani dehiscences and its relationship with the pneumatisation of the temporal bone.
**Authors:** Whyte-Orozco J, Cisneros-Gimeno AI, García-Barrios A, Lozano-Langarita ME, Whyte-Orozco A, Rubio-Aranda E
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-023-08243-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-023-08243-y)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2024 Mar;281(3):1267-1272. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-023-08243-y. Epub 2023 Sep 30.

Association of the superior semicircular canal and tegmen tympani dehiscences 
and its relationship with the pneumatisation of the temporal bone.

Whyte-Orozco J(#)(1)(2)(3), Cisneros-Gimeno AI(#)(1)(2)(3), García-Barrios 
A(4)(5)(6), Lozano-Langarita ME(1), Whyte-Orozco A(7), Rubio-Aranda E(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Histology, School of Medicine, University of 
Zaragoza, C/ Domingo Miral, S/N, 50009, Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Medical and Genetic Research Group (GIIS099) Aragon Health Research 
Institute, Zaragoza, Spain.
(3)Antecessor B51_23D (Government of Aragon), Zaragoza, Spain.
(4)Department of Human Anatomy and Histology, School of Medicine, University of 
Zaragoza, C/ Domingo Miral, S/N, 50009, Zaragoza, Spain. agarciab@unizar.es.
(5)Medical and Genetic Research Group (GIIS099) Aragon Health Research 
Institute, Zaragoza, Spain. agarciab@unizar.es.
(6)Antecessor B51_23D (Government of Aragon), Zaragoza, Spain. 
agarciab@unizar.es.
(7)Department of Animal Pathology, School of Veterinary, University of Zaragoza, 
Zaragoza, Spain.
(8)Department of Microbiology, Pediatrics, Radiology and Public Health, School 
of Medicine, University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.
(9)Water and Environmental Health /B43_23R, Zaragoza, Spain.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: To analyse the degree of pneumatisation of the temporal bone when there 
is an association between dehiscence of the superior semicircular canal and 
dehiscence of the tegmen tympani.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analysed a retrospective CT study of 124 selected 
cases. A single inclusion criterion was applied: the presence of a dehiscence of 
the tegmen tympani. On the other hand, the degree of temporal pneumatisation was 
assessed by axial and coronal planes, and has been divided into the following 
grades O, I, II and III, according to the status and relationship of the 
mastoid, the bony labyrinth, the petrous segment of the carotid canal and 
sigmoid sinus.
RESULTS: Of the 124 cases studied, 35 (28.2%) presented both dehiscences. In 26 
of the 35 (47.3%), grade II pneumatisation, 4 (14,8%), grade I, and 5 (11,9%) 
grade III was observed, with a statistically significant relationship 
(p < 0.001). On the other hand, we did not find a significant relationship when 
relating both dehiscences in any age or sex group. However, when relating the 
degree of pneumatisation to sex, among those with grade III pneumatisation, the 
proportion of men (52.4%) was significantly higher than that of women (47.6%) 
(p = 0.017).
CONCLUSION: We have detected a statistically significant relationship between 
the coexistence of grade II pneumatisation and the presence of both dehiscences 
in the temporal bone.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-023-08243-y
PMCID: PMC10858096
PMID: 37777625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]