---
reference_id: "PMID:26577971"
title: "Dengue-induced Acute Kidney Injury (DAKI): A Neglected and Fatal Complication of Dengue Viral Infection--A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Mallhi TH
- Sarriff A
- Adnan AS
- Khan YH
- Hamzah AA
- Jummaat F
- Khan AH
journal: J Coll Physicians Surg Pak
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue-induced Acute Kidney Injury (DAKI): A Neglected and Fatal Complication of Dengue Viral Infection--A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Mallhi TH, Sarriff A, Adnan AS, Khan YH, Hamzah AA, Jummaat F, Khan AH
**Journal:** J Coll Physicians Surg Pak (2015)

## Content

1. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2015 Nov;25(11):828-34.

Dengue-induced Acute Kidney Injury (DAKI): A Neglected and Fatal Complication of 
Dengue Viral Infection--A Systematic Review.

Mallhi TH(1), Sarriff A(1), Adnan AS(2), Khan YH(1), Hamzah AA(3), Jummaat F(4), 
Khan AH(1).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia.
(2)Chronic Kidney Disease Resource Centre, Hospital University Sains Malaysia, 
Kubang Kerain, Kelantan, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Surgery, Hospital University Sains Malaysia, Kubang Kerain, 
Kelantan, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hospital University Sains Malaysia, 
Kubang Kerain, Kelantan, Malaysia.

Dengue Viral Infection (DVI) imperils an estimated 2.5 billion people living in 
tropical and subtropical regions. World Health Organization (2011) guidelines 
also classified dengue as &#039;Expanded Dengue Syndrome&#039; to incorporate 
wide spectrum of unusual manifestations of dengue infection affecting various 
organ systems - including liver, kidney, heart and brain. Renal involvements are 
least appreciated area of dengue infection, therefore, we systematically 
reviewed studies describing renal disorders in dengue infection, with emphasis 
on Acute Kidney Injury (AKI). The purpose of current review is to underscore 
clinicians&rsquo;attention to this neglected intricacy of DVI. It suggests that 
dengue induced renal involvements vary from glomerulonephritis, nephrotic range 
proteinuria and AKI. We observed great disparity in incidence of AKI among 
dengue patients, based upon criteria used to define AKI. AKI among dengue 
patients was found to be associated with significant morbidity, mortality and 
longer hospitalization, adding financial burden to patients and healthcare 
system. Additionally, we identified several predictors of AKI in dengue patients 
including old age, obesity, severe dengue infection and concurrent bacterial or 
viral infection. Direct viral injury and deposition of antigen-antibody complex 
in glomerulus were found to be possible causes of renal disorders in dengue 
infection. Prior knowledge of clinico-laboratory characteristics and risk 
factors with early detection of AKI by using appropriate criteria would not only 
reduce morbidity and mortality but also decrease burden to patients and 
healthcare system.

PMID: 26577971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]