---
reference_id: "PMID:36252167"
title: "Identification of Patients With Ovarian Cancer Experiencing the Highest Benefit From Bevacizumab in the First-Line Setting on the Basis of Their Tumor-Intrinsic Chemosensitivity (KELIM): The GOG-0218 Validation Study."
authors:
- You B
- Purdy C
- Copeland LJ
- Swisher EM
- Bookman MA
- Fleming G
- Coleman R
- Randall LM
- Tewari KS
- Monk BJ
- Mannel RS
- Walker JL
- Cappuccini F
- Cohn D
- Muzaffar M
- Mutch D
- Wahner-Hendrickson A
- Martin L
- Colomban O
- Burger RA
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.01207
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Patients With Ovarian Cancer Experiencing the Highest Benefit From Bevacizumab in the First-Line Setting on the Basis of Their Tumor-Intrinsic Chemosensitivity (KELIM): The GOG-0218 Validation Study.
**Authors:** You B, Purdy C, Copeland LJ, Swisher EM, Bookman MA, Fleming G, Coleman R, Randall LM, Tewari KS, Monk BJ, Mannel RS, Walker JL, Cappuccini F, Cohn D, Muzaffar M, Mutch D, Wahner-Hendrickson A, Martin L, Colomban O, Burger RA
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.22.01207](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.22.01207)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2022 Dec 1;40(34):3965-3974. doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.01207. Epub
2022  Oct 17.

Identification of Patients With Ovarian Cancer Experiencing the Highest Benefit 
From Bevacizumab in the First-Line Setting on the Basis of Their Tumor-Intrinsic 
Chemosensitivity (KELIM): The GOG-0218 Validation Study.

You B(1)(2), Purdy C(3), Copeland LJ(4), Swisher EM(5), Bookman MA(6), Fleming 
G(7), Coleman R(8), Randall LM(9), Tewari KS(10), Monk BJ(11), Mannel RS(12), 
Walker JL(12), Cappuccini F(10), Cohn D(4), Muzaffar M(13), Mutch D(14), 
Wahner-Hendrickson A(15), Martin L(16)(17), Colomban O(1)(2), Burger RA(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Université Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Faculté de Médecine 
Lyon-Sud, EMR UCBL/HCL 3738, Lyon, France GINECO, Paris, France.
(2)Medical Oncology, Institut de Cancérologie des Hospices Civils de Lyon 
(IC-HCL), CITOHL, GINECO-GINEGEPS, Lyon, France.
(3)Clinical Trial Development Division, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics 
Department, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY.
(4)The Ohio State University, James Cancer Hospital, Columbus, OH.
(5)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Ob/Gyn, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA.
(6)Director, Gynecologic Oncology Therapeutics, Kaiser Permanente Northern 
California, San Francisco, CA.
(7)Hematology and Oncology, The University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL.
(8)Chief Scientific Officer, US Oncology Research, The Woodlands, TX.
(9)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth University, School of 
Medicine, Richmond, VA.
(10)UC Irvine Medical Center, Orange, CA.
(11)HonorHealth Research Institute, University of Arizona, Creighton University, 
Phoenix, AZ.
(12)The University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, OK.
(13)Internal Medicine, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC.
(14)Washington University School of Medicine, Siteman Cancer Center, St Louis, 
MO.
(15)Division of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(16)Abramson Cancer Center at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(17)Mersana Therapeutics, Cambridge, MA.

Comment in
    Ann Transl Med. 2023 Aug 30;11(10):367. doi: 10.21037/atm-23-903.

PURPOSE: In patients with high-grade ovarian cancer, predictors of bevacizumab 
efficacy in first-line setting are needed. In the ICON-7 trial, a poor tumor 
intrinsic chemosensitivity (defined by unfavorable modeled cancer antigen-125 
[CA-125] ELIMination rate constant K [KELIM] score) was a predictive biomarker. 
Only the patients with high-risk disease (suboptimally resected stage III, or 
stage IV) exhibiting unfavorable KELIM score < 1.0 had overall survival (OS) 
benefit from bevacizumab (median: 29.7 v 20.6 months; hazard ratio [HR], 0.78). 
An external validation study in the GOG-0218 trial was performed.
METHODS: In GOG-0218, 1,873 patients were treated with carboplatin-paclitaxel ± 
concurrent-maintenance bevacizumab/placebo. Patient KELIM values were calculated 
with CA-125 kinetics during the first 100 chemotherapy days by the Lyon 
University team. The association between KELIM score (favorable ≥ 1.0, or 
unfavorable < 1.0) and bevacizumab benefit for progression-free survival 
(PFS)/OS was independently assessed by NGR-GOG using univariate/multivariate 
analyses.
RESULTS: KELIM was assessable in 1,662 patients with ≥ 3 CA-125 available 
values. An unfavorable KELIM score was associated with bevacizumab benefit 
compared with placebo (PFS: HR, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.59 to 0.82; OS: HR, 0.87; 95% 
CI, 0.73 to 1.03), whereas a favorable KELIM was not (PFS: HR, 0.96; 95% CI, 
0.79 to 1.17; OS: HR, 1.11; 95% CI, 0.89 to 1.39). The highest benefit was 
observed in patients with a high-risk disease exhibiting unfavorable KELIM, for 
PFS (median: 9.1 v 5.6 months; HR, 0.64; 95% CI, 0.53 to 0.78), and for OS 
(median: 35.1 v 29.1 months; HR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.65 to 0.97).
CONCLUSION: This GOG-0218 trial investigation validates ICON-7 findings about 
the association between poor tumor chemosensitivity and benefit from 
concurrent-maintenance bevacizumab, suggesting that bevacizumab may mainly be 
effective in patients with poorly chemosensitive disease. Bevacizumab may be 
prioritized in patients with a high-risk and poorly chemosensitive disease to 
improve their PFS/OS (patient KELIM score calculator available on the Biomarker 
Kinetics website).

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.22.01207
PMCID: PMC9746742
PMID: 36252167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]