---
reference_id: "PMID:34781360"
title: Variables affecting outcomes after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant for cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy.
authors:
- Chiesa R
- Boelens JJ
- Duncan CN
- Kühl JS
- Sevin C
- Kapoor N
- Prasad VK
- Lindemans CA
- Jones SA
- Amartino HM
- Algeri M
- Bunin N
- Diaz-de-Heredia C
- Loes DJ
- Shamir E
- Timm A
- McNeil E
- Dietz AC
- Orchard PJ
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2021005294
keywords:
- Adrenoleukodystrophy/therapy
- Graft vs Host Disease/etiology
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/adverse effects
- Humans
- Recurrence
- Transplantation Conditioning/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variables affecting outcomes after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant for cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Chiesa R, Boelens JJ, Duncan CN, Kühl JS, Sevin C, Kapoor N, Prasad VK, Lindemans CA, Jones SA, Amartino HM, Algeri M, Bunin N, Diaz-de-Heredia C, Loes DJ, Shamir E, Timm A, McNeil E, Dietz AC, Orchard PJ
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2021005294](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2021005294)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2022 Mar 8;6(5):1512-1524. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2021005294.

Variables affecting outcomes after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant
for cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy.

Chiesa R(1), Boelens JJ(2), Duncan CN(3), Kühl JS(4), Sevin C(5), Kapoor N(6),
Prasad VK(7), Lindemans CA(8)(9), Jones SA(10), Amartino HM(11), Algeri M(12),
Bunin N(13), Diaz-de-Heredia C(14), Loes DJ(15), Shamir E(16), Timm A(16),
McNeil E(16), Dietz AC(16), Orchard PJ(17).

Author information:
(1)Bone Marrow Transplant Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children,
London, UK.
(2)Stem Cell Transplantation andCellular Therapies, Department of Pediatrics,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(3)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(4)Stem Cell Transplantation, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and
Hemostasis, University Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Pediatric Neurology Department, Leukodystrophies Reference Center, Hôpital
Universitaire Hôpital Bicêtre-Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Sud, Paris, France.
(6)Hematology, Oncology and Blood & Marrow Transplantation, Department of
Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(7)Division of Pediatric Transplant and Cellular Therapy, Department of
Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(8)Pediatric Blood and Bone Marrow Transplantation Program, Princess Máxima
Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Utrecht, UU, Utrecht, the
Netherlands.
(10)Paediatric Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Manchester University NHS Foundation
Trust, Manchester, UK.
(11)Child Neurology Service, Hospital Universitario Austral, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
(12)Department ofPediatric Hematology and Oncology, Cell and Gene
Therapy,Bambino GesùChildren's Hospital,IRRCS, Rome, Italy.
(13)Cellular Therapy and Transplant Section, Division of Oncology, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.
(14)Paediatric Oncology and Haematology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall
d'Hebron and Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca, Barcelona, Spain.
(15)Midwest Radiology, Minneapolis, MN.
(16)bluebird bio, Inc., Cambridge, MA; and.
(17)Blood and Marrow Transplantation Program, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Minnesota.

Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT) in early cerebral
adrenoleukodystrophy can stabilize neurologic function and improve survival but
has associated risks including transplant-related mortality (TRM), graft
failure, and graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). An observational study of 59
patients with median age at allo-HSCT of 8 years addressed impact of donor
source, donor match, conditioning regimen, and cerebral disease stage on first
allo-HSCT outcomes. Efficacy analyses included 53 patients stratified by disease
category: advanced disease (AD; n = 16) with Loes score >9 or neurological
function score (NFS) >1 and 2 early disease (ED) cohorts (ED1 [Loes ≤4 and NFS
≤1; n = 24] and ED2 [Loes >4-9 and NFS ≤1; n = 13]). Survival free of major
functional disabilities and without second allo-HSCT at 4 years was
significantly higher in the ED (66%) vs AD (41%) cohort (P = .015) and
comparable between ED1 and ED2 cohorts (P = .991). The stabilization of
neurologic function posttransplant was greater in the ED vs AD cohort, with a
median change from baseline at 24 months after allo-HSCT in NFS and Loes score,
respectively, of 0 and 0.5 in ED1 (n = 13), 0.5 and 0 in ED2 (n = 6), and 2.5
and 3.0 (n = 4) in AD cohort. TRM was lower in the ED (7%) compared with the AD
(22%) cohort; however, the difference was not significant (P = .094).
Transplant-related safety outcomes were also affected by transplant-related
characteristics: graft failure incidence was significantly higher with unrelated
umbilical cord grafts vs matched related donors (P = .039), and acute GVHD and
graft failure incidences varied by conditioning regimen. This study was
registered at www://clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT02204904.

© 2022 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0),
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2021005294
PMCID: PMC8905699
PMID: 34781360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
