---
reference_id: "PMID:28530702"
title: "Metformin alters the gut microbiome of individuals with treatment-naive type 2 diabetes, contributing to the therapeutic effects of the drug."
authors:
- Wu H
- Esteve E
- Tremaroli V
- Khan MT
- Caesar R
- Mannerås-Holm L
- Ståhlman M
- Olsson LM
- Serino M
- Planas-Fèlix M
- Xifra G
- Mercader JM
- Torrents D
- Burcelin R
- Ricart W
- Perkins R
- Fernàndez-Real JM
- Bäckhed F
journal: Nat Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nm.4345
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metformin alters the gut microbiome of individuals with treatment-naive type 2 diabetes, contributing to the therapeutic effects of the drug.
**Authors:** Wu H, Esteve E, Tremaroli V, Khan MT, Caesar R, Mannerås-Holm L, Ståhlman M, Olsson LM, Serino M, Planas-Fèlix M, Xifra G, Mercader JM, Torrents D, Burcelin R, Ricart W, Perkins R, Fernàndez-Real JM, Bäckhed F
**Journal:** Nat Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.4345](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4345)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2017 Jul;23(7):850-858. doi: 10.1038/nm.4345. Epub 2017 May 22.

Metformin alters the gut microbiome of individuals with treatment-naive type 2 
diabetes, contributing to the therapeutic effects of the drug.

Wu H(1), Esteve E(2)(3)(4), Tremaroli V(1), Khan MT(1), Caesar R(1), 
Mannerås-Holm L(1), Ståhlman M(1), Olsson LM(1), Serino M(5), Planas-Fèlix M(6), 
Xifra G(2)(3)(4), Mercader JM(6), Torrents D(6)(7), Burcelin R(8)(9), Ricart 
W(2)(3)(4), Perkins R(1), Fernàndez-Real JM(2)(3)(4), Bäckhed F(1)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, Wallenberg Laboratory, 
Institute of Medicine, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition, Institut d'Investigació 
Biomèdica de Girona, Hospital Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain.
(3)Departament de Medicina, Facultat de Medicina, University of Girona, Girona, 
Spain.
(4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y 
Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(5)IRSD, Université de Toulouse, INSERM, INRA, ENVT, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(6)Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Joint BSC-CRG-IRB Research Program in 
Computational Biology, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Toulouse, 
France.
(9)Université Paul Sabatier (UPS), Unité Mixte de Recherche 1048, Institut de 
Maladies Métaboliques et Cardiovasculaires, Toulouse, France.
(10)Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(11)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Section for 
Metabolic Receptology and Enteroendocrinology, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017 Jul;14(7):387. doi: 
10.1038/nrgastro.2017.73.
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2017 Aug;13(8):440. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2017.72.
    Cell Metab. 2017 Sep 5;26(3):456-457. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2017.08.022.

Metformin is widely used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes (T2D), but its 
mechanism of action is poorly defined. Recent evidence implicates the gut 
microbiota as a site of metformin action. In a double-blind study, we randomized 
individuals with treatment-naive T2D to placebo or metformin for 4 months and 
showed that metformin had strong effects on the gut microbiome. These results 
were verified in a subset of the placebo group that switched to metformin 6 
months after the start of the trial. Transfer of fecal samples (obtained before 
and 4 months after treatment) from metformin-treated donors to germ-free mice 
showed that glucose tolerance was improved in mice that received 
metformin-altered microbiota. By directly investigating metformin-microbiota 
interactions in a gut simulator, we showed that metformin affected pathways with 
common biological functions in species from two different phyla, and many of the 
metformin-regulated genes in these species encoded metalloproteins or metal 
transporters. Our findings provide support for the notion that altered gut 
microbiota mediates some of metformin's antidiabetic effects.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.4345
PMID: 28530702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]