---
reference_id: "PMID:38768929"
title: Novel therapeutic strategies targeting bypass pathways and mitochondrial dysfunction to combat resistance to RET inhibitors in NSCLC.
authors:
- Shiba-Ishii A
- Isagawa T
- Shiozawa T
- Mato N
- Nakagawa T
- Takada Y
- Hirai K
- Hong J
- Saitoh A
- Takeda N
- Niki T
- Murakami Y
- Matsubara D
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2024.167249
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, pathology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/drug effects, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitochondria/metabolism, drug effects"
- "Piperidines/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Quinazolines/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "DNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel therapeutic strategies targeting bypass pathways and mitochondrial dysfunction to combat resistance to RET inhibitors in NSCLC.
**Authors:** Shiba-Ishii A, Isagawa T, Shiozawa T, Mato N, Nakagawa T, Takada Y, Hirai K, Hong J, Saitoh A, Takeda N, Niki T, Murakami Y, Matsubara D
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbadis.2024.167249](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2024.167249)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2024 Aug;1870(6):167249. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2024.167249. Epub 2024 May 18.

Novel therapeutic strategies targeting bypass pathways and mitochondrial
dysfunction to combat resistance to RET inhibitors in NSCLC.

Shiba-Ishii A(1), Isagawa T(2), Shiozawa T(3), Mato N(4), Nakagawa T(5), Takada
Y(1), Hirai K(1), Hong J(6), Saitoh A(7), Takeda N(8), Niki T(9), Murakami Y(7),
Matsubara D(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Institute of Medicine, University of
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(2)Center for Data Science, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi, Japan.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Institute of Medicine, University of
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(4)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical
University, Ibaraki, Japan.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Tsukuba Hospital, Ibaraki, Japan.
(6)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA,
USA.
(7)Division of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Medical Science, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Division of Cardiology and Metabolism, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi
Medical University, Tochigi, Japan.
(9)Department of Pathology, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi, Japan.
(10)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Institute of Medicine, University of
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. Electronic address: matsubarad@md.tsukuba.ac.jp.

RET fusion is an oncogenic driver in 1-2 % of patients with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Although RET-positive tumors have been treated with multikinase
inhibitors such as vandetanib or RET-selective inhibitors, ultimately resistance
to them develops. Here we established vandetanib resistance (VR) clones from
LC-2/ad cells harboring CCDC6-RET fusion and explored the molecular mechanism of
the resistance. Each VR clone had a distinct phenotype, implying they had
acquired resistance via different mechanisms. Consistently, whole exome-seq and
RNA-seq revealed that the VR clones had unique mutational signatures and
expression profiles, and shared only a few common remarkable events. AXL and
IGF-1R were activated as bypass pathway in different VR clones, and sensitive to
a combination of RET and AXL inhibitors or IGF-1R inhibitors, respectively.
SMARCA4 loss was also found in a particular VR clone and 55 % of post-TKI lung
tumor tissues, being correlated with higher sensitivity to SMARCA4/SMARCA2 dual
inhibition and shorter PFS after subsequent treatments. Finally, we detected an
increased number of damaged mitochondria in one VR clone, which conferred
sensitivity to mitochondrial electron transfer chain inhibitors. Increased
mitochondria were also observed in post-TKI biopsy specimens in 13/20 cases of
NSCLC, suggesting a potential strategy targeting mitochondria to treat resistant
tumors. Our data propose new promising therapeutic options to combat resistance
to RET inhibitors in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2024.167249
PMID: 38768929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
