---
reference_id: "PMID:30975995"
title: Spinocerebellar ataxia.
authors:
- Klockgether T
- Mariotti C
- Paulson HL
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0074-3
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- Mass Screening/methods
- Neuroprotective Agents/therapeutic use
- Postural Balance/physiology
- Riluzole/therapeutic use
- Speech Disorders/etiology
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar ataxia.
**Authors:** Klockgether T, Mariotti C, Paulson HL
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-019-0074-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-019-0074-3)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2019 Apr 11;5(1):24. doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0074-3.

Spinocerebellar ataxia.

Klockgether T(1)(2), Mariotti C(3), Paulson HL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 
klockgether@uni-bonn.de.
(2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany. 
klockgether@uni-bonn.de.
(3)Unit of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, 
Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

The spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a genetically heterogeneous group of 
autosomal dominantly inherited progressive disorders, the clinical hallmark of 
which is loss of balance and coordination accompanied by slurred speech; onset 
is most often in adult life. Genetically, SCAs are grouped as repeat expansion 
SCAs, such as SCA3/Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), and rare SCAs that are caused 
by non-repeat mutations, such as SCA5. Most SCA mutations cause prominent damage 
to cerebellar Purkinje neurons with consecutive cerebellar atrophy, although 
Purkinje neurons are only mildly affected in some SCAs. Furthermore, other parts 
of the nervous system, such as the spinal cord, basal ganglia and pontine nuclei 
in the brainstem, can be involved. As there is currently no treatment to slow or 
halt SCAs (many SCAs lead to premature death), the clinical care of patients 
with SCA focuses on managing the symptoms through physiotherapy, occupational 
therapy and speech therapy. Intense research has greatly expanded our 
understanding of the pathobiology of many SCAs, revealing that they occur via 
interrelated mechanisms (including proteotoxicity, RNA toxicity and ion channel 
dysfunction), and has led to the identification of new targets for treatment 
development. However, the development of effective therapies is hampered by the 
heterogeneity of the SCAs; specific therapeutic approaches may be required for 
each disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-019-0074-3
PMID: 30975995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]