---
reference_id: "PMID:11932231"
title: Dracunculiasis (Guinea worm disease) and the eradication initiative.
authors:
- Cairncross S
- Muller R
- Zagaria N
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.15.2.223-246.2002
keywords:
- Animals
- "Dracunculiasis/epidemiology, parasitology, prevention & control"
- "Dracunculus Nematode/growth & development"
- Female
- Health Education
- Humans
- Male
- Socioeconomic Factors
- Water Supply/standards
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dracunculiasis (Guinea worm disease) and the eradication initiative.
**Authors:** Cairncross S, Muller R, Zagaria N
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.15.2.223-246.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.15.2.223-246.2002)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2002 Apr;15(2):223-46. doi: 10.1128/CMR.15.2.223-246.2002.

Dracunculiasis (Guinea worm disease) and the eradication initiative.

Cairncross S(1), Muller R, Zagaria N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London WC1E 7HT, United Kingdom. sandy.cairncross@lshtm.ac.uk

Dracunculiasis, also known as guinea worm disease, is caused by the large female
of the nematode Dracunculus medinensis, which emerges painfully and slowly from
the skin, usually on the lower limbs. The disease can infect animals, and
sustainable animal cycles occur in North America and Central Asia but do not act
as reservoirs of human infection. The disease is endemic across the Sahel belt
of Africa from Mauritania to Ethiopia, having been eliminated from Asia and some
African countries. It has a significant socioeconomic impact because of the
temporary disability that it causes. Dracunculiasis is exclusively caught from
drinking water, usually from ponds. A campaign to eradicate the disease was
launched in the 1980s and has made significant progress. The strategy of the
campaign is discussed, including water supply, health education, case
management, and vector control. Current issues including the integration of the
campaign into primary health care and the mapping of cases by using geographic
information systems are also considered. Finally, some lessons for other disease
control and eradication programs are outlined.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.15.2.223-246.2002
PMCID: PMC118073
PMID: 11932231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
