---
reference_id: PMID:22777705
title: Both IFN-γ and IL-17 are required for the development of severe autoimmune gastritis.
authors:
- Tu E
- Ang DK
- Bellingham SA
- Hogan TV
- Teng MW
- Smyth MJ
- Hill AF
- van Driel IR
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/eji.201142341
keywords:
- Adoptive Transfer
- Animals
- Autoimmune Diseases/immunology
- "CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology, transplantation"
- "CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology, transplantation"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Disease Progression
- Gastritis/immunology
- "Interferon-gamma/genetics, metabolism"
- "Interleukin-17/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Th17 Cells/immunology, transplantation"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Both IFN-γ and IL-17 are required for the development of severe autoimmune gastritis.
**Authors:** Tu E, Ang DK, Bellingham SA, Hogan TV, Teng MW, Smyth MJ, Hill AF, van Driel IR
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eji.201142341](https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.201142341)

## Content

1. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Oct;42(10):2574-83. doi: 10.1002/eji.201142341. Epub 2012 
Aug 15.

Both IFN-γ and IL-17 are required for the development of severe autoimmune 
gastritis.

Tu E(1), Ang DK, Bellingham SA, Hogan TV, Teng MW, Smyth MJ, Hill AF, van Driel 
IR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.

IL-17, produced by a distinct lineage of CD4(+) helper T (Th) cells termed Th17 
cells, induces the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines from resident cells 
and it has been demonstrated that over-expression of IL-17 plays a crucial role 
in the onset of several auto-immune diseases. Here we examined the role of IL-17 
in the pathogenesis of autoimmune gastritis, a disease that was previously 
believed to be mediated by IFN-γ. Significantly higher levels of IL-17 and IFN-γ 
were found in the stomachs and stomach-draining lymph nodes of mice with severe 
autoimmune gastritis. Unlike IL-17, which was produced solely by CD4(+) T cells 
in gastritic mice, the majority of IFN-γ-producing cells were CD8(+) T cells. 
However, CD8(+) T cells alone were not able to induce autoimmune gastritis. T 
cells that were deficient in IL-17 or IFN-γ production were able to induce 
autoimmune gastritis but to a much lower extent compared with the disease 
induced by wild-type T cells. These data demonstrate that production of neither 
IL-17 nor IFN-γ by effector T cells is essential for the initiation of 
autoimmune gastritis, but suggest that both are required for the disease to 
progress to the late pathogenic stage that includes significant tissue 
disruption.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201142341
PMID: 22777705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]