---
reference_id: "PMID:26133318"
title: Association between Ophthalmological Changes and Cardiovascular Diseases in Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease Undergoing Hemodialysis.
authors:
- Nokiba H
- Takei T
- Suto C
- Nitta K
journal: J Atheroscler Thromb
year: '2015'
doi: 10.5551/jat.30601
keywords:
- Aged
- Arteriosclerosis/complications
- Cardiovascular Diseases/complications
- Eye Diseases/complications
- Female
- Humans
- Hypertensive Retinopathy/complications
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pulse Wave Analysis
- Renal Dialysis
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications, therapy"
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- Vascular Stiffness
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between Ophthalmological Changes and Cardiovascular Diseases in Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease Undergoing Hemodialysis.
**Authors:** Nokiba H, Takei T, Suto C, Nitta K
**Journal:** J Atheroscler Thromb (2015)
**DOI:** [10.5551/jat.30601](https://doi.org/10.5551/jat.30601)

## Content

1. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2015;22(12):1248-54. doi: 10.5551/jat.30601. Epub 2015
Jun  30.

Association between Ophthalmological Changes and Cardiovascular Diseases in 
Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease Undergoing Hemodialysis.

Nokiba H(1), Takei T, Suto C, Nitta K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Kidney Center, Tokyo Women's Medical University.

AIMS: Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) undergoing hemodialysis (HD) 
have a high prevalence of cardiovascular diseases (CVD). Arterial sclerosis 
plays an important role in the pathogenesis of CVD. However, to date, there have 
been no reports of assessment of the association between retinal arterial 
sclerosis and CVD in patients with CKD on HD. The aim of this study was to 
assess retinal arterial sclerosis and to investigate the relationship between 
retinal arterial changes in patients with CKD on HD and arterial stiffness/past 
history of CVD.
METHODS: We examined the data of 44 patients (21 female, 23 male) with CKD 
receiving HD treatment at Saiseikai Kurihashi Hospital. The relationship between 
ophthalmological changes and arterial stiffness [pulse wave velocity (PWV)] or 
past history of CVD was evaluated. All medications being taken were recorded, 
and biochemical parameters were analyzed.
RESULTS: Significant correlations were found between the presence of 
arteriosclerotic retinopathy [Scheie classification S grade (grade 0: 7 
patients, grade 1: 18 patients, grade 2: 14 patients, grade 3: 4 patients, and 
grade 4: 1 patient)] and results of the evaluation of arterial stiffness (PWV) 
and past history of CVD (p=0.001, p=0.045). Other ophthalmological findings were 
not associated with a history of CVD or arterial stiffness.
CONCLUSION: We showed that the classification (Scheie S grade) of retinopathy on 
ophthalmoscopic examination may be a useful tool for predicting arterial 
stiffness and its association with CVD.

DOI: 10.5551/jat.30601
PMID: 26133318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]