---
reference_id: "PMID:30307502"
title: Prph2 initiates outer segment morphogenesis but maturation requires Prph2/Rom1 oligomerization.
authors:
- Conley SM
- Stuck MW
- Watson JN
- Zulliger R
- Burnett JL
- Naash MI
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy359
keywords:
- Animals
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Female
- Gene Knock-In Techniques/methods
- Heterozygote
- Male
- Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Morphogenesis
- Mutation
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- "Peripherins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Phenotype
- "Photoreceptor Cells, Vertebrate/physiology"
- Retinal Degeneration/genetics
- "Retinal Rod Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism, physiology"
- Tetraspanins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prph2 initiates outer segment morphogenesis but maturation requires Prph2/Rom1 oligomerization.
**Authors:** Conley SM, Stuck MW, Watson JN, Zulliger R, Burnett JL, Naash MI
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddy359](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddy359)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2019 Feb 1;28(3):459-475. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy359.

Prph2 initiates outer segment morphogenesis but maturation requires Prph2/Rom1
oligomerization.

Conley SM(1), Stuck MW(1), Watson JN(1), Zulliger R(2), Burnett JL(1), Naash
MI(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX,
USA.

The retinal disease gene peripherin 2 (PRPH2) is essential for the formation of
photoreceptor outer segments (OSs), where it functions in oligomers with and
without its homologue ROM1. However, the precise role of these proteins in OS
morphogenesis is not understood. By utilizing a knock-in mouse expressing a
chimeric protein comprised of the body of Rom1 and the C-terminus of Prph2
(termed RRCT), we find that the Prph2 C-terminus is necessary and sufficient for
the initiation of OSs, while OS maturation requires the body of Prph2 and
associated large oligomers. Importantly, dominant-negative physiological and
biochemical defects in RRCT heterozygous rods are rescued by removing Rom1,
suggesting Rom1 is a regulator for OS formation. Our experiments evaluating
Prph2 trafficking show that Rom1 is a key determinant of whether Prph2 complexes
utilize conventional versus unconventional (Golgi bypass) secretory pathways to
reach the OS. These findings significantly advance our understanding of the
molecular underpinnings of OS morphogenesis and particularly the role of Rom1.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy359
PMCID: PMC6337695
PMID: 30307502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
