---
reference_id: "PMID:38054557"
title: Serological methods for the detection of antibodies against monkeypox virus applicable for laboratories with different biosafety levels.
authors:
- Grossegesse M
- Stern D
- Hofmann N
- Surtees R
- Kohl C
- Michel J
- Nitsche A
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.29261
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serological methods for the detection of antibodies against monkeypox virus applicable for laboratories with different biosafety levels.
**Authors:** Grossegesse M, Stern D, Hofmann N, Surtees R, Kohl C, Michel J, Nitsche A
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.29261](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.29261)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2023 Dec;95(12):e29261. doi: 10.1002/jmv.29261.

Serological methods for the detection of antibodies against monkeypox virus 
applicable for laboratories with different biosafety levels.

Grossegesse M(1), Stern D(2), Hofmann N(1), Surtees R(1), Kohl C(1), Michel 
J(1), Nitsche A(1).

Author information:
(1)Robert Koch Institute, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens: 
Highly Pathogenic Viruses (ZBS 1), Berlin, Germany.
(2)Robert Koch Institute, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens: 
Biological Toxins (ZBS 3), Berlin, Germany.

The monkeypox virus (MPXV) outbreak in 2022 has renewed interest in the 
detection of antibodies against orthopox viruses (OPXV) and MPXV, as serological 
methods can aid diagnostics and are key to epidemiological studies. Here three 
complementary serological methods are described with different strengths to aid 
the development and evaluation of in-house assays: An immunofluorescence assay 
(IFA) for specific detection of IgG and IgM, an enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay for higher sample throughput to aid epidemiological studies and a 
neutralization test to detect virus neutralizing antibodies. As implementation 
of MPXV-specific diagnostics is often hampered by the requirement for a 
dedicated biosafety level 3 laboratory (BSL-3), the focus of this study is on 
biosafety aspects to facilitate safe testing also under BSL-2 conditions. To 
this aim, it was analyzed whether OPXV, which can be handled under BSL-2 
conditions, could be used as less virulent alternatives to MPXV. Furthermore, an 
inactivation method was established to remove up to five log-steps of infectious 
virus particles from viraemic sera without compromising antibody detection. The 
results show that immunological cross-reactivity between OPXV provides an 
opportunity for the interchangeable usage of different OPXV species in 
serological assays, enabling MPXV serology outside of BSL-3 facilities.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Medical Virology published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.29261
PMID: 38054557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]