---
reference_id: "PMID:36147170"
title: "Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: A case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Ma M
- Huang Y
- Suo Z
- Ma X
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.104090
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: A case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Ma M, Huang Y, Suo Z, Ma X
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amsu.2022.104090](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amsu.2022.104090)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2022 Aug 6;81:104090. doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.104090.
eCollection 2022 Sep.

Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: A case report and review of the literature.

Ma M(1), Huang Y(1), Suo Z(1), Ma X(1).

Author information:
(1)Huaihe Hospital of Henan University, Kaifeng, Henan, China.

Cronkhite -Canada Syndrome (CCS) is a rare non-hereditary disease characterized
by multiple polyps in the alimentary tract and ectoderm changes, and there is no
clearly diagnostic criteria and treatment methods. A 55-year-old Chinese woman
was admitted to our hospital with diarrhea. She was diagnosed with
Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome (CCS). The clinical symptoms of the patient included
diarrhea, nausea, retching, anorexia, weight loss, and we found that she had
alopecia, onychatrophy, rampant caries and skin pigmentation from the physical
examination. Gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed multiple polyps in the gastric
antrum, stomach body, ileocecal part and colon, and from the microscopically the
polype hyperplsique was observed. The patient was treated by eradicating
Helicobacter pylori and regulating the intestinal flora disbalance and his
diarrhea improved within a short period of time. We suggested that she should
take glucocorticoids orally, but the patient refused. Follow-up at 1 year showed
that the symptoms of the patient had recurred sometimes, and she had taken
Chinese herbal medicine orally a few times. At present, the symptoms of diarrhea
are relieved, the weight of the patient has increased, and the hair and nails of
the patient have grown again. From this case, we learned CCS can be likely
ignored and not be diagnosed promptly because the low morbidity of CCS.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.104090
PMCID: PMC9486408
PMID: 36147170

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared that they have no conflicts
of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any commercial or
associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with
the work submitted.
