---
reference_id: "PMID:32600868"
title: "Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency: An Actionable Risk Factor for Patients with COVID-19?"
authors:
- Jamerson BD
- Haryadi TH
- Bohannon A
journal: Arch Med Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2020.06.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency: An Actionable Risk Factor for Patients with COVID-19?
**Authors:** Jamerson BD, Haryadi TH, Bohannon A
**Journal:** Arch Med Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arcmed.2020.06.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcmed.2020.06.006)

## Content

1. Arch Med Res. 2020 Oct;51(7):743-744. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2020.06.006. Epub 
2020 Jun 7.

Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency: An Actionable Risk Factor for 
Patients with COVID-19?

Jamerson BD(1), Haryadi TH(2), Bohannon A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University, Durham, 
NC, USA; Center on Health and Society, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. 
Electronic address: bjamers@gmail.com.
(2)Community Success Initiative, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(3)Virginia Commonwealth University, Department of Internal Medicine, Richmond, 
VA, USA.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is a common X-linked 
mutation that is more prevalent in African, Asian, Latin American and 
Mediterranean populations. Although most individuals are asymptomatic, exposure 
to certain food, drugs, or infections can trigger acute hemolytic anemia. Given 
the potential for coronavirus to trigger oxidative stress, unrecognized G6PD 
deficiency in the presence of the COVID-19 viral infection may cause hemolytic 
crisis and worse outcome in affected individuals. Further, since certain drugs 
that may be used to treat COVID-19 infection may cause hemolytic crisis in 
individuals with G6PD deficiency, it may be warranted to recommend adding G6PD 
deficiency to the list of screening elements in a COVID-19 workup for those 
patients where there is a high suspicion for this genetic mutation.

Copyright © 2020 IMSS. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2020.06.006
PMCID: PMC7275985
PMID: 32600868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]