---
reference_id: "PMID:16493520"
title: Histochemical differential diagnosis and polarization optical analysis of amyloid and amyloidosis.
authors:
- Bély M
journal: ScientificWorldJournal
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1100/tsw.2006.35
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histochemical differential diagnosis and polarization optical analysis of amyloid and amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Bély M
**Journal:** ScientificWorldJournal (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1100/tsw.2006.35](https://doi.org/10.1100/tsw.2006.35)

## Content

1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2006 Jan 27;6:154-68. doi: 10.1100/tsw.2006.35.

Histochemical differential diagnosis and polarization optical analysis of 
amyloid and amyloidosis.

Bély M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Policlinic of the Hospitaller Brothers of St. John 
of God, Budapest. dr.bely.miklos@axelero.hu

Amyloidosis is characterized by extracellular deposition of protein fibrils of 
chemically heterogeneous composition. Early recognition and identification of 
amyloid deposits allows an early start of therapy, which may entail a better 
prognosis. Congo red staining according to Romhányi (1971) is a highly specific 
and sensitive method for early microscopic recognition of amyloidosis. The main 
and most important types of amyloidosis may be distinguished by classic 
histochemical methods of performate pretreatment according to Romhányi (1979), 
or by KMnO4 oxidation according to Wright (1977) followed by Congo red staining 
and viewed under polarized light. Differences in the speed of breakdown 
(disintegration) of amyloid deposits according to Bély and Apáthy allow a more 
precise distinction of various types of amyloid.

DOI: 10.1100/tsw.2006.35
PMCID: PMC5917172
PMID: 16493520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]