---
reference_id: "PMID:9697698"
title: Febrile seizures and generalized epilepsy associated with a mutation in the Na+-channel beta1 subunit gene SCN1B.
authors:
- Wallace RH
- Wang DW
- Singh R
- Scheffer IE
- George AL Jr
- Phillips HA
- Saar K
- Reis A
- Johnson EW
- Sutherland GR
- Berkovic SF
- Mulley JC
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1038/1252
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 19/genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Epilepsy, Generalized/genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Oocytes
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation/genetics
- "Seizures, Febrile/genetics"
- "Sodium Channels/genetics, physiology"
- Tasmania
- Xenopus laevis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Febrile seizures and generalized epilepsy associated with a mutation in the Na+-channel beta1 subunit gene SCN1B.
**Authors:** Wallace RH, Wang DW, Singh R, Scheffer IE, George AL Jr, Phillips HA, Saar K, Reis A, Johnson EW, Sutherland GR, Berkovic SF, Mulley JC
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/1252](https://doi.org/10.1038/1252)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1998 Aug;19(4):366-70. doi: 10.1038/1252.

Febrile seizures and generalized epilepsy associated with a mutation in the 
Na+-channel beta1 subunit gene SCN1B.

Wallace RH(1), Wang DW, Singh R, Scheffer IE, George AL Jr, Phillips HA, Saar K, 
Reis A, Johnson EW, Sutherland GR, Berkovic SF, Mulley JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Centre for Medical 
Genetics, Women's and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, SA, Australia.

Febrile seizures affect approximately 3% of all children under six years of age 
and are by far the most common seizure disorder. A small proportion of children 
with febrile seizures later develop ongoing epilepsy with afebrile seizures. 
Segregation analysis suggests the majority of cases have complex inheritance but 
rare families show apparent autosomal dominant inheritance. Two putative loci 
have been mapped (FEB1 and FEB2), but specific genes have not yet been 
identified. We recently described a clinical subset, termed generalized epilepsy 
with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+), in which many family members have seizures 
with fever that may persist beyond six years of age or be associated with 
afebrile generalized seizures. We now report linkage, in another large GEFS+ 
family, to chromosome region 19q13.1 and identification of a mutation in the 
voltage-gated sodium (Na+)-channel beta1 subunit gene (SCN1B). The mutation 
changes a conserved cysteine residue disrupting a putative disulfide bridge 
which normally maintains an extracellular immunoglobulin-like fold. 
Co-expression of the mutant beta1 subunit with a brain Na+-channel alpha subunit 
in Xenopus laevis oocytes demonstrates that the mutation interferes with the 
ability of the subunit to modulate channel-gating kinetics consistent with a 
loss-of-function allele. This observation develops the theme that idiopathic 
epilepsies are a family of channelopathies and raises the possibility of 
involvement of other Na+-channel subunit genes in febrile seizures and 
generalized epilepsies with complex inheritance patterns.

DOI: 10.1038/1252
PMID: 9697698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]