---
reference_id: "PMID:30735745"
title: "Botryoid Wilms Tumor: A Rare Diagnosis With an Atypical Presentation."
authors:
- Probst PJ
- Assadi A
- Gleason J
journal: Urology
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2019.01.023
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- "Kidney Neoplasms/diagnosis, surgery"
- "Kidney Tubules, Collecting"
- "Wilms Tumor/diagnosis, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Botryoid Wilms Tumor: A Rare Diagnosis With an Atypical Presentation.
**Authors:** Probst PJ, Assadi A, Gleason J
**Journal:** Urology (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.urology.2019.01.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.urology.2019.01.023)

## Content

1. Urology. 2019 Apr;126:192-194. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2019.01.023. Epub 2019
Feb  5.

Botryoid Wilms Tumor: A Rare Diagnosis With an Atypical Presentation.

Probst PJ(1), Assadi A(1), Gleason J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, TN; Division of Pediatric Urology, LeBonheur Children's Hospital, 
Memphis, TN; Department of Surgery, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN.
(2)Department of Urology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, TN; Division of Pediatric Urology, LeBonheur Children's Hospital, 
Memphis, TN; Department of Surgery, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN. Electronic address: jgleaso6@uthsc.edu.

Wilms tumor commonly presents as an asymptomatic abdominal mass. In some cases, 
it can be accompanied with hypertension, constitutional symptoms, and hematuria 
when involving the collecting system. Below, we review the case of a child 
diagnosed with botryoid Wilms tumor involving the upper calyces and renal pelvis 
in which the presenting symptom was a concern for a foreign body in her left 
ear, and the only abnormality during initial history and physical examination 
was stage II hypertension.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.urology.2019.01.023
PMID: 30735745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]