---
reference_id: "PMID:32165620"
title: Hidradenitis suppurativa.
authors:
- Sabat R
- Jemec GBE
- Matusiak Ł
- Kimball AB
- Prens E
- Wolk K
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0149-1
keywords:
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- Comorbidity
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/complications, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Inflammation/complications, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Risk Reduction Behavior
- Severity of Illness Index
- Skin/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hidradenitis suppurativa.
**Authors:** Sabat R, Jemec GBE, Matusiak Ł, Kimball AB, Prens E, Wolk K
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-020-0149-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-020-0149-1)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020 Mar 12;6(1):18. doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0149-1.

Hidradenitis suppurativa.

Sabat R(1), Jemec GBE(2), Matusiak Ł(3), Kimball AB(4), Prens E(5), Wolk K(6).

Author information:
(1)Psoriasis Research and Treatment Center, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. robert.sabat@charite.de.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Zealand University Hospital and Health Sciences
Faculty, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Wrocław Medical
University, Wrocław, Poland.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School and Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
Netherlands.
(6)BIH Center for Regenerative Therapies, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Dermatology. 2022;238(3):600-602. doi: 10.1159/000518965.

Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS; also designated as acne inversa) is a chronic
inflammatory disorder, which affects the intertriginous skin and is associated
with numerous systemic comorbidities. The estimated prevalence of HS is ~1% in
most studied countries. Typically starting in early adulthood, cutaneous
inflamed nodules, abscesses and pus-discharging tunnels develop in axillary,
inguinal, gluteal and perianal body sites. The comorbidities of HS include
metabolic and cardiovascular disorders, which contribute to reduced life
expectancy. A genetic predisposition, smoking, obesity and hormonal factors are
established aetiological factors for HS. Cutaneous changes seem to start around
hair follicles and involve activation of cells of the innate and adaptive immune
systems, with pivotal roles for pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumour
necrosis factor, IL-1β and IL-17. The unrestricted and chronic immune response
eventually leads to severe pain, pus discharge, irreversible tissue destruction
and scar development. HS has profound negative effects on patients' quality of
life, which often culminate in social withdrawal, unemployment, depression and
suicidal thoughts. The therapeutic options for HS comprise antibiotic treatment,
neutralization of tumour necrosis factor and surgical intervention together with
lifestyle modification. Nevertheless, there is an enormous need for awareness of
HS, understanding of its pathogenesis and novel treatments.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-020-0149-1
PMID: 32165620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
