---
reference_id: "PMID:26932671"
title: KMT2D regulates specific programs in heart development via histone H3 lysine 4 di-methylation.
authors:
- Ang SY
- Uebersohn A
- Spencer CI
- Huang Y
- Lee JE
- Ge K
- Bruneau BG
journal: Development
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1242/dev.132688
keywords:
- Animals
- Aorta/physiology
- Cell Cycle
- Echocardiography
- Electrophysiology
- "Enhancer Elements, Genetic"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Heart/embryology
- Heart Ventricles/cytology
- Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase
- Histones/chemistry
- Hypoxia/metabolism
- Lysine/chemistry
- Methylation
- Mice
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- "Myeloid-Lymphoid Leukemia Protein/genetics, physiology"
- Myocardium/metabolism
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
- Oxygen/chemistry
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KMT2D regulates specific programs in heart development via histone H3 lysine 4 di-methylation.
**Authors:** Ang SY, Uebersohn A, Spencer CI, Huang Y, Lee JE, Ge K, Bruneau BG
**Journal:** Development (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.132688](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.132688)

## Content

1. Development. 2016 Mar 1;143(5):810-21. doi: 10.1242/dev.132688.

KMT2D regulates specific programs in heart development via histone H3 lysine 4 
di-methylation.

Ang SY(1), Uebersohn A(2), Spencer CI(2), Huang Y(2), Lee JE(3), Ge K(3), 
Bruneau BG(4).

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA 
Roddenberry Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San 
Francisco, CA 94158, USA Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(2)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA 
Roddenberry Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San 
Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(3)National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(4)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA 
Roddenberry Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San 
Francisco, CA 94158, USA Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA Cardiovascular Research 
Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA 
Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA benoit.bruneau@gladstone.ucsf.edu.

KMT2D, which encodes a histone H3K4 methyltransferase, has been implicated in 
human congenital heart disease in the context of Kabuki syndrome. However, its 
role in heart development is not understood. Here, we demonstrate a requirement 
for KMT2D in cardiac precursors and cardiomyocytes during cardiogenesis in mice. 
Gene expression analysis revealed downregulation of ion transport and cell cycle 
genes, leading to altered calcium handling and cell cycle defects. We further 
determined that myocardial Kmt2d deletion led to decreased H3K4me1 and H3K4me2 
at enhancers and promoters. Finally, we identified KMT2D-bound regions in 
cardiomyocytes, of which a subset was associated with decreased gene expression 
and decreased H3K4me2 in mutant hearts. This subset included genes related to 
ion transport, hypoxia-reoxygenation and cell cycle regulation, suggesting that 
KMT2D is important for these processes. Our findings indicate that KMT2D is 
essential for regulating cardiac gene expression during heart development 
primarily via H3K4 di-methylation.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.132688
PMCID: PMC4813342
PMID: 26932671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.