---
reference_id: "PMID:31243061"
title: SMCHD1 mutation spectrum for facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy type 2 (FSHD2) and Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome (BAMS) reveals disease-specific localisation of variants in the ATPase domain.
authors:
- Lemmers RJLF
- van der Stoep N
- Vliet PJV
- Moore SA
- San Leon Granado D
- Johnson K
- Topf A
- Straub V
- Evangelista T
- Mozaffar T
- Kimonis V
- Shaw ND
- Selvatici R
- Ferlini A
- Voermans N
- van Engelen B
- Sacconi S
- Tawil R
- Lamers M
- van der Maarel SM
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106168
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics
- Choanal Atresia/genetics
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- DNA Methylation
- Female
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Male
- Microphthalmos/genetics
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Facioscapulohumeral/genetics"
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nose/abnormalities
- Protein Domains
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SMCHD1 mutation spectrum for facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy type 2 (FSHD2) and Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome (BAMS) reveals disease-specific localisation of variants in the ATPase domain.
**Authors:** Lemmers RJLF, van der Stoep N, Vliet PJV, Moore SA, San Leon Granado D, Johnson K, Topf A, Straub V, Evangelista T, Mozaffar T, Kimonis V, Shaw ND, Selvatici R, Ferlini A, Voermans N, van Engelen B, Sacconi S, Tawil R, Lamers M, van der Maarel SM
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106168](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106168)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2019 Oct;56(10):693-700. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106168. Epub
 2019 Jun 26.

SMCHD1 mutation spectrum for facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy type 2
(FSHD2) and Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome (BAMS) reveals
disease-specific localisation of variants in the ATPase domain.

Lemmers RJLF(1), van der Stoep N(2), Vliet PJV(3), Moore SA(4), San Leon Granado
D(3), Johnson K(5), Topf A(5), Straub V(5), Evangelista T(6), Mozaffar T(7),
Kimonis V(8), Shaw ND(9), Selvatici R(10), Ferlini A(11), Voermans N(12), van
Engelen B(12), Sacconi S(13), Tawil R(14), Lamers M(15), van der Maarel SM(3).

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics, Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum, Leiden, The Netherlands
r.j.l.f.lemmers@lumc.nl.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Laboratory for Diagnostic Genome Analysis,
Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Human Genetics, Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(5)John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(6)Unité de Morphologie Neuromusculaire, Institut de Myologie, Paris, France.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of California Irvine, Irvine, California,
USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine,
California, USA.
(9)Research Triangle Park, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(10)Department of Medical Sciences; Medical Genetics Unit, University of
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(11)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Diagnostica, Università di Ferrara,
Ferrara, Italy.
(12)Department of Neurology, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Gelderland, The Netherlands.
(13)Centre de Référence Maladies Neuromusculaires, Hôpital Archet, Nice, France.
(14)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester,
New York, USA.
(15)Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden Universitair Medisch
Centrum, Leiden, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Variants in the Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes flexible Hinge
Domain-containing protein 1 (SMCHD1) can cause facioscapulohumeral muscular
dystrophy type 2 (FSHD2) and the unrelated Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome
(BAMS). In FSHD2, pathogenic variants are found anywhere in SMCHD1 while in
BAMS, pathogenic variants are restricted to the extended ATPase domain.
Irrespective of the phenotypic outcome, both FSHD2-associated and
BAMS-associated SMCHD1 variants result in quantifiable local DNA
hypomethylation. We compared FSHD2, BAMS and non-pathogenic SMCHD1 variants to
derive genotype-phenotype relationships.
METHODS: Examination of SMCHD1 variants and methylation of the SMCHD1-sensitive
FSHD locus DUX4 in 187 FSHD2 families, 41 patients with BAMS and in control
individuals. Analysis of variants in a three-dimensional model of the ATPase
domain of SMCHD1.
RESULTS: DUX4 methylation analysis is essential to establish pathogenicity of
SMCHD1 variants. Although the FSHD2 mutation spectrum includes all types of
variants covering the entire SMCHD1 locus, missense variants are significantly
enriched in the extended ATPase domain. Identification of recurrent variants
suggests disease-specific residues for FSHD2 and in BAMS, consistent with a
largely disease-specific localisation of variants in SMCHD1.
CONCLUSIONS: The localisation of missense variants within the ATPase domain of
SMCHD1 may contribute to the differences in phenotypic outcome.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106168
PMCID: PMC6800092
PMID: 31243061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
