---
reference_id: "PMID:40370685"
title: "Comprehensive Clinical Analysis of Rilonacept in the Treatment of Cryopyrin-Associated Periodic Syndromes: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Zhang T
- Yu Y
- Chen J
- Zhao Z
- Qian M
- Zhang Y
- Ma C
- Chang F
journal: J Multidiscip Healthc
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2147/JMDH.S500838
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive Clinical Analysis of Rilonacept in the Treatment of Cryopyrin-Associated Periodic Syndromes: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Zhang T, Yu Y, Chen J, Zhao Z, Qian M, Zhang Y, Ma C, Chang F
**Journal:** J Multidiscip Healthc (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2147/JMDH.S500838](https://doi.org/10.2147/JMDH.S500838)

## Content

1. J Multidiscip Healthc. 2025 May 9;18:2591-2602. doi: 10.2147/JMDH.S500838. 
eCollection 2025.

Comprehensive Clinical Analysis of Rilonacept in the Treatment of 
Cryopyrin-Associated Periodic Syndromes: A Systematic Review.

Zhang T(1), Yu Y(2), Chen J(2), Zhao Z(2), Qian M(2), Zhang Y(2), Ma C(2), Chang 
F(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, 
Nanjing, 211198, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200040, 
People's Republic of China.
(3)School of International Pharmaceutical Business, China Pharmaceutical 
University, Nanjing, 211198, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes (CAPS), a group of 
interleukin-1 (IL-1) mediated autoinflammatory disorders, were incorporated into 
China's "Second List of Rare Diseases" in 2023. Notably, rilonacept, an IL-1 
inhibitor approved in the United States since 2008, has been a key treatment for 
CAPS. However, comprehensive analysis of its efficacy and safety are limited. 
This systematic review aims to assess rilonacept for CAPS treatment and provide 
evidence-based therapeutic recommendations.
METHODS: We used medical subject headings terms and free-text keywords related 
to rilonacept and CAPS to perform a systematic literature search. This search 
covered databases including PubMed, Ovid/Embase, The Cochrane Library, and 
Chinese databases (CNKI, Wanfang, and VIP) from their inception to September 30, 
2024. A multidimensional systematic review was then conducted, collating the 
efficacy, safety, cost-effectiveness, innovativeness, suitability, and 
accessibility of rilonacept in treating CAPS.
RESULTS: Out of 1223 screened publications, three clinical studies including two 
sequential randomized controlled trials were selected based on the established 
criteria. Notably, no economic evaluations were identified. Treatment with 
rilonacept resulted in a reduction of approximately two points in key symptom 
scores for patients, with significant improvements in all outcome measures such 
as the number of flare days and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein levels. 
Adverse reactions were mostly mild to moderate, and with favorable long-term 
tolerability. Rilonacept meets current clinical needs due to its ease of use, 
demonstrating strong innovativeness and suitability. Its cost-effectiveness and 
accessibility warrant further examination post-market entry, yet it exhibits 
considerable potential for widespread use.
CONCLUSION: Rilonacept demonstrates significant effectiveness in treating CAPS 
with a favorable overall safety profile. It shows high innovativeness and 
acceptable suitability, with the potential for improved cost-effectiveness and 
accessibility. We anticipate that the effective treatment of CAPS with 
rilonacept will encourage further clinical and fundamental research, offering 
valuable insights for the treatment of other autoinflammatory diseases.

© 2025 Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JMDH.S500838
PMCID: PMC12075950
PMID: 40370685

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest in publishing 
this article.