---
reference_id: "PMID:24339129"
title: Abnormal junctions and permeability of myelin in PMP22-deficient nerves.
authors:
- Guo J
- Wang L
- Zhang Y
- Wu J
- Arpag S
- Hu B
- Imhof BA
- Tian X
- Carter BD
- Suter U
- Li J
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ana.24086
keywords:
- "Action Potentials/drug effects, genetics"
- Age Factors
- Animals
- "Arthrogryposis/genetics, metabolism"
- "Axons/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- HEK293 Cells
- "Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Junctional Adhesion Molecules/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation/genetics
- Myelin Proteins/deficiency
- Myelin Sheath/metabolism
- "Neural Conduction/drug effects, genetics"
- "Peripheral Nerves/metabolism, pathology"
- Potassium/pharmacology
- Tight Junction Proteins/metabolism
- "Tight Junctions/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal junctions and permeability of myelin in PMP22-deficient nerves.
**Authors:** Guo J, Wang L, Zhang Y, Wu J, Arpag S, Hu B, Imhof BA, Tian X, Carter BD, Suter U, Li J
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.24086](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.24086)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2014 Feb;75(2):255-65. doi: 10.1002/ana.24086. Epub 2014 Feb 20.

Abnormal junctions and permeability of myelin in PMP22-deficient nerves.

Guo J(1), Wang L, Zhang Y, Wu J, Arpag S, Hu B, Imhof BA, Tian X, Carter BD,
Suter U, Li J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Center for Human Genetics Research, Vanderbilt Brain
Institute, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN.

OBJECTIVE: The peripheral myelin protein-22 (PMP22) gene is associated with the
most common types of inherited neuropathies, including hereditary neuropathy
with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP) caused by PMP22 deficiency. However,
the function of PMP22 has yet to be defined. Our previous study has shown that
PMP22 deficiency causes an impaired propagation of nerve action potentials in
the absence of demyelination. In the present study, we tested an alternative
mechanism relating to myelin permeability.
METHODS: Utilizing Pmp22(+) (/) (-) mice as a model of HNPP, we evaluated myelin
junctions and their permeability using morphological, electrophysiological, and
biochemical approaches.
RESULTS: We show disruption of multiple types of cell junction complexes in
peripheral nerve, resulting in increased permeability of myelin and impaired
action potential propagation. We further demonstrate that PMP22 interacts with
immunoglobulin domain-containing proteins known to regulate tight/adherens
junctions and/or transmembrane adhesions, including junctional adhesion
molecule-C (JAM-C) and myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG). Deletion of Jam-c
or Mag in mice recapitulates pathology in HNPP.
INTERPRETATION: Our study reveals a novel mechanism by which PMP22 deficiency
affects nerve conduction not through removal of myelin, but through disruption
of myelin junctions.

© 2014 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.24086
PMCID: PMC4206215
PMID: 24339129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential Conflicts of Interest Nothing to
report.
