---
reference_id: "PMID:39513946"
title: BRAF Deletion in Adult Patients with Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis Correlates with Multisystem Disease and Poor Outcomes.
authors:
- Lang M
- Chang L
- Cai H
- Lin H
- Liu ZZ
- Duan MH
- Zhou DB
- Cao XX
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-1802
keywords:
- Humans
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/genetics, pathology, mortality"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Young Adult
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- Adolescent
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF Deletion in Adult Patients with Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis Correlates with Multisystem Disease and Poor Outcomes.
**Authors:** Lang M, Chang L, Cai H, Lin H, Liu ZZ, Duan MH, Zhou DB, Cao XX
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-1802](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-1802)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2025 Jan 6;31(1):197-204. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-1802.

BRAF Deletion in Adult Patients with Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis Correlates 
with Multisystem Disease and Poor Outcomes.

Lang M(#)(1), Chang L(#)(1)(2), Cai H(#)(1)(2), Lin H(1), Liu ZZ(1), Duan 
MH(1)(2), Zhou DB(1)(2), Cao XX(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, Peking Union 
Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union 
Medical College, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a rare and highly heterogeneous 
histiocytosis. There are currently few studies examining the correlation between 
molecular profiling and clinical phenotype or outcomes in adult patients with 
LCH. The objective of this study was to characterize the genomic landscape of 
adult LCH and correlate molecular findings with clinical features and patient 
outcomes.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: This study included 254 patients, ages ≥18 years, with 
biopsy-proven LCH from January 2000 to December 2023. All patients underwent 
next-generation sequencing or fluorescence qPCR for the BRAFV600E mutation. 
Patient demographics, disease characteristics, and treatments were collected 
through electronic medical records. Patient outcomes were collected through 
clinical and telephone follow-up.
RESULTS: Overall, 254 patients were enrolled. MAPK/PI3K pathway alterations were 
observed in 77.6% (n = 197) of the patients. BRAFV600E mutation was the most 
common (30.7%, n = 78), followed by BRAFindel (18.1%, n = 46) and MAP2K1 
mutations (12.6%, n = 32). The proportion of BRAFindel was much higher in 
patients with multisystem (MS) involvement than single-system disease (24.5% vs. 
6.6%, P < 0.001). Overall, BRAFindel was associated with inferior overall 
survival (3-year overall survival 89.6% vs. 99.0%, P = 0.014) and 
progression-free survival (PFS) (3-year PFS 50.0% vs. 78.6%, P < 0.001). In 
patients with MS LCH, BRAFindel was associated with worse PFS (3-year PFS 47.8% 
vs. 76.0%, P = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This large study provides molecular and clinical pathologic 
characterization of adult LCH. BRAFindel was highly correlated with MS LCH and 
was associated with worse outcomes.

©2024 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-1802
PMID: 39513946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]