---
reference_id: "PMID:33875303"
title: "Early-onset autosomal dominant GTP-cyclohydrolase I deficiency: Diagnostic delay and residual motor signs."
authors:
- Kim W
- Cho JS
- Shim YK
- Ko YJ
- Choi SA
- Kim SY
- Kim H
- Lim BC
- Hwang H
- Choi J
- Kim KJ
- Kim MJ
- Seong MW
- Chae JH
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2021.02.006
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Child
- Delayed Diagnosis
- "Dystonic Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Female
- GTP Cyclohydrolase/deficiency
- Humans
- Male
- Republic of Korea/epidemiology
- Time Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-onset autosomal dominant GTP-cyclohydrolase I deficiency: Diagnostic delay and residual motor signs.
**Authors:** Kim W, Cho JS, Shim YK, Ko YJ, Choi SA, Kim SY, Kim H, Lim BC, Hwang H, Choi J, Kim KJ, Kim MJ, Seong MW, Chae JH
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2021.02.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2021.02.006)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2021 Aug;43(7):759-767. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2021.02.006. Epub
2021 Apr 17.

Early-onset autosomal dominant GTP-cyclohydrolase I deficiency: Diagnostic delay
and residual motor signs.

Kim W(1), Cho JS(1), Shim YK(1), Ko YJ(1), Choi SA(1), Kim SY(2), Kim H(3), Lim
BC(1), Hwang H(3), Choi J(4), Kim KJ(1), Kim MJ(5), Seong MW(6), Chae JH(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Pediatric Clinical Neuroscience Center, Seoul National University Children's
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Pediatric Clinical Neuroscience Center, Seoul National University Children's
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Rare Disease Center, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, SMG-SNU Boramae Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Rare Disease Center, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of
Korea; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Pediatric Clinical Neuroscience Center, Seoul National University Children's
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Rare Disease Center, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
chaeped1@snu.ac.kr.

OBJECTIVE: Autosomal dominant (AD) guanosine triphosphate cyclohydrolase 1
(GCH1) deficiency is the most common cause of dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD).
Patients with GCH1 deficiency are likely to experience diagnostic delay, but its
consequences have not been described thoroughly in patients with early-onset
disease. We describe the diagnostic delay and residual motor signs (RMS)
observed in patients with early-onset (before 15 years of age) disease.
METHODS: Twelve patients with early-onset AD GCH1 deficiency from a single
center were included in the case series analysis. For the meta-analysis, the
PubMed database was searched for articles on early-onset AD GCH1 deficiency
published from 1995 to 2019.
RESULTS: In the case series, the mean duration of diagnostic delay was
5.6 years. Two patients exhibited RMS, and four patients underwent orthopedic
surgery. The literature search yielded 137 AD GCH1 deficiency cases for review;
gait disturbance was reported in 92.7% of patients, diurnal fluctuation of
symptoms in 91.9%, and RMS in 39%. The mean duration of diagnostic delay was
14.6 years overall: 12.0 years in RMS-negative patients and 21.2 years in
RMS-positive patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Diagnostic delay in early-onset AD GCH1 deficiency is more closely
associated with later RMS. Early clinical suspicion, timely diagnosis, and
levodopa treatment may reduce the occurrence of RMS in patients with early-onset
AD GCH1 deficiency.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2021.02.006
PMID: 33875303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
