---
reference_id: "PMID:33443391"
title: Orthopaedic Manifestations of Amyloidosis.
authors:
- Zhang D
- Makhni MC
- Kang JD
- Blazar P
journal: J Am Acad Orthop Surg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.5435/JAAOS-D-20-01146
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Orthopaedic Manifestations of Amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Zhang D, Makhni MC, Kang JD, Blazar P
**Journal:** J Am Acad Orthop Surg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.5435/JAAOS-D-20-01146](https://doi.org/10.5435/JAAOS-D-20-01146)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2021 May 15;29(10):e488-e496. doi: 
10.5435/JAAOS-D-20-01146.

Orthopaedic Manifestations of Amyloidosis.

Zhang D(1), Makhni MC, Kang JD, Blazar P.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, MA (Zhang, Makhni, Kang, and Blazar), and the Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA (Zhang, Makhni, Kang, and Blazar).

Amyloidosis is a disorder of misfolded proteins in human tissues, which can 
result in morbid cardiac and neurological disease. Historically, the utility of 
tissue biopsy during orthopaedic procedures to detect amyloidosis has been 
limited because no disease-modifying therapies were available; however, new drug 
therapies have recently emerged for the treatment of amyloidosis. Although these 
novel pharmaceuticals show promise for slowing disease progression, they are 
primarily effective in the early stages of amyloidosis, underscoring the 
importance of early diagnosis. Common orthopaedic manifestations of amyloidosis 
include carpal tunnel syndrome, trigger finger, spontaneous distal biceps tendon 
rupture, rotator cuff disease, and lumbar spinal stenosis. Carpal tunnel 
syndrome is frequently the earliest manifestation of amyloidosis, on average 
preceding a formal diagnosis of amyloidosis by over four years. By recognizing 
the constellation of musculoskeletal symptoms in the patient with amyloidosis, 
orthopaedic surgeons can play an active role in patient referral, early 
detection of systemic disease, and prompt initiation of disease-modifying 
treatment. There may be a role for selective biopsy for amyloid deposition in 
at-risk patients during routine orthopaedic procedures.

Copyright © 2021 by the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons.

DOI: 10.5435/JAAOS-D-20-01146
PMID: 33443391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]