---
reference_id: "PMID:19671042"
title: "The VHL tumor suppressor: master regulator of HIF."
authors:
- Haase VH
journal: Curr Pharm Des
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2174/138161209789649394
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The VHL tumor suppressor: master regulator of HIF.
**Authors:** Haase VH
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Des (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2174/138161209789649394](https://doi.org/10.2174/138161209789649394)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Des. 2009;15(33):3895-903. doi: 10.2174/138161209789649394.

The VHL tumor suppressor: master regulator of HIF.

Haase VH(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. volker.haase@vanderbilt.edu

Hypoxia-Inducible Factors (HIFs) are heterodimeric oxygen-sensitive basic 
helix-loop-helix transcription factors that play central roles in cellular 
adaptation to low oxygen environments. The von-Hippel Lindau tumor suppressor 
(pVHL) is the substrate recognition component of an E3 ubiquitin ligase and 
functions as a master regulator of HIF activity by targeting the hydroxylated 
HIF-alpha subunit for ubiquitylation and rapid proteasomal degradation under 
normoxic conditions. Mutations in pVHL can be found in familial and sporadic 
hemangioblastomas, clear cell carcinomas of the kidney, pheochromocytomas and 
inherited forms of erythrocytosis, illustrating the importance of disrupted 
molecular oxygen sensing in the pathogenesis of these diseases. Tissue-specific 
gene targeting of pVHL in mice has demonstrated that efficient execution of HIF 
proteolysis is critically important for normal tissue physiology, and has 
provided novel insights into the functional consequences of HIF activation on 
the cellular and tissue level. Here we focus on the contribution of individual 
HIF transcription factors to the development of VHL phenotypes and discuss how 
the pVHL/HIF axis could be exploited pharmacologically.

DOI: 10.2174/138161209789649394
PMCID: PMC3622710
PMID: 19671042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHOR STATEMENT The author states that no 
conflict of interest exists.