---
reference_id: "PMID:17206865"
title: "A role for Alström syndrome protein, alms1, in kidney ciliogenesis and cellular quiescence."
authors:
- Li G
- Vega R
- Nelms K
- Gekakis N
- Goodnow C
- McNamara P
- Wu H
- Hong NA
- Glynne R
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0030008
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/pathology"
- Aging/metabolism
- Animals
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "Cilia/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- "Kidney/abnormalities, cytology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Mechanotransduction, Cellular"
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Peptide Fragments/metabolism
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Small Interfering/metabolism"
- Syndrome
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A role for Alström syndrome protein, alms1, in kidney ciliogenesis and cellular quiescence.
**Authors:** Li G, Vega R, Nelms K, Gekakis N, Goodnow C, McNamara P, Wu H, Hong NA, Glynne R
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.0030008](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.0030008)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2007 Jan 5;3(1):e8. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0030008. Epub 2006
Nov  30.

A role for Alström syndrome protein, alms1, in kidney ciliogenesis and cellular
quiescence.

Li G(1), Vega R, Nelms K, Gekakis N, Goodnow C, McNamara P, Wu H, Hong NA,
Glynne R.

Author information:
(1)Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, San Diego,
California, United States of America.

Premature truncation alleles in the ALMS1 gene are a frequent cause of human
Alström syndrome. Alström syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by early
obesity and sensory impairment, symptoms shared with other genetic diseases
affecting proteins of the primary cilium. ALMS1 localizes to centrosomes and
ciliary basal bodies, but truncation mutations in Alms1/ALMS1 do not preclude
formation of cilia. Here, we show that in vitro knockdown of Alms1 in mice
causes stunted cilia on kidney epithelial cells and prevents these cells from
increasing calcium influx in response to mechanical stimuli. The stunted-cilium
phenotype can be rescued with a 5' fragment of the Alms1 cDNA, which resembles
disease-associated alleles. In a mouse model of Alström syndrome, Alms1 protein
can be stably expressed from the mutant allele and is required for cilia
formation in primary cells. Aged mice developed specific loss of cilia from the
kidney proximal tubules, which is associated with foci of apoptosis or
proliferation. As renal failure is a common cause of mortality in Alström
syndrome patients, we conclude that this disease should be considered as a
further example of the class of renal ciliopathies: wild-type or mutant alleles
of the Alström syndrome gene can support normal kidney ciliogenesis in vitro and
in vivo, but mutant alleles are associated with age-dependent loss of kidney
primary cilia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0030008
PMCID: PMC1761047
PMID: 17206865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. RJG owns stock in Phenomix.
