---
reference_id: "PMID:22429945"
title: "Spontaneous tegmen defect and semicircular canal dehiscence: same etiopathogenic entity?"
authors:
- El Hadi T
- Sorrentino T
- Calmels MN
- Fraysse B
- Deguine O
- Marx M
journal: Otol Neurotol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/MAO.0b013e31824bae10
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Cerebrospinal Fluid Leak
- Cerebrospinal Fluid Rhinorrhea/etiology
- "Cranial Fossa, Middle/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Ear, Middle/pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Semicircular Canals/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Surgical Wound Dehiscence/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Temporal Bone/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spontaneous tegmen defect and semicircular canal dehiscence: same etiopathogenic entity?
**Authors:** El Hadi T, Sorrentino T, Calmels MN, Fraysse B, Deguine O, Marx M
**Journal:** Otol Neurotol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MAO.0b013e31824bae10](https://doi.org/10.1097/MAO.0b013e31824bae10)

## Content

1. Otol Neurotol. 2012 Jun;33(4):591-5. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0b013e31824bae10.

Spontaneous tegmen defect and semicircular canal dehiscence: same etiopathogenic 
entity?

El Hadi T(1), Sorrentino T, Calmels MN, Fraysse B, Deguine O, Marx M.

Author information:
(1)Avicenne University Hospital, Rabat, Morocco. tarik_elhadi@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVES: To describe the clinical and radiologic features of associated 
spontaneous tegmen defects (STDs) with semicircular canal dehiscences (SCCDs) 
and to postulate a novel etiopathogenic hypothesis of these pathologic 
conditions.
METHODS: Medical records of all patients with surgically confirmed STD between 
2001 and May 2010 were reviewed. We excluded all secondary tegmen defects. 
Clinical, audiological, and radiologic data were analyzed.
RESULTS: Twenty-three patients matched the inclusion criteria. Semicircular 
canal dehiscence was associated to STD in 13 patients. Of these patients, 12 
(95%) had protruding superior semicircular canals in the middle cranial fossa 
versus only 3 (30%) of 10 patients for the nondehiscent cases. Twenty-two 
patients complained of hearing loss. Cerebrospinal fluid leak was found in 13 
patients. Four patients had history of meningitis. Vestibular symptoms were 
present in 8 patients.
CONCLUSION: This is the largest series of reported coexistence of STD and SCCD 
in the literature. Protrusion of the superior semicircular canal in the middle 
cranial fossa is probably an additional factor underlying STD and SCCD 
etiopathogeny. Semicircular canal dehiscence should always be looked for when 
STD is present.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0b013e31824bae10
PMID: 22429945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]