---
reference_id: "PMID:26775594"
title: "Cisplatin and carboplatin-based chemotherapy in the first-line treatment of non-small cell lung cancer: Analysis from the European FRAME study."
authors:
- Smit E
- Moro-Sibilot D
- Carpeño Jde C
- Lesniewski-Kmak K
- Aerts J
- Villatoro R
- Kraaij K
- Nacerddine K
- Dyachkova Y
- Smith KT
- Girvan A
- Visseren-Grul C
- Schnabel PA
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.11.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cisplatin and carboplatin-based chemotherapy in the first-line treatment of non-small cell lung cancer: Analysis from the European FRAME study.
**Authors:** Smit E, Moro-Sibilot D, Carpeño Jde C, Lesniewski-Kmak K, Aerts J, Villatoro R, Kraaij K, Nacerddine K, Dyachkova Y, Smith KT, Girvan A, Visseren-Grul C, Schnabel PA
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.11.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.11.022)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2016 Feb;92:35-40. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.11.022. Epub 2015 
Dec 3.

Cisplatin and carboplatin-based chemotherapy in the first-line treatment of 
non-small cell lung cancer: Analysis from the European FRAME study.

Smit E(1), Moro-Sibilot D(2), Carpeño Jde C(3), Lesniewski-Kmak K(4), Aerts 
J(5), Villatoro R(6), Kraaij K(7), Nacerddine K(8), Dyachkova Y(9), Smith 
KT(10), Girvan A(10), Visseren-Grul C(7), Schnabel PA(11).

Author information:
(1)Vrije Universiteit Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic 
address: EF.smit@vumc.nl.
(2)Unité d'Oncologie Thoracique-Pneumologie, CHU de Grenoble, INSERM U823, 
Grenoble, France.
(3)Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdynia, Poland.
(5)Amphia Hospital Breda, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Hospital Costa del Sol, Marbella, Spain.
(7)Eli Lilly and Company, Houten, The Netherlands.
(8)Eli Lilly and Company, Neuilly-sur-Seine, France.
(9)Eli Lilly GmbH, Vienna, Austria.
(10)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(11)Institut für Allgemeine und Spezielle Pathologie, Universitätsklinikum des 
Saarlandes, Homburg, Saar, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: To explore patient and disease factors, and reasons behind the 
physician's choice of platinum backbone for the first-line treatment of 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), as observed in a European prospective 
observational study of patients receiving platinum-based chemotherapy as 
first-line treatment for advanced or metastatic NSCLC (the FRAME study). 
Additionally, overall survival (OS) for patients who received cisplatin or 
carboplatin was evaluated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A post-hoc analysis of the prospective study population 
was conducted. Baseline characteristics of patients receiving cisplatin versus 
carboplatin were compared and summarized by propensity score. Survival for 
matched patients was summarized using the Kaplan-Meier approach.
RESULTS: Of the 1564 patients who were included in the prospective study, 1520 
received either cisplatin (54%) or carboplatin (46%) in combination with 
pemetrexed, gemcitabine, taxanes or vinorelbine. Patients treated with 
carboplatin were older than patients receiving cisplatin (mean age 67 versus 61 
years; p<0.001), had poorer performance status (p<0.001), and more comorbidities 
(p<0.001). Cisplatin was most frequently combined with pemetrexed (47%), and 
carboplatin most frequently with taxanes (31%). Unadjusted median OS estimates 
for patients from the total prospective study sample were 11.5 months (95% 
confidence interval [CI] 10.1-12.9) for cisplatin recipients and 9.0 months (95% 
CI 8.1-10.6) for carboplatin recipients. Median (95% CI) overall survival for 
the matched cohorts was 10.8 months (8.8-14.3) for cisplatin versus 9.5 months 
(8.2-11.3) for carboplatin; p=0.086.
CONCLUSION: This post-hoc analysis illustrated real-life differences in patients 
with NSCLC prescribed platinum-based first-line treatment, and suggested that 
baseline patient and disease characteristics were associated with physician's 
choice of platinum agent, with cisplatin being more frequently prescribed to 
younger and fitter patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.11.022
PMID: 26775594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]