---
reference_id: "PMID:11002236"
title: "Pleuropulmonary blastoma: management and prognosis of 11 cases."
authors:
- Indolfi P
- Casale F
- Carli M
- Bisogno G
- Ninfo V
- Cecchetto G
- Bagnulo S
- Santoro N
- Giuliano M
- Di Tullio MT
journal: Cancer
year: '2000'
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Male
- "Pleural Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Prognosis
- "Pulmonary Blastoma/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Survival Analysis
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pleuropulmonary blastoma: management and prognosis of 11 cases.
**Authors:** Indolfi P, Casale F, Carli M, Bisogno G, Ninfo V, Cecchetto G, Bagnulo S, Santoro N, Giuliano M, Di Tullio MT
**Journal:** Cancer (2000)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2000 Sep 15;89(6):1396-401.

Pleuropulmonary blastoma: management and prognosis of 11 cases.

Indolfi P(1), Casale F, Carli M, Bisogno G, Ninfo V, Cecchetto G, Bagnulo S,
Santoro N, Giuliano M, Di Tullio MT.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Oncology Service-Pediatric Department II, University of Napoli,
Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) is a rare and aggressive malignant
tumor that affects children and adults. This neoplasm is histologically
characterized by primitive blastema and a malignant mesenchymal stroma that
often demonstrates multidirectional differentiation. Despite the introduction of
multimodal therapy, the prognosis of patients with PPB remains poor.
METHODS: In the current study the authors reported on PPB cases from a national
retrospective search performed in 18 Italian Associations for Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology centers. Clinical data, surgical notes, pathologic
findings, and summaries of chemotherapy and radiotherapy were obtained from
reports and correlated with outcome by standard statistical methods.
RESULTS: The series included 11 patients (7 boys and 4 girls) with a median age
of 32 months. Respiratory distress was the most common clinical symptom. In
three patients the PPB developed from other primary dysplastic diseases: cystic
adenomatoid malformation in one case and congenital lung cysts in the other two
cases. Five patients experienced disease recurrences (local recurrence in three
patients and distant metastasis in two patients, within the central nervous
system and an intraocular location, respectively). Patients with a type 2
histologic pattern and/or pleural involvement were found to have a worse outcome
compared with patients without such features. Event free survival at 2 years
from the time of diagnosis was 45% for all patients. Overall survival at 2 years
was 72% for all patients.
CONCLUSIONS: PPB is an aggressive neoplasm of early childhood and to the
authors' knowledge no adequate therapy has been defined to date for patients
with PPB. After making the diagnosis, the main goal of therapy should be radical
surgery, even in patients with microscopic residual disease. Because the
response to chemotherapy is poor, the authors' experience suggests that
chemotherapy should be given with local radiotherapy in the majority of
patients.

Copyright 2000 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 11002236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
