---
reference_id: "PMID:12769630"
title: Current status of antipsychotic treatment.
authors:
- Conley RR
- Kelly DL
journal: Curr Drug Targets CNS Neurol Disord
year: '2002'
doi: 10.2174/1568007024606221
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current status of antipsychotic treatment.
**Authors:** Conley RR, Kelly DL
**Journal:** Curr Drug Targets CNS Neurol Disord (2002)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1568007024606221](https://doi.org/10.2174/1568007024606221)

## Content

1. Curr Drug Targets CNS Neurol Disord. 2002 Apr;1(2):123-8. doi: 
10.2174/1568007024606221.

Current status of antipsychotic treatment.

Conley RR(1), Kelly DL.

Author information:
(1)University of Maryland, Maryland Psychiatric Research Center, Baltimore, MD 
21228, USA. rconley@mprc.umaryland.edu

With the use of chlorpromazine and other traditional antipsychotics for 
psychosis, it was soon discovered that the antipsychotic efficacy of this class 
of medications was closely associated with their ability to block dopamine D(2) 
receptors in the brain. This prompted the hypothesis that the etiology of 
schizophrenia and other psychotic illnesses might be caused by a dysregulation 
of dopamine. This hypothesis, that the dopamine system explains schizophrenia 
symptoms, however, is far from complete and the treatment with conventional 
antipsychotic medications is far from ideal. There has been a great deal of 
speculation regarding the role of serotonin receptor antagonism in regards to 
antipsychotic effects. The second generation antipsychotics (SGAs), clozapine, 
risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine and ziprasidone all have relatively high 
serotonin to dopamine binding ratios. Serotonin receptor binding may be 
important to these drugs' actions, possibly by stimulating dopamine activity in 
mesocortical pathways. Yet, while the mechanism of action of SGAs as a group 
remain unsolved, it is important to note that the SGAs offer many clinical 
benefits to treatment as compared to traditional antipsychotics and are quickly 
emerging as first-line therapy for schizophrenia. In addition to lower rates of 
EPS and tardive dyskinesia, other benefits to treatment with this class of 
antipsychotics include better treatment of negative symptoms, better compliance, 
possible benefits for cognitive impairments, lower rates of relapse and 
rehospitalization, and more cost-effective therapy. Within the class of SGAs, 
however, differences exist both in efficacy and side effects and these will be 
described. Optimization of treatment and understanding the exact mechanism of 
action of current antipsychotic medications will help pave the way for new drug 
targets in the future.

DOI: 10.2174/1568007024606221
PMID: 12769630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]