---
reference_id: "PMID:18283340"
title: Role of the TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion in prostate cancer.
authors:
- Tomlins SA
- Laxman B
- Varambally S
- Cao X
- Yu J
- Helgeson BE
- Cao Q
- Prensner JR
- Rubin MA
- Shah RB
- Mehra R
- Chinnaiyan AM
journal: Neoplasia
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1593/neo.07822
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Line
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Gene Fusion
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Plasminogen Activators/metabolism
- Prostate/cytology
- "Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Trans-Activators/genetics
- Transcriptional Regulator ERG
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of the TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion in prostate cancer.
**Authors:** Tomlins SA, Laxman B, Varambally S, Cao X, Yu J, Helgeson BE, Cao Q, Prensner JR, Rubin MA, Shah RB, Mehra R, Chinnaiyan AM
**Journal:** Neoplasia (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1593/neo.07822](https://doi.org/10.1593/neo.07822)

## Content

1. Neoplasia. 2008 Feb;10(2):177-88. doi: 10.1593/neo.07822.

Role of the TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion in prostate cancer.

Tomlins SA(1), Laxman B, Varambally S, Cao X, Yu J, Helgeson BE, Cao Q, Prensner 
JR, Rubin MA, Shah RB, Mehra R, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information:
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology, 
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusions are the predominant molecular subtype of prostate 
cancer. Here, we explored the role of TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion product using in 
vitro and in vivo model systems. Transgenic mice expressing the ERG gene fusion 
product under androgen-regulation develop mouse prostatic intraepithelial 
neoplasia (PIN), a precursor lesion of prostate cancer. Introduction of the ERG 
gene fusion product into primary or immortalized benign prostate epithelial 
cells induced an invasion-associated transcriptional program but did not 
increase cellular proliferation or anchorage-independent growth. These results 
suggest that TMPRSS2-ERG may not be sufficient for transformation in the absence 
of secondary molecular lesions. Transcriptional profiling of ERG knockdown in 
the TMPPRSS2-ERG-positive prostate cancer cell line VCaP revealed decreased 
expression of genes over-expressed in prostate cancer versus PIN and genes 
overexpressed in ETS-positive versus -negative prostate cancers in addition to 
inhibiting invasion. ERG knockdown in VCaP cells also induced a transcriptional 
program consistent with prostate differentiation. Importantly, VCaP cells and 
benign prostate cells overexpressing ERG directly engage components of the 
plasminogen activation pathway to mediate cellular invasion, potentially 
representing a downstream ETS target susceptible to therapeutic intervention. 
Our results support previous work suggesting that TMPRSS2-ERG fusions mediate 
invasion, consistent with the defining histologic distinction between PIN and 
prostate cancer.

DOI: 10.1593/neo.07822
PMCID: PMC2244693
PMID: 18283340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]