---
reference_id: "PMID:26305119"
title: "Peroxisome biogenesis in mammalian cells: The impact of genes and environment."
authors:
- Farr RL
- Lismont C
- Terlecky SR
- Fransen M
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.08.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisome biogenesis in mammalian cells: The impact of genes and environment.
**Authors:** Farr RL, Lismont C, Terlecky SR, Fransen M
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.08.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.08.011)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 May;1863(5):1049-60. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.08.011. Epub 2015 Aug 21.

Peroxisome biogenesis in mammalian cells: The impact of genes and environment.

Farr RL(1), Lismont C(2), Terlecky SR(3), Fransen M(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Lipid Biochemistry and Protein Interactions, Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven-University of Leuven, Herestraat 49 
box 601, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium; Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State 
University School of Medicine, 540 E. Canfield Ave., Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Lipid Biochemistry and Protein Interactions, Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven-University of Leuven, Herestraat 49 
box 601, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 540 E. 
Canfield Ave., Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Lipid Biochemistry and Protein Interactions, Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven-University of Leuven, Herestraat 49 
box 601, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
marc.fransen@med.kuleuven.be.

The initiation and progression of many human diseases are mediated by a complex 
interplay of genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors. As all diseases 
begin with an imbalance at the cellular level, it is essential to understand how 
various types of molecular aberrations, metabolic changes, and environmental 
stressors function as switching points in essential communication networks. In 
recent years, peroxisomes have emerged as important intracellular hubs for 
redox-, lipid-, inflammatory-, and nucleic acid-mediated signaling pathways. In 
this review, we focus on how nature and nurture modulate peroxisome biogenesis 
and function in mammalian cells. First, we review emerging evidence that changes 
in peroxisome activity can be linked to the epigenetic regulation of cell 
function. Next, we outline how defects in peroxisome biogenesis may directly 
impact cellular pathways involved in the development of disease. In addition, we 
discuss how changes in the cellular microenvironment can modulate peroxisome 
biogenesis and function. Finally, given the importance of peroxisome function in 
multiple aspects of health, disease, and aging, we highlight the need for more 
research in this still understudied field.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.08.011
PMID: 26305119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]