---
reference_id: "PMID:3029191"
title: "Kaposi's sarcoma and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Postmortem findings in twenty-four cases."
authors:
- Lemlich G
- Schwam L
- Lebwohl M
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1016/s0190-9622(87)70043-7
keywords:
- "Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome/complications, mortality, pathology"
- Adult
- Cytomegalovirus Infections/etiology
- "Gastrointestinal Neoplasms/etiology, pathology"
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/etiology, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mycobacterium Infections/etiology
- "Pneumonia, Pneumocystis/etiology"
- "Sarcoma, Kaposi/etiology, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/etiology, pathology"
- Viscera
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kaposi's sarcoma and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Postmortem findings in twenty-four cases.
**Authors:** Lemlich G, Schwam L, Lebwohl M
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0190-9622(87)70043-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0190-9622(87)70043-7)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1987 Feb;16(2 Pt 1):319-25. doi:
10.1016/s0190-9622(87)70043-7.

Kaposi's sarcoma and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Postmortem findings in
twenty-four cases.

Lemlich G, Schwam L, Lebwohl M.

Autopsy results on twenty-four patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS) and Kaposi's sarcoma were reviewed. At postmortem, 29% of patients had
evidence of visceral Kaposi's sarcoma without skin lesions. The most common
sites for visceral involvement with Kaposi's sarcoma were as follows: lung
(37%), gastrointestinal tract (50%), and lymph nodes (50%). At the time of
death, only 25% of patients had evidence of cutaneous disease alone. The
patients survived up to 36 months after the diagnosis of AIDS was made according
to the specific diagnostic criteria established by the Centers for Disease
Control. Many of the patients had severe, disseminated infections during the
course of their AIDS illness. The most common infections diagnosed during the
patients' clinical courses and/or at autopsy were cytomegalovirus (75%),
candidiasis (50%), Mycobacterium avium intracellulare (50%), Pneumocystis
carinii pneumonia (50%), bacterial pneumonia (33%), and herpes simplex virus
(29%). Nearly 80% of the deaths were attributed to infection. In only one case
was overwhelming Kaposi's sarcoma determined to be the cause of death.

DOI: 10.1016/s0190-9622(87)70043-7
PMID: 3029191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
