---
reference_id: "PMID:24989722"
title: Smoking behaviour modifies IL23r-associated disease risk in patients with Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Doecke JD
- Simms LA
- Zhao ZZ
- Roberts RL
- Fowler EV
- Croft A
- Lin A
- Huang N
- Whiteman DC
- Florin TH
- Barclay ML
- Merriman TR
- Gearry RB
- Montgomery GW
- Radford-Smith GL
journal: J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/jgh.12674
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smoking behaviour modifies IL23r-associated disease risk in patients with Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Doecke JD, Simms LA, Zhao ZZ, Roberts RL, Fowler EV, Croft A, Lin A, Huang N, Whiteman DC, Florin TH, Barclay ML, Merriman TR, Gearry RB, Montgomery GW, Radford-Smith GL
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jgh.12674](https://doi.org/10.1111/jgh.12674)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 Feb;30(2):299-307. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12674.

Smoking behaviour modifies IL23r-associated disease risk in patients with 
Crohn's disease.

Doecke JD(1), Simms LA, Zhao ZZ, Roberts RL, Fowler EV, Croft A, Lin A, Huang N, 
Whiteman DC, Florin TH, Barclay ML, Merriman TR, Gearry RB, Montgomery GW, 
Radford-Smith GL.

Author information:
(1)CSIRO Computational Informatics/Australian E-Health Research Centre, Royal 
Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane, Victoria, Australia; Preventative 
Health Flagship, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The etiology of Crohn's disease (CD) implicates both genetic 
and environmental factors. Smoking behavior is one environmental risk factor to 
play a role in the development of CD. The study aimed to assess the contribution 
of the interleukin 23 receptor (IL23R) in determining disease susceptibility in 
two independent cohorts of CD, and to investigate the interactions between IL23R 
variants, smoking behavior, and CD-associated genes, NOD2 and ATG16L1.
METHODS: Ten IL23R single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in 675 
CD cases, and 1255 controls from Brisbane, Australia (dataset 1). Six of these 
SNPs were genotyped in 318 CD cases and 533 controls from Canterbury, New 
Zealand (dataset 2). Case-control analysis of genotype and allele frequencies, 
and haplotype analysis for all SNPs was conducted.
RESULTS: We demonstrate a strong increased CD risk for smokers in both datasets 
(odds ratio 3.77, 95% confidence interval 2.88-4.94), and an additive 
interaction between IL23R SNPs and cigarette smoking. Ileal involvement was a 
consistent marker of strong SNP-CD association (P ≤ 0.001), while the lowest 
minor allele frequencies for location were found in those with colonic CD (L2). 
Three haplotype blocks were identified across the 10 IL23R SNPs conferring 
different risk of CD. Haplotypes conferred no further risk of CD when compared 
with single SNP analyses.
CONCLUSION: IL23R gene variants determine CD susceptibility in the Australian 
and New Zealand population, particularly ileal CD. A strong additive interaction 
exists between IL23R SNPs and smoking behavior resulting in a dramatic increase 
in disease risk depending upon specific genetic background.

© 2014 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley 
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jgh.12674
PMID: 24989722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]