---
reference_id: "PMID:37195243"
title: Scalable High-Precision Trimming of Photonic Resonances by Polymer Exposure to Energetic Beams.
authors:
- Farmakidis N
- Yu H
- Lee JS
- Feldmann J
- Wang M
- He Y
- Aggarwal S
- Dong B
- Pernice WHP
- Bhaskaran H
journal: Nano Lett
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.3c00220
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scalable High-Precision Trimming of Photonic Resonances by Polymer Exposure to Energetic Beams.
**Authors:** Farmakidis N, Yu H, Lee JS, Feldmann J, Wang M, He Y, Aggarwal S, Dong B, Pernice WHP, Bhaskaran H
**Journal:** Nano Lett (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.nanolett.3c00220](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.3c00220)

## Content

1. Nano Lett. 2023 Jun 14;23(11):4800-4806. doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.3c00220.
Epub  2023 May 17.

Scalable High-Precision Trimming of Photonic Resonances by Polymer Exposure to 
Energetic Beams.

Farmakidis N(1), Yu H(1), Lee JS(1), Feldmann J(1), Wang M(1), He Y(1), Aggarwal 
S(1), Dong B(1), Pernice WHP(2), Bhaskaran H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Materials, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PH, 
U.K.
(2)Kirchhoff-Institute for Physics, Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany.

Erratum in
    Nano Lett. 2024 Oct 1. doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.4c03363.

Integrated photonic circuits (PICs) have seen an explosion in interest, through 
to commercialization in the past decade. Most PICs rely on sharp resonances to 
modulate, steer, and multiplex signals. However, the spectral characteristics of 
high-quality resonances are highly sensitive to small variations in fabrication 
and material constants, which limits their applicability. Active tuning 
mechanisms are commonly employed to account for such deviations, consuming 
energy and occupying valuable chip real estate. Readily employable, accurate, 
and highly scalable mechanisms to tailor the modal properties of photonic 
integrated circuits are urgently required. Here, we present an elegant and 
powerful solution to achieve this in a scalable manner during the semiconductor 
fabrication process using existing lithography tools: by exploiting the volume 
shrinkage exhibited by certain polymers to permanently modulate the waveguide's 
effective index. This technique enables broadband and lossless tuning with 
immediate applicability in wide-ranging applications in optical computing, 
telecommunications, and free-space optics.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.3c00220
PMCID: PMC10273466
PMID: 37195243

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.