---
reference_id: "PMID:32080199"
title: Ebola virus disease.
authors:
- Jacob ST
- Crozier I
- Fischer WA 2nd
- Hewlett A
- Kraft CS
- Vega MA
- Soka MJ
- Wahl V
- Griffiths A
- Bollinger L
- Kuhn JH
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0147-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola virus disease.
**Authors:** Jacob ST, Crozier I, Fischer WA 2nd, Hewlett A, Kraft CS, Vega MA, Soka MJ, Wahl V, Griffiths A, Bollinger L, Kuhn JH
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-020-0147-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-020-0147-3)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020 Feb 20;6(1):13. doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0147-3.

Ebola virus disease.

Jacob ST(1)(2), Crozier I(3), Fischer WA 2nd(4), Hewlett A(5), Kraft CS(6), Vega 
MA(7), Soka MJ(8), Wahl V(9), Griffiths A(10), Bollinger L(11), Kuhn JH(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, UK.
(2)Global Health Security Department, Infectious Diseases Institute, Makerere 
University, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Integrated Research Facility at Fort Detrick, Clinical Monitoring Research 
Program Directorate, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research supported 
by the National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Disease and Critical Care 
Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(5)Nebraska Biocontainment Unit, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(6)Microbiology Section, Emory Medical Laboratory, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Immunology & Infectious Diseases, Université 
Laval, Quebec City, QC, Canada.
(8)Partnership for Ebola Virus Disease Research in Liberia, Monrovia Medical 
Units ELWA-2 Hospital, Monrovia, Liberia.
(9)National Biodefense Analysis and Countermeasures Center, Fort Detrick, 
Frederick, MD, USA.
(10)Department of Microbiology and National Emerging Infectious Diseases 
Laboratories, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Integrated Research Facility at Fort Detrick, National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Fort Detrick, Frederick, 
MD, USA.
(12)Integrated Research Facility at Fort Detrick, National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Fort Detrick, Frederick, 
MD, USA. kuhnjens@mail.nih.gov.

Ebola virus disease (EVD) is a severe and frequently lethal disease caused by 
Ebola virus (EBOV). EVD outbreaks typically start from a single case of probable 
zoonotic transmission, followed by human-to-human transmission via direct 
contact or contact with infected bodily fluids or contaminated fomites. EVD has 
a high case-fatality rate; it is characterized by fever, gastrointestinal signs 
and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. Diagnosis requires a combination of 
case definition and laboratory tests, typically real-time reverse transcription 
PCR to detect viral RNA or rapid diagnostic tests based on immunoassays to 
detect EBOV antigens. Recent advances in medical countermeasure research 
resulted in the recent approval of an EBOV-targeted vaccine by European and US 
regulatory agencies. The results of a randomized clinical trial of 
investigational therapeutics for EVD demonstrated survival benefits from two 
monoclonal antibody products targeting the EBOV membrane glycoprotein. New 
observations emerging from the unprecedented 2013-2016 Western African EVD 
outbreak (the largest in history) and the ongoing EVD outbreak in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo have substantially improved the understanding of EVD and 
viral persistence in survivors of EVD, resulting in new strategies toward 
prevention of infection and optimization of clinical management, acute illness 
outcomes and attendance to the clinical care needs of patients.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-020-0147-3
PMCID: PMC7223853
PMID: 32080199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no competing interests.