---
reference_id: "PMID:36808684"
title: "Liver transplantation for alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency (A1ATD) using a heterozygous donor: Outcomes and review of the literature."
authors:
- Sood V
- Lee EJ
- Raghu V
- Reyes-Mugica M
- Salgado CM
- Squires J
- Mazariegos G
journal: Pediatr Transplant
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/petr.14488
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver transplantation for alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency (A1ATD) using a heterozygous donor: Outcomes and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Sood V, Lee EJ, Raghu V, Reyes-Mugica M, Salgado CM, Squires J, Mazariegos G
**Journal:** Pediatr Transplant (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/petr.14488](https://doi.org/10.1111/petr.14488)

## Content

1. Pediatr Transplant. 2023 Jun;27(4):e14488. doi: 10.1111/petr.14488. Epub 2023 
Feb 19.

Liver transplantation for alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency (A1ATD) using a 
heterozygous donor: Outcomes and review of the literature.

Sood V(1), Lee EJ(2), Raghu V(3), Reyes-Mugica M(4), Salgado CM(4), Squires 
J(3), Mazariegos G(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hepatology, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, 
New Dehli, India.
(2)Department of Surgery, Pediatric Transplant Center, Boston Children's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Pittsburgh Medical Center Pittsburgh Children's Hospital, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Division of Transplant Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center Pittsburgh Children's Hospital, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency (A1ATD) accounts for 21% of all 
pediatric liver transplants due to metabolic disease in the western world. Donor 
heterozygosity has been evaluated in adults but not to a recipient with A1ATD.
METHODS: The data of patient were retrospectively analyzed and a literature 
review performed.
RESULTS: We present a unique case of living related donation from a A1ATD 
heterozygote female to a child for decompensated cirrhosis due to A1ATD. In the 
immediate postoperative period, the child had low-alpha 1 antitrypsin levels, 
but these normalized by 3 months posttransplant. He is currently 19 months 
post-transplant with no evidence of recurrent disease.
CONCLUSION: Our case provides initial evidence that A1ATD heterozygote donors 
may be safely used for pediatric patients with A1ATD, thus expanding the donor 
pool.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/petr.14488
PMID: 36808684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]