---
reference_id: "PMID:25832989"
title: "The myths we believed in familial Mediterranean fever: what have we learned in the past years?"
authors:
- Ozen S
- Batu ED
journal: Semin Immunopathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00281-015-0484-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The myths we believed in familial Mediterranean fever: what have we learned in the past years?
**Authors:** Ozen S, Batu ED
**Journal:** Semin Immunopathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00281-015-0484-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00281-015-0484-6)

## Content

1. Semin Immunopathol. 2015 Jul;37(4):363-9. doi: 10.1007/s00281-015-0484-6. Epub
 2015 Apr 2.

The myths we believed in familial Mediterranean fever: what have we learned in 
the past years?

Ozen S(1), Batu ED.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, Hacettepe University 
Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, 06100, Turkey, sezaozen@hacettepe.edu.tr.

Familial Mediterranean fever is the most common monogenic periodic fever 
syndrome over the world especially in the eastern Mediterranean. It presents 
with recurrent and self-limited inflammatory attacks of fever and polyserositis 
along with high acute-phase reactants. The disease is associated with mutations 
in the MEFV gene that encodes pyrin, a component of inflammasome, which leads to 
exaggerated inflammatory response through uncontrolled production of interleukin 
1. With the identification of the gene associated with the disease, we believed 
that everything was solved and that this was an ordinary monogenic disease with 
autosomal recessive inheritance. However, through the breathtaking progress in 
the basic research field as well as the clinical care of these patients, we have 
understood that the picture for this monogenic disorder was more complicated 
than we had anticipated. In this review, we have discussed the myths we believed 
in familial Mediterranean fever and how they have evolved during the past years.

DOI: 10.1007/s00281-015-0484-6
PMID: 25832989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]