---
reference_id: "PMID:24968777"
title: "Dopaminergic function in relation to genes associated with risk for schizophrenia: translational mutant mouse models."
authors:
- Moran PM
- O'Tuathaigh CM
- Papaleo F
- Waddington JL
journal: Prog Brain Res
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63425-2.00004-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dopaminergic function in relation to genes associated with risk for schizophrenia: translational mutant mouse models.
**Authors:** Moran PM, O'Tuathaigh CM, Papaleo F, Waddington JL
**Journal:** Prog Brain Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-63425-2.00004-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63425-2.00004-0)

## Content

1. Prog Brain Res. 2014;211:79-112. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63425-2.00004-0.

Dopaminergic function in relation to genes associated with risk for 
schizophrenia: translational mutant mouse models.

Moran PM(1), O'Tuathaigh CM(2), Papaleo F(3), Waddington JL(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(2)School of Medicine, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Instituto Italiano di 
Tecnologia, Genova, Italy.
(4)Molecular & Cellular Therapeutics, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 
Dublin, Ireland. Electronic address: jwadding@rcsi.ie.

Mutant mice play an increasingly important role in understanding disease 
processes at multiple levels. In particular, they illuminate the impact of risk 
genes for disease on such processes. This article reviews recent advances in the 
application of mutant mice to study the intricacies of dopaminergic (DAergic) 
function in relation to the putative pathophysiology of psychotic illness, 
particularly schizophrenia, and antipsychotic drug action. It considers models 
for understanding the role(s) of risk genes, with a particular focus on DTNBP1 
and NRG1, their interactions with environmental factors, and with each other 
(epistasis). In overview, it considers new schemas for understanding psychotic 
illness that integrate DAergic pathophysiology with developmental, social, and 
cognitive processes, and how mutant mouse models can reflect and inform on such 
schemas.

© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63425-2.00004-0
PMID: 24968777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]