---
reference_id: "PMID:32304420"
title: "Heart transplantation in cardiac storage diseases: data on Fabry disease and cardiac amyloidosis."
authors:
- Di Nora C
- Livi U
journal: Curr Opin Organ Transplant
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/MOT.0000000000000756
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heart transplantation in cardiac storage diseases: data on Fabry disease and cardiac amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Di Nora C, Livi U
**Journal:** Curr Opin Organ Transplant (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOT.0000000000000756](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOT.0000000000000756)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Organ Transplant. 2020 Jun;25(3):211-217. doi: 
10.1097/MOT.0000000000000756.

Heart transplantation in cardiac storage diseases: data on Fabry disease and 
cardiac amyloidosis.

Di Nora C(1), Livi U(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Science.
(2)Department of Medical Area (DAME), University of Udine, Udine, Italy.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To deeply investigate one type of intracellular cardiac 
storage disease, the Fabry disease and one example of extracellular cardiac 
storage disease, the cardiac amyloidosis, with the aim to collect data about 
cardiac treatment at the end-stage level and the feasibility of heart 
transplantation (HTx) in this setting of patients.
RECENT FINDINGS: Some registry describes that Fabry disease and cardiac 
amyloidosis showed similar characteristics as hypertrophic cardiomyopathies; 
thus, their correct diagnosis is often missing or time consuming. A multiorgan 
approach is mandatory to recognize the main systemic findings of these diseases, 
involving also the kidneys, the brain, the autonomous system and the skin.
SUMMARY: The early diagnosis of these diseases is required to start as soon as 
possible the correct therapy for the patients affected. However, the end-stage 
heart failure is common and HTx could be offered to selected patients, 
especially if affected by light chain cardiac amyloidosis, to allow to perform 
the autologous stem cell transplantation after the cardiac transplant. 
Considering the Fabry disease patients, the enzyme recombinant therapy is also 
mandatory after HTx to avoid potential release of the systemic disease on the 
donor graft.

DOI: 10.1097/MOT.0000000000000756
PMID: 32304420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]