---
reference_id: "PMID:17942002"
title: Molecular evolution of the human SRPX2 gene that causes brain disorders of the Rolandic and Sylvian speech areas.
authors:
- Royer B
- Soares DC
- Barlow PN
- Bontrop RE
- Roll P
- Robaglia-Schlupp A
- Blancher A
- Levasseur A
- Cau P
- Pontarotti P
- Szepetowski P
journal: BMC Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-8-72
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Brain Diseases/genetics
- "Evolution, Molecular"
- Female
- Frontal Lobe
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins
- "Models, Molecular"
- Neoplasm Proteins
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Phylogeny
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Primates/genetics
- Protein Interaction Mapping
- Sequence Alignment
- Species Specificity
- Speech
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular evolution of the human SRPX2 gene that causes brain disorders of the Rolandic and Sylvian speech areas.
**Authors:** Royer B, Soares DC, Barlow PN, Bontrop RE, Roll P, Robaglia-Schlupp A, Blancher A, Levasseur A, Cau P, Pontarotti P, Szepetowski P
**Journal:** BMC Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2156-8-72](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2156-8-72)

## Content

1. BMC Genet. 2007 Oct 18;8:72. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-8-72.

Molecular evolution of the human SRPX2 gene that causes brain disorders of the
Rolandic and Sylvian speech areas.

Royer B(1), Soares DC, Barlow PN, Bontrop RE, Roll P, Robaglia-Schlupp A,
Blancher A, Levasseur A, Cau P, Pontarotti P, Szepetowski P.

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMR 491, Université de la Méditerranée, 13385 Marseille, Cedex 5,
France. barbara.royer@medecine.univ-mrs.fr

BACKGROUND: The X-linked SRPX2 gene encodes a Sushi Repeat-containing Protein of
unknown function and is mutated in two disorders of the Rolandic/Sylvian speech
areas. Since it is linked to defects in the functioning and the development of
brain areas for speech production, SRPX2 may thus have participated in the
adaptive organization of such brain regions. To address this issue, we have
examined the recent molecular evolution of the SRPX2 gene.
RESULTS: The complete coding region was sequenced in 24 human X chromosomes from
worldwide populations and in six representative nonhuman primate species. One
single, fixed amino acid change (R75K) has been specifically incorporated in
human SRPX2 since the human-chimpanzee split. The R75K substitution occurred in
the first sushi domain of SRPX2, only three amino acid residues away from a
previously reported disease-causing mutation (Y72S). Three-dimensional
structural modeling of the first sushi domain revealed that Y72 and K75 are both
situated in the hypervariable loop that is usually implicated in protein-protein
interactions. The side-chain of residue 75 is exposed, and is located within an
unusual and SRPX-specific protruding extension to the hypervariable loop. The
analysis of non-synonymous/synonymous substitution rate (Ka/Ks) ratio in
primates was performed in order to test for positive selection during recent
evolution. Using the branch models, the Ka/Ks ratio for the human branch was
significantly different (p = 0.027) from that of the other branches. In
contrast, the branch-site tests did not reach significance. Genetic analysis was
also performed by sequencing 9,908 kilobases (kb) of intronic SRPX2 sequences.
Despite low nucleotide diversity, neither the HKA (Hudson-Kreitman-Aguadé) test
nor the Tajima's D test reached significance.
CONCLUSION: The R75K human-specific variation occurred in an important
functional loop of the first sushi domain of SRPX2, indicating that this
evolutionary mutation may have functional importance; however, positive
selection for R75K could not be demonstrated. Nevertheless, our data contribute
to the first understanding of molecular evolution of the human SPRX2 gene.
Further experiments are now required in order to evaluate the possible
consequences of R75K on SRPX2 interactions and functioning.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2156-8-72
PMCID: PMC2151080
PMID: 17942002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
