---
reference_id: "PMID:27379969"
title: "T-cell immunology in sarcoidosis: Disruption of a delicate balance between helper and regulatory T-cells."
authors:
- Broos CE
- Hendriks RW
- Kool M
journal: Curr Opin Pulm Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000303
keywords:
- Autoimmune Diseases/immunology
- Humans
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/immunology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory/immunology"
- Th1 Cells/immunology
- Th17 Cells/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# T-cell immunology in sarcoidosis: Disruption of a delicate balance between helper and regulatory T-cells.
**Authors:** Broos CE, Hendriks RW, Kool M
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pulm Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCP.0000000000000303](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCP.0000000000000303)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2016 Sep;22(5):476-83. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000303.

T-cell immunology in sarcoidosis: Disruption of a delicate balance between 
helper and regulatory T-cells.

Broos CE(1), Hendriks RW, Kool M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Although the aetiology of sarcoidosis is not yet completely 
understood, immunological changes within the T-cell compartment are 
characteristic for an exaggerated antigen-driven immune response. In this 
review, we describe the most recent findings on T-cell subset responses and 
regulation in sarcoidosis. We discuss how future immunological research can 
advance the field to unravel pathobiological mechanisms of this intriguingly 
complex disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: Research into the field of T-cell plasticity has recently 
challenged the long-held T helper type 1 (Th1) paradigm in sarcoidosis and 
striking parallels with autoimmune disorders and common variable 
immunodeficiency were recognized. For instance, it was demonstrated that 
Th17.1-cells rather than Th1-cells are responsible for the exaggerated IFN-γ 
production in pulmonary sarcoidosis. Furthermore, impaired regulatory T-cell 
function and alterations within the expression of co-inhibitory receptors that 
control T-cell responses, such as PD-1, CTLA-4 and BTNL2, raise new questions 
regarding T-cell regulation in pulmonary sarcoidosis.
SUMMARY: It becomes increasingly clear that Th17(.1)-cells and regulatory 
T-cells are key players in sarcoidosis T-cell immunology. New findings on 
plasticity and co-inhibitory receptor expression by these subsets help build a 
more comprehensive model for T-cell regulation in sarcoidosis and will finally 
shed light on the potential of new treatment modalities.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000303
PMID: 27379969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]