---
reference_id: "PMID:28900784"
title: "Liver involvement in urea cycle disorders: a review of the literature."
authors:
- Bigot A
- Tchan MC
- Thoreau B
- Blasco H
- Maillot F
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-017-0088-5
keywords:
- Animals
- Carcinogenesis/pathology
- Humans
- Liver/pathology
- Liver Diseases/pathology
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver involvement in urea cycle disorders: a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Bigot A, Tchan MC, Thoreau B, Blasco H, Maillot F
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-017-0088-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-017-0088-5)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2017 Nov;40(6):757-769. doi: 10.1007/s10545-017-0088-5.
Epub 2017 Sep 12.

Liver involvement in urea cycle disorders: a review of the literature.

Bigot A(1)(2)(3)(4), Tchan MC(5), Thoreau B(6)(7)(8)(9), Blasco H(7)(8)(10)(11),
Maillot F(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)CHRU de Tours, service médecine interne, Tours, France.
adrien.bigot@univ-tours.fr.
(2)CHRU de Tours, centre de référence des maladies héréditaires du métabolisme,
Tours, France. adrien.bigot@univ-tours.fr.
(3)Department of Genetic Medicine, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
adrien.bigot@univ-tours.fr.
(4)Service de Médecine Interne, Hôpital Bretonneau, 2, boulevard Tonnelle,
37044, Tours, France. adrien.bigot@univ-tours.fr.
(5)Department of Genetic Medicine, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(6)CHRU de Tours, service médecine interne, Tours, France.
(7)CHRU de Tours, centre de référence des maladies héréditaires du métabolisme,
Tours, France.
(8)Université François Rabelais, Tours, France.
(9)UMR INSERM U 1069, Tours, France.
(10)CHRU de Tours, service de biochimie-biologie moléculaire, Tours, France.
(11)UMR INSERM U930, 37000, Tours, France.

Urea cycle disorders (UCDs) are inborn errors of metabolism of the nitrogen
detoxification pathway and encompass six principal enzymatic deficiencies. The
aging of UCD patients leads to a better knowledge of the long-term natural
history of the condition and to the reporting of previously unnoticed
manifestations. Despite historical evidence of liver involvement in UCDs, little
attention has been paid to this organ until recently. Hence, we reviewed the
available scientific evidence on acute and chronic liver dysfunction and liver
carcinogenesis in UCDs and discuss their pathophysiology. Overall, liver
involvement, such as acute liver failure or steatotic-like disease, which may
evolve toward cirrhosis, has been reported in all six main UCDs. Excessive
glycogen storage is also a prominent histologic feature, and hypoglycemia has
been reported in citrin deficiency. Hepatocarcinomas seem frequent in some UCDs,
such as in citrin deficiency, and can sometimes occur in non-cirrhotic patients.
UCDs may differ in liver involvement according to the enzymatic deficiency.
Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency may be associated more with acute liver
failure and argininosuccinic aciduria with chronic liver failure and cirrhosis.
Direct toxicity of metabolites, downstream metabolic deficiencies, impaired
tricarboxylic acid cycle, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, energy
deficit, and putative toxicity of therapies combine in various ways to cause the
different liver diseases reported.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-017-0088-5
PMID: 28900784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
