---
reference_id: "PMID:15727636"
title: Circulating clonal CLA(+) and CD4(+) T cells in Sezary syndrome express the skin-homing chemokine receptors CCR4 and CCR10 as well as the lymph node-homing chemokine receptor CCR7.
authors:
- Sokolowska-Wojdylo M
- Wenzel J
- Gaffal E
- Lenz J
- Speuser P
- Erdmann S
- Abuzahra F
- Bowman E
- Roszkiewicz J
- Bieber T
- Tüting T
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2004.06325.x
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antigens, Differentiation, T-Lymphocyte"
- "Antigens, Neoplasm"
- CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Complementarity Determining Regions/genetics
- Female
- Flow Cytometry/methods
- Humans
- Lymph Nodes/immunology
- Male
- Membrane Glycoproteins/blood
- Middle Aged
- Mycosis Fungoides/immunology
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell, alpha-beta/genetics"
- "Receptors, CCR10"
- "Receptors, CCR4"
- "Receptors, CCR7"
- "Receptors, Chemokine/blood"
- Sezary Syndrome/immunology
- Skin Neoplasms/immunology
- T-Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Circulating clonal CLA(+) and CD4(+) T cells in Sezary syndrome express the skin-homing chemokine receptors CCR4 and CCR10 as well as the lymph node-homing chemokine receptor CCR7.
**Authors:** Sokolowska-Wojdylo M, Wenzel J, Gaffal E, Lenz J, Speuser P, Erdmann S, Abuzahra F, Bowman E, Roszkiewicz J, Bieber T, Tüting T
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.2004.06325.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.2004.06325.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2005 Feb;152(2):258-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2004.06325.x.

Circulating clonal CLA(+) and CD4(+) T cells in Sezary syndrome express the
skin-homing chemokine receptors CCR4 and CCR10 as well as the lymph node-homing
chemokine receptor CCR7.

Sokolowska-Wojdylo M(1), Wenzel J, Gaffal E, Lenz J, Speuser P, Erdmann S,
Abuzahra F, Bowman E, Roszkiewicz J, Bieber T, Tüting T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Dermatology, Department of Dermatology, Rheinische
Friedrich Wilhelm-University, Sigmund Freud Str. 25, 53105 Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Adhesion molecules and chemokine receptors are involved in
tissue-specific homing of T cells to the skin and play an important role in the
pathophysiology of cutaneous lymphoma. It has recently been reported that the
chemokine CCL27 expressed by keratinocytes attracts lymphocytes bearing the
chemokine receptor CCR10.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the expression of CCR4, CCR7 and CCR10 on skin-homing
CLA(+) and CD4(+) T cells in the peripheral blood of patients with Sezary
syndrome (SS), a rare leukaemic variant of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
METHODS: Lymphocytes from five patients with SS, six patients with mycosis
fungoides and four healthy volunteers were isolated and analysed using flow
cytometry. Additionally, the T-cell receptor (TCR)-Vbeta CDR3 regions were
cloned and sequenced in two patients.
RESULTS: We found that CCR4 is expressed on almost all CLA(+) and CD4(+) memory
T cells. Using monoclonal antibodies specific for single TCR-Vbeta chains we
identified malignant T cells in four patients with SS. Importantly, we found
that most but not all malignant Sezary cells expressed the skin-homing chemokine
receptor CCR10. Additionally, we found that a significant proportion of these
cells also expressed the lymph node-homing chemokine receptor CCR7.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the concept that chemokine receptors play an
important role in the pathophysiology of SS and suggest that the malignant clone
may represent an expansion of skin-homing cutaneous 'central' memory T cells in
the peripheral blood of these patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2004.06325.x
PMID: 15727636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
