---
reference_id: "PMID:34867780"
title: Identification of Potential Genes in Pathogenesis and Diagnostic Value Analysis of Partial Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome Using Bioinformatics Analysis.
authors:
- Peng Y
- Zhu H
- Han B
- Xu Y
- Liu X
- Song H
- Qiao J
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2021.731107
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Androgen-Insensitivity Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- Computational Biology/methods
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Gene Regulatory Networks
- Humans
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Prognosis
- Protein Interaction Maps
- Transcriptome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Potential Genes in Pathogenesis and Diagnostic Value Analysis of Partial Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome Using Bioinformatics Analysis.
**Authors:** Peng Y, Zhu H, Han B, Xu Y, Liu X, Song H, Qiao J
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2021.731107](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2021.731107)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Nov 18;12:731107. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2021.731107. eCollection 2021.

Identification of Potential Genes in Pathogenesis and Diagnostic Value Analysis
of Partial Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome Using Bioinformatics Analysis.

Peng Y(1), Zhu H(1), Han B(1), Xu Y(1), Liu X(1), Song H(2), Qiao J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Research Centre for Clinical Medicine, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) is a rare X-linked genetic
disease and one of the causes of 46,XY disorder of sexual development. The
unstraightforward diagnosis of AIS and the gender assignment dilemma still make
a plague for this disorder due to the overlapping clinical phenotypes.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of partial AIS (PAIS)
patients and healthy controls were separated, and RNA-seq was performed to
investigate transcriptome variance. Then, tissue-specific gene expression,
functional enrichment, and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analyses
were performed; and the key modules were identified. Finally, the RNA expression
of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) of interest was validated by
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: In our dataset, a total of 725 DEGs were captured, with functionally
enriched reproduction and immune-related pathways and Gene Ontology (GO)
functions. The most highly specific systems centered on hematologic/immune and
reproductive/endocrine systems. We finally filtered out CCR1, PPBP, PF4, CLU,
KMT2D, GP6, and SPARC by the key gene clusters of the PPI network and manual
screening of tissue-specific gene expression. These genes provide novel insight
into the pathogenesis of AIS in the immune system or metabolism and bring
forward possible molecular markers for clinical screening. The qRT-PCR results
showed a consistent trend in the expression levels of related genes between PAIS
patients and healthy controls.
CONCLUSION: The present study sheds light on the molecular mechanisms underlying
the pathogenesis and progression of AIS, providing potential targets for
diagnosis and future investigation.

Copyright © 2021 Peng, Zhu, Han, Xu, Liu, Song and Qiao.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.731107
PMCID: PMC8637961
PMID: 34867780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
