---
reference_id: "PMID:25062860"
title: Optimising mobility outcome measures in Huntington's disease.
authors:
- Busse M
- Quinn L
- Khalil H
- McEwan K
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3233/JHD-140091
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optimising mobility outcome measures in Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Busse M, Quinn L, Khalil H, McEwan K
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JHD-140091](https://doi.org/10.3233/JHD-140091)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2014;3(2):175-88. doi: 10.3233/JHD-140091.

Optimising mobility outcome measures in Huntington's disease.

Busse M(1), Quinn L(1), Khalil H(2), McEwan K(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Healthcare Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, 
Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan.
(3)Institute of Translation, Innovation, Methodology & Engagement Cardiff 
University School of Medicine, Cardiff, UK.

BACKGROUND: Many of the performance-based mobility measures that are currently 
used in Huntington's disease (HD) were developed for assessment in other 
neurological conditions such as stroke.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to assess the individual item-response of commonly used 
performance-based mobility measures, with a view to optimizing the scales for 
specific application in Huntington's Disease (HD).
METHOD: Data from a larger multicentre, observational study were used. 
Seventy-five people with HD (11 pre-manifest & 64 manifest) were assessed on the 
Six-Minute Walk Test, 10-Meter Walk Test, Timed "Up & Go" Test (TUG), Berg 
Balance Scale (BBS), Physical Performance Test (PPT), Four Square Step Test, and 
Tinetti Mobility Test (TMT). The Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale 
(UHDRS) Total Motor Score, Functional Assessment Scale and Total Functional 
Capacity scores were recorded, alongside cognitive measures. Standard regression 
analysis was used to assess predictive validity. Individual item responses were 
investigated using a sequence of approaches to allow for gradual removal of 
items and the subsequent creation of shortened versions. Psychometric properties 
(reliability and discriminant ability) of the shortened scales were assessed.
RESULTS: TUG (β 0.46, CI 0.20-3.47), BBS (β -0.35, CI -2.10-0.14), and TMT (β 
-0.45, CI -3.14-0.64) were good disease-specific mobility measures. PPT was the 
best measure of functional performance (β 0.42, CI 0.00-0.43 for TFC & β 0.57 CI 
0.15-0.81 for FAS). Shortened versions of BBS and TMT were developed based on 
item analysis. The resultant BBS and TMT shortened scales were reliable for use 
in manifest HD. ROC analysis showed that shortened scales were able to 
discriminate between manifest and pre-manifest disease states.
DISCUSSION: Our data suggests that the PPT is appropriate as a general measure 
of function in individuals with HD, and we have identified shortened versions of 
the BBS and TMT that measure the unique gait and balance impairments in HD. 
These scales, alongside the TUG, may therefore be important measures to consider 
in future clinical trials.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-140091
PMID: 25062860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]