---
reference_id: "PMID:37547106"
title: Clinical and genetic characteristics of 36 children with Joubert syndrome.
authors:
- Dong Y
- Zhang K
- Yao H
- Jia T
- Wang J
- Zhu D
- Xu F
- Cheng M
- Zhao S
- Shi X
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1102639
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic characteristics of 36 children with Joubert syndrome.
**Authors:** Dong Y, Zhang K, Yao H, Jia T, Wang J, Zhu D, Xu F, Cheng M, Zhao S, Shi X
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2023.1102639](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2023.1102639)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2023 Jul 21;11:1102639. doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1102639. 
eCollection 2023.

Clinical and genetic characteristics of 36 children with Joubert syndrome.

Dong Y(1)(2), Zhang K(1)(3), Yao H(1)(3), Jia T(1), Wang J(4), Zhu D(4), Xu 
F(1), Cheng M(5), Zhao S(1), Shi X(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Henan Key Laboratory of Child Brain Injury, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(3)Academy of Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(4)Department of Children Rehabilitation, Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(5)Department of Radiology, Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China.
(6)Department of Pediatric Development and Behavior, Third Affiliated Hospital 
of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Joubert syndrome (JBTS, OMIM # 213300) is a group of 
ciliopathies characterized by mid-hindbrain malformation, developmental delay, 
hypotonia, oculomotor apraxia, and breathing abnormalities. Molar tooth sign in 
brain imaging is the hallmark for diagnosing JBTS. It is a clinically and 
genetically heterogeneous disorder involving mutations in more than 40 
ciliopathy-related genes. However, long-term follow-up data are scarce, and 
further research is needed to determine the abundant phenotypes and genetics of 
this disorder. The study aimed to summarize clinical manifestations, particular 
appearance on cranial imaging, genetic data, and prognostic features of patients 
with JBTS.
METHODS: A retrospective case review of 36 cases of JBTS from May 1986 to 
December 2021 was performed. Clinical data of JBTS patients with development 
retardation and molar tooth sign on cranial imaging as the main features were 
analyzed. Genetic testing was performed according to consent obtained from 
patients and their families. The Gesell Developmental Scale was used to evaluate 
the intelligence level before and after treatment. The children were divided 
into a purely neurological JBTS (pure JBTS) group and JBTS with multi-organ 
system involvement group and then followed up every 3-6 months.
RESULTS: We enrolled 18 males and 18 females. Thirty-four (94.44%) cases had 
developmental delay, one patient (2.78%) had strabismus, and one patient (2.78%) 
had intermittent dizziness. There was one case co-morbid with Lesch-Nyhan 
syndrome. Three-quarters of cases had one or more other organ or system 
involvement, with a greater predilection for vision and hearing impairment. JBTS 
could also involve the skin. Thirty-one cases (86.11%) showed a typical molar 
tooth sign, and five cases showed a bat wing sign on cranial imaging. Abnormal 
video electroencephalogram (VEEG) result was obtained in 7.69% of cases. We 
found six JBTS-related novel gene loci variants: CPLANE1: c.4189 + 1G > A, 
c.3101T > C(p.Ile1034Thr), c.3733T > C (p.Cys1245Arg), c.4080G > A(p.Lys1360=); 
RPGRIP1l: c.1351-11A > G; CEP120: c.214 C > T(p.Arg72Cys). The CHD7 gene may be 
potentially related to the occurrence of JBTS. Analysis showed that the 
prognosis of pure JBTS was better than that of JBTS with neurological and 
non-neurological involvement after the formal rehabilitation treatment 
(P < 0.05). Of the three children with seizures, two cases had epilepsy with a 
poor prognosis, and another case had breath-holding spells.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that early cranial imaging is helpful for the 
etiological diagnosis of children with unexplained developmental delay and 
multiple malformations. Patients with JBTS may have coexisting skin 
abnormalities. The novel gene loci of CPLANE1, RPGRIP1l, and CEP120 were 
associated with JBTS in our study and provided significant information to enrich 
the related genetic data. Future works investigating several aspects of the 
association between CHD7 gene and JBTS merit further investigation. The 
prognosis of children with pure JBTS is better than that of children with JBTS 
with non-neurological involvement.

© 2023 Dong, Zhang, Yao, Jia, Wang, Zhu, Xu, Cheng, Zhao and Shi.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2023.1102639
PMCID: PMC10401045
PMID: 37547106

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.