---
reference_id: "PMID:17504900"
title: "11p15 imprinting center region 1 loss of methylation is a common and specific cause of typical Russell-Silver syndrome: clinical scoring system and epigenetic-phenotypic correlations."
authors:
- Netchine I
- Rossignol S
- Dufourg MN
- Azzi S
- Rousseau A
- Perin L
- Houang M
- Steunou V
- Esteva B
- Thibaud N
- Demay MC
- Danton F
- Petriczko E
- Bertrand AM
- Heinrichs C
- Carel JC
- Loeuille GA
- Pinto G
- Jacquemont ML
- Gicquel C
- Cabrol S
- Le Bouc Y
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-0354
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Aging/metabolism
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7/genetics"
- DNA/genetics
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- Fetal Growth Retardation/genetics
- Genomic Imprinting
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Infant, Small for Gestational Age/physiology"
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor II/metabolism
- Male
- Methylation
- "Mutation/genetics, physiology"
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 11p15 imprinting center region 1 loss of methylation is a common and specific cause of typical Russell-Silver syndrome: clinical scoring system and epigenetic-phenotypic correlations.
**Authors:** Netchine I, Rossignol S, Dufourg MN, Azzi S, Rousseau A, Perin L, Houang M, Steunou V, Esteva B, Thibaud N, Demay MC, Danton F, Petriczko E, Bertrand AM, Heinrichs C, Carel JC, Loeuille GA, Pinto G, Jacquemont ML, Gicquel C, Cabrol S, Le Bouc Y
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2007-0354](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2007-0354)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Aug;92(8):3148-54. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-0354.
Epub  2007 May 15.

11p15 imprinting center region 1 loss of methylation is a common and specific 
cause of typical Russell-Silver syndrome: clinical scoring system and 
epigenetic-phenotypic correlations.

Netchine I(1), Rossignol S, Dufourg MN, Azzi S, Rousseau A, Perin L, Houang M, 
Steunou V, Esteva B, Thibaud N, Demay MC, Danton F, Petriczko E, Bertrand AM, 
Heinrichs C, Carel JC, Loeuille GA, Pinto G, Jacquemont ML, Gicquel C, Cabrol S, 
Le Bouc Y.

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Explorations Fonctionnelles Endocriniennes, Paris 
75012, France. irene.netchine@trs.aphp.fr

Erratum in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Nov;92(11):4305.

CONTEXT: Russell-Silver syndrome (RSS), characterized by intrauterine and 
postnatal growth retardation, dysmorphic features, and frequent body asymmetry, 
spares cranial growth. Maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 7 (mUPD7) is 
found in 5-10% of cases. We identified loss of methylation (LOM) of 11p15 
Imprinting Center Region 1 (ICR1) domain (including IGF-II) as a mechanism 
leading to RSS.
OBJECTIVE: The aim was to screen for 11p15 epimutation and mUPD7 in RSS and 
non-RSS small-for-gestational-age (SGA) patients and identify 
epigenetic-phenotypic correlations. STUDIED POPULATION AND METHODS: A total of 
127 SGA patients were analyzed. Clinical diagnosis of RSS was established when 
the criterion of being SGA was associated with at least three of five criteria: 
postnatal growth retardation, relative macrocephaly, prominent forehead, body 
asymmetry, and feeding difficulties. Serum IGF-II was evaluated for 82 patients.
RESULTS: Of the 127 SGA patients, 58 were diagnosed with RSS; 37 of these 
(63.8%) displayed partial LOM of the 11p15 ICR1 domain, and three (5.2%) had 
mUPD7. No molecular abnormalities were found in the non-RSS SGA group (n = 69). 
Birth weight, birth length, and postnatal body mass index (BMI) were lower in 
the abnormal 11p15 RSS group (ab-ICR1-RSS) than in the normal 11p15 RSS group 
[-3.4 vs.-2.6 SD score (SDS), -4.4 vs.-3.4 SDS, and -2.5 vs.-1.6 SDS, 
respectively; P < 0.05]. Among RSS patients, prominent forehead, relative 
macrocephaly, body asymmetry, and low BMI were significantly associated with 
ICR1 LOM. All ab-ICR1-RSS patients had at least four of five criteria of the 
scoring system. Postnatal IGF-II levels were within normal values.
CONCLUSION: The 11p15 ICR1 epimutation is a major, specific cause of RSS 
exhibiting failure to thrive. We propose a clinical scoring system (including a 
BMI < -2 SDS), highly predictive of 11p15 ICR1 LOM, for the diagnosis of RSS.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2007-0354
PMID: 17504900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]