---
reference_id: "PMID:7493307"
title: Post-hepatitis syndrome revisited.
authors:
- Berelowitz GJ
- Burgess AP
- Thanabalasingham T
- Murray-Lyon IM
- Wright DJ
journal: J Viral Hepat
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.1995.tb00018.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Post-hepatitis syndrome revisited.
**Authors:** Berelowitz GJ, Burgess AP, Thanabalasingham T, Murray-Lyon IM, Wright DJ
**Journal:** J Viral Hepat (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2893.1995.tb00018.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2893.1995.tb00018.x)

## Content

1. J Viral Hepat. 1995;2(3):133-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.1995.tb00018.x.

Post-hepatitis syndrome revisited.

Berelowitz GJ(1), Burgess AP, Thanabalasingham T, Murray-Lyon IM, Wright DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Charing Cross Hospital, London, UK.

To examine the role of acute hepatitis A and B infection in the aetiology of 
chronic fatigue syndrome and psychiatric morbidity we studied 40 patients with 
acute viral hepatitis A or B consecutively admitted to an infectious diseases 
unit and studied at least 6 months after recovery. Liver function tests (LFT) 
had returned to normal in each case. Forty-seven patients with other infectious 
diseases, of which 12 were presumed viral, admitted immediately after each 
hepatitis patient during the same period acted as controls. The main outcome 
measures were scores on a fatigue and muscle pain questionnaire, general health 
questionnaire (GHQ-12) and supplementary questions. The hepatitis cases scored 
significantly higher fatigue scores, GHQ-12 scores and muscle pain scores. 
Length of time since recovery from illness, age and sex were not confounding 
factors. Hepatitis cases were also less energetic, had greater weight change, 
had altered alcohol tolerance, had less exercise tolerance and felt less fit 
than the control group and compared with their premorbid state. Hence fatigue is 
more common after recovery in patients hospitalized for hepatitis A and B up to 
30 months post-infection compared with matched controls hospitalized for other 
infectious diseases. Hepatitis A and B infection is a risk factor for 
post-infection fatigue, intermittent fatigue, as well as for psychiatric 
morbidity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.1995.tb00018.x
PMID: 7493307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]