---
reference_id: "PMID:21376430"
title: "[Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome related to abnormalities within the complement system]."
authors:
- Frémeaux-Bacchi V
- Fakhouri F
- Roumenina L
- Dragon-Durey MA
- Loirat C
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2009.09.039
keywords:
- Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome
- Complement C3/genetics
- Complement Factor B/genetics
- Complement Factor H/genetics
- Complement System Proteins/genetics
- Fibrinogen/genetics
- "Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- Immunologic Factors/genetics
- Membrane Cofactor Protein/genetics
- Mutation
- Plasma Exchange
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome related to abnormalities within the complement system].
**Authors:** Frémeaux-Bacchi V, Fakhouri F, Roumenina L, Dragon-Durey MA, Loirat C
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.revmed.2009.09.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revmed.2009.09.039)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2011 Apr;32(4):232-40. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2009.09.039.
Epub  2011 Mar 3.

[Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome related to abnormalities within the
complement system].

[Article in French]

Frémeaux-Bacchi V(1), Fakhouri F, Roumenina L, Dragon-Durey MA, Loirat C.

Author information:
(1)Service d'immunologie biologique, hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou,
Assistance publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 20-40, rue Leblanc, 75908 Paris cedex 15,
France. veronique.fremeaux-bacchi@egp.aphp.fr

Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) is a thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) disorder
characterised by the association of haemolytic anaemia, thrombocytopenia and
acute renal failure. Atypical forms (non-shigatoxin related forms) may be
familial or sporadic, frequently with relapses and most of them lead to end
stage renal failure. During the last years, different groups have demonstrated
genetic predisposition to atypical HUS (aHUS) involving five genes encoding for
complement components which play a role in the activation or control of the
alternative pathway: encoding factor H (CFH), accounting for 30% of aHUS; CD46
(encoding membrane cofactor protein [MCP]) accounting for approximately 10% of
aHUS; CFI (encoding factor I) accounting for an estimated 5-15% of patients; C3
(encoding C3) accounting for approximately 10% of aHUS; and rarely CFB (encoding
factor B). Predisposition to aHUS is inherited with incomplete penetrance. It is
admitted that mutations confer a predisposition to develop aHUS rather than
directly causing the disease and that a second event (genetic or environmental)
is required for disease manifestation. HUS onset follows a triggering event in
most cases (frequently banal seasonal infection and pregnancy). Uncontrolled C3
convertase leads to increased deposition of C3b on vascular endothelium and
participates to the prothrombotic state. The phenotype of aHUS is variable
ranging from mild forms, with complete recovery of renal function to severe
forms with end stage renal disease within the first year after the onset.
Overall, the outcome is severe with a mortality rate of 10% and with more than
60% of patients on dialysis. The most severe prognosis was in the CFH mutation
group. There is a high risk of recurrence of the disease after renal
transplantation in patients with mutations in CFH, CFI, CFB and C3. Plasma
therapy may allow complete haematological remission but frequently with
persistent renal damage. Some patients are plasma resistant and some are plasma
dependent. The recent progress in the determination of the susceptibility
factors for aHUS, have allowed to propose new diagnostic tests including a
molecular genetic testing and may permit to consider some new specific
treatments in this disease (human plasma-derived CFH or complement inhibitors).

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2009.09.039
PMID: 21376430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
