---
reference_id: "PMID:36831419"
title: "Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors: Latest Concepts in Disease Pathogenesis and Clinical Management."
authors:
- Yao C
- Zhou H
- Dong Y
- Alhaskawi A
- Hasan Abdullah Ezzi S
- Wang Z
- Lai J
- Goutham Kota V
- Hasan Abdulla Hasan Abdulla M
- Lu H
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers15041077
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors: Latest Concepts in Disease Pathogenesis and Clinical Management.
**Authors:** Yao C, Zhou H, Dong Y, Alhaskawi A, Hasan Abdullah Ezzi S, Wang Z, Lai J, Goutham Kota V, Hasan Abdulla Hasan Abdulla M, Lu H
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers15041077](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15041077)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Feb 8;15(4):1077. doi: 10.3390/cancers15041077.

Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors: Latest Concepts in Disease 
Pathogenesis and Clinical Management.

Yao C(1)(2), Zhou H(1), Dong Y(1), Alhaskawi A(1), Hasan Abdullah Ezzi S(3)(4), 
Wang Z(1)(2), Lai J(1)(2), Goutham Kota V(3), Hasan Abdulla Hasan Abdulla M(3), 
Lu H(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University, #79 Qingchun Road, Hangzhou 310003, China.
(2)School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, #866 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou 
310058, China.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University, #79 Qingchun Road, Hangzhou 310003, China.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
#138 Tongzipo Road, Changsha 410013, China.
(5)Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Center of Future Digital 
Healthcare, Zhejiang University, #866 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou 310058, China.

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) is an aggressive soft tissue 
sarcoma with limited therapeutic options and a poor prognosis. Although 
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and radiation exposure have been identified as 
risk factors for MPNST, the genetic and molecular mechanisms underlying MPNST 
pathogenesis have only lately been roughly elucidated. Plexiform neurofibroma 
(PN) and atypical neurofibromatous neoplasm of unknown biological potential 
(ANNUBP) are novel concepts of MPNST precancerous lesions, which revealed 
sequential mutations in MPNST development. This review summarized the current 
understanding of MPNST and the latest consensus from its diagnosis to treatment, 
with highlights on molecular biomarkers and targeted therapies. Additionally, we 
discussed the current challenges and prospects for MPNST management.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15041077
PMCID: PMC9954030
PMID: 36831419

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that they have no competing 
interest.