---
reference_id: "PMID:7685145"
title: Peroxisomal disorders. Neurodevelopmental and biochemical aspects.
authors:
- Brown FR 3rd
- Voigt R
- Singh AK
- Singh I
journal: Am J Dis Child
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1001/archpedi.1993.02160300023015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisomal disorders. Neurodevelopmental and biochemical aspects.
**Authors:** Brown FR 3rd, Voigt R, Singh AK, Singh I
**Journal:** Am J Dis Child (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archpedi.1993.02160300023015](https://doi.org/10.1001/archpedi.1993.02160300023015)

## Content

1. Am J Dis Child. 1993 Jun;147(6):617-26. doi: 
10.1001/archpedi.1993.02160300023015.

Peroxisomal disorders. Neurodevelopmental and biochemical aspects.

Brown FR 3rd(1), Voigt R, Singh AK, Singh I.

Author information:
(1)Meyer Center for Developmental Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston 
77030.

The peroxisomal disorders represent a group of inherited metabolic disorders 
that derive from defects of peroxisomal biogenesis and/or from dysfunction of 
single or multiple peroxisomal enzymes. Because peroxisomes are involved in the 
metabolism of lipids critical to the functioning of the nervous system, many of 
the peroxisomal disorders manifest with significant degrees of progressive 
psychomotor dysfunction. These disorders should be considered in the 
differential diagnosis of the infant with hypotonia and psychomotor delay 
(especially if accompanied by facial dysmorphisms, hepatomegaly, cataracts 
and/or retinitis, calcific stippling, short limbs, or combinations of these 
features), in the school-aged child with progressive neurologic dysfunction, and 
in adults with slowly progressive motor dysfunction. Current knowledge of 
peroxisomal biochemical and enzymatic processes permits precise identification 
of particular disorders within the peroxisomal disorder grouping. An effort 
should be made to identify the specific peroxisomal disorder to provide a 
precise explanation for neurodevelopmental deficits, to potentially prevent 
recurrence through genetic counseling, and to provide appropriate therapies when 
available.

DOI: 10.1001/archpedi.1993.02160300023015
PMID: 7685145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]