---
reference_id: "PMID:36117004"
title: Equity of the Meningitis B vaccination programme in England, 2016-2018.
authors:
- Tiley KS
- White JM
- Andrews N
- Tessier E
- Edelstein M
journal: Vaccine
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.09.023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Equity of the Meningitis B vaccination programme in England, 2016-2018.
**Authors:** Tiley KS, White JM, Andrews N, Tessier E, Edelstein M
**Journal:** Vaccine (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.09.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.09.023)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2022 Oct 6;40(42):6125-6132. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.09.023. Epub
 2022 Sep 16.

Equity of the Meningitis B vaccination programme in England, 2016-2018.

Tiley KS(1), White JM(2), Andrews N(3), Tessier E(4), Edelstein M(5).

Author information:
(1)Public Health England (now UK Health Security Agency), 61 Colindale Avenue, 
London NW9 5EQ, UK. Electronic address: karen.tiley@paediatrics.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Public Health England (now UK Health Security Agency), 61 Colindale Avenue, 
London NW9 5EQ, UK. Electronic address: joannemshivji@gmail.com.
(3)Public Health England (now UK Health Security Agency), 61 Colindale Avenue, 
London NW9 5EQ, UK. Electronic address: Nick.Andrews@ukhsa.gov.uk.
(4)Public Health England (now UK Health Security Agency), 61 Colindale Avenue, 
London NW9 5EQ, UK. Electronic address: Elise.Tessier@ukhsa.gov.uk.
(5)Public Health England (now UK Health Security Agency), 61 Colindale Avenue, 
London NW9 5EQ, UK. Electronic address: michael.edelstein@biu.ac.il.

In England, the Meningitis B (MenB) vaccine is scheduled at eight and 16 weeks 
with a booster dose at one year of age and protects children against invasive 
bacterial meningococcal disease caused by Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B. 
Coverage of the second dose of MenB vaccine at 12 months was >92% in 2017/18, 
but this may mask inequalities in coverage in particular population groups. MenB 
vaccination records for children aged six, 12 and 18 months of age from December 
2016 to May 2018 were routinely extracted from GP patient management systems 
every month in England via a web-based platform for national monitoring of 
vaccine coverage. We determined the association between ethnicity, deprivation 
and area of residence, vaccine coverage and drop-out rates (between dose one and 
dose two), using binomial regression. After adjusting for other factors, ethnic 
groups with lowest dose one coverage (Black or Black British-Caribbean, 
White-Any other White background, White-Irish) also had lowest dose two 
coverage, but in addition, these ethnic groups also had the largest drop-out 
rates between dose one and dose two. The drop-out rate for Black or Black 
British-Caribbean children was 5.7 percentage points higher than for 
White-British children. Vaccine coverage decreased with increasing deprivation 
quintile, and this was most marked for the booster coverage (6.2 percentage 
points lower in the most deprived compared to least deprived quintile, 
p < 0.001). To achieve high coverage for completed courses across all ethnic 
groups and deprivation quintiles both high initiation rates and a reduction in 
drop-out rates for ethnic groups with lowest coverage is necessary. A 
qualitative approach to better understand reasons behind lower coverage and 
higher drop-out rates in the most underserved ethnic groups is required to 
develop tailored approaches addressing these inequalities.

Crown Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.09.023
PMID: 36117004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.