---
reference_id: "PMID:36604605"
title: Impaired OTUD7A-dependent Ankyrin regulation mediates neuronal dysfunction in mouse and human models of the 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome.
authors:
- Unda BK
- Chalil L
- Yoon S
- Kilpatrick S
- Irwin C
- Xing S
- Murtaza N
- Cheng A
- Brown C
- Afonso A
- McCready E
- Ronen GM
- Howe J
- Caye-Eude A
- Verloes A
- Doble BW
- Faivre L
- Vitobello A
- Scherer SW
- Lu Y
- Penzes P
- Singh KK
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-022-01937-5
keywords:
- Chromosome Disorders
- Neurons
- Ankyrins/genetics
- Seizures
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Animals
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15"
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired OTUD7A-dependent Ankyrin regulation mediates neuronal dysfunction in mouse and human models of the 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome.
**Authors:** Unda BK, Chalil L, Yoon S, Kilpatrick S, Irwin C, Xing S, Murtaza N, Cheng A, Brown C, Afonso A, McCready E, Ronen GM, Howe J, Caye-Eude A, Verloes A, Doble BW, Faivre L, Vitobello A, Scherer SW, Lu Y, Penzes P, Singh KK
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-022-01937-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-022-01937-5)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2023 Apr;28(4):1747-1769. doi: 10.1038/s41380-022-01937-5.
Epub  2023 Jan 6.

Impaired OTUD7A-dependent Ankyrin regulation mediates neuronal dysfunction in
mouse and human models of the 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome.

Unda BK(1)(2), Chalil L(1)(2), Yoon S(3), Kilpatrick S(1)(2), Irwin C(2)(4),
Xing S(1), Murtaza N(1)(2), Cheng A(2), Brown C(1)(2), Afonso A(1), McCready
E(1), Ronen GM(1), Howe J(5), Caye-Eude A(6)(7), Verloes A(8)(9), Doble BW(10),
Faivre L(11)(12), Vitobello A(11)(13), Scherer SW(5)(14), Lu Y(1), Penzes
P(3)(15), Singh KK(16)(17)(18)(19).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, McMaster University, 1200 Main St. West,
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(2)Donald K. Johnson Eye Institute, Krembil Research Institute, University
Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology,
Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, The Hospital for Sick Children,
686 Bay Street, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)INSERM, UMR_S1131, Institut de Recherche Saint-Louis, Université de Paris,
Paris, France.
(7)Département de Génétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Assistance Publique des
Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.
(8)Département de Génétique, Hôpital Robert DEBRE, 48 Boulevard Serurier, 75019,
Paris, France.
(9)INSERM UMR 1141 "NeuroDiderot", Hôpital R DEBRE, Paris, France.
(10)Departments of Pediatrics & Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Max Rady
College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(11)UMR1231 GAD, Inserm - Université Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon, France.
(12)Centre de Référence Maladies Rares "Anomalies du développement et syndromes
malformatifs", centre de génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon,
France.
(13)Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares,
FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France.
(14)Department of Molecular Genetics and McLaughlin Centre, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(15)Northwestern University, Center for Autism and Neurodevelopment, Chicago,
IL, USA.
(16)Faculty of Health Sciences, McMaster University, 1200 Main St. West,
Hamilton, ON, Canada. karun.singh@uhnresearch.ca.
(17)Donald K. Johnson Eye Institute, Krembil Research Institute, University
Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada. karun.singh@uhnresearch.ca.
(18)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada. karun.singh@uhnresearch.ca.
(19)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada. karun.singh@uhnresearch.ca.

Comment in
    Mol Psychiatry. 2023 Apr;28(4):1400-1401. doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-01965-9.

Copy number variations (CNVs) are associated with psychiatric and
neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), and most, including the recurrent 15q13.3
microdeletion disorder, have unknown disease mechanisms. We used a heterozygous
15q13.3 microdeletion mouse model and patient iPSC-derived neurons to reveal
developmental defects in neuronal maturation and network activity. To identify
the underlying molecular dysfunction, we developed a neuron-specific
proximity-labeling proteomics (BioID2) pipeline, combined with patient
mutations, to target the 15q13.3 CNV genetic driver OTUD7A. OTUD7A is an
emerging independent NDD risk gene with no known function in the brain, but has
putative deubiquitinase function. The OTUD7A protein-protein interaction network
included synaptic, axonal, and cytoskeletal proteins and was enriched for ASD
and epilepsy risk genes (Ank3, Ank2, SPTAN1, SPTBN1). The interactions between
OTUD7A and Ankyrin-G (Ank3) and Ankyrin-B (Ank2) were disrupted by an
epilepsy-associated OTUD7A L233F variant. Further investigation of Ankyrin-G in
mouse and human 15q13.3 microdeletion and OTUD7AL233F/L233F models revealed
protein instability, increased polyubiquitination, and decreased levels in the
axon initial segment, while structured illumination microscopy identified
reduced Ankyrin-G nanodomains in dendritic spines. Functional analysis of human
15q13.3 microdeletion and OTUD7AL233F/L233F models revealed shared and distinct
impairments to axonal growth and intrinsic excitability. Importantly, restoring
OTUD7A or Ankyrin-G expression in 15q13.3 microdeletion neurons led to a
reversal of abnormalities. These data reveal a critical OTUD7A-Ankyrin pathway
in neuronal development, which is impaired in the 15q13.3 microdeletion
syndrome, leading to neuronal dysfunction. Furthermore, our study highlights the
utility of targeting CNV genes using cell type-specific proteomics to identify
shared and unexplored disease mechanisms across NDDs.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-022-01937-5
PMCID: PMC10208958
PMID: 36604605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
