---
reference_id: "PMID:20148114"
title: Mutations in the nuclear localization sequence of the Aristaless related homeobox; sequestration of mutant ARX with IPO13 disrupts normal subcellular distribution of the transcription factor and retards cell division.
authors:
- Shoubridge C
- Tan MH
- Fullston T
- Cloosterman D
- Coman D
- McGillivray G
- Mancini GM
- Kleefstra T
- Gécz J
journal: Pathogenetics
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1755-8417-3-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the nuclear localization sequence of the Aristaless related homeobox; sequestration of mutant ARX with IPO13 disrupts normal subcellular distribution of the transcription factor and retards cell division.
**Authors:** Shoubridge C, Tan MH, Fullston T, Cloosterman D, Coman D, McGillivray G, Mancini GM, Kleefstra T, Gécz J
**Journal:** Pathogenetics (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1755-8417-3-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/1755-8417-3-1)

## Content

1. Pathogenetics. 2010 Jan 5;3:1. doi: 10.1186/1755-8417-3-1.

Mutations in the nuclear localization sequence of the Aristaless related
homeobox; sequestration of mutant ARX with IPO13 disrupts normal subcellular
distribution of the transcription factor and retards cell division.

Shoubridge C(1), Tan MH, Fullston T, Cloosterman D, Coman D, McGillivray G,
Mancini GM, Kleefstra T, Gécz J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology at the Women's
and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, South Australia 5006, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Aristaless related homeobox (ARX) is a paired-type homeobox gene.
ARX function is frequently affected by naturally occurring mutations. Nonsense
mutations, polyalanine tract expansions and missense mutations in ARX cause a
range of intellectual disability and epilepsy phenotypes with or without
additional features including hand dystonia, lissencephaly, autism or
dysarthria. Severe malformation phenotypes, such as X-linked lissencephaly with
ambiguous genitalia (XLAG), are frequently observed in individuals with protein
truncating or missense mutations clustered in the highly conserved paired-type
homeodomain.
RESULTS: We have identified two novel point mutations in the R379 residue of the
ARX homeodomain; c.1135C>A, p.R379S in a patient with infantile spasms and
intellectual disability and c.1136G>T, p.R379L in a patient with XLAG. We
investigated these and other missense mutations (R332P, R332H, R332C, T333N:
associated with XLAG and Proud syndrome) predicted to affect the nuclear
localisation sequences (NLS) flanking either end of the ARX homeodomain. The NLS
regions are required for correct nuclear import facilitated by Importin 13
(IPO13). We demonstrate that missense mutations in either the N- or C-terminal
NLS regions of the homeodomain cause significant disruption to nuclear
localisation of the ARX protein in vitro. Surprisingly, none of these mutations
abolished the binding of ARX to IPO13. This was confirmed by
co-immunoprecipitation and immmuno fluorescence studies. Instead, tagged and
endogenous IPO13 remained bound to the mutant ARX proteins, even in the RanGTP
rich nuclear environment. We also identify the microtubule protein TUBA1A as a
novel interacting protein for ARX and show cells expressing mutant ARX protein
accumulate in mitosis, indicating normal cell division may be disrupted.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that the most likely, common pathogenic mechanism of the
missense mutations in NLS regions of the ARX homeodomain is inadequate
accumulation and distribution of the ARX transcription factor within the nucleus
due to sequestration of ARX with IPO13.

DOI: 10.1186/1755-8417-3-1
PMCID: PMC2819251
PMID: 20148114
