---
reference_id: "PMID:35685550"
title: "Hospital-Acquired Acute Kidney Injury in Noncritical Care Setting: Clinical Characteristics and Outcomes."
authors:
- Tso M
- Sud K
- Van C
- Patekar A
- Tesfaye W
- Castelino RL
journal: Int J Clin Pract
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1155/2022/7077587
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Australia
- Female
- Hospital Mortality
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Tertiary Care Centers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hospital-Acquired Acute Kidney Injury in Noncritical Care Setting: Clinical Characteristics and Outcomes.
**Authors:** Tso M, Sud K, Van C, Patekar A, Tesfaye W, Castelino RL
**Journal:** Int J Clin Pract (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2022/7077587](https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/7077587)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Pract. 2022 May 16;2022:7077587. doi: 10.1155/2022/7077587. 
eCollection 2022.

Hospital-Acquired Acute Kidney Injury in Noncritical Care Setting: Clinical 
Characteristics and Outcomes.

Tso M(1), Sud K(2)(3), Van C(1), Patekar A(4), Tesfaye W(1)(5), Castelino 
RL(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)The University of Sydney, Faculty of Medicine and Health, School of Pharmacy, 
Camperdown, Australia.
(2)The University of Sydney Nepean Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health, Kingswood, Australia.
(3)Renal Medicine, Nepean Hospital, Kingswood, Australia.
(4)Transplantation Medical Unit, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, Australia.
(5)The University of Canberra, Health Research Institute, Faculty of Health, 
Canberra, Australia.
(6)Department of Pharmacy, Blacktown Hospital, Blacktown, Australia.

BACKGROUND: There is limited Australian data on the incidence and outcomes of 
hospital-acquired acute kidney injury (HA-AKI) in noncritically ill patients.
AIMS: This study aimed to characterise HA-AKI and assess the impact of 
nephrology consultations on outcomes.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort of all noncritically ill patients with HA-AKI 
admitted to a large tertiary hospital in 2018 were followed up from hospital 
admission to discharge. HA-AKI was defined using the Kidney Disease Improving 
Global Outcomes (KDIGO) criteria. The primary outcome of this study was the 
clinical characteristics of patients who developed HA-AKI and the difference in 
these characteristics by nephrology consultation.
RESULTS: A total of 222 noncritically ill patients were included in the study. 
The mean age of included patients was 74.8 ± 15.8 years and 57.2% were females. 
While most patients (92%)were characterised to have KDIGO stage 1, 14% received 
a nephrology consultation, and 80% had complete or partial recovery of kidney 
function at discharge. Lower recovery rates (65% versus 83%, P = 0.022), longer 
hospitalisations (10 versus 5 days, P = 0.001), and higher serum creatinine 
values on discharge (152 versus 101 μmol/L, P < 0.001) were associated with 
receipt of nephrology consultation. There was no difference in mortality rates 
(13% versus 11%, P = 0.754) between those with and without nephrology 
consultation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that signficant proportion of noncritically 
ill patients experience mild form of AKI and have good recovery of kidney 
function during hospitalisation. Although severity of AKI and length of 
hospitalisation were associated with nephrology interventions, large scale study 
is required to understand the impact of such interventions on clinical outcomes, 
such as hospital readmission and mortality.

Copyright © 2022 Maggie Tso et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/7077587
PMCID: PMC9159216
PMID: 35685550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.