---
reference_id: "PMID:26536413"
title: The Impact of Postmeningitic Labyrinthitis Ossificans on Speech Performance After Pediatric Cochlear Implantation.
authors:
- Liu CC
- Sweeney M
- Booth TN
- Lee KH
- Kutz JW
- Roland P
- Isaacson B
journal: Otol Neurotol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000877
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Impact of Postmeningitic Labyrinthitis Ossificans on Speech Performance After Pediatric Cochlear Implantation.
**Authors:** Liu CC, Sweeney M, Booth TN, Lee KH, Kutz JW, Roland P, Isaacson B
**Journal:** Otol Neurotol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MAO.0000000000000877](https://doi.org/10.1097/MAO.0000000000000877)

## Content

1. Otol Neurotol. 2015 Dec;36(10):1633-7. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000877.

The Impact of Postmeningitic Labyrinthitis Ossificans on Speech Performance 
After Pediatric Cochlear Implantation.

Liu CC(1), Sweeney M, Booth TN, Lee KH, Kutz JW, Roland P, Isaacson B.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Texas at 
Southwestern Medical Center †Department of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Children's 
Health ‡Callier Center for Communication Disorders, University of Texas at 
Dallas §Department of Radiology, Children's Health ||Department of Radiology, 
University of Texas at Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, U.S.A.

OBJECTIVE: 1) To characterize pediatric cochlear implant performance in patients 
with hearing loss secondary to bacterial meningitis. 2) To evaluate performance 
differences in patients with and without labyrinthitis ossificans (LO).
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective case review.
SETTING: A large university-based multidisciplinary cochlear implant program.
PATIENTS: Forty-nine patients with hearing loss from bacterial meningitis who 
received cochlear implants from 1991 to 2011. Thirty-nine patients had adequate 
data for analysis.
INTERVENTION: Cochlear implantation with postoperative performance evaluation.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Speech perception category (SPC).
RESULTS: Nineteen (48.7%) patients had intraoperative evidence of LO. Fourteen 
patients (70.0%) without LO compared with seven (36.8%) with LO developed 
open-set speech after implantation. There was a trend toward better postimplant 
SPC outcomes in patients without LO that did not reach statistical significance 
(p = 0.17). The presence of LO negatively correlated with classroom placement 
(p < 0.05). Analysis of each group individually demonstrated statistically 
significant improvement in pre- versus postimplant SPC outcomes (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The presence of LO may negatively affect performance in pediatric 
patients receiving a cochlear implant for hearing loss secondary to bacterial 
meningitis.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000877
PMID: 26536413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]