---
reference_id: "PMID:12627666"
title: Antiphospholipid thrombosis syndromes.
authors:
- Bick RL
journal: Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0889-8588(02)00103-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid thrombosis syndromes.
**Authors:** Bick RL
**Journal:** Hematol Oncol Clin North Am (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0889-8588(02)00103-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0889-8588(02)00103-x)

## Content

1. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2003 Feb;17(1):115-47. doi: 
10.1016/s0889-8588(02)00103-x.

Antiphospholipid thrombosis syndromes.

Bick RL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, 10455 North Central Expressway, Suite 109-PMB320, Dallas, TX 
75231, USA. rbick@thrombosis.com

Antiphospholipid antibodies are associated strongly with thrombosis and are the 
most common of the acquired blood protein defects causing thrombosis. Although 
the precise mechanisms whereby antiphospholipid antibodies alter hemostasis to 
induce a hypercoagulable state remain unclear, numerous theories, as previously 
discussed, have been advanced. The most common thrombotic events associated with 
ACLAs are deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolus (type I syndrome), coronary 
or peripheral artery thrombosis (type II syndrome), or cerebrovascular/retinal 
vessel thrombosis (type III syndrome), and occasionally patients present with 
mixtures (type IV syndrome). Patients with type V disease are those with 
antiphospholipid antibodies and RMS. It is as yet unclear how many seemingly 
normal individuals who may never develop manifestations of antiphospholipid 
syndrome (type VI) harbor asymptomatic antiphospholipid antibodies. The relative 
frequency of ACLAs in association with arterial and venous thrombosis strongly 
suggests that they should be looked for in any individual with unexplained 
thrombosis; all three idiotypes (IgG, IgA, and IgM) should be assessed. Also, 
the type of syndrome (I-VI) should be defined, if possible, because this 
identification may dictate both the type and the duration of immediate and 
long-term anticoagulant therapy. Unlike those patients with ACLAs, patients with 
primary LA-thrombosis syndrome usually have venous thrombosis. Because the aPTT 
is unreliable in patients with LA (prolonged in only approximately 40%-50% of 
patients) and usually is not prolonged in patients with ACLAs, definitive tests, 
including ELISA for ACLA, the dilute Russell's viper venom time for LA, 
hexagonal phospholipid-neutralization procedure, and B-2-GP-I (IgG, IgA, and 
IgM) should be ordered immediately when suspecting antiphospholipid syndrome or 
in individuals with otherwise unexplained thrombotic or thromboembolic events. 
If these test results are negative, subgroups also should be assessedin the 
appropriate clinical setting. Most patients with antiphospholipid thrombosis 
syndrome will fail to respond to warfarin therapy, and except for retinal 
vascular thrombosis, may fail some types of antiplatelet therapy, so it is of 
major importance to make this diagnosis so patients can be treated with the most 
effective therapy for secondary prevention-LMWH or unfractionated heparin in 
most instances and clopidogrel in some instances.

DOI: 10.1016/s0889-8588(02)00103-x
PMID: 12627666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]