---
reference_id: "PMID:36720220"
title: The landscape of immune dysregulation in Crohn's disease revealed through single-cell transcriptomic profiling in the ileum and colon.
authors:
- Kong L
- Pokatayev V
- Lefkovith A
- Carter GT
- Creasey EA
- Krishna C
- Subramanian S
- Kochar B
- Ashenberg O
- Lau H
- Ananthakrishnan AN
- Graham DB
- Deguine J
- Xavier RJ
journal: Immunity
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2023.01.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The landscape of immune dysregulation in Crohn's disease revealed through single-cell transcriptomic profiling in the ileum and colon.
**Authors:** Kong L, Pokatayev V, Lefkovith A, Carter GT, Creasey EA, Krishna C, Subramanian S, Kochar B, Ashenberg O, Lau H, Ananthakrishnan AN, Graham DB, Deguine J, Xavier RJ
**Journal:** Immunity (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.immuni.2023.01.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2023.01.002)

## Content

1. Immunity. 2023 Feb 14;56(2):444-458.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2023.01.002.
Epub  2023 Jan 30.

The landscape of immune dysregulation in Crohn's disease revealed through 
single-cell transcriptomic profiling in the ileum and colon.

Kong L(1), Pokatayev V(2), Lefkovith A(3), Carter GT(3), Creasey EA(4), Krishna 
C(3), Subramanian S(5), Kochar B(6), Ashenberg O(3), Lau H(3), Ananthakrishnan 
AN(6), Graham DB(1), Deguine J(3), Xavier RJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Center for 
Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of Molecular Biology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(2)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of 
Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(3)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(4)Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(5)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of 
Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA; 
Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Center for the Study of Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(7)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Center for 
Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of Molecular Biology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Division of 
Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02114, USA; Center for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic address: 
xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.

Erratum in
    Immunity. 2023 Dec 12;56(12):2855. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2023.10.017.

Crohn's disease (CD) is a chronic gastrointestinal disease that is increasing in 
prevalence worldwide. CD is multifactorial, involving the complex interplay of 
genetic, immune, and environmental factors, necessitating a system-level 
understanding of its etiology. To characterize cell-type-specific 
transcriptional heterogeneity in active CD, we profiled 720,633 cells from the 
terminal ileum and colon of 71 donors with varying inflammation status. Our 
integrated datasets revealed organ- and compartment-specific responses to acute 
and chronic inflammation; most immune changes were in cell composition, whereas 
transcriptional changes dominated among epithelial and stromal cells. These 
changes correlated with endoscopic inflammation, but small and large intestines 
exhibited distinct responses, which were particularly apparent when focusing on 
IBD risk genes. Finally, we mapped markers of disease-associated myofibroblast 
activation and identified CHMP1A, TBX3, and RNF168 as regulators of fibrotic 
complications. Altogether, our results provide a roadmap for understanding 
cell-type- and organ-specific differences in CD and potential directions for 
therapeutic development.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2023.01.002
PMCID: PMC9957882
PMID: 36720220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests R.J.X. is a co-founder 
of Celsius Therapeutics and Jnana Therapeutics.