---
reference_id: "PMID:27412979"
title: "Cholera in pregnant women: the 2012 epidemic at the reference center at the Donka National Hospital in Conakry."
authors:
- Sako FB
- Traoré FA
- Camara MK
- Sylla M
- Bangoura EF
- Baldé O
journal: Med Sante Trop
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1684/mst.2016.0554
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera in pregnant women: the 2012 epidemic at the reference center at the Donka National Hospital in Conakry.
**Authors:** Sako FB, Traoré FA, Camara MK, Sylla M, Bangoura EF, Baldé O
**Journal:** Med Sante Trop (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1684/mst.2016.0554](https://doi.org/10.1684/mst.2016.0554)

## Content

1. Med Sante Trop. 2016 May 1;26(2):199-202. doi: 10.1684/mst.2016.0554.

Cholera in pregnant women: the 2012 epidemic at the reference center at the 
Donka National Hospital in Conakry.

[Article in English]

Sako FB(1), Traoré FA(2), Camara MK(3), Sylla M(4), Bangoura EF(2), Baldé O(4).

Author information:
(1)Service des maladies infectieuses et tropicales, hôpital national Donka, 
Conakry, République de Guinée, Université Gamal Abdel Nasser de Conakry, BP 1147 
Conakry, République de Guinée, Kipé, rue 177 Kakimbo, commune de Ratoma, BP 
5845, Conakry, République de Guinée.
(2)Service des maladies infectieuses et tropicales, hôpital national Donka, 
Conakry, République de Guinée, Faculté de médecine, pharmacie, 
odontostomatologie, université Gamal-Abdel-Nasser, BP 1147 Conakry, République 
de Guinée.
(3)Faculté de médecine, pharmacie, odontostomatologie, université 
Gamal-Abdel-Nasser, BP 1147 Conakry, République de Guinée, Service de 
gynéco-obstétrique, hôpital national Donka, Conakry, République de Guinée.
(4)Service des maladies infectieuses et tropicales, hôpital national Donka, 
Conakry, République de Guinée.

Cholera is an epidemic diarrheal disease transmitted through the digestive 
tract; it can cause obstetric complications in pregnant women. The objective of 
this study was to describe the epidemiological, clinical, and therapeutic 
aspects of cholera in pregnant women, as well as its course, during the 2012 
epidemic in Conakry. This retrospective, descriptive studied examined the 
records of this epidemic over a 7-month period (from May 15 to December 15, 
2012). Of 2,808 cholera patients at our hospital, 80 were pregnant, that is, 
2.85%. Their mean age was 30 years [range: 15-45 years], 94% were from Conakry 
(94%), and 69% were in the third trimester of pregnancy. Choleriform diarrhea 
and vomiting were the main signs, found respectively in 100% and 95% of the 
women; dehydration was mild for 16%, moderate for 45%, and severe for 39%. 
Support consisted of rehydration, by plans A (16%), B (45%) or C (39%) and 
antibiotic treatment based on erythromycin (85%), doxycycline (14%), or 
azithromycin (1%). Other drugs that were used included 
phloroglucinol-trimethylphloroglucinol (Spasfon(®)) for 45%, acetaminophen for 
65%, and iron/folic acid for 1% of cases. The major obstetric complications were 
4 intrauterine deaths (5%), 2 cases of threatened abortion (2%), 1 preterm 
delivery (1%), and 1 maternal death. The cholera outbreak in 2012 affected a 
large number of pregnant women in Conakry, most during their third trimester. 
The classic clinical manifestations were associated with obstetric complications 
and maternal-fetal risks.

DOI: 10.1684/mst.2016.0554
PMID: 27412979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]