---
reference_id: "PMID:35609210"
title: BROMI/TBC1D32 together with CCRK/CDK20 and FAM149B1/JBTS36 contributes to intraflagellar transport turnaround involving ICK/CILK1.
authors:
- Satoda Y
- Noguchi T
- Fujii T
- Taniguchi A
- Katoh Y
- Nakayama K
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1091/mbc.E22-03-0089
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/metabolism"
- Animals
- Biological Transport
- Cilia/metabolism
- Ciliopathies/metabolism
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinases
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- Eye Abnormalities/metabolism
- Humans
- "Kidney Diseases, Cystic/metabolism"
- Mice
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
- Protein Transport
- Proteins/metabolism
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase-Activating Kinase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BROMI/TBC1D32 together with CCRK/CDK20 and FAM149B1/JBTS36 contributes to intraflagellar transport turnaround involving ICK/CILK1.
**Authors:** Satoda Y, Noguchi T, Fujii T, Taniguchi A, Katoh Y, Nakayama K
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.E22-03-0089](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E22-03-0089)

## Content

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2022 Aug 1;33(9):ar79. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E22-03-0089. Epub 2022 
May 24.

BROMI/TBC1D32 together with CCRK/CDK20 and FAM149B1/JBTS36 contributes to 
intraflagellar transport turnaround involving ICK/CILK1.

Satoda Y(1), Noguchi T(1), Fujii T(1), Taniguchi A(1), Katoh Y(1), Nakayama 
K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Primary cilia are antenna-like organelles that contain specific proteins, and 
are crucial for tissue morphogenesis. Anterograde and retrograde trafficking of 
ciliary proteins are mediated by the intraflagellar transport (IFT) machinery. 
BROMI/TBC1D32 interacts with CCRK/CDK20, which phosphorylates and activates the 
intestinal cell kinase (ICK)/CILK1 kinase, to regulate the change in direction 
of the IFT machinery at the ciliary tip. Mutations in BROMI, CCRK, and ICK in 
humans cause ciliopathies, and mice defective in these genes are also known to 
demonstrate ciliopathy phenotypes. We show here that BROMI interacts not only 
with CCRK but also with CFAP20, an evolutionarily conserved ciliary protein, and 
with FAM149B1/ Joubert syndrome (JBTS)36, a protein in which mutations cause 
JBTS. In addition, we show that FAM149B1 interacts directly with CCRK as well as 
with BROMI. Ciliary defects observed in CCRK-knockout (KO), BROMI-KO, and 
FAM149B1-KO cells, including abnormally long cilia and accumulation of the IFT 
machinery and ICK at the ciliary tip, resembled one another, and BROMI mutants 
that are defective in binding to CCRK and CFAP20 were unable to rescue the 
ciliary defects of BROMI-KO cells. These data indicate that CCRK, BROMI, 
FAM149B1, and probably CFAP20 altogether regulate the IFT turnaround process 
under the control of ICK.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E22-03-0089
PMCID: PMC9582636
PMID: 35609210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]