---
reference_id: "PMID:38034430"
title: "Healthy Patients With AKR1D1 Mutation Not Requiring Primary Bile Acid Therapy: A Case Series."
authors:
- Kimura A
- Mori J
- Pham AN
- Thi KB
- Takei H
- Murai T
- Hayashi H
- Nittono H
journal: JPGN Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/PG9.0000000000000372
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Healthy Patients With AKR1D1 Mutation Not Requiring Primary Bile Acid Therapy: A Case Series.
**Authors:** Kimura A, Mori J, Pham AN, Thi KB, Takei H, Murai T, Hayashi H, Nittono H
**Journal:** JPGN Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PG9.0000000000000372](https://doi.org/10.1097/PG9.0000000000000372)

## Content

1. JPGN Rep. 2023 Oct 9;4(4):e372. doi: 10.1097/PG9.0000000000000372. eCollection
 2023 Nov.

Healthy Patients With AKR1D1 Mutation Not Requiring Primary Bile Acid Therapy: A 
Case Series.

Kimura A(1)(2), Mori J(3), Pham AN(4), Thi KB(4), Takei H(2), Murai T(5), 
Hayashi H(6), Nittono H(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatrics, Kumamoto-Ashikita Medical Center for the 
Severely Disabled, Kumamoto, Japan.
(2)Junshin Clinic Bile Acid Institute, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Hepatology Department, National Children's Hospital, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(5)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Science, Health Science University of Hokkaido, 
Hokkaido, Japan.
(6)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacokinetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Δ4-3-Oxosteroid 5β-reductase (AKR1D1) deficiency typically causes severe 
cholestasis occurs in newborns, leading to death unless patients are treated 
with primary bile acids. However, we encountered an AKR1D1 deficiency patient 
treated with only ursodeoxycholic acid who had cholestasis until about 1 year of 
age but then grew up healthy without further treatment. We also have been 
following other healthy patients with AKR1D1 mutation who have never developed 
cholestasis and have not been treated. However, reports are few, involving 3 
patients. To better understand and clinically manage a diverse group of patients 
with AKR1D1 mutation who do not develop potentially fatal cholestasis in the 
neonatal period, ongoing accumulation and study of informative cases is needed.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer on behalf of 
European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition and 
North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and 
Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1097/PG9.0000000000000372
PMCID: PMC10684241
PMID: 38034430

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no funding or conflicts of 
interest.