---
reference_id: "PMID:35252399"
title: "Relevance of Cor Pulmonale in COPD With and Without Pulmonary Hypertension: A Retrospective Cohort Study."
authors:
- Yogeswaran A
- Kuhnert S
- Gall H
- Faber M
- Krauss E
- Rako ZA
- Keranov S
- Grimminger F
- Ghofrani HA
- Naeije R
- Seeger W
- Richter MJ
- Tello K
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.826369
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relevance of Cor Pulmonale in COPD With and Without Pulmonary Hypertension: A Retrospective Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Yogeswaran A, Kuhnert S, Gall H, Faber M, Krauss E, Rako ZA, Keranov S, Grimminger F, Ghofrani HA, Naeije R, Seeger W, Richter MJ, Tello K
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2022.826369](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2022.826369)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Feb 16;9:826369. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.826369.
eCollection 2022.

Relevance of Cor Pulmonale in COPD With and Without Pulmonary Hypertension: A
Retrospective Cohort Study.

Yogeswaran A(1), Kuhnert S(1), Gall H(1), Faber M(1), Krauss E(1), Rako ZA(1),
Keranov S(2), Grimminger F(3), Ghofrani HA(1), Naeije R(4), Seeger W(1), Richter
MJ(1), Tello K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Member of the German Center for Lung
Research, Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center,
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(2)Department of Cardiology and Angiology, DZHK (German Center for
Cardiovascular Research), University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Member of the German Center for Lung
Research, Institute for Lung Health, Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Universities of
Giessen and Marburg Lung Center, Giessen, Germany.
(4)Department of Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine, Free University of
Brussels, Brussels, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: The relevance of cor pulmonale in COPD and pulmonary hypertension
due to COPD (PH-COPD) is incompletely understood. We aimed to investigate the
relationship of right ventricular-pulmonary arterial (RV-PA) uncoupling with
disease severity in COPD, and the relationship of RV-PA uncoupling and use of
targeted PH therapies with mortality in PH-COPD.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed 231 patients with COPD without PH and 274
patients with PH-COPD. COPD was classified according to GOLD stages and the
modified Medical Research Council dyspnoea scale. PH was categorized as
mild-to-moderate or severe. RV-PA uncoupling was assessed as the
echocardiographic tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion/pulmonary artery
systolic pressure (TAPSE/PASP) ratio.
RESULTS: Of the cohort with COPD without PH, 21, 58, 54 and 92 were classified
as GOLD I, II, III and IV, respectively. Patients in advanced GOLD stages and
those with severe dyspnoea showed significantly decreased TAPSE/PASP.Of the
PH-COPD cohort, 144 had mild-to-moderate PH and 130 had severe PH. During
follow-up, 126 patients died. In univariate Cox regression, TAPSE/PASP and 6-min
walk distance (6MWD; 10 m increments) predicted survival [hazard ratios (95%
CI): 0.12 (0.03-0.57) and 0.95 (0.93-0.97), respectively]; notably, PH severity
and simplified European Society of Cardiology/European Respiratory Society risk
stratification did not. Among patients in the lowest or intermediate tertiles of
TAPSE/PASP and 6MWD, those with targeted PH therapy had higher survival than
those without (53 vs. 17% at 3 years).
CONCLUSION: Cor pulmonale (decreased TAPSE/PASP and 6MWD) is associated with
disease severity in COPD and predicts outcome in PH-COPD.

Copyright © 2022 Yogeswaran, Kuhnert, Gall, Faber, Krauss, Rako, Keranov,
Grimminger, Ghofrani, Naeije, Seeger, Richter and Tello.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.826369
PMCID: PMC8889008
PMID: 35252399

Conflict of interest statement: AY reports non-financial support from the
University of Giessen during the conduct of the study. SK reports personal fees
from Chiesi, Berlin Chemie MENARINI and Insmed, and personal fees and
non-financial support from GSK, Novartis and AstraZeneca outside the submitted
work. HG reports grants from the German Research Foundation and non-financial
support from the University of Giessen during the conduct of the study, and
personal fees from Actelion, AstraZeneca, Bayer, BMS, GSK, Janssen-Cilag, Lilly,
MSD, Novartis, OMT, Pfizer and United Therapeutics outside the submitted work.
MF reports non-financial support from the University of Giessen during the
conduct of the study. HG reports grants from the German Research Foundation and
nonfinancial support from the University of Giessen during the conduct of the
study, and personal fees from Bayer, Actelion, Pfizer, Merck, GSK and Takeda,
grants and personal fees from Novartis, Bayer HealthCare and Encysive/Pfizer,
and grants from Aires, the German Research Foundation, Excellence Cluster
Cardiopulmonary Research and the German Ministry for Education and Research
outside the submitted work. RN reports relationships including consultancies,
speaker's fees and membership of advisory boards with AOP Orphan
Pharmaceuticals, Johnson & Johnson, Lung Biotechnology Corporation and United
Therapeutics. WS reports grants from the German Research Foundation and
nonfinancial support from the University of Giessen during the conduct of the
study, and personal fees from Pfizer and Bayer Pharma AG outside the submitted
work. MR reports grants from the German Research Foundation and non-financial
support from the University of Giessen during the conduct of the study, and
grants from United Therapeutics, grants and personal fees from Bayer, and
personal fees from Actelion, Mundipharma, Roche and OMT outside the submitted
work. KT reports grants from the German Research Foundation and non-financial
support from the University of Giessen during the conduct of the study, and
personal fees from Actelion and Bayer outside the submitted work. The remaining
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.