---
reference_id: "PMID:29544234"
title: "[Addisonian Crisis - Risk Assessment and Appropriate Treatment]."
authors:
- Meyer G
- Badenhoop K
journal: Dtsch Med Wochenschr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1055/s-0043-111729
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Addisonian Crisis - Risk Assessment and Appropriate Treatment].
**Authors:** Meyer G, Badenhoop K
**Journal:** Dtsch Med Wochenschr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0043-111729](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-111729)

## Content

1. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2018 Mar;143(6):392-396. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-111729.
Epub  2018 Mar 15.

[Addisonian Crisis - Risk Assessment and Appropriate Treatment].

[Article in German]

Meyer G, Badenhoop K.

An adrenal crisis (Addisonian crisis) is an acute life-threatening complication 
of adrenal insufficiency. It occurs when hydrocortisone demand is not met by 
supplementation in the context of an infection - often gastrointestinal, fever, 
trauma, acute psychological or physical stress. Symptoms of weakness, nausea, 
muscle/joint pain and drowsiness may develop out of robust health within few 
hours. If overlooked, treated too late, with insufficient dose or route of 
application, there exists a considerable risk of mortality. Treatment consists 
of immediate parenteral hydrocortisone (100 mg bolus) and subsequent continuous 
infusion until the underlying precipitating cause is cured and/or when regular 
supplementation can be continued. Physicians and nurses must not underestimate 
the condition, since diagnosis and treatment must not be delayed. Patients, 
relatives and spouses need to be trained in prevention and early recognition 
through educational programs and emergency cards.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-111729
PMID: 29544234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KB gibt an, Honorar bzw. 
Reisekostenunterstützung durch Shisc erhalten zu haben.