---
reference_id: "PMID:27545757"
title: Clinical Drug-Drug Interactions Through Cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) for the Selective ALK Inhibitor Alectinib.
authors:
- Morcos PN
- Cleary Y
- Guerini E
- Dall G
- Bogman K
- De Petris L
- Viteri S
- Bordogna W
- Yu L
- Martin-Facklam M
- Phipps A
journal: Clin Pharmacol Drug Dev
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/cpdd.298
keywords:
- Adult
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- "Carbazoles/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- Cytochrome P-450 CYP3A/metabolism
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Female
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Male
- "Midazolam/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Middle Aged
- "Piperidines/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics"
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Rifampin/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Triazoles/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Drug-Drug Interactions Through Cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) for the Selective ALK Inhibitor Alectinib.
**Authors:** Morcos PN, Cleary Y, Guerini E, Dall G, Bogman K, De Petris L, Viteri S, Bordogna W, Yu L, Martin-Facklam M, Phipps A
**Journal:** Clin Pharmacol Drug Dev (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cpdd.298](https://doi.org/10.1002/cpdd.298)

## Content

1. Clin Pharmacol Drug Dev. 2017 May;6(3):280-291. doi: 10.1002/cpdd.298. Epub
2016  Sep 28.

Clinical Drug-Drug Interactions Through Cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) for the
Selective ALK Inhibitor Alectinib.

Morcos PN(1), Cleary Y(2), Guerini E(2), Dall G(3), Bogman K(2), De Petris L(4),
Viteri S(5), Bordogna W(2), Yu L(1), Martin-Facklam M(2), Phipps A(6).

Author information:
(1)Roche Innovation Center, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Roche Innovation Center, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)d3 Medicine, Parsippany, NJ, USA.
(4)Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)IOR Quiron Dexeus University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Roche Products Ltd, Welwyn, UK.

The efficacy and safety of alectinib, a central nervous system-active and
selective anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitor, has been demonstrated in
patients with ALK-positive (ALK+) non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) progressing
on crizotinib. Alectinib is mainly metabolized by cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) to
a major similarly active metabolite, M4. Alectinib and M4 show evidence of weak
time-dependent inhibition and small induction of CYP3A in vitro. We present
results from 3 fixed-sequence studies evaluating drug-drug interactions for
alectinib through CYP3A. Studies NP28990 and NP29042 enrolled 17 and 24 healthy
subjects, respectively, and investigated potent CYP3A inhibition with
posaconazole and potent CYP3A induction through rifampin, respectively, on the
single oral dose pharmacokinetics (PK) of alectinib. A substudy of the global
phase 2 NP28673 study enrolled 15 patients with ALK+ NSCLC to determine the
effect of multiple doses of alectinib on the single oral dose PK of midazolam, a
sensitive substrate of CYP3A. Potent CYP3A inhibition or induction resulted in
only minor effects on the combined exposure of alectinib and M4. Multiple doses
of alectinib did not influence midazolam exposure. These results suggest that
dose adjustments may not be needed when alectinib is coadministered with CYP3A
inhibitors or inducers or for coadministered CYP3A substrates.

© 2016, The American College of Clinical Pharmacology.

DOI: 10.1002/cpdd.298
PMID: 27545757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
