---
reference_id: "PMID:19597009"
title: Food-borne trematodiases.
authors:
- Keiser J
- Utzinger J
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.00012-09
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Food-borne trematodiases.
**Authors:** Keiser J, Utzinger J
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.00012-09](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00012-09)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2009 Jul;22(3):466-83. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00012-09.

Food-borne trematodiases.

Keiser J(1), Utzinger J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology, Swiss Tropical 
Institute, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland. jennifer.keiser@unibas.ch

An estimated 750 million people are at risk of infections with food-borne 
trematodes, which comprise liver flukes (Clonorchis sinensis, Fasciola 
gigantica, Fasciola hepatica, Opisthorchis felineus, and Opisthorchis 
viverrini), lung flukes (Paragonimus spp.), and intestinal flukes (e.g., 
Echinostoma spp., Fasciolopsis buski, and the heterophyids). Food-borne 
trematodiases pose a significant public health and economic problem, yet these 
diseases are often neglected. In this review, we summarize the taxonomy, 
morphology, and life cycle of food-borne trematodes. Estimates of the at-risk 
population and number of infections, geographic distribution, history, and 
ecological features of the major food-borne trematodes are reviewed. We 
summarize clinical manifestations, patterns of infection, and current means of 
diagnosis, treatment, and other control options. The changing epidemiological 
pattern and the rapid growth of aquaculture and food distribution networks are 
highlighted, as these developments might be associated with an elevated risk of 
transmission of food-borne trematodiases. Current research needs are emphasized.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00012-09
PMCID: PMC2708390
PMID: 19597009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]