---
reference_id: "PMID:33829948"
title: Estimating the basic reproductive number of varicella in South Korea incorporating social contact patterns and seroprevalence.
authors:
- Lee T
- Suh J
- Choi JK
- Lee J
- Park SH
journal: Hum Vaccin Immunother
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/21645515.2021.1898917
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimating the basic reproductive number of varicella in South Korea incorporating social contact patterns and seroprevalence.
**Authors:** Lee T, Suh J, Choi JK, Lee J, Park SH
**Journal:** Hum Vaccin Immunother (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21645515.2021.1898917](https://doi.org/10.1080/21645515.2021.1898917)

## Content

1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2021 Aug 3;17(8):2488-2493. doi: 
10.1080/21645515.2021.1898917. Epub 2021 Apr 8.

Estimating the basic reproductive number of varicella in South Korea 
incorporating social contact patterns and seroprevalence.

Lee T(1), Suh J(2), Choi JK(3), Lee J(1)(2), Park SH(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Mathematics and Computing (Mathematics), Yonsei University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)School of Mathematics and Computing (Computational Science and Engineering), 
Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, College of 
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Varicella, which is caused by the varicella zoster virus (VZV), is a common 
infectious disease affecting children. Varicella vaccines have been used for 
decades; however, vaccination policies vary across countries because of 
differences in VZV epidemiology. The basic reproductive number R0a 
transmissibility measure parameter, also differs from country to country. In 
this study R0 for varicella was estimated in South Korea using the contact rate 
matrix derived from averaged POLYMOD contact data, the Korean population, and 
proportionality factor fitted to the Korean VZV seroprevalence R0 for varicella 
in South Korea was estimated to be 5.67 (95% CI: 5.33, 6.33). Therefore, to 
reach the herd immunity threshold, the critical vaccine coverage should be 
greater than 82.4% with a perfect vaccine, or the primary vaccine failure 
proportion should be less than 17.6% with 100% coverage. Because of the 
relatively low seroconversion rate and rapidly waning immunity after one-dose 
vaccination in South Korea, the herd immunity threshold is difficult to attain 
with only a one-dose vaccine. Two doses of vaccination may be necessary to 
effectively interrupt varicella transmission and maintain herd immunity in South 
Korea. The study results can help guide the decision-making on an effective 
varicella vaccination policy in South Korea.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2021.1898917
PMCID: PMC8475589
PMID: 33829948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]