---
reference_id: "PMID:36814727"
title: "Why Is Whipple's Disease Still a Challenging Diagnosis? A Case Report and Brief Review of Literature."
authors:
- Viegas AF
- Lopes AM
- Venade G
- Rodrigues P
- Tavares J
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.34029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Why Is Whipple's Disease Still a Challenging Diagnosis? A Case Report and Brief Review of Literature.
**Authors:** Viegas AF, Lopes AM, Venade G, Rodrigues P, Tavares J
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.34029](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.34029)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Jan 21;15(1):e34029. doi: 10.7759/cureus.34029. eCollection 2023 
Jan.

Why Is Whipple's Disease Still a Challenging Diagnosis? A Case Report and Brief 
Review of Literature.

Viegas AF(1), Lopes AM(1), Venade G(1), Rodrigues P(2), Tavares J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Centro Hospitalar Tondela-Viseu, Viseu, PRT.
(2)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Centro Hospitalar Tondela-Viseu, Viseu, 
PRT.

Whipple's disease (WD) is a rare multisystemic infectious disease caused by 
Tropheryma whipplei. The pathogenesis of Whipple's disease remains unknown and 
clinical experience relies solely on various case reports published in the 
literature. The disease may occur at any age, with most studies describing 
patients in their fifth decade. Classic WD mainly affects the gastrointestinal 
tract, but extraintestinal commitment can occur, with the most common 
manifestations being arthralgias, lymphadenopathy, fever, and neurological 
symptoms. We present a case of a 69-year-old woman who presented with fever, 
macular rash, abdominal pain, lymphadenopathy, pleural and pericardial effusion, 
weight loss, and severely altered mental status over seven days. Initial workup 
tests only revealed leucopenia, thrombocytopenia, and hyperferritinemia. 
Since the fever persisted despite antibiotic treatment, an extensive workup was 
required until the final diagnosis of classic WD through histological 
examination of duodenal biopsies. Treatment with ceftriaxone was implemented for 
two weeks, followed by trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 160/800mg bid for 12 
months. The patient presented full recovery and no recurrence after three years 
of follow-up. Even though WD was first described more than a century ago, WD is 
an elusive disease with a wide variety of clinical findings, leading to a still 
significant delay in diagnosis. WD should be considered in the differential 
diagnosis of rheumatologic disorders, chronic abdominal pain or diarrhea, 
neurological manifestations not suggestive of any other specific disease, 
non-caseating granulomatous diseases, and cases of lymphadenopathies. The 
authors aim to add additional clinical data and raise awareness for a rare 
condition that can be lethal if not timely treated. More studies and 
recommendations are needed concerning screening patients and treatment, with an 
urgent need to improve the delay in diagnosis.

Copyright © 2023, Viegas et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.34029
PMCID: PMC9939952
PMID: 36814727

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.