---
reference_id: "PMID:31021589"
title: Type II Collagen Disorders Overview.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Gregersen PA
- Savarirayan R
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type II Collagen Disorders Overview.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Gregersen PA, Savarirayan R

## Content

1. Type II Collagen Disorders Overview.

Gregersen PA(1), Savarirayan R(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2019 Apr 25 [updated 2024 Oct 24].

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics;, Centre for Rare Diseases;, Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark
(2)Victorian Clinical Genetics Service;, Murdoch Children's Research Institute;, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia

The purpose of this GeneReview is to: 1.. Describe the clinical characteristics 
of type II collagen disorders; 2.. Provide an evaluation strategy to identify 
the genetic cause of a type II collagen disorder in a proband; 3.. Review the 
differential diagnosis of type II collagen disorders with a focus on genetic 
conditions; 4.. Review management of type II collagen disorders; 5.. Inform 
genetic counseling of family members of an individual with a type II collagen 
disorder.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 31021589