---
reference_id: "PMID:36434575"
title: "Acute annular outer retinopathy preceded by invasive ductal breast carcinoma: a case report."
authors:
- Gupta RB
- Dang H
- Albreiki D
- Dollin ML
- Weston B
- Gottlieb CC
journal: BMC Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12886-022-02647-w
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography/methods
- "Retinal Diseases/complications, diagnosis"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Vision Disorders
- Acute Disease
- Atrophy
- "Breast Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute annular outer retinopathy preceded by invasive ductal breast carcinoma: a case report.
**Authors:** Gupta RB, Dang H, Albreiki D, Dollin ML, Weston B, Gottlieb CC
**Journal:** BMC Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12886-022-02647-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12886-022-02647-w)

## Content

1. BMC Ophthalmol. 2022 Nov 24;22(1):452. doi: 10.1186/s12886-022-02647-w.

Acute annular outer retinopathy preceded by invasive ductal breast carcinoma: a 
case report.

Gupta RB(#)(1), Dang H(#)(2), Albreiki D(3)(4)(5), Dollin ML(3)(4)(5), Weston 
B(3)(4), Gottlieb CC(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada. rgupt010@uottawa.ca.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences, Dalhousie University, Halifax, 
NS, Canada.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada.
(4)The University of Ottawa Eye Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(5)The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Acute annular outer retinopathy (AAOR) is an uncommon disease. To 
date, there are few documented cases in the literature. Our case report is the 
first to describe a case of acute annular outer retinopathy in a patient with 
invasive ductal breast carcinoma.
CASE PRESENTATION: The patient presented with photopsias and visual loss 
approximately 3 weeks prior to a diagnosis of invasive ductal breast carcinoma. 
We have documented the outer annular white ring seen in the acute phase of this 
disease and correlate it anatomically with Spectral-domain optical coherence 
tomography (SD-OCT) imaging. We identified RPE atrophy with nodular 
hyperreflectivity and loss of ellipsoid layer within the white annular ring with 
corresponding visual field loss. Fundus autofluorescence correlated with 
structural alterations seen on SD-OCT and showed both presumed active 
hyperautofluorescent zones with patchy hypoautofluorescent zones of atrophy and 
a classic annular hyperautofluorescent border. This case provides additional 
information about the natural history of this rare entity and its prognosis and 
varied presentation.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors report a single case of acute annular outer retinopathy 
in a patient with invasive ductal breast carcinoma with the corresponding 
SD-OCT, fundus autofluorescence and visual field findings, during the acute 
phase of the disease. These findings provide new insight into the characteristic 
features, etiology and progression of this rare disease.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12886-022-02647-w
PMCID: PMC9700880
PMID: 36434575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have any 
financial/conflicting interests to disclose.