---
reference_id: "PMID:29254929"
title: Inhibition of JAK-STAT Signaling Suppresses Pathogenic Immune Responses in Medium and Large Vessel Vasculitis.
authors:
- Zhang H
- Watanabe R
- Berry GJ
- Tian L
- Goronzy JJ
- Weyand CM
journal: Circulation
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.030423
keywords:
- Adaptive Immunity/drug effects
- Adoptive Transfer
- Aged
- Animals
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Cytokines/immunology, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/enzymology, immunology, pathology, prevention & control"
- Heterografts
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate/drug effects"
- Immunologic Memory/drug effects
- "Janus Kinase 1/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Janus Kinase 3/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Janus Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Janus Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Lymphocyte Activation/drug effects
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Middle Aged
- Neointima
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic"
- Piperidines/pharmacology
- Pyrimidines/pharmacology
- Pyrroles/pharmacology
- STAT Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "T-Lymphocytes/drug effects, enzymology, immunology, transplantation"
- "Temporal Arteries/drug effects, enzymology, immunology, transplantation"
- Vascular Remodeling/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of JAK-STAT Signaling Suppresses Pathogenic Immune Responses in Medium and Large Vessel Vasculitis.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Watanabe R, Berry GJ, Tian L, Goronzy JJ, Weyand CM
**Journal:** Circulation (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.030423](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.030423)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2018 May 1;137(18):1934-1948. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.030423. Epub 2017 Dec 18.

Inhibition of JAK-STAT Signaling Suppresses Pathogenic Immune Responses in
Medium and Large Vessel Vasculitis.

Zhang H(1), Watanabe R(1), Berry GJ(2), Tian L(3), Goronzy JJ(1), Weyand CM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Immunology and Rheumatology (H.Z., R.W.,
J.J.G., C.M.W.).
(2)Department of Pathology (G.J.B.).
(3)Department of Biomedical Data Science (L.T.), Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Immunology and Rheumatology (H.Z., R.W.,
J.J.G., C.M.W.) cweyand@stanford.edu.

BACKGROUND: Giant cell arteritis, a chronic autoimmune disease of the aorta and
its large branches, is complicated by aneurysm formation, dissection, and
arterial occlusions. Arterial wall dendritic cells attract CD4+ T cells and
macrophages to form prototypic granulomatous infiltrates. Vasculitic lesions
contain a diverse array of effector T cells that persist despite corticosteroid
therapy and sustain chronic, smoldering vasculitis. Transmural inflammation
induces microvascular neoangiogenesis and results in lumen-occlusive intimal
hyperplasia. We have examined whether persistent vessel wall inflammation is
maintained by lesional T cells, including the newly identified tissue-resident
memory T cells, and whether such T cells are sensitive to the cytokine-signaling
inhibitor tofacitinib, a Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor targeting JAK3 and JAK1.
METHODS: Vascular inflammation was induced in human arteries engrafted into
immunodeficient mice that were reconstituted with T cells and monocytes from
patients with giant cell arteritis. Mice carrying inflamed human arteries were
treated with tofacitinib or vehicle. Vasculitic arteries were examined for gene
expression (reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction), protein expression
(immunohistochemistry), and infiltrating cell populations (flow cytometry).
RESULTS: Tofacitinib effectively suppressed innate and adaptive immunity in the
vessel wall. Lesional T cells responded to tofacitinib with reduced
proliferation rates (<10%) and minimal production of the effector molecules
interferon-γ, interleukin-17, and interleukin-21. Tofacitinib disrupted
adventitial microvascular angiogenesis, reduced outgrowth of hyperplastic
intima, and minimized CD4+CD103+ tissue-resident memory T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Cytokine signaling dependent on JAK3 and JAK1 is critically
important in chronic inflammation of medium and large arteries. The JAK
inhibitor tofacitinib effectively suppresses tissue-resident memory T cells and
inhibits core vasculitogenic effector pathways.

© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.030423
PMCID: PMC5930040
PMID: 29254929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
