---
reference_id: "PMID:18837778"
title: Monkeypox virus and insights into its immunomodulatory proteins.
authors:
- Weaver JR
- Isaacs SN
journal: Immunol Rev
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2008.00691.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox virus and insights into its immunomodulatory proteins.
**Authors:** Weaver JR, Isaacs SN
**Journal:** Immunol Rev (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-065X.2008.00691.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-065X.2008.00691.x)

## Content

1. Immunol Rev. 2008 Oct;225:96-113. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2008.00691.x.

Monkeypox virus and insights into its immunomodulatory proteins.

Weaver JR(1), Isaacs SN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6073, USA.

Monkeypox is a disease that is endemic in Central and Western Africa. However, 
in 2003, there was an outbreak in the United States, representing the first 
documented monkeypox cases in the Western hemisphere. Although monkeypox virus 
is less fatal and not as transmissible as variola virus, the causative agent of 
smallpox, there is concern that monkeypox virus could become a more efficient 
human pathogen. The reason for this may lie in the virus' genetic makeup, 
ecological changes, changes in host behavior, and the fact that with the 
eradication of variola virus, routine smallpox vaccination is no longer carried 
out. In this review, we focus on the viral proteins that are predicted to 
modulate the host immune response and compare the genome of monkeypox virus with 
the genomes of variola virus and the vaccinia virus, the orthopoxvirus that 
represented the smallpox vaccine. There are differences found in several of 
these immune-modulating genes including genes that express proteins that affect 
cytokines such as interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor, and interferon. There 
are also differences in genes that code for virulence factors and host range 
proteins. Genetic differences likely also explain the differences in virulence 
between two strains of monkeypox virus found in two different regions of Africa. 
In the current setting of limited smallpox vaccination and little orthopoxvirus 
immunity in parts of the world, monkeypox could become a more efficient human 
pathogen under the right circumstances.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2008.00691.x
PMCID: PMC2567051
PMID: 18837778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]