---
reference_id: "PMID:29363319"
title: Morphological analysis using geometric parameters for splenic aneurysms.
authors:
- Kimura M
- Hoshina K
- Kobayashi M
- Yamamoto S
- Ohshima M
- Watanabe T
journal: Asian Cardiovasc Thorac Ann
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1177/0218492318757040
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aneurysm/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Aneurysm, Ruptured/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- Chi-Square Distribution
- Computed Tomography Angiography/methods
- "Dilatation, Pathologic"
- Female
- Hemodynamics
- Humans
- "Imaging, Three-Dimensional/methods"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Patient-Specific Modeling
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- Propensity Score
- "Radiographic Image Interpretation, Computer-Assisted/methods"
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Software
- "Splenic Artery/diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Morphological analysis using geometric parameters for splenic aneurysms.
**Authors:** Kimura M, Hoshina K, Kobayashi M, Yamamoto S, Ohshima M, Watanabe T
**Journal:** Asian Cardiovasc Thorac Ann (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0218492318757040](https://doi.org/10.1177/0218492318757040)

## Content

1. Asian Cardiovasc Thorac Ann. 2018 Feb;26(2):133-138. doi: 
10.1177/0218492318757040. Epub 2018 Jan 24.

Morphological analysis using geometric parameters for splenic aneurysms.

Kimura M(1), Hoshina K(1), Kobayashi M(2), Yamamoto S(3), Ohshima M(2), Watanabe 
T(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Graduate School of 
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)2 Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies/Institute of Industrial 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)3 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Graduate School, Shibaura Institute 
of Technology, Tokyo, Japan.

Background Considering the unique characteristics of splenic artery aneurysms, 
we hypothesized that hemodynamic forces could play an important role in splenic 
artery aneurysm formation and that splenic artery geometry should be correlated 
with aneurysm development. Methods Tortuosity of the splenic artery was 
evaluated three-dimensionally by calculating the curvature using software and 
the original modeling system. We selected 54 splenic artery aneurysm patients 
who had undergone thin-slice computed tomography imaging with contrast. We 
compared the splenic artery aneurysm group to non-vascular patients via 
propensity-score matching (35 patients in each group). The splenic artery length 
index, average curvature, and maximum curvature were analyzed. Results Splenic 
artery aneurysm patients tended to have a longer splenic artery and the 
curvature was more severe compared to the non-vascular control patients. The 
average curvature of splenic artery aneurysm patients was associated with the 
dilatation rate in female patients. Conclusion Females with a tortuous splenic 
artery may have an increased risk of aneurysm formation.

DOI: 10.1177/0218492318757040
PMID: 29363319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]