---
reference_id: "PMID:24845800"
title: Assessing effects of cholera vaccination in the presence of interference.
authors:
- Perez-Heydrich C
- Hudgens MG
- Halloran ME
- Clemens JD
- Ali M
- Emch ME
journal: Biometrics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/biom.12184
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessing effects of cholera vaccination in the presence of interference.
**Authors:** Perez-Heydrich C, Hudgens MG, Halloran ME, Clemens JD, Ali M, Emch ME
**Journal:** Biometrics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/biom.12184](https://doi.org/10.1111/biom.12184)

## Content

1. Biometrics. 2014 Sep;70(3):731-44. doi: 10.1111/biom.12184. Epub 2014 May 20.

Assessing effects of cholera vaccination in the presence of interference.

Perez-Heydrich C(1), Hudgens MG(2), Halloran ME(3)(4), Clemens JD(5), Ali M(6), 
Emch ME(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Meredith College, Raleigh, North Carolina, 
U.S.A.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, U.S.A.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
U.S.A.
(4)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, U.S.A.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, University of California, Los Angeles, 
California, U.S.A.
(6)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
Maryland, U.S.A.
(7)Department of Geography, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, U.S.A.

Interference occurs when the treatment of one person affects the outcome of 
another. For example, in infectious diseases, whether one individual is 
vaccinated may affect whether another individual becomes infected or develops 
disease. Quantifying such indirect (or spillover) effects of vaccination could 
have important public health or policy implications. In this article we use 
recently developed inverse-probability weighted (IPW) estimators of treatment 
effects in the presence of interference to analyze an individually-randomized, 
placebo-controlled trial of cholera vaccination that targeted 121,982 
individuals in Matlab, Bangladesh. Because these IPW estimators have not been 
employed previously, a simulation study was also conducted to assess the 
empirical behavior of the estimators in settings similar to the cholera vaccine 
trial. Simulation study results demonstrate the IPW estimators can yield 
unbiased estimates of the direct, indirect, total, and overall effects of 
vaccination when there is interference provided the untestable no unmeasured 
confounders assumption holds and the group-level propensity score model is 
correctly specified. Application of the IPW estimators to the cholera vaccine 
trial indicates the presence of interference. For example, the IPW estimates 
suggest on average 5.29 fewer cases of cholera per 1000 person-years (95% 
confidence interval 2.61, 7.96) will occur among unvaccinated individuals within 
neighborhoods with 60% vaccine coverage compared to neighborhoods with 32% 
coverage. Our analysis also demonstrates how not accounting for interference can 
render misleading conclusions about the public health utility of vaccination.

© 2014, The International Biometric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/biom.12184
PMCID: PMC4239215
PMID: 24845800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]