---
reference_id: "PMID:40250457"
title: "Clinical validation of droplet digital PCR assays in detecting BRAF(V600)-mutant circulating tumour DNA as a prognostic biomarker in patients with resected stage III melanoma receiving adjuvant therapy (COMBI-AD): a biomarker analysis from a double-blind, randomised phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Syeda MM
- Long GV
- Garrett J
- Atkinson V
- Santinami M
- Schadendorf D
- Hauschild A
- Millward M
- Mandala M
- Chiarion-Sileni V
- Smylie M
- Manikhas GM
- Dummer R
- Wiggins JM
- Ali S
- Adnaik SB
- Tan M
- Dajee M
- Polsky D
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(25)00139-1
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics, blood"
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- "Circulating Tumor DNA/blood, genetics"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Double-Blind Method
- "Imidazoles/administration & dosage"
- "Melanoma/genetics, pathology, drug therapy, blood, mortality"
- Mutation
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/genetics"
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Oximes/administration & dosage"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Pyridones/administration & dosage"
- "Pyrimidinones/administration & dosage"
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, drug therapy, blood, mortality"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical validation of droplet digital PCR assays in detecting BRAF(V600)-mutant circulating tumour DNA as a prognostic biomarker in patients with resected stage III melanoma receiving adjuvant therapy (COMBI-AD): a biomarker analysis from a double-blind, randomised phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Syeda MM, Long GV, Garrett J, Atkinson V, Santinami M, Schadendorf D, Hauschild A, Millward M, Mandala M, Chiarion-Sileni V, Smylie M, Manikhas GM, Dummer R, Wiggins JM, Ali S, Adnaik SB, Tan M, Dajee M, Polsky D
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(25)00139-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(25)00139-1)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2025 May;26(5):641-653. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(25)00139-1. Epub
 2025 Apr 15.

Clinical validation of droplet digital PCR assays in detecting BRAF(V600)-mutant
circulating tumour DNA as a prognostic biomarker in patients with resected stage
III melanoma receiving adjuvant therapy (COMBI-AD): a biomarker analysis from a
double-blind, randomised phase 3 trial.

Syeda MM(1), Long GV(2), Garrett J(3), Atkinson V(4), Santinami M(5),
Schadendorf D(6), Hauschild A(7), Millward M(8), Mandala M(9), Chiarion-Sileni
V(10), Smylie M(11), Manikhas GM(12), Dummer R(13), Wiggins JM(14), Ali S(1),
Adnaik SB(15), Tan M(16), Dajee M(16), Polsky D(17).

Author information:
(1)Ronald O Perelman Department of Dermatology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine,
NYU Langone Health, New York City, NY, USA; Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer
Center, NYU Langone Health, New York City, NY, USA.
(2)Melanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW,
Australia; Royal North Shore and Mater Hospitals, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Princess Alexandra Hospital, Gallipoli Medical Research Foundation,
University of Queensland, Woolloongabba, QLD, Australia.
(5)Fondazione IRCCS-Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori (INT), Milan, Italy.
(6)University Hospital Essen, Essen and German Cancer Consortium, Essen and
National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT-WEST), Campus Essen and University
Alliance Ruhr, Research Center One Health, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen,
Germany.
(7)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein (UKSH),
Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(8)University of Western Australia and Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Nedlands,
WA, Australia.
(9)University of Perugia, Santa Maria della Misericordia Hospital, Perugia,
Italy.
(10)Oncology 2, Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV-IRCCS, Padua, Italy.
(11)Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(12)St Petersburg Oncology Hospital, St Petersburg, Russia.
(13)University Hospital Zürich Skin Cancer Center, Zürich, Switzerland.
(14)Ronald O Perelman Department of Dermatology, NYU Grossman School of
Medicine, NYU Langone Health, New York City, NY, USA; Laura and Isaac Perlmutter
Cancer Center, NYU Langone Health, New York City, NY, USA; Booz Allen Hamilton,
Washington DC, MD, USA.
(15)Novartis Healthcare, Hyderabad, India.
(16)Novartis Pharmaceuticals, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(17)Ronald O Perelman Department of Dermatology, NYU Grossman School of
Medicine, NYU Langone Health, New York City, NY, USA; Laura and Isaac Perlmutter
Cancer Center, NYU Langone Health, New York City, NY, USA. Electronic address:
david.polsky@nyulangone.org.

BACKGROUND: Cell-free, circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) is an established measure
of minimal residual disease; however, it is not utilised in melanoma management.
We investigated whether ctDNA measurements could predict survival outcomes
during adjuvant targeted therapy or placebo treatment in stage III melanoma,
thereby identifying patients at high risk and low risk of recurrence.
METHODS: Analytically validated mutation-specific droplet digital PCR assays
were used to measure BRAFV600E or BRAFV600K ctDNA in patients aged 18 years or
older who were enrolled in the COMBI-AD trial, which was a double-blind,
randomised, phase 3 study of oral dabrafenib (150 mg twice daily) plus oral
trametinib (2 mg once daily) combination therapy versus two matched placebos in
resected BRAFV600-mutant stage III melanoma. Patients were screened for
enrolment between Jan 31, 2013, and Dec 11, 2014, had an Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group performance status of 0 or 1, and were randomly assigned (1:1) to
the two treatment groups. The primary endpoint was recurrence-free survival, and
the results from final analysis have been previously published and will not be
described here. Biomarker analysis was a prespecified exploratory endpoint and
performed in the intention-to-treat population. We compared associations between
survival outcomes and baseline (post-resection) ctDNA copies per mL, tumour
mutational burden and interferon gamma (IFNG) gene expression. In a subset of
patients, ctDNA quantities during follow-up or at recurrence were measured. The
trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01682083, and has been
completed.
FINDINGS: Baseline plasma samples were available for 597 of 870 patients (331
male patients and 266 female patients) and samples for assessing the ctDNA
positivity rate at landmark follow-up timepoints of 3 months, 6 months, 9
months, and 12 months after treatment initiation were available for 94 of 870
patients. Additionally, samples were available from 118 of 870 patients within a
2-month timeframe before or after clinical or radiographic recurrence. Median
follow-up for the biomarker analyses was 60 months (IQR 39-66) in the
combination therapy group and 58 months (21-66) for the placebo group. ctDNA was
detectable in 79 (13%) of 597 baseline samples. ctDNA positivity rate and mutant
copies per mL plasma were significantly higher in patients with higher disease
substages. As a binary variable, ctDNA detection was associated with worse
recurrence-free survival (placebo group: median 3·71 months [95% CI 2·39-6·89]
vs 24·41 months [17·28-43·13]; hazard ratio [HR] 2·91 [95% CI 1·99-4·25],
p<0·0001); combination therapy group: median 16·59 months [95% CI 12·02-26·80]
vs 68·11 months [50·36-not reached]; HR 2·98 [1·95-4·54], p<0·0001) and overall
survival (placebo group: median 33·90 months [13·96-not reached] vs not reached;
HR 3·35 [2·01-5·55], p<0·0001); combination therapy group: median 40·31 months
[24·90-not reached] vs not reached; HR 4·27 [2·50-7·27], p<0·0001) in the
placebo group and combination therapy groups. Baseline ctDNA was more strongly
associated with survival outcomes than IFNG gene expression or tumour mutational
burden. Patients with adverse longitudinal ctDNA kinetics (molecular relapse or
persistently positive) had markedly shorter median recurrence-free survival
(8·31 months [95% CI 5·39-12·20] and 5·32 months [2·79-not reached],
respectively) compared with patients with favourable kinetics (ie, undetectable
after positive baseline result: 19·25 months [16·39-not reached]; and durable
undetectable: not reached [38·44-not reached], p<0·0001).
INTERPRETATION: Droplet digital PCR measurements of ctDNA to assess minimal
residual disease before adjuvant targeted therapy and during follow-up can
identify patients at high risk of early recurrence. Additional studies using
ctDNA measurements to guide therapeutic interventions might lead to improvements
in the management of resected stage III melanoma.
FUNDING: Novartis.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved, including those for text and
data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(25)00139-1
PMID: 40250457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests GVL is a consultant
advisor for Agenus, Amgen, Array Biopharma, AstraZeneca, Bayer Health Care,
BioNTech, Boehringer Ingelheim International, Bristol Myers Squibb, Evaxion
Biotech, GI Innovation, Hexal (Sandoz Company), Highlight Therapeutics, IO
Biotech, Immunocore Ireland, Innovent Biologics USA, Merck Sharp & Dohme
(Australia), Novartis Pharma, PHMR, Pierre Fabre, Qbiotics Group, Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals, Scancell, and Skyline DX BV. GVL also reports personal
honoraria for lectures from Bristol Myers Squibb and Pierre Fabre. JG was an
employee of Novartis at the time of writing the manuscript draft. VA reports
honoraria as a speaker for and participation in advisory boards from Bristol
Myers Squibb, Merck Sharpe Dohme, Novartis, Immunocore, Qbiotics, and Pierre
Fabre, and travel support from Pierre Fabre. DS reports consulting fees from
Roche/Genentech, Merck Serono, Sanofi/Regeneron, Sun Pharma, NeraCare,
Replimune, Helsinn, OncoSec, InflaRx Merck Sharp & Dohme, Immunocore, 4SC,
Pierre Fabre, Array BioPharma, Pfizer, Philogen, Regeneron, Nektar, and Sandoz;
and grants from Bristol Myers Squibb, Amgen, and Novartis, outside of the
submitted work. AH reports consulting fees or advisory role from Amgen, Bristol
Myers Squibb, Merck Serono, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Roche, Philogen,
Regeneron, Sanofi/Aventis, lmmunocore, Replimune, and 10 Biotech, and honoraria
from Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck Serano, Merck Sharp & Dahme, Novartis,
Roche, Philogen, Regeneron, Sanofi/Aventis, lmmunocore, and Replimune. AH also
reports financial support for travel to meetings by Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb,
Merck Serono, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Roche, and Sanofi/Aventis, and
research grants from Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck Serono, Merck Sharp &
Dohme, Novartis, Roche, and Regeneron. MMi reports personal fees from Bristol
Myers Squibb during the conduct of the study as well as personal fees from
Roche, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Pfizer, Merck Serono, BeiGene, IQVIA, Eli Lilly,
Guardant Health, and Limbic. MMa reports consulting fees for and honoraria from
Novartis, Regeneron, Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck Sharp & Dohme, and Sun Pharma.
VC-S reports honoraria from Immunocore; travel support from Pierre Fabre and
Sanofi; and participation in advisory boards for Pierre Fabre and Merck Sharp &
Dohme. MSm reports consulting fees from Regeneron and honoraria from Bristol
Myers Squibb, Merck, and Regeneron. RD has intermittent, project-focused
consulting or advisory relationships with Novartis, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol
Myers Squibb, Roche, Amgen, Takeda, Pierre Fabre, Sun Pharma, Sanofi, Catalym,
Second Genome, Regeneron, T3 Pharma, MaxiVAX SA, Pfizer, and Simcere, outside of
the submitted work. SBA, MD, and MT are Novartis employees. DP is an advisory
board member for Novartis and Merck; reports honoraria from WebMD, Physicians'
Education Resource, and Oncology Specialty Group (OncLive); and has laboratory
research contracts with Novartis and Bristol Myers Squibb and in-kind laboratory
support from BioRad. GMM, JMW, SA, MMS, and MSa declare no competing interests
outside of the submitted work.
