---
reference_id: "PMID:31474092"
title: Proximal renal tubular acidosis with and without Fanconi syndrome.
authors:
- Kashoor I
- Batlle D
journal: Kidney Res Clin Pract
year: '2019'
doi: 10.23876/j.krcp.19.056
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proximal renal tubular acidosis with and without Fanconi syndrome.
**Authors:** Kashoor I, Batlle D
**Journal:** Kidney Res Clin Pract (2019)
**DOI:** [10.23876/j.krcp.19.056](https://doi.org/10.23876/j.krcp.19.056)

## Content

1. Kidney Res Clin Pract. 2019 Sep 30;38(3):267-281. doi: 10.23876/j.krcp.19.056.

Proximal renal tubular acidosis with and without Fanconi syndrome.

Kashoor I(1), Batlle D(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, The Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.

Proximal renal tubular acidosis (RTA) is caused by a defect in bicarbonate 
(HCO3-) reabsorption in the kidney proximal convoluted tubule. It usually 
manifests as normal anion-gap metabolic acidosis due to HCO3- wastage. In a 
normal kidney, the thick ascending limb of Henle's loop and more distal nephron 
segments reclaim all of the HCO3- not absorbed by the proximal tubule. 
Bicarbonate wastage seen in type II RTA indicates that the proximal tubular 
defect is severe enough to overwhelm the capacity for HCO3- reabsorption beyond 
the proximal tubule. Proximal RTA can occur as an isolated syndrome or with 
other impairments in proximal tubular functions under the spectrum of Fanconi 
syndrome. Fanconi syndrome, which is characterized by a defect in proximal 
tubular reabsorption of glucose, amino acids, uric acid, phosphate, and HCO3-, 
can occur due to inherited or acquired causes. Primary inherited Fanconi 
syndrome is caused by a mutation in the sodium-phosphate cotransporter (NaPi-II) 
in the proximal tubule. Recent studies have identified new causes of Fanconi 
syndrome due to mutations in the EHHADH and the HNF4A genes. Fanconi syndrome 
can also be one of many manifestations of various inherited systemic diseases, 
such as cystinosis. Many of the acquired causes of Fanconi syndrome with or 
without proximal RTA are drug-induced, with the list of causative agents 
increasing as newer drugs are introduced for clinical use, mainly in the 
oncology field.

DOI: 10.23876/j.krcp.19.056
PMCID: PMC6727890
PMID: 31474092

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest All authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.