---
reference_id: "PMID:38461085"
title: Mainstream Model of Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer at a Large Tertiary Cancer Centre.
authors:
- Wang X
- Waldman L
- Silberman Y
- Wang M
- Tackey C
- Hanna L
- Vesprini D
- Emmenegger U
- Eisen A
- Smoragiewicz M
journal: Clin Genitourin Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.clgc.2024.02.003
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Aged
- Genetic Testing/methods
- Retrospective Studies
- Tertiary Care Centers
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Ontario
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Checkpoint Kinase 2/genetics
- Mismatch Repair Endonuclease PMS2/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group N Protein/genetics
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
- Homeodomain Proteins
- RNA Helicases
- Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mainstream Model of Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer at a Large Tertiary Cancer Centre.
**Authors:** Wang X, Waldman L, Silberman Y, Wang M, Tackey C, Hanna L, Vesprini D, Emmenegger U, Eisen A, Smoragiewicz M
**Journal:** Clin Genitourin Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clgc.2024.02.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clgc.2024.02.003)

## Content

1. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2024 Jun;22(3):102052. doi:
10.1016/j.clgc.2024.02.003.  Epub 2024 Feb 12.

Mainstream Model of Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer at a Large Tertiary
Cancer Centre.

Wang X(1), Waldman L(2), Silberman Y(3), Wang M(4), Tackey C(5), Hanna L(5),
Vesprini D(6), Emmenegger U(5), Eisen A(7), Smoragiewicz M(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; Department of Medical Oncology, Sunnybrook Odette Cancer
Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Cancer Genetics and High-Risk Program, Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Cancer Genetics and High-Risk Program, Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; Department of Bio-Medical Science, Guelph University, Guelph,
Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(7)Cancer Genetics and High-Risk Program, Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Medical Oncology, Sunnybrook Odette
Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: martin.smoragiewicz@sunnybrook.ca.

BACKGROUND: An estimated 20% to 30% of men with advanced prostate cancer carry a
mutation in DNA damage repair genes, of which half are estimated to be germline.
Eligibility criteria for germline genetic testing expanded significantly for
Ontario patients in May 2021 and many centers adopted a "mainstream" model,
defined as oncologist-initiated genetic testing.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective chart review to report on the first-year
mainstream experience of a large tertiary oncologic center, the Sunnybrook
Odette Cancer Centre. All patients who underwent mainstream at the discretion of
their treating physician were included. A subset underwent somatic profiling as
part of clinical trial screening. Descriptive statistics were used to report
baseline clinicopathologic characteristics and treatments received.
RESULTS: Between May 1, 2021, and May 30, 2022, 174 patients with prostate
cancer underwent mainstream germline genetic testing with a 19-gene panel.
Median age was 75 (IQR 68-80), and 82% of patients were diagnosed with either de
novo metastatic or high-risk localized prostate adenocarcinoma. Fourteen
patients (8%; 95% CI 4%-12%) were found to have a deleterious germline mutation,
including pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in BRCA1/2, ATM, CHEK2, PMS2,
RAD51C, HOXB13, and BRIP1. Forty-nine patients (28%; 95% CI 21%-35%) were found
to have a variant of uncertain significance. Thirty-four patients also had
next-generation sequencing (NGS) of their somatic tissue. Among this subset, 8
of 34 (23%) had an alteration in homologous recombination repair (HRR) genes. Of
the 14 patients with a germline mutation, none had a prior personal history of
malignancy and 6 (43%) did not have any first- or second-degree relatives with
history of prostate, pancreatic, breast, or ovarian cancer.
CONCLUSION: We report on the real-world characteristics of prostate cancer
patients who underwent mainstream germline genetic testing. Personal history and
family history of cancer cannot reliably stratify patients for the presence of
pathogenic germline variants.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clgc.2024.02.003
PMID: 38461085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Dr. Emmenegger reports
personal fees from Amgen, personal fees from AstraZeneca, grants and personal
fees from Astellas, grants and personal fees from Bayer, grants and personal
fees from Janssen, grants and personal fees from Merck, grants and personal fees
from Novartis, personal fees from Pfizer, grants from Clovis, grants from
Roche-Genentech, all outside the submitted work. All other authors disclose no
financial interests or conflicts of interest.
