---
reference_id: "PMID:41633545"
title: "Key Pediatric Dermatologic Conditions: A Clinical Review-Part II."
authors:
- Kaufman LC
- Paradiso MM
- Mosser-Goldfarb JL
journal: Pediatr Ann
year: '2026'
doi: 10.3928/19382359-20251112-04
keywords:
- Humans
- "Skin Diseases/diagnosis, therapy"
- Child
- Primary Health Care
- Pediatrics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Key Pediatric Dermatologic Conditions: A Clinical Review-Part II.
**Authors:** Kaufman LC, Paradiso MM, Mosser-Goldfarb JL
**Journal:** Pediatr Ann (2026)
**DOI:** [10.3928/19382359-20251112-04](https://doi.org/10.3928/19382359-20251112-04)

## Content

1. Pediatr Ann. 2026 Feb;55(2):e76-e80. doi: 10.3928/19382359-20251112-04. Epub
2026 Feb 1.

Key Pediatric Dermatologic Conditions: A Clinical Review-Part II.

Kaufman LC(1), Paradiso MM(2), Mosser-Goldfarb JL(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio.
(2)The Ohio State University Department of Dermatology, Columbus, Ohio.
(3)Nationwide Children's Hospital Department of Dermatology, Columbus, Ohio.

Dermatologic complaints are commonly encountered in pediatric primary care,
accounting for up to 30% of visits; yet, diagnostic error rates remain high due
to limited dermatologic training during pediatric residency training. This
article, the second installment of a two-part series, provides practical
guidance for primary care pediatricians on five commonly encountered
dermatologic conditions: keratosis pilaris and variants, pity-riasis lichenoides
et varioliformis acuta and pityriasis lichenoides chronica, neonatal vs
infantile acne, Gianotti-Crosti syndrome, and urticarial eruptions. For each
condition, key clinical features, diagnostic challenges, and evidence-based
management strategies are discussed, with a focus on empowering pediatricians to
make timely and accurate diagnoses and improve patient outcomes. Emphasis is
placed on the importance of patient and family education, recognition of
clinical signs, and management approaches. This series aims to bridge existing
knowledge gaps and provide pediatric clinicians with essential tools for
addressing dermatologic conditions in children.

DOI: 10.3928/19382359-20251112-04
PMID: 41633545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: JLM-G has received honoraria for
speaker presentations from the 2025 University of Vermont Winter Dermatology
Conference and the University of Cincinnati Dermatology Grand Rounds; and was on
the advisory board for Incyte Dermatology. The remaining authors have disclosed
no potential conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise.
