---
reference_id: "PMID:23574397"
title: What do we know about asthma triggers? a review of the literature.
authors:
- Vernon MK
- Wiklund I
- Bell JA
- Dale P
- Chapman KR
journal: J Asthma
year: '2012'
doi: 10.3109/02770903.2012.738268
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What do we know about asthma triggers? a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Vernon MK, Wiklund I, Bell JA, Dale P, Chapman KR
**Journal:** J Asthma (2012)
**DOI:** [10.3109/02770903.2012.738268](https://doi.org/10.3109/02770903.2012.738268)

## Content

1. J Asthma. 2012 Dec;49(10):991-8. doi: 10.3109/02770903.2012.738268.

What do we know about asthma triggers? a review of the literature.

Vernon MK(1), Wiklund I, Bell JA, Dale P, Chapman KR.

Author information:
(1)United BioSource Corporation, London, UK. margaret.vernon@unitedbiosource.com

OBJECTIVE: For patients with asthma, exacerbations and poor control can result 
from exposure to environmental triggers, such as allergens and air particulates. 
This study reviewed the international literature to determine whether a global 
checklist of common asthma triggers might be feasible for use as a research or 
management tool in clinical practice.
METHODS: Literature published from 2002 to 2012 was identified through PubMed 
and EMBASE using the following search terms: asthma, asthma triggers, 
prevalence, among others. A total of 1046 abstracts were found; 85 articles were 
reviewed covering six continents (number of articles): Africa (1), Asia (22), 
Australia (1), Europe (27), North America (22), and South America (4).
RESULTS: The literature consistently pointed to asthma triggers as one 
contributor to poor asthma control. Frequently cited triggers were similar 
across countries/regions and included allergens (particularly pollens, molds, 
dust, and pet dander), tobacco smoke, exercise, air pollutants/particulates, 
weather patterns/changes, and respiratory infections. Definitions of asthma 
triggers, how triggers are taken into account in definitions of asthma control, 
and scientific inquiry into optimal management techniques for triggers were 
inconsistent and sparse.
CONCLUSIONS: Given the apparent importance of triggers in attaining and 
maintaining asthma control, empirical research concerning optimal trigger 
management is needed. Results demonstrate that asthma triggers are similar 
across continents, suggesting a global checklist of triggers for use in research 
and clinical practice would be feasible.

DOI: 10.3109/02770903.2012.738268
PMID: 23574397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]