---
reference_id: "PMID:36983025"
title: "Inherited Disorders of Coenzyme A Biosynthesis: Models, Mechanisms, and Treatments."
authors:
- Cavestro C
- Diodato D
- Tiranti V
- Di Meo I
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24065951
keywords:
- Humans
- Iron/metabolism
- Pantothenate Kinase-Associated Neurodegeneration/drug therapy
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated"
- Biosynthetic Pathways/genetics
- Coenzyme A/metabolism
- Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited Disorders of Coenzyme A Biosynthesis: Models, Mechanisms, and Treatments.
**Authors:** Cavestro C, Diodato D, Tiranti V, Di Meo I
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24065951](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24065951)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 21;24(6):5951. doi: 10.3390/ijms24065951.

Inherited Disorders of Coenzyme A Biosynthesis: Models, Mechanisms, and 
Treatments.

Cavestro C(1), Diodato D(2), Tiranti V(1), Di Meo I(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Medical Genetics and Neurogenetics, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto 
Neurologico Carlo Besta, 20126 Milan, Italy.
(2)Unit of Muscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, 00165 Rome, Italy.

Coenzyme A (CoA) is a vital and ubiquitous cofactor required in a vast number of 
enzymatic reactions and cellular processes. To date, four rare human inborn 
errors of CoA biosynthesis have been described. These disorders have distinct 
symptoms, although all stem from variants in genes that encode enzymes involved 
in the same metabolic process. The first and last enzymes catalyzing the CoA 
biosynthetic pathway are associated with two neurological conditions, namely 
pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) and COASY 
protein-associated neurodegeneration (CoPAN), which belong to the heterogeneous 
group of neurodegenerations with brain iron accumulation (NBIA), while the 
second and third enzymes are linked to a rapidly fatal dilated cardiomyopathy. 
There is still limited information about the pathogenesis of these diseases, and 
the knowledge gaps need to be resolved in order to develop potential therapeutic 
approaches. This review aims to provide a summary of CoA metabolism and 
functions, and a comprehensive overview of what is currently known about 
disorders associated with its biosynthesis, including available preclinical 
models, proposed pathomechanisms, and potential therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24065951
PMCID: PMC10054636
PMID: 36983025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.