---
reference_id: "PMID:24485215"
title: "Lifestyle and cardiometabolic risk in adults with type 1 diabetes: a review."
authors:
- Leroux C
- Brazeau AS
- Gingras V
- Desjardins K
- Strychar I
- Rabasa-Lhoret R
journal: Can J Diabetes
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcjd.2013.08.268
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lifestyle and cardiometabolic risk in adults with type 1 diabetes: a review.
**Authors:** Leroux C, Brazeau AS, Gingras V, Desjardins K, Strychar I, Rabasa-Lhoret R
**Journal:** Can J Diabetes (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcjd.2013.08.268](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcjd.2013.08.268)

## Content

1. Can J Diabetes. 2014 Feb;38(1):62-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jcjd.2013.08.268.

Lifestyle and cardiometabolic risk in adults with type 1 diabetes: a review.

Leroux C(1), Brazeau AS(2), Gingras V(1), Desjardins K(1), Strychar I(3), 
Rabasa-Lhoret R(4).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 
Department of Nutrition, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Nutrition, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 
Montreal Diabetes Research Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; University of 
Montreal Hospital Research Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 
Department of Nutrition, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 
Montreal Diabetes Research Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Division of 
Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de 
Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: 
Remi.rabasa-lhoret@ircm.qc.ca.

Over the past decades, there has been a major upward shift in the prevalence of 
cardiometabolic risk (CMR) factors (central obesity, insulin resistance, 
hypertension and dyslipidemia) in patients with type 1 diabetes, which could 
have either an additive or a synergistic effect on risk for cardiovascular 
disease. These metabolic changes are occurring in parallel to the worldwide 
obesity epidemic and the widespread use of intensive insulin therapy. Poor 
lifestyle habits (poor diet quality, sedentary behaviours and smoking) are known 
to be driving factors for increased CMR factors in the general population. The 
objective of this review is to explore the lifestyle habits of adults with type 
1 diabetes and its potential association with CMR factors. Evidence suggests 
that adherence to dietary guidelines is low in subjects with type 1 diabetes 
with a high prevalence of patients consuming an atherogenic diet. Sedentary 
habits are also more prevalent than in the general population, possibly because 
of the additional contribution of exercise-induced hypoglycemic fear. Moreover, 
the prevalence of smokers is still significant in the population with type 1 
diabetes. All of these behaviours could trigger a cascade of metabolic anomalies 
that may contribute to increased CMR factors in patients with type 1 diabetes. 
The intensification of insulin treatment leading to new daily challenges (e.g. 
carbohydrates counting, increase of hypoglycemia) could contribute to the 
adoption of poor lifestyle habits. Preventive measures, such as identification 
of patients at high risk and promotion of lifestyle changes, should be 
encouraged. The most appropriate therapeutic measures remain to be established.

Copyright © 2014 Canadian Diabetes Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcjd.2013.08.268
PMID: 24485215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]