---
reference_id: "PMID:9753516"
title: Basophils and mast cells in airway inflammation and asthma.
authors:
- Denburg JA
journal: Can Respir J
year: '1998'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Basophils and mast cells in airway inflammation and asthma.
**Authors:** Denburg JA
**Journal:** Can Respir J (1998)

## Content

1. Can Respir J. 1998 Jul-Aug;5 Suppl A:41A-4A.

Basophils and mast cells in airway inflammation and asthma.

Denburg JA(1).

Author information:
(1)McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada. denburg@fhs.csu.mcmaster.ca

Accumulation of basophils and mast cells in airway tissues during allergic and 
allergic-type inflammatory responses, including asthma, is one of the hallmarks 
of these disease processes. Contributing mechanisms include induction of 
differentiation of the cell lineages, including production of 
differentiation-specific cytokines for these lineages within the tissues; 
enhanced survival of the cells during inflammation within the airways; 
attraction to tissue factors such as extracellular matrix proteins (fibronectin 
and vitronectin) in inflammation; and heterogeneity of the cells and their 
products during both early- and late-phase responses within the inflamed 
airways. Whether the mast cell and basophil can be simplistically assigned a 
role for early- and late-phase responses, respectively, and whether the cells 
are both necessary and sufficient for the ongoing asthmatic response, including 
the development of bronchial hyper-responsiveness, remain to be studied. The 
relative contributions of basophils, mast cells, eosinophils and T cells to the 
inflammatory process and production of proinflammatory and hemopoietic cytokines 
within inflamed airway tissues remain subjects of active investigation.

PMID: 9753516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]