---
reference_id: "PMID:30929919"
title: ANK2 functionally interacts with KCNH2 aggravating long QT syndrome in a double mutation carrier.
authors:
- Gessner G
- Runge S
- Koenen M
- Heinemann SH
- Koenen M
- Haas J
- Meder B
- Thomas D
- Katus HA
- Schweizer PA
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.162
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Animals
- "Ankyrins/genetics, metabolism"
- "ERG1 Potassium Channel/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/etiology, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Oocytes/metabolism
- Pedigree
- Xenopus laevis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ANK2 functionally interacts with KCNH2 aggravating long QT syndrome in a double mutation carrier.
**Authors:** Gessner G, Runge S, Koenen M, Heinemann SH, Koenen M, Haas J, Meder B, Thomas D, Katus HA, Schweizer PA
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.162](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.162)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2019 May 14;512(4):845-851. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.162. Epub 2019 Mar 28.

ANK2 functionally interacts with KCNH2 aggravating long QT syndrome in a double
mutation carrier.

Gessner G(1), Runge S(2), Koenen M(3), Heinemann SH(1), Koenen M(4), Haas J(5),
Meder B(5), Thomas D(5), Katus HA(5), Schweizer PA(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Biomedicine, Department of Biophysics, Friedrich
Schiller University Jena and Jena University Hospital, Hans-Knöll-St. 2,
D-07745, Jena, Germany.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Medical University Hospital Heidelberg, INF 410,
D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Medical University Hospital Heidelberg, INF 410,
D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Max Planck
Institute for Medical Research, Jahnstr. 29, D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Institute for Comparative and Molecular Endocrinology, University of Ulm,
Helmholtzstr. 8/1, D-89081, Ulm, Germany.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Medical University Hospital Heidelberg, INF 410,
D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany; DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research),
partner site Heidelberg/Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, INF 410, D-69120,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Medical University Hospital Heidelberg, INF 410,
D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany; DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research),
partner site Heidelberg/Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, INF 410, D-69120,
Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
patrick.schweizer@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Pathogenic long QT mutations often comprise high phenotypic variability and
particularly variants in ANK2 (long QT syndrome 4) frequently lack QT
prolongation. We sought to elucidate the genetic and functional background
underlying the clinical diversity in a 3-generation family with different
cardiac arrhythmias. Next-generation sequencing-based screening of patients with
QT prolongation identified the index patient of the family carrying an
ANK2-E1813K variant and a previously uncharacterized KCNH2-H562R mutation in a
double heterozygous conformation. The patient presented with a severe clinical
phenotype including a markedly prolonged QTc interval (544 ms), recurrent
syncope due to Torsade de Pointes tachycardias, survived cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, progressive cardiac conduction defect, and atrial fibrillation.
Evaluation of other family members identified a sister and a niece solely
carrying the ANK2-E1813K variant, who showed age-related conduction disease. An
asymptomatic second sister solely carried the KCNH2-H562R mutation.
Voltage-clamp recordings in Xenopus oocytes revealed that KCNH2-H562R subunits
were non-functional but did not exert dominant-negative effects on wild-type
subunits. Expression of KCNH2-H562R in HEK293 cells showed a trafficking
deficiency. Co-expression of the C-terminal regulatory domain of ANK2 in Xenopus
oocytes revealed that ANK2-E1813K diminished currents mediated by the
combination of wild-type and H562R KCNH2 subunits. Our data suggest that ANK2
functionally interacts with KCNH2 leading to a stronger current suppression and
marked aggravation of long QT syndrome in the patient carrying variants in both
proteins.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.162
PMID: 30929919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
