---
reference_id: "PMID:25042840"
title: "Renal cells exposed to cadmium in vitro and in vivo: normalizing gene expression data."
authors:
- Nair AR
- Smeets K
- Keunen E
- Lee WK
- Thévenod F
- Van Kerkhove E
- Cuypers A
journal: J Appl Toxicol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/jat.3047
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal cells exposed to cadmium in vitro and in vivo: normalizing gene expression data.
**Authors:** Nair AR, Smeets K, Keunen E, Lee WK, Thévenod F, Van Kerkhove E, Cuypers A
**Journal:** J Appl Toxicol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jat.3047](https://doi.org/10.1002/jat.3047)

## Content

1. J Appl Toxicol. 2015 May;35(5):478-84. doi: 10.1002/jat.3047. Epub 2014 Jul
18.

Renal cells exposed to cadmium in vitro and in vivo: normalizing gene expression 
data.

Nair AR(1), Smeets K, Keunen E, Lee WK, Thévenod F, Van Kerkhove E, Cuypers A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Environmental Sciences, Hasselt University, Agoralaan Building D, 
3590, Diepenbeek, Belgium.

Cadmium (Cd) is a toxic metal with a long half-life in biological systems. This 
half-life is partly as a result of metallothioneins (MTs), metal-binding 
proteins with a high affinity for Cd. The high retention properties of the 
kidneys reside in proximal tubular cells that possess transport mechanisms for 
Cd-MT uptake, ultimately leading to more Cd accumulation. Researchers have 
studied MT-metal interactions using various techniques including quantitative 
real-time PCR (qPCR), an efficient tool for quantifying gene expression. Often a 
poor choice of reference genes, which is represented by their instability and 
condition dependency, leads to inefficient normalization of gene expression data 
and misinterpretations. This study demonstrates the importance of an efficient 
normalization strategy in toxicological research. A selection of stable 
reference genes was proposed in order to acquire reliable and reproducible gene 
quantification under metal stress using MT expression as an example. Moreover, 
in vitro and in vivo setups were compared to identify the influence of 
toxicological compounds in function of the experimental design. This study shows 
that glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Gapdh), tyrosine 
monooxygenase/tryptophan5-monooxygenase activation-protein, zeta polypeptide 
(Ywhaz) and beta-actin (Actb) are the most stable reference genes in a kidney 
proximal tubular cell line exposed to moderate and high Cd concentrations, 
applied as CdCl2 . A slightly different sequence in reference gene stability was 
found in renal cells isolated from rats in vivo exposed to Cd. It was further 
shown that three reference genes are required for efficient normalization in 
this experimental setup. This study demonstrates the importance of an efficient 
normalization strategy in toxicological research.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jat.3047
PMID: 25042840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]