---
reference_id: "PMID:39746677"
title: Novel Phenotypes and Genotype-Phenotype Correlations in a Large Clinical Cohort of Patients With Kleefstra Syndrome.
authors:
- Frazier ZJ
- Kilic S
- Osika H
- Mo A
- Quinn M
- Ballal S
- Katz T
- Shearer AE
- Horlbeck MA
- Pais LS
- Dies KA
- "O'Donnell-Luria A"
- Kossowsky J
- Lipton JO
- Kleefstra T
- Srivastava S
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/cge.14697
keywords:
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9"
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Cohort Studies
- Genotype
- Phenotype
- Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Phenotypes and Genotype-Phenotype Correlations in a Large Clinical Cohort of Patients With Kleefstra Syndrome.
**Authors:** Frazier ZJ, Kilic S, Osika H, Mo A, Quinn M, Ballal S, Katz T, Shearer AE, Horlbeck MA, Pais LS, Dies KA, O'Donnell-Luria A, Kossowsky J, Lipton JO, Kleefstra T, Srivastava S
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.14697](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.14697)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2025 Jun;107(6):636-645. doi: 10.1111/cge.14697. Epub 2025 Jan 2.

Novel Phenotypes and Genotype-Phenotype Correlations in a Large Clinical Cohort 
of Patients With Kleefstra Syndrome.

Frazier ZJ(1), Kilic S(2), Osika H(1), Mo A(3), Quinn M(1), Ballal S(4), Katz 
T(5), Shearer AE(6), Horlbeck MA(7), Pais LS(7)(8), Dies KA(1), O'Donnell-Luria 
A(7)(8), Kossowsky J(9), Lipton JO(1)(3), Kleefstra T(10)(11), Srivastava 
S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Rosamund Stone Zander Translational Neuroscience Center, Department of 
Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)School of Arts and Sciences, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology & Communication Enhancement, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(9)Department of Anesthesiology, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(10)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(11)Center of Excellence for Neuropsychiatry, Vincent van Gogh Institute for 
Psychiatry, Venray and Human Genetics, Radboud UMC, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Kleefstra syndrome (KLEFS) is a genetic neurodevelopmental disorder caused by 
haploinsufficiency of EHMT1. The full spectrum of clinical features and 
genotype-phenotype correlations is currently not fully understood. We performed 
a retrospective chart review of patients with KLEFS evaluated at the Boston 
Children's Hospital Kleefstra Clinic. There were 65 individuals (40 females, 25 
males, mean age 9.3 years). 17% had large 9q34 deletions (≥ 1 Mb), 29% had small 
9q34 deletions (< 1 Mb), and 54% had sequence variants. Global developmental 
delay (GDD) or intellectual disability (ID) was present in 77%. Behavioral 
disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder (38%), were common. Epilepsy 
affected 15%. Systemic health issues included structural cardiac defects (40%), 
hearing loss (32%), and constipation (31%). Novel features including subgroups 
with significant motor impairment (24%) and refractory epilepsy (9%), as well as 
small numbers with opsoclonus-like eye movements (n = 2), thrombocytopenia 
(n = 2), progressive cerebral atrophy (n = 1), and adrenal carcinoma (n = 1). 
9q34 deletion subgroups had higher rates of GDD/ID (p = 0.037), significant 
motor impairment (p = 0.01), epilepsy (p = 0.004), and cortical visual 
impairment (p = 0.003) compared to the subgroup with sequence variants. This 
information may be used to improve clinical care as well as inform research and 
future therapeutic initiatives.

© 2025 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.14697
PMCID: PMC12050201
PMID: 39746677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest SS: SS has received 
consulting fees from GLG, Guidepoint (which connected to a client, Fortress 
Biotech), Novartis, ExpertConnect, Orchard Therapeutics. MAH: MAH has received 
consulting fees from Akuos Inc. and DEM BioPharma. JOL: JOL has received 
consulting fees from Synchronicity Pharma.