---
reference_id: "PMID:11739418"
title: Phenotypes Associated with SHOX Deficiency.
authors:
- Ross JL
- Scott C Jr
- Marttila P
- Kowal K
- Nass A
- Papenhausen P
- Abboudi J
- Osterman L
- Kushner H
- Carter P
- Ezaki M
- Elder F
- Wei F
- Chen H
- Zinn AR
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1210/jcem.86.12.8125
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Body Height
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Palate/abnormalities
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation/genetics
- Scoliosis/etiology
- Short Stature Homeobox Protein
- "Turner Syndrome/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Wrist/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypes Associated with SHOX Deficiency.
**Authors:** Ross JL, Scott C Jr, Marttila P, Kowal K, Nass A, Papenhausen P, Abboudi J, Osterman L, Kushner H, Carter P, Ezaki M, Elder F, Wei F, Chen H, Zinn AR
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.86.12.8125](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.86.12.8125)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Dec;86(12):5674-80. doi:
10.1210/jcem.86.12.8125.

Phenotypes Associated with SHOX Deficiency.

Ross JL(1), Scott C Jr, Marttila P, Kowal K, Nass A, Papenhausen P, Abboudi J, 
Osterman L, Kushner H, Carter P, Ezaki M, Elder F, Wei F, Chen H, Zinn AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19107, USA. Judith.Ross@mail.tju.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Dec;86(12):5672-3. doi: 
10.1210/jcem.86.12.eg1201.8186.
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Apr;87(4):1911-2; author reply 1912. doi: 
10.1210/jcem.87.4.8424.

Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) (MIM 127300) is a dominantly inherited 
skeletal dysplasia characterized phenotypically by Madelung wrist deformity, 
mesomelia, and short stature. LWD can now be defined genetically by 
haploinsufficiency of the SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing) gene. We have 
studied 21 LWD families (43 affected LWD subjects, including 32 females and 11 
males, ages 3-56 yr) with confirmed SHOX abnormalities. We investigated the 
relationship between SHOX mutations, height deficit, and Madelung deformity to 
determine the contribution of SHOX haploinsufficiency to the LWD and Turner 
syndrome (TS) phenotypes. Also, we examined the effects of age, gender, and 
female puberty (estrogen) on the LWD phenotype. SHOX deletions were present in 
affected individuals from 17 families (81%), and point mutations were detected 
in 4 families (19%). In the LWD subjects, height deficits ranged from -4.6 to 
+0.6 SD (mean +/- SD = -2.2 +/- 1.0). There were no statistically significant 
effects of age, gender, pubertal status, or parental origin of SHOX mutations on 
height z-score. The height deficit in LWD is approximately two thirds that of 
TS. Madelung deformity was present in 74% of LWD children and adults and was 
more frequent and severe in females than males. The prevalence of the Madelung 
deformity was higher in the LWD vs. a TS population. The prevalence of increased 
carrying angle, high arched palate, and scoliosis was similar in the two 
populations. In conclusion, SHOX deletions or mutations accounted for all of our 
LWD cases. SHOX haploinsufficiency accounts for most, but not all, of the TS 
height deficit. The LWD phenotype shows some gender- and age-related 
differences.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.86.12.8125
PMID: 11739418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]