---
reference_id: "PMID:24698610"
title: Surgical management of lens subluxation in Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Miraldi Utz V
- Coussa RG
- Traboulsi EI
journal: J AAPOS
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2013.12.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical management of lens subluxation in Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Miraldi Utz V, Coussa RG, Traboulsi EI
**Journal:** J AAPOS (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaapos.2013.12.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaapos.2013.12.007)

## Content

1. J AAPOS. 2014 Apr;18(2):140-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2013.12.007.

Surgical management of lens subluxation in Marfan syndrome.

Miraldi Utz V(1), Coussa RG(2), Traboulsi EI(3).

Author information:
(1)Abrahamson Eye Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
(3)The Cole Eye Institute, Ophthalmology, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of 
Medicine of Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. Electronic 
address: traboue@ccf.org.

PURPOSE: To review the literature on the surgical management, describe a 
simplified surgical technique, and to report the postoperative clinical course 
of ectopia lentis removal in patients with Marfan syndrome.
METHODS: The medical records of patients with a clinical diagnosis of Marfan 
syndrome and clinically significant lens subluxation were retrospectively 
reviewed. Patients underwent lens extraction by a single surgeon via a 
simplified anterior segment approach. The pre- and postoperative best-corrected 
visual acuity, biometric measurements, intraocular pressure, and incidence of 
surgery-related complications were reviewed.
RESULTS: A total of 42 eyes of 22 patients were included. Mean postoperative 
follow-up was 4.9 ± 2.9 years (range, 1-10 years). Average age at surgery was 
10.2 ± 9.2 years (range, 2-37 years), with 18 patients (36 eyes) ≤ 18 years of 
age. The average preoperative best-corrected visual acuity was 20/80, and the 
average postoperative best-corrected visual acuity at last follow-up was 20/25, 
with an average improvement of 6 lines on the Snellen chart. All eyes had a 
best-corrected visual acuity > 20/30 at last follow-up with aphakic correction. 
One eye of 1 patient developed a retinal detachment following blunt trauma. No 
other intra- or postoperative complications were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Anterior lensectomy and limited vitrectomy with aphakic correction 
is safe and provides a consistent visual outcome in patients with lens 
subluxation secondary to Marfan syndrome. This is especially important in 
pediatric patients, in whom long-term follow-up for iris- and scleral-fixated 
intraocular lenses is limited.

Copyright © 2014 American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and 
Strabismus. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2013.12.007
PMID: 24698610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]