---
reference_id: "PMID:38964420"
title: "Fazirsiran for Adults With Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Liver Disease: A Phase 2 Placebo Controlled Trial (SEQUOIA)."
authors:
- Clark VC
- Strange C
- Strnad P
- Sanchez AJ
- Kwo P
- Pereira VM
- van Hoek B
- Barjaktarevic I
- Corsico AG
- Pons M
- Goldklang M
- Gray M
- Kuhn B
- Vargas HE
- Vierling JM
- Vuppalanchi R
- Brantly M
- Kappe N
- Chang T
- Schluep T
- Zhou R
- Hamilton J
- San Martin J
- Loomba R
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2024.06.028
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fazirsiran for Adults With Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Liver Disease: A Phase 2 Placebo Controlled Trial (SEQUOIA).
**Authors:** Clark VC, Strange C, Strnad P, Sanchez AJ, Kwo P, Pereira VM, van Hoek B, Barjaktarevic I, Corsico AG, Pons M, Goldklang M, Gray M, Kuhn B, Vargas HE, Vierling JM, Vuppalanchi R, Brantly M, Kappe N, Chang T, Schluep T, Zhou R, Hamilton J, San Martin J, Loomba R
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2024.06.028](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2024.06.028)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2024 Oct;167(5):1008-1018.e5. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2024.06.028. Epub 2024 Jul 2.

Fazirsiran for Adults With Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Liver Disease: A Phase 
2 Placebo Controlled Trial (SEQUOIA).

Clark VC(1), Strange C(2), Strnad P(3), Sanchez AJ(4), Kwo P(5), Pereira VM(6), 
van Hoek B(7), Barjaktarevic I(8), Corsico AG(9), Pons M(10), Goldklang M(11), 
Gray M(12), Kuhn B(13), Vargas HE(14), Vierling JM(15), Vuppalanchi R(16), 
Brantly M(17), Kappe N(18), Chang T(19), Schluep T(19), Zhou R(19), Hamilton 
J(19), San Martin J(19), Loomba R(20).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida. Electronic address: 
Virginia.clark@medicine.ufl.edu.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep Medicine, Medical 
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital, 
Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule, Aachen University, Health Care 
Provider of the European Reference Network on Rare Liver Disorders, Aachen, 
Germany.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Iowa Hospital and 
Clinics, Iowa City, Iowa.
(5)School of Medicine, Stanford University, Redwood City, California.
(6)Hospital Central do Funchal, Madeira, Portugal; Universidade da Madeira, 
Madeira, Portugal.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology and LUMC Transplantation 
Center, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(8)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine at University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy; Division of Respiratory Diseases, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo 
Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(10)Liver Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, Vall d'Hebron University 
Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Research, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, CIBERehd, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New York.
(12)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
(13)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of 
California, Davis, Sacramento, California; University of California, Davis, 
Alpha-1 Deficiency Clinic, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, 
California.
(14)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix, 
Arizona.
(15)Departments of Medicine and Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas.
(16)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(17)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida.
(18)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(19)Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Pasadena, California.
(20)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of California, 
University of California San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, California.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Homozygous ZZ alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency produces 
mutant AAT (Z-AAT) proteins in hepatocytes, leading to progressive liver 
fibrosis. We evaluated the safety and efficacy of an investigational RNA 
interference therapeutic, fazirsiran, that degrades Z-AAT messenger RNA, 
reducing deleterious protein synthesis.
METHODS: This ongoing, phase 2 study randomized 40 patients to subcutaneous 
placebo or fazirsiran 25, 100, or 200 mg. The primary endpoint was percent 
change in serum Z-AAT concentration from baseline to week 16. Patients with 
fibrosis on baseline liver biopsy received treatment on day 1, at week 4, and 
then every 12 weeks and had a second liver biopsy at or after weeks 48, 72, or 
96. Patients without fibrosis received 2 doses on day 1 and at week 4.
RESULTS: At week 16, least-squares mean percent declines in serum Z-AAT 
concentration were -61%, -83%, and -94% with fazirsiran 25, 100, and 200 mg, 
respectively, vs placebo (all P < .0001). Efficacy was sustained through week 
52. At postdose liver biopsy, fazirsiran reduced median liver Z-AAT 
concentration by 93% compared with an increase of 26% with placebo. All 
fazirsiran-treated patients had histologic reduction from baseline in hepatic 
globule burden. Portal inflammation improved in 5 of 12 and 0 of 8 patients with 
a baseline score of >0 in the fazirsiran and placebo groups, respectively. 
Histologic meta-analysis of histologic data in viral hepatitis score improved by 
>1 point in 7 of 14 and 3 of 8 patients with fibrosis of >F0 at baseline in the 
fazirsiran and placebo groups, respectively. No adverse events led to 
discontinuation, and pulmonary function tests remained stable.
CONCLUSIONS: Fazirsiran reduced serum and liver concentrations of Z-AAT in a 
dose-dependent manner and reduced hepatic globule burden. (ClinicalTrials.gov, 
Number NCT03945292).

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2024.06.028
PMID: 38964420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]