---
reference_id: "PMID:17848072"
title: Ebolavirus and other filoviruses.
authors:
- Gonzalez JP
- Pourrut X
- Leroy E
journal: Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-70962-6_15
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebolavirus and other filoviruses.
**Authors:** Gonzalez JP, Pourrut X, Leroy E
**Journal:** Curr Top Microbiol Immunol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-540-70962-6_15](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-70962-6_15)

## Content

1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2007;315:363-87. doi:
10.1007/978-3-540-70962-6_15.

Ebolavirus and other filoviruses.

Gonzalez JP(1), Pourrut X, Leroy E.

Author information:
(1)Fundamentals and Domains of Disease Emergence Research Unit, RU178, Institute 
for Research Development, IRD, Paris, France. frjpg@mahidol.ac.th

Since Ebola fever emerged in Central Africa in 1976, a number of studies have 
been undertaken to investigate its natural history and to characterize its 
transmission from a hypothetical reservoir host(s) to humans. This research has 
comprised investigations on a variety of animals and their characterization as 
intermediate, incidental, amplifying, reservoir, or vector hosts. A viral 
transmission chain was recently unveiled after a long absence of epidemic Ebola 
fever. Animal trapping missions were carried out in the Central African rain 
forest in an area where several epidemics and epizootics had occurred between 
2001 and 2005. Among the various animals captured and analyzed, three species of 
fruit bats (suborder Megachiroptera) were found asymptomatically and naturally 
infected with Ebola virus: Hypsignathus monstrosus (hammer-headed fruit beats), 
Epomops franqueti (singing fruit bats), and Myonycteris torquata (little 
collared fruit bats). From experimental data, serological studies and virus 
genetic analysis, these findings confirm the importance of these bat species as 
potential reservoir species of Ebola virus in Central Africa. While feeding bats 
drop partially eaten fruit and masticated fruit pulp (spats) to the ground, 
possibly promoting indirect transmission of Ebola virus to certain ground 
dwelling mammals, if virus is being shed in saliva by chronically and 
asymptomatically infected bats. Great apes and forest duikers are particularly 
sensitive to lethal Ebola virus infection. These terrestrial mammals feed on 
fallen fruits and possibly spats, suggesting a chain of events leading to Ebola 
virus spillover to these incidental hosts. This chain of events may occur 
sporadically at different sites and times depending on a combination of the 
phenology of fruit production by different trees, animal behavior, and various, 
but as yet still unknown environmental factors, which could include drought. 
During the reproductive period, infected body fluid can also be shed in the 
environment and present a potential risk for indirect transmission to other 
vertebrates.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-70962-6_15
PMCID: PMC7121322
PMID: 17848072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]