---
reference_id: "PMID:36268624"
title: Reproductive Phenotypes and Genotypes in Men With IHH.
authors:
- Dwyer AA
- Stamou MI
- Anghel E
- Hornstein S
- Chen D
- Salnikov KB
- McDonald IR
- Plummer L
- Seminara SB
- Balasubramanian R
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgac615
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reproductive Phenotypes and Genotypes in Men With IHH.
**Authors:** Dwyer AA, Stamou MI, Anghel E, Hornstein S, Chen D, Salnikov KB, McDonald IR, Plummer L, Seminara SB, Balasubramanian R
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgac615](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgac615)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2023 Mar 10;108(4):897-908. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgac615.

Reproductive Phenotypes and Genotypes in Men With IHH.

Dwyer AA(1)(2), Stamou MI(2)(3), Anghel E(4), Hornstein S(3), Chen D(2)(3), 
Salnikov KB(2)(3), McDonald IR(1)(3), Plummer L(2)(3), Seminara SB(2)(3), 
Balasubramanian R(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)William F. Connell School of Nursing, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, 
Massachusetts 02467, USA.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital-Harvard Center for Reproductive Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
(3)Reproductive Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02114, USA.
(4)Department of Measurement, Evaluation, Statistics and Assessment, Boston 
College Lynch School of Education and Human Development, Chestnut Hill, 
Massachusetts 02467, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2023 Mar 10;108(4):e50-e51. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgac727.

CONTEXT: Isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) is phenotypically and 
genetically heterogeneous.
OBJECTIVE: This work aimed to determine the correlation between genotypic 
severity with pubertal and neuroendocrine phenotypes in IHH men.
METHODS: A retrospective study was conducted (1980-2020) examining olfaction 
(Kallmann syndrome [KS] vs normosmic IHH [nHH]), baseline testicular volume 
(absent vs partial puberty), neuroendocrine profiling (pulsatile vs apulsatile 
luteinizing hormone [LH] secretion), and genetic variants in 62 IHH-associated 
genes through exome sequencing (ES).
RESULTS: In total, 242 men (KS: n = 131 [54%], nHH: n = 111 [46%]) were 
included. Men with absent puberty had significantly lower gonadotropin levels (P 
< .001) and were more likely to have undetectable LH (P < .001). Logistic 
regression showed partial puberty as a statistically significant predictor of 
pulsatile LH secretion (R2 = 0.71, P < .001, OR: 10.8; 95% CI, 3.6-38.6). Serum 
LH of 2.10 IU/L had a 95% true positive rate for predicting LH pulsatility. 
Genetic analyses in 204 of 242 IHH men with ES data available revealed 36 of 204 
(18%) men carried protein-truncating variants (PTVs) in 12 IHH genes. Men with 
absent puberty and apulsatile LH were enriched for oligogenic PTVs (P < .001), 
with variants in ANOS1 being the predominant PTV in this genotype-phenotype 
association. Men with absent puberty were enriched for ANOS1 PTVs compared to 
partial puberty counterparts (P = .002). PTVs in other IHH genes imparted more 
variable reproductive phenotypic severity.
CONCLUSION: Partial puberty and LH greater than or equal to 2.10 IU/L are 
proxies for pulsatile LH secretion. ANOS1 PTVs confer severe reproductive 
phenotypes. Variable phenotypic severity in the face of severe genetic variants 
in other IHH genes point to significant neuroendocrine plasticity of the HPG 
axis in IHH men.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgac615
PMCID: PMC10211495
PMID: 36268624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]