---
reference_id: "PMID:24662816"
title: AIP inactivation leads to pituitary tumorigenesis through defective Gαi-cAMP signaling.
authors:
- Tuominen I
- Heliövaara E
- Raitila A
- Rautiainen MR
- Mehine M
- Katainen R
- Donner I
- Aittomäki V
- Lehtonen HJ
- Ahlsten M
- Kivipelto L
- Schalin-Jäntti C
- Arola J
- Hautaniemi S
- Karhu A
journal: Oncogene
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.50
keywords:
- Adenoma/metabolism
- Animals
- Cell Line
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, pathology"
- Cyclic AMP/metabolism
- Fibroblasts/cytology
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gi-Go/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- "Pituitary Gland/metabolism, pathology"
- Pituitary Neoplasms/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AIP inactivation leads to pituitary tumorigenesis through defective Gαi-cAMP signaling.
**Authors:** Tuominen I, Heliövaara E, Raitila A, Rautiainen MR, Mehine M, Katainen R, Donner I, Aittomäki V, Lehtonen HJ, Ahlsten M, Kivipelto L, Schalin-Jäntti C, Arola J, Hautaniemi S, Karhu A
**Journal:** Oncogene (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2014.50](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2014.50)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2015 Feb 26;34(9):1174-84. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.50. Epub 2014 Mar
24.

AIP inactivation leads to pituitary tumorigenesis through defective Gαi-cAMP
signaling.

Tuominen I(1), Heliövaara E(1), Raitila A(1), Rautiainen MR(1), Mehine M(1),
Katainen R(1), Donner I(1), Aittomäki V(2), Lehtonen HJ(1), Ahlsten M(1),
Kivipelto L(3), Schalin-Jäntti C(4), Arola J(5), Hautaniemi S(2), Karhu A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Genome-Scale Biology Research Program,
Institute of Biomedicine, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.
(2)Systems Biology Laboratory, Genome-Scale Biology Research Program, Institute
of Biomedicine, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Department of Pathology, HUSLAB, Helsinki University Central Hospital and
Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) is a tumor-suppressor
gene underlying the pituitary adenoma predisposition. Thus far, the exact
molecular mechanisms by which inactivated AIP exerts its tumor-promoting action
have been unclear. To better understand the role of AIP in pituitary
tumorigenesis, we performed gene expression microarray analysis to examine
changes between Aip wild-type and knockout mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cell
lines. Transcriptional analyses implied that Aip deficiency causes a dysfunction
in cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) signaling, as well as impairments in
signaling cascades associated with developmental and immune-inflammatory
responses. In vitro experiments showed that AIP deficiency increases
intracellular cAMP concentrations in both MEF and murine pituitary adenoma cell
lines. Based on knockdown of various G protein α subunits, we concluded that AIP
deficiency leads to elevated cAMP concentrations through defective Gαi-2 and
Gαi-3 proteins that normally inhibit cAMP synthesis. Furthermore, immunostaining
of Gαi-2 revealed that AIP deficiency is associated with a clear reduction in
Gαi-2 protein expression levels in human and mouse growth hormone (GH)-secreting
pituitary adenomas, thus indicating defective Gαi signaling in these tumors. By
contrast, all prolactin-secreting tumors showed prominent Gαi-2 protein levels,
irrespective of Aip mutation status. We additionally observed reduced expression
of phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 and cAMP response
element-binding protein levels in mouse and human AIP-deficient
somatotropinomas. This study implies for the first time that a failure to
inhibit cAMP synthesis through dysfunctional Gαi signaling underlies the
development of GH-secreting pituitary adenomas in AIP mutation carriers.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2014.50
PMID: 24662816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
