---
reference_id: "PMID:11783914"
title: "Hepatocellular carcinoma: an update."
authors:
- Dominguez-Malagón H
- Gaytan-Graham S
journal: Ultrastruct Pathol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1080/019131201753343539
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Cytoplasm/ultrastructure
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Focal Nodular Hyperplasia/pathology
- Hepatocytes/ultrastructure
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Oncogenes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatocellular carcinoma: an update.
**Authors:** Dominguez-Malagón H, Gaytan-Graham S
**Journal:** Ultrastruct Pathol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1080/019131201753343539](https://doi.org/10.1080/019131201753343539)

## Content

1. Ultrastruct Pathol. 2001 Nov-Dec;25(6):497-516. doi:
10.1080/019131201753343539.

Hepatocellular carcinoma: an update.

Dominguez-Malagón H(1), Gaytan-Graham S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Instituto Nacional de Cancerologia,
Tlalpan, Mexico. hdominguezm@conacyt.mx

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common malignant tumor of males in
the world, with an incidence of 1,000,000 new cases a year. It is endemic in
Southeast Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. Risk factors include chronic infection
with hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV), Aflatoxin B1 uptake,
hemochromatosis, and alpha1 -antitripsin deficiency. Epidemiological studies
provide evidence for the association of HCC with HBV infection. The incidence of
HCC is high in regions hyperendemic for HBV. Chronic carrier state and
maternal-infant transmission are important factors in the development of HCC.
Evidence of direct oncogenic effect of H BV is well established, HCCs contain
viral DNA sequences integrated into hepatocyte DNA that act as random
insertional mutagens, and these sites are near genes involved in the control of
proliferation and differentiation. The mechanism of hepatitis C virus in
hepatocarcinogenesis is still imprecise but a high percentage of cases are
related to this virus. Chronic alcohol consumption and cirrhosis are cofactors
that increase the development of HCC in patients with chronic viral infection.
In experimental carcinogenesis a multipotential element called oval cell
proliferates in the early stages. The cellular events are accompanied by
increased expression of several growth factors that enhance the survival of
carcinogen-activated cells by suppressing apoptosis and increasing elements
entering the cell cycle. Hepatic carcinogenesis is a complex process associated
with accumulation of genetic and epigenetic changes that run through steps of
initiation, promotion and progression. Activation of oncogenes of the "ras"
family and others has been detected during chemically-induced HCC in rodents,
but there is little evidence of such activation in human tumors. The role of
tumor supressor genes such as retinoblastoma (RB) and P53 genes has been
documented. Aflatoxin B1 that contaminates foods in endemic areas has a clear
role in hepatocarcinogenesis. Metabolites of this toxin promote apurinic sites
and G to T mutations in chromosomal DNA, the third base of codon 249 of the P53
gene is preferentially targeted to form aducts with aflatoxin B1, and this
mutation has been specifically identified in HBV infection. Histological and
cytological criteria for the diagnosis of HCC are well established and are based
in architectural and cytological changes. An important issue is the diagnosis of
liver "nodules" detected by image, from which small biopsies or aspiration
material is obtained. Special studies such as reticulin, CD34, cytokeratin
profile, and MOC-31 can be very useful for the differential diagnosis of primary
and metastatic tumors. Telomerase activity has been found in HCC and negative in
pericancerous tissue. It is more pronounced in poorly differentiated tumors and
correlates with factors of clinical importance, such as prognosis and
recurrences. Cells of well-differentiated HCC have an ultrastructural appearance
similar to normal hepatocytes. During the process of dedifferentiation, there is
progressive loss of organization of intracellular organelles. The cell cohesion
is lost, intercellular gaps with microvilli appear, the sinusoids become
capillarized, and reparative changes are seen in the spaces of Disse. A variety
of inclusions, such as Mallory bodies, granular material, secondary lysosomes,
and Dubin-Johnson pigment, have been described. Fibrolamellar carcinoma has a
characteristic histological picture and ultrastructurally oncocytic features.
Neuroendocrine granules and combination of HCC with bile duct carcinoma are seen
by electron microscopy.

DOI: 10.1080/019131201753343539
PMID: 11783914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
