---
reference_id: "PMID:36749647"
title: Prdm6 drives ductus arteriosus closure by promoting ductus arteriosus smooth muscle cell identity and contractility.
authors:
- Zou M
- Mangum KD
- Magin JC
- Cao HH
- Yarboro MT
- Shelton EL
- Taylor JM
- Reese J
- Furey TS
- Mack CP
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.163454
keywords:
- Pregnancy
- Female
- Mice
- Humans
- Animals
- "Ductus Arteriosus, Patent/genetics, metabolism"
- Ductus Arteriosus/metabolism
- "Myocytes, Smooth Muscle/metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prdm6 drives ductus arteriosus closure by promoting ductus arteriosus smooth muscle cell identity and contractility.
**Authors:** Zou M, Mangum KD, Magin JC, Cao HH, Yarboro MT, Shelton EL, Taylor JM, Reese J, Furey TS, Mack CP
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.163454](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.163454)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2023 Mar 8;8(5):e163454. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.163454.

Prdm6 drives ductus arteriosus closure by promoting ductus arteriosus smooth 
muscle cell identity and contractility.

Zou M(1), Mangum KD(1), Magin JC(1), Cao HH(1), Yarboro MT(2), Shelton EL(2), 
Taylor JM(1), Reese J(2), Furey TS(1), Mack CP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and McAllister Heart Institute, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.

Based upon our demonstration that the smooth muscle cell-selective 
(SMC-selective) putative methyltransferase, Prdm6, interacts with 
myocardin-related transcription factor-A, we examined Prdm6's role in SMCs in 
vivo using cell type-specific knockout mouse models. Although SMC-specific 
depletion of Prdm6 in adult mice was well tolerated, Prdm6 depletion in 
Wnt1-expressing cells during development resulted in perinatal lethality and a 
completely penetrant patent ductus arteriosus (DA) phenotype. Lineage tracing 
experiments in Wnt1Cre2 Prdm6fl/fl ROSA26LacZ mice revealed normal neural 
crest-derived SMC investment of the outflow tract. In contrast, myography 
measurements on DA segments isolated from E18.5 embryos indicated that Prdm6 
depletion significantly reduced DA tone and contractility. RNA-Seq analyses on 
DA and ascending aorta samples at E18.5 identified a DA-enriched gene program 
that included many SMC-selective contractile associated proteins that was 
downregulated by Prdm6 depletion. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing 
experiments in outflow tract SMCs demonstrated that 50% of the genes Prdm6 
depletion altered contained Prdm6 binding sites. Finally, using several 
genome-wide data sets, we identified an SMC-selective enhancer within the Prdm6 
third intron that exhibited allele-specific activity, providing evidence that 
rs17149944 may be the causal SNP for a cardiovascular disease GWAS locus 
identified within the human PRDM6 gene.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.163454
PMCID: PMC10077476
PMID: 36749647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.