---
reference_id: "PMID:31326280"
title: "An update on anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis for neurologists and psychiatrists: mechanisms and models."
authors:
- Dalmau J
- Armangué T
- Planagumà J
- Radosevic M
- Mannara F
- Leypoldt F
- Geis C
- Lancaster E
- Titulaer MJ
- Rosenfeld MR
- Graus F
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30244-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An update on anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis for neurologists and psychiatrists: mechanisms and models.
**Authors:** Dalmau J, Armangué T, Planagumà J, Radosevic M, Mannara F, Leypoldt F, Geis C, Lancaster E, Titulaer MJ, Rosenfeld MR, Graus F
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30244-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30244-3)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2019 Nov;18(11):1045-1057. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30244-3. 
Epub 2019 Jul 17.

An update on anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis for neurologists and psychiatrists: 
mechanisms and models.

Dalmau J(1), Armangué T(2), Planagumà J(3), Radosevic M(3), Mannara F(3), 
Leypoldt F(4), Geis C(5), Lancaster E(6), Titulaer MJ(7), Rosenfeld MR(8), Graus 
F(3).

Author information:
(1)Neuroimmunology Programme, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i 
Sunyer Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Department of 
Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red para Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, Spain; 
Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic 
address: jdalmau@clinic.cat.
(2)Neuroimmunology Programme, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i 
Sunyer Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Pediatric 
Neuroimmunology Unit, Department of Neurology, Sant Joan de Déu Children's 
Hospital, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Neuroimmunology Programme, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i 
Sunyer Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, 
Kiel, Germany; Department of Neurology, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, 
Kiel, Germany.
(5)Translational Neuroimmunology, Department of Neurology, Jena University 
Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands.
(8)Neuroimmunology Programme, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i 
Sunyer Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Department of 
Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The identification of anti-NMDA receptor (NMDAR) encephalitis about 12 years ago 
made it possible to recognise that some patients with rapidly progressive 
psychiatric symptoms or cognitive impairment, seizures, abnormal movements, or 
coma of unknown cause, had an autoimmune disease. In this disease, 
autoantibodies serve as a diagnostic marker and alter NMDAR-related synaptic 
transmission. At symptom onset, distinguishing the disease from a primary 
psychiatric disorder is challenging. The severity of symptoms often requires 
intensive care. Other than clinical assessment, no specific prognostic 
biomarkers exist. The disease is more prevalent in women (with a female to male 
ratio of around 8:2) and about 37% of patients are younger than 18 years at 
presentation of the disease. Tumours, usually ovarian teratoma, and herpes 
simplex encephalitis are known triggers of NMDAR autoimmunity. About 80% of 
patients improve with immunotherapy and, if needed, tumour removal, but the 
recovery is slow. Animal models have started to reveal the complexity of the 
underlying pathogenic mechanisms and will lead to novel treatments beyond 
immunotherapy. Future studies should aim at identifying prognostic biomarkers 
and treatments that accelerate recovery.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30244-3
PMID: 31326280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]