---
reference_id: PMID:8152774
title: The silent sinus syndrome. A cause of spontaneous enophthalmos.
authors:
- Soparkar CN
- Patrinely JR
- Cuaycong MJ
- Dailey RA
- Kersten RC
- Rubin PA
- Linberg JV
- Howard GR
- Donovan DT
- Matoba AY
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1016/s0161-6420(94)31267-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The silent sinus syndrome. A cause of spontaneous enophthalmos.
**Authors:** Soparkar CN, Patrinely JR, Cuaycong MJ, Dailey RA, Kersten RC, Rubin PA, Linberg JV, Howard GR, Donovan DT, Matoba AY
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0161-6420(94)31267-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0161-6420(94)31267-x)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 1994 Apr;101(4):772-8. doi: 10.1016/s0161-6420(94)31267-x.

The silent sinus syndrome. A cause of spontaneous enophthalmos.

Soparkar CN(1), Patrinely JR, Cuaycong MJ, Dailey RA, Kersten RC, Rubin PA, 
Linberg JV, Howard GR, Donovan DT, Matoba AY, et al.

Author information:
(1)Cullen Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

Comment in
    Ophthalmology. 1994 Nov;101(11):1763-4. doi: 10.1016/s0161-6420(13)31424-9.

PURPOSE: Spontaneous enophthalmos and hypoglobus, in the absence of other 
symptoms and unrelated to trauma or surgery, may be alarming to both physician 
and patient. The authors describe the clinicopathologic features of a benign 
syndrome ("silent sinus syndrome") with this constellation of features and 
discuss the possible pathophysiology.
METHODS: A multicenter retrospective search for similar clinical cases was 
performed. All clinical records, computed tomographs, and pathology reports for 
each case were reviewed at one center. A literature search for similar cases 
also was conducted.
RESULTS: Nineteen cases of a new syndrome are presented. This syndrome affects 
individuals at approximately the fourth decade of life (average age, 36 years; 
range, 29-46 years); is characterized by bone resorption and remodeling of the 
orbital floor due to otherwise asymptomatic maxillary sinus disease; is 
associated with ipsilateral maxillary sinus hypoplasia; and is not fully 
explained by any previously described, classic cystic lesion of the maxillary 
antrum.
CONCLUSION: Enophthalmos and hypoglobus unassociated with prior trauma, surgery, 
or other symptoms may represent "silent sinus syndrome," which is ipsilateral 
maxillary sinus hypoplasia and orbital floor resorption.

DOI: 10.1016/s0161-6420(94)31267-x
PMID: 8152774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]