---
reference_id: "PMID:32679220"
title: "AGA Clinical Practice Update on Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth: Expert Review."
authors:
- Quigley EMM
- Murray JA
- Pimentel M
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.06.090
keywords:
- "Blind Loop Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Practice Patterns, Physicians'"
- Symptom Assessment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AGA Clinical Practice Update on Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth: Expert Review.
**Authors:** Quigley EMM, Murray JA, Pimentel M
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2020.06.090](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2020.06.090)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2020 Oct;159(4):1526-1532. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2020.06.090.  Epub 2020 Jul 15.

AGA Clinical Practice Update on Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth: Expert
Review.

Quigley EMM(1), Murray JA(2), Pimentel M(3).

Author information:
(1)Lynda K. and David M. Underwood Center for Digestive Disorders, Houston
Methodist Hospital and Weill Cornell Medical College, Houston, Texas. Electronic
address: equigley@houstonmethodist.org.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Medically Associated Science and Technology Program, Cedars-Sinai, Los
Angeles, California.

DESCRIPTION: Thanks to ready access to hydrogen breath testing, small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) is now commonly diagnosed among individuals
presenting with a variety of gastrointestinal and even nongastrointestinal
symptoms and is increasingly implicated in lay press and media in the causation
of a diverse array of disorders. Its definition, however, remains controversial
and true prevalence, accordingly, undefined. The purpose of this review,
therefore, was to provide a historical background to the concept of SIBO,
critically review current concepts of SIBO (including symptomatology,
pathophysiology, clinical consequences, diagnosis and treatment), define
unanswered questions and provide a road map toward their resolution.
METHODS: Best Practice Advice statements were developed following discussion by
the 3 authors. Two authors each developed text around certain Best Practice
Advice based on a review of available literature. All 3 authors reviewed the
complete draft and after discussion, redrafting, and further review and
revision, all of the authors agreed on a final draft. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 1:
The definition of SIBO as a clinical entity lacks precision and consistency; it
is a term generally applied to a clinical disorder where symptoms, clinical
signs, and/or laboratory abnormalities are attributed to changes in the numbers
of bacteria or in the composition of the bacterial population in the small
intestine. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 2: Symptoms traditionally linked to SIBO include
bloating, diarrhea, and abdominal pain/discomfort. Steatorrhea may be seen in
more severe cases. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 3: There is insufficient evidence to
support the use of inflammatory markers, such as fecal calprotectin to detect
SIBO. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 4: Laboratory findings can include elevated folate
and, less commonly, vitamin B-12 deficiency, or other nutritional deficiencies.
BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 5: A major impediment to our ability to accurately define
SIBO is our limited understanding of normal small intestinal microbial
populations-progress in sampling technology and techniques to enumerate
bacterial populations and their metabolic products should provide much needed
clarity. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 6: Controversy remains concerning the role of SIBO
in the pathogenesis of common functional symptoms, such as those regarded as
components of irritable bowel syndrome. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 7: Management
should focus on the identification and correction (where possible) of underlying
causes, correction of nutritional deficiencies, and the administration of
antibiotics. This is especially important for patients with significant
maldigestion and malabsorption. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 8: Although irritable bowel
syndrome has been shown to respond to therapy with a poorly absorbed antibiotic,
the role of SIBO or its eradication in the genesis of this response warrants
further confirmation in randomized controlled trials. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 9:
There is a limited database to guide the clinician in developing antibiotic
strategies for SIBO, in any context. Therapy remains, for the most part, empiric
but must be ever mindful of the potential risks of long-term broad-spectrum
antibiotic therapy.

Copyright © 2020 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.06.090
PMID: 32679220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
