---
reference_id: "PMID:29691807"
title: "Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis: an update."
authors:
- Compston J
journal: Endocrine
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s12020-018-1588-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis: an update.
**Authors:** Compston J
**Journal:** Endocrine (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12020-018-1588-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-018-1588-2)

## Content

1. Endocrine. 2018 Jul;61(1):7-16. doi: 10.1007/s12020-018-1588-2. Epub 2018 Apr 
24.

Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis: an update.

Compston J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0SL, UK. 
jec1001@cam.ac.uk.

Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis is the most common secondary cause of 
osteoporosis and the resulting fractures cause significant morbidity. Following 
initiation of oral glucocorticoids, rapid bone loss occurs, and fracture risk 
increases within a few months in a dose-dependent manner. These adverse effects 
are due to inhibition of bone formation accompanied by an early but transient 
increase in bone resorption. Multiple mechanisms underlie these changes in bone 
remodeling; direct effects include upregulation of PPARγR2, increased expression 
of sclerostin and increased RANKL/OPG ratio, whilst hypogonadism, altered renal 
and intestinal calcium handling, and reduced production of insulin-like growth 
factor 1 also contribute. Fracture risk assessment should be performed as soon 
as possible after glucocorticoids are initiated and bone protective therapy 
started promptly in individuals at high-risk, with calcium and vitamin D 
supplements where appropriate. Oral bisphosphonates are currently regarded as 
first line options on the grounds of their low cost. However, teriparatide has 
been shown to be superior in its effects on BMD and vertebral fracture risk in 
glucocorticoid-treated individuals with osteoporosis and should be considered as 
an alternative first line option in high-risk patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-018-1588-2
PMCID: PMC5997116
PMID: 29691807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Prof Compston has received advisory and speaking 
fees from Gilead and speaking fees from Amgen and UCB.