---
reference_id: "PMID:34662067"
title: Primary Congenital Glaucoma.
authors:
- Kaur K
- Zeppieri M
- Gurnani B
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Congenital Glaucoma.
**Authors:** Kaur K, Zeppieri M, Gurnani B

## Content

1. Primary Congenital Glaucoma.

Kaur K(1), Zeppieri M(2), Gurnani B(1).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2024 Nov 10.

Author information:
(1)Gomabai Netralaya and Research Centre
(2)University Hospital of Udine, Italy

Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is a category of glaucoma characterized by 
chronic and progressive visual neuropathies that result in irreversible 
blindness. The classification pertains to childhood glaucoma cases, 
characterized by unique clinical features with an onset before 18 years of age. 
Genetic mutations leading to early-onset glaucoma are uncommon yet significant. 
Childhood glaucoma constitutes a notable category within early-onset glaucoma 
cases. Diagnosis is generally established through specific clinical criteria, 
including elevated intraocular pressure (IOP), optic nerve damage, corneal 
alterations, or visual field defects indicative of optic neuropathy. PCG 
involves impairment of the normal drainage of aqueous fluid in the eye, 
predominantly arising from developmental abnormalities in the trabecular 
meshwork and anterior chamber angle, resulting in elevated IOP. This untreated 
pressure damages the optic nerve, resulting in subsequent vision loss. The 
disease's natural history frequently advances swiftly in the absence of 
intervention, exhibiting a marked tendency for bilateral involvement. Therefore, 
timely diagnosis and intervention are crucial for maintaining vision. The 
trabecular meshwork of the eye is essential for regulating aqueous humor 
outflow. This route is either aberrant or obstructed in PCG, resulting in 
increased IOP. The anterior chamber angle, comprising features such as the 
Schlemm canal and trabecular meshwork, is essential for proper fluid drainage. 
Irregularities in these structures in patients with PCG obstruct the correct 
passage of aqueous humor from the eye, leading to increased IOP, which damages 
the optic nerve and the retinal nerve fiber layer. Comprehending the anatomical 
foundation of PCG is essential for clinical assessment and surgical 
intervention. Hippocrates first described PCG when he noted abnormally enlarged 
eyes in infants. The pathogenesis of increased IOP and angle abnormalities were 
later correlated with this entity. PCG is also referred to as developmental 
glaucoma, as it might not always be present at birth. Subtypes of PCG correlate 
with the age of onset of the disease.These subtypes are: True congenital 
glaucoma: Also known as newborn glaucoma, this subtype accounts for 
approximately 25% of cases of PCG. In true congenital glaucoma, the child is 
either born with ocular enlargement or enlargement of the eyes is noticed within 
the 1st month of life. The elevation IOP likely occurs during fetal life. 
Infantile glaucoma: This subtype of PCG includes patients who manifest symptoms 
between ages 1 and 36 months and accounts for approximately 65% of patients with 
PCG. Juvenile glaucoma: This subtype accounts for approximately 10% of cases of 
PCG and includes patients with signs of elevated IOP that manifest between 3 
years and adulthood. The Hoskin classification is another classification system 
for PCG. This system is based on the area of dysgenesis and comprises 3 types. 
Hoskin type I is referred to as PCG; types II and III are considered secondary 
congenital glaucoma. Type I, Trabeculodysgenesis: The defect lies in the 
development of trabecular meshwork. Type II, Iridotrabeculodysgenesis: This 
includes hypoplasia or hyperplasia of the stroma, anomalous iris vessels, or 
structural defects in the form of coloboma or aniridia. Type III, 
Corneotrabeculodysgenesis : This includes complex cases of congenital glaucoma 
like Axenfield, Rieger, or Peters anomaly. In conjunction with prominent 
ophthalmological organizations, the Childhood Glaucoma Research Network (CGRN) 
has established a consensus-driven classification system for childhood glaucoma. 
This method classifies childhood glaucoma into primary and secondary glaucoma. 
Primary pediatric glaucoma encompasses PCG and juvenile open-angle glaucoma 
(JOAG). PCG, the predominant nonsyndromic variant in infancy, can be further 
categorized by the age of onset into neonatal or newborn onset (within 1 month 
of age), infantile (1 month to 2 years of age), or late-onset (older than 2 
years of age) classifications. PCG usually manifests in neonates or infants with 
symptoms such as buphthalmos (enlarged eyes) and Haab striae (corneal striae). 
In contrast, JOAG is typically asymptomatic and frequently identified in older 
children or discovered incidentally during family screenings. Conversely, 
secondary childhood glaucoma arises from nonacquired ocular defects, nonacquired 
systemic disorders, acquired conditions, or complications following cataract 
surgery. This classification facilitates the differentiation of glaucoma 
subtypes and guides treatment methods, acknowledging the impact of hereditary 
factors and systemic circumstances on disease progression.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 34662067

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Kirandeep Kaur declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Marco Zeppieri 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Bharat Gurnani declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.