---
reference_id: "PMID:37221366"
title: Evaluation of airway involvement and treatment in patients with relapsing polychondritis.
authors:
- Handa H
- Ooka S
- Shimizu J
- Suzuki N
- Mineshita M
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-35616-4
keywords:
- Humans
- "Polychondritis, Relapsing"
- Biological Products
- Granulation Tissue
- Immunosuppressive Agents
- Medical Records
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of airway involvement and treatment in patients with relapsing polychondritis.
**Authors:** Handa H, Ooka S, Shimizu J, Suzuki N, Mineshita M
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-35616-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-35616-4)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 May 23;13(1):8307. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-35616-4.

Evaluation of airway involvement and treatment in patients with relapsing 
polychondritis.

Handa H(1), Ooka S(2), Shimizu J(3), Suzuki N(3), Mineshita M(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, St. 
Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki City, Kanagawa, Japan. 
hiroshihstv@marianna-u.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Rheumatology and Allergology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
St. Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki City, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Department of Immunology and Medicine, St. Marianna University School of 
Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan.
(4)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, St. 
Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki City, Kanagawa, Japan.

Airway involvement in relapsing polychondritis (RP) can be debilitating and life 
threatening, often requiring interventional procedures. If standard therapies 
including systemic corticosteroid and immunosuppressive agents are ineffective, 
airway stenting is often required. Recently, biologics have been reported to be 
effective for RP, and the early administration of biologics may avoid airway 
stenting. To evaluate survival rates and treatment approaches, medical records 
of RP patients with airway involvement were reviewed. These cases were divided 
into the following groups: with and without malacia, stenting and non-stenting, 
and with and without biologics. Kaplan-Meier was used to calculate survival 
rates and log rank tests were used to analyze biologics groups. A total of 77 
patients were enrolled. Airway stenting was performed in 13 patients, all of 
which developed airway malacia. The stenting group had significantly lower 
survival rates than the non-stenting group (p < 0.001). Stent-related 
complications were granulation tissue (85%) and mucostasis (69%). In the 
non-stenting group, a lower mortality rate was observed. A significantly higher 
survival rate was seen in patients administered biologics than without 
(p = 0.014). The early administration of biologics shows promise in preventing 
severe airway disorders that require airway stenting.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-35616-4
PMCID: PMC10205724
PMID: 37221366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.