---
reference_id: "PMID:35618795"
title: Trachoma.
authors:
- Solomon AW
- Burton MJ
- Gower EW
- Harding-Esch EM
- Oldenburg CE
- Taylor HR
- Traoré L
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-022-00359-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trachoma.
**Authors:** Solomon AW, Burton MJ, Gower EW, Harding-Esch EM, Oldenburg CE, Taylor HR, Traoré L
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-022-00359-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-022-00359-5)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2022 May 26;8(1):32. doi: 10.1038/s41572-022-00359-5.

Trachoma.

Solomon AW(1), Burton MJ(2)(3), Gower EW(4)(5), Harding-Esch EM(6), Oldenburg 
CE(7)(8), Taylor HR(9), Traoré L(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases, World Health 
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. solomona@who.int.
(2)International Centre for Eye Health, London School of Hygiene & Tropical 
Medicine, London, UK.
(3)National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre for 
Ophthalmology, Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and UCL Institute of 
Ophthalmology, London, UK.
(4)Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(5)RTI International, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.
(6)Clinical Research Department, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, 
London, UK.
(7)Francis I Proctor Foundation, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(9)Melbourne School of Population Health, University of Melbourne, Carlton, 
Victoria, Australia.
(10)Programme National de la Santé Oculaire, Ministère de la Santé, Bamako, 
Mali.

Trachoma is a neglected tropical disease caused by infection with conjunctival 
strains of Chlamydia trachomatis. It can result in blindness. 
Pathophysiologically, trachoma is a disease complex composed of two linked 
chronic processes: a recurrent, generally subclinical infectious-inflammatory 
disease that mostly affects children, and a non-communicable, cicatricial and, 
owing to trichiasis, eventually blinding disease that supervenes in some 
individuals later in life. At least 150 infection episodes over an individual's 
lifetime are needed to precipitate trichiasis; thus, opportunity exists for a 
just global health system to intervene to prevent trachomatous blindness. 
Trachoma is found at highest prevalence in the poorest communities of low-income 
countries, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa; in June 2021, 1.8 million people 
worldwide were going blind from the disease. Blindness attributable to trachoma 
can appear in communities many years after conjunctival C. trachomatis 
transmission has waned or ceased; therefore, the two linked disease processes 
require distinct clinical and public health responses. Surgery is offered to 
individuals with trichiasis and antibiotic mass drug administration and 
interventions to stimulate facial cleanliness and environmental improvement are 
designed to reduce infection prevalence and transmission. Together, these 
interventions comprise the SAFE strategy, which is achieving considerable 
success. Although much work remains, a continuing public health problem from 
trachoma in the year 2030 will be difficult for the world to excuse.

© 2022. World Health Organization, under exclusive licence to Springer Nature 
Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-022-00359-5
PMID: 35618795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]