---
reference_id: "PMID:39451125"
title: "A retrospective study on biotinidase deficiency: analysis of the Eastern Anatolia region patient cohort."
authors:
- Yaralı O
- Arslan S
- Gündoğdu Öğütlü ÖB
- Guler MC
- Akgül BN
journal: Scand J Clin Lab Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/00365513.2024.2420320
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A retrospective study on biotinidase deficiency: analysis of the Eastern Anatolia region patient cohort.
**Authors:** Yaralı O, Arslan S, Gündoğdu Öğütlü ÖB, Guler MC, Akgül BN
**Journal:** Scand J Clin Lab Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00365513.2024.2420320](https://doi.org/10.1080/00365513.2024.2420320)

## Content

1. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2024 Nov-Dec;84(7-8):470-476. doi: 
10.1080/00365513.2024.2420320. Epub 2024 Oct 25.

A retrospective study on biotinidase deficiency: analysis of the Eastern 
Anatolia region patient cohort.

Yaralı O(1), Arslan S(2), Gündoğdu Öğütlü ÖB(1), Guler MC(3), Akgül BN(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Erzurum Regional Training and Research 
Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Metabolism, Erzurum Regional Training and Research 
Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey.
(3)Department of Physiology, Ataturk University Training and Research Hospital, 
Erzurum, Turkey.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Erzurum Technical University 
Faculty of Science Erzurum, Turkey.

ABTRACTThis study retrospectively reviews individuals diagnosed with biotinidase 
deficiency in Eastern Anatolia to analyze the genetic variants and their 
relationship with biotinidase activity levels. The research focuses on 
determining the percentage impact of different variants on enzyme activity. The 
study included 357 patients who presented to Erzurum City Hospital with symptoms 
of biotinidase deficiency between 2018 and 2023 and were referred to the medical 
genetics department. Biotinidase enzyme levels were determined using 
spectrophotometric and colorimetric techniques, while Sanger sequencing analyzed 
the four exons and intron boundaries of the BTD gene. In the analysis of 357 
patients (181 boys, 176 girls), the most frequent variant was c.1270G > C | 
p.Asp424His. Biotinidase enzyme activity was above 30% in 97.3% of patients with 
a homozygous p.D424His mutation. The mutations that caused the most significant 
decrease in enzyme activity were c.410G > A p.Arg137His, c.38_delinsTCC 
p.Cys13phefs*36, and c.1535C > T p.Thr512Met. Hearing loss (4 patients) and 
optic atrophy (1 patient) were mainly observed in patients with the 
c.38_delinsTCC mutation (homozygous or heterozygous). Most patients were 
asymptomatic, and mild symptoms were effectively prevented with biotin 
treatment. This study provides a detailed analysis of genetic diversity and 
clinical presentation in biotinidase deficiency cases in Eastern Anatolia, 
demonstrating the efficacy of biotin treatment. It highlights the significant 
role of genetic variants in phenotypic diversity and the need for personalized 
treatment, calling for further genetic research to enhance understanding of 
variant diversity and its impact on enzyme activity.

DOI: 10.1080/00365513.2024.2420320
PMID: 39451125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]