---
reference_id: "PMID:18585914"
title: Sensory ataxic neuropathy with ophthalmoparesis caused by POLG mutations.
authors:
- Milone M
- Brunetti-Pierri N
- Tang LY
- Kumar N
- Mezei MM
- Josephs K
- Powell S
- Simpson E
- Wong LJ
journal: Neuromuscul Disord
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2008.05.009
keywords:
- Adult
- "Blepharoptosis/etiology, genetics"
- "Blotting, Southern"
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Polymerase gamma
- DNA-Directed DNA Polymerase/genetics
- "Dysarthria/complications, genetics"
- Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics
- Female
- "Gait Disorders, Neurologic/etiology, genetics"
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Dosage
- "Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- "Mutation/genetics, physiology"
- "Ophthalmoplegia/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- "Paresthesia/etiology, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Succinate Dehydrogenase/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sensory ataxic neuropathy with ophthalmoparesis caused by POLG mutations.
**Authors:** Milone M, Brunetti-Pierri N, Tang LY, Kumar N, Mezei MM, Josephs K, Powell S, Simpson E, Wong LJ
**Journal:** Neuromuscul Disord (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nmd.2008.05.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmd.2008.05.009)

## Content

1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2008 Aug;18(8):626-32. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2008.05.009.
Epub  2008 Jun 27.

Sensory ataxic neuropathy with ophthalmoparesis caused by POLG mutations.

Milone M(1), Brunetti-Pierri N, Tang LY, Kumar N, Mezei MM, Josephs K, Powell S, 
Simpson E, Wong LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

Mutations in POLG gene are responsible for a wide spectrum of clinical disorders 
with altered mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) integrity, including mtDNA multiple 
deletions and depletion. Sensory ataxic neuropathy with ophthalmoparesis (SANDO) 
caused by mutations in POLG gene, fulfilling the clinical triad of sensory 
ataxic neuropathy, dysarthria and/or dysphagia and ophthalmoparesis, has 
described in a few reports. Here we described five cases of adult onset 
autosomal recessive sensory ataxic neuropathy with ophthalmoplegia. All patients 
had ataxia, neuropathy, myopathy, and progressive external ophthalmoplegia 
(PEO). The muscle pathology revealed ragged-red and cytochrome c oxidase (COX) 
negative fibers in three patients. However, deficiencies in the activities of 
mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme complexes were not detected in any of the 
patients' muscle samples. Multiple deletions of mtDNA were detected in blood and 
muscle specimens but mtDNA depletion was not found. Due to these diagnostic 
difficulties, POLG-related syndromes are definitively diagnosed based on the 
presence of deleterious mutations in the POLG gene.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2008.05.009
PMID: 18585914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]