---
reference_id: "PMID:28876549"
title: Useful laboratory markers for the diagnosis of bone marrow involvement by malignant lymphoma.
authors:
- Nishimura K
- Ota R
- Mikajiri Y
- Takahashi K
- Sugishima S
- Eto T
journal: Int J Lab Hematol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12725
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Useful laboratory markers for the diagnosis of bone marrow involvement by malignant lymphoma.
**Authors:** Nishimura K, Ota R, Mikajiri Y, Takahashi K, Sugishima S, Eto T
**Journal:** Int J Lab Hematol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijlh.12725](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijlh.12725)

## Content

1. Int J Lab Hematol. 2018 Feb;40(1):34-40. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12725. Epub 2017
Sep  6.

Useful laboratory markers for the diagnosis of bone marrow involvement by 
malignant lymphoma.

Nishimura K(1)(2), Ota R(2), Mikajiri Y(2), Takahashi K(2), Sugishima S(3), Eto 
T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Hamanomachi Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(4)Department of Hematology, Hamanomachi Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: This study aimed to investigate the effect of bone marrow 
involvement by malignant lymphoma (BMI) on laboratory data and to determine the 
useful laboratory markers for diagnosing BMI.
METHODS: We compared laboratory data between patients with and without BMI. We 
performed multivariate logistic regression and receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC) analyses to evaluate the diagnostic values of independent predictors.
RESULTS: In the BMI group, platelets in peripheral blood (PLT) and megakaryocyte 
count in bone marrow (MgK) were significantly lower than those in the non-BMI 
group (PLT, P < .0001; MgK, P = .0384). The rate of peripheral blood involvement 
by malignant lymphoma (PBI), red blood cell distribution width (RDW), D-dimer 
(DD), soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL2R), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 
and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was significantly higher in the BMI group than 
in the non-BMI group (PBI, P < .0001; RDW, P = .0190; DD, P = .0006; sIL2R, 
P < .0001; AST, P = .0256; LDH, P = .0002). In multivariate analysis, PBI, PLT, 
sIL2R, and MgK levels were independent predictors of BMI.
CONCLUSION: PBI, PLT, sIL2R, and MgK may be the useful laboratory markers for 
BMI diagnosis.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ijlh.12725
PMID: 28876549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]