---
reference_id: "PMID:16501494"
title: Urinary cystine excretion and capacity in patients with cystinuria.
authors:
- Goldfarb DS
- Coe FL
- Asplin JR
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1038/sj.ki.5000104
keywords:
- Biological Assay/methods
- Chemical Precipitation
- Creatinine/urine
- "Cystine/analysis, chemistry"
- Cystinuria/urine
- Female
- Humans
- Hydrogen-Ion Concentration
- Male
- Phase Transition
- Sodium/urine
- Solubility
- Sulfhydryl Compounds/urine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urinary cystine excretion and capacity in patients with cystinuria.
**Authors:** Goldfarb DS, Coe FL, Asplin JR
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.ki.5000104](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ki.5000104)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2006 Mar;69(6):1041-7. doi: 10.1038/sj.ki.5000104.

Urinary cystine excretion and capacity in patients with cystinuria.

Goldfarb DS(1), Coe FL, Asplin JR.

Author information:
(1)Nephrology Section, New York Harbor VAMC, St Vincents Hospital, New York, New 
York 10010, USA. david.goldfarb@med.va.gov

The treatment of cystinuria is hampered by methods used to measure urinary 
lithogenicity. Most cystine assays cannot reliably distinguish cystine from 
soluble thiol drug-cysteine complexes. We used a solid-phase assay of urinary 
cystine capacity in a large sample of patients with cystinuria. A known amount 
of solid-phase cystine is added to urine. In supersaturated urine, cystine 
precipitates onto added crystals, so the solid phase recovered after incubation 
will be greater than that added. We studied the effect of cystine-binding thiol 
drugs (CBTD) to solubilize cystine and determined correlates of cystine capacity 
in patients who were and were not taking CBTD. Increasing concentrations of 
D-penicillamine, tiopronin and captopril dissolved cystine in urine with similar 
efficacy. A general linear model in which 24 h cystine excretion was the 
dependent variable showed that creatinine, urea nitrogen, and sodium excretions 
were associated with cystine excretion (P<0.02, all three). Urine volume, pH, 
and cystine excretion strongly correlated with cystine capacity (P<0.001). 
Tiopronin had no effect on supersaturation in a cross-sectional analysis. A 
subset of supersaturated samples, with negative cystine capacity, occurred 
mainly among women not taking CBTD. For this subset, capacity differed 
significantly between CBTD users and non-users; use of CBTD avoided extremes of 
supersaturation. Female enrichment in the supersaturated group was accounted for 
in part by underprescription of CBTD to women. This assay of cystine capacity 
was reliable in the presence of CBTD. It should be useful in monitoring 
patients' response to dietary interventions and administration of fluid, 
citrate, and CBTD.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ki.5000104
PMID: 16501494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]