---
reference_id: "PMID:20938103"
title: "Congo red, an amyloid-inhibiting compound, alleviates various types of cellular dysfunction triggered by mutant protein kinase cγ that causes spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA14) by inhibiting oligomerization and aggregation."
authors:
- Seki T
- Takahashi H
- Yamamoto K
- Ogawa K
- Onji T
- Adachi N
- Tanaka S
- Hide I
- Saito N
- Sakai N
journal: J Pharmacol Sci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1254/jphs.10170fp
keywords:
- "Amyloid/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Apoptosis/drug effects, genetics"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cerebellum/physiopathology
- Coloring Agents/pharmacology
- Congo Red/pharmacology
- "Dendrites/genetics, metabolism"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- "Embryo, Mammalian"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred ICR"
- "Mutant Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Neuroblastoma/pathology
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/genetics
- "Protein Kinase C/genetics, metabolism"
- Purkinje Cells/metabolism
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias
- "Spinocerebellar Degenerations/drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congo red, an amyloid-inhibiting compound, alleviates various types of cellular dysfunction triggered by mutant protein kinase cγ that causes spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA14) by inhibiting oligomerization and aggregation.
**Authors:** Seki T, Takahashi H, Yamamoto K, Ogawa K, Onji T, Adachi N, Tanaka S, Hide I, Saito N, Sakai N
**Journal:** J Pharmacol Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1254/jphs.10170fp](https://doi.org/10.1254/jphs.10170fp)

## Content

1. J Pharmacol Sci. 2010;114(2):206-16. doi: 10.1254/jphs.10170fp.

Congo red, an amyloid-inhibiting compound, alleviates various types of cellular 
dysfunction triggered by mutant protein kinase cγ that causes spinocerebellar 
ataxia type 14 (SCA14) by inhibiting oligomerization and aggregation.

Seki T(1), Takahashi H, Yamamoto K, Ogawa K, Onji T, Adachi N, Tanaka S, Hide I, 
Saito N, Sakai N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Pharmacological Neuroscience, Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Several missense mutations in the protein kinase Cγ (γPKC) gene have been found 
to cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA14), an autosomal dominant 
neurodegenerative disease. We previously demonstrated that the mutant γPKC found 
in SCA14 is susceptible to aggregation that induces apoptotic cell death. Congo 
red is widely used as a histological dye for amyloid detection. Recent evidence 
has revealed that Congo red has the property to inhibit amyloid oligomers and 
fibril formation of misfolded proteins. In the present study, we examine whether 
Congo red inhibits aggregate formation and cytotoxicity of mutant γPKC. Congo 
red likely inhibits aggregate formation of mutant γPKC – green fluorescent 
protein (GFP) without affecting its expression level in SH-SY5Y cells. Congo red 
counteracts the insolubilization of recombinant mutant γPKC, suggesting that the 
dye inhibits aggregation of mutant γPKC by a direct mechanism. Congo red also 
inhibits aggregation and oligomerization of mutant γPKC-GFP in primary cultured 
cerebellar Purkinje cells. Moreover, the dye reverses the improper development 
of dendrites and inhibits apoptotic cell death in Purkinje cells that express 
mutant γPKC-GFP. These results indicate that amyloid-inhibiting compounds like 
Congo red may be novel therapeutics for SCA14.

DOI: 10.1254/jphs.10170fp
PMID: 20938103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]