---
reference_id: "PMID:37559750"
title: "Diagnosis and Management of Marchiafava-Bignami Disease, a Rare Neurological Complication of Long-term Alcohol Abuse."
authors:
- Singer E
- Bhatt K
- Prashad A
- Rudman L
- Gadelmoula I
- Michel G
journal: Discoveries (Craiova)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.15190/d.2023.7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Management of Marchiafava-Bignami Disease, a Rare Neurological Complication of Long-term Alcohol Abuse.
**Authors:** Singer E, Bhatt K, Prashad A, Rudman L, Gadelmoula I, Michel G
**Journal:** Discoveries (Craiova) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.15190/d.2023.7](https://doi.org/10.15190/d.2023.7)

## Content

1. Discoveries (Craiova). 2023 Jun 30;11(2):e168. doi: 10.15190/d.2023.7. 
eCollection 2023 Apr-Jun.

Diagnosis and Management of Marchiafava-Bignami Disease, a Rare Neurological 
Complication of Long-term Alcohol Abuse.

Singer E(1), Bhatt K(2), Prashad A(2), Rudman L(2), Gadelmoula I(2), Michel 
G(2).

Author information:
(1)UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(2)Larkin Community Hospital, South Miami, FL.

Marchiafava Bignami disease (MBD) is a neurological disorder characterized by 
myelin degeneration and tissue necrosis within the central nervous system. This 
condition predominantly afflicts individuals with chronic alcohol abuse and 
malnutrition. The most distinctive pathological feature of MBD is the necrotic 
degeneration specifically observed in the corpus callosum; however, emerging 
evidence also indicates the potential involvement of other brain regions. The 
main pathophysiological mechanisms involve alcohol consumption, which leads to 
thiamine depletion and disrupts various metabolic pathways. This, in turn, 
hinders myelin synthesis and impairs signal transmission, resulting in a wide 
range of symptoms and signs. MBD can manifest in different stages, including 
acute, subacute, and chronic, each with varying severity. Diagnosing MBD can be 
challenging due to its presenting symptoms being nonspecific. In the era 
preceding the development of sophisticated imaging methodologies, the diagnosis 
of MBD was primarily established through postmortem examination conducted during 
autopsies. However, with a detailed medical history and imaging modalities such 
as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT), it is now 
possible to diagnose MBD and differentiate it from other diseases with similar 
clinical presentations. MRI is considered the gold standard for visualizing 
lesions in the corpus callosum and other affected areas. Also, positron emission 
tomography (PET), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) could show brain damage in the corpus 
callosum associated with MBD. MRI-diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) detects early 
lesions, while diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) investigates clinical 
manifestations and recovery. Poor prognostic indicators for MBD include 
extensive cerebral cortex involvement and severe disturbances in consciousness. 
Differential diagnosis involves ruling out other alcohol-related disorders, such 
as neoplastic conditions, Wernicke's encephalopathy, and multiple sclerosis, 
among others, through careful evaluation. The therapeutic strategies for the 
management of MBD are currently lacking definitive establishment; however, 
available evidence indicates that targeted interventions have the potential to 
induce amelioration. Corticosteroids offer prospective advantages in addressing 
brain edema, demyelination, and inflammation; research findings present a 
heterogeneous outcome pattern. Notably, thiamine treatment reduces the 
likelihood of unfavorable consequences, particularly when administered promptly, 
and thus is endorsed as the primary therapeutic approach for MBD. This review 
will highlight this rare disease that many healthcare providers might not be 
familiar with. By understanding its clinical presentation, differential 
diagnosis, imaging, and management, medical providers might better identify and 
diagnose MBD. Raising awareness about this condition can lead to better 
prevention, early detection, and timely intervention.

Copyright © 2023, Singer E. et al., Applied Systems and Discoveries Journals.

DOI: 10.15190/d.2023.7
PMCID: PMC10406581
PMID: 37559750

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests: The authors whose names 
are listed certify that they have NO affiliations with or involvement in any 
organization or entity with any financial interest (such as honoraria; 
educational grants; participation in speakers’ bureaus; membership, employment, 
consultancies, stock ownership, or other equity interest; and expert testimony 
or patent-licensing arrangements), or non-financial interest (such as personal 
or professional relationships, affi liations, knowledge or beliefs) in the 
subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.