---
reference_id: PMID:17033962
title: Epigenetic allele silencing unveils recessive RYR1 mutations in core myopathies.
authors:
- Zhou H
- Brockington M
- Jungbluth H
- Monk D
- Stanier P
- Sewry CA
- Moore GE
- Muntoni F
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1086/508500
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- "Azacitidine/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Base Sequence
- Case-Control Studies
- "Cells, Cultured"
- CpG Islands
- DNA Methylation
- DNA Primers/genetics
- Decitabine
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Female
- Fetus/metabolism
- Gene Silencing
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genomic Imprinting
- Humans
- Hydroxamic Acids/pharmacology
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- "Myoblasts, Skeletal/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Myopathy, Central Core/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics, metabolism"
- Tissue Distribution
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetic allele silencing unveils recessive RYR1 mutations in core myopathies.
**Authors:** Zhou H, Brockington M, Jungbluth H, Monk D, Stanier P, Sewry CA, Moore GE, Muntoni F
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1086/508500](https://doi.org/10.1086/508500)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Nov;79(5):859-68. doi: 10.1086/508500. Epub 2006 Sep 21.

Epigenetic allele silencing unveils recessive RYR1 mutations in core myopathies.

Zhou H(1), Brockington M, Jungbluth H, Monk D, Stanier P, Sewry CA, Moore GE, 
Muntoni F.

Author information:
(1)Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, Department of Paediatrics, Imperial College, 
Hammersmith Hospital London, United Kingdom.

Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is a source of genetic variation, which 
can mimic recessive mutations by creating transcriptional haploinsufficiency. 
Germline epimutations and genomic imprinting are typical examples, although 
their existence can be difficult to reveal. Genomic imprinting can be tissue 
specific, with biallelic expression in some tissues and monoallelic expression 
in others or with polymorphic expression in the general population. Mutations in 
the skeletal-muscle ryanodine-receptor gene (RYR1) are associated with malignant 
hyperthermia susceptibility and the congenital myopathies central core disease 
and multiminicore disease. RYR1 has never been thought to be affected by 
epigenetic regulation. However, during the RYR1-mutation analysis of a cohort of 
patients with recessive core myopathies, we discovered that 6 (55%) of 11 
patients had monoallelic RYR1 transcription in skeletal muscle, despite being 
heterozygous at the genomic level. In families for which parental DNA was 
available, segregation studies showed that the nonexpressed allele was 
maternally inherited. Transcription analysis in patients' fibroblasts and 
lymphoblastoid cell lines indicated biallelic expression, which suggests 
tissue-specific silencing. Transcription analysis of normal human fetal tissues 
showed that RYR1 was monoallelically expressed in skeletal and smooth muscles, 
brain, and eye in 10% of cases. In contrast, 25 normal adult human 
skeletal-muscle samples displayed only biallelic expression. Finally, the 
administration of the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-deoxycytidine to 
cultured patient skeletal-muscle myoblasts reactivated the transcription of the 
silenced allele, which suggests hypermethylation as a mechanism for RYR1 
silencing. Our data indicate that RYR1 undergoes polymorphic, tissue-specific, 
and developmentally regulated allele silencing and that this unveils recessive 
mutations in patients with core myopathies. Furthermore, our data suggest that 
imprinting is a likely mechanism for this phenomenon and that similar mechanisms 
could play a role in human phenotypic heterogeneity.

DOI: 10.1086/508500
PMCID: PMC1698560
PMID: 17033962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]