---
reference_id: "PMID:32521132"
title: Phase 3 Trial of RNAi Therapeutic Givosiran for Acute Intermittent Porphyria.
authors:
- Balwani M
- Sardh E
- Ventura P
- Peiró PA
- Rees DC
- Stölzel U
- Bissell DM
- Bonkovsky HL
- Windyga J
- Anderson KE
- Parker C
- Silver SM
- Keel SB
- Wang JD
- Stein PE
- Harper P
- Vassiliou D
- Wang B
- Phillips J
- Ivanova A
- Langendonk JG
- Kauppinen R
- Minder E
- Horie Y
- Penz C
- Chen J
- Liu S
- Ko JJ
- Sweetser MT
- Garg P
- Vaishnaw A
- Kim JB
- Simon AR
- Gouya L
- ENVISION Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1913147
keywords:
- "Acetylgalactosamine/adverse effects, analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Adult
- Aminolevulinic Acid/urine
- Double-Blind Method
- Fatigue/etiology
- Female
- Humans
- "Injections, Subcutaneous"
- Least-Squares Analysis
- Liver/drug effects
- Male
- Nausea/etiology
- Pain/etiology
- Patient Outcome Assessment
- Porphobilinogen/urine
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/complications, drug therapy, urine"
- "Pyrrolidines/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- RNAi Therapeutics
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/chemically induced"
- Transaminases/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase 3 Trial of RNAi Therapeutic Givosiran for Acute Intermittent Porphyria.
**Authors:** Balwani M, Sardh E, Ventura P, Peiró PA, Rees DC, Stölzel U, Bissell DM, Bonkovsky HL, Windyga J, Anderson KE, Parker C, Silver SM, Keel SB, Wang JD, Stein PE, Harper P, Vassiliou D, Wang B, Phillips J, Ivanova A, Langendonk JG, Kauppinen R, Minder E, Horie Y, Penz C, Chen J, Liu S, Ko JJ, Sweetser MT, Garg P, Vaishnaw A, Kim JB, Simon AR, Gouya L, ENVISION Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1913147](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1913147)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2020 Jun 11;382(24):2289-2301. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1913147.

Phase 3 Trial of RNAi Therapeutic Givosiran for Acute Intermittent Porphyria.

Balwani M(1), Sardh E(1), Ventura P(1), Peiró PA(1), Rees DC(1), Stölzel U(1),
Bissell DM(1), Bonkovsky HL(1), Windyga J(1), Anderson KE(1), Parker C(1),
Silver SM(1), Keel SB(1), Wang JD(1), Stein PE(1), Harper P(1), Vassiliou D(1),
Wang B(1), Phillips J(1), Ivanova A(1), Langendonk JG(1), Kauppinen R(1), Minder
E(1), Horie Y(1), Penz C(1), Chen J(1), Liu S(1), Ko JJ(1), Sweetser MT(1), Garg
P(1), Vaishnaw A(1), Kim JB(1), Simon AR(1), Gouya L(1); ENVISION Investigators.

Collaborators: Petrides P, Kuter D, Sasapu A, Ritchie B, Monroy S, Ross G, Oh J,
Lee MJ, Kuo HC, Hother-Nielsen O, Sangro B, Guillén Navarro E, Thapar M, Stewart
P, Coman D, Adachi T, Goto Y, Takase KI, Cassiman D, Cappellini M, Singal A,
Levy C, Nakahara F, Marcacci M, Celestin B, D'Avola D, Cohen DE, Turks Wittes J,
Dienstag JL, Shedlofsky SI.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York (M.B.); Porphyria Center Sweden, Center for
Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm (E.S., P.H., D.V.); the Department of Surgical and Medical
Sciences for Children and Adults, Internal Medicine Unit, University of Modena
and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy (P.V.); Hospital Clínic de Barcelona,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona (P.A.P.); King's College London, King's
College Hospital, London (D.C.R., P.E.S.); Klinikum Chemnitz, Chemnitz, Germany
(U.S.); the Liver Center and Porphyria Center, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco (D.M.B., B.W.); the Section on Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Wake Forest University-North Carolina Baptist Medical Center,
Winston-Salem (H.L.B.); the Department of Hemostatic Disorders and Internal
Medicine, Institute of Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, Warsaw, Poland
(J.W.); the University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston (K.E.A.); the
University of Utah, Salt Lake City (C. Parker, J.P.); the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor (S.M.S.); the Department of Medicine, Division of
Hematology, University of Washington, Seattle (S.B.K.); the Center for Rare
Disease and Hemophilia, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan
(J.-D.W.); St. Ivan Rilski University Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria (A.I.);
Porphyria Center Rotterdam, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Disease,
Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands (J.G.L.); the Department of
Medicine, University Hospital of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland (R.K.); Stadtspital
Triemli, Zentrallabor, Zurich, Switzerland (E.M.); Tottori University School of
Medicine, Tottori, Japan (Y.H.); Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA (C.
Penz, J.C., S.L., J.J.K., M.T.S., P.G., A.V., J.B.K., A.R.S.); and the
University of Paris and the Laboratory of Excellence GR-Ex, Paris, and Centre de
Référence Maladies Rares Porphyries, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Colombes - all in France (L.G.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2020 Jun 11;382(24):2366-2367. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2010986.
    N Engl J Med. 2020 Nov 12;383(20):1989. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2026458.

BACKGROUND: Up-regulation of hepatic delta-aminolevulinic acid synthase 1
(ALAS1), with resultant accumulation of delta-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and
porphobilinogen, is central to the pathogenesis of acute attacks and chronic
symptoms in acute hepatic porphyria. Givosiran, an RNA interference therapy,
inhibits ALAS1 expression.
METHODS: In this double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial, we randomly
assigned symptomatic patients with acute hepatic porphyria to receive either
subcutaneous givosiran (2.5 mg per kilogram of body weight) or placebo monthly
for 6 months. The primary end point was the annualized rate of composite
porphyria attacks among patients with acute intermittent porphyria, the most
common subtype of acute hepatic porphyria. (Composite porphyria attacks resulted
in hospitalization, an urgent health care visit, or intravenous administration
of hemin at home.) Key secondary end points were levels of ALA and
porphobilinogen and the annualized attack rate among patients with acute hepatic
porphyria, along with hemin use and daily worst pain scores in patients with
acute intermittent porphyria.
RESULTS: A total of 94 patients underwent randomization (48 in the givosiran
group and 46 in the placebo group). Among the 89 patients with acute
intermittent porphyria, the mean annualized attack rate was 3.2 in the givosiran
group and 12.5 in the placebo group, representing a 74% lower rate in the
givosiran group (P<0.001); the results were similar among the 94 patients with
acute hepatic porphyria. Among the patients with acute intermittent porphyria,
givosiran led to lower levels of urinary ALA and porphobilinogen, fewer days of
hemin use, and better daily scores for pain than placebo. Key adverse events
that were observed more frequently in the givosiran group were elevations in
serum aminotransferase levels, changes in serum creatinine levels and the
estimated glomerular filtration rate, and injection-site reactions.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with acute intermittent porphyria, those who
received givosiran had a significantly lower rate of porphyria attacks and
better results for multiple other disease manifestations than those who received
placebo. The increased efficacy was accompanied by a higher frequency of hepatic
and renal adverse events. (Funded by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals; ENVISION
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03338816.).

Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1913147
PMID: 32521132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
