---
reference_id: "PMID:34329521"
title: "Inborn errors of metabolism and coronavirus disease 2019: Evaluation of the metabolic outcome."
authors:
- Zubarioglu T
- Hopurcuoglu D
- Ahmadzada S
- Uzunyayla-Inci G
- Cansever MS
- Kiykim E
- Aktuglu-Zeybek C
journal: Pediatr Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/ped.14938
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors"
- COVID-19
- Humans
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Propionic Acidemia/complications
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inborn errors of metabolism and coronavirus disease 2019: Evaluation of the metabolic outcome.
**Authors:** Zubarioglu T, Hopurcuoglu D, Ahmadzada S, Uzunyayla-Inci G, Cansever MS, Kiykim E, Aktuglu-Zeybek C
**Journal:** Pediatr Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ped.14938](https://doi.org/10.1111/ped.14938)

## Content

1. Pediatr Int. 2022 Jan;64(1):e14938. doi: 10.1111/ped.14938.

Inborn errors of metabolism and coronavirus disease 2019: Evaluation of the
metabolic outcome.

Zubarioglu T(1), Hopurcuoglu D(1), Ahmadzada S(1), Uzunyayla-Inci G(1), Cansever
MS(2), Kiykim E(1), Aktuglu-Zeybek C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nutrition and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Cerrahpasa
Medical Faculty, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Division of Medical Laboratory Techniques, Department of Medical
Documentation and Techniques, The Vocational School of Health Services, Istanbul
University-Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Infectious diseases can result in a catabolic state and possibly
trigger an acute metabolic decompensation in inborn errors of metabolism (IEM),
which could be life threatening. Studies regarding the course of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infections in patients with IEM are generally
limited to case reports. Here, we aimed to evaluate the clinical findings of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and describe the impact of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infections on metabolic outcomes in IEM
patients.
METHODS: Patients who were diagnosed with different types of IEM and developed
microbiologically confirmed COVID-19 infection were included. Clinical findings
and laboratory results were recorded retrospectively in terms of both IEM and
COVID-19.
RESULTS: Eleven patients with diagnosis of intoxication type metabolic
disorders, five patients with energy metabolism disorders, and six patients with
complex molecular disorders were enrolled. The most frequent clinical finding
was fever (52.1%) followed by fatigue/myalgia (47.8%). None of the patients was
younger than 1 year. None of the patients presented severe or critical disease.
In terms of metabolic decompensation, two patients diagnosed with propionic
acidemia, one patient with methylmalonic acidemia and one patient with
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency presented clinical and
biochemical findings of an acute metabolic attack.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our results, IEM are not found to be an additional risk
factor for severe COVID-19 infection. However, patients with intoxication type
and energy metabolism disorders should be considered as a vulnerable population
for COVID-19 and have a major risk of developing acute metabolic decompensation
that can lead to life-threatening complications.

© 2021 Japan Pediatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ped.14938
PMCID: PMC8447071
PMID: 34329521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
