---
reference_id: "PMID:28942967"
title: De Novo Mutations in PPP3CA Cause Severe Neurodevelopmental Disease with Seizures.
authors:
- Myers CT
- Stong N
- Mountier EI
- Helbig KL
- Freytag S
- Sullivan JE
- Ben Zeev B
- Nissenkorn A
- Tzadok M
- Heimer G
- Shinde DN
- Rezazadeh A
- Regan BM
- Oliver KL
- Ernst ME
- Lippa NC
- Mulhern MS
- Ren Z
- Poduri A
- Andrade DM
- Bird LM
- Bahlo M
- Berkovic SF
- Lowenstein DH
- Scheffer IE
- Sadleir LG
- Goldstein DB
- Mefford HC
- Heinzen EL
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.08.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De Novo Mutations in PPP3CA Cause Severe Neurodevelopmental Disease with Seizures.
**Authors:** Myers CT, Stong N, Mountier EI, Helbig KL, Freytag S, Sullivan JE, Ben Zeev B, Nissenkorn A, Tzadok M, Heimer G, Shinde DN, Rezazadeh A, Regan BM, Oliver KL, Ernst ME, Lippa NC, Mulhern MS, Ren Z, Poduri A, Andrade DM, Bird LM, Bahlo M, Berkovic SF, Lowenstein DH, Scheffer IE, Sadleir LG, Goldstein DB, Mefford HC, Heinzen EL
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.08.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.08.013)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2017 Oct 5;101(4):516-524. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.08.013.
Epub  2017 Sep 21.

De Novo Mutations in PPP3CA Cause Severe Neurodevelopmental Disease with 
Seizures.

Myers CT(1), Stong N(2), Mountier EI(3), Helbig KL(4), Freytag S(5), Sullivan 
JE(6), Ben Zeev B(7), Nissenkorn A(7), Tzadok M(7), Heimer G(7), Shinde DN(4), 
Rezazadeh A(8), Regan BM(8), Oliver KL(9), Ernst ME(2), Lippa NC(2), Mulhern 
MS(2), Ren Z(2), Poduri A(10), Andrade DM(8), Bird LM(11), Bahlo M(5), Berkovic 
SF(12), Lowenstein DH(13), Scheffer IE(14), Sadleir LG(3), Goldstein DB(2), 
Mefford HC(15), Heinzen EL(16).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(2)Institute for Genomic Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, 
NY 10032, USA.
(3)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Otago, Wellington 
6242, New Zealand.
(4)Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA 92656, USA.
(5)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC 3052, 
Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, VIC 3050, Australia.
(6)Department of Neurology & Pediatrics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(7)Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel.
(8)Division of Neurology, Epilepsy Genetics Research Program, Toronto Western 
Hospital, Krembil Neuroscience Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T 
2S8, Canada.
(9)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC 3052, 
Australia; Epilepsy Research Centre, Department of Medicine, Austin Health, The 
University of Melbourne, Heidelberg, VIC 3084, Australia.
(10)Epilepsy Genetics Program, Department of Neurology, Boston Children's 
Hospital and Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA 
92037, USA; Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, CA 92037, USA.
(12)Epilepsy Research Centre, Department of Medicine, Austin Health, The 
University of Melbourne, Heidelberg, VIC 3084, Australia.
(13)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(14)Epilepsy Research Centre, Department of Medicine, Austin Health, The 
University of Melbourne, Heidelberg, VIC 3084, Australia; Florey Institute of 
Neuroscience and Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 
3010, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, Royal Children's Hospital, The 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3050, Australia.
(15)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. Electronic address: hmefford@uw.edu.
(16)Institute for Genomic Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic address: 
eh2682@cumc.columbia.edu.

Exome sequencing has readily enabled the discovery of the genetic mutations 
responsible for a wide range of diseases. This success has been particularly 
remarkable in the severe epilepsies and other neurodevelopmental diseases for 
which rare, often de novo, mutations play a significant role in disease risk. 
Despite significant progress, the high genetic heterogeneity of these disorders 
often requires large sample sizes to identify a critical mass of individuals 
with disease-causing mutations in a single gene. By pooling genetic findings 
across multiple studies, we have identified six individuals with severe 
developmental delay (6/6), refractory seizures (5/6), and similar dysmorphic 
features (3/6), each harboring a de novo mutation in PPP3CA. PPP3CA encodes the 
alpha isoform of a subunit of calcineurin. Calcineurin encodes a calcium- and 
calmodulin-dependent serine/threonine protein phosphatase that plays a role in a 
wide range of biological processes, including being a key regulator of synaptic 
vesicle recycling at nerve terminals. Five individuals with de novo PPP3CA 
mutations were identified among 4,760 trio probands with neurodevelopmental 
diseases; this is highly unlikely to occur by chance (p = 1.2 × 10-8) given the 
size and mutability of the gene. Additionally, a sixth individual with a de novo 
mutation in PPP3CA was connected to this study through GeneMatcher. Based on 
these findings, we securely implicate PPP3CA in early-onset refractory epilepsy 
and further support the emerging role for synaptic dysregulation in epilepsy.

Copyright © 2017 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.08.013
PMCID: PMC5630160
PMID: 28942967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]