---
reference_id: "PMID:28707712"
title: "Acne prevalence and associations with lifestyle: a cross-sectional online survey of adolescents/young adults in 7 European countries."
authors:
- Wolkenstein P
- Machovcová A
- Szepietowski JC
- Tennstedt D
- Veraldi S
- Delarue A
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.14475
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acne prevalence and associations with lifestyle: a cross-sectional online survey of adolescents/young adults in 7 European countries.
**Authors:** Wolkenstein P, Machovcová A, Szepietowski JC, Tennstedt D, Veraldi S, Delarue A
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.14475](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.14475)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2018 Feb;32(2):298-306. doi: 10.1111/jdv.14475. 
Epub 2017 Sep 6.

Acne prevalence and associations with lifestyle: a cross-sectional online survey 
of adolescents/young adults in 7 European countries.

Wolkenstein P(1), Machovcová A(2), Szepietowski JC(3), Tennstedt D(4), Veraldi 
S(5), Delarue A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hôpital Henri Mondor, APHP, UPEC, Créteil, France.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venerology, Motol Hospital, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Venerology and Allergology, Medical University, 
Wroclaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Dermatology, UCL, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(5)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(6)Pierre Fabre Dermatologie, Les Cauquillous, Lavaur, France.

BACKGROUND: Although acne vulgaris is a common skin disorder, limited 
epidemiological data exist specifically for European populations.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of self-reported acne among young people 
in Europe and evaluate the effect of lifestyle on acne.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional population-based online survey in 
representative samples of individuals aged 15-24 years in Belgium, Czech and 
Slovak Republics, France, Italy, Poland and Spain (n = 10 521), identified by a 
quota sampling method based on age, geographic location and socio-professional 
category.
RESULTS: The overall adjusted prevalence of self-reported acne was 57.8% (95% 
confidence interval 56.9% to 58.7%). The rates per country ranged from 42.2% in 
Poland to 73.5% in the Czech and Slovak Republics. The prevalence of acne was 
highest at age 15-17 years and decreased with age. On multivariate analysis, a 
history of maternal or paternal acne was associated with an increased 
probability of having acne (odds ratio 3.077, 95% CI 2.743 to 3.451, and 2.700, 
95% CI 2.391 to 3.049, respectively; both P < 0.0001), as was the consumption of 
chocolate (OR 1.276, 95% CI 1.094 to 1.488, for quartile 4 vs. quartile 1). 
Increasing age (OR 0.728, 95% CI 0.639 to 0.830 for age 21-24 years vs. 
15-17 years) and smoking tobacco (OR 0.705, 95% CI 0.616 to 0.807) were 
associated with a reduced probability of acne.
CONCLUSION: The overall prevalence of self-reported acne was high in 
adolescents/young adults in the European countries investigated. Heredity was 
the main risk factor for developing acne.

© 2017 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.14475
PMID: 28707712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]