---
reference_id: "PMID:38534382"
title: Tofogliflozin Delays Portal Hypertension and Hepatic Fibrosis by Inhibiting Sinusoidal Capillarization in Cirrhotic Rats.
authors:
- Asada S
- Kaji K
- Nishimura N
- Koizumi A
- Matsuda T
- Tanaka M
- Yorioka N
- Sato S
- Kitagawa K
- Namisaki T
- Akahane T
- Yoshiji H
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13060538
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tofogliflozin Delays Portal Hypertension and Hepatic Fibrosis by Inhibiting Sinusoidal Capillarization in Cirrhotic Rats.
**Authors:** Asada S, Kaji K, Nishimura N, Koizumi A, Matsuda T, Tanaka M, Yorioka N, Sato S, Kitagawa K, Namisaki T, Akahane T, Yoshiji H
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13060538](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13060538)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 Mar 19;13(6):538. doi: 10.3390/cells13060538.

Tofogliflozin Delays Portal Hypertension and Hepatic Fibrosis by Inhibiting 
Sinusoidal Capillarization in Cirrhotic Rats.

Asada S(1), Kaji K(1), Nishimura N(1), Koizumi A(1), Matsuda T(1), Tanaka M(1), 
Yorioka N(1), Sato S(1), Kitagawa K(1), Namisaki T(1), Akahane T(1), Yoshiji 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Nara Medical University, Kashihara 634-8521, 
Nara, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Liver cirrhosis leads to portal hypertension (PH) with 
capillarization of liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs), although drug 
treatment options for PH are currently limited. Sodium glucose transporter 2 
inhibitors, which are antidiabetic agents, have been shown to improve 
endothelial dysfunction. We aimed to elucidate the effect of tofogliflozin on PH 
and liver fibrosis in a rat cirrhosis model.
METHODS: Male-F344/NSlc rats repeatedly received carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) 
intraperitoneally to induce PH and liver cirrhosis alongside tofogliflozin (10 
or 20 mg/kg). Portal hemodynamics and hepatic phenotypes were assessed after 14 
weeks. An in vitro study investigated the effects of tofogliflozin on the 
crosstalk between LSEC and activated hepatic stellate cells (Ac-HSC), which are 
relevant to PH development.
RESULTS: Tofogliflozin prevented PH with attenuated intrahepatic 
vasoconstriction, sinusoidal capillarization, and remodeling independent of 
glycemic status in CCl4-treated rats. Hepatic macrophage infiltration, 
proinflammatory response, and fibrogenesis were suppressed by treatment with 
tofogliflozin. In vitro assays showed that tofogliflozin suppressed 
Ac-HSC-stimulated capillarization and vasoconstriction in LSECs by enhancing the 
antioxidant capacity, as well as inhibited the capilliarized LSEC-stimulated 
contractive, profibrogenic, and proliferative activities of Ac-HSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides strong support for tofogliflozin in the 
prevention of liver cirrhosis-related PH.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13060538
PMCID: PMC10968969
PMID: 38534382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
These funders had no role in the main experimental equipment, supply expenses, 
study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation 
of this manuscript.