---
reference_id: "PMID:24727425"
title: Acute intermittent porphyria causes hepatic mitochondrial energetic failure in a mouse model.
authors:
- Homedan C
- Laafi J
- Schmitt C
- Gueguen N
- Lefebvre T
- Karim Z
- Desquiret-Dumas V
- Wetterwald C
- Deybach JC
- Gouya L
- Puy H
- Reynier P
- Malthièry Y
journal: Int J Biochem Cell Biol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.03.032
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Energy Metabolism
- Female
- "Liver Diseases/etiology, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Oxidative Phosphorylation
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/complications, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute intermittent porphyria causes hepatic mitochondrial energetic failure in a mouse model.
**Authors:** Homedan C, Laafi J, Schmitt C, Gueguen N, Lefebvre T, Karim Z, Desquiret-Dumas V, Wetterwald C, Deybach JC, Gouya L, Puy H, Reynier P, Malthièry Y
**Journal:** Int J Biochem Cell Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biocel.2014.03.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2014.03.032)

## Content

1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Jun;51:93-101. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2014.03.032.  Epub 2014 Apr 13.

Acute intermittent porphyria causes hepatic mitochondrial energetic failure in a
mouse model.

Homedan C(1), Laafi J(2), Schmitt C(3), Gueguen N(4), Lefebvre T(3), Karim Z(3),
Desquiret-Dumas V(4), Wetterwald C(5), Deybach JC(3), Gouya L(3), Puy H(3),
Reynier P(6), Malthièry Y(1).

Author information:
(1)UMR INSERM 1063, Angers, France; Centre Hospitalier Universitaire,
Département de Biochimie et Génétique, Angers, France.
(2)UMR INSERM 1063, Angers, France.
(3)Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre Français des Porphyries,
Hôpital Louis Mourier, Université Paris Diderot, Colombes, France; INSERM U1149,
Center for Research on Inflammation (CRI), Université Paris Diderot, Paris,
France; Laboratory of Excellence, GR-Ex, Paris, France.
(4)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Département de Biochimie et Génétique,
Angers, France; UMR CNRS 6214-INSERM 1083, Angers, France.
(5)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Département de Biochimie et Génétique,
Angers, France.
(6)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Département de Biochimie et Génétique,
Angers, France; UMR CNRS 6214-INSERM 1083, Angers, France. Electronic address:
pareynier@chu-angers.fr.

Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), an inherited hepatic disorder, is due to a
defect of hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMBS), an enzyme involved in heme
biosynthesis. AIP is characterized by recurrent, life-threatening attacks at
least partly due to the increased hepatic production of 5-aminolaevulinic acid
(ALA). Both the mitochondrial enzyme, ALA synthase (ALAS) 1, involved in the
first step of heme biosynthesis, which is closely linked to mitochondrial
bioenergetic pathways, and the promise of an ALAS1 siRNA hepatic therapy in
humans, led us to investigate hepatic energetic metabolism in Hmbs KO mice
treated with phenobarbital. The mitochondrial respiratory chain (RC) and the
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle were explored in the Hmbs(-/-) mouse model. RC
and TCA cycle were significantly affected in comparison to controls in mice
treated with phenobarbital with decreased activities of RC complexes I (-52%,
(**)p<0.01), II (-50%, (**)p<0.01) and III (-55%, (*)p<0.05), and decreased
activity of α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (-64%, (*)p<0.05), citrate synthase
(-48%, (**)p<0.01) and succinate dehydrogenase (-53%, (*)p<0.05). Complex
II-driven succinate respiration was also significantly affected. Most of these
metabolic alterations were at least partially restored after the phenobarbital
arrest and heme arginate administration. These results suggest a cataplerosis of
the TCA cycle induced by phenobarbital, caused by the massive withdrawal of
succinyl-CoA by ALAS induction, such that the TCA cycle is unable to supply the
reduced cofactors to the RC. This profound and reversible impact of AIP on
mitochondrial energetic metabolism offers new insights into the beneficial
effect of heme, glucose and ALAS1 siRNA treatments by limiting the cataplerosis
of TCA cycle.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.03.032
PMID: 24727425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
