---
reference_id: "PMID:24836681"
title: Tolerogenic dendritic cells modified by tacrolimus suppress CD4(+) T-cell proliferation and inhibit collagen-induced arthritis in mice.
authors:
- Ren Y
- Yang Y
- Yang J
- Xie R
- Fan H
journal: Int Immunopharmacol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.05.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tolerogenic dendritic cells modified by tacrolimus suppress CD4(+) T-cell proliferation and inhibit collagen-induced arthritis in mice.
**Authors:** Ren Y, Yang Y, Yang J, Xie R, Fan H
**Journal:** Int Immunopharmacol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.intimp.2014.05.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2014.05.004)

## Content

1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Jul;21(1):247-54. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.05.004.
 Epub 2014 May 14.

Tolerogenic dendritic cells modified by tacrolimus suppress CD4(+) T-cell 
proliferation and inhibit collagen-induced arthritis in mice.

Ren Y(1), Yang Y(2), Yang J(2), Xie R(2), Fan H(2).

Author information:
(1)Blood Engineering Laboratory, Shanghai Blood Center, Shanghai 200051, China. 
Electronic address: yana.ren021@hotmail.com.
(2)Blood Engineering Laboratory, Shanghai Blood Center, Shanghai 200051, China.

BACKGROUND: Tolerogenic dendritic cells (tDCs) can be generated in vitro by a 
variety of methods, including genetic or pharmacological modification. DCs that 
were modified by the immunosuppressive drug tacrolimus were considered to be 
endowed with tolerogenic functions.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: DCs derived from human monocytes were induced in vitro 
by GM-CSF/IL-4 with tacrolimus. The phenotype and production of cytokines in 
these DCs were analyzed. The functionality of tDCs modified by tacrolimus was 
subsequently determined via a CFSE proliferation assay. The severity of 
arthritis was monitored in CIA mice after treatment with tDCs modified by 
tacrolimus.
RESULTS: tDCs that were modified by tacrolimus exhibited an immature phenotype. 
The expression of mRNA encoding IL-10 and TGF-β increased after 12h of 
tacrolimus stimulation, with the strongest responses being observed after 24h. 
The mRNA was further upregulated after tDCs were treated with LPS and IFN-γ. 
tDCs secreted more IL-10 and less TNF-α and had a reduced ability to activate 
allo-CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells. These cells suppressed mDC-induced-proliferation of 
CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells and produced less TNF-α and IFN-γ but increased the level 
of IL-10 than imDCs. Treatment of arthritic mice with tDCs modified by 
tacrolimus significantly inhibited the severity and progression of the disease. 
tDC treatment also altered the proportion of the Th1 and Th17 populations in the 
spleen.
CONCLUSIONS: tDCs modified by tacrolimus suppressed CD4(+) T cell proliferation 
and inhibited collagen-induced arthritis. These results suggest the potential 
use of tDCs as a therapeutic approach for autoimmune arthritis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.05.004
PMID: 24836681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]