---
reference_id: "PMID:33789010"
title: "Lumasiran, an RNAi Therapeutic for Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 1."
authors:
- Garrelfs SF
- Frishberg Y
- Hulton SA
- Koren MJ
- "O'Riordan WD"
- Cochat P
- Deschênes G
- Shasha-Lavsky H
- Saland JM
- "Van't Hoff WG"
- Fuster DG
- Magen D
- Moochhala SH
- Schalk G
- Simkova E
- Groothoff JW
- Sas DJ
- Meliambro KA
- Lu J
- Sweetser MT
- Garg PP
- Vaishnaw AK
- Gansner JM
- McGregor TL
- Lieske JC
- ILLUMINATE-A Collaborators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2021712
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Creatinine/urine
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- "Hyperoxaluria, Primary/blood, complications, drug therapy, urine"
- "Kidney Calculi/prevention & control"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Oxalates/blood, metabolism, urine"
- "RNA, Small Interfering/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- RNAi Therapeutics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lumasiran, an RNAi Therapeutic for Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 1.
**Authors:** Garrelfs SF, Frishberg Y, Hulton SA, Koren MJ, O'Riordan WD, Cochat P, Deschênes G, Shasha-Lavsky H, Saland JM, Van't Hoff WG, Fuster DG, Magen D, Moochhala SH, Schalk G, Simkova E, Groothoff JW, Sas DJ, Meliambro KA, Lu J, Sweetser MT, Garg PP, Vaishnaw AK, Gansner JM, McGregor TL, Lieske JC, ILLUMINATE-A Collaborators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2021712](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2021712)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2021 Apr 1;384(13):1216-1226. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2021712.

Lumasiran, an RNAi Therapeutic for Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 1.

Garrelfs SF(1), Frishberg Y(1), Hulton SA(1), Koren MJ(1), O'Riordan WD(1),
Cochat P(1), Deschênes G(1), Shasha-Lavsky H(1), Saland JM(1), Van't Hoff WG(1),
Fuster DG(1), Magen D(1), Moochhala SH(1), Schalk G(1), Simkova E(1), Groothoff
JW(1), Sas DJ(1), Meliambro KA(1), Lu J(1), Sweetser MT(1), Garg PP(1), Vaishnaw
AK(1), Gansner JM(1), McGregor TL(1), Lieske JC(1); ILLUMINATE-A Collaborators.

Collaborators: Alasrawi S, Arampatzis S, Aung-Din K, Bacchetta J, Bartilucci D,
Baudouin V, Benchimol C, Becker-Cohen R, Ben-Shalom E, Walsh SB, Berdaguer M,
Bockenhauer D, Borema T, Chan L, Chu H, Coch C, Coenen M, Cooper L, Couderc A,
Dossier C, Doye E, Dubourg L, Garvey J, Gupta A, Gupta M, Habeeb S, Hayes W,
Harambat J, Hohenadel M, Hoppe B, Hotchkiss H, Jacqmein J, Kaguelidou F, Kwon T,
Lee K, Lemoine S, Llanas B, Lorenz E, Maisin A, Mansour B, Milliner D, Muorah M,
Oosterveld M, Overcash JS, Prasad P, Portefaix A, Pollack S, Paz Z, Patel A,
Ranchin B, Reid-Adam J, Rinat C, Rothstein M, Schulte I, Sellier-Leclerc AL,
Tran C, Tzvi Behr S, Videen J, Vogt B, Weinbrand-Goichberg J, Weissman I, Zepeda
K, Greenbaum A, Goldfarb D, Schaefer F, Heubi JE, Doros G.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Emma Children's Hospital,
Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam (S.F.G., J.W.G.); the Division
of Pediatric Nephrology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem (Y.F.); the
Department of Nephrology, Birmingham Women's and Children's Hospital, Birmingham
(S.A.H.), and the Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Great Ormond Street
Hospital (W.G.H.), and UCL Department of Renal Medicine, Royal Free Hospital
(S.H.M.), London - both in the United Kingdom; Jacksonville Center for Clinical
Research, Jacksonville, FL (M.J.K.); eStudySite, San Diego, CA (W.D.O.); Center
for Rare Renal Diseases and INSERM Pediatric Clinical Investigation
Center-Hospices Civils de Lyon and Université de Lyon, Lyon (P.C.), and the
Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Hôpital Robert-Debré, Paris (G.D.) - both in
France; the Pediatric Nephrology Unit, Galilee Medical Center, Nahariya
(H.S.-L.), and the Pediatric Nephrology Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus,
Haifa (D.M.) - both in Israel; the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York (J.M.S., K.A.M.); the Department of Nephrology and Hypertension,
Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
(D.G.F.); the University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany (G.S.); Al Jalila Children's
Hospital, Dubai, United Arab Emirates (E.S.); the Divisions of Pediatric
Nephrology and Hypertension (D.J.S.) and Nephrology and Hypertension (J.C.L.),
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; and Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA (J.L.,
M.T.S., P.P.G., A.K.V., J.M.G., T.L.M.).

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2022 Feb;101(2):208-211. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2021.05.027.
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2021 Sep;17(9):573-574. doi: 10.1038/s41581-021-00449-9.
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Nov 11;385(20):e69. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2107661.

BACKGROUND: Primary hyperoxaluria type 1 (PH1) is a rare genetic disease caused
by hepatic overproduction of oxalate that leads to kidney stones,
nephrocalcinosis, kidney failure, and systemic oxalosis. Lumasiran, an
investigational RNA interference (RNAi) therapeutic agent, reduces hepatic
oxalate production by targeting glycolate oxidase.
METHODS: In this double-blind, phase 3 trial, we randomly assigned (in a 2:1
ratio) patients with PH1 who were 6 years of age or older to receive
subcutaneous lumasiran or placebo for 6 months (with doses given at baseline and
at months 1, 2, 3, and 6). The primary end point was the percent change in
24-hour urinary oxalate excretion from baseline to month 6 (mean percent change
across months 3 through 6). Secondary end points included the percent change in
the plasma oxalate level from baseline to month 6 (mean percent change across
months 3 through 6) and the percentage of patients with 24-hour urinary oxalate
excretion no higher than 1.5 times the upper limit of the normal range at month
6.
RESULTS: A total of 39 patients underwent randomization; 26 were assigned to the
lumasiran group and 13 to the placebo group. The least-squares mean difference
in the change in 24-hour urinary oxalate excretion (lumasiran minus placebo) was
-53.5 percentage points (P<0.001), with a reduction in the lumasiran group of
65.4% and an effect seen as early as month 1. The between-group differences for
all hierarchically tested secondary end points were significant. The difference
in the percent change in the plasma oxalate level (lumasiran minus placebo) was
-39.5 percentage points (P<0.001). In the lumasiran group, 84% of patients had
24-hour urinary oxalate excretion no higher than 1.5 times the upper limit of
the normal range at month 6, as compared with 0% in the placebo group (P<0.001).
Mild, transient injection-site reactions were reported in 38% of
lumasiran-treated patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Lumasiran reduced urinary oxalate excretion, the cause of
progressive kidney failure in PH1. The majority of patients who received
lumasiran had normal or near-normal levels after 6 months of treatment. (Funded
by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals; ILLUMINATE-A ClinicalTrials.gov number,
NCT03681184.).

Copyright © 2021 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2021712
PMID: 33789010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
