---
reference_id: "PMID:25470569"
title: Gigantism and acromegaly due to Xq26 microduplications and GPR101 mutation.
authors:
- Trivellin G
- Daly AF
- Faucz FR
- Yuan B
- Rostomyan L
- Larco DO
- Schernthaner-Reiter MH
- Szarek E
- Leal LF
- Caberg JH
- Castermans E
- Villa C
- Dimopoulos A
- Chittiboina P
- Xekouki P
- Shah N
- Metzger D
- Lysy PA
- Ferrante E
- Strebkova N
- Mazerkina N
- Zatelli MC
- Lodish M
- Horvath A
- de Alexandre RB
- Manning AD
- Levy I
- Keil MF
- Sierra Mde L
- Palmeira L
- Coppieters W
- Georges M
- Naves LA
- Jamar M
- Bours V
- Wu TJ
- Choong CS
- Bertherat J
- Chanson P
- Kamenický P
- Farrell WE
- Barlier A
- Quezado M
- Bjelobaba I
- Stojilkovic SS
- Wess J
- Costanzi S
- Liu P
- Lupski JR
- Beckers A
- Stratakis CA
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1408028
keywords:
- Acromegaly/genetics
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Duplication
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- Female
- Gigantism/genetics
- Human Growth Hormone/metabolism
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Protein Conformation
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Gigantism and acromegaly due to Xq26 microduplications and GPR101 mutation.
**Authors:** Trivellin G, Daly AF, Faucz FR, Yuan B, Rostomyan L, Larco DO, Schernthaner-Reiter MH, Szarek E, Leal LF, Caberg JH, Castermans E, Villa C, Dimopoulos A, Chittiboina P, Xekouki P, Shah N, Metzger D, Lysy PA, Ferrante E, Strebkova N, Mazerkina N, Zatelli MC, Lodish M, Horvath A, de Alexandre RB, Manning AD, Levy I, Keil MF, Sierra Mde L, Palmeira L, Coppieters W, Georges M, Naves LA, Jamar M, Bours V, Wu TJ, Choong CS, Bertherat J, Chanson P, Kamenický P, Farrell WE, Barlier A, Quezado M, Bjelobaba I, Stojilkovic SS, Wess J, Costanzi S, Liu P, Lupski JR, Beckers A, Stratakis CA
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1408028](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1408028)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2014 Dec 18;371(25):2363-74. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1408028. Epub
2014  Dec 3.

Gigantism and acromegaly due to Xq26 microduplications and GPR101 mutation.

Trivellin G(1), Daly AF, Faucz FR, Yuan B, Rostomyan L, Larco DO,
Schernthaner-Reiter MH, Szarek E, Leal LF, Caberg JH, Castermans E, Villa C,
Dimopoulos A, Chittiboina P, Xekouki P, Shah N, Metzger D, Lysy PA, Ferrante E,
Strebkova N, Mazerkina N, Zatelli MC, Lodish M, Horvath A, de Alexandre RB,
Manning AD, Levy I, Keil MF, Sierra Mde L, Palmeira L, Coppieters W, Georges M,
Naves LA, Jamar M, Bours V, Wu TJ, Choong CS, Bertherat J, Chanson P, Kamenický
P, Farrell WE, Barlier A, Quezado M, Bjelobaba I, Stojilkovic SS, Wess J,
Costanzi S, Liu P, Lupski JR, Beckers A, Stratakis CA.

Author information:
(1)The authors' affiliations are listed in the Appendix.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015 Feb;11(2):64. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.230.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Mar 26;372(13):1265. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1500340.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Mar 26;372(13):1264. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1500340.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Mar 26;372(13):1264-5. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1500340.

BACKGROUND: Increased secretion of growth hormone leads to gigantism in children
and acromegaly in adults; the genetic causes of gigantism and acromegaly are
poorly understood.
METHODS: We performed clinical and genetic studies of samples obtained from 43
patients with gigantism and then sequenced an implicated gene in samples from
248 patients with acromegaly.
RESULTS: We observed microduplication on chromosome Xq26.3 in samples from 13
patients with gigantism; of these samples, 4 were obtained from members of two
unrelated kindreds, and 9 were from patients with sporadic cases. All the
patients had disease onset during early childhood. Of the patients with
gigantism who did not carry an Xq26.3 microduplication, none presented before
the age of 5 years. Genomic characterization of the Xq26.3 region suggests that
the microduplications are generated during chromosome replication and that they
contain four protein-coding genes. Only one of these genes, GPR101, which
encodes a G-protein-coupled receptor, was overexpressed in patients' pituitary
lesions. We identified a recurrent GPR101 mutation (p.E308D) in 11 of 248
patients with acromegaly, with the mutation found mostly in tumors. When the
mutation was transfected into rat GH3 cells, it led to increased release of
growth hormone and proliferation of growth hormone-producing cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe a pediatric disorder (which we have termed X-linked
acrogigantism [X-LAG]) that is caused by an Xq26.3 genomic duplication and is
characterized by early-onset gigantism resulting from an excess of growth
hormone. Duplication of GPR101 probably causes X-LAG. We also found a recurrent
mutation in GPR101 in some adults with acromegaly. (Funded by the Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1408028
PMCID: PMC4291174
PMID: 25470569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Somatic growth is orchestrated by a complex hormonal crosstalk involving the hypothalamus, pituitary, and peripheral tissues.1 Genetic disorders that affect this network can lead to increased secretion of growth hormone, which results in acromegaly. If the excess in growth hormone occurs before epiphyseal fusion, the result can be gigantism. Nonsyndromic gigantism is most frequently caused by pituitary adenomas occurring as familial isolated pituitary adenomas or sporadically, usually as a result of mutations in the gene encoding aryl hydrocarbon receptor–interacting protein (AIP).2–4 Other mono-genic diseases can cause gigantism, but most of these conditions develop in adulthood in association with other tumors.5 In young children, somatic overgrowth that is due to an excess of growth hormone is rare, and the cause is unknown. Other syndromic genetic overgrowth conditions in children, such as the Sotos syndrome and the Simpson–Golabi–Behmel syndrome, are not associated with pituitary abnormalities.6,7

We report a striking phenotype of gigantism that has an onset in early childhood and that is caused by an excess of growth hormone. The disorder is associated with heritable microduplications on chromosome Xq26.3. There are four genes in the duplicated stretch of DNA; one of these, GPR101, encodes an orphan G-protein–coupled receptor and is probably the gene that drives the phenotype in young children and the growth of sporadic growth hormone–producing adenomas in some patients with acromegaly.

We analyzed samples obtained from 43 patients with gigantism who had hypersecretion of growth hormone, evidence of an anterior pituitary lesion on magnetic resonance imaging, a height on country-specific growth charts of either more than the 97th percentile or more than 2 SD above the mean height for age, and negative test results for mutations or deletions in genes associated with pituitary adenomas (Table 1). Details with respect to one family with this syndrome8,9 and two patients with sporadic disease10,11 have been described previously.

We sequenced the four genes in the duplicated region on chromosome Xq26.3 in 259 germline and tumor DNA samples that were obtained from 248 patients with sporadic acromegaly (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). We sequenced GPR101 and performed array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) on germline DNA in samples obtained from 13 families with familial isolated pituitary adenomas without AIP mutations. We used quantitative reverse-transcriptase–polymerase-chain-reaction (qRT-PCR) assays to measure the expression levels of duplicated genes in both leukocytes and pituitary tumors. We performed comparative protein-structure modeling on GPR101 using Modeller software, version 9.13.12 We determined the level of growth hormone and cyclic AMP (cAMP) and the rate of cellular proliferation after transient overexpression of each of the four implicated genes in GH3 cells obtained from rat pituitary tumors.

The institutional review board at each of the participating institutions approved our studies. We studied the anonymized samples from international acromegaly cohorts with approval from the National Institutes of Health Intramural Office for Human Research Protections. Written informed consent was obtained from all adult patients and parents or guardians of children with early-onset gigantism.

The clinical and biochemical characteristics of the 43 patients who had nonsyndromic gigantism without abnormalities in genes associated with pituitary tumors are presented in Table 1. Genetic analyses delineated two phenotypes: an early-childhood form of gigantism with a typical onset in late infancy (Fig. 1) and a second form with a typical onset in adolescence.

We detected microduplications on chromosome Xq26.3 in samples obtained from patients with the early-childhood form of gigantism (Fig. 2, and Fig. S1, S2, and S3 in the Supplementary Appendix). Nine of the 13 patients with an Xq26.3 microduplication and the 1 probable carrier (an affected mother with gigantism) were female and were of normal size at birth. All the patients grew rapidly during infancy, attaining a median height score of +3.8 SD at diagnosis (median age, 36 months). At the time of diagnosis, they showed marked overall somatic growth, with elevated weight and an enlarged head circumference (median, 51.2 cm). The onset of accelerated growth and the onset of accelerated weight gain usually coincided but were not always synchronous (Fig. 1, and Fig. S4 in the Supplementary Appendix). As compared with patients who did not have an Xq26.3 microduplication, those with the microduplication had an earlier median age at the onset of abnormal growth (12 months vs. 16 years), an increased acceleration in height, and elevated levels of insulin-like growth factor 1 and prolactin (Table 1). We did not observe precocious puberty in the microduplication carriers. Levels of peripheral growth hormone–releasing hormone did not suggest ectopic secretion of this hormone, and nuclear imaging scans were negative for other tumors.

Of the 13 patients who underwent surgery, 10 had pituitary macroadenomas alone (median maximum diameter, 16 mm), and 3 patients had pituitary hyperplasia, with or without an identified adenoma (Fig. 3H). In all the patients, hormonal control was not achieved with medical therapy alone. Such control required either radical or repeated neurosurgery alone (in 4 patients) or in combination with the administration of the growth hormone receptor antagonist pegvisomant (in 3 patients) or radiotherapy (in 2 patients). Seven patients had permanent hypo-pituitarism at the time of this study.

The common duplicated genomic segment was approximately 500 kb in length, from position 135,627,637 to 136,118,269 (GRCh37/hg19) (Fig. 2). One patient had a complex genomic rearrangement, with two duplicated segments that were separated by a short region of normal genomic sequence. No other patterns of duplication or deletion or homozygosity were shared among the affected patients. One family with familial isolated pituitary adenomas included an affected mother and two affected sons (who have been described previously8) with the same Xq26.3 microduplication; the unaffected father did not have the duplication. In another family with this condition, the mother had childhood-onset gigantism and a histologically confirmed pituitary macroadenoma but had died of complications of hypopituitarism. She had two children: the son carried the Xq26.3 microduplication and had childhood-onset gigantism (Patient F2A), and the healthy daughter did not have the duplication. The most parsimonious explanation is that the son inherited the X-linked disease from his carrier mother. Hence, Xq26.3 microduplications can be considered to be a new pathogenic explanation in certain kindreds with familial isolated pituitary adenomas that have acrogigantism without AIP mutations.

Using high-definition analysis of the critical duplicated region, we analyzed 10 distinct genomic duplications in 12 patients, including 4 patients with the familial form of the disease and 8 patients with the sporadic form (Fig. S1 and S3 in the Supplementary Appendix). On genomewide aCGH, these mutations appeared to be simple duplications. However, using high-resolution aCGH, long-range PCR, and Sanger sequencing of the breakpoints, we found various underlying genomic complexities (Fig. S3 in the Supplementary Appendix).

All sporadic Xq26.3 duplications were nonrecurrent; the boundaries of the duplicated segment were unique to each patient. On both aCGH and breakpoint PCR assays, samples obtained from unaffected parents and siblings of patients with sporadic disease showed negative results, documenting the microduplication as a new mutation (Fig. S3A and S5A in the Supplementary Appendix). The same duplication was transmitted from an affected mother (Patient F1A) to her affected offspring, Patients F1B and F1C (Fig. 2, and Fig. S3 and S5B in the Supplementary Appendix).

The duplicated genomic regions that were shared by all affected persons consisted of the two smallest regions of overlap (SRO), which were designated as SRO1 and SRO2 (Fig. 2). SRO1 (chromosomal position, 135,627,637 to 135,986,830; hg19) encompassed three genes in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database: CD40LG (OMIM number, 300386), ARHGEF6 (OMIM number, 300267), and RBMX (OMIM number, 300199), whereas SRO2 (chromosomal position, 136,045,310 to 136,118,269; hg19) included GPR101 (OMIM number, 300393) (Fig. 2).

Sequencing of each of the four genes in the 43 patients with gigantism did not reveal any single-nucleotide variants of likely pathogenicity. A quantitative RT-PCR assay of pituitary tumor RNA from 2 patients with Xq26.3 microduplications suggested that CD40LG was not expressed in the pituitary tumors. Neither ARHGEF6 nor RBMX showed up-regulated expression in the pituitary tumors of 2 patients with the duplication (Fig. 4). In contrast, the expression of GPR101 in the pituitaries of the children carrying an Xq26.3 duplication was increased by a factor as high as 1000, as compared with unaffected pituitary tissue and pituitary tumors from persons who tested negative for microduplications (Fig. 4A). This result was confirmed at the protein level by increased immunostaining for GPR101 in pituitary tumors from patients with Xq26.3 duplications (Fig. 3G, and Fig. S7 in the Supplementary Appendix). Experimental overexpression of ARHGEF6, RBMX, and GPR101 alone in the rat GH3 cell line did not significantly increase either cell proliferation or the secretion of growth hormone (Fig. 4D and 4E, and Fig. S8 in the Supplementary Appendix). Nonmutated GPR101 in combination with ARH-GEF6, RBMX, or both modestly increased cell proliferation but not the secretion of growth hormone (Fig. S8 in the Supplementary Appendix).

The X-chromosome–inactivation pattern was random in the female patients with sporadic disease and skewed in Patient F1A, who had familial disease; CpG islands were identified in silico only in RBMX and GPR101 (Fig. S9 and S10 in the Supplementary Appendix).

In a series of 248 patients with sporadic acromegaly, none carried a microduplication at Xq26.3. However, 11 patients had a c.924G C substitution (p.E308D) in GPR101, which was not found in 7600 control samples obtained from public databases (Tables S1 and S2 in the Supplementary Appendix). Of the 11 mutation carriers, 3 appeared to carry a constitutive mutation, which was detected in DNA from peripheral-blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). We detected the mutation in the tumor DNA in the remaining 8 patients (Fig. 5A). In one patient, we determined that the mutation was a de novo somatic mutation — that is, the GPR101 mutation occurred only in the tumor DNA sequence and not in the PBMC sequence (Fig. 5B). None of the 13 families with familial isolated pituitary adenomas carried the p.E308D mutation in GPR101.

GPR101 encodes an orphan G-protein–coupled receptor that is highly expressed in rodent hypothalamus (Fig. S11 and S12 in the Supplementary Appendix) and is predicted to couple to the stimulatory G protein (Gs), a potent activator of adenylyl cyclase.13,14 A model of human GPR101 in complex with a Gs heterotrimer shows the physical relationship between the p.E308D amino acid change and the activating p.A397K change, a mutation that has been described previously.15 The two amino acids, which are predicted to be affected by the mutations, are on the cytosolic side of the receptor (Fig. 5C). The E308 residue is located in the long intracellular loop 3, which connects transmembrane domains 5 and 6.

Overexpression of the p.E308D and p.A397K mutants, but not of nonmutant GPR101, significantly increased cell proliferation and secretion of growth hormone in rat GH3 cells (Fig. 4D and 4E). As in the construct containing the nonmutant receptor, the two mutant constructs resulted in increased cAMP signaling in GH3 cells in an in vitro reporter assay, both at baseline and in the presence of 10 μM forskolin, a direct stimulator of adenylyl cyclase (Fig. 4F).

Several lines of evidence support the identification of a new pituitary gigantism syndrome in young children carrying microduplications on chromosome Xq26.3, a disorder that is probably caused by GPR101 overexpression. We propose that this syndrome be called X-linked acrogigantism (X-LAG). First, we did not find disruption of Xq26.3 in patients with later-onset gigantism (Table 1). Second, the finding that patients with other conditions had different duplications within the same region narrowed our focus to the smallest region of overlap. A duplication encompassing CD40LG and ARHGEF6 but not RBMX and GPR101 occurred in a family with low birth weight, intellectual disability, and craniofacial abnormalities,16 which suggests that duplications with the exclusion of RBMX and GPR101 do not lead to gigantism. Third, short stature has been reported in several patients with deletions in this region, which suggests that the absence of these genes may lead to the opposite phenotype (Table S4 in the Supplementary Appendix).16–18 Other investigators have described at least 15 additional patients with the same phenotype of early-onset growth who may be good candidates for a diagnosis of X-LAG (Table S3 in the Supplementary Appendix).

The breakpoint features of Xq26.3 duplications suggest that they were generated by means of a replication-based mechanism that underlies the genesis of other copy-number variants (CNVs) and the pathogenesis of other genomic disorders.19

The cytogenetic data narrowed the smallest region of overlap to a segment spanning CD40LG, ARHGEF6, RBMX, GPR101, one microRNA (miR-934), and a small nucleolar RNA (SNORD61) of unknown function. We did not detect CD40LG expression in the pituitary tissues from our patients (Fig. 4). Messenger RNA for ARHGEF6 and RBMX was expressed to a similar degree in affected and unaffected tissues from duplication carriers. Of all the genes and the noncoding RNAs in the duplicated segment, only GPR101 had markedly increased expression in the pituitary tumors from the duplication carriers (Fig. 4).

GPR101 is an orphan G-protein–coupled receptor that is strongly expressed in the hypothalamus in rodents (Fig. S11 and S12 in the Supplementary Appendix).13,14,20 It was recently shown that a fragment of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone could be a ligand for this receptor.21 The GPR101 protein may also play a role in hypothalamic control of energy homeostasis.22 The effect of a mutation (p.A397K) that is predicted to activate GPR101 when tested in vitro and in mice supports such a role.15 The pituitary-specific over-expression of GPR101 may be due to a gene-dose effect (as described in many genomic disorders23) or to an unknown promoter sequence created by the chromosomal rearrangement, although we did not identify any putative new promoter, or to perturbed chromatin regulation due to the genomic structural alteration from duplication CNVs.24,25 On the basis of our data from transfection experiments, we cannot rule out a modest contribution of RBMX and ARHGEF6 coexpression to cell proliferation. However, unlike GPR101, neither ARHGEF6 nor RBMX was overexpressed in the pituitary tumors from children with microduplications.

Our studies of sporadic acromegaly provide further support for a role of GPR101 in X-LAG. We found a recurrent GPR101 mutation, p.E308D, in 4.4% of DNA in tumor samples and in 1.9% of DNA in PBMC samples obtained from patients with isolated acromegaly. In at least one patient, the mutation was present only in the tumor DNA. We did not identify GPR101 mutations in families with familial isolated pituitary adenomas. A model of human GPR101 in complex with a Gs heterotrimer showed that both the p.E308D mutation and the previously described p.A397K mutation15 are on the cytosolic side of the receptor that interacts with heterotrimeric G proteins. Residue E308 is located in a remarkably long intracellular loop, which connects two transmembrane domains. But in the absence of a model template for the GPR101 intracellular loop in which E308 resides, it is difficult to estimate the structural effect of the p.E308D substitution. However, transfection of a construct expressing GPR101 containing the p.E308D mutation increased proliferation and growth hormone secretion in a rat pituitary cell line. Moreover, we showed that GPR101 can strongly activate the cAMP pathway, for which the mitogenic effects in pituitary somatotropes are well established.26 These data further support a role for variant GPR101 in sporadic acromegaly.

The mechanism by which mutant GPR101 contributes to increased growth hormone secretion is unclear. Some of the patients with early-onset gigantism whom we evaluated had normal or mildly elevated levels of circulating growth hormone–releasing hormone (but below the threshold required for ectopic tumoral secretion of this hormone), as was previously noted in Family F1.8 The tumor tissue showed strong expression of the growth hormone–releasing hormone receptor, in contrast to its expression of growth hormone–releasing hormone, which was low or absent (Fig. S15 in the Supplementary Appendix).

In conclusion, our results suggest that Xq26.3 microduplication is associated with a clinical syndrome of early-onset gigantism, which we have termed X-LAG. An increased dose of GPR101 on chromosome Xq26.3 probably causes the disease, and its activation by mutation occurs in patients with sporadic acromegaly. Xq26.3 micro-duplications may explain other historical cases of gigantism with features that closely resemble those of X-LAG.27,28 Our results offer an opportunity to study a new pathway involved in the central regulation of human growth.
