---
reference_id: "PMID:34926352"
title: A Case Report and Literature Review of a Novel Mutation in the MAGED2 Gene of a Patient With Severe Transient Polyhydramnios.
authors:
- Wu X
- Huang L
- Luo C
- Liu Y
- Niu J
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.778814
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case Report and Literature Review of a Novel Mutation in the MAGED2 Gene of a Patient With Severe Transient Polyhydramnios.
**Authors:** Wu X, Huang L, Luo C, Liu Y, Niu J
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2021.778814](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2021.778814)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Dec 1;9:778814. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.778814. eCollection
 2021.

A Case Report and Literature Review of a Novel Mutation in the MAGED2 Gene of a 
Patient With Severe Transient Polyhydramnios.

Wu X(1)(2), Huang L(2), Luo C(2), Liu Y(2), Niu J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(2)Affiliated Shenzhen Maternity and Child Healthcare Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Shenzhen, China.

Background: Polyhydramnios occurs frequently during pregnancy. Mutations in the 
MAGED2 gene can cause X-linked acute early-onset polyhydramnios with a severe 
but transient form of antenatal Bartter's syndrome. Case Presentation: Here, we 
report a new novel frameshift mutation c.733_734delCT (p. Leu245GlufsTer4) in 
the MAGED2 gene (NM_177433.1) that caused prenatal polyhydramnios, but did not 
cause polyuria after birth. Follow-up was conducted for 2 months, and the baby's 
growth and development were normal, without polyuria and renal impairment. In 
addition, we identified all individuals with MAGED2 mutations reported in the 
literature before March 2021. Conclusion: We report a new case with a novel 
variant of the MAGED2 gene that caused severe hydramnios but with a good result 
and summary clinical characteristics in a newborn with antenatal Bartter's 
syndrome caused by an MAGED2 mutation. Good prenatal diagnosis and genetic 
consultation can improve pregnancy monitoring and newborn management.

Copyright © 2021 Wu, Huang, Luo, Liu and Niu.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.778814
PMCID: PMC8671809
PMID: 34926352

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.