---
reference_id: "PMID:29054894"
title: "Mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (Morquio A): a close differential diagnosis of spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia."
authors:
- Biswas SN
- Patra S
- Chakraborty PP
- Barman H
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2017-221156
keywords:
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Corneal Opacity/pathology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Male
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis IV/diagnosis, physiopathology, rehabilitation"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/congenital, diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Pressure Ulcer/drug therapy, pathology"
- Radiography
- "Surgery, Plastic"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (Morquio A): a close differential diagnosis of spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Biswas SN, Patra S, Chakraborty PP, Barman H
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2017-221156](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2017-221156)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2017 Oct 20;2017:bcr2017221156. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2017-221156.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (Morquio A): a close differential diagnosis of 
spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia.

Biswas SN(1), Patra S(1), Chakraborty PP(1), Barman H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Midnapore Medical College and Hospital, Midnapore, 
West Bengal, India.

Patients with mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) have a plethora of multisystemic 
manifestations depending on the particular type, and atypical presentations are 
not uncommon. MPS type IVA (Morquio A syndrome) has predominant musculoskeletal 
system involvement and corneal clouding with normal intelligence and can be 
misdiagnosed as primary skeletal disorders in clinical practice. The absence of 
corneal clouding with normal urinary glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) level in a 
proportion of patients with MPS IVA makes the correct diagnosis even more 
challenging for physicians. Healthcare providers across specialties should have 
a high degree of suspicion for MPS IVA in all patients with suspected 
spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia as early diagnosis and early treatment 
significantly improve the clinical outcome and activity of daily living.

© BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (unless otherwise stated in the text of the article) 
2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2017-221156
PMCID: PMC5665360
PMID: 29054894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.