---
reference_id: "PMID:35031708"
title: "Thromboembolism in children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome: a literature review."
authors:
- Menon NM
- Srivaths LV
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41390-021-01873-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thromboembolism in children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome: a literature review.
**Authors:** Menon NM, Srivaths LV
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41390-021-01873-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41390-021-01873-0)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2022 Oct;92(4):946-950. doi: 10.1038/s41390-021-01873-0. Epub
2022  Jan 14.

Thromboembolism in children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome: a literature 
review.

Menon NM(1), Srivaths LV(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston, 7000 Fannin Street, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. 
Neethu.m.menon@uth.tmc.edu.
(2)Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston, 7000 Fannin Street, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.

Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a hyperinflammatory 
response observed in children several weeks to months after acute infection with 
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2). On review of all 
published cases of thromboembolism (TE) as a complication of MIS-C, 33 cases of 
TE were found with incidence ranging from 1.4 to 6.5%. TE occurred mostly in 
children aged 12 years and above. One-third of the cases were cerebral infarcts 
and the remaining cases included intracardiac and radial arterial thromboses, 
upper and lower extremity deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, and splenic 
infarcts. Five were asymptomatic cases and 3/33 (9%) patients (all three with 
cerebral infarcts) died. To conclude, TE appears to be a significant 
complication of MIS-C caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection, associated with morbidity 
and/or mortality. Patients ≥12 years are affected more often, and TE occurs 
despite thromboprophylaxis in some patients. Thromboprophylaxis should be 
considered in all cases after reviewing the concomitant bleeding risk. 
Prospective studies are needed to confirm the role of standard-dose 
thromboprophylaxis and to explore whether higher-dose thromboprophylaxis is 
required in certain high-risk patients with MIS-C. IMPACT: Compiles all cases of 
thromboembolism associated with COVID-19-related MIS-C, a report that has not 
been published to date.

© 2021. The Author (s), under exclusive license to the International Pediatric 
Research Foundation, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41390-021-01873-0
PMCID: PMC8758928
PMID: 35031708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.