---
reference_id: "PMID:36074783"
title: The characteristics of bacteremia among patients with acute febrile illness requiring hospitalization in Indonesia.
authors:
- Soedarmono P
- Diana A
- Tauran P
- Lokida D
- Aman AT
- Alisjahbana B
- Arlinda D
- Tjitra E
- Kosasih H
- Merati KTP
- Arif M
- Gasem MH
- Susanto NH
- Lukman N
- Sugiyono RI
- Hadi U
- Lisdawati V
- Tchos KGF
- Neal A
- Karyana M
journal: PLoS One
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0273414
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The characteristics of bacteremia among patients with acute febrile illness requiring hospitalization in Indonesia.
**Authors:** Soedarmono P, Diana A, Tauran P, Lokida D, Aman AT, Alisjahbana B, Arlinda D, Tjitra E, Kosasih H, Merati KTP, Arif M, Gasem MH, Susanto NH, Lukman N, Sugiyono RI, Hadi U, Lisdawati V, Tchos KGF, Neal A, Karyana M
**Journal:** PLoS One (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0273414](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0273414)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2022 Sep 8;17(9):e0273414. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0273414. 
eCollection 2022.

The characteristics of bacteremia among patients with acute febrile illness 
requiring hospitalization in Indonesia.

Soedarmono P(1), Diana A(2)(3), Tauran P(4), Lokida D(5), Aman AT(6), 
Alisjahbana B(7), Arlinda D(8), Tjitra E(8), Kosasih H(2), Merati KTP(9), Arif 
M(4), Gasem MH(10), Susanto NH(2), Lukman N(2), Sugiyono RI(2), Hadi U(11), 
Lisdawati V(12), Tchos KGF(13), Neal A(13), Karyana M(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia/ Dr. Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital, 
Jakarta, Indonesia.
(2)Indonesia Research Partnership on Infectious Disease (INA-RESPOND), Jakarta, 
Indonesia.
(3)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Padjadjaran, 
Sumedang, Indonesia.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Hasanuddin/ Dr. Wahidin Sudirohusodo 
Hospital, Makassar, Indonesia.
(5)Tangerang District Hospital, Tangerang, Banten, Indonesia.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Public Heath, and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada/ Dr. 
Sardjito Hospital, Yogyakarta, Indonesia.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas 
Padjadjaran/ Dr Hasan Sadikin Hospital, Bandung, Indonesia.
(8)National Institute of Health Research and Development (NIHRD), Ministry of 
Health Republic of Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(9)Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University, Sanglah General Hospital, Denpasar, 
Bali, Indonesia.
(10)Faculty of Medicine, Diponegoro University/ Dr. Kariadi Hospital, Semarang, 
Indonesia.
(11)Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Airlangga/ Dr. Soetomo Hospital, Surabaya, 
Indonesia.
(12)Sulianti Saroso Infectious Disease Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(13)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID), National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Blood culturing remains the "gold standard" for bloodstream infection (BSI) 
diagnosis, but the method is inaccessible to many developing countries due to 
high costs and insufficient resources. To better understand the utility of blood 
cultures among patients in Indonesia, a country where blood cultures are not 
routinely performed, we evaluated data from a previous cohort study that 
included blood cultures for all participants. An acute febrile illness study was 
conducted from July 2013 to June 2016 at eight major hospitals in seven 
provincial capitals in Indonesia. All participants presented with a fever, and 
two-sided aerobic blood cultures were performed within 48 hours of hospital 
admission. Positive cultures were further assessed for antimicrobial resistance 
(AMR) patterns. Specimens from participants with negative culture results were 
screened by advanced molecular and serological methods for evidence of causal 
pathogens. Blood cultures were performed for 1,459 of 1,464 participants, and 
the 70.6% (1,030) participants that were negative by dengue NS1 antigen test 
were included in further analysis. Bacteremia was observed in 8.9% (92) 
participants, with the most frequent pathogens being Salmonella enterica serovar 
Typhi (41) and Paratyphi A (10), Escherichia coli (14), and Staphylococcus 
aureus (10). Two S. Paratyphi A cases had evidence of AMR, and several E. coli 
cases were multidrug resistant (42.9%, 6/14) or monoresistant (14.3%, 2/14). 
Culture contamination was observed in 3.6% (37) cases. Molecular and serological 
assays identified etiological agents in participants having negative cultures, 
with 23.1% to 90% of cases being missed by blood cultures. Blood cultures are a 
valuable diagnostic tool for hospitalized patients presenting with fever. In 
Indonesia, pre-screening patients for the most common viral infections, such as 
dengue, influenza, and chikungunya viruses, would maximize the benefit to the 
patient while also conserving resources. Blood cultures should also be 
supplemented with advanced laboratory tests when available.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0273414
PMCID: PMC9455855
PMID: 36074783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.