---
reference_id: "PMID:32492418"
title: Regional Variation in Epidermal Susceptibility to UV-Induced Carcinogenesis Reflects Proliferative Activity of Epidermal Progenitors.
authors:
- Roy E
- Wong HY
- Villani R
- Rouille T
- Salik B
- Sim SL
- Murigneux V
- Stark MS
- Fink JL
- Soyer HP
- Walker G
- Lyons JG
- Saunders N
- Khosrotehrani K
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107702
keywords:
- Animals
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Proliferation
- Cyclin D1/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Epidermis/metabolism, radiation effects"
- Hair Follicle/pathology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Neoplasms, Radiation-Induced/metabolism, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- "Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- "Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics, metabolism"
- Ultraviolet Rays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regional Variation in Epidermal Susceptibility to UV-Induced Carcinogenesis Reflects Proliferative Activity of Epidermal Progenitors.
**Authors:** Roy E, Wong HY, Villani R, Rouille T, Salik B, Sim SL, Murigneux V, Stark MS, Fink JL, Soyer HP, Walker G, Lyons JG, Saunders N, Khosrotehrani K
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107702](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107702)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2020 Jun 2;31(9):107702. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107702.

Regional Variation in Epidermal Susceptibility to UV-Induced Carcinogenesis
Reflects Proliferative Activity of Epidermal Progenitors.

Roy E(1), Wong HY(1), Villani R(1), Rouille T(2), Salik B(2), Sim SL(1),
Murigneux V(1), Stark MS(3), Fink JL(1), Soyer HP(4), Walker G(5), Lyons JG(6),
Saunders N(1), Khosrotehrani K(7).

Author information:
(1)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, The University of
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4102, Australia.
(2)UQ Centre for Clinical Research, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD
4029, Australia.
(3)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, The University of
Queensland, Dermatology Research Centre, Brisbane, QLD 4102, Australia.
(4)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, The University of
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4102, Australia; The University of Queensland
Diamantina Institute, The University of Queensland, Dermatology Research Centre,
Brisbane, QLD 4102, Australia.
(5)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, QLD 4006, Australia.
(6)Discipline of Dermatology, Bosch Institute, Charles Perkins Centre, The
University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
(7)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, The University of
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4102, Australia; UQ Centre for Clinical Research, The
University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4029, Australia. Electronic address:
k.khosroterhani@uq.edu.au.

To better understand the influence of ultraviolet (UV) irradiation on the
initial steps of skin carcinogenesis, we examine patches of labeled
keratinocytes as a proxy for clones in the interfollicular epidermis (IFE) and
measure their size variation upon UVB irradiation. Multicolor lineage tracing
reveals that in chronically irradiated skin, patches near hair follicles (HFs)
increase in size, whereas those far from follicles do not change. This is
explained by proliferation of basal epidermal cells within 60 μm of HF openings.
Upon interruption of UVB, patch size near HFs regresses significantly. These
anatomical differences in proliferative behavior have significant consequences
for the cell of origin of basal cell carcinomas (BCCs). Indeed, a UV-inducible
murine BCC model shows that BCC patches are more frequent, larger, and more
invasive near HFs. These findings have major implications for the prevention of
field cancerization in the epidermis.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107702
PMID: 32492418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
