---
reference_id: "PMID:38520832"
title: Validation of a new extraction-free real-time PCR test to detect MPOX virus.
authors:
- Lima A
- Rowe L
- Silbert S
journal: Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2024.116265
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Validation of a new extraction-free real-time PCR test to detect MPOX virus.
**Authors:** Lima A, Rowe L, Silbert S
**Journal:** Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2024.116265](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2024.116265)

## Content

1. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2024 Jun;109(2):116265. doi: 
10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2024.116265. Epub 2024 Mar 14.

Validation of a new extraction-free real-time PCR test to detect MPOX virus.

Lima A(1), Rowe L(2), Silbert S(2).

Author information:
(1)Esoteric Testing/R&D Laboratory, Tampa General Hospital, 1 Tampa General 
Circle, Tampa, FL 33606, USA. Electronic address: alima@tgh.org.
(2)Esoteric Testing/R&D Laboratory, Tampa General Hospital, 1 Tampa General 
Circle, Tampa, FL 33606, USA.

The monkeypox (Mpox) virus has raised significant concerns given its recent 
spread with an increasing number of confirmed cases worldwide. In this study, we 
evaluated the performance of a laboratory developed test (LDT) using BioGX Xfree 
hMPXV/OPXV reagents for the qualitative detection of non-variola Orthopoxviruses 
and Mpox virus DNA, in swabs from human pustular or vesicular rash specimens. 
Analytical and clinical testing analysis were carried out on two different 
platforms: the BD MAX™ System (BD Diagnostics) and the new pixl.16 Real-Time PCR 
Platform (BioGX), using a synthetic Mpox virus DNA (ATCC VR-3270SD) and residual 
clinical samples previously identified with an EUA approved Mpox real-time PCR 
assay. In the end, the Xfree hMPXV/OPXV LDT proved to be a sensitive, specific, 
and reproducible test for the detection of Mpox on both platforms evaluated with 
the pixl.16 having an advantage of a small footprint and providing faster TAT 
facilitated by an extraction-free workflow.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2024.116265
PMID: 38520832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.