---
reference_id: "PMID:20375481"
title: "Occurrence of antibiotic resistance genes in reclaimed water and river water in the Werribee Basin, Australia."
authors:
- Barker-Reid F
- Fox EM
- Faggian R
journal: J Water Health
year: '2010'
doi: 10.2166/wh.2010.102
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Occurrence of antibiotic resistance genes in reclaimed water and river water in the Werribee Basin, Australia.
**Authors:** Barker-Reid F, Fox EM, Faggian R
**Journal:** J Water Health (2010)
**DOI:** [10.2166/wh.2010.102](https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2010.102)

## Content

1. J Water Health. 2010 Sep;8(3):521-31. doi: 10.2166/wh.2010.102. Epub 2010 Mar
9.

Occurrence of antibiotic resistance genes in reclaimed water and river water in 
the Werribee Basin, Australia.

Barker-Reid F(1), Fox EM, Faggian R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Natural Resource Management and Geography, The University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia. 
s.barker-reid@pgrad.unimelb.edu.au

The purpose of this study was to investigate the occurrence of antibiotic 
resistance genes (ARGs) in water used for irrigation in the Werribee River 
Basin, Australia, including river water and reclaimed effluent water (reclaimed 
water). Samples of reclaimed water, collected over a one-year period, were 
screened for the occurrence of ARGs using PCR detection assays. The presence of 
ARGs in the reclaimed water samples were contrasted with that of water samples 
taken from the Werribee River Basin, collected over the same time period, from 
five points selected for varying levels of urban and agricultural impact. Of the 
54 river water samples collected, 2 (4%), 2 (4%), 0 and 0 were positive for 
methicillin, sulfonamide, gentamicin and vancomycin-resistant genes, 
respectively, while 6 of 11 reclaimed water samples were positive for 
methicillin (9%) and sulfonamide (45%). The presence/absence of ARGs did not 
appear to correlate with other measured water quality parameters. The low 
detection of ARGs in river water indicates that, regardless of its poor quality, 
the river has not yet been severely contaminated with ARGs. The greater 
prevalence of ARGs in reclaimed water indicates that this important agricultural 
water source will need to be monitored into the future.

DOI: 10.2166/wh.2010.102
PMID: 20375481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]