---
reference_id: "PMID:29900887"
title: "Pulmonary functions' assessment in post-tuberculosis cases by spirometry: Obstructive pattern is predominant and needs cautious evaluation in all treated cases irrespective of symptoms."
authors:
- Patil S
- Patil R
- Jadhav A
journal: Int J Mycobacteriol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_56_18
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary functions' assessment in post-tuberculosis cases by spirometry: Obstructive pattern is predominant and needs cautious evaluation in all treated cases irrespective of symptoms.
**Authors:** Patil S, Patil R, Jadhav A
**Journal:** Int J Mycobacteriol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_56_18](https://doi.org/10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_56_18)

## Content

1. Int J Mycobacteriol. 2018 Apr-Jun;7(2):128-133. doi: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_56_18.

Pulmonary functions' assessment in post-tuberculosis cases by spirometry: 
Obstructive pattern is predominant and needs cautious evaluation in all treated 
cases irrespective of symptoms.

Patil S(1), Patil R(2), Jadhav A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, MIMSR Medical College, Latur, Maharashtra, 
India.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, MIMSR Medical College, Latur, Maharashtra, 
India.

Comment in
    Int J Mycobacteriol. 2018 Jul-Sep;7(3):295. doi: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_76_18.

BACKGROUND: Approximately 30%-40% patients suffer with lung function issues in 
spite of successful treatment outcome; and these problems are less documented 
routinely.
METHODS: Prospective multicentric study conducted during July 2013-June 2017, to 
find pulmonary function assessment in posttuberculosis (TB) cases irrespective 
of their symptoms, included 500 cases in symptomatic and asymptomatic group and 
subjected to inclusion and exclusion criteria. All cases were subjected to 
spirometry analysis. Statistical analysis was done using Chi-square test.
RESULTS: In spirometry assessment of symptomatic post-TB cases, obstructive 
pattern was predominant type documented in 42% cases. In spirometry assessment 
of asymptomatic post-TB cases, obstructive pattern is documented in 32%, mixed 
pattern in 14%, and normal spirometry is documented in 46% cases. In spirometry 
assessment in symptomatic and asymptomatic cases, obstructive pattern is 
documented in 210 cases and 160 cases, respectively (P < 0.00001). Abnormal lung 
function is documented in 70% and 54% in symptomatic and asymptomatic post-TB 
cases, respectively (P < 0.00001).
CONCLUSIONS: Lung function impairment is known to occur after pulmonary TB 
irrespective of duration of treatment and outcome of disease. Obstructive lung 
disease is the predominant lung function impairment in symptomatic cases. 
Significant number of asymptomatic cases are also having obstructive pattern of 
lung function in spirometry analysis.

DOI: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_56_18
PMID: 29900887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest