---
reference_id: "PMID:18633434"
title: Murine neonatal melanocytes exhibit a heightened proliferative response to ultraviolet radiation and migrate to the epidermal basal layer.
authors:
- Walker GJ
- Kimlin MG
- Hacker E
- Ravishankar S
- Muller HK
- Beermann F
- Hayward NK
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/jid.2008.210
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Murine neonatal melanocytes exhibit a heightened proliferative response to ultraviolet radiation and migrate to the epidermal basal layer.
**Authors:** Walker GJ, Kimlin MG, Hacker E, Ravishankar S, Muller HK, Beermann F, Hayward NK
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jid.2008.210](https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2008.210)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2009 Jan;129(1):184-93. doi: 10.1038/jid.2008.210. Epub
2008  Jul 17.

Murine neonatal melanocytes exhibit a heightened proliferative response to 
ultraviolet radiation and migrate to the epidermal basal layer.

Walker GJ(1), Kimlin MG, Hacker E, Ravishankar S, Muller HK, Beermann F, Hayward 
NK.

Author information:
(1)Oncogenomic Laboratory, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Herston, 
Queensland, Australia. Graeme.Walker@qimr.edu.au

Melanocytes respond to UVR not only by producing melanin, but also by 
proliferating. This is essentially a protective response. We have studied the 
melanocyte proliferative response after a single UVR exposure to neonatal mice. 
At 3 days post-UVR in wild-type neonates we observed a marked melanocyte 
activation not seen in adults. Melanocytes migrated to the epidermal basal 
layer, their numbers peaking at 3-5 days after UVR then diminishing. They 
appeared to emanate from the hair follicle, migrating to the epidermis via the 
outer root sheath. In melanoma-prone mice with melanocyte-specific 
overexpression of Hras(G12V), basal layer melanocytes were increased in size and 
dendricity compared to UVR-treated wild-type mice. Melanocytes in mice carrying 
a pRb pathway cell-cycle defect (oncogenic Cdk4(R24C)) did not show an enhanced 
response to UVR such as those carrying Hras(G12V). The exquisite sensitivity to 
UVR-induced proliferation and migration that characterizes neonatal mouse 
melanocytes may partly explain the utility of this form of exposure for inducing 
melanoma in mice that carry oncogenic mutations.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2008.210
PMID: 18633434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]