---
reference_id: "PMID:38882583"
title: "Hairy cell leukemia - etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and modern therapeutic approach."
authors:
- Maćkowiak K
- Jankowiak M
- Szewczyk-Golec K
- Hołyńska-Iwan I
journal: Biochem Med (Zagreb)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.11613/BM.2024.020502
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Leukemia, Hairy Cell/diagnosis, therapy"
- Mutation
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hairy cell leukemia - etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and modern therapeutic approach.
**Authors:** Maćkowiak K, Jankowiak M, Szewczyk-Golec K, Hołyńska-Iwan I
**Journal:** Biochem Med (Zagreb) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.11613/BM.2024.020502](https://doi.org/10.11613/BM.2024.020502)

## Content

1. Biochem Med (Zagreb). 2024 Jun 15;34(2):020502. doi: 10.11613/BM.2024.020502.

Hairy cell leukemia - etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and modern therapeutic
approach.

Maćkowiak K(1), Jankowiak M(1), Szewczyk-Golec K(2), Hołyńska-Iwan I(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Diagnostic, Dr Jan Biziel University Hospital No. 2,
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(2)Department of Medical Biology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Ludwik
Rydygier Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in
Toruń, Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(3)Department of Pathobiochemistry and Clinical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy,
Ludwik Rydygier Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University
in Toruń, Bydgoszcz, Poland.

Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) represents 2% of all leukemia cases, with men aged
above 55 years being the most affected. The most common symptoms of this type of
leukemia include splenomegaly, monocytopenia, and neutropenia. In the basic
blood count examination, leukopenia with monocytopenia and granulocytopenia, as
well as aplastic anemia and/or thrombocytopenia occur. The mutation of β-rapidly
accelerated fibrosarcoma (BRAF) proto-oncogene, which can be found in nearly
100% of patients, is an important feature of HCL. Immunophenotypic analysis of
the HCL cells reveals high expression of B-lineage antigens, including CD19,
CD20, and CD22. Additionally, CD11c, CD25, CD103, and CD123 belong to specific
markers of HCL. Lactate dehydrogenase activity and β-2-microglobulin
concentration are also important in the patient's assessment. The differential
diagnosis between HCL, hairy cell leukemia variant (HCL-V) and splenic marginal
zone lymphoma (SMZL) is of first importance. Currently, the main treatment for
HCL involves the use of purine analogues, excluding pregnant women, individuals
with severe infections, and those with relapsing HCL.

Copyright Croatian Society of Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory Medicine.

DOI: 10.11613/BM.2024.020502
PMCID: PMC11177658
PMID: 38882583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflict of interest None declared.
