---
reference_id: "PMID:24992337"
title: "Meiosis-specific cohesin component, Stag3 is essential for maintaining centromere chromatid cohesion, and required for DNA repair and synapsis between homologous chromosomes."
authors:
- Hopkins J
- Hwang G
- Jacob J
- Sapp N
- Bedigian R
- Oka K
- Overbeek P
- Murray S
- Jordan PW
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004413
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Centromere/genetics
- Chromatids/genetics
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics, metabolism"
- Chromosome Pairing/genetics
- DNA Repair/genetics
- Meiosis/genetics
- Mice
- Multiprotein Complexes
- Mutation
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Phosphoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cohesins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meiosis-specific cohesin component, Stag3 is essential for maintaining centromere chromatid cohesion, and required for DNA repair and synapsis between homologous chromosomes.
**Authors:** Hopkins J, Hwang G, Jacob J, Sapp N, Bedigian R, Oka K, Overbeek P, Murray S, Jordan PW
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1004413](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1004413)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jul 3;10(7):e1004413. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004413. 
eCollection 2014 Jul.

Meiosis-specific cohesin component, Stag3 is essential for maintaining 
centromere chromatid cohesion, and required for DNA repair and synapsis between 
homologous chromosomes.

Hopkins J(1), Hwang G(1), Jacob J(1), Sapp N(1), Bedigian R(2), Oka K(3), 
Overbeek P(3), Murray S(2), Jordan PW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Johns Hopkins University 
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of 
America.
(2)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, United States of America.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America, Department of Molecular and Human 
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Cohesins are important for chromosome structure and chromosome segregation 
during mitosis and meiosis. Cohesins are composed of two structural maintenance 
of chromosomes (SMC1-SMC3) proteins that form a V-shaped heterodimer structure, 
which is bridged by a α-kleisin protein and a stromal antigen (STAG) protein. 
Previous studies in mouse have shown that there is one SMC1 protein (SMC1β), two 
α-kleisins (RAD21L and REC8) and one STAG protein (STAG3) that are 
meiosis-specific. During meiosis, homologous chromosomes must recombine with one 
another in the context of a tripartite structure known as the synaptonemal 
complex (SC). From interaction studies, it has been shown that there are at 
least four meiosis-specific forms of cohesin, which together with the mitotic 
cohesin complex, are lateral components of the SC. STAG3 is the only 
meiosis-specific subunit that is represented within all four meiosis-specific 
cohesin complexes. In Stag3 mutant germ cells, the protein level of other 
meiosis-specific cohesin subunits (SMC1β, RAD21L and REC8) is reduced, and their 
localization to chromosome axes is disrupted. In contrast, the mitotic cohesin 
complex remains intact and localizes robustly to the meiotic chromosome axes. 
The instability of meiosis-specific cohesins observed in Stag3 mutants results 
in aberrant DNA repair processes, and disruption of synapsis between homologous 
chromosomes. Furthermore, mutation of Stag3 results in perturbation of 
pericentromeric heterochromatin clustering, and disruption of centromere 
cohesion between sister chromatids during meiotic prophase. These defects result 
in early prophase I arrest and apoptosis in both male and female germ cells. The 
meiotic defects observed in Stag3 mutants are more severe when compared to 
single mutants for Smc1β, Rec8 and Rad21l, however they are not as severe as the 
Rec8, Rad21l double mutants. Taken together, our study demonstrates that STAG3 
is required for the stability of all meiosis-specific cohesin complexes. 
Furthermore, our data suggests that STAG3 is required for structural changes of 
chromosomes that mediate chromosome pairing and synapsis, DNA repair and 
progression of meiosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004413
PMCID: PMC4081007
PMID: 24992337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.