---
reference_id: "PMID:30114215"
title: Characterising seasonal influenza epidemiology using primary care surveillance data.
authors:
- Cope RC
- Ross JV
- Chilver M
- Stocks NP
- Mitchell L
journal: PLoS Comput Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006377
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterising seasonal influenza epidemiology using primary care surveillance data.
**Authors:** Cope RC, Ross JV, Chilver M, Stocks NP, Mitchell L
**Journal:** PLoS Comput Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006377](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006377)

## Content

1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018 Aug 16;14(8):e1006377. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006377.  eCollection 2018 Aug.

Characterising seasonal influenza epidemiology using primary care surveillance 
data.

Cope RC(1), Ross JV(1), Chilver M(2), Stocks NP(2), Mitchell L(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Mathematical Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia.
(2)Discipline of General Practice, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia.
(3)Stream Lead, Data to Decisions CRC, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Understanding the epidemiology of seasonal influenza is critical for healthcare 
resource allocation and early detection of anomalous seasons. It can be 
challenging to obtain high-quality data of influenza cases specifically, as 
clinical presentations with influenza-like symptoms may instead be cases of one 
of a number of alternate respiratory viruses. We use a new dataset of confirmed 
influenza virological data from 2011-2016, along with high-quality denominators 
informing a hierarchical observation process, to model seasonal influenza 
dynamics in New South Wales, Australia. We use approximate Bayesian computation 
to estimate parameters in a climate-driven stochastic epidemic model, including 
the basic reproduction number R0, the proportion of the population susceptible 
to the circulating strain at the beginning of the season, and the probability an 
infected individual seeks treatment. We conclude that R0 and initial population 
susceptibility were strongly related, emphasising the challenges of identifying 
these parameters. Relatively high R0 values alongside low initial population 
susceptibility were among the results most consistent with these data. Our 
results reinforce the importance of distinguishing between R0 and the effective 
reproduction number (Re) in modelling studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006377
PMCID: PMC6112683
PMID: 30114215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.