---
reference_id: "PMID:36774407"
title: "Radiological and audiological predictors of stapes destruction in adherent pars tensa."
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: "2023"
doi: 10.1007/s00405-023-07873-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radiological and audiological predictors of stapes destruction in adherent pars tensa.

## Content

PURPOSE: Progressive adherent pars tensa occasionally induces ossicular erosion.
Specifically, stapes discontinuity adversely affects postoperative hearing.
However, this irretrievable sequela is challenging to prove preoperatively,
partly because perimatrix inflammation on the pars tensa can obscure the
visibility of the ossicles or the partial volume effect of computed tomography
(CT) imaging can hamper detailed ossicular visualization. Therefore, there is no
consensus regarding the ideal timing for switching from a wait-and-see approach
to a surgical one. Herein, we aimed to explore the potential predictors of
stapes superstructure destruction in adherent pars tensa. METHODS: This
retrospective cohort study enrolled consecutive patients who underwent primary
tympanoplasty for adherent pars tensa categorized as grade IV on Sadé's grading
scale between April 2016 and September 2021. The impact of features on otoscopy
and CT and air-bone gap (ABG) on stapes superstructure destruction was assessed
using uni- and multivariable logistic regression analyses. RESULTS: Sixty-four
ears were included. Multivariate analysis revealed the presence of debris on the
adherent pars tensa (odds ratio [OR] [95% confidence interval {CI}]): 4.799
[1.063-21.668], p = 0.0415), presence of soft-tissue density occupying the oval
window (OR [95% CI]: 13.876 [3.084-62.437], p = 0.0006), and a ≥ 20-dB
preoperative ABG at 3 kHz (OR [95% CI]: 7.595 [1.596-36.132], p = 0.0108) as
independent predictors for stapes superstructure destruction. CONCLUSION: High
preoperative awareness of the possibility of destruction of the stapes
superstructure would enable the surgeon to make a timely decision to provide
surgical intervention before progression to severe stapes destruction, thereby
maintaining long-term satisfactory hearing.
