---
reference_id: "PMID:20690115"
title: "CEP290, a gene with many faces: mutation overview and presentation of CEP290base."
authors:
- Coppieters F
- Lefever S
- Leroy BP
- De Baere E
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21337
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Animals
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "Cilia/genetics, pathology"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CEP290, a gene with many faces: mutation overview and presentation of CEP290base.
**Authors:** Coppieters F, Lefever S, Leroy BP, De Baere E
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21337](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21337)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Oct;31(10):1097-108. doi: 10.1002/humu.21337.

CEP290, a gene with many faces: mutation overview and presentation of 
CEP290base.

Coppieters F(1), Lefever S, Leroy BP, De Baere E.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Ciliopathies are an emerging group of disorders, caused by mutations in ciliary 
genes. One of the most intriguing disease genes associated with ciliopathies is 
CEP290, in which mutations cause a wide variety of distinct phenotypes, ranging 
from isolated blindness over Senior-Loken syndrome (SLS), nephronophthisis 
(NPHP), Joubert syndrome (related disorders) (JS[RD]), Bardet-Biedl syndrome 
(BBS), to the lethal Meckel-Grüber syndrome (MKS). Despite the identification of 
over 100 unique CEP290 mutations, no clear genotype-phenotype correlations could 
yet be established, and consequently the predictive power of a CEP290-related 
genotype remains limited. One of the challenges is a better understanding of 
second-site modifiers. In this respect, there is a growing interest in the 
potential modifying effects of variations in genes encoding other members of the 
ciliary proteome that interact with CEP290. Here, we provide an overview of all 
CEP290 mutations identified so far, with their associated phenotypes. To this 
end, we developed CEP290base, a locus-specific mutation database that links 
mutations with patients and their phenotypes (medgen.ugent.be/cep290base).

Hum Mutat 31:1097-1108, 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21337
PMID: 20690115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]