---
reference_id: "PMID:18421897"
title: "Tarui disease and distal glycogenoses: clinical and genetic update."
authors:
- Toscano A
- Musumeci O
journal: Acta Myol
year: '2007'
keywords:
- "Anemia, Hemolytic/genetics"
- Exercise Tolerance
- Fructose-Bisphosphate Aldolase/deficiency
- Glycogen Storage Disease/enzymology
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type VII/complications, diagnosis, enzymology, genetics"
- Humans
- Hyperuricemia/genetics
- L-Lactate Dehydrogenase/deficiency
- Muscle Cramp/genetics
- Mutation
- Myoglobinuria/genetics
- "Phosphofructokinases/deficiency, genetics"
- Phosphoglycerate Kinase/deficiency
- Phosphoglycerate Mutase/deficiency
- Phosphopyruvate Hydratase/deficiency
- Rhabdomyolysis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tarui disease and distal glycogenoses: clinical and genetic update.
**Authors:** Toscano A, Musumeci O
**Journal:** Acta Myol (2007)

## Content

1. Acta Myol. 2007 Oct;26(2):105-7.

Tarui disease and distal glycogenoses: clinical and genetic update.

Toscano A(1), Musumeci O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anaesthesiology, University of
Messina, Italy. Antonio.toscano@unime.it

Phosphofructokinase deficiency (Tarui disease) was the first disorder recognized
to directly affect glycolysis. Since the discovery of the disease, in 1965, a
wide range of biochemical, physiological and molecular studies have greatly
contributed to our knowledge concerning not only phosphofructokinase function in
normal muscle but also on the general control of glycolysis and glycogen
metabolism. Studies on phosphofructokinase deficiency vastly enriched the field
of glycogen storage diseases, making a relevant improvement also in the
molecular genetic area. So far, more than one hundred patients have been
described with prominent clinical symptoms characterized by muscle cramps,
exercise intolerance, rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria, often associated with
haemolytic anaemia and hyperuricaemia. The muscle phosphofructokinase gene is
located on chromosome 12 and about 20 mutations have been described. Other
glycogenoses have been recognised in the distal part of the glycolytic pathway:
these are infrequent but some may induce muscle cramps, exercise intolerance and
rhabdomyolysis. Phosphoglycerate Kinase, Phosphoglycerate Mutase, Lactate
Dehydrogenase, beta-Enolase and Aldolase A deficiencies have been described as
distal glycogenoses. From the molecular point of view, the majority of these
enzyme deficiencies are sustained by "private" mutations.

PMCID: PMC2949577
PMID: 18421897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
