---
reference_id: "PMID:38731137"
title: Drusen in AMD from the Perspective of Cholesterol Metabolism and Hypoxic Response.
authors:
- Ban N
- Shinojima A
- Negishi K
- Kurihara T
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13092608
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drusen in AMD from the Perspective of Cholesterol Metabolism and Hypoxic Response.
**Authors:** Ban N, Shinojima A, Negishi K, Kurihara T
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13092608](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13092608)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Apr 29;13(9):2608. doi: 10.3390/jcm13092608.

Drusen in AMD from the Perspective of Cholesterol Metabolism and Hypoxic 
Response.

Ban N(1)(2), Shinojima A(2)(3), Negishi K(2), Kurihara T(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Aging and Retinal Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 
160-8582, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Photobiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 
160-8582, Japan.

Drusen are one of the most characteristic pathologies of precursor lesion of 
age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Drusen comprise a yellowish white 
substance that accumulates typically under the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), 
and their constituents are lipids, complement, amyloid, crystallin, and others. 
In the past, many researchers have focused on drusen and tried to elucidate the 
pathophysiology of AMD because they believed that disease progression from early 
AMD to advanced AMD might be based on drusen or drusen might cause AMD. In fact, 
it is well established that drusen are the hallmark of precursor lesion of AMD 
and a major risk factor for AMD progression mainly based on their size and 
number. However, the existence of advanced AMD without drusen has long been 
recognized. For example, polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV), which 
comprises the majority of AMD cases in Asians, often lacks drusen. Thus, there 
is the possibility that drusen might be no more than a biomarker of AMD and not 
a cause of AMD. Now is the time to reconsider the relationship between AMD and 
drusen. In this review, we focus on early AMD pathogenesis based on basic 
research from the perspective of cholesterol metabolism and hypoxic response in 
the retina, and we discuss the role of drusen.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13092608
PMCID: PMC11084323
PMID: 38731137

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.