---
reference_id: "PMID:34599046"
title: Schizophrenia Genetics and Neuropsychiatric Features in Childhood-onset Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
authors:
- Ulloa AC
- Liao F
- Carlomagno RL
- Diaz T
- Dominguez D
- Levy DM
- Ng L
- Knight AM
- Hiraki LT
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3899/jrheum.210363
keywords:
- Antiphospholipid Syndrome
- Child
- Female
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/genetics"
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System"
- Male
- Psychotic Disorders/genetics
- Schizophrenia/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schizophrenia Genetics and Neuropsychiatric Features in Childhood-onset Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
**Authors:** Ulloa AC, Liao F, Carlomagno RL, Diaz T, Dominguez D, Levy DM, Ng L, Knight AM, Hiraki LT
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3899/jrheum.210363](https://doi.org/10.3899/jrheum.210363)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2022 Feb;49(2):192-196. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.210363. Epub 2021 Oct
 1.

Schizophrenia Genetics and Neuropsychiatric Features in Childhood-onset Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus.

Ulloa AC(1), Liao F(2), Carlomagno RL(2), Diaz T(2), Dominguez D(2), Levy DM(3),
Ng L(2), Knight AM(2), Hiraki LT(4).

Author information:
(1)A.C. Ulloa, MPH, Genetics & Genome Biology, Research Institute, The Hospital
for Sick Children.
(2)F. Liao, MSc, R.L. Carlomagno, MD, T. Diaz, MD, D. Dominguez, MD, MSc, L. Ng,
BSc, A.M. Knight, MD, MSCE, Division of Rheumatology, The Hospital for Sick
Children.
(3)D.M. Levy, MD, MS, Division of Rheumatology, The Hospital for Sick Children,
and Department of Pediatrics, The University of Toronto.
(4)L.T. Hiraki, MD, FRCPC, ScD, Genetics & Genome Biology, Research Institute,
and Division of Rheumatology, The Hospital for Sick Children, and Department of
Pediatrics, The University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
linda.hiraki@sickkids.ca.

OBJECTIVE: We examined the association between schizophrenia genetic
susceptibility loci and neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE)
features in childhood-onset SLE (cSLE) participants.
METHODS: Study participants from the Lupus Clinic at the Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, met ≥ 4 of the American College of Rheumatology and/or SLE
International Collaborating Clinics SLE classification criteria and were
genotyped using the Illumina Multi-Ethnic Global Array or the Global Screening
Array. Ungenotyped single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were imputed, and
ancestry was genetically inferred. We calculated 2 additive
schizophrenia-weighted polygenic risk scores (PRS) using (1) genome-wide
significant SNPs (P < 5 × 10-8), and (2) an expanded list of SNPs with
significance at P < 0.05. We defined 2 outcomes compared to absence of NPSLE
features: (1) any NPSLE feature, and (2) subtypes of NPSLE features (psychosis
and nonpsychosis NPSLE). We completed logistic and multinomial regressions,
first adjusted for inferred ancestry only and then added for variables
significantly associated with NPSLE in our cohort (P < 0.05).
RESULTS: We included 513 participants with cSLE. Median age at diagnosis was
13.8 years (IQR 11.2-15.6), 83% were female, and 31% were of European ancestry.
An increasing schizophrenia genome-wide association PRS was not associated with
NPSLE (OR 1.04, 95% CI 0.87-1.26, P = 0.62), nor with the NPSLE subtypes,
psychosis (OR 0.97, 95% CI 0.73-1.29, P = 0.84) and other nonpsychosis NPSLE (OR
1.08, 95% CI 0.88-1.34, P = 0.45), in ancestry-adjusted models. Results were
similar for the model including covariates (ancestry, malar rash, oral/nasal
ulcers, arthritis, lymphopenia, Coombs-positive hemolytic anemia, lupus
anticoagulant, and anticardiolipin antibodies) and for the expanded PRS
estimates.
CONCLUSION: We did not observe an association between known risk loci for
schizophrenia and NPSLE in a multiethnic cSLE cohort. This work warrants further
validation.

© 2022 by the Journal of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.3899/jrheum.210363
PMID: 34599046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
