---
reference_id: "PMID:24874124"
title: The systemic nature of chronic lung disease.
authors:
- Evans RA
- Morgan MD
journal: Clin Chest Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2014.02.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The systemic nature of chronic lung disease.
**Authors:** Evans RA, Morgan MD
**Journal:** Clin Chest Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccm.2014.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccm.2014.02.009)

## Content

1. Clin Chest Med. 2014 Jun;35(2):283-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2014.02.009. Epub
2014  Apr 12.

The systemic nature of chronic lung disease.

Evans RA(1), Morgan MD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Glenfield Hospital, Groby Road, Leicester 
LE3 9QP, UK.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Glenfield Hospital, Groby Road, Leicester 
LE3 9QP, UK. Electronic address: rachael.evans@uhl-tr.nhs.uk.

The systemic effects and comorbidities of chronic respiratory disease such as 
COPD contribute substantially to its burden. Symptoms in COPD do not solely 
arise from the degree of airflow obstruction as exercise limitation is 
compounded by the specific secondary manifestations of the disease including 
skeletal muscle impairment, osteoporosis, mood disturbance, anemia, and hormonal 
imbalance. Pulmonary rehabilitation targets the systemic manifestations of COPD, 
the causes of which include inactivity, systemic inflammation, hypoxia and 
corticosteroid treatment. Comorbidities are common, including cardiac disease, 
obesity, and metabolic syndrome and should not preclude pulmonary rehabilitation 
as they may also benefit from similar approaches.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccm.2014.02.009
PMID: 24874124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]