---
reference_id: "PMID:25355273"
title: Immunological response in Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
authors:
- Abe R
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.12674
keywords:
- Annexin A1/metabolism
- Antigen Presentation
- "Antigens, Differentiation, T-Lymphocyte/metabolism"
- Granzymes/metabolism
- Haptens/immunology
- Humans
- Perforin/metabolism
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell/metabolism"
- "Receptors, Formyl Peptide/metabolism"
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/immunology, metabolism"
- fas Receptor/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunological response in Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
**Authors:** Abe R
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1346-8138.12674](https://doi.org/10.1111/1346-8138.12674)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2015 Jan;42(1):42-8. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.12674. Epub 2014 Oct
30.

Immunological response in Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal 
necrolysis.

Abe R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sapporo, Japan.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are 
life-threatening cutaneous adverse drug reactions that induce widespread 
epidermal necrosis. Recent advances in pharmacogenomic studies have provided 
evidence of genetic predispositions to SJS/TEN. Several concepts have been 
proposed to explain the pathogenesis of severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions. 
In the hapten concept, small molecules called haptens elicit an immune response 
only when attached to proteins. The "p-i" concept postulates that the causative 
drugs can stimulate cells by binding directly and reversibly to immune 
receptors. In addition, there is the idea that drugs alter the antigen by 
binding to the human leukocyte antigen pocket. With regard to keratinocyte 
death, several cell death mediators, such as FasL, granulysin and annexin A1, 
have been proposed as playing a role in SJS/TEN pathogenesis. A subset of T 
lymphocytes, including regulatory T cells, also may play a role in SJS/TEN.

© 2014 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.12674
PMID: 25355273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]