---
reference_id: "PMID:36092864"
title: "Case Report: Novel compound heterozygous variants in CHRNA1 gene leading to lethal multiple pterygium syndrome: A case report."
authors:
- Zhuang J
- Wang J
- Luo Q
- Zeng S
- Chen Y
- Jiang Y
- Chen X
- Wang Y
- Xie Y
- Wang G
- Chen C
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.964098
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: Novel compound heterozygous variants in CHRNA1 gene leading to lethal multiple pterygium syndrome: A case report.
**Authors:** Zhuang J, Wang J, Luo Q, Zeng S, Chen Y, Jiang Y, Chen X, Wang Y, Xie Y, Wang G, Chen C
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.964098](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.964098)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 Aug 26;13:964098. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.964098.
eCollection  2022.

Case Report: Novel compound heterozygous variants in CHRNA1 gene leading to
lethal multiple pterygium syndrome: A case report.

Zhuang J(1), Wang J(1), Luo Q(2), Zeng S(1), Chen Y(3), Jiang Y(1), Chen X(1),
Wang Y(1), Xie Y(4)(5), Wang G(6), Chen C(7).

Author information:
(1)Prenatal Diagnosis Center, Quanzhou Women's and Children's Hospital,
Quanzhou, China.
(2)Department of Public Health for Women and Children, Quanzhou Women's and
Children's Hospital, Quanzhou, China.
(3)Ultrasonography, Quanzhou Women's and Children's Hospital, Quanzhou, China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory
of Major Obstetric Diseases, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Reproduction and Genetics of Guangdong Higher Education
Institutes, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou, China.
(6)Quanzhou Women's and Children's Hospital, Quanzhou, China.
(7)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical
University, Quanzhou, China.

Background: Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome (LMPS) is a rare autosomal
recessive inherited disorder typically characterized by intrauterine growth
retardation, multiple pterygia, and flexion contractures. Case presentation: We
herein report a Chinese case with a history of three adverse pregnancies
demonstrating the same ultrasonic phenotypes, including increased nuchal
translucency, edema, fetal neck cystoma, reduced movement, joint contractures,
and other congenital features. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) revealed novel
compound heterozygous variants in the CHRNA1 gene NM_000079.4: c.[1128delG
(p.Pro377LeufsTer10)]; [505T>C (p.Trp169Arg)] in the recruited individual, and
subsequent familial segregation showed that both parents transmitted their
respective mutation. Conclusion: For the first time, we identified an
association between the CHRNA1 gene and the recurrent lethal multiple pterygium
syndrome (LMPS) in a Chinese family. This finding may also enrich the mutation
spectrum of the CHRNA1 gene and promote the applications of WES technology in
etiologic diagnosis of ultrasound anomalies in prenatal examination.

Copyright © 2022 Zhuang, Wang, Luo, Zeng, Chen, Jiang, Chen, Wang, Xie, Wang and
Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.964098
PMCID: PMC9459375
PMID: 36092864

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
