---
reference_id: "PMID:26628470"
title: Complete Surgical Excision Is Essential for the Management of Patients With Breast Implant-Associated Anaplastic Large-Cell Lymphoma.
authors:
- Clemens MW
- Medeiros LJ
- Butler CE
- Hunt KK
- Fanale MA
- Horwitz S
- Weisenburger DD
- Liu J
- Morgan EA
- Kanagal-Shamanna R
- Parkash V
- Ning J
- Sohani AR
- Ferry JA
- Mehta-Shah N
- Dogan A
- Liu H
- Thormann N
- Di Napoli A
- Lade S
- Piccolini J
- Reyes R
- Williams T
- McCarthy CM
- Hanson SE
- Nastoupil LJ
- Gaur R
- Oki Y
- Young KH
- Miranda RN
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.63.3412
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Breast Implants/adverse effects
- "Breast Neoplasms/etiology, pathology, surgery, therapy"
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Disease Management
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Lymphoma, Large-Cell, Anaplastic/etiology, pathology, surgery, therapy"
- Middle Aged
- "Radiotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complete Surgical Excision Is Essential for the Management of Patients With Breast Implant-Associated Anaplastic Large-Cell Lymphoma.
**Authors:** Clemens MW, Medeiros LJ, Butler CE, Hunt KK, Fanale MA, Horwitz S, Weisenburger DD, Liu J, Morgan EA, Kanagal-Shamanna R, Parkash V, Ning J, Sohani AR, Ferry JA, Mehta-Shah N, Dogan A, Liu H, Thormann N, Di Napoli A, Lade S, Piccolini J, Reyes R, Williams T, McCarthy CM, Hanson SE, Nastoupil LJ, Gaur R, Oki Y, Young KH, Miranda RN
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2015.63.3412](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2015.63.3412)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2016 Jan 10;34(2):160-8. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.63.3412. Epub
2015  Nov 30.

Complete Surgical Excision Is Essential for the Management of Patients With
Breast Implant-Associated Anaplastic Large-Cell Lymphoma.

Clemens MW(1), Medeiros LJ(1), Butler CE(1), Hunt KK(1), Fanale MA(1), Horwitz
S(1), Weisenburger DD(1), Liu J(1), Morgan EA(1), Kanagal-Shamanna R(1), Parkash
V(1), Ning J(1), Sohani AR(1), Ferry JA(1), Mehta-Shah N(1), Dogan A(1), Liu
H(1), Thormann N(1), Di Napoli A, Lade S(1), Piccolini J(1), Reyes R(1),
Williams T(1), McCarthy CM(1), Hanson SE(1), Nastoupil LJ(1), Gaur R(1), Oki
Y(1), Young KH(1), Miranda RN(2).

Author information:
(1)Mark W. Clemens, L. Jeffrey Medeiros, Charles E. Butler, Kelly K. Hunt,
Michelle A. Fanale, Jun Liu, Rashmi Kanagal-Shamanna, Jing Ning, Summer E.
Hanson, Loretta J. Nastoupil, Yasuhiro Oki, Ken H. Young, and Roberto N.
Miranda, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Steven
Horwitz, Neha Mehta-Shah, Ahmed Dogan, and Colleen M. McCarthy, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; Dennis D. Weisenburger, City of Hope
National Medical Center, Duarte, CA; Elizabeth A. Morgan, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School; Aliyah R. Sohani and Judith A. Ferry,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; Vinita
Parkash, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; Hui Liu, Xuzhou Medical
College, Xuzhou, People's Republic of China; Nora Thormann, Fundacao
Universitaria Mario Martins, Porto Alegre, Brazil; Arianna DiNapoli, Sant'Andrea
Hospital, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy; Stephen Lade, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; Jorge Piccolini, Hospital Italiano de
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina; Ruben Reyes, Kansas University Medical
Center, Kansas City, KS; Travis Williams, St Luke's Mountain States Tumor
Institute, Meridian, ID; and Rakesh Gaur, St Luke's Hospital, Kansas City, MO.
(2)Mark W. Clemens, L. Jeffrey Medeiros, Charles E. Butler, Kelly K. Hunt,
Michelle A. Fanale, Jun Liu, Rashmi Kanagal-Shamanna, Jing Ning, Summer E.
Hanson, Loretta J. Nastoupil, Yasuhiro Oki, Ken H. Young, and Roberto N.
Miranda, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Steven
Horwitz, Neha Mehta-Shah, Ahmed Dogan, and Colleen M. McCarthy, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; Dennis D. Weisenburger, City of Hope
National Medical Center, Duarte, CA; Elizabeth A. Morgan, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School; Aliyah R. Sohani and Judith A. Ferry,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; Vinita
Parkash, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; Hui Liu, Xuzhou Medical
College, Xuzhou, People's Republic of China; Nora Thormann, Fundacao
Universitaria Mario Martins, Porto Alegre, Brazil; Arianna DiNapoli, Sant'Andrea
Hospital, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy; Stephen Lade, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; Jorge Piccolini, Hospital Italiano de
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina; Ruben Reyes, Kansas University Medical
Center, Kansas City, KS; Travis Williams, St Luke's Mountain States Tumor
Institute, Meridian, ID; and Rakesh Gaur, St Luke's Hospital, Kansas City, MO.
roberto.miranda@mdanderson.org.

Erratum in
    J Clin Oncol. 2016 Mar 10;34(8):888. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2016.66.7659..
DiNapoli, Arianna [corrected to Di Napoli, Arianna].

PURPOSE: Breast implant-associated anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (BI-ALCL) is a
rare type of T-cell lymphoma that arises around breast implants. The optimal
management of this disease has not been established. The goal of this study is
to evaluate the efficacy of different therapies used in patients with BI-ALCL to
determine an optimal treatment approach.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this study, we applied strict criteria to pathologic
findings, assessed therapies used, and conducted a clinical follow-up of 87
patients with BI-ALCL, including 50 previously reported in the literature and 37
unreported. A Prentice, Williams, and Peterson model was used to assess the rate
of events for each therapeutic intervention.
RESULTS: The median and mean follow-up times were 45 and 30 months, respectively
(range, 3 to 217 months). The median overall survival (OS) time after diagnosis
of BI-ALCL was 13 years, and the OS rate was 93% and 89% at 3 and 5 years,
respectively. Patients with lymphoma confined by the fibrous capsule surrounding
the implant had better event-free survival (EFS) and OS than did patients with
lymphoma that had spread beyond the capsule (P = .03). Patients who underwent a
complete surgical excision that consisted of total capsulectomy with breast
implant removal had better OS (P = .022) and EFS (P = .014) than did patients
who received partial capsulectomy, systemic chemotherapy, or radiation therapy.
CONCLUSION: Surgical management with complete surgical excision is essential to
achieve optimal EFS in patients with BI-ALCL.

© 2015 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2015.63.3412
PMCID: PMC4872006
PMID: 26628470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' disclosures of potential conflicts of
interest are found in the article online at www.jco.org. Author contributions
are found at the end of this article.
