---
reference_id: "PMID:19088198"
title: "Oncogenic kinase NPM/ALK induces through STAT3 expression of immunosuppressive protein CD274 (PD-L1, B7-H1)."
authors:
- Marzec M
- Zhang Q
- Goradia A
- Raghunath PN
- Liu X
- Paessler M
- Wang HY
- Wysocka M
- Cheng M
- Ruggeri BA
- Wasik MA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0810958105
keywords:
- "Antigens, CD/biosynthesis, genetics"
- B7-H1 Antigen
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Cell Survival/drug effects, genetics"
- Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic/drug effects, genetics"
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell/genetics, metabolism"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Small Interfering/genetics"
- "STAT3 Transcription Factor/biosynthesis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oncogenic kinase NPM/ALK induces through STAT3 expression of immunosuppressive protein CD274 (PD-L1, B7-H1).
**Authors:** Marzec M, Zhang Q, Goradia A, Raghunath PN, Liu X, Paessler M, Wang HY, Wysocka M, Cheng M, Ruggeri BA, Wasik MA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0810958105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0810958105)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 30;105(52):20852-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0810958105. Epub 2008 Dec 16.

Oncogenic kinase NPM/ALK induces through STAT3 expression of immunosuppressive
protein CD274 (PD-L1, B7-H1).

Marzec M(1), Zhang Q, Goradia A, Raghunath PN, Liu X, Paessler M, Wang HY,
Wysocka M, Cheng M, Ruggeri BA, Wasik MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The mechanisms of malignant cell transformation caused by the oncogenic,
chimeric nucleophosmin (NPM)/anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) remain only
partially understood, with most of the previous studies focusing mainly on the
impact of NPM/ALK on cell survival and proliferation. Here we report that the
NPM/ALK-carrying T cell lymphoma (ALK+TCL) cells strongly express the
immunosuppressive cell-surface protein CD274 (PD-L1, B7-H1), as determined on
the mRNA and protein level. The CD274 expression is strictly dependent on the
expression and enzymatic activity of NPM/ALK, as demonstrated by inhibition of
the NPM/ALK function in ALK+TCL cells by the small molecule ALK inhibitor
CEP-14083 and by documenting CD274 expression in IL-3-depleted BaF3 cells
transfected with the wild-type NPM/ALK, but not the kinase-inactive NPM/ALK
K210R mutant or empty vector alone. NPM/ALK induces CD274 expression by
activating its key signal transmitter, transcription factor STAT3. STAT3 binds
to the CD274 gene promoter in vitro and in vivo, as shown in the gel
electromobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, and is required
for the PD-L1 gene expression, as demonstrated by siRNA-mediated STAT3
depletion. These findings identify an additional cell-transforming property of
NPM/ALK and describe a direct link between an oncoprotein and an
immunosuppressive cell-surface protein. These results also provide an additional
rationale to therapeutically target NPM/ALK and STAT3 in ALK+TCL. Finally, they
suggest that future immunotherapeutic protocols for this type of lymphoma may
need to include the inhibition of NPM/ALK and STAT3 to achieve optimal clinical
efficacy.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0810958105
PMCID: PMC2634900
PMID: 19088198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
