---
reference_id: "PMID:38584907"
title: "Hyperargininemia: A Rare Diagnosis in Adulthood."
authors:
- Freitas Henriques C
- Fernandes R
- Barreto F
- Miranda R
- Aguiar TC
journal: Eur J Case Rep Intern Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.12890/2024_004379
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperargininemia: A Rare Diagnosis in Adulthood.
**Authors:** Freitas Henriques C, Fernandes R, Barreto F, Miranda R, Aguiar TC
**Journal:** Eur J Case Rep Intern Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.12890/2024_004379](https://doi.org/10.12890/2024_004379)

## Content

1. Eur J Case Rep Intern Med. 2024 Mar 28;11(4):004379. doi:
10.12890/2024_004379.  eCollection 2024.

Hyperargininemia: A Rare Diagnosis in Adulthood.

Freitas Henriques C(1), Fernandes R(1), Barreto F(1), Miranda R(1), Aguiar
TC(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine Department, Hospital Central do Funchal, Portugal.
(2)Neurology Department, Hospital Central do Funchal, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Hyperargininemia is a rare inherited metabolic disorder of the urea
cycle with an autosomal recessive transmission. It occurs due to a deficiency of
the enzyme arginase I and causes progressive neurological damage. Very few cases
are diagnosed in adulthood, with the majority being diagnosed before the age of
4. Currently, this condition is diagnosed by a mass spectrometry technique in
neonatal screening, which has been implemented in Portugal since 2007; births
before that were not screened for this entity.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We present a case of a 23-year-old woman referred to the
internal medicine and neurology departments with a history of two hospital
admissions for rhabdomyolysis at the age of 18, consanguineous parents, learning
difficulties and multiple falls since the age of 8. In addition, the patient
also had behavioural changes so she had psychological counselling at school, but
lacked family support. Neurological examination showed mild proximal
paraparesis, and spastic and paraparetic gait. The aetiological study revealed a
pathological variant in homozygosity ARG1 and increased blood levels of
arginine. Therefore, the diagnosis of hyperargininemia was confirmed.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared to other urea cycle disorders, hyperargininemia is the
rarest one. It is important to recognise the characteristic clinical features
and diagnose it early because a favourable outcome can be achieved with
appropriate treatment. This case shows a delayed diagnosis of hyperargininemia
and highlights the importance of the internist's role in diagnosing rare
diseases.
LEARNING POINTS: Hyperargininemia is a rare hereditary metabolic disease of the
urea cycle and the rarest of the disorders affecting this cycle.The diagnosis is
almost always made within the first four years of life and very few are
diagnosed in adulthood.Early diagnosis is essential to reduce the progression of
neurological damage, through appropriate treatment.

© EFIM 2024.

DOI: 10.12890/2024_004379
PMCID: PMC10997388
PMID: 38584907

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interests: The Authors declare that
there are no competing interests.
