---
reference_id: "PMID:37195455"
title: Characterization and implications of intracoronary hemodynamic assessment during coronary spasm provocation testing.
authors:
- Seitz A
- Martínez Pereyra V
- Froebel S
- Hubert A
- McChord J
- Bekeredjian R
- Sechtem U
- Ong P
journal: Clin Res Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00392-023-02224-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Male
- Coronary Vessels/diagnostic imaging
- Coronary Angiography
- Coronary Vasospasm/diagnosis
- Acetylcholine
- Vasoconstriction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization and implications of intracoronary hemodynamic assessment during coronary spasm provocation testing.
**Authors:** Seitz A, Martínez Pereyra V, Froebel S, Hubert A, McChord J, Bekeredjian R, Sechtem U, Ong P
**Journal:** Clin Res Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00392-023-02224-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00392-023-02224-1)

## Content

1. Clin Res Cardiol. 2023 Sep;112(9):1312-1321. doi: 10.1007/s00392-023-02224-1. 
Epub 2023 May 17.

Characterization and implications of intracoronary hemodynamic assessment during 
coronary spasm provocation testing.

Seitz A(1), Martínez Pereyra V(2), Froebel S(2), Hubert A(2), McChord J(2), 
Bekeredjian R(2), Sechtem U(2), Ong P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology and Angiology, Robert Bosch Hospital, Auerbachstr. 
110, 70376, Stuttgart, Germany. andreas.seitz@rbk.de.
(2)Department of Cardiology and Angiology, Robert Bosch Hospital, Auerbachstr. 
110, 70376, Stuttgart, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Current diagnostic criteria for coronary spasm are based on 
patient's symptoms, ECG shifts and epicardial vasoconstriction during 
acetylcholine (ACh) spasm testing.
AIMS: To assess the feasibility and diagnostic value of coronary blood flow 
(CBF) and resistance (CR) assessment as objective parameters during ACh testing.
METHODS: Eighty-nine patients who underwent intracoronary reactivity testing 
including ACh testing with synchronous Doppler wire-based measurements of CBF 
and CR were included. Coronary microvascular and epicardial spasm, respectively, 
were diagnosed based on COVADIS criteria.
RESULTS: Patients were 63 ± 13 years old, predominantly female (69%) and had 
preserved LV ejection fraction (64 ± 8%). Overall, assessment of CBF and CR 
during ACh testing revealed a decrease in CBF of 0.62 (0.17-1.53)-fold and an 
increase of CR of 1.45 [0.67-4.02]-fold in spasm patients compared to 2.08 
(1.73-4.76) for CBF and 0.45 (0.44-0.63) for CR in patients without coronary 
spasm (both p < 0.01). Receiver operating characteristic revealed a high 
diagnostic ability of CBF and CR (AUC 0.86, p < 0.001, respectively) in 
identifying patients with coronary spasm. However, in 21% of patients with 
epicardial spasm and 42% of patients with microvascular spasm a paradoxical 
response was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates feasibility and potential diagnostic value 
of intracoronary physiology assessments during ACh testing. We observed opposite 
responses of CBF and CR to ACh in patients with positive vs. negative spasm 
test. While a decrease in CBF and an increase in CR during ACh seem 
pathognomonic for spasm, some patients with coronary spasm demonstrate 
paradoxical ACh response demanding further scientific investigations.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany.

DOI: 10.1007/s00392-023-02224-1
PMID: 37195455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]