---
reference_id: "PMID:36114030"
title: Uterine sarcomas and rare uterine mesenchymal tumors with malignant potential. Diagnostic guidelines of the French Sarcoma Group and the Rare Gynecological Tumors Group.
authors:
- Croce S
- Devouassoux-Shisheboran M
- Pautier P
- Ray-Coquard I
- Treilleux I
- Neuville A
- Arnould L
- Just PA
- Belda MALF
- Averous G
- Leroux A
- Mery E
- Loussouarn D
- Weinbreck N
- Le Guellec S
- Mishellany F
- Morice P
- Guyon F
- Genestie C
journal: Gynecol Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2022.07.031
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- "Leiomyosarcoma/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Genital Neoplasms, Female"
- "Sarcoma, Endometrial Stromal/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- "Uterine Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Pelvic Neoplasms
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma, Embryonal"
- Endometrial Neoplasms
- Perivascular Epithelioid Cell Neoplasms
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- DNA Helicases
- Nuclear Proteins
- Transcription Factors
- Ribonuclease III
- DEAD-box RNA Helicases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uterine sarcomas and rare uterine mesenchymal tumors with malignant potential. Diagnostic guidelines of the French Sarcoma Group and the Rare Gynecological Tumors Group.
**Authors:** Croce S, Devouassoux-Shisheboran M, Pautier P, Ray-Coquard I, Treilleux I, Neuville A, Arnould L, Just PA, Belda MALF, Averous G, Leroux A, Mery E, Loussouarn D, Weinbreck N, Le Guellec S, Mishellany F, Morice P, Guyon F, Genestie C
**Journal:** Gynecol Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ygyno.2022.07.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2022.07.031)

## Content

1. Gynecol Oncol. 2022 Nov;167(2):373-389. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2022.07.031. Epub
 2022 Sep 14.

Uterine sarcomas and rare uterine mesenchymal tumors with malignant potential. 
Diagnostic guidelines of the French Sarcoma Group and the Rare Gynecological 
Tumors Group.

Croce S(1), Devouassoux-Shisheboran M(2), Pautier P(3), Ray-Coquard I(4), 
Treilleux I(5), Neuville A(6), Arnould L(7), Just PA(8), Belda MALF(9), Averous 
G(10), Leroux A(11), Mery E(12), Loussouarn D(13), Weinbreck N(14), Le Guellec 
S(15), Mishellany F(16), Morice P(17), Guyon F(18), Genestie C(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of BioPathology, Anticancer Center, Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, 
France; Unité INSERM U1218, Bordeaux, France; Gynecological Pathology Group of 
RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie des Sarcomes) Network, France. 
Electronic address: s.croce@bordeaux.unicancer.fr.
(2)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie des 
Sarcomes) Network, France; Department of Pathology, CHU, Lyon, France.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut Gustave-Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Centre Leon Berard, Lyon, France; Laboratoire 
RESHAPE U1290, University Claude Bernard Lyon I, France.
(5)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie des 
Sarcomes) Network, France; Department of Pathology, Centre Leon Berard, Lyon, 
France.
(6)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie des 
Sarcomes) Network, France; Institut de Pathologie de Haut de France, Amiens, 
France.
(7)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie des 
Sarcomes) Network, France; Biology and Tumor Pathology Department, Centre G-F 
Leclerc, Dijon, France.
(8)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie des 
Sarcomes) Network, France; Department of Pathology, Hopital Cochin, APHP, Paris, 
France.
(9)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie des 
Sarcomes) Network, France; Department of Pathology, European Georges Pompidou 
Hospital, APHP, Centre, Paris, France.
(10)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie 
des Sarcomes) Network, France; Department of Pathology, CHRU, Strasbourg, 
France.
(11)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie 
des Sarcomes) Network, France; Department of Pathology, Institut de Cancérologie 
de Lorraine, Nancy, France.
(12)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie 
des Sarcomes) Network, France; Department of Pathology, IUCT Oncopole, Toulouse, 
France.
(13)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie 
des Sarcomes) Network, France; Department of Pathology, CHU, Nantes, France.
(14)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie 
des Sarcomes) Network, France; Medipath, Fréjus, France.
(15)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie 
des Sarcomes) Network, France; Medipath-Les Feuillants, Toulouse, France.
(16)Gynecological Pathology Group of RRePS (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie 
des Sarcomes) Network, France; Department of Pathology, Centre de Lutte contre 
le Cancer Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(17)Department of Gynecological Surgery, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, 
Île-de-France, France.
(18)Department of Surgery, Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France.
(19)Department de Biopathologie, Gustave Roussy, Unité 981, Villejuif, France.

The landscape of uterine sarcomas is becoming increasingly complex with the 
description of new entities associated with recurrent molecular alterations. 
Uterine sarcomas, as well as soft tissue sarcomas, can be distinguished into 
complex genomic sarcomas and simple genomic sarcomas. Leiomyosarcoma and 
pleomorphic type undifferentiated uterine sarcoma belong to the first group. 
Low-grade and high-grade endometrial stromal sarcomas, NTRK, COL1A1::PDGFB, ALK, 
RET, ROS1 associated sarcomas, and SMARCA4 deficient uterine sarcoma belong to 
the second group. Leiomyosarcoma is the most common uterine sarcoma followed by 
endometrial stromal sarcomas. Three different histologic subtypes of 
leiomyosarcomas are recognized with distinct diagnostic criteria and different 
clinical outcomes, the myxoid and epithelioid leiomyosarcomas being even more 
aggressive than the fusiform type. The distinction between low-grade and 
high-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma is based first on morphology and 
immunohistochemistry. The detection of fusion transcripts helps in the 
diagnosis. Definitely recognized as a separate entity, uterine PEComa is a rare 
tumor whose diagnostic criteria are being recently defined. Uterine PEComa has a 
specific algorithm stratifying the tumors into uncertain malignant potential and 
malignant tumors. Embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas of the uterine cervix are not 
restricted to children but can also be observed in adult women and are almost 
always DICER1 mutated, unlike embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the vagina which are 
DICER1wild-type, and adenosarcoma which can be DICER1 mutated but with less 
frequency. As sarcomas associated with fusion transcripts involving the NTRK, 
ALK, COL1A1::PDGFB genes can benefit from targeted therapy, systematic detection 
are now relevant especially for patients with high risk of relapse or in 
recurrent setting. The integration of molecular data with dedicated expert 
pathology review for histology and clinical data allows better identification of 
uterine sarcomas in order to better treat them.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2022.07.031
PMID: 36114030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]