---
reference_id: "PMID:35711422"
title: "Potential Benefits of TNF Targeting Therapy in Blau Syndrome, a NOD2-Associated Systemic Autoinflammatory Granulomatosis."
authors:
- Matsuda T
- Kambe N
- Takimoto-Ito R
- Ueki Y
- Nakamizo S
- Saito MK
- Takei S
- Kanazawa N
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.895765
keywords:
- Arthritis
- Child
- Cytokines/metabolism
- Humans
- "Nod2 Signaling Adaptor Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Sarcoidosis
- "Synovitis/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Tumor Necrosis Factor Inhibitors
- "Uveitis/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potential Benefits of TNF Targeting Therapy in Blau Syndrome, a NOD2-Associated Systemic Autoinflammatory Granulomatosis.
**Authors:** Matsuda T, Kambe N, Takimoto-Ito R, Ueki Y, Nakamizo S, Saito MK, Takei S, Kanazawa N
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.895765](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.895765)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 May 27;13:895765. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.895765. 
eCollection 2022.

Potential Benefits of TNF Targeting Therapy in Blau Syndrome, a NOD2-Associated 
Systemic Autoinflammatory Granulomatosis.

Matsuda T(1), Kambe N(1)(2), Takimoto-Ito R(2), Ueki Y(1), Nakamizo S(2), Saito 
MK(3), Takei S(4), Kanazawa N(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kansai Medical University, Hirakata, Japan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Clinical Application, Center for iPS Cell Research and 
Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Hyogo Medical University, Nishinomiya, Japan.

Blau syndrome is a systemic autoinflammatory granulomatous disease caused by 
mutations in the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2) gene. NOD2 
is an intracellular pathogen recognition receptor. Upon binding to muramyl 
dipeptide (MDP), NOD2 activates the NF-κB pathway, leading to the upregulation 
of proinflammatory cytokines. Clinical manifestations of Blau syndrome appear in 
patients before the age of four. Skin manifestations resolve spontaneously in 
some cases; however, joint and eye manifestations are progressive, and lead to 
serious complications, such as joint contracture and blindness. Currently, there 
is no specific curative treatment for the disease. Administration of high-dose 
oral steroids can improve clinical manifestations; however, treatments is 
difficult to maintain due to the severity of the side effects, especially in 
children. While several new therapies have been reported, including JAK 
inhibitors, anti-IL-6 and anti-IL-1 therapies, anti-TNF therapy plays a central 
role in the treatment of Blau syndrome. We recently performed an ex vivo study, 
using peripheral blood and induced pluripotent stem cells from patients. This 
study demonstrated that abnormal cytokine expression in macrophages from 
untreated patients requires IFNγ stimulation, and that anti-TNF treatment 
corrects the abnormalities associated with Blau syndrome, even in the presence 
of IFNγ. Therefore, although the molecular mechanisms by which the genetic 
mutations in NOD2 lead to granuloma formation remain unclear, it is possible 
that prior exposure to TNFα combined with IFNγ stimulation may provide the 
impetus for the clinical manifestations of Blau syndrome.

Copyright © 2022 Matsuda, Kambe, Takimoto-Ito, Ueki, Nakamizo, Saito, Takei and 
Kanazawa.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.895765
PMCID: PMC9195515
PMID: 35711422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.