---
reference_id: "PMID:33768216"
title: Commentary on Vulnerability and Resilience to Activity-Based Anorexia and the Role of Dopamine.
authors:
- Beeler JA
- Burghardt NS
journal: J Exp Neurol
year: '2021'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Commentary on Vulnerability and Resilience to Activity-Based Anorexia and the Role of Dopamine.
**Authors:** Beeler JA, Burghardt NS
**Journal:** J Exp Neurol (2021)

## Content

1. J Exp Neurol. 2021 Mar;2(1):21-28.

Commentary on Vulnerability and Resilience to Activity-Based Anorexia and the
Role of Dopamine.

Beeler JA(1)(2)(3)(4), Burghardt NS(5)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Queens College, CUNY, Flushing, NY, 11367 USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, The Graduate Center, CUNY, New York, NY, 10016 USA.
(3)Department of Biology, The Graduate Center, CUNY, New York, NY, 10016 USA.
(4)CUNY Neuroscience Collaborative, The Graduate Center, CUNY, New York, NY,
10016 USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, Hunter College, CUNY, New York, NY, 10065 USA.

Activity-based anorexia (ABA) is a commonly used rodent model of anorexia
nervosa that is based on observations made in rats decades ago. In recently
published work, we describe using this paradigm to model vulnerability and
resilience to anorexia nervosa in mice, where vulnerability is characterized by
hyperactivity and life-threatening weight loss and resilience is characterized
by adaptation and weight stabilization. Using genetically modified
hyperdopaminergic mice, we also demonstrate that increased dopamine augments
vulnerability to ABA. Here, we briefly review our findings and discuss how
obtaining vulnerable and resilient phenotypes enhances utility of the ABA model
for understanding the neurobiological basis of anorexia nervosa. We comment on
our dopamine findings and close by discussing implications for clinical
treatment.

PMCID: PMC7990270
PMID: 33768216
