---
reference_id: "PMID:30940925"
title: "Biallelic loss-of-function P4HTM gene variants cause hypotonia, hypoventilation, intellectual disability, dysautonomia, epilepsy, and eye abnormalities (HIDEA syndrome)."
authors:
- Rahikkala E
- Myllykoski M
- Hinttala R
- Vieira P
- Nayebzadeh N
- Weiss S
- Plomp AS
- Bittner RE
- Kurki MI
- Kuismin O
- Lewis AM
- Väisänen ML
- Kokkonen H
- Westermann J
- Bernert G
- Tuominen H
- Palotie A
- Aaltonen L
- Yang Y
- Potocki L
- Moilanen J
- van Koningsbruggen S
- Wang X
- Schmidt WM
- Koivunen P
- Uusimaa J
journal: Genet Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0503-4
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Biallelic loss-of-function P4HTM gene variants cause hypotonia, hypoventilation, intellectual disability, dysautonomia, epilepsy, and eye abnormalities (HIDEA syndrome).
**Authors:** Rahikkala E, Myllykoski M, Hinttala R, Vieira P, Nayebzadeh N, Weiss S, Plomp AS, Bittner RE, Kurki MI, Kuismin O, Lewis AM, Väisänen ML, Kokkonen H, Westermann J, Bernert G, Tuominen H, Palotie A, Aaltonen L, Yang Y, Potocki L, Moilanen J, van Koningsbruggen S, Wang X, Schmidt WM, Koivunen P, Uusimaa J
**Journal:** Genet Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-019-0503-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-019-0503-4)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2019 Oct;21(10):2355-2363. doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0503-4. Epub
2019  Apr 3.

Biallelic loss-of-function P4HTM gene variants cause hypotonia, hypoventilation, 
intellectual disability, dysautonomia, epilepsy, and eye abnormalities (HIDEA 
syndrome).

Rahikkala E(1)(2), Myllykoski M(3)(4), Hinttala R(5)(3), Vieira P(5)(6), 
Nayebzadeh N(5)(3), Weiss S(7), Plomp AS(8), Bittner RE(9), Kurki 
MI(10)(11)(12), Kuismin O(5)(13)(12), Lewis AM(14)(15), Väisänen ML(16), 
Kokkonen H(16), Westermann J(8), Bernert G(7), Tuominen H(17), Palotie 
A(10)(11)(12)(18)(19), Aaltonen L(20), Yang Y(15)(21), Potocki L(14)(15), 
Moilanen J(5)(13), van Koningsbruggen S(8), Wang X(15)(21), Schmidt WM(9), 
Koivunen P(3)(4), Uusimaa J(5)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)PEDEGO Research Unit and Medical Research Centre Oulu, University of Oulu and 
Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland. elisa.rahikkala@ppshp.fi.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland. 
elisa.rahikkala@ppshp.fi.
(3)Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(4)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Oulu Centre for Cell-Matrix 
Research, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(5)PEDEGO Research Unit and Medical Research Centre Oulu, University of Oulu and 
Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(6)Department of Children and Adolescents, Division of Paediatric Neurology, 
Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(7)Kaiser Franz Josef Hospital with G.v. Preyer Children's Hospital, Department 
of Pediatrics, Vienna, Austria.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Neuromuscular Research Department, Medical University of Vienna, Centre for 
Anatomy and Cell Biology, Vienna, Austria.
(10)Psychiatric & Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)The Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, The Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(12)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(13)Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(14)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(15)Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(16)Northern Finland Laboratory Centre NordLab and Medical Research Centre, Oulu 
University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(17)Department of Pathology, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(18)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(19)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(20)Department of Medical Genetics, Genome-Scale Biology Research Program, 
University of Helsinki and Haartman Institute, Helsinki, Finland.
(21)Baylor Genetics, Houston, TX, 77021, USA.

PURPOSE: A new syndrome with hypotonia, intellectual disability, and eye 
abnormalities (HIDEA) was previously described in a large consanguineous family. 
Linkage analysis identified the recessive disease locus, and genome sequencing 
yielded three candidate genes with potentially pathogenic biallelic variants: 
transketolase (TKT), transmembrane prolyl 4-hydroxylase (P4HTM), and ubiquitin 
specific peptidase 4 (USP4). However, the causative gene remained elusive.
METHODS: International collaboration and exome sequencing were used to identify 
new patients with HIDEA and biallelic, potentially pathogenic, P4HTM variants. 
Segregation analysis was performed using Sanger sequencing. P4H-TM wild-type and 
variant constructs without the transmembrane region were overexpressed in insect 
cells and analyzed using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis and western blot.
RESULTS: Five different homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic P4HTM 
gene variants were identified in six new and six previously published patients 
presenting with HIDEA. Hypoventilation, obstructive and central sleep apnea, and 
dysautonomia were identified as novel features associated with the phenotype. 
Characterization of three of the P4H-TM variants demonstrated yielding insoluble 
protein products and, thus, loss-of-function.
CONCLUSIONS: Biallelic loss-of-function P4HTM variants were shown to cause HIDEA 
syndrome. Our findings enable diagnosis of the condition, and highlight the 
importance of assessing the need for noninvasive ventilatory support in 
patients.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-019-0503-4
PMCID: PMC6774999
PMID: 30940925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Prolyl 4-hydroxylases (P4Hs) are key enzymes in the synthesis of
collagens and the regulation of oxygen homeostasis.1–3 Previously, variants in the
P4HA2 (OMIM 600608) encoding collagen prolyl
4-hydroxylase (C-P4H) ɑ-2 subunit have been associated with nonsyndromic high myopia
(OMIM 617238),4 and variants in the P4HB (OMIM 176790) encoding prolyl 4-hydroxylase β-subunit have been
associated with Cole–Carpenter syndrome (OMIM 112240),5 while variants in the
EGLN1 (OMIM 606425) coding for a
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) isoenzyme HIF-P4H/PHD2 have been associated with
familial erythrocytosis and high altitude adaptation
hemoglobin.6–9 A transmembrane prolyl 4-hydroxylase (P4H-TM)
is encoded by the P4HTM gene (OMIM 614584), which
has not yet been unequivocally linked to any Mendelian disorder. P4H-TM has its
highest expression in the brain and eye,10,11 and it participates in the oxygen-dependent
regulation of the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF). The normal functioning of P4H-TM
has been assessed to be crucial for normal vision and renal function in
mice.12 However, the relevance of P4H-TM to human
disease remains to be clarified.

In a previous study, we identified a large Finnish family with multiple
affected family members presenting with a syndromic form of severe cognitive
impairment.13 All the affected individuals had profound
intellectual disability, hypotonia, and strabismus; we proposed the acronym HIDEA
(hypotonia, intellectual disability, and eye abnormalities) for this condition. Our
study identified a recessive disease locus in the chromosomal region 3p22.1-3p21.1.
However, because all affected individuals carried potentially pathogenic biallelic
variants in three genes, P4HTM, TKT, and USP4,
segregating with the disease, the causative gene remained elusive.

In the current study, we report seven novel patients from four unrelated
families presenting with HIDEA. DNA was available from six patients who carried
potentially pathogenic biallelic P4HTM gene
variants. One of the patients carried the same previously published homozygous
potentially pathogenic variants in P4HTM,
TKT, and USP4 genes. Five of the patients had novel homozygous or compound
heterozygous variants only in the P4HTM gene,
thereby indicating that P4HTM is the causative
gene. Variant characterization demonstrated that the variants yield an insoluble
protein product. In summary, we present robust evidence that HIDEA is caused by
biallelic pathogenic P4HTM gene variants, and
delineate the clinical characteristics of this syndrome.

We conducted clinical and molecular genetic studies on seven patients
from four families presenting with the phenotype resembling previously described
patients with HIDEA syndrome.13 Patients were enrolled in the study from
four centers (Clinic for Children and Adolescents, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu,
Finland; Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX; Kaiser Franz Josef Hospital with
G.v. Preyer Children’s Hospital, Vienna, Austria; Department of Clinical Genetics,
Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Novel patients
were recruited in the study based on the clinical phenotypes and biallelic
potentially pathogenic P4HTM variants in patients
resembling patients with HIDEA syndrome previously described by Kaasinen et al.,
which allowed clinicians and relatives of patients with HIDEA syndrome and biallelic
potentially pathogenic P4HTM variants to contact
the corresponding author (L.A.).13 Furthermore, we re-evaluated the patients of
the previously published study.13 Written informed consent was obtained from
all the parents or guardians of the patients participating in this study, including
permission to publish photos. The study was approved by the ethics committees of the
Northern Ostrobothnia Hospital District at the Oulu University Hospital and Baylor
College (Houston, TX) (for family 2).

We extracted genomic DNA from peripheral blood or buccal swab
samples of the probands, their affected siblings, and their parents using
standard methods. We performed exome sequencing (ES) at the Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard (Cambridge, MA) for family 1; at the Baylor Genetics Laboratory
(Houston, TX) for family 2; at the Neuromuscular Research Department, Medical
University of Vienna, Austria, for family 3; and at the Department of Clinical
Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
for family 4. Segregation of P4HTM variants
within the families was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. More details on ES
analyses are provided in the Supplementary Note including detailed clinical data.

Fibroblasts and myoblasts from healthy control individuals were
cultured, RNA was isolated, and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was performed to identify the transcript variants for P4H-TM, as
described in the Supplementary Note.

P4H-TM variants were generated to the
pVL1392–P4H-TM88–502
construct10 using routine PCR with appropriate primers
(available on request). To generate the baculoviruses, variant constructs were
transfected into Sf9 cells in the presence of
flashBAC DNA with baculoFECTIN II transfection reagent (Oxford Expression
Technologies) according to the flashBAC transfection protocol. Transfection of
the wild-type construct has been described previously.10 Baculovirus stocks were
amplified twice, and the amplified virus stocks were used to infect Sf9 cells grown as adherent culture on 10-cm tissue
culture plates in complete TNM-FH insect cell media (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were
harvested 72 hours after infection, washed with phosphate buffer saline (PBS),
and stored at -80 °C until use.

For lysis, the cells were thawed, resuspended, and homogenized in
5 ml lysis buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 100 mM glycine, 150 mM NaCl,
20 mM imidazol, 2 mM CaCl2, 20 µM
FeSO4, 0,1% Triton X-100, and 1X Complete EDTA-free
protease inhibitor (Roche). The insoluble and soluble fractions were separated
with a 15-minute centrifugation at 20,000 × g
at 4 °C. Cell pellets were washed twice with 5 ml lysis buffer and centrifuged
again after each wash. The supernatants with soluble fractions were pooled
together. Finally, the cell pellet was resuspended in 5 ml of lysis buffer, and
sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) samples
were prepared of the insoluble and soluble fractions. Two 10% SDS-PAGE gels were
run parallel to each other and a threefold excess of the soluble sample versus
the insoluble sample was loaded to take into account the increased volume from
the washes. Further, one of the gels was stained with Coomassie, while the other
was transferred overnight (4 °C, 30 V) to a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF)
membrane. The membrane was blocked, incubated for two hours (4 °C) with 1:10,000
dilution of rabbit anti-P4H-TM antibody,10 and for one hour (4 °C)
with 1:5000 dilution of HRP-conjugated goat antirabbit antibody (Dako Denmark
A/S, Glostrup, Denmark). Finally, the membrane was incubated for one minute with
Pierce ECL Western Blotting Substrate (Thermo Scientific) and for three minutes
with Amersham Hyperfilm ECL (GE Healthcare).

As a part of clinical diagnostics, skeletal muscle biopsy samples
had previously been taken from 3 of 13 patients due to suggested neurometabolic
disease. Histology and histochemistry on skeletal muscle samples (patients 1, 2,
and 5) and autopsy tissue samples (patient 13) were performed using standard
methods. Further, the activities of mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme
complexes were determined from skeletal muscle biopsy samples, as described
previously.14

Clinical findings of patients 1–7 compared with an update of the
previously described patients13 are compiled in Table 1. Eight patients are currently alive (current
age between 3 and 55 years), and five are deceased (age at death between 7
months and 61 years). Nine patients are male, and four are female. All the
patients have hypotonia (N = 13/13), and
either intellectual disability (N = 12/13) or
developmental delay (1/13, patient 4 who died at the age of 7 months).
Furthermore, the common presenting features include strabismus (N = 11/13, 85%), epilepsy (N = 10/13, 77%), and central or obstructive sleep apnea
(N = 8/13, 62%). Nine patients have a
medical history of pneumonia or recurrent pneumonias (N = 9/13, 69%). Four patients have had respiratory distress and
required respiratory support during pneumonias, and three patients died during
pneumonia or other respiratory tract infections. Some patients also show
dysautonomia, including constipation (N = 6/13, 46%), recurrent hypothermia or hyperthermia (N = 4/13, 31%), and reduced sweating (N = 2/13, 15%). Further, some patients have
suspected recurrent parasomnias (N = 4/13,
31%). Six patients (N = 6/13, 46%) have a
body mass index (BMI) over 25 kg/m2. Two patients
(N = 2/4, 50%) had advanced bone age at
the age of 8 years. Brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) is normal in most
patients.Table 1Clinical characteristics of patients with pathogenic
biallelic P4HTM
variantsFamily 1Family 2Family 3Patient 1Patient 2Patient 3Patient 4Patient 5Patient 6ReferenceThis reportThis reportThis reportThis reportThis reportThis reportOutcomeDied (5 years)Alive at 18 yearsAlive at 13 yearsDied (7 months)Died (8 years)Alive at 3 yearsGenderFemaleMaleMaleMaleMaleMaleGrowth parameters  Height (cm)114 cm, 90th percentile178 cm, 59th percentile147 cm, 32nd percentile50th percentile134 cm, 50th percentile96.5 cm, 50th percentile  Weight (kg)42 kg, 99th percentile90 kg, 94th percentile40 kg, 41st percentileIn normal range24 kg, 10th percentile15 kg, 70th percentile  BMI32 kg/m228 kg/m218 kg/m2No failure to thrive13.4 kg/m216.3 kg/m2  OFC (cm)53 cm, 85th percentile58 cm, 91st percentile54 cm, 50th percentileIn normal range49.5 cm, <3rd percentile47 cm, <3rd percentileNeurologic features  Hypotonia+++++++++  Independent walking+++---  Language developmentSimple sentencesSimple sentencesNo speechNANo speechNo speech  Severity of intellectual
disabilitySevereNANANAProfoundProfound  Epilepsy+-++++  EEGSlow background activity, ictal epileptiform
discharges close to the midlineDiffuse disturbance, generalized sharp and wave
dischargesEpileptiform activity during sleepNAMultifocal spikes, theta-delta
activityMultifocal spikesRespiratory problems  Obstructive sleep apnea+++NA--  Central sleep apnea-+++++  BiPAP or HFNC oxygen therapy-BiPAP at nightsBiPAP at nightsNABiPAP at nightsHFNC  Other respiratory problemsSudden death at night during a respiratory tract
infectionBradypneaBradypneaBradypnea, sudden death during first febrile
respiratory infectionBradypnea, respiratory rate cannot adapt to
metabolic needBradypnea, respiratory rate cannot adapt to
metabolic need  Sleep behavior disorder--+---Ophthalmological features  StrabismusAlternating exotropia, vertical
deviationAlternating exotropiaIntermittent alternating exotropia-Alternating exotropia, vertical
deviationAlternating exotropia, vertical
deviation  Other ophthalmological
abnormalitiesHyperopia, amblyopia in the left eye, optic
atrophyRefractive amblyopiaStrabismus amblyopia, cortical
blindnessAbnormal eye movementsAchromic fundi-Other  InfectionsRecurrent pneumoniasViral pneumonias requiring respiratory
supportViral pneumonias requiring respiratory
supportDied during first pneumoniaRecurrent pneumonias until age 3
yearsRecurrent pneumonias  Dysautonomia of thermoregulation--Recurrent hypothermia-Recurrent hyperthermia, reduced
sweatingRecurrent hyperthermia, reduced
sweating  Constipation--+---  Bone ageNAAdvancedNANANANAFamily 4Family 5Patient 7Patient 8Patient 9Patient 10Patient 11Patient 12Patient 13 This reportKaasinen et al.Kaasinen et al.Kaasinen et al.Kaasinen et al.Kaasinen et al.Kaasinen et al. Died (7 months)Alive at 31 yearsAlive at 29 yearsAlive at 18 yearsAlive at 21 yearsAlive at 55 yearsDied (61 years) MaleMaleFemaleMaleMaleFemaleFemale 64 cm, 50th percentile160 cm, <3rd percentile163 cm, 28th percentile166 cm, 5th percentile161.5 cm, <3rd percentile150 cm, <3rd percentile140 cm, <3rd percentile 6.7 kg, 80th percentile62 kg, 20th percentile57 kg, 48th percentile76 kg, 74th percentile76 kg, 67th percentile58 kg, 51st percentile55 kg, 36th percentile NA24.2 kg/m²21.4 kg/m²27.6 kg/m²29.1 kg/m²25.8 kg/m²27.8 kg/m² 42 cm, 55th percentileNA58 cm, 96th percentile57.6 cm, 65th percentile60 cm, 95th percentile56 cm, 65th percentileNA ++++++++ -+--++- NASimple sentencesNo speechNo speechNo speechNo speechNo speech ProfoundProfoundProfoundProfoundProfoundProfoundProfound +-++-++ Focal abnormalitiesMonotonic and slow background activity, no
epileptiform changesStrong background abnormality and intermittent
epileptiform sharp wavesBackground abnormality, epileptiform
activitySlow background activity, no irritative
featuresNANA --NA++NANA --NA-+NANA BiPAP--BiPAP at nightsBiPAP at nights-- Hypoventilation---Chronic hypoventilation, respiratory distress
during a pneumoniaRespiratory distress requiring ventilator
support during pneumoniasDied at the age of 61 years, autopsy showed
acute pneumonia ++--+-- -Alternating exotropiaAlternating exotropiaAlternating exotropia, vertical
deviationAlternating exotropia and vertical
deviationAlternating exotropiaExotropia Rotating eye movementsMyopia, rotatory nystagmus, achromic
fundiHyperopia, achromic fundiHyperopia, achromic fundi, dermoid in the left
eyeHyperopia, astigmatismus, temporally achromic
fundiKeratoconus and eyelid entropium in the right
eye- -Recurrent otitis media as adult--Recurrent otitis media, pneumonia requiring
ventilator support and tracheostomyRecurrent pneumonias, left lung pleurectomy due
to pleural empyemaRecurrent urinary tract infections, died during
pneumonia --Recurrent hypothermia---- +++-+-+ NAAdvancedNormalNormalNANANABiPAP bilevel positive
airway pressure, BMI body mass
index, EEG electroencephalogram,
HFNC high flow nasal cannula,
NA not available, OFC occipital frontal
circumference.

Clinical characteristics of patients with pathogenic
biallelic P4HTM
variants

BiPAP bilevel positive
airway pressure, BMI body mass
index, EEG electroencephalogram,
HFNC high flow nasal cannula,
NA not available, OFC occipital frontal
circumference.

Detailed clinical descriptions of the patients are provided in the
Supplementary Note. The characteristic
gait of patients 2, 3, 8, 10, and 11 is demonstrated in Supplementary
Videos 1-5.

The muscle biopsy of patient 1 showed low activity of mitochondrial
respiratory chain complex III. In addition, the muscle biopsy of patient 2 was
suggestive of a mitochondrial, neurometabolic disease. Electron microscopy
indicated increased mitochondria, with some that were enlarged and abnormally
shaped. Mitochondrial respiratory chain activities revealed a decrease in
complexes I–IV. Furthermore, the muscle biopsy of patient 5 showed an increased
variability of muscle fiber diameters, hypertrophied muscle fibers, scattered
small atrophied fibers, and basophilic muscle fibers (Supplementary
Fig. 1). The muscle biopsy sample
of patient 13, taken during autopsy, showed unspecific type 2 muscle fiber
atrophy (Supplementary Fig. 2A) and
COX-negative fibers suggestive of mitochondrial pathology. In addition to these
findings in skeletal muscle samples, two patients (patients 1 and 13) had mild
fatty degeneration of liver. Patient 13’s autopsy also revealed that the
cerebellum was atrophic, and histologically there was both loss and degeneration
of Purkinje cells (Supplementary Fig. 2B).

All seven Finnish patients (family 1, patient 1 and family 5,
patients 8–13) had a homozygous P4HTM gene
variant c.1073G>A (NM_177938.2, GRCh38 g.3:49005046G>A, rs182812551).
While this variant is predicted to cause a missense change in the canonical
transcript, which was not expressed in fibroblasts and myoblasts, it creates an
in-frame loss of complete exon 6 of the main transcript (NM_177939.2) on the RNA
level (r.888_1073del).13 The parents of the patients were
heterozygous carriers of the variant. The variant is present in the Genome
Aggregation Database (gnomAD, http://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/variant/3-49042479-G-A) database with a minor allele frequency (MAF) of 9.75 ×
10−5; the allele frequency is 20× higher in
Finland (7.8 × 10−4) than in non-Finnish Europeans (4
× 10−5), and there are no homozygous
individuals.

Two brothers of family 2, patients 2 and 3, were compound
heterozygous for the P4HTM gene c.482A>C;
p.(His161Pro) (NM_177938.2, GRCh38 g.3:49001483A>C) and c.286dupC;
p.(Gln96Profs*29) (NM_177938.2, GRCh38 g.3:48990542dupC) variants. The father
was a heterozygous carrier of the P4HTM gene
c.286dupC; p.(Gln96Profs*29) variant and the mother was a heterozygous carrier
of the P4HTM gene c.482A>C; p.(His161Pro)
variant. The healthy sister was heterozygous for the P4HTM gene c.482A>C; p.(His161Pro) variant and negative for
the c.286dupC; p.(Gln96Profs*29) variant.

Two brothers of family 3, patients 5 and 6, were homozygous for the
c.1594C>T; p.(Gln532*) (NM_177938.2, GRCh38 g.3:49006809C>T) variant.
Their parents were heterozygous carriers. No DNA was available from patient 4,
who presented with a similar clinical phenotype as his affected siblings.

Trio ES analysis of patient 7 (family 4) and his parents revealed
that the patient had a homozygous variant in the P4HTM gene c.949delG (NM_177938.2, GRCh38 g.3:49004922delG). The
parents carried this variant in a heterozygous state. This deletion predicts a
frameshift change in the protein. Valine at position 317 is the first affected
amino acid, with a premature stop codon after 28 amino acids p.(Val317Phefs*30).
Frameshift variants creating a premature stop codon yield a shorter protein or
no protein at all.

The pedigrees, identified variants, and their location in the
protein are illustrated in Fig. 1. The
genetic findings are described in Supplementary Table 1.Fig. 1Pedigrees and Sanger validation
and segregation of the identified
P4HTM
variants. (a) The segregation of the P4HTM c.1073G>A variant
(NM_177938.2) in family 1. The protein defect of the
biologically active main transcript is given in parenthesis
(NM_177939.2). (b) The
segregation of the compound heterozygous P4HTM c.286dupC; p.(Gln96Profs*29) and
c.482A>C; p.(His161Pro) variants (NM_177938.2) in family 2.
(c) The segregation of the
P4HTM c.1594C>T;
p.(Gln532*) variant (NM_177938.2) in family 3. (d) The segregation of the P4HTM c.949delG; p.(Val317Phefs*30)
variant (NM_177938.2) in family 4. (e) Facial figure of patient 1 (F1:II.3) shows
facial hypotonia with tented upper lip vermilion and open mouth
posture, a round face, and strabismus. (f) Facial figure of patient 2 (F2:II.1) shows
hypotonic/myopathic facial appearance with a tented upper lip
vermilion and open mouth posture. (g) Facial figure of patient 3 (F2:II.3) shows
marked facial hypotonia with open mouth posture, giving a
myopathic facial appearance. (h) Depiction of the P4HTM protein and location of
the variants identified in the four families.

Pedigrees and Sanger validation
and segregation of the identified
P4HTM
variants. (a) The segregation of the P4HTM c.1073G>A variant
(NM_177938.2) in family 1. The protein defect of the
biologically active main transcript is given in parenthesis
(NM_177939.2). (b) The
segregation of the compound heterozygous P4HTM c.286dupC; p.(Gln96Profs*29) and
c.482A>C; p.(His161Pro) variants (NM_177938.2) in family 2.
(c) The segregation of the
P4HTM c.1594C>T;
p.(Gln532*) variant (NM_177938.2) in family 3. (d) The segregation of the P4HTM c.949delG; p.(Val317Phefs*30)
variant (NM_177938.2) in family 4. (e) Facial figure of patient 1 (F1:II.3) shows
facial hypotonia with tented upper lip vermilion and open mouth
posture, a round face, and strabismus. (f) Facial figure of patient 2 (F2:II.1) shows
hypotonic/myopathic facial appearance with a tented upper lip
vermilion and open mouth posture. (g) Facial figure of patient 3 (F2:II.3) shows
marked facial hypotonia with open mouth posture, giving a
myopathic facial appearance. (h) Depiction of the P4HTM protein and location of
the variants identified in the four families.

Previously, we characterized in vitro recombinant
P4H-TM88–502 of the 502-residue noncanonical
isoform, which lacks the transmembrane domain expressed in insect
cells.10 Our RT-PCR analyses suggested that the
502-residue variant is the major transcript expressed from human-derived cells
(Supplementary Fig. 3); therefore, we
used it here to separately generate the variants corresponding to p.His161Pro,
p.Gln532* and p.Arg296Ser;Val297_Arg358del on this backbone and expressed these
variants in insect cells along with wild-type
P4H-TM88-502. All variants yielded a recombinant
enzyme analyzed using SDS-PAGE and Coomassie blue or western blotting
(Fig. 2). However, the fraction of
soluble protein was severely reduced for the p.Gln532* variant and completely
abolished for the p.His161Pro and p.Arg296Ser;Val297_Arg358del variants
(Fig. 2). Despite the lack of the
C-terminal endoplasmic reticulum retention signal Arg-Val-Glu-Leu in the
p.Gln532* variant, we were unable to detect it in the expression medium at the
end of the 72-hour expression period (data not shown). The P4HTM variants studied here reside in different
parts of the polypeptide and represent different types of variants. Despite
these differences, the outcome is very similar. Although no structural data is
available on P4H-TM, the insolubility of the variants suggests improper folding
of the proteins. Together, these data suggest that the variants identified in
the patients cause loss of function of P4H-TM.Fig. 2P4H-TM wild-type (WT) and variant enzymes were
overexpressed in insect cells and analyzed with sodium dodecyl
sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and
western blotting.Cells were lysed and the proteins were separated into
insoluble (IS) and soluble (S) fractions. Both fractions of WT
and variant enzymes p.His161Pro, p.Gln532*, and
p.Arg296Ser;Val297_Arg358del (Ex6del) were loaded on 10%
SDS-PAGE, and the gels were either stained with Coomassie blue
(top) or western blotting against P4H-TM (bottom).

Cells were lysed and the proteins were separated into
insoluble (IS) and soluble (S) fractions. Both fractions of WT
and variant enzymes p.His161Pro, p.Gln532*, and
p.Arg296Ser;Val297_Arg358del (Ex6del) were loaded on 10%
SDS-PAGE, and the gels were either stained with Coomassie blue
(top) or western blotting against P4H-TM (bottom).

In this study, we report seven new patients from four unrelated
families and a clinical update of a large previously published consanguineous family
with HIDEA syndrome caused by biallelic P4HTM
variants. The phenotype is characterized by muscular and central hypotonia,
hypoventilation, intellectual disability, dysautonomia, epilepsy, and eye
abnormalities (HIDEA). Variant characterization demonstrates that the variants
affect protein folding by yielding an insoluble protein product.

P4H-TM has a broad expression pattern, with the highest expression
levels in the brain and eye. All the patients with P4HTM gene variants have developmental delay or intellectual
disability and visual abnormalities—such as strabismus, rotating eye movements,
nystagmus, or cortical blindness—thereby suggesting that P4H-TM is crucial for the
functioning of the normal human brain as well as the visual tract. Muscle biopsy
samples from four patients demonstrate increased variability of the muscle fiber
diameters, mild type 2 muscle fiber atrophy and COX-negative fibers, and decreased
mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme activities in two patients, thereby
suggesting that a defect in P4H-TM may also disrupt normal mitochondrial function.
The autopsy of a 61-year-old patient with the homozygous c.1073G>A variant
revealed loss and degeneration of Purkinje cells, which could be caused by a
long-term undiagnosed hypoventilation and/or neurodegeneration based on progressive
neurodegenerative diseases.

P4H-TM knockout mice reveal overlapping phenotypic features with HIDEA
patients with biallelic P4HTM variants, such as
retinal defects causing vision impairment,12 thereby suggesting that
loss-of-function is the possible underlying mechanism. Further, mouse studies
suggest that P4H-TM is necessary for normal visual and renal
function.12 As mentioned above, the patients exhibit various
visual abnormalities, such as congenital nystagmus, strabismus, rotating eye
movements, achromic retinal fundi, and cortical blindness. However, patients with
P4HTM gene variants did not show any evidence
of structural kidney abnormalities or albuminuria indicative of decreased kidney
function, even at an older age.

In addition to the previously described combination of symptoms, this
study reveals hypoventilation, including obstructive and central sleep apnea,
dysautonomia, and an increased tendency to develop respiratory distress during
pneumonias as novel characteristic clinical features of HIDEA patients. Several
patients have BiPAP dependency at night due to central and obstructive sleep apnea
or hypoventilation especially during respiratory infections requiring respiratory
support. Four patients (4/13, 31%) had infantile onset tendency to respiratory
insufficiency and respiratory arrest resulting in infantile or childhood death of
three of them. There is heterogeneity in the clinical presentation of patients even
with exactly the same pathogenic biallelic P4HTM
variants suggesting that the disease severity is modified by additional genetic and
environmental factors.

Further, we found that the P4HTM
c.1073G>A variant creates an in-frame loss of exon 6 from the messenger RNA
(mRNA) of the 502-residue transcript variant 1 (NM_177939.2), which yields an
insoluble protein product. This is consistent with the latest research findings that
pathogenic variants altering protein code often disrupt
splicing.15 Interestingly, the noncanonical transcript
(NM_177939.2) coding for the 502-residue protein was the prevalent transcript
variant expressed in normal human fibro- and myoblasts instead of the canonical
transcript (NM_177938.2) yielding a 563-residue protein. Theoretically, the
canonical transcript coding for the 563-residue protein could be expressed in brain
tissue, which is critical for HIDEA syndrome, but we do not have any experimental
evidence to prove this. In northern blot analysis in brain the major P4HTM mRNA species was 2.3 kb, unlike in all other
tissue studied, where it was 1.8 kb,10 which may indicate that in the brain the
canonical transcript is expressed. Both transcripts have nine exons, but the
transcript coding for the 502-residue protein excludes parts of exons 6 and 7. All
the pathogenic variants identified in this study located in areas of the P4HTM sequence present in both transcripts, and it is
currently unknown whether HIDEA syndrome could be caused by biallelic pathogenic
variants located in parts of exons 6 or 7 that are not present in the transcript
coding for the 502-residue protein.

P4H-TM was originally suggested to be a fourth
HIF-P4H,16 although it was later reported to be more
closely homologous to the C-P4Hs.10 Unlike neither of the previously
characterized P4Hs, it has an N-terminal EF-hand motif16 that is implicated in
calcium binding. Recombinant P4H-TM did not hydroxylate in vitro type I collagen
polypeptide but  it hydroxylated HIF1α.10 Its downregulation by small interfering
(siRNA) stabilized HIFα,10 and its genetic knockout in mice associated with
induction of renal erythropoietin expression similarly to inhibition of
HIF-P4Hs.17 In cortical neurons genetic deficiency of P4H-TM
stabilized HIF1α under normoxia, and in tissues with high endogenous P4H-TM
expression level, such as brain, eye, and kidney, the expression of certain HIF
target genes was more upregulated in hypoxia compared with wild-type
mice.12 However, its location having the catalytic
domain within the endoplasmic reticulum lumen, and its ability to also hydroxylate
to a low extent HIFα polypeptide, where the HIF-P4H  prolines were mutated to
alanines, would suggest it may have other substrates than
HIFα.10 The only known genetic variants of any HIF-P4H
are those for HIF-P4H-2, the most abundant isoenzyme whose inhibition alone
stabilizes HIFα3 that associate with erythropoiesis. As these
variants did not cause a complete loss-of-function, and some even had a
gain-of-function phenotype, it may be that complete loss of HIF-P4H-2 catalytic
activity, which would result in a full-powered HIF response, is not tolerable in
humans, similarly to mice.18 Therefore direct comparison of the phenotype
of the loss-of-function P4HTM variants
characterized here to regulation of the hypoxia response is not feasible.

Autosomal recessive inheritance is estimated to have a small
contribution in the etiology of intellectual disability in outbred
populations.19 Northern Finland is a known genetic isolate,
where the current population has arisen from a small number of founder families, and
enrichment of rare recessive gene variants has been demonstrated in this young
population.20 All the Finnish patients in this study had the
same variant in the P4HTM, thereby suggesting a
founder effect.21 Homogeneous populations, such as the Finnish
population, that share long segments of linkage disequilibrium are useful in mapping
the causative locus of a monogenic disease; however, the homogeneous genetic
background hinders the identification of the actual disease-causing gene as multiple
variants in different genes in the same locus may cosegregate with the disease. In
contrast, heterogeneous populations with marked genetic variability facilitate in
underpinning the causative gene and broaden the knowledge of the full phenotypic
spectrum caused by a specific gene. Studying patients with the same monogenic
syndrome from different ethnic backgrounds has repeatedly revealed novel
disease-causing genes. International collaborations may enable the identification of
the causative gene and the delineation of the phenotype even in very rare childhood
heritable diseases.22

In conclusion, we report seven new patients with the HIDEA syndrome and
demonstrate that the phenotype in this cohort of patients is strikingly similar to
the previously studied patients with the syndrome. Genetic analysis identified
recessively inherited intragenic P4HTM variants
as an underlying cause of the syndrome. Variant characterization suggested that the
identified variants cause loss of function of P4H-TM. Novel, previously undescribed
features include hypoventilation (most pronounced during respiratory infections),
central and obstructive sleep apnea, and dysautonomia. This indicates the importance
of performing polysomnography in patients with biallelic pathogenic P4HTM variants and assessing the possible need for
noninvasive ventilatory support to prevent sudden death. Our results demonstrate
that biallelic loss-of-function P4HTM gene
variants cause HIDEA, and greatly facilitate the diagnosis and management of this
challenging condition.


Supplementary table 1
Supplementary Figure 1
Supplementary information
Supplementary Figure 2
Supplementary Figure 3
Supplementary Video 1
Supplementary Video 2
Supplementary Video 3
Supplementary Video 4
Supplementary Video 5


Supplementary table 1

Supplementary Figure 1

Supplementary information

Supplementary Figure 2

Supplementary Figure 3

Supplementary Video 1

Supplementary Video 2

Supplementary Video 3

Supplementary Video 4

Supplementary Video 5