---
reference_id: "PMID:36996587"
title: "Pediatric acute flaccid myelitis: Evaluation of diagnostic criteria and differentiation from other causes of acute flaccid paralysis."
authors:
- Helfferich J
- Neuteboom RF
- de Lange MMA
- Benschop KSM
- Van Leer-Buter CC
- Meijer A
- Bakker DP
- de Bie E
- Braakman HMH
- Brandsma R
- Niks EH
- Niermeijer JM
- Roelfsema V
- Schoenmaker N
- Sie LT
- Niesters HG
- Te Wierik MJM
- Jacobs BC
- Brouwer OF
journal: Eur J Paediatr Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2023.03.002
keywords:
- Myelitis
- "Paralysis/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Enterovirus D, Human"
- Child
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/diagnosis, complications"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Central Nervous System Viral Diseases
- "Myelitis, Transverse/diagnosis"
- Muscle Weakness
- Enterovirus Infections/diagnosis
- alpha-Fetoproteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric acute flaccid myelitis: Evaluation of diagnostic criteria and differentiation from other causes of acute flaccid paralysis.
**Authors:** Helfferich J, Neuteboom RF, de Lange MMA, Benschop KSM, Van Leer-Buter CC, Meijer A, Bakker DP, de Bie E, Braakman HMH, Brandsma R, Niks EH, Niermeijer JM, Roelfsema V, Schoenmaker N, Sie LT, Niesters HG, Te Wierik MJM, Jacobs BC, Brouwer OF
**Journal:** Eur J Paediatr Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejpn.2023.03.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpn.2023.03.002)

## Content

1. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2023 May;44:28-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2023.03.002.
Epub  2023 Mar 22.

Pediatric acute flaccid myelitis: Evaluation of diagnostic criteria and
differentiation from other causes of acute flaccid paralysis.

Helfferich J(1), Neuteboom RF(2), de Lange MMA(3), Benschop KSM(3), Van
Leer-Buter CC(4), Meijer A(3), Bakker DP(5), de Bie E(5), Braakman HMH(6),
Brandsma R(7), Niks EH(8), Niermeijer JM(9), Roelfsema V(10), Schoenmaker N(11),
Sie LT(12), Niesters HG(4), Te Wierik MJM(3), Jacobs BC(13), Brouwer OF(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: j.helfferich@umcg.nl.
(2)Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Centre for Infectious Disease Control (CIb), National Institute for Public
Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Amsterdam University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Paediatric Neurology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Neurology, Elisabeth-Tweesteden Hospital, Tilburg, the
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Paediatrics, Martini Hospital, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Neurology, Isala Hospital, Zwolle, the Netherlands.
(12)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Haga Hospital, the Hague, the
Netherlands.
(13)Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University
Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(14)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2023 May;44:A3-A4. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2023.05.002.

BACKGROUND: Acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) is characterized by rapidly
progressive limb weakness with low muscle tone. It has a broad differential
diagnosis, which includes acute flaccid myelitis (AFM), a rare polio-like
condition that mainly affects young children. Differentiation between AFM and
other causes of AFP may be difficult, particularly at onset of disease. Here, we
evaluate the diagnostic criteria for AFM and compare AFM to other causes of
acute weakness in children, aiming to identify differentiating clinical and
diagnostic features.
METHODS: The diagnostic criteria for AFM were applied to a cohort of children
with acute onset of limb weakness. An initial classification based on positive
diagnostic criteria was compared to the final classification, based on
application of features suggestive for an alternative diagnosis and discussion
with expert neurologists. Cases classified as definite, probable, or possible
AFM or uncertain, were compared to cases with an alternative diagnosis.
RESULTS: Of 141 patients, seven out of nine patients initially classified as
definite AFM, retained this label after further classification. For probable
AFM, this was 3/11, for possible AFM 3/14 and for uncertain 11/43. Patients
initially classified as probable or possible AFM were most commonly diagnosed
with transverse myelitis (16/25). If the initial classification was uncertain,
Guillain-Barré syndrome was the most common diagnosis (31/43). Clinical and
diagnostic features not included in the diagnostic criteria, were often used for
the final classification.
CONCLUSION: The current diagnostic criteria for AFM usually perform well, but
additional features are sometimes required to distinguish AFM from other
conditions.

© 2023 Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of European Paediatric Neurology
Society.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2023.03.002
PMID: 36996587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflict of interest, relevant to this study.
