---
reference_id: "PMID:37772236"
title: "Cat Scratch Disease: An Unusual Case of Right Inguinal Lymphadenitis Due to Bartonella henselae."
authors:
- Sulaiman ZI
- Samra H
- Askar G
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.44280
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cat Scratch Disease: An Unusual Case of Right Inguinal Lymphadenitis Due to Bartonella henselae.
**Authors:** Sulaiman ZI, Samra H, Askar G
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.44280](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.44280)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Aug 28;15(8):e44280. doi: 10.7759/cureus.44280. eCollection 2023 
Aug.

Cat Scratch Disease: An Unusual Case of Right Inguinal Lymphadenitis Due to 
Bartonella henselae.

Sulaiman ZI(1), Samra H(2), Askar G(1).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases, Augusta University Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, 
USA.
(2)Pathology, Augusta University Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, USA.

Cat scratch disease (CSD) is caused by a bacterial infection due to Bartonella 
henselae and is associated with young cats and kittens. CSD commonly occurs as 
regional lymphadenitis in the setting of subacute regional lymphadenopathy 
predominantly in children and young adults. The prognosis for immunocompetent 
patients is favorable with complete recovery, however, immunocompromised adults 
can progress to life-threatening complications such as neuroretinitis, 
osteomyelitis, and bacillary angiomatosis. B. henselae is transmitted from cats 
to humans through scratching or biting when located on the cat's claws or oral 
cavity. In 1% of diagnosed cases, patients developed this disease without ever 
receiving an animal scratch.  We present a case of a 29-year-old immunocompetent 
male developing severe right inguinal pain with concern for an incarcerated 
inguinal hernia. He reported exposure to a vaccinated six-month-old kitten but 
denied any recent scratches or bites. His infectious workup revealed right 
inguinal lymphadenitis on CT imaging and subsequent lymph node biopsy confirmed 
a diagnosis of CSD. He was treated with a short course of oral doxycycline for 
CSD and opioids for pain management. This case illustrates the importance of 
thorough complete history and physical taking even in immunocompetent patients 
and early recognition with prompt targeted treatment of Bartonella lymphadenitis 
to prevent unfavorable outcomes.

Copyright © 2023, Sulaiman et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.44280
PMCID: PMC10532035
PMID: 37772236

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.