---
reference_id: "PMID:23466470"
title: Nutrition management of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
authors:
- Greenwood DI
journal: Nutr Clin Pract
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1177/0884533613476554
keywords:
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/complications, diet therapy"
- Body Mass Index
- Enteral Nutrition/methods
- Gastrostomy/methods
- Humans
- "Intubation, Gastrointestinal/methods"
- "Malnutrition/diagnosis, diet therapy, etiology"
- Nutritional Requirements
- Nutritional Status
- Parenteral Nutrition/methods
- Quality of Life
- Vital Capacity
- Weight Loss
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nutrition management of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Greenwood DI
**Journal:** Nutr Clin Pract (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0884533613476554](https://doi.org/10.1177/0884533613476554)

## Content

1. Nutr Clin Pract. 2013 Jun;28(3):392-9. doi: 10.1177/0884533613476554. Epub
2013  Mar 6.

Nutrition management of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Greenwood DI(1).

Author information:
(1)Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Health Care System, Minneapolis VA Medical 
Center, Minneapolis, MN 55417, USA. dangreenwood22@gmail.com

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurological disease with 
high risk of malnutrition. Symptoms of dysphagia, depression, cognitive 
impairment, difficulty with self-feeding and meal preparation, hypermetabolism, 
anxiety, respiratory insufficiency, and fatigue with meals increase the risk of 
malnutrition. Malnutrition negatively affects prognosis and quality of life, 
making early and frequent nutrition assessment and intervention essential. 
Implementation of an adequate calorie diet, dietary texture modification, use of 
adaptive eating utensils, and placement of a feeding tube aid in preventing 
malnutrition. When nutrition status is compromised by dysphagia and weight loss 
(5%-10% of usual body weight) or body mass index <20 kg/m(2) without weight loss 
and when forced vital capacity is >50%, a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy 
placement is indicated. When forced vital capacity is <50%, a radiologically 
inserted gastrostomy is the preferred means of enteral placement due to lessened 
aspiration and respiratory risk. Parenteral nutrition (PN) is indicated only 
when enteral nutrition (EN) is contraindicated or impossible. This article 
reviews the background of ALS, nutrition implications and risk of malnutrition, 
treatment strategies to prevent malnutrition, the role of EN and PN, and feeding 
tube placement methods according to disease stage.

DOI: 10.1177/0884533613476554
PMID: 23466470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]