---
reference_id: "PMID:15065017"
title: "Myotonic dystrophy: RNA pathogenesis comes into focus."
authors:
- Ranum LP
- Day JW
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1086/383590
keywords:
- Animals
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 19/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 3/genetics"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Myotonic Dystrophy/genetics, pathology"
- Myotonin-Protein Kinase
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- RNA/physiology
- RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeats/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myotonic dystrophy: RNA pathogenesis comes into focus.
**Authors:** Ranum LP, Day JW
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1086/383590](https://doi.org/10.1086/383590)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 May;74(5):793-804. doi: 10.1086/383590. Epub 2004 Apr 2.

Myotonic dystrophy: RNA pathogenesis comes into focus.

Ranum LP(1), Day JW.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA. ranum001@umn.edu

Myotonic dystrophy (DM)--the most common form of muscular dystrophy in adults,
affecting 1/8000 individuals--is a dominantly inherited disorder with a peculiar
and rare pattern of multisystemic clinical features affecting skeletal muscle,
the heart, the eye, and the endocrine system. Two genetic loci have been
associated with the DM phenotype: DM1, on chromosome 19, and DM2, on chromosome
3. In 1992, the mutation responsible for DM1 was identified as a CTG expansion
located in the 3' untranslated region of the dystrophia myotonica-protein kinase
gene (DMPK). How this untranslated CTG expansion causes myotonic dystrophy type
1(DM1) has been controversial. The recent discovery that myotonic dystrophy type
2 (DM2) is caused by an untranslated CCTG expansion, along with other
discoveries on DM1 pathogenesis, indicate that the clinical features common to
both diseases are caused by a gain-of-function RNA mechanism in which the CUG
and CCUG repeats alter cellular function, including alternative splicing of
various genes. We discuss the pathogenic mechanisms that have been proposed for
the myotonic dystrophies, the clinical and molecular features of DM1 and DM2,
and the characterization of murine and cell-culture models that have been
generated to better understand these diseases.

DOI: 10.1086/383590
PMCID: PMC1181975
PMID: 15065017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
