---
reference_id: "PMID:21071979"
title: Mechanisms of nephronophthisis and related ciliopathies.
authors:
- Hurd TW
- Hildebrandt F
journal: Nephron Exp Nephrol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1159/000320888
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of nephronophthisis and related ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Hurd TW, Hildebrandt F
**Journal:** Nephron Exp Nephrol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000320888](https://doi.org/10.1159/000320888)

## Content

1. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2011;118(1):e9-14. doi: 10.1159/000320888. Epub 2010 Nov 
11.

Mechanisms of nephronophthisis and related ciliopathies.

Hurd TW(1), Hildebrandt F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5646, 
USA.

An emerging group of human genetic diseases termed 'ciliopathies' are caused by 
dysfunction of two functionally and physically associated organelles, the 
centrosome and cilium. These organelles are central to perception of the 
physical environment through detection of a diverse variety of extracellular 
signals such as growth factors, chemicals, light and fluid flow. Many of the 
described ciliopathies display multi-organ involvement, with renal and retina 
being the most commonly affected. Nephronophthisis is a recessive disorder of 
the kidney that is the leading cause of end-stage renal failure in children. 
Through positional cloning, many of the causative mutations have been mapped to 
genes involved in centrosome and cilia function. In this review, we discuss the 
identified causative mutations that give rise to nephronophthisis and how these 
are related to the disease etiology in both the kidney and other organs.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000320888
PMCID: PMC2992643
PMID: 21071979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]