---
reference_id: "PMID:15316978"
title: "Inheritance of most X-linked traits is not dominant or recessive, just X-linked."
authors:
- Dobyns WB
- Filauro A
- Tomson BN
- Chan AS
- Ho AW
- Ting NT
- Oosterwijk JC
- Ober C
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30123
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, X/genetics"
- "Dosage Compensation, Genetic"
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Inheritance Patterns/genetics
- Male
- Penetrance
- Phenotype
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inheritance of most X-linked traits is not dominant or recessive, just X-linked.
**Authors:** Dobyns WB, Filauro A, Tomson BN, Chan AS, Ho AW, Ting NT, Oosterwijk JC, Ober C
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30123](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30123)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Aug 30;129A(2):136-43. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30123.

Inheritance of most X-linked traits is not dominant or recessive, just X-linked.

Dobyns WB(1), Filauro A, Tomson BN, Chan AS, Ho AW, Ting NT, Oosterwijk JC, Ober
C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
60637, USA. wbd@genetics.bsd.uchicago.edu

The existence of X-linked disorders in humans has been recognized for many
centuries, based on lessons in religious texts and observations of specific
human families (e.g., color blindness or Daltonism). Our modern concepts of
Mendelian (including X-linked) inheritance originated just after the turn of the
last century. Early concepts of dominance and recessiveness were first used in
conjunction with autosomal traits, and then applied to "sex"-linked traits to
distinguish X-linked recessive and X-linked dominant inheritance. The former was
defined as vertical transmission in which carrier women pass the disorder to
affected sons, while the latter was defined as vertical transmission in which
daughters of affected males are always affected, transmitting the disorder to
offspring of both sexes. However, many X-linked disorders such as
adrenoleukodystrophy, fragile X syndrome, and ornithine transcarbamylase
deficiency do not fit these rules. We reviewed the literature on 32 X-linked
disorders and recorded information on penetrance and expressivity in both sexes.
As expected, penetrance and an index of severity of the phenotype (defined in
our Methods) were both high in males, while the severity index was low in
females. Contrary to standard presentations of X-linked inheritance, penetrance
was highly variable in females. Our analysis classified penetrance as high in
28% of the disorders studied, intermediate in 31%, and low in 40%. The high
proportion of X-linked disorders with intermediate penetrance is difficult to
reconcile with standard definitions of X-linked recessive and dominant
inheritance. They do not capture the extraordinarily variable expressivity of
X-linked disorders or take into account the multiple mechanisms that can result
in disease expression in females, which include cell autonomous expression,
skewed X-inactivation, clonal expansion, and somatic mosaicism. We recommend
that use of the terms X-linked recessive and dominant be discontinued, and that
all such disorders be simply described as following "X-linked" inheritance.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30123
PMID: 15316978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
