---
reference_id: "PMID:21497178"
title: "X-linked GnRH deficiency: role of KAL-1 mutations in GnRH deficiency."
authors:
- Hu Y
- Bouloux PM
journal: Mol Cell Endocrinol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.04.001
keywords:
- Animals
- Developmental Biology
- "Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Genes, X-Linked"
- "Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neurons/metabolism, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked GnRH deficiency: role of KAL-1 mutations in GnRH deficiency.
**Authors:** Hu Y, Bouloux PM
**Journal:** Mol Cell Endocrinol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mce.2011.04.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2011.04.001)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Oct 22;346(1-2):13-20. doi:
10.1016/j.mce.2011.04.001.  Epub 2011 Apr 8.

X-linked GnRH deficiency: role of KAL-1 mutations in GnRH deficiency.

Hu Y(1), Bouloux PM.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuroendocrinology, UCL Medical School, Royal Free Campus, London 
NW3 2QG, UK. y.hu@medsch.ucl.ac.uk

The gene for X-linked Kallmann's syndrome (KAL-1, encoding anosmin-1) was cloned 
in 1991. Over a decade elapsed before autosomal forms of KS and most of other 
genetic forms of isolated hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism (IHH) became 
characterized, and the genetic diversity of these disorders fully appreciated. 
Although KAL-1 mutations appear to cause a more severe reproductive phenotype 
than other IHH genes, the biology of this multidomain extracellular matrix 
protein has only been partially characterized. Initial studies suggested a 
central role of anosmin-1, in GnRH neuron ontogeny - specifically in GnRH 
neuronal migration from the cribriform plate area into the brain - as well as in 
olfactory bulb development. Anosmin-1 is expressed extracellularly, with high 
affinity binding to cell membrane heparan sulphate proteoglycans. It is 
expressed in the outer layers of the developing olfactory bulb, the neuroretina, 
the cerebellum, spinal cord and developing kidney. Recent observations have 
demonstrated an anosmin-1 heparan sulphate dependent functional interaction with 
the product of the autosomal dominant KAL-2 (FGFR1: anosmin-2) gene, thereby 
modulating FGFR1 signalling. Although these genes are frequently co-expressed in 
developing tissues, this may not represent the sole mode of action of anosmin-1, 
and FGFR1 independent actions of the protein have also been identified. 
Structural and in vitro functional studies have shown that anosmin-1 may have 
complex biological actions. Anosmin-1 interactions with FGFR1 have however been 
best characterized and represent the dominant focus of this chapter.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.04.001
PMID: 21497178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]