---
reference_id: "PMID:37644104"
title: A G1528C Hadha knock-in mouse model recapitulates aspects of human clinical phenotypes for long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
authors:
- Gaston G
- Babcock S
- Ryals R
- Elizondo G
- DeVine T
- Wafai D
- Packwood W
- Holden S
- Raber J
- Lindner JR
- Pennesi ME
- Harding CO
- Gillingham MB
journal: Commun Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s42003-023-05268-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A G1528C Hadha knock-in mouse model recapitulates aspects of human clinical phenotypes for long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
**Authors:** Gaston G, Babcock S, Ryals R, Elizondo G, DeVine T, Wafai D, Packwood W, Holden S, Raber J, Lindner JR, Pennesi ME, Harding CO, Gillingham MB
**Journal:** Commun Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42003-023-05268-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-023-05268-1)

## Content

1. Commun Biol. 2023 Aug 29;6(1):890. doi: 10.1038/s42003-023-05268-1.

A G1528C Hadha knock-in mouse model recapitulates aspects of human clinical 
phenotypes for long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.

Gaston G(1), Babcock S(1), Ryals R(1)(2), Elizondo G(1), DeVine T(1), Wafai 
D(2), Packwood W(3), Holden S(4), Raber J(3)(4)(5)(6), Lindner JR(3)(7), Pennesi 
ME(2), Harding CO(1), Gillingham MB(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(2)Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(3)Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, 
Portland, OR, USA.
(4)Department of Behavioral Neuroscience, Oregon Health and Science University, 
Portland, OR, USA.
(5)Departments of Neurology and Radiation Medicine, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(6)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center (ONPRC), 
Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(7)Cardiovascular Division, University of Virginia Medical Center, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(8)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA. gillingm@ohsu.edu.

Long chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (LCHADD) is a fatty acid 
oxidation disorder (FAOD) caused by a pathogenic variant, c.1528 G > C, in HADHA 
encoding the alpha subunit of trifunctional protein (TFPα). Individuals with 
LCHADD develop chorioretinopathy and peripheral neuropathy not observed in other 
FAODs in addition to the more ubiquitous symptoms of hypoketotic hypoglycemia, 
rhabdomyolysis and cardiomyopathy. We report a CRISPR/Cas9 generated knock-in 
murine model of G1528C in Hadha that recapitulates aspects of the human LCHADD 
phenotype. Homozygous pups are less numerous than expected from Mendelian 
probability, but survivors exhibit similar viability with wildtype (WT) 
littermates. Tissues of LCHADD homozygotes express TFPα protein, but LCHADD mice 
oxidize less fat and accumulate plasma 3-hydroxyacylcarnitines compared to WT 
mice. LCHADD mice exhibit lower ketones with fasting, exhaust earlier during 
treadmill exercise and develop a dilated cardiomyopathy compared to WT mice. In 
addition, LCHADD mice exhibit decreased visual performance, decreased cone 
function, and disruption of retinal pigment epithelium. Neurological function is 
affected, with impaired motor function during wire hang test and reduced open 
field activity. The G1528C knock-in mouse exhibits a phenotype similar to that 
observed in human patients; this model will be useful to explore pathophysiology 
and treatments for LCHADD in the future.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-023-05268-1
PMCID: PMC10465608
PMID: 37644104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.