---
reference_id: "PMID:34951116"
title: "Pediatric Graves' orbitopathy: a multicentre study."
authors:
- Ionescu IC
- van Trotsenburg PAS
- Paridaens D
- Tanck M
- Mooij CF
- Cagienard E
- Kalmann R
- Pakdel F
- van der Meeren S
- Saeed P
journal: Acta Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/aos.15084
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Graves' orbitopathy: a multicentre study.
**Authors:** Ionescu IC, van Trotsenburg PAS, Paridaens D, Tanck M, Mooij CF, Cagienard E, Kalmann R, Pakdel F, van der Meeren S, Saeed P
**Journal:** Acta Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/aos.15084](https://doi.org/10.1111/aos.15084)

## Content

1. Acta Ophthalmol. 2022 Sep;100(6):e1340-e1348. doi: 10.1111/aos.15084. Epub
2021  Dec 23.

Pediatric Graves' orbitopathy: a multicentre study.

Ionescu IC(1), van Trotsenburg PAS(2), Paridaens D(3), Tanck M(4), Mooij CF(2), 
Cagienard E(1), Kalmann R(5), Pakdel F(6), van der Meeren S(7), Saeed P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Orbital Center, Amsterdam University Medical 
Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam 
University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Orbital Center Rotterdam (The Rotterdam Eye Hospital & Erasmus Medical Center 
Rotterdam), Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, 
Amsterdam Public Health, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Department, Farabi Hospital, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Graves' orbitopathy (GO) is a rare condition in children often 
considered to be a less severe condition than at an older age. The aim of our 
study was to analyse if there are any factors that distinguish paediatric from 
adult GO in order to provide guidelines for assessing and managing paediatric 
GO.
METHODS: Study design is a multicentre retrospective observational case series; 
115 paediatric patients diagnosed with GO who visited our university medical 
centres in the Netherlands and Iran between 2003 and 2019 were submitted for 
complete ophthalmological examinations, serological testing and/or orbital 
imaging. Main outcome measures focussed on the natural course and clinical 
picture as well as medical and surgical treatment in paediatric GO.
RESULTS: Clinical findings included proptosis (n = 97; 84.3%), eyelid retraction 
(n = 77; 67%) and diplopia (n = 13; 11.3%). Ninety-two patients (80%) presented 
with mild disease, 21 (18.3%) with moderate-severe disease and two (1.7%) with 
severe GO. Five patients (4.3%) underwent intravenous glucocorticoids and 25 
patients underwent orbital decompression surgery. Strabismus surgery due to 
primary involvement of extraocular muscles was performed in two patients (1.7%). 
Overall, rehabilitative surgical treatment was planned in 31 patients (26.9%) 
with inactive disease. Two patients experienced reactivation of the disease.
CONCLUSION: Despite the fact that paediatric and adult GO are considered two 
separate entities, they might be the same disease with two different clinical 
phenotypes. Paediatric GO population presents with a comparable clinical picture 
regarding both soft tissue involvement and proptosis, which may require surgical 
intervention. Proptosis was present in the majority of paediatric GO patients. 
Orbital decompression was performed in 21.7% of patients.

© 2021 The Authors. Acta Ophthalmologica published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation.

DOI: 10.1111/aos.15084
PMID: 34951116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]