---
reference_id: "PMID:9083516"
title: Bronchiolitis obliterans in ataxia-telangiectasia.
authors:
- Ito M
- Nakagawa A
- Hirabayashi N
- Asai J
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1007/BF01008034
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/complications, genetics"
- "Autoimmune Diseases/complications, genetics"
- "Bronchi/immunology, microbiology, pathology"
- "Bronchiolitis Obliterans/etiology, pathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Aberrations/diagnosis
- Chromosome Disorders
- Cytomegalovirus Infections/pathology
- "Epithelium/immunology, microbiology, pathology"
- Female
- "Genes, MHC Class II/immunology"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Infant
- Lung/pathology
- Male
- Mycoplasma Infections/pathology
- Pseudomonas Infections/pathology
- Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bronchiolitis obliterans in ataxia-telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Ito M, Nakagawa A, Hirabayashi N, Asai J
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF01008034](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01008034)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 1997 Feb;430(2):131-7. doi: 10.1007/BF01008034.

Bronchiolitis obliterans in ataxia-telangiectasia.

Ito M(1), Nakagawa A, Hirabayashi N, Asai J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Nagoya University Hospital, Japan.

Pulmonary disease was studied in four patients with ataxia-telangiectasia.
Immunodeficiency was characterized by lymphopaenia, hypo-gammaglobulinaemia and
decreased T-cell response to phytohaemagglutinin stimulation in mixed lymphocyte
cultures. All four patients died from respiratory failure. Autopsy revealed that
all four patients suffered from bronchiolitis obliterans in all lobes.
Immunohistochemical examination demonstrated expression of MHC class II antigens
on bronchiolar epithelium. Pulmonary infections in ataxia-telangiectasia
patients included a case of mycoplasma pneumonia, one of cytomegalovirus
pneumonia and one of Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. The aetiology and
immunological background of bronchiolitis obliterans are discussed.
Bronchiolitis obliterans is a characteristic finding in ataxia-telangiectasia
and may be due to the underlying immune deficit.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01008034
PMID: 9083516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
