---
reference_id: "PMID:39631164"
title: "Roles of ANK2/ankyrin-B in neurodevelopmental disorders: Isoform functions and implications for autism spectrum disorder and epilepsy."
authors:
- Yoon S
- Penzes P
journal: Curr Opin Neurobiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2024.102938
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ankyrins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Epilepsy/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein Isoforms/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Roles of ANK2/ankyrin-B in neurodevelopmental disorders: Isoform functions and implications for autism spectrum disorder and epilepsy.
**Authors:** Yoon S, Penzes P
**Journal:** Curr Opin Neurobiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.conb.2024.102938](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2024.102938)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2025 Feb;90:102938. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2024.102938. Epub
 2024 Dec 3.

Roles of ANK2/ankyrin-B in neurodevelopmental disorders: Isoform functions and
implications for autism spectrum disorder and epilepsy.

Yoon S(1), Penzes P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address:
sehyoun.yoon@northwestern.edu.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL
60611, USA; Department of Pharmacology, Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA; Northwestern University, Center for Autism
and Neurodevelopment, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.

The ANK2 gene, encoding ankyrin-B, is a high-confidence risk factor for
neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Evidence from exome sequencing studies have
repeatedly implicated rare variants in ANK2 in autism spectrum disorder.
Recently, the functions of ankyrin-B isoforms on neuronal phenotypes have been
investigated using a number of techniques including electrophysiology, proteomic
screens and behavioral analysis using animal models with loss of distinct Ank2
isoforms or with targeted loss of Ank2 in different cell types and time points
during brain development. ANK2 variants and their pathophysiology could provide
valuable insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying NDDs. In this review,
we focus on recently reported studies to help understand the pathological
mechanisms of ANK2 loss and how it may facilitate the development of treatments
for NDDs in the future.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.conb.2024.102938
PMCID: PMC11839328
PMID: 39631164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The Authors
(Sehyoun Yoon and Peter Penzes) do not have any conflict of interest to declare
in relation to this submission.
