---
reference_id: "PMID:18638556"
title: Rodent genetic models of Huntington disease.
authors:
- Heng MY
- Detloff PJ
- Albin RL
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.06.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rodent genetic models of Huntington disease.
**Authors:** Heng MY, Detloff PJ, Albin RL
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2008.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2008.06.005)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2008 Oct;32(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.06.005. Epub 2008
Jun  26.

Rodent genetic models of Huntington disease.

Heng MY(1), Detloff PJ, Albin RL.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
USA.

Huntington disease (HD) is a dominantly inherited human neurodegenerative 
disorder characterized by motor deficits, cognitive impairment, and psychiatric 
symptoms leading to inexorable decline and death. Since the identification of 
the huntingtin gene and the characteristic expanded CAG repeat/polyglutamine 
mutation, multiple murine genetic models and one rat genetic model have been 
generated. These models fall into two general categories: transgenic models with 
ectopic expression of the characteristic expanded CAG codon mutation, and 
knock-in models with expression of mutant huntingtin under control of endogenous 
regulatory elements. Rodent genetic models are valuable tools for studying 
mechanisms of pathogenesis in HD and for preclinical evaluation of possible 
therapies. In this mini-review, we provide a concise comparative summary of 
rodent genetic models of HD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.06.005
PMID: 18638556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]