---
reference_id: "PMID:27806994"
title: Human Parvoviruses.
authors:
- Qiu J
- Söderlund-Venermo M
- Young NS
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.00040-16
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human Parvoviruses.
**Authors:** Qiu J, Söderlund-Venermo M, Young NS
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.00040-16](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00040-16)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2017 Jan;30(1):43-113. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00040-16.

Human Parvoviruses.

Qiu J(1), Söderlund-Venermo M(2), Young NS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of 
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA jqiu@kumc.edu.
(2)Department of Virology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Parvovirus B19 (B19V) and human bocavirus 1 (HBoV1), members of the large 
Parvoviridae family, are human pathogens responsible for a variety of diseases. 
For B19V in particular, host features determine disease manifestations. These 
viruses are prevalent worldwide and are culturable in vitro, and serological and 
molecular assays are available but require careful interpretation of results. 
Additional human parvoviruses, including HBoV2 to -4, human parvovirus 4 
(PARV4), and human bufavirus (BuV) are also reviewed. The full spectrum of 
parvovirus disease in humans has yet to be established. Candidate recombinant 
B19V vaccines have been developed but may not be commercially feasible. We 
review relevant features of the molecular and cellular biology of these viruses, 
and the human immune response that they elicit, which have allowed a deep 
understanding of pathophysiology.

Copyright © 2016 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00040-16
PMCID: PMC5217800
PMID: 27806994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]