---
reference_id: "PMID:37031301"
title: Phenotypic diversity observed in a Chinese patient cohort with biallelic variants in Bardet-Biedl syndrome genes.
authors:
- Zhong J
- Xie Y
- Ye H
- Chen C
- Sun T
- Xu K
- Zhang X
- Li Y
journal: Eye (Lond)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41433-023-02516-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Mutation
- East Asian People
- Eye/pathology
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- Retinal Dystrophies/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic diversity observed in a Chinese patient cohort with biallelic variants in Bardet-Biedl syndrome genes.
**Authors:** Zhong J, Xie Y, Ye H, Chen C, Sun T, Xu K, Zhang X, Li Y
**Journal:** Eye (Lond) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41433-023-02516-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433-023-02516-w)

## Content

1. Eye (Lond). 2023 Nov;37(16):3398-3405. doi: 10.1038/s41433-023-02516-w. Epub
2023 Apr 8.

Phenotypic diversity observed in a Chinese patient cohort with biallelic
variants in Bardet-Biedl syndrome genes.

Zhong J(#)(1), Xie Y(#)(1), Ye H, Chen C(1), Sun T(1), Xu K(1), Zhang X(1), Li
Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Institute of Ophthalmology, Beijing Tongren Eye Center, Beijing
Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing Ophthalmology & Visual
Sciences Key Lab, Beijing, China.
(2)Beijing Institute of Ophthalmology, Beijing Tongren Eye Center, Beijing
Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing Ophthalmology & Visual
Sciences Key Lab, Beijing, China. yilbio@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare multisystem ciliopathy. The aim
of this study was to describe the clinical and genetic features of a cohort of
Chinese patients carrying biallelic BBS gene variants.
METHODS: We recruited 34 patients from 31 unrelated pedigrees who carried
biallelic pathogenic variants in BBS genes. All patients underwent ophthalmic
and systematic evaluations, as well as comprehensive molecular genetic analyses.
Ultimately, 14 patients were followed up over time.
RESULTS: We identified 47 diseasing-causing variants in 10 BBS genes; 33 were
novel. Diagnosis of BBS and non-syndromic retinitis pigmentosa (RP) were
established in 28 patients from 27 pedigrees and 6 patients, respectively. The
two most prevalent genes in patients with BBS were BBS2 and BBS4, accounting for
51.8% of the probands. The patients exhibited clinical heterogeneity, from
patients with all six primary clinical components to patients suffering from
non-syndromic RP. The common components were retinal dystrophy, polydactyly, and
obesity, with frequencies of 78.6% to 100%, while renal anomaly frequencies were
only 7.1%. Patients exhibited early and severe visual defects and retinal
degeneration. Patients with biallelic missense variants in BBS2 suffered fewer
clinical symptoms and mild visual impairment. Patients with BBS10 variants
tended to have cone dystrophy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study defined the mutated gene profiles and established the
configuration of the variation frequencies for each BBS gene in Chinese
patients. Overall, our patients showed early and severe visual defects and
retinal degeneration. Genetic analysis is therefore crucial for diagnosis,
genetic counseling, and future gene therapy in these patients.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Royal College of
Ophthalmologists.

DOI: 10.1038/s41433-023-02516-w
PMCID: PMC10630479
PMID: 37031301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
