---
reference_id: "PMID:36943852"
title: Predictive factors of distant metastasis in surgically treated HPV-positive tonsil cancer.
authors:
- Shin HI
- Cho KJ
- Kim MS
- Joo YH
journal: PLoS One
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0283368
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictive factors of distant metastasis in surgically treated HPV-positive tonsil cancer.
**Authors:** Shin HI, Cho KJ, Kim MS, Joo YH
**Journal:** PLoS One (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0283368](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0283368)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2023 Mar 21;18(3):e0283368. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0283368. 
eCollection 2023.

Predictive factors of distant metastasis in surgically treated HPV-positive 
tonsil cancer.

Shin HI(1), Cho KJ(1), Kim MS(1), Joo YH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, The Catholic University of Korea, College 
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Human papilloma virus (HPV)-related tonsil cancer is associated with 
favorable outcomes.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to define factors affecting distant 
metastasis in patients with surgically treated HPV-positive tonsil cancer.
METHODS: The present study enrolled 76 patients diagnosed with HPV-positive 
tonsil cancer who underwent primary surgery between January 2010 and December 
2021.
RESULTS: Twelve (15.7%) patients experienced a distant failure with a median 
follow-up time of 43 months. Sites of distant metastasis included the lung (n = 
10), liver (n = 1), and brain (n = 1). Upon multivariate analysis, an advanced T 
stage (odds ratio [OR]: 13.94, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.29-149.863, p = 
0.003) and margin involvement (OR: 5.96, 95% CI: 1.33-26.76, p = 0.02) were 
independent predictors of distant metastases. The five-year disease-specific 
survival for the entire cohort was 85%. The multivariate analysis confirmed that 
distant metastasis (hazard ratio [HR]: 12.688, 95% CI: 3.424-47.016; p < 0.001) 
and margin involvement (HR: 6.243; 95% CI: 1.681-23.191; p = 0.006) were 
significant factors associated with the five-year disease-specific survival.
CONCLUSION: HPV-positive tonsil cancer patients with an advanced T stage and a 
positive surgical margin have a substantial risk of distant metastases. Distant 
metastasis and margin involvement are factors that affect their survival.

Copyright: © 2023 Shin et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0283368
PMCID: PMC10030005
PMID: 36943852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.