---
reference_id: "PMID:32673537"
title: "Myofibroblasts and Fibrosis: Mitochondrial and Metabolic Control of Cellular Differentiation."
authors:
- Gibb AA
- Lazaropoulos MP
- Elrod JW
journal: Circ Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.316958
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium Signaling
- Cell Differentiation
- Energy Metabolism
- Fibrosis
- "Heart Diseases/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Mitochondria, Heart/metabolism, pathology"
- "Myofibroblasts/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myofibroblasts and Fibrosis: Mitochondrial and Metabolic Control of Cellular Differentiation.
**Authors:** Gibb AA, Lazaropoulos MP, Elrod JW
**Journal:** Circ Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.316958](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.316958)

## Content

1. Circ Res. 2020 Jul 17;127(3):427-447. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.316958. Epub
 2020 Jul 16.

Myofibroblasts and Fibrosis: Mitochondrial and Metabolic Control of Cellular 
Differentiation.

Gibb AA(1), Lazaropoulos MP(1), Elrod JW(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Center for Translational Medicine, Lewis Katz School of Medicine at 
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.

Cardiac fibrosis is mediated by the activation of resident cardiac fibroblasts, 
which differentiate into myofibroblasts in response to injury or stress. 
Although myofibroblast formation is a physiological response to acute injury, 
such as myocardial infarction, myofibroblast persistence, as occurs in heart 
failure, contributes to maladaptive remodeling and progressive functional 
decline. Although traditional pathways of activation, such as TGFβ (transforming 
growth factor β) and AngII (angiotensin II), have been well characterized, less 
understood are the alterations in mitochondrial function and cellular metabolism 
that are necessary to initiate and sustain myofibroblast formation and function. 
In this review, we highlight recent reports detailing the mitochondrial and 
metabolic mechanisms that contribute to myofibroblast differentiation, 
persistence, and function with the hope of identifying novel therapeutic targets 
to treat, and potentially reverse, tissue organ fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.316958
PMCID: PMC7982967
PMID: 32673537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]