---
reference_id: "PMID:23276963"
title: The autoimmunity in Graves's disease.
authors:
- Li H
- Wang T
journal: Front Biosci (Landmark Ed)
year: '2013'
doi: 10.2741/4141
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The autoimmunity in Graves's disease.
**Authors:** Li H, Wang T
**Journal:** Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) (2013)
**DOI:** [10.2741/4141](https://doi.org/10.2741/4141)

## Content

1. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2013 Jan 1;18(2):782-7. doi: 10.2741/4141.

The autoimmunity in Graves's disease.

Li H(1), Wang T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Long Hua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China. 
shanhongli2012@yeah.net

Graves' disease (GD) is a systemic autoimmune syndrome manifesting complications 
in thyroid and orbital connective tissues. The thyroid gland plays a major role 
in the human body by producing the hormones necessary for appropriate energy 
levels and an active life. At the same time, the thyroid is highly vulnerable to 
autoimmune thyroid diseases. GD arises due to the complex interplay of genetic, 
environmental and endogenous factors, and the specific combination is required 
to initiate thyroid autoimmunity. Earlier studies have demonstrated the 
autoimmune response plays a dominant role in the development of GD. This review 
summarizes the inflammatory events which occur during the development of GD, 
such as Th17/Treg cell infiltration, Th1/Th2 cytokine and chemokine production, 
and the subtypes of immunogloblins (IgGs) generated.

DOI: 10.2741/4141
PMID: 23276963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]