---
reference_id: "PMID:26863109"
title: Disability and Fatigue Can Be Objectively Measured in Multiple Sclerosis.
authors:
- Motta C
- Palermo E
- Studer V
- Germanotta M
- Germani G
- Centonze D
- Cappa P
- Rossi S
- Rossi S
journal: PLoS One
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148997
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disability and Fatigue Can Be Objectively Measured in Multiple Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Motta C, Palermo E, Studer V, Germanotta M, Germani G, Centonze D, Cappa P, Rossi S, Rossi S
**Journal:** PLoS One (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0148997](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0148997)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 10;11(2):e0148997. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148997. 
eCollection 2016.

Disability and Fatigue Can Be Objectively Measured in Multiple Sclerosis.

Motta C(1)(2), Palermo E(3), Studer V(1)(4), Germanotta M(5), Germani G(1)(4), 
Centonze D(1)(2), Cappa P(3), Rossi S(1)(2)(6), Rossi S(7).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina dei Sistemi, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy.
(2)IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Mediterraneo (INM) Neuromed, Pozzilli, Italy.
(3)Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, "Sapienza" University of 
Rome, Italy.
(4)Fondazione Santa Lucia/Centro Europeo per la Ricerca sul Cervello (CERC), 
Rome, Italy.
(5)Don Carlo Gnocchi Onlus Foundation, Milan, Italy.
(6)Neuroimmunology and Neuromuscolar Diseases Unit, IRCCS Foundation Carlo Besta 
Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy.
(7)Department of Economics and Management-Industrial Engineering, University of 
Tuscia, Viterbo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The available clinical outcome measures of disability in multiple 
sclerosis are not adequately responsive or sensitive.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the feasibility of inertial sensor-based gait analysis 
in multiple sclerosis.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study of 80 multiple sclerosis patients and 50 
healthy controls was performed. Lower-limb kinematics was evaluated by using a 
commercially available magnetic inertial measurement unit system. Mean and 
standard deviation of range of motion (mROM, sROM) for each joint of lower limbs 
were calculated in one minute walking test. A motor performance index (E) 
defined as the sum of sROMs was proposed.
RESULTS: We established two novel observer-independent measures of disability. 
Hip mROM was extremely sensitive in measuring lower limb motor impairment, being 
correlated with muscle strength and also altered in patients without clinically 
detectable disability. On the other hand, E index discriminated patients 
according to disability, being altered only in patients with moderate and severe 
disability, regardless of walking speed. It was strongly correlated with fatigue 
and patient-perceived health status.
CONCLUSIONS: Inertial sensor-based gait analysis is feasible and can detect 
clinical and subclinical disability in multiple sclerosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148997
PMCID: PMC4749243
PMID: 26863109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Dr. Rossi received funding 
for traveling and honoraria for speaking or consultation fees from Biogen Idec, 
Merck Serono, Teva, Novartis, Bayer Schering, Genzyme, Almirall. She acted as an 
Advisory Board member of Biogen Idec, Teva, Merck Serono, Bayer, and Novartis 
and is involved as sub-investigator in clinical trials for Novartis, Merck 
Serono, Teva, Bayer Schering, Biogen Idec, Roche. Dr. Centonze acted as an 
Advisory Board member of Merck Serono, Teva, Bayer Schering, Biogen Idec, 
Novartis, Almirall, GW Pharmaceuticals, and received funding for traveling and 
honoraria for speaking or consultation fees from Merck Serono, Teva, Novartis, 
Bayer Schering, Sanofi-aventis, Biogen Idec, Almirall. He is the principal 
investigator in clinical trials for Novartis, Merck Serono, Teva, Bayer 
Schering, Sanofi-aventis, Biogen Idec, Roche, Almirall. This does not alter the 
authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. All other 
authors declare that they have no competing interests.