---
reference_id: "PMID:12705498"
title: The osteodystrophy of mucolipidosis type III and the effects of intravenous pamidronate treatment.
authors:
- Robinson C
- Baker N
- Noble J
- King A
- David G
- Sillence D
- Hofman P
- Cundy T
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2002'
doi: "10.1023/a:1022935115323"
keywords:
- "Absorptiometry, Photon"
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Biomarkers
- Bone Density
- "Bone Diseases/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, etiology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diphosphonates/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Fibroblasts/enzymology
- Humans
- "Injections, Intravenous"
- Leukocytes/enzymology
- Lysosomes/enzymology
- Male
- Mucolipidoses/complications
- Pain/etiology
- Pamidronate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The osteodystrophy of mucolipidosis type III and the effects of intravenous pamidronate treatment.
**Authors:** Robinson C, Baker N, Noble J, King A, David G, Sillence D, Hofman P, Cundy T
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1022935115323](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1022935115323)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2002 Dec;25(8):681-93. doi: 10.1023/a:1022935115323.

The osteodystrophy of mucolipidosis type III and the effects of intravenous
pamidronate treatment.

Robinson C(1), Baker N, Noble J, King A, David G, Sillence D, Hofman P, Cundy T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Nelson Hospital, Nelson, New Zealand.

Mucolipidosis type III (ML III; McKusick 252600) is a rare lysosomal storage
disease in which skeletal involvement is prominent, in particular the
destruction of vertebral bodies and the femoral heads. We describe studies in
two siblings with ML III that suggest the presence of a distinct metabolic bone
disorder. Biochemical indices of bone turnover were increased, and transiliac
bone biopsy demonstrated both trabecular osteopenia and marked subperiosteal
bone resorption. Intravenous pamidronate treatment given monthly for a year was
well tolerated and produced dramatic clinical effects, with reduction in bone
pain and improvements in mobility, despite incomplete suppression of bone
resorption as assessed by biochemical, radiographic and histological criteria.
Bisphosphonate therapy may have an important role in the management of bone pain
in ML III, as it does in the related lysosomal disorder of Gaucher disease.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1022935115323
PMID: 12705498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
