---
reference_id: "PMID:25081016"
title: "Glutamate receptor antibodies in neurological diseases: anti-AMPA-GluR3 antibodies, anti-NMDA-NR1 antibodies, anti-NMDA-NR2A/B antibodies, anti-mGluR1 antibodies or anti-mGluR5 antibodies are present in subpopulations of patients with either: epilepsy, encephalitis, cerebellar ataxia, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and neuropsychiatric SLE, Sjogren's syndrome, schizophrenia, mania or stroke. These autoimmune anti-glutamate receptor antibodies can bind neurons in few brain regions, activate glutamate receptors, decrease glutamate receptor's expression, impair glutamate-induced signaling and function, activate blood brain barrier endothelial cells, kill neurons, damage the brain, induce behavioral/psychiatric/cognitive abnormalities and ataxia in animal models, and can be removed or silenced in some patients by immunotherapy."
authors:
- Levite M
journal: J Neural Transm (Vienna)
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00702-014-1193-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Antibodies/metabolism
- Brain/immunology
- Glutamic Acid/metabolism
- Humans
- Immunotherapy/methods
- "Nervous System Diseases/immunology, therapy"
- Neurons/immunology
- "Receptors, Glutamate/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glutamate receptor antibodies in neurological diseases: anti-AMPA-GluR3 antibodies, anti-NMDA-NR1 antibodies, anti-NMDA-NR2A/B antibodies, anti-mGluR1 antibodies or anti-mGluR5 antibodies are present in subpopulations of patients with either: epilepsy, encephalitis, cerebellar ataxia, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and neuropsychiatric SLE, Sjogren's syndrome, schizophrenia, mania or stroke. These autoimmune anti-glutamate receptor antibodies can bind neurons in few brain regions, activate glutamate receptors, decrease glutamate receptor's expression, impair glutamate-induced signaling and function, activate blood brain barrier endothelial cells, kill neurons, damage the brain, induce behavioral/psychiatric/cognitive abnormalities and ataxia in animal models, and can be removed or silenced in some patients by immunotherapy.
**Authors:** Levite M
**Journal:** J Neural Transm (Vienna) (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00702-014-1193-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-014-1193-3)

## Content

1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2014 Aug;121(8):1029-75. doi:
10.1007/s00702-014-1193-3. Epub 2014 Aug 1.

Glutamate receptor antibodies in neurological diseases: anti-AMPA-GluR3
antibodies, anti-NMDA-NR1 antibodies, anti-NMDA-NR2A/B antibodies, anti-mGluR1
antibodies or anti-mGluR5 antibodies are present in subpopulations of patients
with either: epilepsy, encephalitis, cerebellar ataxia, systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) and neuropsychiatric SLE, Sjogren's syndrome, schizophrenia,
mania or stroke. These autoimmune anti-glutamate receptor antibodies can bind
neurons in few brain regions, activate glutamate receptors, decrease glutamate
receptor's expression, impair glutamate-induced signaling and function, activate
blood brain barrier endothelial cells, kill neurons, damage the brain, induce
behavioral/psychiatric/cognitive abnormalities and ataxia in animal models, and
can be removed or silenced in some patients by immunotherapy.

Levite M(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Behavioral Sciences, Academic College of Tel-Aviv-Yafo, Tel Aviv,
Israel, mialevite@mta.ac.il.

Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter of the Central Nervous System
(CNS), and it is crucially needed for numerous key neuronal functions. Yet,
excess glutamate causes massive neuronal death and brain damage by
excitotoxicity--detrimental over activation of glutamate receptors.
Glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity is the main pathological process taking place
in many types of acute and chronic CNS diseases and injuries. In recent years,
it became clear that not only excess glutamate can cause massive brain damage,
but that several types of anti-glutamate receptor antibodies, that are present
in the serum and CSF of subpopulations of patients with a kaleidoscope of human
neurological diseases, can undoubtedly do so too, by inducing several very
potent pathological effects in the CNS. Collectively, the family of
anti-glutamate receptor autoimmune antibodies seem to be the most widespread,
potent, dangerous and interesting anti-brain autoimmune antibodies discovered up
to now. This impression stems from taking together the presence of various types
of anti-glutamate receptor antibodies in a kaleidoscope of human neurological
and autoimmune diseases, their high levels in the CNS due to intrathecal
production, their multiple pathological effects in the brain, and the unique and
diverse mechanisms of action by which they can affect glutamate receptors,
signaling and effects, and subsequently impair neuronal signaling and induce
brain damage. The two main families of autoimmune anti-glutamate receptor
antibodies that were already found in patients with neurological and/or
autoimmune diseases, and that were already shown to be detrimental to the CNS,
include the antibodies directed against ionotorpic glutamate receptors: the
anti-AMPA-GluR3 antibodies, anti-NMDA-NR1 antibodies and anti-NMDA-NR2
antibodies, and the antibodies directed against Metabotropic glutamate
receptors: the anti-mGluR1 antibodies and the anti-mGluR5 antibodies. Each type
of these anti-glutamate receptor antibodies is discussed separately in this very
comprehensive review, with regards to: the human diseases in which these
anti-glutamate receptor antibodies were found thus far, their presence and
production in the nervous system, their association with various
psychiatric/behavioral/cognitive/motor impairments, their possible association
with certain infectious organisms, their detrimental effects in vitro as well as
in vivo in animal models in mice, rats or rabbits, and their diverse and unique
mechanisms of action. The review also covers the very encouraging positive
responses to immunotherapy of some patients that have either of the
above-mentioned anti-glutamate receptor antibodies, and that suffer from various
neurological diseases/problems. All the above are also summarized in the
review's five schematic and useful figures, for each type of anti-glutamate
receptor antibodies separately. The review ends with a summary of all the main
findings, and with recommended guidelines for diagnosis, therapy, drug design
and future investigations. In the nut shell, the human studies, the in vitro
studies, as well as the in vivo studies in animal models in mice, rats and
rabbit revealed the following findings regarding the five different types of
anti-glutamate receptor antibodies: (1) Anti-AMPA-GluR3B antibodies are present
in ~25-30% of patients with different types of Epilepsy. When these
anti-glutamate receptor antibodies (or other types of autoimmune antibodies) are
found in Epilepsy patients, and when these autoimmune antibodies are suspected
to induce or aggravate the seizures and/or the cognitive/psychiatric/behavioral
impairments that sometimes accompany the seizures, the Epilepsy is called
'Autoimmune Epilepsy'. In some patients with 'Autoimmune Epilepsy' the
anti-AMPA-GluR3B antibodies associate significantly with
psychiatric/cognitive/behavior abnormalities. In vitro and/or in animal models,
the anti-AMPA-GluR3B antibodies by themselves induce many pathological effects:
they activate glutamate/AMPA receptors, kill neurons by 'Excitotoxicity', and/or
by complement activation modulated by complement regulatory proteins, cause
multiple brain damage, aggravate chemoconvulsant-induced seizures, and also
induce behavioral/motor impairments. Some patients with 'Autoimmune Epilepsy'
that have anti-AMPA-GluR3B antibodies respond well (although sometimes
transiently) to immunotherapy, and thanks to that have reduced seizures and
overall improved neurological functions. (2) Anti-NMDA-NR1 antibodies are
present in patients with autoimmune 'Anti-NMDA-receptor Encephalitis'. In
humans, in animal models and in vitro the anti-NMDA-NR1 antibodies can be very
pathogenic since they can cause a pronounced decrease of surface NMDA receptors
expressed in hippocampal neurons, and also decrease the cluster density and
synaptic localization of the NMDA receptors. The anti-NMDA-NR1 antibodies induce
these effects by crosslinking and internalization of the NMDA receptors. Such
changes can impair glutamate signaling via the NMDA receptors and lead to
various neuronal/behavior/cognitive/psychiatric abnormalities. Anti-NMDA-NR1
antibodies are frequently present in high levels in the CSF of the patients with
'Anti-NMDA-receptor encephalitis' due to their intrathecal production. Many
patients with 'Anti-NMDA receptor Encephalitis' respond well to several modes of
immunotherapy. (3) Anti-NMDA-NR2A/B antibodies are present in a substantial
number of patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) with or without
neuropsychiatric problems. The exact percentage of SLE patients having
anti-NMDA-NR2A/B antibodies varies in different studies from 14 to 35%, and in
one study such antibodies were found in 81% of patients with diffuse
'Neuropshychiatric SLE', and in 44% of patients with focal 'Neuropshychiatric
SLE'. Anti-NMDA-NR2A/B antibodies are also present in subpopulations of patients
with Epilepsy of several types, Encephalitis of several types (e.g., chronic
progressive limbic Encephalitis, Paraneoplastic Encephalitis or Herpes Simplex
Virus Encephalitis), Schizophrenia, Mania, Stroke, or Sjorgen syndrome. In some
patients, the anti-NMDA-NR2A/B antibodies are present in both the serum and the
CSF. Some of the anti-NMDA-NR2A/B antibodies cross-react with dsDNA, while
others do not. Some of the anti-NMDA-NR2A/B antibodies associate with
neuropsychiatric/cognitive/behavior/mood impairments in SLE patients, while
others do not. The anti-NMDA-NR2A/B antibodies can undoubtedly be very
pathogenic, since they can kill neurons by activating NMDA receptors and
inducing 'Excitotoxicity', damage the brain, cause dramatic decrease of
membranal NMDA receptors expressed in hippocampal neurons, and also induce
behavioral cognitive impairments in animal models. Yet, the concentration of the
anti-NMDA-NR2A/B antibodies seems to determine if they have positive or negative
effects on the activity of glutamate receptors and on the survival of neurons.
Thus, at low concentration, the anti-NMDA-NR2A/B antibodies were found to be
positive modulators of receptor function and increase the size of NMDA
receptor-mediated excitatory postsynaptic potentials, whereas at high
concentration they are pathogenic as they promote 'Excitotoxcity' through
enhanced mitochondrial permeability transition. (4) Anti-mGluR1 antibodies were
found thus far in very few patients with Paraneoplastic Cerebellar Ataxia, and
in these patients they are produced intrathecally and therefore present in much
higher levels in the CSF than in the serum. The anti-mGluR1 antibodies can be
very pathogenic in the brain since they can reduce the basal neuronal activity,
block the induction of long-term depression of Purkinje cells, and altogether
cause cerebellar motor coordination deficits by a combination of rapid effects
on both the acute and the plastic responses of Purkinje cells, and by chronic
degenerative effects. Strikingly, within 30 min after injection of anti-mGluR1
antibodies into the brain of mice, the mice became ataxic. Anti-mGluR1
antibodies derived from patients with Ataxia also caused disturbance of eye
movements in animal models. Immunotherapy can be very effective for some
Cerebellar Ataxia patients that have anti-mGluR1 antibodies. (5) Anti-mGluR5
antibodies were found thus far in the serum and CSF of very few patients with
Hodgkin lymphoma and Limbic Encephalopathy (Ophelia syndrome). The sera of these
patients that contained anti-GluR5 antibodies reacted with the neuropil of the
hippocampus and cell surface of live rat hippocampal neurons, and
immunoprecipitation from cultured neurons and mass spectrometry demonstrated
that the antigen was indeed mGluR5. Taken together, all these evidences show
that anti-glutamate receptor antibodies are much more frequent among various
neurological diseases than ever realized before, and that they are very
detrimental to the nervous system. As such, they call for diagnosis, therapeutic
removal or silencing and future studies. What we have learned by now about the
broad family of anti-glutamate receptor antibodies is so exciting, novel, unique
and important, that it makes all future efforts worthy and essential.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-014-1193-3
PMID: 25081016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
