---
reference_id: "PMID:20301298"
title: Dystrophinopathies.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Darras BT
- Urion DK
- Ghosh PS
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dystrophinopathies.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Darras BT, Urion DK, Ghosh PS

## Content

1. Dystrophinopathies.

Darras BT(1), Urion DK(2), Ghosh PS(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2000 Sep 5 [updated 2022 Jan 20].

Author information:
(1)Director, Neuromuscular Center, Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
(2)Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts
(3)Neuromuscular Center, Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The dystrophinopathies cover a spectrum of X-linked 
muscle disease ranging from mild to severe that includes Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy, Becker muscular dystrophy, and DMD-associated dilated cardiomyopathy 
(DCM). The mild end of the spectrum includes the phenotypes of asymptomatic 
increase in serum concentration of creatine phosphokinase (CK) and muscle cramps 
with myoglobinuria. The severe end of the spectrum includes progressive muscle 
diseases that are classified as Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy when skeletal 
muscle is primarily affected and as DMD-associated DCM when the heart is 
primarily affected. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) usually presents in early 
childhood with delayed motor milestones including delays in walking 
independently and standing up from a supine position. Proximal weakness causes a 
waddling gait and difficulty climbing stairs, running, jumping, and standing up 
from a squatting position. DMD is rapidly progressive, with affected children 
being wheelchair dependent by age 12 years. Cardiomyopathy occurs in almost all 
individuals with DMD after age 18 years. Few survive beyond the third decade, 
with respiratory complications and progressive cardiomyopathy being common 
causes of death. Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD) is characterized by later-onset 
skeletal muscle weakness. With improved diagnostic techniques, it has been 
recognized that the mild end of the spectrum includes men with onset of symptoms 
after age 30 years who remain ambulatory even into their 60s. Despite the milder 
skeletal muscle involvement, heart failure from DCM is a common cause of 
morbidity and the most common cause of death in BMD. Mean age of death is in the 
mid-40s. DMD-associated DCM is characterized by left ventricular dilatation and 
congestive heart failure. Females heterozygous for a DMD pathogenic variant are 
at increased risk for DCM.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a dystrophinopathy is established in a 
proband with the characteristic clinical findings and elevated CK concentration 
and/or by identification of a hemizygous pathogenic variant in DMD on molecular 
genetic testing in a male and of a heterozygous pathogenic variant in DMD on 
molecular genetic testing in a female. Females may present with a classic 
dystrophinopathy or may be asymptomatic carriers.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: ACE inhibitors are used with or without 
beta blockers for cardiomyopathy in both DMD and BMD phenotypes. Congestive 
heart failure is treated with diuretics and oxygen as needed; cardiac 
transplantation is offered to persons with severe dilated cardiomyopathy and BMD 
with limited or no clinical evidence of skeletal muscle disease. Scoliosis is 
treated with bracing and surgery. Corticosteroid therapy improves muscle 
strength and function for individuals with DMD between ages five and 15 years; 
the same treatment is used in BMD, although the efficacy is less clear. 
Dystrophin restoration therapies have been developed by using synthetic 
antisense oligonucleotides to restore the reading frame by exon skipping for 
individuals with specific pathogenic variants in DMD. Prevention of secondary 
complications: Evaluation by a pulmonologist and cardiologist before surgeries; 
pneumococcal and influenza immunizations annually; nutrition assessment; 
physical therapy to promote mobility and prevent contractures; sunshine and a 
balanced diet rich in vitamin D and calcium to improve bone density and reduce 
the risk of fractures; weight control to avoid obesity. Surveillance: For males 
with DMD or BMD: annual or biannual evaluation by a cardiologist beginning at 
the time of diagnosis; monitoring for scoliosis; baseline pulmonary function 
testing before wheelchair dependence; frequent evaluations by a pediatric 
pulmonologist. For heterozygous females: cardiac evaluation at least once after 
the teenage years. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Botulinum toxin injections; 
succinylcholine and inhalational anesthetics because of susceptibility to 
malignant hyperthermia or malignant hyperthermia-like reactions. Evaluation of 
relatives at risk: Early identification of heterozygous females who are at 
increased risk for cardiomyopathy and, thus, need routine cardiac surveillance 
and prompt treatment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: The dystrophinopathies are inherited in an X-linked manner. 
The risk to the sibs of a proband depends on the genetic status of the mother. 
Heterozygous females have a 50% chance of transmitting the DMD pathogenic 
variant in each pregnancy. Sons who inherit the pathogenic variant will be 
affected; daughters who inherit the pathogenic variant are heterozygous and may 
have a range of clinical manifestations. Males with DMD usually do not 
reproduce. Males with BMD or DMD-associated DCM may reproduce: all of their 
daughters are heterozygotes; none of their sons inherit their father's DMD 
pathogenic variant. Carrier testing for at-risk females, prenatal testing, and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible if the DMD pathogenic variant in 
the family is known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301298