---
reference_id: "PMID:25494028"
title: Scoliosis in Children With Aicardi Syndrome.
authors:
- Grigoriou E
- DeSabato JJ
- Colo D
- Dormans JP
journal: J Pediatr Orthop
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/BPO.0000000000000368
keywords:
- "Aicardi Syndrome/complications, physiopathology"
- Braces/adverse effects
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Progression
- Early Diagnosis
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Intraoperative Neurophysiological Monitoring/methods
- "Orthopedic Procedures/adverse effects, methods"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Scoliosis/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology, surgery"
- Spine/surgery
- Time-to-Treatment
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scoliosis in Children With Aicardi Syndrome.
**Authors:** Grigoriou E, DeSabato JJ, Colo D, Dormans JP
**Journal:** J Pediatr Orthop (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BPO.0000000000000368](https://doi.org/10.1097/BPO.0000000000000368)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Orthop. 2015 Jul-Aug;35(5):e38-42. doi:
10.1097/BPO.0000000000000368.

Scoliosis in Children With Aicardi Syndrome.

Grigoriou E(1), DeSabato JJ, Colo D, Dormans JP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA.

BACKGROUND: Aicardi syndrome (ACS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder that 
was classically characterized by the triad of agenesis of corpus callosum, 
infantile spasms, and chorioretinal lacunae. As new cases emerge and new common 
phenotypic features are being described in subsequent reports, new modified 
diagnostic criteria have been proposed that now classify the observed 
costovertebral abnormalities as supporting diagnostic features. To our knowledge 
there are no previous studies focusing and describing the scoliosis observed in 
children with ACS.
METHODS: We screened billing lists to identify patients seen in the Division of 
Orthopaedic Surgery at our institution with a diagnosis of ACS that were treated 
for scoliosis after 2001. A total of 5 patients were identified. Medical records 
and radiographs were retrospectively reviewed in all cases. In all of the 
patients the diagnosis of ACS had been confirmed through complete genetic 
evaluation and advanced imaging.
RESULTS: The mean age when scoliosis was first noticed was 3.9±4.2 years (range, 
0.5 to 10.5 y) with a mean Cobb angle of 22.5±6.7 degrees (range, 10 to 27 
degrees). The mean age at the first orthopedic visit was 5.8±5.0 years (range, 
1.5 to 13 y) with a progressed mean Cobb angle of 39.5±17.3 degrees (range, 15 
to 57 degrees). Congenital vertebral anomalies were observed in 1 patient. Three 
patients were treated surgically; 1 of the 3 patients had a surgical 
complication with loss of intraoperative neuromonitoring signals. Two patients 
had not undergone surgery at the last visit with a mean Cobb angle of 75.5 
degrees. The mean postoperative follow-up for the surgical group (cases 1 to 3) 
was 3±3.6 years (range, 0.6 to 7.2 y) and the mean total follow-up for both 
groups was 6.6±2.5 years (range, 2.6 to 8.6 y).
CONCLUSIONS: Scoliosis in ACS can represent a clinically significant problem 
that is underdiagnosed and overshadowed by the other severe medical 
complications associated with the syndrome. Our data suggest that scoliosis in 
patients with ACS is rapidly progressive and bracing is ineffective; early 
screening, close observation, and low threshold for referral to an orthopedic 
surgeon are crucial.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level IV-case series.

DOI: 10.1097/BPO.0000000000000368
PMID: 25494028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]