---
reference_id: "PMID:36569014"
title: "Kawasaki disease without changes in inflammatory biomarkers: A case report."
authors:
- Yamashita K
- Kanazawa T
- Abe Y
- Naruto T
- Mori M
journal: World J Clin Cases
year: '2022'
doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i35.13038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki disease without changes in inflammatory biomarkers: A case report.
**Authors:** Yamashita K, Kanazawa T, Abe Y, Naruto T, Mori M
**Journal:** World J Clin Cases (2022)
**DOI:** [10.12998/wjcc.v10.i35.13038](https://doi.org/10.12998/wjcc.v10.i35.13038)

## Content

1. World J Clin Cases. 2022 Dec 16;10(35):13038-13043. doi: 
10.12998/wjcc.v10.i35.13038.

Kawasaki disease without changes in inflammatory biomarkers: A case report.

Yamashita K(1), Kanazawa T(2), Abe Y(2), Naruto T(3), Mori M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Children's Medical Center, Showa University Koto Toyosu Hospital, Tokyo 
135-8577, Japan. meko11115@med.showa-u.ac.jp.
(2)Children's Medical Center, Showa University Koto Toyosu Hospital, Tokyo 
135-8577, Japan.
(3)Lifetime Clinical Immunology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Clinical Immunology and Allergology, St. Marianna 
University School of Medicine, Kanagawa 216-8511, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Kawasaki disease (KD) is diagnosed based on clinical features. Blood 
tests and other tests are auxiliary diagnostic tools. Since KD is a disease 
caused by arterial inflammation, many patients with KD have elevated levels of 
inflammatory biomarkers, such as C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR), and serum amyloid A protein (SAA) in blood tests. We 
report our experience of a patient with KD who did not have elevated levels of 
inflammatory biomarkers.
CASE SUMMARY: A 1-year-old boy presented with a 3-day history of fever. Five of 
the six symptoms of KD were observed, except for changes in the lips and oral 
cavity. Blood tests revealed no elevation in CRP, ESR, or SAA levels. Although 
the blood test results were atypical, the patient was diagnosed with KD based on 
clinical symptoms and was admitted to the hospital for treatment. The patient 
was administered intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and aspirin. Despite 
commencing treatment, the fever persisted; therefore, additional IVIG was 
administered, the dosage of aspirin was increased, and ulinastatin was added. 
Three doses of IVIG were administered and the fever resolved on day 11 of KD 
symptoms started. Blood tests performed during hospitalization showed normal 
levels of inflammatory biomarkers. We examined leucine-rich alpha-2-glycoprotein 
1 - a protein that is elevated during the acute phase of KD. The protein levels 
did not increase during hospitalization.
CONCLUSION: This case suggests the need to identify criteria and biomarkers for 
detecting KD conditions that do not require KD treatment.

©The Author(s) 2022. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i35.13038
PMCID: PMC9782948
PMID: 36569014

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: There is no 
conflicts of interest.