---
reference_id: "PMID:35671351"
title: Mechanism of Tubulin Oligomers and Single-Ring Disassembly Catastrophe.
authors:
- Shemesh A
- Ginsburg A
- Dharan R
- Levi-Kalisman Y
- Ringel I
- Raviv U
journal: J Phys Chem Lett
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.2c00947
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism of Tubulin Oligomers and Single-Ring Disassembly Catastrophe.
**Authors:** Shemesh A, Ginsburg A, Dharan R, Levi-Kalisman Y, Ringel I, Raviv U
**Journal:** J Phys Chem Lett (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.jpclett.2c00947](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.2c00947)

## Content

1. J Phys Chem Lett. 2022 Jun 7;13(23):5246-5252. doi:
10.1021/acs.jpclett.2c00947.  Online ahead of print.

Mechanism of Tubulin Oligomers and Single-Ring Disassembly Catastrophe.

Shemesh A(1)(2), Ginsburg A(1), Dharan R(1), Levi-Kalisman Y(2)(3), Ringel I(4), 
Raviv U(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Chemistry, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 
9190401, Israel.
(2)Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, The Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel.
(3)Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 
9190401, Israel.
(4)Institute for Drug Research, School of Pharmacy, The Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9112102, Israel.

Cold tubulin dimers coexist with tubulin oligomers and single rings. These 
structures are involved in microtubule assembly; however, their dynamics are 
poorly understood. Using state-of-the-art solution synchrotron time-resolved 
small-angle X-ray scattering, we discovered a disassembly catastrophe (half-life 
of ∼0.1 s) of tubulin rings and oligomers upon dilution or addition of guanosine 
triphosphate. A slower disassembly (half-life of ∼38 s) was observed following 
an increase in temperature. Our analysis showed that the assembly and 
disassembly processes were consistent with an isodesmic mechanism, involving a 
sequence of reversible reactions in which dimers were rapidly added or removed 
one at a time, terminated by a 2 order-of-magnitude slower ring-closing/opening 
step. We revealed how assembly conditions varied the mass fraction of tubulin in 
each of the coexisting structures, the rate constants, and the standard 
Helmholtz free energies for closing a ring and for longitudinal dimer-dimer 
associations.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.2c00947
PMCID: PMC9208022
PMID: 35671351

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.