---
reference_id: PMID:40726775
title: Blood parameters differentiate post COVID-19 condition from Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome and Fibromyalgia.
authors:
- Giménez-Orenga K
- Pierquin J
- Brunel J
- Charvet B
- Martín-Martínez E
- Lemarinier M
- Fried S
- Lucas A
- Perron H
- Oltra E
journal: Brain Behav Immun Health
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbih.2025.101058
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blood parameters differentiate post COVID-19 condition from Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome and Fibromyalgia.
**Authors:** Giménez-Orenga K, Pierquin J, Brunel J, Charvet B, Martín-Martínez E, Lemarinier M, Fried S, Lucas A, Perron H, Oltra E
**Journal:** Brain Behav Immun Health (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbih.2025.101058](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbih.2025.101058)

## Content

1. Brain Behav Immun Health. 2025 Jul 4;48:101058. doi:
10.1016/j.bbih.2025.101058.  eCollection 2025 Oct.

Blood parameters differentiate post COVID-19 condition from Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome and Fibromyalgia.

Giménez-Orenga K(1), Pierquin J(2), Brunel J(2), Charvet B(2), Martín-Martínez 
E(3), Lemarinier M(4), Fried S(4), Lucas A(4), Perron H(2)(5), Oltra E(6).

Author information:
(1)Doctoral School, Catholic University of Valencia San Vicente Mártir, 
Valencia, Spain.
(2)Geneuro-Innovation, Bioparc Laënnec, Lyon, France.
(3)National Health Service, Manises Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Institut des Maladies Métaboliques et Cardiovasculaires, INSERM, University 
Toulouse III-Paul Sabatier, UMR 1297-I2MC, Toulouse, France.
(5)GeNeuro, Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Catholic 
University of Valencia, C/ Quevedo 2, 46001, Valencia, Spain.

Post-COVID-19 condition, such as Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome (ME/CFS) and Fibromyalgia (FM), are characterized by fatigue, pain, 
shortness of breath, sleep disturbances, cognitive dysfunction and other 
symptoms, heavily impacting on patients daily functioning. Moreover, over half 
of patients end up fulfilling ME/CFS and/or FM clinical criteria after a few 
months of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Expression of the toxic human endogenous 
retrovirus (HERV)-W ENV protein can be induced by viral infection and HERV-W 
detection was correlated with acute COVID-19 severity and found significantly 
expressed in post-COVID-19 condition. This study shows that HERV-W ENV may also 
be present in prepandemic cases of ME/CFS, FM or co-diagnosed with both clinical 
criteria, suggesting viral participation in these chronic diseases. To learn 
whether associated antiviral mechanisms may also show differing patterns of 
immunological responses, we measured IgM, IgG, IgA and IgE antibody isotypes 
against SARS-CoV-2 spike and nucleocapsid antigens, the levels of IL-6, IL-8, 
IL-10, IFNγ and TNFα cytokines, the level of NfL, a neural damage biomarker, as 
well as some blood cell markers potentially related with fatigue. Importantly, 
some of the measured variables showed a capacity to discriminate post-COVID-19 
condition cases from all other participants, with 100 % sensitivity and up to 
71.9 % specificity providing a new tool for a differential diagnosis between 
diseases or syndromes with so many overlapping clinical symptoms. Interestingly, 
the detected markers showed moderate-to-strong correlations with patient 
symptoms pointing at novel therapeutic opportunities.

© 2025 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbih.2025.101058
PMCID: PMC12302357
PMID: 40726775

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following financial 
interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing 
interests: Herve Perron reports financial support was provided by GeNeuro 
Innovation. Justine Pierquin reports financial support was provided by GeNeuro 
Innovation. Joanna Brunel reports financial support was provided by GeNeuro 
Innovation. Benjamin Charvet reports financial support was provided by GeNeuro 
Innovation. Elisa Oltra reports financial support was provided by Generalitat of 
Valencia Ministry of Education Culture Universities and Employment to cover 
reagents and external services only. Karen Gimenez-Orenga reports financial 
support was provided by Generalitat of Valencia Ministry of Education Culture 
Universities and Employment in the form of a PhD fellowship. All other authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper. Neither Generalitat of Valencia Ministry of Education Culture 
Universities and Employment, nor the Spanish public National Health Service or 
GeNeuro Innovation, participated in the design, investigation, data analysis and 
interpretation, or writing of this article.