---
reference_id: "PMID:34535635"
title: CRISPR/Cas9 mediated gene correction ameliorates abnormal phenotypes in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells.
authors:
- He L
- Wang S
- Peng L
- Zhao H
- Li S
- Han X
- Habimana JD
- Chen Z
- Wang C
- Peng Y
- Peng H
- Xie Y
- Lei L
- Deng Q
- Wan L
- Wan N
- Yuan H
- Gong Y
- Zou G
- Li Z
- Tang B
- Jiang H
journal: Transl Psychiatry
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41398-021-01605-2
keywords:
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- Machado-Joseph Disease/genetics
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CRISPR/Cas9 mediated gene correction ameliorates abnormal phenotypes in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells.
**Authors:** He L, Wang S, Peng L, Zhao H, Li S, Han X, Habimana JD, Chen Z, Wang C, Peng Y, Peng H, Xie Y, Lei L, Deng Q, Wan L, Wan N, Yuan H, Gong Y, Zou G, Li Z, Tang B, Jiang H
**Journal:** Transl Psychiatry (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41398-021-01605-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-021-01605-2)

## Content

1. Transl Psychiatry. 2021 Sep 17;11(1):479. doi: 10.1038/s41398-021-01605-2.

CRISPR/Cas9 mediated gene correction ameliorates abnormal phenotypes in
spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells.

He L(1), Wang S(1), Peng L(1), Zhao H(2), Li S(3), Han X(3), Habimana JD(3),
Chen Z(1)(4)(5), Wang C(6), Peng Y(1), Peng H(1), Xie Y(1), Lei L(1), Deng Q(1),
Wan L(1), Wan N(1), Yuan H(1), Gong Y(1), Zou G(1), Li Z(2)(3)(7)(8)(9), Tang
B(1)(4)(5)(10), Jiang H(11)(12)(13)(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Hunan Province in Neurodegenerative Disorders, Central
South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(5)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Diseases, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(6)Department of Pathology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, China.
(7)CAS Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(8)GZMU-GIBH Joint School of Life Sciences, Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou, China.
(9)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central
South. University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(10)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan,
China.
(11)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, China. jianghong73868@126.com.
(12)Key Laboratory of Hunan Province in Neurodegenerative Disorders, Central
South University, Changsha, Hunan, China. jianghong73868@126.com.
(13)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Diseases, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan, China. jianghong73868@126.com.
(14)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan,
China. jianghong73868@126.com.
(15)School of Basic Medical Science, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan,
China. jianghong73868@126.com.
(16)Hunan International Scientific and Technological Cooperation Base of
Neurodegenerative and Neurogenetic Diseases, Changsha, China.
jianghong73868@126.com.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3/Machado-Joseph disease (SCA3/MJD) is a progressive
autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease caused by abnormal CAG repeats in
the exon 10 of ATXN3. The accumulation of the mutant ataxin-3 proteins carrying
expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) leads to selective degeneration of neurons. Since
the pathogenesis of SCA3 has not been fully elucidated, and no effective
therapies have been identified, it is crucial to investigate the pathogenesis
and seek new therapeutic strategies of SCA3. Induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) can be used as the ideal cell model for the molecular pathogenesis of
polyQ diseases. Abnormal CAG expansions mediated by CRISPR/Cas9 genome
engineering technologies have shown promising potential for the treatment of
polyQ diseases, including SCA3. In this study, SCA3-iPSCs can be corrected by
the replacement of the abnormal CAG expansions (74 CAG) with normal repeats (17
CAG) using CRISPR/Cas9-mediated homologous recombination (HR) strategy. Besides,
corrected SCA3-iPSCs retained pluripotent and normal karyotype, which can be
differentiated into a neural stem cell (NSCs) and neuronal cells, and maintained
electrophysiological characteristics. The expression of differentiation markers
and electrophysiological characteristics were similar among the neuronal
differentiation from normal control iPSCs (Ctrl-iPSCs), SCA3-iPSCs, and isogenic
control SCA3-iPSCs. Furthermore, this study proved that the phenotypic
abnormalities in SCA3 neurons, including aggregated IC2-polyQ protein, decreased
mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and glutathione expressions, increased
reactive oxygen species (ROS), intracellular Ca2+ concentrations, and lipid
peroxidase malondialdehyde (MDA) levels, all were rescued in the corrected
SCA3-NCs. For the first time, this study demonstrated the feasibility of
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated HR strategy to precisely repair SCA3-iPSCs, and reverse the
corresponding abnormal disease phenotypes. In addition, the importance of
genetic control using CRISPR/Cas9-mediated iPSCs for disease modeling. Our work
may contribute to providing a potential ideal model for molecular mechanism
research and autologous stem cell therapy of SCA3 or other polyQ diseases, and
offer a good gene therapy strategy for future treatment.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-021-01605-2
PMCID: PMC8448778
PMID: 34535635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
