---
reference_id: "PMID:22550424"
title: "Desmoplastic small round cell tumor: current management and recent findings."
authors:
- Dufresne A
- Cassier P
- Couraud L
- Marec-Bérard P
- Meeus P
- Alberti L
- Blay JY
journal: Sarcoma
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1155/2012/714986
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Desmoplastic small round cell tumor: current management and recent findings.
**Authors:** Dufresne A, Cassier P, Couraud L, Marec-Bérard P, Meeus P, Alberti L, Blay JY
**Journal:** Sarcoma (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2012/714986](https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/714986)

## Content

1. Sarcoma. 2012;2012:714986. doi: 10.1155/2012/714986. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor: current management and recent findings.

Dufresne A(1), Cassier P, Couraud L, Marec-Bérard P, Meeus P, Alberti L, Blay 
JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunity, Virus and Microenvironnement, Cancer Research Center 
of Lyon (CRCL), UMR INSERM 1052-CNRS 5286, Leon Berard Cancer Center, 28 Rue 
Laennec, 69008 Lyon, France.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a rare and highly aggressive 
mesenchymal tumor that develops in the abdominal cavity of young men adults. 
Patients typically present with symptoms of abdominal sarcomatosis. Diagnosis is 
based on histological analysis of biopsies which typically show small round blue 
cells in nests separated by an abundant desmoplastic stroma. DSRCT is associated 
with a unique chromosomal translocation t(11:22) (p 13; q 12) that involves the 
EWSR1 and WT1 genes. The prognosis is particularly poor; median survival ranges 
from 17 to 25 months, largely due to the presentation of the majority of 
patients with metastatic disease. Management of DSRCT remains challenging and 
current schemes lack a significant cure rate despite the use of aggressive 
treatments such as polychemotherapy, debulking surgery and whole abdominal 
radiation. Several methods are being evaluated to improve survival: addition of 
chemotherapy and targeted therapies to standard neoadjuvant protocol, completion 
of surgical resection with HIPEC, postoperative IMRT, treatment of hepatic 
metastases with [(90)Y]Yttrium microsphere liver embolization.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/714986
PMCID: PMC3329898
PMID: 22550424