---
reference_id: "PMID:20301739"
title: "Spinal Muscular Atrophy, X-Linked Infantile."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Baumbach-Reardon L
- Hunter JM
- Ahearn ME
- Pfautsch M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal Muscular Atrophy, X-Linked Infantile.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Baumbach-Reardon L, Hunter JM, Ahearn ME, Pfautsch M

## Content

1. Spinal Muscular Atrophy, X-Linked Infantile.

Baumbach-Reardon L(1), Hunter JM(2), Ahearn ME(3), Pfautsch M(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2008 Oct 30 [updated 2024 May 9].

Author information:
(1)Associate Professor, Dr Kiran C Patel College of Medicine, Tampa Bay Campus, 
Clearwater, Florida
(2)Clinical Lab Director, Institute for Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children's 
Hospital, Columbus, Ohio
(3)Research Operations Manager, Translational Genomics Research Institute, 
Phoenix, Arizona
(4)Dr Kiran C Patel College of Medicine, Tampa Bay Campus, Clearwater, Florida

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy (XL-SMA) is 
characterized by congenital hypotonia, areflexia, and evidence of degeneration 
and loss of anterior horn cells (i.e., lower motor neurons) in the spinal cord 
and brain stem. Often congenital contractures and/or fractures are present. 
Intellect is normal. Life span is significantly shortened because of progressive 
ventilatory insufficiency resulting from chest muscle involvement.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy 
is established in a male proband with suggestive clinical features and a 
hemizygous pathogenic variant in UBA1 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Assure adequate caloric intake by 
caloric supplementation and/or gastrostomy feedings; manage constipation with 
diet or medication; provide rigorous airway clearance techniques, secretion 
management, and, ideally, noninvasive ventilatory support, although tracheostomy 
with permanent mechanical ventilation can be considered; discuss "do not attempt 
to resuscitate" status with the family before respiratory failure occurs. 
Orthopedic consultation and physical and occupational therapy to manage 
contractures and progressive scoliosis. Standard treatment for gastroesophageal 
reflux disease. Surveillance: Affected children should be followed at least 
monthly until the severity and disease course are more clearly delineated. 
Routine evaluations by a multidisciplinary team, including neurology, 
pulmonology, orthopedics, physical and occupational therapy, nutrition, and 
gastroenterology, as needed. Measurement of growth parameters, neurologic 
evaluation, nutrition/feeding assessment, evaluation of respiratory status, and 
physical examination for kyphosis/scoliosis at each visit.
GENETIC COUNSELING: By definition, XL-SMA is inherited in an X-linked manner. 
Heterozygous females have a 50% chance of transmitting the pathogenic variant 
with each pregnancy. Males who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected; 
females who inherit the pathogenic variant will be heterozygotes and will 
usually not be affected. Once the UBA1 pathogenic variant has been identified in 
an affected family member, carrier testing for at risk female relatives and 
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301739