---
reference_id: "PMID:28274900"
title: "Comparative Study between the use of Melatonin and A Solution with Melatonin, Tryptophan, and Vitamin B6 as an Inducer of Spontaneous Sleep in Children During an Auditory Response Test: An Alternative to Commonly Used Sedative Drugs."
authors:
- Volpe AD
- Lucia A
- Pirozzi C
- Pastore V
journal: J Int Adv Otol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.5152/iao.2017.3054
keywords:
- "Audiometry, Evoked Response/methods"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Deafness/diagnosis, etiology"
- Drug Combinations
- Early Diagnosis
- Electroencephalography
- "Evoked Potentials, Auditory, Brain Stem"
- Female
- "Hearing Loss/complications, diagnosis"
- Hearing Tests
- Humans
- "Hypnotics and Sedatives/administration & dosage"
- Male
- "Melatonin/administration & dosage"
- "Tryptophan/administration & dosage"
- "Vitamin B 6/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative Study between the use of Melatonin and A Solution with Melatonin, Tryptophan, and Vitamin B6 as an Inducer of Spontaneous Sleep in Children During an Auditory Response Test: An Alternative to Commonly Used Sedative Drugs.
**Authors:** Volpe AD, Lucia A, Pirozzi C, Pastore V
**Journal:** J Int Adv Otol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.5152/iao.2017.3054](https://doi.org/10.5152/iao.2017.3054)

## Content

1. J Int Adv Otol. 2017 Apr;13(1):69-73. doi: 10.5152/iao.2017.3054. Epub 2017
Mar  9.

Comparative Study between the use of Melatonin and A Solution with Melatonin, 
Tryptophan, and Vitamin B6 as an Inducer of Spontaneous Sleep in Children During 
an Auditory Response Test: An Alternative to Commonly Used Sedative Drugs.

Volpe AD(1), Lucia A, Pirozzi C, Pastore V.

Author information:
(1)Santobono-Pausilipon Pediatric Hospital, Otololgy and Cochlear Implant Unit, 
Napoli, Italy. antoniodellavolpe@yahoo.it.

OBJECTIVE: An elective investigation into the early diagnosis of deafness in 
children under the age of 4-5 years is performed using auditory evoked 
potentials of auditory brainstem responses (ABRs). In case of pediatric 
patients, the major difficulty includes being examined during spontaneous sleep, 
which is complicated to obtain, especially in the age range of 12 to 72 months. 
Recently, melatonin has been used as a "sleep inducer" in diagnostic tests with 
positive results. Our aim was to evaluate the use of melatonin and of a solution 
containing melatonin, tryptophan, and vitamin B6 as an inducer of spontaneous 
sleep on repeated ABR analyses as well as to evaluate the reduction in analyses 
with sedative drugs in case of uncooperative patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In total, 748 children aged between 12 and 48 months were 
included in the study and divided into three groups: A: placebo (n=235), B: 
melatonin (n=246), and C: melatonin, tryptophan, and vitamin B6 (n=267).
RESULTS: In groups B and C, in addition to physiological awakening, we observed 
a significant reduction in the number of repeated analyses as well as drug 
regimen usage.
CONCLUSION: This study confirms the strategic role of melatonin as an inducer of 
spontaneous sleep. However, above all, it suggests that the administration of a 
solution containing melatonin, tryptophan, and vitamin B6 significantly reduces 
the number of repeated ABR examinations as well as the percentage of repeated 
analysis performed using sedative drugs compared to both the control group and 
the melatonin-only group.

DOI: 10.5152/iao.2017.3054
PMID: 28274900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]