---
reference_id: "PMID:29278291"
title: "Rating scales for cognition in Huntington's disease: Critique and recommendations."
authors:
- Mestre TA
- Bachoud-Lévi AC
- Marinus J
- Stout JC
- Paulsen JS
- Como P
- Duff K
- Sampaio C
- Goetz CG
- Cubo E
- Stebbins GT
- Martinez-Martin P
- Members of the MDS Committee on Rating Scales Development
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/mds.27227
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rating scales for cognition in Huntington's disease: Critique and recommendations.
**Authors:** Mestre TA, Bachoud-Lévi AC, Marinus J, Stout JC, Paulsen JS, Como P, Duff K, Sampaio C, Goetz CG, Cubo E, Stebbins GT, Martinez-Martin P, Members of the MDS Committee on Rating Scales Development
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.27227](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.27227)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2018 Feb;33(2):187-195. doi: 10.1002/mds.27227. Epub 2017 Dec 26.

Rating scales for cognition in Huntington's disease: Critique and 
recommendations.

Mestre TA(1), Bachoud-Lévi AC(2), Marinus J(3), Stout JC(4), Paulsen JS(5), Como 
P(6), Duff K(7), Sampaio C(8), Goetz CG(9), Cubo E(10), Stebbins GT(9), 
Martinez-Martin P(11); Members of the MDS Committee on Rating Scales 
Development.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center, Division of Neurology, 
Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, University of 
Ottawa Brain and Mind Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, National Centre of Reference for 
Huntington's Disease, Neurology Department; Université Paris Est, Créteil; 
INSERM U955 E01, Institut Mondor De Recherché Biomédicale, École Normale 
Supérieure, Créteil-Paris, France.
(3)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Institute of Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience, School of Psychological 
Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(5)Departments of Neurology, Psychiatry, Psychological and Brain Sciences, 
Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(6)Division of Neurological and Physical Medicine Devices, Office of Device 
Evaluation, Center for Devices and Radiological Health, United States Food and 
Drug Administration, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Center for Alzheimer's Care, Imaging, and Research, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(8)CHDI Foundation/CHDI Management, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(9)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitário Hermanos Yagüe, Burgos, 
Spain.
(11)National Center of Epidemiology and CIBERNED, Carlos III Institute of 
Health, Madrid, Spain.

Cognitive impairment is one of the main features of Huntington's disease and is 
present across the disease spectrum. As part of the International Parkinson's 
Disease and Movement Disorder Society-sponsored project to review all clinical 
rating scales used in Huntington's disease, a systematic review of the 
literature was performed to identify cognitive scales used in Huntington's 
disease and make recommendations for their use. A total of 17 cognitive scales 
were identified and evaluated. None of the scales met criteria for a 
"recommended" status. For assessing severity of cognitive dysfunction, the 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment was "recommended with caveats." The UHDRS 
Cognitive Assessment, the UHDRS-For Advanced Patients cognitive section, the 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale, the Frontal Assessment 
Battery, the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale, the Mini-Mental State Examination, 
and the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status were 
"suggested" for evaluating severity of cognitive impairment. The MoCA was 
"suggested" as a screening tool for cognitive impairment. The major challenge in 
the assessment of cognition in Huntington's disease is the lack of a formal 
definition of dementia and/or mild cognitive impairment in this disease. The 
committee concluded that there is a need to further validate currently available 
cognitive scales in Huntington's disease, but that it is premature to recommend 
the development of new scales. Recently developed Huntington's disease-specific 
scales, such as the Huntington's Disease-Cognitive Assessment Battery, hold 
promise but require the completion of more comprehensive clinimetric 
development. © 2017 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

© 2017 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.27227
PMCID: PMC10080408
PMID: 29278291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Relevant conflicts of interest/financial 
disclosures: Nothing to report.