---
reference_id: "PMID:37608221"
title: "Susac syndrome: neurological update (clinical features, long-term observational follow-up and management of sixteen patients)."
authors:
- Bose S
- Papathanasiou A
- Karkhanis S
- Appleton JP
- King D
- Batra R
- Mollan SP
- Jacob S
journal: J Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-023-11891-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Susac Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, therapy"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Brain/pathology
- Retinal Artery Occlusion
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Susac syndrome: neurological update (clinical features, long-term observational follow-up and management of sixteen patients).
**Authors:** Bose S, Papathanasiou A, Karkhanis S, Appleton JP, King D, Batra R, Mollan SP, Jacob S
**Journal:** J Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-023-11891-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-023-11891-z)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2023 Dec;270(12):6193-6206. doi: 10.1007/s00415-023-11891-z. Epub
2023  Aug 22.

Susac syndrome: neurological update (clinical features, long-term observational 
follow-up and management of sixteen patients).

Bose S(#)(1), Papathanasiou A(#)(2), Karkhanis S(#)(1), Appleton JP(1)(3), King 
D(1), Batra R(4), Mollan SP(4), Jacob S(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation 
Trust, Birmingham, B15 2TH, UK.
(2)Department of Neurology, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Nottingham, UK.
(3)Institute of Applied Health Research, College of Dental and Medical Sciences, 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation 
Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation 
Trust, Birmingham, B15 2TH, UK. saiju.jacob@uhb.nhs.uk.
(6)Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK. saiju.jacob@uhb.nhs.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Susac syndrome is a likely autoimmune microangiopathy affecting the brain, 
retina and inner ear. Due to the rarity of this condition, diagnosis and 
treatment can be challenging. Diagnosis is based on the presence of the clinical 
triad of central nervous system dysfunction, branch retinal artery occlusions 
and sensorineural hearing loss. Typical MRI findings of callosal and 
peri-callosal lesions may assist in diagnosis. Clinical course can be 
monophasic, polycyclic or chronic continuous. It is important to look out for 
red flags to attain an accurate diagnosis and follow a therapeutic algorithm 
based on severity of the disease and response to treatment. Patients are treated 
with steroids and immunosuppressive agents with a variable response. Early 
aggressive treatment especially in severe cases, may help in preventing relapses 
and morbidity/disability. This study highlights important diagnostic features 
and proposes a treatment algorithm based on clinical experience from management 
of 16 patients from 2 neuroscience centres in the UK since 2007, who were 
followed up over a long period of 3-15 years.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-023-11891-z
PMCID: PMC10632257
PMID: 37608221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Prof Jacob has served as an international 
advisory board member for Alexion, Alnylam, ArgenX, Immunovant, Janssen, 
Regeneron and UCB pharmaceuticals, is currently an expert panel member of 
Myasthenia Gravis consortium for Argenx pharmaceuticals, and has received 
speaker fees from Terumo BCT and Eisai pharmaceuticals. None of these are 
relevant to the submitted manuscript. Prof. Mollan reports advisory board 
membership for Invex Therapeutics and Janssen. She is currently a consultant for 
Neurodiem and has received speaker fees from Heidelberg Engineering, and 
Chugai-Roche Ltd. All outside the submitted work. Dr Appleton is supported in 
part by a National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) Health and Care Research 
Scholarship.