---
reference_id: "PMID:15300460"
title: "Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency: neurological phenotype, clinical follow-up and novel mutations in TTPA gene in Italian families."
authors:
- Mariotti C
- Gellera C
- Rimoldi M
- Mineri R
- Uziel G
- Zorzi G
- Pareyson D
- Piccolo G
- Gambi D
- Piacentini S
- Squitieri F
- Capra R
- Castellotti B
- Di Donato S
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-004-0246-z
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Ataxia/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Italy
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Vitamin E/therapeutic use
- "Vitamin E Deficiency/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency: neurological phenotype, clinical follow-up and novel mutations in TTPA gene in Italian families.
**Authors:** Mariotti C, Gellera C, Rimoldi M, Mineri R, Uziel G, Zorzi G, Pareyson D, Piccolo G, Gambi D, Piacentini S, Squitieri F, Capra R, Castellotti B, Di Donato S
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-004-0246-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-004-0246-z)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2004 Jul;25(3):130-7. doi: 10.1007/s10072-004-0246-z.

Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency: neurological phenotype, clinical 
follow-up and novel mutations in TTPA gene in Italian families.

Mariotti C(1), Gellera C, Rimoldi M, Mineri R, Uziel G, Zorzi G, Pareyson D, 
Piccolo G, Gambi D, Piacentini S, Squitieri F, Capra R, Castellotti B, Di Donato 
S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Genetics, C. Besta National Neurological 
Institute, Via Celoria 11, I-20133 Milan, Italy. mariotti@istituto-besta.it

Comment in
    Neurol Sci. 2004 Jul;25(3):119-21. doi: 10.1007/s10072-004-0245-0.

Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency (AVED) is a rare autosomal recessive 
neurodegenerative disorder due to mutations in the alpha-tocopherol transfer 
protein (TTPA) gene on chromosome 8q13. AVED patients have progressive 
spinocerebellar symptoms and markedly reduced plasma levels of vitamin E. We 
studied neurological phenotype at diagnosis, and long-term effect of vitamin E 
supplementation in 16 patients from 12 Italian families. The most common 
mutations were the 744delA and 513insTT. Two novel TTPA mutations were 
identified: a severe truncating mutation (219insAT) in a homozygous patient, and 
a Gly246Arg missense mutation (G246R) in a compound heterozygous patient. The 
missense mutation was associated with a mild and slowly progressive form of the 
disease. Vitamin E supplementation therapy allowed a stabilization of the 
neurological conditions in most of the patients. However, development of 
spasticity and retinitis pigmentosa was noted in a few patients during therapy. 
Prompt genetic characterization of AVED patients may allow an effective early 
treatment and an adequate genetic counseling.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-004-0246-z
PMID: 15300460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]