---
reference_id: "PMID:35062288"
title: A Functional Minigenome of Parvovirus B19.
authors:
- Reggiani A
- Avati A
- Valenti F
- Fasano E
- Bua G
- Manaresi E
- Gallinella G
journal: Viruses
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/v14010084
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Functional Minigenome of Parvovirus B19.
**Authors:** Reggiani A, Avati A, Valenti F, Fasano E, Bua G, Manaresi E, Gallinella G
**Journal:** Viruses (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v14010084](https://doi.org/10.3390/v14010084)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2022 Jan 4;14(1):84. doi: 10.3390/v14010084.

A Functional Minigenome of Parvovirus B19.

Reggiani A(1), Avati A(1), Valenti F(1), Fasano E(1), Bua G(1), Manaresi E(1), 
Gallinella G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, 40138 
Bologna, Italy.

Parvovirus B19 (B19V) is a human pathogenic virus of clinical relevance, 
characterized by a selective tropism for erythroid progenitor cells in bone 
marrow. Relevant information on viral characteristics and lifecycle can be 
obtained from experiments involving engineered genetic systems in appropriate in 
vitro cellular models. Previously, a B19V genome of defined consensus sequence 
was designed, synthesized and cloned in a complete and functional form, able to 
replicate and produce infectious viral particles in a producer/amplifier cell 
system. Based on such a system, we have now designed and produced a derived B19V 
minigenome, reduced to a replicon unit. The genome terminal regions were 
maintained in a form able to sustain viral replication, while the internal 
region was clipped to include only the left-side genetic set, containing the 
coding sequence for the functional NS1 protein. Following transfection in 
UT7/EpoS1 cells, this minigenome still proved competent for replication, 
transcription and production of NS1 protein. Further, the B19V minigenome was 
able to complement B19-derived, NS1-defective genomes, restoring their ability 
to express viral capsid proteins. The B19V genome was thus engineered to yield a 
two-component system, with complementing functions, providing a valuable tool 
for studying viral expression and genetics, suitable to further engineering for 
purposes of translational research.

DOI: 10.3390/v14010084
PMCID: PMC8780457
PMID: 35062288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.