---
reference_id: "PMID:12434156"
title: Cbfbeta interacts with Runx2 and has a critical role in bone development.
authors:
- Kundu M
- Javed A
- Jeon JP
- Horner A
- Shum L
- Eckhaus M
- Muenke M
- Lian JB
- Yang Y
- Nuckolls GH
- Stein GS
- Liu PP
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/ng1050
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Chondrocytes/cytology, physiology"
- Core Binding Factor Alpha 1 Subunit
- Core Binding Factor alpha Subunits
- Core Binding Factor beta Subunit
- Core Binding Factors
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Embryonic and Fetal Development/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- "Genes, Lethal"
- Green Fluorescent Proteins
- HeLa Cells
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Luminescent Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Neoplasm Proteins
- Osteogenesis
- Phenotype
- Pluripotent Stem Cells/physiology
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/physiology
- Transcription Factor AP-2
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cbfbeta interacts with Runx2 and has a critical role in bone development.
**Authors:** Kundu M, Javed A, Jeon JP, Horner A, Shum L, Eckhaus M, Muenke M, Lian JB, Yang Y, Nuckolls GH, Stein GS, Liu PP
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1050](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1050)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2002 Dec;32(4):639-44. doi: 10.1038/ng1050. Epub 2002 Nov 18.

Cbfbeta interacts with Runx2 and has a critical role in bone development.

Kundu M(1), Javed A, Jeon JP, Horner A, Shum L, Eckhaus M, Muenke M, Lian JB,
Yang Y, Nuckolls GH, Stein GS, Liu PP.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, 49 Convent Drive, Building 49, Room
3A26, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Runx2 (runt-related transcription factor 2, also known as Cbfa1, Osf2 and AML3)
is essential for bone development in mice, and mutations in RUNX2 are found in
65-80% of individuals with cleidocranial dysplasia. Although all Runx family
members can interact with Cbfbeta (core-binding factor b, encoded by Cbfb), a
role for Cbfbeta in bone development has not been demonstrated owing to
lethality in Cbfb(-/-) mouse embryos at 12.5 days post coitum (d.p.c.) from
hemorrhages and lack of definitive hematopoiesis. Using a 'knock-in' strategy,
we generated mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells that express Cbfb fused in-frame to
a cDNA encoding green fluorescent protein (GFP). Cbfb(+/GFP) mice had normal
life spans and appeared normal, but Cbfb(GFP/GFP) pups died within the first day
after birth. The Cbfb(GFP/GFP) mice exhibited a delay in endochondral and
intramembranous ossification as well as in chondrocyte differentiation, similar
to but less severe than delays observed in Runx2(-/-) mice. We demonstrate that
Cbfbeta is expressed in developing bone and forms a functional interaction with
Runx2, and that Cbfb(GFP) is a hypomorphic allele. The fusion allele maintains
sufficient function in hematopoietic cells to bypass the early embryonic
lethality, and identifies a new role for Cbfb in bone development. Our findings
raise the possibility that mutations in CBFB may be responsible for some cases
of cleidocranial dysplasia that are not linked to mutations in RUNX2.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1050
PMID: 12434156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
