---
reference_id: PMID:38791344
title: "Exploring Acne Treatments: From Pathophysiological Mechanisms to Emerging Therapies."
authors:
- Kim HJ
- Kim YH
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25105302
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploring Acne Treatments: From Pathophysiological Mechanisms to Emerging Therapies.
**Authors:** Kim HJ, Kim YH
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25105302](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25105302)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 May 13;25(10):5302. doi: 10.3390/ijms25105302.

Exploring Acne Treatments: From Pathophysiological Mechanisms to Emerging 
Therapies.

Kim HJ(1), Kim YH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, International St. Mary's Hospital, College of 
Medicine, Catholic Kwandong University, Incheon 22711, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, 
The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 06591, Republic of Korea.

Acne vulgaris is a common dermatological condition that can present across 
different ages but predominantly affects adolescents and young adults. 
Characterized by various lesion types, the pathogenesis of acne is complex, 
involving genetic, hormonal, microbial, and inflammatory factors. This review 
comprehensively addresses current and emerging acne management strategies, 
emphasizing both topical and systemic treatments, procedural therapies, and 
dietary modifications. Key topical agents include retinoids, benzoyl peroxide, 
antibiotics, and other specialized compounds. Systemic options like antibiotics, 
hormonal therapies, and retinoids offer significant therapeutic benefits, 
particularly for moderate to severe cases. Procedural treatments such as laser 
devices, photodynamic therapy, chemical peels, and intralesional injections 
present viable alternatives for reducing acne symptoms and scarring. Emerging 
therapies focus on novel biologics, bacteriophages, probiotics, and peptides, 
providing promising future options. This review underscores the importance of 
personalized approaches to treatment due to the multifaceted nature of acne, 
highlighting the potential of innovative therapies for improving patient 
outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25105302
PMCID: PMC11121268
PMID: 38791344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.