---
reference_id: "PMID:35871032"
title: Risk reducing surgery with peritoneal staging in BRCA1-2 mutation carriers. A prospective study.
authors:
- Marchetti C
- Arcieri M
- Vertechy L
- Ergasti R
- Russo G
- Zannoni GF
- Minucci A
- Ercoli A
- Scambia G
- Fagotti A
journal: Eur J Surg Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2022.07.007
keywords:
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- Carcinoma/genetics
- Fallopian Tube Neoplasms/surgery
- "Genes, BRCA1"
- "Genes, BRCA2"
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms, Unknown Primary"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/genetics, surgery, pathology"
- Ovariectomy
- Prospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk reducing surgery with peritoneal staging in BRCA1-2 mutation carriers. A prospective study.
**Authors:** Marchetti C, Arcieri M, Vertechy L, Ergasti R, Russo G, Zannoni GF, Minucci A, Ercoli A, Scambia G, Fagotti A
**Journal:** Eur J Surg Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejso.2022.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejso.2022.07.007)

## Content

1. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2022 Dec;48(12):2539-2544. doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2022.07.007. 
Epub 2022 Jul 19.

Risk reducing surgery with peritoneal staging in BRCA1-2 mutation carriers. A 
prospective study.

Marchetti C(1), Arcieri M(2), Vertechy L(3), Ergasti R(3), Russo G(3), Zannoni 
GF(3), Minucci A(4), Ercoli A(5), Scambia G(6), Fagotti A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Women, Child and Public Health, Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario A, Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy; Catholic University of Sacred 
Heart, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical, Dental, Morphological and Functional Imaging 
Science, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(3)Department of Women, Child and Public Health, Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario A, Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Molecular and Genomic Diagnostics Unit (MGDUnit), Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario A, Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Human Pathology in Adult and Childhood "G. Barresi", University 
of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(6)Department of Women, Child and Public Health, Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario A, Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy; Catholic University of Sacred 
Heart, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: giovanni.scambia@policlinicogemelli.it.

INTRODUCTION: International guidelines recommend risk-reducing 
salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) in BRCA1-2 mutations carriers to decrease ovarian 
cancer occurrence. In this prospective study, we describe the incidence of 
occult malignancies and the surgical outcomes in asymptomatic BRCA mutation 
carriers submitted to RRSO.
METHODS: Data on BRCA1-2 carriers undergoing RRSO with peritoneal washing and 
peritoneal/omental biopsies (PeS), between January 2019 until March 2021, were 
prospectively collected.
RESULTS: A total of 132 patients were enrolled: 74 BRCA1 and 58 BRCA2 mutation 
carriers. 31.1% women underwent RRSO and PeS (16.2% of BRCA1 and 50% of BRCA2 
carriers), while 68.9% patients were submitted also to concomitant hysterectomy. 
Almost all the procedures (99.2%) were performed by minimally invasive surgery. 
Postoperative complications occurred in twelve patients (9.1%): 10 in the 
concomitant hysterectomy group and two complications in the RRSO group. At the 
final pathological examination, 6 (4.5%) occult carcinomas were diagnosed: 3 
fallopian tube carcinomas, one ovarian carcinoma and two serous tubal 
intraepithelial carcinomas (STICs), with negative PeS. Median age of occult 
carcinomas patients at RRSO was 54 (range: 48-79) years. The mean follow up was 
20 (range: 7-34) months. During the follow up, no primary peritoneal cancer has 
been diagnosed.
CONCLUSIONS: Occult pathologic findings in RRSO occurred in 4.5% (3% invasive 
carcinomas, STIC 1.5%) among our patients. The routine use of peritoneal 
biopsies does not improve the detection of occult malignancies. Our data confirm 
the importance of timely performing RRSO in BRCA1-2 carriers.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejso.2022.07.007
PMID: 35871032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.