---
reference_id: "PMID:17272906"
title: "Nemaline rod myopathy: a rare form of myopathy."
authors:
- Sharma MC
- Gulati S
- Atri S
- Seth R
- Kalra V
- Das TK
- Sarkar C
journal: Neurol India
year: '2007'
doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.30433
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nemaline rod myopathy: a rare form of myopathy.
**Authors:** Sharma MC, Gulati S, Atri S, Seth R, Kalra V, Das TK, Sarkar C
**Journal:** Neurol India (2007)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0028-3886.30433](https://doi.org/10.4103/0028-3886.30433)

## Content

1. Neurol India. 2007 Jan-Mar;55(1):70-4. doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.30433.

Nemaline rod myopathy: a rare form of myopathy.

Sharma MC(1), Gulati S, Atri S, Seth R, Kalra V, Das TK, Sarkar C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

Nemaline rod myopathy (NM) is a rare form of congenital myopathy characterized 
by slowly progressive or nonprogressive muscle weakness and pathognomonic 
rod-like structures within the muscle fibers. To the best of our knowledge, this 
is first documentation of the clinicopathological features of this rare entity 
from India. All cases of NM diagnosed in our laboratory were retrieved. Clinical 
and pathological features were reviewed. During a period of 1.5 years (Jan 2004 
to June 2005), we received 750 muscle biopsies for various reasons. Of which, 15 
were diagnosed as congenital myopathies and four as nemaline rod myopathies. 
Thus, NM comprises 0.53% of all muscle diseases and 22.6% of all congenital 
myopathies. All of them presented in childhood (first five years of life) with 
generalized hypotonia, feeding problems, repeated respiratory infections and 
muscle weakness. Both males and females were equally affected. The CPK levels 
were normal and EMG was myopathic. Microscopic examination revealed minimal 
changes but characteristic red-colored material was seen on modified Gomori 
trichrome staining which was immunopositive to alpha actinin. Ultrastructural 
examination confirmed this material to be nemaline rods. NM, although a rare 
form of congenital myopathies, should be suspected in children who present with 
generalized hypotonia, repeated chest infections and slowly progressive muscle 
weakness. This report highlights the importance of histochemistry and 
ultrastructural examination in the diagnosis of this entity, in the absence of 
the availability of methodology for genetic studies.

DOI: 10.4103/0028-3886.30433
PMID: 17272906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]