---
reference_id: "PMID:29572711"
title: Low-dose Synachten test with measurement of salivary cortisol in adult patients with β-thalassemia major.
authors:
- Ambrogio AG
- Danesi L
- Baldini M
- Radin R
- Cassinerio E
- Graziadei G
- Mirra N
- D'Angelo E
- Marcon A
- Mancarella M
- Orsatti A
- Bonetti F
- Scacchi M
- Cappellini MD
- Persani L
- Pecori Giraldi F
journal: Endocrine
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s12020-018-1562-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low-dose Synachten test with measurement of salivary cortisol in adult patients with β-thalassemia major.
**Authors:** Ambrogio AG, Danesi L, Baldini M, Radin R, Cassinerio E, Graziadei G, Mirra N, D'Angelo E, Marcon A, Mancarella M, Orsatti A, Bonetti F, Scacchi M, Cappellini MD, Persani L, Pecori Giraldi F
**Journal:** Endocrine (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12020-018-1562-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-018-1562-z)

## Content

1. Endocrine. 2018 May;60(2):348-354. doi: 10.1007/s12020-018-1562-z. Epub 2018
Mar  23.

Low-dose Synachten test with measurement of salivary cortisol in adult patients 
with β-thalassemia major.

Ambrogio AG(1), Danesi L(2), Baldini M(3), Radin R(2), Cassinerio E(3), 
Graziadei G(3), Mirra N(4), D'Angelo E(4), Marcon A(3), Mancarella M(3), Orsatti 
A(5), Bonetti F(6), Scacchi M(5)(7), Cappellini MD(3)(5), Persani L(2)(5), 
Pecori Giraldi F(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Neuroendocrine Research Laboratory, Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, 
Milan, Italy.
(2)Division of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Ospedale San Luca, Istituto 
Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Medicine and Medical Specialties, Rare Diseases Center, 
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(4)Fondazione Policlinico Mangiagalli Regina Elena, Second Pediatric Clinic, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(6)Pediatric Haematology Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 
Pavia, Italy.
(7)Division of General Medicine, Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Ospedale 
San Giuseppe, Piancavallo-Verbania, Via San Vittore, Italy.
(8)Neuroendocrine Research Laboratory, Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, 
Milan, Italy. fpg@auxologico.it.
(9)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy. fpg@auxologico.it.

PURPOSE: Beta-thalassemia major is a severe, congenital hematological disorder 
and, if untreated, leads to early mortality. Progress in therapeutical 
strategies improved clinical outcomes and life expectancy; however, increased 
survival led to the development of new disorders, including endocrinopathies. 
Little is known on the possible impairment of adrenocortical function, a 
potentially life-threatening condition, in long-term thalassaemic survivors. We 
therefore decided to assess adrenal reserve and the value of salivary cortisol 
during ACTH stimulation in the diagnosis of adrenocortical insufficiency in 
adult patients with β-thalassemia major.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study including 72 adults with β-thalassemia major. 
Patients were tested with 1 µg ACTH for serum and salivary cortisol.
RESULTS: Subnormal serum cortisol responses to ACTH stimulation (i.e., 
<500 nmol/l) were registered in 15 out of 72 patients. Salivary cortisol 
increased in parallel with serum cortisol and a clear-cut positive correlation 
was detected at each timepoint. Moreover, peak salivary cortisol values after 
ACTH stimulation were significantly lower in patients with impaired adrenal 
reserve (513.6 ± 52.33 vs. 914.1 ± 44.04 nmol/l p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results attest to the need for testing for adrenal 
insufficiency among adult thalassaemic patients, as up to 20% presented impaired 
adrenal reserve. Salivary and serum cortisol levels during stimulation with ACTH 
were closely correlated and the use of salivary cortisol sampling during ACTH 
testing may represent a surrogate to serum cortisol in these patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-018-1562-z
PMCID: PMC5893656
PMID: 29572711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest. ETHICAL APPROVAL: All procedures performed in 
studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical 
standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 
1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical 
standards. INFORMED CONSENT: Informed consent was obtained from all participants 
included in the study.