---
reference_id: "PMID:15064594"
title: "Effects of exercise on joint sense and balance in elderly men: Tai Chi versus golf."
authors:
- Tsang WW
- Hui-Chan CW
journal: Med Sci Sports Exerc
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1249/01.mss.0000122077.87090.2e
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of exercise on joint sense and balance in elderly men: Tai Chi versus golf.
**Authors:** Tsang WW, Hui-Chan CW
**Journal:** Med Sci Sports Exerc (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1249/01.mss.0000122077.87090.2e](https://doi.org/10.1249/01.mss.0000122077.87090.2e)

## Content

1. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2004 Apr;36(4):658-67. doi: 
10.1249/01.mss.0000122077.87090.2e.

Effects of exercise on joint sense and balance in elderly men: Tai Chi versus 
golf.

Tsang WW(1), Hui-Chan CW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 
Hong Kong (SAR), China.

PURPOSE: Our previous studies showed that experienced Tai Chi practitioners had 
better joint proprioception and balance control during weight shifting. The 
objective of the present study was to examine whether experienced golfers had 
attained similar improvement when compared with the Tai Chi practitioners, as 
well as healthy elderly subjects and young university students.
METHODS: We compared 12 experienced elderly Tai Chi practitioners, with 11 
experienced elderly golfers, 12 healthy elderly subjects, and 12 young 
university students, who were all males, using: 1) passive knee joint 
repositioning test to assess their joint proprioceptive acuity and 2) limits of 
stability test to assess their ability to voluntarily weight shift within their 
base of support.
RESULTS: Both Tai Chi practitioners and golfers had better knee joint 
proprioceptive acuity than did the elderly control subjects (P < 0.05). Of 
special interest is that their performance was similar to that of the young 
subjects. In the limits of stability test, Tai Chi practitioners and golfers had 
faster reaction time, leaned further without losing stability, and showed better 
control of leaning trajectory than did elderly control subjects (all P < 0.05). 
The latter two outcome measures were also comparable to those of the young 
subjects.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that both experienced Tai Chi 
practitioners and golfers had improved knee joint proprioception and limits of 
stability, when compared with those of elderly control subjects similar in age, 
gender (male), and physical activity level. Such improved outcome measures were 
comparable to those of young male subjects. These findings suggest that 
experienced Tai Chi practitioners and golfers had improved joint proprioceptive 
acuity and dynamic standing balance control, despite the known aging effects in 
these specific sensorimotor functions.

DOI: 10.1249/01.mss.0000122077.87090.2e
PMID: 15064594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]