---
reference_id: PMID:37881633
title: Analysis of clinical features of oxcarbazepine-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
authors:
- Yan Q
- Liu X
- Lei H
- Liu R
- Hu Y
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1232969
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of clinical features of oxcarbazepine-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
**Authors:** Yan Q, Liu X, Lei H, Liu R, Hu Y
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2023.1232969](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2023.1232969)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Oct 10;10:1232969. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1232969. 
eCollection 2023.

Analysis of clinical features of oxcarbazepine-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome 
and toxic epidermal necrolysis.

Yan Q(1), Liu X(1), Lei H(1), Liu R(1), Hu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Xiangtan Central Hospital, Xiangtan, China.

BACKGROUND: Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) is considered a hypersensitivity 
syndrome affecting the skin and mucous membranes. It has been reported that an 
anticonvulsant drug, oxcarbazepine, may cause Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic 
epidermal necrolysis (TEN). However, the clinical features of 
oxcarbazepine-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal 
necrolysis (TEN) remain ambiguous. This article aims to explore the clinical 
features of SJS/TEN.
METHODS: Systematic searches of several Chinese and English databases were 
conducted for case reports published on PubMed, EMBASE, Web of Science, MEDLINE, 
CNKI from January 1, 2007 to March 1, 2023.
RESULTS: A total of seventeen patients (10 males and 7 females) were included in 
this study, including nine adult patients and eight pediatric patients. The 
results showed that males seem to have a higher prevalence of SJS/TEN than 
females, and SJS/TEN usually occurs within 2 weeks after administration of 
oxcarbazepine (OXC). The main clinical manifestations among the included 
patients were rashes or maculopapules (17 cases, 100%), fever (11 cases, 64.7%), 
mucosal lesions (15 cases, 88.2%), conjunctivitis with/without ocular discharge 
(12 cases, 70.6%), and blisters (12 cases, 70.6%). After stopping OXC or 
switching to other drugs that treat primary disease as well as treatment with 
IVIG, glucocorticoid, anti-allergy, and fluid replacement, eight of the included 
patients recovered completely, and another eight of the included patients 
reported symptomatic improvement, while the prognosis of one of the included 
patients was not reported.
CONCLUSION: Diverse clinical signs and symptoms of SJS/TEN might result in 
misinterpretation and delayed diagnosis. It should be identified and treated 
immediately to avoid significant consequences and potentially jeopardize 
patients' lives.

Copyright © 2023 Yan, Liu, Lei, Liu and Hu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1232969
PMCID: PMC10597665
PMID: 37881633

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.