---
reference_id: "PMID:40610367"
title: "Screening for Life: Perspectives From Adult Metabolic Specialists on Newborn Screening for Inherited Metabolic Diseases."
authors:
- Langeveld M
- Sirrs S
- Schoenmakers DH
- Fazio T
- van der Klauw MM
- Maillot F
- Sharma R
- Tran C
- Ziagaki A
- Mochel F
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.70057
keywords:
- Humans
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis"
- Adult
- Metabolic Diseases/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening for Life: Perspectives From Adult Metabolic Specialists on Newborn Screening for Inherited Metabolic Diseases.
**Authors:** Langeveld M, Sirrs S, Schoenmakers DH, Fazio T, van der Klauw MM, Maillot F, Sharma R, Tran C, Ziagaki A, Mochel F
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.70057](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.70057)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2025 Jul;48(4):e70057. doi: 10.1002/jimd.70057.

Screening for Life: Perspectives From Adult Metabolic Specialists on Newborn
Screening for Inherited Metabolic Diseases.

Langeveld M(1), Sirrs S(2), Schoenmakers DH(3), Fazio T(4)(5), van der Klauw
MM(6), Maillot F(7), Sharma R(8), Tran C(9), Ziagaki A(10), Mochel F(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism and Amsterdam Gastroenterology
Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Institute, Amsterdam University Medical
Centers, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Child Neurology, Emma's Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC
Location Vrije Universiteit and Amsterdam Leukodystrophy Center, Amsterdam
Neuroscience, Cellular & Molecular Mechanisms, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Metabolic Diseases Unit, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.
(5)Department of Medicine, Melbourne Medical School, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(6)Department of Endocrinology, University of Groningen, University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(7)Internal Medicine Department, Tours Hospital and Tours University, INSERM
1253 'iBraiN', Tours, France.
(8)Department of Adult Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Salford Royal Hospital
NCA, UK.
(9)Division of Genetic Medicine, University of Lausanne and University Hospital
of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.
(11)AP-HP, Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Department of Medical
Genetics, Reference Centers for Adult Neurometabolic Diseases and Adult
Leukodystrophies, Paris, France.
(12)INSERM U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR S
1127, Institut du Cerveau, ICM, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    J Inherit Metab Dis. 2025 Sep;48(5):e70073. doi: 10.1002/jimd.70073.

The number of inherited metabolic diseases (IMDs) in newborn screening (NBS)
programs has increased significantly in the past decades. For some of the IMDs
included in NBS (e.g., tyrosinemia type I), there are clear and substantial
health benefits of NBS, while for others (e.g., very long chain acyl CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency and 3-methylcrotonyl CoA carboxylase 1 deficiency),
this is less clear as NBS identifies individuals who are asymptomatic or have
milder forms of the disease. Therefore, knowledge of the full disease spectrum
(including later onset forms) is needed when setting diagnostic metabolite
cut-offs for NBS. Insights into the clinical, genetic and biochemical
characteristics of different patient subsets can be used to redefine NBS
protocols to identify patients with more severe forms of the disease who are
most likely to benefit from identification in the newborn period. These insights
require life-long monitoring of individuals identified based on symptoms versus
those identified by NBS to determine long-term health outcomes and quantify the
benefits of NBS. Adult metabolic specialists should be included in the
development of NBS programs to provide data from this long-term monitoring and
to contribute specific knowledge about later onset phenotypes of the IMDs
included in NBS programs. The goal should be to develop NBS programs that
identify newborns that benefit from early disease detection and treatment,
without increasing psychological, social and management burden for individuals
who may develop disease in adulthood with milder phenotype or potentially even
not at all.

© 2025 The Author(s). Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.70057
PMCID: PMC12226250
PMID: 40610367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
