---
reference_id: "PMID:28059794"
title: "Oxidative Stress, Synaptic Dysfunction, and Alzheimer's Disease."
authors:
- Tönnies E
- Trushina E
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3233/JAD-161088
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oxidative Stress, Synaptic Dysfunction, and Alzheimer's Disease.
**Authors:** Tönnies E, Trushina E
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-161088](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-161088)

## Content

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;57(4):1105-1121. doi: 10.3233/JAD-161088.

Oxidative Stress, Synaptic Dysfunction, and Alzheimer's Disease.

Tönnies E(1), Trushina E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder without a 
cure. Most AD cases are sporadic where age represents the greatest risk factor. 
Lack of understanding of the disease mechanism hinders the development of 
efficacious therapeutic approaches. The loss of synapses in the affected brain 
regions correlates best with cognitive impairment in AD patients and has been 
considered as the early mechanism that precedes neuronal loss. Oxidative stress 
has been recognized as a contributing factor in aging and in the progression of 
multiple neurodegenerative diseases including AD. Increased production of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) associated with age- and disease-dependent loss of 
mitochondrial function, altered metal homeostasis, and reduced antioxidant 
defense directly affect synaptic activity and neurotransmission in neurons 
leading to cognitive dysfunction. In addition, molecular targets affected by ROS 
include nuclear and mitochondrial DNA, lipids, proteins, calcium homeostasis, 
mitochondrial dynamics and function, cellular architecture, receptor trafficking 
and endocytosis, and energy homeostasis. Abnormal cellular metabolism in turn 
could affect the production and accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) and 
hyperphosphorylated Tau protein, which independently could exacerbate 
mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS production, thereby contributing to a vicious 
cycle. While mounting evidence implicates ROS in the AD etiology, clinical 
trials with antioxidant therapies have not produced consistent results. In this 
review, we will discuss the role of oxidative stress in synaptic dysfunction in 
AD, innovative therapeutic strategies evolved based on a better understanding of 
the complexity of molecular mechanisms of AD, and the dual role ROS play in 
health and disease.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-161088
PMCID: PMC5409043
PMID: 28059794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]