---
reference_id: "PMID:36214320"
title: In vitro measurement of ciliary beat frequency in 92 children with recurrent respiratory tract problems.
authors:
- Drake-Lee A
- Green A
- McDermott AL
journal: J Laryngol Otol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1017/S0022215121003984
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In vitro measurement of ciliary beat frequency in 92 children with recurrent respiratory tract problems.
**Authors:** Drake-Lee A, Green A, McDermott AL
**Journal:** J Laryngol Otol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0022215121003984](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022215121003984)

## Content

1. J Laryngol Otol. 2022 Dec;136(12):1183-1188. doi: 10.1017/S0022215121003984. 
Epub 2022 Oct 10.

In vitro measurement of ciliary beat frequency in 92 children with recurrent 
respiratory tract problems.

Drake-Lee A(1)(2), Green A(2), McDermott AL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Birmingham Children's Hospital, UK.
(2)Department of Radiation Protection Services, United Birmingham Hospitals, UK.

BACKGROUND: Chronic or recurrent mucoid respiratory tract symptoms may be 
difficult to diagnose.
METHOD: Ninety-two children with chronic respiratory symptoms were divided into 
4 groups: 18 children with refractory asthma, 10 with bronchiectasis without 
dextrocardia, 18 with dextrocardia and 46 with recurrent respiratory tract 
infections. Except for five neonates, cytology samples were taken under general 
anaesthesia. Ciliary beat frequency was measured photometrically and analysed by 
in-house computer software.
RESULTS: Nasal polyps were found in one child with normal ciliary beat 
frequency. Twenty-six children had no beating cilia (male to female ratio, 
15:11). The effect of increasing temperature on the ciliary beat frequency of 
the remaining 66 patients was evaluated (42 patients, more than 30°C, median, 
8.3 Hz; 24 patients, 30-37°C, median, 11.8 Hz; p = 0.0003).
CONCLUSION: The measurement of ciliary beat frequency is part of the diagnostic 
work up of patients with persistent or recurrent respiratory tract infections.

DOI: 10.1017/S0022215121003984
PMID: 36214320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]