---
reference_id: "PMID:37064498"
title: Circulating Tumor DNA Testing Overcomes Limitations of Comprehensive Genomic Profiling from Tumor Tissue.
authors:
- Kumar A
- Green M
- Thacker J
- Jeck WR
- Strickler JH
journal: Case Rep Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000529813
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Circulating Tumor DNA Testing Overcomes Limitations of Comprehensive Genomic Profiling from Tumor Tissue.
**Authors:** Kumar A, Green M, Thacker J, Jeck WR, Strickler JH
**Journal:** Case Rep Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000529813](https://doi.org/10.1159/000529813)

## Content

1. Case Rep Oncol. 2023 Apr 12;16(1):210-217. doi: 10.1159/000529813. eCollection
 2023 Jan-Dec.

Circulating Tumor DNA Testing Overcomes Limitations of Comprehensive Genomic
Profiling from Tumor Tissue.

Kumar A(1), Green M(2), Thacker J(3), Jeck WR(2), Strickler JH(4).

Author information:
(1)Duke University School of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, Duke University,
Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Duke University,
Durham, NC, USA.

"Liquid biopsy" is an established technique for examining circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA) from a routine blood draw and detecting actionable biomarkers.
Nonetheless, ctDNA testing is rarely utilized for patients with newly diagnosed
metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC). We report a case in which ctDNA testing
uncovered an actionable biomarker that was not detected by comprehensive genomic
profiling of tumor tissue. An 81-year-old woman with a remote history of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma presented with primary masses in the ascending colon and
sigmoid colon. The ascending colon and sigmoid colon tumors were classified as
microsatellite stable (MSS) and mismatch repair proficient (pMMR), and both
ctDNA and tissue next-generation sequencing (NGS) from the ascending colon mass
were ordered. Because tissue NGS results indicated that the ascending colon
tumor was MSS, palliative 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX)
chemotherapy was started. However, the ctDNA NGS results that arrived after the
start of FOLFOX found high microsatellite instability (MSI-H) and mismatch
repair deficiency (dMMR) disease with a serine/threonine-protein kinase B-Raf
(BRAF V600E ) mutation. To treat both her MSS/pMMR ascending colon and sigmoid
colon tumors and MSI-H/dMMR metastatic disease, the immunotherapy nivolumab was
added to FOLFOX. After 8 months of combined nivolumab and chemotherapy, the
patient's metastatic disease had a complete clinical response. This case
highlights the complementary role of ctDNA testing for biomarker identification.
By performing simultaneous ctDNA testing at the time of diagnosis, an actionable
biomarker was discovered that significantly altered this patient's prognosis and
treatment options. Orthogonal testing of key molecular alterations offers
significant advantages for identifying actionable biomarkers and improving
management of metastatic CRC.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000529813
PMCID: PMC10091230
PMID: 37064498

Conflict of interest statement: J.H.S.: consultant for AbbVie, Takeda,
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Eli Lilly, GSK, Natera, Pfizer, Seagen, Silverback
Therapeutics, and Viatris. Research (institutional) for Amgen, Bayer, Erasca,
Eli Lilly, Seagen, Daiichi Sankyo, Gossamer Bio, Astar D3, Sanofi,
Roche/Genentech, Curegenix, Nektar, AbbVie, and Silverback Therapeutics.
