---
reference_id: "PMID:37951180"
title: Site-specific imprinting of dengue virus non-structural 1 antigen on a polydopamine-based sensing film for early detection and prognosis of dengue.
authors:
- Lim HJ
- Saha T
- Ooi CW
journal: Talanta
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2023.125376
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Site-specific imprinting of dengue virus non-structural 1 antigen on a polydopamine-based sensing film for early detection and prognosis of dengue.
**Authors:** Lim HJ, Saha T, Ooi CW
**Journal:** Talanta (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.talanta.2023.125376](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.talanta.2023.125376)

## Content

1. Talanta. 2024 Feb 1;268(Pt 2):125376. doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2023.125376. Epub
 2023 Oct 31.

Site-specific imprinting of dengue virus non-structural 1 antigen on a 
polydopamine-based sensing film for early detection and prognosis of dengue.

Lim HJ(1), Saha T(2), Ooi CW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, School of Engineering, Monash University 
Malaysia, Jalan Lagoon Selatan, 47500, Bandar Sunway, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Electrical and Robotics Engineering, School of Engineering, 
Monash University Malaysia, Jalan Lagoon Selatan, 47500, Bandar Sunway, 
Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, School of Engineering, Monash University 
Malaysia, Jalan Lagoon Selatan, 47500, Bandar Sunway, Selangor, Malaysia; 
Advanced Engineering Platform, Monash University Malaysia, Jalan Lagoon Selatan, 
47500, Bandar Sunway, Selangor, Malaysia; Tropical Medicine and Biology 
Platform, Monash University Malaysia, Jalan Lagoon Selatan, 47500, Bandar 
Sunway, Selangor, Malaysia. Electronic address: ooi.chien.wei@monash.edu.

Serum levels of dengue virus (DENV) non-structural 1 (NS1) antigen can serve as 
a valuable prognostic indicator of severe dengue infections. A quartz crystal 
microbalance (QCM)-based biosensor with a biomimetic recognition element was 
designed to quantitatively detect DENV NS1 as an early disease biomarker. To 
mitigate the reliance on costly viral antigens during the molecular imprinting 
process, a synthetic peptide mimicking a DENV NS1 epitope was used as a 
surrogate template for the synthesis of an epitope-imprinted polydopamine 
(EMIPDA) sensing film on the biosensor surface. The maximal frequency shift for 
DENV NS1 was obtained with an EMIPDA film synthesised using 5 mg mL-1 of 
dopamine monomer and 0.5 mg mL-1 of peptide template. The EMIPDA-QCM biosensor 
achieved low detection and quantitation limits of 0.091 μg mL-1 and 
0.436 μg mL-1, respectively, allowing acute-phase detection of dengue and 
prognosis of the disease progression. The EMIPDA-QCM biosensor exhibited 
remarkable selectivity with up to 68-fold larger frequency responses towards 
DENV NS1 compared to a major serum protein. The site-specific imprinting 
approach not only enhanced the biosensing performance but also enabled a 26-fold 
cost reduction for biosensor functionalisation, providing a cost-effective 
strategy for label-free biosensing of the dengue biomarker via the biopolymer 
film.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.talanta.2023.125376
PMID: 37951180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.