---
reference_id: "PMID:34633491"
title: Dynamic Subspecies Population Structure of Vibrio cholerae in Dhaka, Bangladesh.
authors:
- Nasreen T
- Islam MT
- Liang KYH
- Johura FT
- Kirchberger PC
- Hill E
- Sultana M
- Case RJ
- Alam M
- Boucher YF
journal: Microb Ecol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00248-021-01838-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dynamic Subspecies Population Structure of Vibrio cholerae in Dhaka, Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Nasreen T, Islam MT, Liang KYH, Johura FT, Kirchberger PC, Hill E, Sultana M, Case RJ, Alam M, Boucher YF
**Journal:** Microb Ecol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00248-021-01838-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00248-021-01838-0)

## Content

1. Microb Ecol. 2022 Oct;84(3):730-745. doi: 10.1007/s00248-021-01838-0. Epub
2021  Oct 11.

Dynamic Subspecies Population Structure of Vibrio cholerae in Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Nasreen T(1), Islam MT(1), Liang KYH(1), Johura FT(2), Kirchberger PC(3), Hill 
E(4)(5), Sultana M(2), Case RJ(1), Alam M(2), Boucher YF(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 
2E9, Canada.
(2)Infectious Diseases Division, International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease 
Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b), Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas At Austin, Austin, TX, 
78712, USA.
(4)Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore and 
National University Hospital System, Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Singapore Centre for Environmental Life Sciences Engineering (SCELSE), 
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 
2E9, Canada. ephyb@nus.edu.sg.
(7)Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore and 
National University Hospital System, Singapore, Singapore. ephyb@nus.edu.sg.
(8)Singapore Centre for Environmental Life Sciences Engineering (SCELSE), 
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. ephyb@nus.edu.sg.

Cholera has been endemic to the Ganges Delta for centuries. Although the 
causative agent, Vibrio cholerae, is autochthonous to coastal and brackish 
water, cholera occurs continually in Dhaka, the inland capital city of 
Bangladesh which is surrounded by fresh water. Despite the persistence of this 
problem, little is known about the environmental abundance and distribution of 
lineages of V. cholerae, the most important being the pandemic generating (PG) 
lineage consisting mostly of serogroup O1 strains. To understand spatial and 
temporal dynamics of PG lineage and other lineages belonging to the V. cholerae 
species in surface water in and around Dhaka City, we used qPCR and 
high-throughput amplicon sequencing. Seven different freshwater sites across 
Dhaka were investigated for six consecutive months, and physiochemical 
parameters were measured in situ. Total abundance of V. cholerae was found to be 
relatively stable throughout the 6-month sampling period, with 2 × 105 to 
4 × 105 genome copies/L at six sites and around 5 × 105 genome copies/L at the 
site located in the most densely populated part of Dhaka City. PG O1 V. cholerae 
was present in high abundance during the entire sampling period and composed 
between 24 and 92% of the total V. cholerae population, only showing occasional 
but sudden reductions in abundance. In instances where PG O1 lost its dominance, 
other lineages underwent a rapid expansion while the size of the total V. 
cholerae population remained almost unchanged. Intraspecies richness of V. 
cholerae was positively correlated with salinity, conductivity, and total 
dissolved solids (TDS), while it was negatively correlated with dissolved oxygen 
(DO) concentration in water. Interestingly, negative correlation was observed 
specifically between PG O1 and salinity, even though the changes in this 
variable were minor (0-0.8 ppt). Observations in this study suggest that at the 
subspecies level, population composition of naturally occurring V. cholerae can 
be influenced by fluctuations in environmental factors, which can lead to 
altered competition dynamics among the lineages.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-021-01838-0
PMID: 34633491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]