---
reference_id: "PMID:40931078"
title: Functional synapses between neurons and small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Sakthivelu V
- Schmitt A
- Odenthal F
- Ndoci K
- Touet M
- Shaib AH
- Chihab A
- Wani GA
- Nieper P
- Hartmann GG
- Pintelon I
- Kisis I
- Boecker M
- Eckert NM
- Iannicelli Caiaffa M
- Ibruli O
- Weber J
- Maresch R
- Bebber CM
- Chitsaz A
- Lütz A
- Kim Alves Carpinteiro M
- Morris KM
- Franchino CA
- Benz J
- Pérez-Revuelta L
- Soriano-Campos JA
- Huetzen MA
- Goergens J
- Jevtic M
- Jahn-Kelleter HM
- Zempel H
- Placzek A
- Hennrich AA
- Conzelmann KK
- Tumbrink HL
- Hunold P
- Isensee J
- Werr L
- Gaedke F
- Schauss A
- Minère M
- Müller M
- Fenselau H
- Liu Y
- Heimsoeth A
- Gülcüler Balta GS
- Walczak H
- Frezza C
- Jachimowicz RD
- George J
- Schmiel M
- Brägelmann J
- Hucho T
- von Karstedt S
- Peifer M
- Annibaldi A
- Hänsel-Hertsch R
- Persigehl T
- Grüll H
- Sos ML
- Reifenberger G
- Fischer M
- Adriaensen D
- Büttner R
- Sage J
- Brouns I
- Rad R
- Thomas RK
- Anstötz M
- Rizzoli SO
- Bergami M
- Motori E
- Reinhardt HC
- Beleggia F
journal: Nature
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09434-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional synapses between neurons and small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Sakthivelu V, Schmitt A, Odenthal F, Ndoci K, Touet M, Shaib AH, Chihab A, Wani GA, Nieper P, Hartmann GG, Pintelon I, Kisis I, Boecker M, Eckert NM, Iannicelli Caiaffa M, Ibruli O, Weber J, Maresch R, Bebber CM, Chitsaz A, Lütz A, Kim Alves Carpinteiro M, Morris KM, Franchino CA, Benz J, Pérez-Revuelta L, Soriano-Campos JA, Huetzen MA, Goergens J, Jevtic M, Jahn-Kelleter HM, Zempel H, Placzek A, Hennrich AA, Conzelmann KK, Tumbrink HL, Hunold P, Isensee J, Werr L, Gaedke F, Schauss A, Minère M, Müller M, Fenselau H, Liu Y, Heimsoeth A, Gülcüler Balta GS, Walczak H, Frezza C, Jachimowicz RD, George J, Schmiel M, Brägelmann J, Hucho T, von Karstedt S, Peifer M, Annibaldi A, Hänsel-Hertsch R, Persigehl T, Grüll H, Sos ML, Reifenberger G, Fischer M, Adriaensen D, Büttner R, Sage J, Brouns I, Rad R, Thomas RK, Anstötz M, Rizzoli SO, Bergami M, Motori E, Reinhardt HC, Beleggia F
**Journal:** Nature (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-025-09434-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09434-9)

## Content

1. Nature. 2025 Oct;646(8087):1243-1253. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09434-9. Epub
2025  Sep 10.

Functional synapses between neurons and small cell lung cancer.

Sakthivelu V(#)(1)(2)(3), Schmitt A(#)(2)(4), Odenthal F(#)(5), Ndoci K(#)(6), 
Touet M(#)(2)(7), Shaib AH(#)(8), Chihab A(#)(6), Wani GA(6), Nieper P(1)(2), 
Hartmann GG(9)(10), Pintelon I(11)(12), Kisis I(1)(2)(3), Boecker M(1)(2)(3), 
Eckert NM(1), Iannicelli Caiaffa M(1)(2)(3), Ibruli O(1)(2), Weber J(13), 
Maresch R(13), Bebber CM(1)(6), Chitsaz A(1)(2)(3), Lütz A(1)(2)(3), Kim Alves 
Carpinteiro M(1)(2)(3), Morris KM(5), Franchino CA(5), Benz J(6), Pérez-Revuelta 
L(6), Soriano-Campos JA(6), Huetzen MA(2)(6)(14)(15), Goergens J(2)(6)(14)(15), 
Jevtic M(6), Jahn-Kelleter HM(6), Zempel H(15)(16), Placzek A(6), Hennrich 
AA(17), Conzelmann KK(17), Tumbrink HL(1)(18), Hunold P(1)(15), Isensee 
J(19)(20), Werr L(21), Gaedke F(6), Schauss A(6), Minère M(6)(22), Müller 
M(6)(22), Fenselau H(6)(22)(23), Liu Y(24), Heimsoeth A(1)(15)(18), Gülcüler 
Balta GS(1)(2)(3), Walczak H(6)(25)(26), Frezza C(27)(28), Jachimowicz 
RD(2)(6)(14)(15), George J(1)(29), Schmiel M(30), Brägelmann J(1)(3)(15), Hucho 
T(19)(20), von Karstedt S(1)(6)(15), Peifer M(1)(15), Annibaldi A(15), 
Hänsel-Hertsch R(1)(6)(15)(16), Persigehl T(31), Grüll H(31), Sos ML(1)(32)(33), 
Reifenberger G(34), Fischer M(15)(21), Adriaensen D(11), Büttner R(30), Sage 
J(9)(10), Brouns I(11), Rad R(13), Thomas RK(1)(30), Anstötz M(35), Rizzoli 
SO(36)(37)(38), Bergami M(39)(40)(41)(42), Motori E(43)(44)(45), Reinhardt 
HC(46)(47)(48)(49), Beleggia F(50)(51)(52).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Genomics, Faculty of Medicine and University 
Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department I of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and University 
Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Mildred Scheel School of Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Düsseldorf (MSSO ABCD), 
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany.
(4)Institute of Virology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, 
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(5)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(6)Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Response in Aging-Associated 
Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(7)Department of Hematology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University Hospital 
Essen, Essen, Germany.
(8)Department of Neuro- and Sensory Physiology, University Medical Center 
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(11)Laboratory of Cell Biology and Histology, Department of Veterinary Sciences, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(12)Antwerp Centre for Advanced Microscopy (ACAM), University of Antwerp, 
Antwerp, Belgium.
(13)Institute of Molecular Oncology and Functional Genomics, School of Medicine, 
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(14)Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany.
(15)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Faculty of Medicine and 
University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(16)Institute of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(17)Virology, Max von Pettenkofer Institute, Faculty of Medicine and Gene 
Center, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany.
(18)Molecular Pathology, Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and 
University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(19)Translational Pain Research, Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care 
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of 
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(20)Pain Center, Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany.
(21)Department of Experimental Pediatric Oncology, University Children's 
Hospital of Cologne, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(22)Research Group Synaptic Transmission in Energy Homeostasis, Max Planck 
Institute for Metabolism Research, Cologne, Germany.
(23)Policlinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Preventive Medicine, University 
Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(24)Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, VA, USA.
(25)Cell Death, Inflammation and Immunity Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry 
I, Center for Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany.
(26)Centre for Cell Death, Cancer and Inflammation, UCL Cancer Institute, 
University College London, London, UK.
(27)Institute for Metabolomics in Ageing, University of Cologne, Faculty of 
Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular 
Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Cologne, Germany.
(28)Institute of Genetics, University of Cologne, Faculty of Mathematics and 
Natural Sciences, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in 
Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Cologne, Germany.
(29)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University 
Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(30)Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, 
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(31)Institute for Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Faculty of Medicine 
and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(32)Department of Translational Oncology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), 
partner site Munich, a partnership between DKFZ and 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München (LMU), Munich, Germany.
(33)Department of Medicine III, LMU University Hospital Munich, Munich, Germany.
(34)Institute of Neuropathology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University and 
University Hospital Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(35)Institute of Anatomy II, Medical Faculty, University Hospital Düsseldorf, 
Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany. max.anstoetz@hhu.de.
(36)Department of Neuro- and Sensory Physiology, University Medical Center 
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. srizzol@gwdg.de.
(37)Center for Biostructural Imaging of Neurodegeneration, University Medical 
Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. srizzol@gwdg.de.
(38)Cluster of Excellence 'Multiscale Bioimaging: from Molecular Machines to 
Networks of Excitable Cells' (MBExC), University of Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany. srizzol@gwdg.de.
(39)Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Response in Aging-Associated 
Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 
matteo.bergami@uk-koeln.de.
(40)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Faculty of Medicine and 
University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 
matteo.bergami@uk-koeln.de.
(41)Institute of Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 
matteo.bergami@uk-koeln.de.
(42)Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany. matteo.bergami@uk-koeln.de.
(43)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 
elisa.motori@uni-koeln.de.
(44)Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Response in Aging-Associated 
Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 
elisa.motori@uni-koeln.de.
(45)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Faculty of Medicine and 
University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 
elisa.motori@uni-koeln.de.
(46)Department of Hematology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University Hospital 
Essen, Essen, Germany. christian.reinhardt@uk-essen.de.
(47)West German Cancer Center, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany. 
christian.reinhardt@uk-essen.de.
(48)DKTK, partner site Essen, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany. 
christian.reinhardt@uk-essen.de.
(49)Center for Molecular Biotechnology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, 
Germany. christian.reinhardt@uk-essen.de.
(50)Department of Translational Genomics, Faculty of Medicine and University 
Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 
filippo.beleggia@uk-koeln.de.
(51)Department I of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and University 
Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 
filippo.beleggia@uk-koeln.de.
(52)Mildred Scheel School of Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Düsseldorf (MSSO 
ABCD), Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of 
Cologne, Cologne, Germany. filippo.beleggia@uk-koeln.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nature. 2025 Oct;646(8086):E17. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09638-z.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a highly aggressive type of lung cancer, 
characterized by rapid proliferation, early metastatic spread, frequent early 
relapse and a high mortality rate1-3. Recent evidence has suggested that 
innervation has an important role in the development and progression of several 
types of cancer4,5. Cancer-to-neuron synapses have been reported in gliomas6,7, 
but whether peripheral tumours can form such structures is unknown. Here we show 
that SCLC cells can form functional synapses and receive synaptic transmission. 
Using in vivo insertional mutagenesis screening in conjunction with 
cross-species genomic and transcriptomic validation, we identified neuronal, 
synaptic and glutamatergic signalling gene sets in mouse and human SCLC. Further 
experiments revealed the ability of SCLC cells to form synaptic structures with 
neurons in vitro and in vivo. Electrophysiology and optogenetic experiments 
confirmed that cancer cells can receive NMDA receptor- and GABAA 
receptor-mediated synaptic inputs. Fitting with a potential oncogenic role of 
neuron-SCLC interactions, we showed that SCLC cells derive a proliferation 
advantage when co-cultured with vagal sensory or cortical neurons. Moreover, 
inhibition of glutamate signalling had therapeutic efficacy in an autochthonous 
mouse model of SCLC. Therefore, following malignant transformation, SCLC cells 
seem to hijack synaptic signalling to promote tumour growth, thereby exposing a 
new route for therapeutic intervention.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-025-09434-9
PMCID: PMC12571904
PMID: 40931078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: H.C.R. received consulting 
and lecture fees from Abbvie, AstraZeneca, Vertex and Merck. H.C.R. received 
research funding from AstraZeneca and Gilead Pharmaceuticals. H.C.R. is a 
co-founder of CDL Therapeutics. R.K.T. is a founder of PearlRiver Bio (now part 
of Centessa), a shareholder of Centessa, a founder and shareholder of Epiphanes 
and a consultant to PearlRiver Bio and Epiphanes. R.K.T. has received research 
support from Roche. R.K.T. and J.S. are co-founders and shareholders of DISCO 
Pharmaceuticals. M.L.S. is a co-founder and was an advisor of PearlRiver Bio 
(now part of Centessa). M.L.S. received research funding from PearlRiver Bio 
(now part of Centessa). S.O.R. is a shareholder of NanoTag Biotechnologies. H.W. 
was a co-founder of Apogenix. J. George is a consultant to DISCO Pharmaceuticals 
and received honoraria from MSD and Boehringer Ingelheim. J. Brägelmann has 
received research funding from Bayer and travel grants from Merck and Bicycle 
Therapeutics. The other authors declare no competing interests.