---
reference_id: "PMID:39501809"
title: "Dominantly inherited muscle disorders: understanding their complexity and exploring therapeutic approaches."
authors:
- Findlay AR
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.050720
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dominantly inherited muscle disorders: understanding their complexity and exploring therapeutic approaches.
**Authors:** Findlay AR
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.050720](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.050720)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2024 Oct 1;17(10):dmm050720. doi: 10.1242/dmm.050720. Epub
2024  Nov 6.

Dominantly inherited muscle disorders: understanding their complexity and 
exploring therapeutic approaches.

Findlay AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Washington University Saint Louis, Neuromuscular Disease Center, 660 S. 
Euclid Ave., St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Treatments for disabling and life-threatening hereditary muscle disorders are 
finally close to becoming a reality. Research has thus far focused primarily on 
recessive forms of muscle disease. The gene replacement strategies that are 
commonly employed for recessive, loss-of-function disorders are not readily 
translatable to most dominant myopathies owing to the presence of a normal 
chromosome in each nucleus, hindering the development of novel treatments for 
these dominant disorders. This is largely due to their complex, heterogeneous 
disease mechanisms that require unique therapeutic approaches. However, as viral 
and RNA interference-based therapies enter clinical use, key tools are now in 
place to develop treatments for dominantly inherited disorders of muscle. This 
article will review what is known about dominantly inherited disorders of 
muscle, specifically their genetic basis, how mutations lead to disease, and the 
pathomechanistic implications for therapeutic approaches.

© 2024. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.050720
PMCID: PMC11574355
PMID: 39501809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The author is a co-inventor 
on patent US12043832B2.