---
reference_id: "PMID:32100585"
title: An overview of binimetinib for the treatment of melanoma.
authors:
- Specenier P
journal: Expert Opin Pharmacother
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/14656566.2020.1729122
keywords:
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Benzimidazoles/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Carbamates/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Kinase 1/metabolism
- MAP Kinase Kinase 2/metabolism
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Mutation
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Sulfonamides/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An overview of binimetinib for the treatment of melanoma.
**Authors:** Specenier P
**Journal:** Expert Opin Pharmacother (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14656566.2020.1729122](https://doi.org/10.1080/14656566.2020.1729122)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2020 May;21(7):747-754. doi:
10.1080/14656566.2020.1729122. Epub 2020 Feb 26.

An overview of binimetinib for the treatment of melanoma.

Specenier P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Antwerp University Hospital , Edegem, Belgium.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences en Medicine, University of Antwerp , Antwerp,
Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: Approximately 50% of patients with metastatic melanoma have
mutations in BRAF. Based on the results of prior phase III trials, the
combination of a BRAF inhibitor (BRAFi) and a MEK inhibitor (MEKi) is
the standard of care in patients with BRAF-mutant metastatic melanoma.
AREAS COVERED: The author summarizes the available data on binimetinib, a
reversible inhibitor of the kinase activity of MEK1 and MEK2, in BRAF- and
NRAS-mutated melanoma.
EXPERT OPINION: With the advent of binimetinib and encorafenib, clinicians can
choose between three BRAFi/MEKi combinations. Indirect comparison and a network
meta-analysis suggest that binimetinib plus encorafenib is at least as active as
the other two BRAFi/MEKi combinations and that safety is similar. The choice
should be guided by the slightly different toxicity profile, local availability,
and product experience. The optimal sequence of immunotherapy and BRAFi/MEKi in
patients with BRAF-mutated tumors is unclear. As the response to BRAF/MEK
inhibition is usually prompt and response to immunotherapy can be delayed,
clinicians often choose a BRAFi/MEKi combination as first-line therapy in
patients with rapidly evolving and threatening disease. Single-agent binimetinib
almost doubled median progression-free survival when compared to dacarbazine in
patients with NRAS-mutated melanoma.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2020.1729122
PMID: 32100585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
