---
reference_id: "PMID:33781801"
title: A review of low-dose arsenic risks and human cancers.
authors:
- Lamm SH
- Boroje IJ
- Ferdosi H
- Ahn J
journal: Toxicology
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2021.152768
keywords:
- Animals
- "Arsenic/administration & dosage, toxicity"
- Case-Control Studies
- Cohort Studies
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- "Drinking Water/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Humans
- "Neoplasms/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- Risk Assessment
- "Water Pollutants, Chemical/administration & dosage, toxicity"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of low-dose arsenic risks and human cancers.
**Authors:** Lamm SH, Boroje IJ, Ferdosi H, Ahn J
**Journal:** Toxicology (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tox.2021.152768](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2021.152768)

## Content

1. Toxicology. 2021 May 30;456:152768. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2021.152768. Epub 2021
Mar 26.

A review of low-dose arsenic risks and human cancers.

Lamm SH(1), Boroje IJ(2), Ferdosi H(3), Ahn J(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Epidemiology and Environmental Health (CEOH, LLC), Washington, DC,
20016, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Georgetown University School of Medicine,
Washington, DC, 20007, USA. Electronic address: Steve@CEOH.com.
(2)Center for Epidemiology and Environmental Health (CEOH, LLC), Washington, DC,
20016, USA; Milken Institute School of Public Health, George Washington
University, Washington, DC, 20052, USA. Electronic address: Isabella@CEOH.com.
(3)Center for Epidemiology and Environmental Health (CEOH, LLC), Washington, DC,
20016, USA; Milken Institute School of Public Health, George Washington
University, Washington, DC, 20052, USA. Electronic address: Hamid@CEOH.com.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Bioinformatics, and Biomathematics, Georgetown
University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, 20007, USA. Electronic address:
ja1030@georgetown.edu.

The linear no-threshold (LNT) model has historically been the default assumption
in assessing carcinogenic risk from arsenic ingestion based on epidemiological
studies. This contrasts with the threshold model used in assessing carcinogenic
risk from arsenic ingestion derived from toxicological investigations of
experimental animals. We present here a review of our epidemiological work that
has examined models that may better explain the human cancer risk from the
ingestion of arsenic, particularly from low level exposures, than does the LNT
model. While previous epidemiology studies have demonstrated increased risks of
bladder, lung, and skin cancers at arsenic exposures of 200 ug/L or greater, we
seek here to examine the dose-response patterns at lower exposure levels. These
include ecological, case/control, and cohort designs. Methodologic issues
include choice of continuous or stratified analysis of exposure data, search for
sources of non-conformity or variability, and distinctions in water sources and
geography. Multiple studies have yielded useful data-based models, including
threshold models, hockey-stick models, and "J-shaped" linear-quadratic models.
These models have found that increased cancer risk may only begin at specific
arsenic exposure levels greater than zero. These results provide guidance in
seeking toxicological explanations and public health reference levels.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tox.2021.152768
PMID: 33781801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
