---
reference_id: "PMID:25788406"
title: Surgical treatment of varicose veins and venous malformations in Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome.
authors:
- Malgor RD
- Gloviczki P
- Fahrni J
- Kalra M
- Duncan AA
- Oderich GS
- Vrtiska T
- Driscoll D
journal: Phlebology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1177/0268355515577322
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber Syndrome/complications, mortality, pathology, surgery"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Varicose Veins/complications, mortality, pathology, surgery"
- "Vascular Malformations/complications, mortality, pathology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical treatment of varicose veins and venous malformations in Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome.
**Authors:** Malgor RD, Gloviczki P, Fahrni J, Kalra M, Duncan AA, Oderich GS, Vrtiska T, Driscoll D
**Journal:** Phlebology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0268355515577322](https://doi.org/10.1177/0268355515577322)

## Content

1. Phlebology. 2016 Apr;31(3):209-15. doi: 10.1177/0268355515577322. Epub 2015
Mar  17.

Surgical treatment of varicose veins and venous malformations in 
Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome.

Malgor RD(1), Gloviczki P(2), Fahrni J(3), Kalra M(3), Duncan AA(3), Oderich 
GS(3), Vrtiska T(4), Driscoll D(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, The University of Oklahoma 
College of Medicine, Tulsa, Oklahoma, USA.
(2)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA gloviczki.peter@mayo.edu.
(3)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Vascular Malformation Clinic, Gonda Vascular Center, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome (KTS) is a mixed mesenchymal malformation 
characterised by varicose veins, venous and capillary malformations, and 
hypertrophy of soft tissue and bone. The purpose of this study was to evaluate 
the surgical outcomes in KTS patients to provide standards for comparison with 
endovenous therapy.
METHODS: The clinical data of consecutive patient with KTS who underwent open 
venous surgical treatment between January 1987 and December 2008 were reviewed. 
Demographics, clinical presentation, operative data, and clinical outcomes were 
recorded. Follow-up information was obtained from the medical records, mailed 
questionnaires and phone calls. Descriptive statistics, the Kaplan-Meier method 
and Log-rank statistics were used where appropriate.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven females and 22 males, (mean age 26.5 years, range 
7.7-55.8) were included in this study. All had varicose veins, 36 (73%) had limb 
hypertrophy, and 33 (67%) had capillary malformations, with two of three 
clinical features present in all. The most frequent symptom was pain (N = 43, 
88%). Forty-nine patients underwent operations on 53 limbs. Stripping of the 
GSV, small and accessory saphenous and lateral embryonic veins was performed in 
17 (32%), 10 (19%), 9 (17%), and 15 (28%) limbs, respectively. Two patients 
developed deep vein thrombosis, one had pulmonary embolism (PE), and one patient 
had peroneal nerve palsy. Freedom from disabling pain at 1, 3 and 5 years was 
95%, 77% and 59%, respectively, and freedom from secondary procedures was 78% at 
3 years, and 74% at 5 years. At the last follow-up visit, the venous clinical 
severity score had decreased from 9.48 ± 3.27 to 6.07 ± 3.20 (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In selected symptomatic patients with KT syndrome, open surgical 
treatment is safe and durable. Three-fourths of the patients remain free of 
disabling pain at five years, but secondary procedures are required in 
one-fourth of the patients. These data can serve as standards for comparison of 
endovenous therapy for KT syndrome.

© The Author(s) 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/0268355515577322
PMID: 25788406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]