---
reference_id: "PMID:26161907"
title: Genome-Wide DNA Methylation Analysis Identifies Novel Hypomethylated Non-Pericentromeric Genes with Potential Clinical Implications in ICF Syndrome.
authors:
- Simo-Riudalbas L
- Diaz-Lagares A
- Gatto S
- Gagliardi M
- Crujeiras AB
- Matarazzo MR
- Esteller M
- Sandoval J
journal: PLoS One
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132517
keywords:
- Case-Control Studies
- Cell Line
- Centromere/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human/genetics"
- CpG Islands/genetics
- DNA (Cytosine-5-)-Methyltransferases/genetics
- DNA Methylation/genetics
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genetic Variation
- "Genome, Human"
- Humans
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics
- Male
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- Reproducibility of Results
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- DNA Methyltransferase 3B
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-Wide DNA Methylation Analysis Identifies Novel Hypomethylated Non-Pericentromeric Genes with Potential Clinical Implications in ICF Syndrome.
**Authors:** Simo-Riudalbas L, Diaz-Lagares A, Gatto S, Gagliardi M, Crujeiras AB, Matarazzo MR, Esteller M, Sandoval J
**Journal:** PLoS One (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0132517](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0132517)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 10;10(7):e0132517. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132517.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-Wide DNA Methylation Analysis Identifies Novel Hypomethylated
Non-Pericentromeric Genes with Potential Clinical Implications in ICF Syndrome.

Simo-Riudalbas L(1), Diaz-Lagares A(1), Gatto S(2), Gagliardi M(2), Crujeiras
AB(1), Matarazzo MR(2), Esteller M(3), Sandoval J(1).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC), Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics ABT, CNR, Naples, Italy.
(3)Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC), Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; Department of Physiological
Sciences II, School of Medicine, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia,
Spain; Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain.

INTRODUCTION AND RESULTS: Immunodeficiency, centromeric instability and facial
anomalies syndrome (ICF) is a rare autosomal recessive disease, characterized by
severe hypomethylation in pericentromeric regions of chromosomes (1, 16 and 9),
marked immunodeficiency and facial anomalies. The majority of ICF patients
present mutations in the DNMT3B gene, affecting the DNA methyltransferase
activity of the protein. In the present study, we have used the Infinium 450K
DNA methylation array to evaluate the methylation level of 450,000 CpGs in
lymphoblastoid cell lines and untrasformed fibroblasts derived from ICF patients
and healthy donors. Our results demonstrate that ICF-specific DNMT3B variants
A603T/STP807ins and V699G/R54X cause global DNA hypomethylation compared to
wild-type protein. We identified 181 novel differentially methylated positions
(DMPs) including subtelomeric and intrachromosomic regions, outside the
classical ICF-related pericentromeric hypomethylated positions. Interestingly,
these sites were mainly located in intergenic regions and inside the CpG
islands. Among the identified hypomethylated CpG-island associated genes, we
confirmed the overexpression of three selected genes, BOLL, SYCP2 and
NCRNA00221, in ICF compared to healthy controls, which are supposed to be
expressed in germ line and silenced in somatic tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, this study contributes in clarifying the direct
relationship between DNA methylation defect and gene expression impairment in
ICF syndrome, identifying novel direct target genes of DNMT3B. A high percentage
of the DMPs are located in the subtelomeric regions, indicating a specific role
of DNMT3B in methylating these chromosomal sites. Therefore, we provide further
evidence that hypomethylation in specific non-pericentromeric regions of
chromosomes might be involved in the molecular pathogenesis of ICF syndrome. The
detection of DNA hypomethylation at BOLL, SYCP2 and NCRNA00221 may pave the way
for the development of specific clinical biomarkers with the aim to facilitate
the identification of ICF patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132517
PMCID: PMC4498748
PMID: 26161907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
