---
reference_id: "PMID:32986228"
title: Sex differences impact the pancreatic response to chronic immobilization stress in rats.
authors:
- Abdel Hafez SMN
- Allam FAFA
- Elbassuoni E
journal: Cell Stress Chaperones
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12192-020-01169-y
keywords:
- Animals
- Female
- "Inflammation/etiology, pathology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Ovariectomy
- Oxidative Stress
- "Pancreas/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Pancreatic Diseases/etiology, pathology, physiopathology"
- Rats
- "Restraint, Physical/adverse effects"
- Sex Characteristics
- "Stress, Physiological"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sex differences impact the pancreatic response to chronic immobilization stress in rats.
**Authors:** Abdel Hafez SMN, Allam FAFA, Elbassuoni E
**Journal:** Cell Stress Chaperones (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12192-020-01169-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12192-020-01169-y)

## Content

1. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2021 Jan;26(1):199-215. doi:
10.1007/s12192-020-01169-y.  Epub 2020 Sep 28.

Sex differences impact the pancreatic response to chronic immobilization stress 
in rats.

Abdel Hafez SMN(1), Allam FAFA(2), Elbassuoni E(3).

Author information:
(1)Histology and Cell Biology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Minia University, 
Minia, Egypt. sara_histology@yahoo.com.
(2)Anatomy Department, Faculty of Medicine, Minia University, Minia, Egypt.
(3)Physiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Minia University, Minia, Egypt.

Chronic stress has been related to multiple diseases. Inflammation is proposed 
strongly to link stress to stress-related diseases in different organs, such as 
small intestine, colon, and brain. However, stress cellular effect on the 
pancreatic tissue, especially the exocrine one, had received relatively little 
attention. This work aimed to evaluate the cellular effect of chronic 
immobilization stress on the pancreatic tissue function and structure along with 
evaluating the sex role in this type of pancreatic injury. Thirty rats were 
equally divided into 5 groups: control male, control female, stressed male, 
stressed female, and stressed female with bilateral ovariectomy. Stressed rats 
were exposed to immobilization for 1 h/day, 6 days/week, for 3 weeks. Rats were 
then decapitated for further biochemical, histological, histo-morphometric, and 
immunohistochemical study. The results showed that, in male and female rats, 
chronic immobilization stress produced hypoinsulinemia and hyperglycemia, with 
increasing exocrine pancreatic injury markers by increasing oxidative and 
inflammatory status of the pancreatic tissue, and exhibited a degenerative 
effect on the pancreatic tissue. However, the stress-induced pancreatic effects 
were more obvious in male rats and female rats with bilateral ovariectomy than 
that in female rats. It could be concluded that male animals were more 
susceptible to stress-induced pancreatic damage than females. The ovarian 
hormones are responsible, at least partly, for pancreatic tissue protection 
since the stress-induced pancreatic injury in females was exacerbated by 
ovariectomy. In this study, inflammatory and oxidative stress differences in 
both sexes could provide a plausible explanation for sex differences.

DOI: 10.1007/s12192-020-01169-y
PMCID: PMC7736456
PMID: 32986228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.