---
reference_id: "PMID:37321363"
title: "The role of lifestyle factors in cognitive health and dementia in oldest-old: A systematic review."
authors:
- Ye KX
- Sun L
- Wang L
- Khoo ALY
- Lim KX
- Lu G
- Yu L
- Li C
- Maier AB
- Feng L
journal: Neurosci Biobehav Rev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105286
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of lifestyle factors in cognitive health and dementia in oldest-old: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Ye KX, Sun L, Wang L, Khoo ALY, Lim KX, Lu G, Yu L, Li C, Maier AB, Feng L
**Journal:** Neurosci Biobehav Rev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105286](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105286)

## Content

1. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2023 Sep;152:105286. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105286. Epub 2023 Jun 13.

The role of lifestyle factors in cognitive health and dementia in oldest-old: A 
systematic review.

Ye KX(1), Sun L(2), Wang L(2), Khoo ALY(1), Lim KX(1), Lu G(3), Yu L(4), Li 
C(3), Maier AB(5), Feng L(6).

Author information:
(1)Healthy Longevity Translational Research Program, Yong Loo Lin School of 
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore; Department of 
Psychological Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore; Centre for Healthy Longevity, @AgeSingapore, National 
University Health System, Singapore.
(2)School of Anesthesiology, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, China.
(3)School of Psychology, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, China.
(4)School of Nursing, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, China.
(5)Healthy Longevity Translational Research Program, Yong Loo Lin School of 
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore; Centre for Healthy 
Longevity, @AgeSingapore, National University Health System, Singapore; 
Department of Human Movement Sciences, @AgeAmsterdam, Amsterdam Movement 
Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Healthy Longevity Translational Research Program, Yong Loo Lin School of 
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore; Department of 
Psychological Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore; Centre for Healthy Longevity, @AgeSingapore, National 
University Health System, Singapore. Electronic address: 
fenglei2020sg@nus.edu.sg.

Oldest-old is the fastest growing segment of society. A substantial number of 
these individuals are cognitively impaired or demented. Given the lack of a 
cure, attention is directed to lifestyle interventions that could help alleviate 
the stress in patients, their families, and society. The aim of this review was 
to identify lifestyle factors with important roles in dementia prevention in 
oldest-old. Searches were conducted in PubMed, EMBASE, Scopus and Web of 
Science. We identified 27 observational cohort studies that met the inclusion 
criteria. Results showed that eating a healthy diet with plenty of fruits and 
vegetables, and participation in leisure and physical activities may protect 
against cognitive decline and cognitive impairment among oldest-old regardless 
of the APOE genotype. Combined lifestyles may generate multiplicative effects 
than individual factors. This is the first review known to systematically 
examine the association between lifestyle and cognitive health in oldest-old. 
Lifestyle interventions for diet, leisure, or a combination of lifestyles could 
be beneficial for cognitive function in oldest-old. Interventional studies are 
warranted to strengthen the evidence.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105286
PMID: 37321363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.