---
reference_id: "PMID:17624415"
title: Epidemic asthma and the role of the fungal mold Alternaria alternata.
authors:
- Pulimood TB
- Corden JM
- Bryden C
- Sharples L
- Nasser SM
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2007.04.045
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Alternaria/immunology
- "Asthma/epidemiology, etiology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Lightning
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Particulate Matter/adverse effects, immunology"
- Rain
- "Spores, Fungal/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemic asthma and the role of the fungal mold Alternaria alternata.
**Authors:** Pulimood TB, Corden JM, Bryden C, Sharples L, Nasser SM
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2007.04.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2007.04.045)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007 Sep;120(3):610-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2007.04.045.  Epub 2007 Jul 10.

Epidemic asthma and the role of the fungal mold Alternaria alternata.

Pulimood TB(1), Corden JM, Bryden C, Sharples L, Nasser SM.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007 Sep;120(3):530-2. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2007.07.012.

BACKGROUND: After July 29, 2002, an epidemic of asthma admissions was associated 
with a thunderstorm in the United Kingdom.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to study the cause of epidemics of asthma associated with 
thunderstorms.
METHODS: We performed a case-control study of 26 patients presenting to 
Cambridge University Hospital with asthma after the thunderstorm. Control 
subjects were 31 patients with summer seasonal asthma. Subjects underwent skin 
tests and specific IgE serology to inhaled aeroallergens. Meteorologic and 
aerobiologic data correlated with asthma admissions were analyzed.
RESULTS: Twenty-three of 26 cases had IgE sensitization to Alternaria species. 
Eleven of 31 control subjects gave a history of asthma exacerbation during 
thunderstorms. Ten of these 11 control subjects were sensitive to Alternaria 
species on skin testing, but Alternaria species sensitivity was only identified 
in 4 of the 20 remaining control subjects who did not report 
thunderstorm-related asthma symptoms. The odds ratio of having epidemic 
thunderstorm-related asthma if sensitive to Alternaria species was 9.31 (95% CI, 
2.305-37.601; P = .0008) and 63.966 (95% CI, 3.577-1143.9; P < .0001) if 
sensitive to Alternaria species, Cladosporium species, or both. Poisson 
regression analysis showed that counts of broken Alternaria species and 
Didymella and Cladosporium species were significantly correlated with each other 
and with asthma admissions. The thunderstorm was associated with increased 
levels of Alternaria, Cladosporium, and Didymella species.
CONCLUSIONS: Alternaria alternata sensitivity is a compelling predictor of 
epidemic asthma in patients with seasonal asthma and grass pollen allergy and is 
likely to be the important factor in thunderstorm-related asthma.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Alternaria species sensitization in asthmatic subjects 
with grass pollen sensitivity predicts susceptibility to thunderstorm-associated 
asthma.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2007.04.045
PMID: 17624415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]