---
reference_id: "PMID:21267586"
title: "Medulloblastoma: clinicopathological correlates of SHH, WNT, and non-SHH/WNT molecular subgroups."
authors:
- Ellison DW
- Dalton J
- Kocak M
- Nicholson SL
- Fraga C
- Neale G
- Kenney AM
- Brat DJ
- Perry A
- Yong WH
- Taylor RE
- Bailey S
- Clifford SC
- Gilbertson RJ
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-011-0800-8
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/metabolism"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- "Cerebellar Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Contractile Proteins/metabolism
- Female
- Filamins
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/physiology"
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- Humans
- Infant
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- "Medulloblastoma/metabolism, pathology"
- Microfilament Proteins/metabolism
- Middle Aged
- Phosphoproteins/metabolism
- Retrospective Studies
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Transcription Factors
- Wnt Proteins/metabolism
- YAP-Signaling Proteins
- Young Adult
- beta Catenin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medulloblastoma: clinicopathological correlates of SHH, WNT, and non-SHH/WNT molecular subgroups.
**Authors:** Ellison DW, Dalton J, Kocak M, Nicholson SL, Fraga C, Neale G, Kenney AM, Brat DJ, Perry A, Yong WH, Taylor RE, Bailey S, Clifford SC, Gilbertson RJ
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-011-0800-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-011-0800-8)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2011 Mar;121(3):381-96. doi: 10.1007/s00401-011-0800-8. Epub
 2011 Jan 26.

Medulloblastoma: clinicopathological correlates of SHH, WNT, and non-SHH/WNT 
molecular subgroups.

Ellison DW(1), Dalton J, Kocak M, Nicholson SL, Fraga C, Neale G, Kenney AM, 
Brat DJ, Perry A, Yong WH, Taylor RE, Bailey S, Clifford SC, Gilbertson RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology MS# 250, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 
Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. David.Ellison@stjude.org

Medulloblastoma is heterogeneous, being characterized by molecular subgroups 
that demonstrate distinct gene expression profiles. Activation of the WNT or SHH 
signaling pathway characterizes two of these molecular subgroups, the former 
associated with low-risk disease and the latter potentially targeted by novel 
SHH pathway inhibitors. This manuscript reports the validation of a novel 
diagnostic immunohistochemical method to distinguish SHH, WNT, and non-SHH/WNT 
tumors and details their associations with clinical, pathological and 
cytogenetic variables. A cohort (n = 235) of medulloblastomas from patients aged 
0.4-52 years was studied for expression of four immunohistochemical markers: 
GAB1, β-catenin, filamin A, and YAP1. Immunoreactivity (IR) for GAB1 
characterizes only SHH tumors and nuclear IR for β-catenin only WNT tumors. IRs 
for filamin A and YAP1 identify SHH and WNT tumors. SHH, WNT, and non-SHH/WNT 
tumors contributed 31, 14, and 55% to the series. All desmoplastic/nodular (D/N) 
medulloblastomas were SHH tumors, while most WNT tumors (94%) had a classic 
phenotype. Monosomy 6 was strongly associated with WNT tumors, while PTCH1 loss 
occurred almost exclusively among SHH tumors. MYC or MYCN amplification and 
chromosome 17 imbalance occurred predominantly among non-SHH/WNT tumors. Among 
patients aged 3-16 years and entered onto the SIOP PNET3 trial, outcome was 
significantly better for children with WNT tumors, when compared to SHH or 
non-SHH/WNT tumors, which showed similar survival curves. However, high-risk 
factors (M+ disease, LC/A pathology, MYC amplification) significantly influenced 
survival in both SHH and non-SHH/WNT groups. We describe a robust method for 
detecting SHH, WNT, and non-SHH/WNT molecular subgroups in formalin-fixed 
medulloblastoma samples. In corroborating other studies that indicate the value 
of combining clinical, pathological, and molecular variables in therapeutic 
stratification schemes for medulloblastoma, we also provide the first outcome 
data based on a clinical trial cohort and novel data on how molecular subgroups 
are distributed across the range of disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-011-0800-8
PMCID: PMC3519926
PMID: 21267586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]