---
reference_id: "PMID:37353769"
title: "Correlation analysis between morphologic characteristics of the thoracolumbar basivertebral foramen and Kummell's disease in patients with osteoporosis using imaging techniques."
authors:
- Qin GB
- Wu YH
- Chen HS
- Huang YT
- Yi JF
- Xiao Y
journal: BMC Musculoskelet Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12891-023-06609-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correlation analysis between morphologic characteristics of the thoracolumbar basivertebral foramen and Kummell's disease in patients with osteoporosis using imaging techniques.
**Authors:** Qin GB, Wu YH, Chen HS, Huang YT, Yi JF, Xiao Y
**Journal:** BMC Musculoskelet Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12891-023-06609-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-023-06609-1)

## Content

1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2023 Jun 23;24(1):513. doi: 
10.1186/s12891-023-06609-1.

Correlation analysis between morphologic characteristics of the thoracolumbar 
basivertebral foramen and Kummell's disease in patients with osteoporosis using 
imaging techniques.

Qin GB(1), Wu YH(2), Chen HS(1), Huang YT(3), Yi JF(1), Xiao Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Affiliated Liutie Centarl Hospital of 
GuangXi Medical University, Guangxi Province, Liuzhou, China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Hechi People's Hospital, Guangxi Province, 
Hechi, China.
(3)Department of Radiological Diagnosis, Affiliated Liutie Centarl Hospital of 
GuangXi Medical University, Guangxi Province, Liuzhou, China.
(4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical 
University, Guangxi Province, GuiLin, China. qin416000224@163.com.

BACKGROUND: The aging of the population is a social problem faced by many 
countries in the world. With the increase in the elderly population, the number 
of patients with Kummell's disease is also gradually increasing. No study has 
demonstrated that Kummell's disease has a clear correlation with the foramen of 
a vertebrobasilar vein.
OBJECTIVES: The research was conducted to describe and evaluate the 
morphological characteristics of a basivertebral foramen in patients with 
osteoporosis and Kummell's disease by CT; to infer whether the specific 
morphological characteristics of basivertebral foramen may be one of the risk 
factors of Kummell's disease; to provide clinical suggestions for the treatment 
of Kummell's disease.
DESIGN: Retrospective analysis from January 2020 to December 2021 on 83 patients 
with 83 vertebral bodies (T8-L5) diagnosed with senile osteoporosis and 
Kummell's disease hospitalized in our hospital due to chronic low back pain, 
including 57 women and 23 men. Group A was assigned for the following patients: 
the age ranged from 59 to 86 years old, with the average age of 
67.30 ± 7.32 years old; the body mass index ranged from 20.01 to 29.46 kg/m2, 
with the average body mass index of 23.51 ± 3.03 kg/m2.Group B was assigned for 
the following patients: 83 patients diagnosed with senile osteoporosis in our 
outpatient department from January 2020 to December 2021, including 41 males and 
42 females; the age ranged from 60 to 85 years, with an average age of 
68.52 ± 4.68 years old; the height to weight ratio met the normal reference 
standard (except 20% above or 10% below the standard weight). Through the lanwon 
PACS imaging system, the related parameters of the vertebrobasilar foramen in 
patients with osteoporosis and Kummell's disease were measured to evaluate and 
analyze the correlation between the morphological characteristics of the 
vertebrobasilar foramen in patients with osteoporosis and Kummell's disease.
RESULTS: In patients with osteoporosis, the distribution of incidence rate of 
Kummell's disease in the spine was consistent with that of osteoporotic 
compression fractures. Sagittal view of the vertebral body on CT scan and the 
triangular-shaped, trapezoidal-shaped, and irregular-shaped basivertebral 
foramen in group A accounted for 18%,57%,and 36%,respectively. In group B, 
triangular-shaped, trapezoidal-shaped, and irregular-shaped foramen accounted 
for 51%,17%,and 26%,respectively.The distribution of triangular-shaped, 
trapezoidal-shaped, and irregular-shaped foramen was compared between groups A 
and B, and the difference was recorded as statistically significant (P < 0.05). 
Additionally, the difference in the distribution of triangular-shaped, 
trapezoidal-shaped, and irregular-shaped foramen in group A was found 
statistically significant (P < 0.05),while that of Group B was found 
statistically insignificant (P > 0.05).On a horizontal CT scan of the vertebra 
of group A, triangles, trapezoids, and irregularities accounted for 28%, 26%, 
and 47%, respectively. In group B, triangles,trapezoids,and irregularities 
accounted for 31%, 37%, and 30%, respectively. The difference in the 
distribution of the triangular-shaped and trapezoidal-shaped foramen in groups A 
and B was statistically insignificant (P > 0.05), while that of irregular-shaped 
was statistically significant (P < 0.05). Additionally, there was no statistical 
significance (P > 0.05) in the difference in the morphological distribution of 
triangular-shaped and trapezoidal-shaped foramen in group A, while that of 
irregular-shaped was found to be statistically significant (P < 0.05). Further, 
the difference in the morphological distribution of triangular-shaped, 
trapezoidal-shaped, and irregular-shaped foramen in group B was not 
statistically significant (P > 0.05).In general, about 8% of the vertebral body 
of BF has an osseous septum. In group A, 97% are single-holed while the 
remaining 3% are porous; in group B, those with single holes accounted for 76%, 
while the remaining 24% are porous. In groups A and B, the difference in the 
morphological distribution of single-holed and multi-holed T8, T11, T12, L1, L2, 
L4, and L5 vertebral bodies was statistically significant (P < 0.05). In group 
A, the difference in the distribution of single-holed and multi-holed L1 and L5 
vertebral bodies was statistically significant (P < 0.05). Similarly, the 
difference in the distribution of single-holed and multi-holed T8, T11, T12, L1, 
L2, and L4 basivertebral foramen was statistically significant (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with osteoporosis, the incidence of vertebral Kummell's 
disease can be associated with the morphological characteristics of the 
basivertebral foramen, as observed in the CT scan. Furthermore, the vertebral 
body with trapezoidal-shaped and irregular-shaped basivertebral foramen and 
boneless septum in the foramen is highly susceptible to Kummell's disease.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-023-06609-1
PMCID: PMC10288774
PMID: 37353769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.