---
reference_id: "PMID:37699417"
title: "The future of cystic fibrosis treatment: from disease mechanisms to novel therapeutic approaches."
authors:
- Graeber SY
- Mall MA
journal: Lancet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01608-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The future of cystic fibrosis treatment: from disease mechanisms to novel therapeutic approaches.
**Authors:** Graeber SY, Mall MA
**Journal:** Lancet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01608-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01608-2)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2023 Sep 30;402(10408):1185-1198. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01608-2. 
Epub 2023 Sep 9.

The future of cystic fibrosis treatment: from disease mechanisms to novel 
therapeutic approaches.

Graeber SY(1), Mall MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine, Immunology and Critical Care 
Medicine, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie 
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Cystic 
Fibrosis Center, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie 
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany; German 
Center for Lung Research, associated partner site, Berlin, Germany; Berlin 
Institute of Health at Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine, Immunology and Critical Care 
Medicine, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie 
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Cystic 
Fibrosis Center, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie 
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany; German 
Center for Lung Research, associated partner site, Berlin, Germany; Berlin 
Institute of Health at Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 
Electronic address: Marcus.Mall@charite.de.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2024 Jul 13;404(10448):117-120. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)01134-6.

With the 2019 breakthrough in the development of highly effective modulator 
therapy providing unprecedented clinical benefits for over 90% of patients with 
cystic fibrosis who are genetically eligible for treatment, this rare disease 
has become a front runner of transformative molecular therapy. This success is 
based on fundamental research, which led to the identification of the 
disease-causing CFTR gene and our subsequent understanding of the disease 
mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of cystic fibrosis, working together with 
a continuously evolving clinical research and drug development pipeline. In this 
Series paper, we focus on advances since 2018, and remaining knowledge gaps in 
our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of CFTR dysfunction in the airway 
epithelium and their links to mucus dysfunction, impaired host defences, airway 
infection, and chronic inflammation of the lungs of people with cystic fibrosis. 
We review progress in (and the remaining obstacles to) pharmacological 
approaches to rescue CFTR function, and novel strategies for improved 
symptomatic therapies for cystic fibrosis, including how these might be 
applicable to common lung diseases, such as bronchiectasis and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. Finally, we discuss the promise of genetic 
therapies and gene editing approaches to restore CFTR function in the lungs of 
all patients with cystic fibrosis independent of their CFTR genotype, and the 
unprecedented opportunities to transform cystic fibrosis from a fatal disease to 
a treatable and potentially curable one.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01608-2
PMID: 37699417

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests No funding was provided 
specifically for this Series paper. SYG reports grants from the Christiane 
Herzog Foundation, the German Cystic Fibrosis Association (Mukoviszidose), 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals, and a fellowship from the Berlin Institute of Health 
Charité Clinician Scientist Program; lecture honoraria from Chiesi and Vertex 
Pharmaceuticals; and advisory board participation for Chiesi and Vertex 
Pharmaceuticals outside the submitted work. MAM reports grants from the German 
Research Foundation (DFG; grant numbers SFB-TR 84 and SFB 1449; project numbers 
431232613 and 450557679), the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research 
(BMBF; grant number 82DZL009B1), the German Innovation Fund (grant number 
01NVF19008), and Vertex Pharmaceuticals; consulting fees from AbbVie, Antabio, 
Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, Boehringer Ingelheim, Enterprise Therapeutics, Kither 
Biotech, Prieris, Recode, Santhera, Splisense, and Vertex Pharmaceuticals; 
lecture honoraria from Vertex Pharmaceuticals; travel support from Boehringer 
Ingelheim and Vertex Pharmaceuticals; a patent on the Scnn1b-transgenic mouse as 
an animal model for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and cystic fibrosis, a 
patent on the medical uses of thiol-functionalised polyglycerol derivatives, and 
a patent on receptor for advanced glycation endproducts (RAGE) proteins for the 
treatment of fibrosis and DNA damage-mediated diseases; and advisory board 
participation with AbbVie, Antabio, Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Enterprise Therapeutics, Kither Biotech, Pari, and Vertex 
Pharmaceuticals outside the submitted work. MAM is a Fellow of the European 
Respiratory Society (FERS).