---
reference_id: "PMID:36807901"
title: Spasticity evaluation and management tools.
authors:
- Howard IM
- Patel AT
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mus.27792
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spasticity evaluation and management tools.
**Authors:** Howard IM, Patel AT
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.27792](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.27792)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2023 Apr;67(4):272-283. doi: 10.1002/mus.27792. Epub 2023 Feb
19.

Spasticity evaluation and management tools.

Howard IM(1)(2), Patel AT(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Rehabilitation Care Services, Veterans Affairs Sound, Seattle, Washington, 
DC, USA.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.
(3)Kansas Institute of Research, Overland Park, Kansas, USA.
(4)Research Associate Professor, School of Medicine, University of Missouri 
Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, USA.

Spasticity is a complex and often disabling symptom for patients with upper 
motor neuron syndromes. Although spasticity arises from neurological disease, it 
often cascades into muscle and soft tissue changes, which may exacerbate 
symptoms and further hamper function. Effective management therefore hinges on 
early recognition and treatment. To this end, the definition of spasticity has 
expanded over time to more accurately reflect the spectrum of symptoms 
experienced by persons with this disorder. Once identified, clinical and 
research quantitative assessments of spasticity are hindered by the uniqueness 
of presentations both for individuals and for specific neurological diagnoses. 
Objective measures in isolation often fail to reflect the complex functional 
impact of spasticity. Multiple tools exist to quantitatively or qualitatively 
assess the severity of spasticity, including clinician and patient-reported 
measures as well as electrodiagnostic, mechanical, and ultrasound measures. A 
combination of objective and patient-reported outcomes is likely required to 
better reflect the burden of spasticity symptoms in an individual. Therapeutic 
options exist for the treatment of spasticity along a broad spectrum from 
nonpharmacologic to interventional procedures. Treatment strategies may include 
exercise, physical agent modalities, oral medications, injections, pumps, and 
surgery. Optimal spasticity management most often requires a multimodal 
approach, combining pharmacological management with interventions that match the 
functional needs, goals, and preferences of the patient. Physicians and other 
healthcare providers who manage spasticity must be familiarized with the full 
array of spasticity interventions and must frequently reassess results of 
treatment to ensure the patient's goals of treatment are met.

Copyright © 2023 by the American Association of Neuromuscular & 
Electrodiagnostic Medicine, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.27792
PMID: 36807901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]