---
reference_id: "PMID:37348121"
title: "Targeting Type 2 Inflammation and Epithelial Alarmins in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Biologics Outlook."
authors:
- Rabe KF
- Rennard S
- Martinez FJ
- Celli BR
- Singh D
- Papi A
- Bafadhel M
- Heble J
- Radwan A
- Soler X
- Jacob Nara JA
- Deniz Y
- Rowe PJ
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.202303-0455CI
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting Type 2 Inflammation and Epithelial Alarmins in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Biologics Outlook.
**Authors:** Rabe KF, Rennard S, Martinez FJ, Celli BR, Singh D, Papi A, Bafadhel M, Heble J, Radwan A, Soler X, Jacob Nara JA, Deniz Y, Rowe PJ
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.202303-0455CI](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.202303-0455CI)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2023 Aug 15;208(4):395-405. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.202303-0455CI.

Targeting Type 2 Inflammation and Epithelial Alarmins in Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease: A Biologics Outlook.

Rabe KF(1)(2)(3), Rennard S(4), Martinez FJ(5), Celli BR(6)(7), Singh D(8), Papi 
A(9), Bafadhel M(10), Heble J(11), Radwan A(12), Soler X(12), Jacob Nara JA(11), 
Deniz Y(12), Rowe PJ(11).

Author information:
(1)LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, Grosshansdorf, Germany.
(2)Christian Albrechts University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Airway Research Center North, German Center for Lung Research, Grosshansdorf, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, Nebraska.
(5)NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New 
York.
(6)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(7)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(8)Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester University National Health Service 
Foundation Trust, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(9)Respiratory Medicine, Department of Translational Medicine, University of 
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(10)School of Immunology and Microbial Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences and 
Medicine, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(11)Sanofi, Bridgewater, New Jersey; and.
(12)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc., Tarrytown, New York.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a complex, heterogeneous, 
progressive inflammatory airway disease associated with a significant impact on 
patients' lives, including morbidity and mortality, and significant healthcare 
costs. Current pharmacologic strategies, including first- and second-line 
therapies such as long-acting β2-agonists, long-acting muscarinic antagonists, 
inhaled corticosteroids, phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors, and macrolides, provide 
relief to patients with COPD. However, many patients remain symptomatic, with 
persistent symptoms and/or acute exacerbations and progressive lung function 
loss. Although neutrophilic inflammation is the most common type of inflammation 
in COPD, 20-40% of patients with COPD exhibit type 2 inflammation, with roles 
for CD4+ (cluster of differentiation 4) T-helper cell type 1 cells, type 2 
innate lymphoid cells, eosinophils, and alternatively activated macrophages. On 
the basis of the current limitations of available therapies, a significant unmet 
need exists in COPD management, including the need for targeted therapies to 
address the underlying pathophysiology leading to disease progression, such as 
type 2 inflammation, as well as biomarkers to help select the patients who would 
most benefit from the new therapies. Significant progress is being made, with 
evolving understanding of the pathobiology of COPD leading to novel therapeutic 
targets including epithelial alarmins. In this review, we describe the current 
therapeutic landscape in COPD, discuss unmet treatment needs, review the current 
knowledge of type 2 inflammation and epithelial alarmins in COPD, explore 
potential biomarkers of type 2 inflammation in COPD, and finally provide a 
rationale for incorporating therapies targeting type 2 inflammation and 
epithelial alarmins in COPD. Video Abstract available online at 
www.atsjournals.org.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.202303-0455CI
PMID: 37348121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]