---
reference_id: "PMID:40289214"
title: GRB2 promotes brain metastasis in HER2-positive breast cancer by regulating the Ras/MAPK pathway.
authors:
- Li H
- Zhang Y
- Han X
- Li B
- Liu D
- Sun G
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-99685-3
keywords:
- "GRB2 Adaptor Protein/metabolism, genetics"
- "Breast Neoplasms/pathology, metabolism, genetics"
- Humans
- Female
- "Brain Neoplasms/secondary, metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- "Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation
- Mice
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Cell Movement
- Apoptosis
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GRB2 promotes brain metastasis in HER2-positive breast cancer by regulating the Ras/MAPK pathway.
**Authors:** Li H, Zhang Y, Han X, Li B, Liu D, Sun G
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-025-99685-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-99685-3)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2025 Apr 27;15(1):14736. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-99685-3.

GRB2 promotes brain metastasis in HER2-positive breast cancer by regulating the
Ras/MAPK pathway.

Li H(1)(2), Zhang Y(3), Han X(3), Li B(4), Liu D(4), Sun G(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast Internal Medicine, Xinjiang Medical University
Affiliated Tumor Hospital, Urumqi, 830011, China. lhygxykdx@163.com.
(2)Postdoctoral Research Workstation of Tumor Hospital Affiliated to Xinjiang
Medical University, Urumqi, 830011, China. lhygxykdx@163.com.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Xinjiang Medical University Affiliated
Tumor Hospital, Urumqi, 830011, China.
(4)Department of Breast Internal Medicine, Xinjiang Medical University
Affiliated Tumor Hospital, Urumqi, 830011, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Oncology of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, Department of
Breast and Thyroid Surgery, People's Hospital of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous
Region, Urumqi, 830011, China. sung853219@126.com.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2026 Feb 3;16(1):4729. doi: 10.1038/s41598-026-37879-z.

Brain metastasis is emerging as the most serious concern for breast cancer
patients. HER2-positive breast cancer is more prone to undergo brain metastasis
than other subtypes; notably, there has been little improvement in the treatment
of brain metastasis .Our study confirmed the relevance of HER2 status to brain
metastasis risk via clinical data analysis and revealed that exerts GRB2
tumorigenic effects by regulating the Ras/MAPK pathway in vivo and in vitro.
Both an in situ injection model and a direct cerebral injection model were used
to explore the ability of GRB2 to promote the brain metastasis. Results
indicated that HER2- positive is a risk factor for brain metastasis according to
clinical data. GRB2 enhances proliferation, migration, and invasion while
suppressing apoptosis in HER2-positive breast cancer cells in vitro, primarily
by regulating phosphorylation and alternative splicing of key proteins within
the Ras/MAPK pathway. Notably, tumor cells were able to cross the blood‒brain
barrier in both models assessed in this study. Thus, GRB2 is an oncogenic factor
that contributes to the malignancy of HER2-positive breast cancer, GRB2 and HER2
can synergistically promote tumor cell penetration of the blood‒brain barrier
and induce metastasis.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-99685-3
PMCID: PMC12034778
PMID: 40289214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors
declare no competing interests. Ethics declarations: All experiments involving
human participants and/or human tissue samples were conducted in accordance with
relevant guidelines and regulations, including the Declaration of Helsinki. All
experimental protocols were reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of the
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University (Approval ID:
K-2024018).Informed consent was obtained from all participants and/or their
legal guardian(s) prior to their inclusion in the study.All experiments
involving live vertebrates were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of
Newlong Youshu Technology (Hangzhou) Co., Ltd (Approval ID: YS-m202501001). All
procedures were performed in accordance with the Chinese Guidelines for Ethical
Review of Laboratory Animal Welfare (GB/T 35892 − 2018) and international
ethical guidelines for animal research. This study adheres to the ARRIVE
guidelines 2.0 ( https://arriveguidelines.org ) to ensure comprehensive
reporting of experimental methodology. Efforts were made to minimize animal
suffering and reduce the number of animals used, following the principles of
Replacement, Reduction, and Refinement (3Rs).
