---
reference_id: "PMID:36580829"
title: Synthetic mRNA rescues very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in patient fibroblasts and a murine model.
authors:
- Zhao XJ
- Mohsen AW
- Mihalik S
- Solo K
- Aliu E
- Shi H
- Basu S
- Kochersperger C
- "Van't Land C"
- Karunanidhi A
- Coughlan KA
- Siddiqui S
- Rice LM
- Hillier S
- Guadagnin E
- Giangrande PH
- Martini PGV
- Vockley J
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.106982
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synthetic mRNA rescues very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in patient fibroblasts and a murine model.
**Authors:** Zhao XJ, Mohsen AW, Mihalik S, Solo K, Aliu E, Shi H, Basu S, Kochersperger C, Van't Land C, Karunanidhi A, Coughlan KA, Siddiqui S, Rice LM, Hillier S, Guadagnin E, Giangrande PH, Martini PGV, Vockley J
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.106982](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.106982)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2023 Jan;138(1):106982. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.106982.
Epub  2022 Dec 23.

Synthetic mRNA rescues very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in 
patient fibroblasts and a murine model.

Zhao XJ(1), Mohsen AW(2), Mihalik S(1), Solo K(1), Aliu E(1), Shi H(1), Basu 
S(1), Kochersperger C(1), Van't Land C(1), Karunanidhi A(1), Coughlan KA(3), 
Siddiqui S(3), Rice LM(3), Hillier S(3), Guadagnin E(3), Giangrande PH(3), 
Martini PGV(3), Vockley J(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Department of Human Genetics, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Moderna Therapeutics, Inc., Rare Diseases, 200 Technology Square, Cambridge, 
MA, USA.
(4)Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Department of Human Genetics, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Electronic address: 
vockleyg@upmc.edu.

Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency is an inborn error of 
long chain fatty acid β-oxidation (FAO) with limited treatment options. Patients 
present with heterogeneous clinical phenotypes affecting predominantly heart, 
liver, and skeletal muscle. While VLCAD deficiency is a systemic disease, 
restoration of liver FAO has the potential to improve symptoms more broadly due 
to increased total body ATP production and reduced accumulation of potentially 
toxic metabolites. We explored the use of synthetic human VLCAD (hVLCAD) mRNA 
and lipid nanoparticle encapsulated hVLCAD mRNA (LNP-VLCAD) to generate 
functional VLCAD enzyme in patient fibroblasts derived from VLCAD deficient 
patients, mouse embryonic fibroblasts, hepatocytes isolated from VLCAD knockout 
(Acadvl-/-) mice, and Acadvl-/- mice to reverse the metabolic effects of the 
deficiency. Transfection of all cell types with hVLCAD mRNA resulted in high 
level expression of protein that localized to mitochondria with increased enzyme 
activity. Intravenous administration of LNP-VLCAD to Acadvl-/- mice produced a 
significant amount of VLCAD protein in liver, which declined over a week. 
Treated Acadvl-/- mice showed reduced hepatic steatosis, were more resistant to 
cold stress, and accumulated less toxic metabolites in blood than untreated 
animals. Results from this study support the potential for hVLCAD mRNA for 
treatment of VLCAD deficiency.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.106982
PMCID: PMC9877169
PMID: 36580829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Moderna 
Therapeutic, Inc. provided the experimental treatment and funded the study. All 
authors from University of Pittsburgh have no conflict of interest.