---
reference_id: "PMID:37094782"
title: "Duration of Symptoms Prior to Pediatric and Adolescent Tuberculosis Diagnosis and Its Impact on Schooling in Tanzania: A Mixed Methods Study."
authors:
- Ilaiwy G
- Lukumay S
- Augustino D
- Mejan P
- Bukhay R
- Justine M
- Massong C
- Rao P
- Petros de Guex K
- Pfaeffle H
- Mduma E
- Vinnard C
- Xie YL
- Heysell SK
- Thomas TA
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.22-0798
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Duration of Symptoms Prior to Pediatric and Adolescent Tuberculosis Diagnosis and Its Impact on Schooling in Tanzania: A Mixed Methods Study.
**Authors:** Ilaiwy G, Lukumay S, Augustino D, Mejan P, Bukhay R, Justine M, Massong C, Rao P, Petros de Guex K, Pfaeffle H, Mduma E, Vinnard C, Xie YL, Heysell SK, Thomas TA
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.22-0798](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.22-0798)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2023 Apr 24;108(6):1235-1239. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.22-0798. 
Print 2023 Jun 7.

Duration of Symptoms Prior to Pediatric and Adolescent Tuberculosis Diagnosis 
and Its Impact on Schooling in Tanzania: A Mixed Methods Study.

Ilaiwy G(1), Lukumay S(2), Augustino D(2), Mejan P(2), Bukhay R(2), Justine 
M(2), Massong C(2), Rao P(1), Petros de Guex K(1), Pfaeffle H(3), Mduma E(2), 
Vinnard C(4), Xie YL(4), Heysell SK(1), Thomas TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of 
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(2)Haydom Global Health Research Center, Haydom Lutheran Hospital, Haydom, 
Tanzania.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Navy Medicine and Readiness Training Command 
Portsmouth, Portsmouth, Virginia.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Rutgers New Jersey 
Medical School, Newark, New Jersey.

At least a third of tuberculosis (TB) cases remain undiagnosed, 
disproportionately so in children and adolescents, which is hampering global 
elimination goals. Prolonged symptom duration presents a high-risk scenario for 
childhood TB in endemic areas, but the prolonged period of symptoms and its 
impact on educational attainment are rarely documented. Using a mixed method 
approach, we aimed to quantify the duration of respiratory symptoms and describe 
their impact on education among children from a rural area of Tanzania. We used 
data from a prospectively enrolled cohort of children and adolescents aged 4-17 
years in rural Tanzania at the start of active TB treatment. We report on the 
cohort's baseline characteristics and explore the correlation between duration 
of symptoms and other variables. In-depth qualitative interviews were designed 
on the basis of a grounded theory approach to explore the impact of TB on 
educational attainment among school-aged children. In this cohort, children and 
adolescents diagnosed with TB experienced symptoms for a median of 85 days 
(interquartile range: 30, 231 days) prior to treatment initiation. In addition, 
56 participants (65%) had a TB exposure in the household. Of the 16 families 
with school-aged children who were interviewed, 15 (94%) reported a significant 
negative impact of TB on the schooling of their children. Children in this 
cohort experienced a long duration of TB symptoms; the extent of illness 
impacted absenteeism at school. Screening initiatives for households affected by 
TB may lead to a shortened duration of symptoms and may minimize the impact on 
school attendance.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.22-0798
PMCID: PMC10540103
PMID: 37094782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]