---
reference_id: "PMID:30181904"
title: Clinical course of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy complicated by choroidal neovascularization.
authors:
- Introini U
- Casalino G
- Dhrami-Gavazi E
- Mukkamala SK
- Mrejen S
- Schubert H
- Cohen SY
- Azzolini C
- Bandello F
- Chang S
- Yannuzzi LA
journal: Int J Retina Vitreous
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s40942-018-0134-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical course of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy complicated by choroidal neovascularization.
**Authors:** Introini U, Casalino G, Dhrami-Gavazi E, Mukkamala SK, Mrejen S, Schubert H, Cohen SY, Azzolini C, Bandello F, Chang S, Yannuzzi LA
**Journal:** Int J Retina Vitreous (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40942-018-0134-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40942-018-0134-y)

## Content

1. Int J Retina Vitreous. 2018 Aug 29;4:32. doi: 10.1186/s40942-018-0134-y.
eCollection 2018.

Clinical course of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy complicated by choroidal
neovascularization.

Introini U(1), Casalino G(1)(2), Dhrami-Gavazi E(3)(4), Mukkamala SK(3)(4),
Mrejen S(5), Schubert H(4), Cohen SY(5), Azzolini C(6), Bandello F(1), Chang
S(4), Yannuzzi LA(3).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Ophthalmology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Vita-Salute
University, Milan, Italy.
(2)2Moorfields Eye Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Vitreous Retina Macula Consultants of New York, New York, USA.
(4)4Department of Ophthalmology, Edward S. Harkness Eye Institute, Columbia
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, USA.
(5)Ophthalmic Center for Imaging and Laser, Paris, France.
(6)6Department of Surgical Sciences, Ophthalmology Section, University of
Insubria Ospedale di Circolo, Varèse, Italy.

PURPOSE: To report the clinical course and multimodal imaging features of acute
zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR) complicated by choroidal
neovascularization (CNV) treated with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) treatment or photodynamic therapy (PDT).
METHODS: Observational case series. Retrospective analysis of patients
presenting to different institutions with evidence of AZOOR and neovascular
lesions. Diagnosis of AZOOR was made on the basis of clinical presentation and
multimodal imaging. All patients underwent a comprehensive ophthalmic evaluation
and multimodal retinal imaging, including color fundus photos, fundus
autofluorescence, fundus fluorescein angiography and spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography.
RESULTS: Four patients (three males, mean age 53.5 years) were included in the
study. Mean follow-up was 5.1 years. Presentation of AZOOR was unilateral in two
patients and bilateral in the remainder two patients. One of the patients
presenting with unilateral AZOOR developed zonal lesions in the fellow eye
during follow-up. All patients presented with unilateral type 2 (subretinal)
CNV. Three patients underwent intravitreal anti-VEGF injections and one patient
underwent a single PDT. Multimodal retinal imaging showed zonal or multizonal
progression during treatment. After treatment, visual acuity and CNV
stabilization was observed in all patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of CNV expands the clinical spectrum of AZOOR. CNV
complicating AZOOR may be effectively treated with intravitreal injections of
anti-VEGF, despite progression of the zonal lesions. Further studies are
required to define the role of treatment in the progression of the zonal
lesions.

DOI: 10.1186/s40942-018-0134-y
PMCID: PMC6114516
PMID: 30181904
