---
reference_id: "PMID:20301608"
title: Alpha-Thalassemia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Tamary H
- Dgany O
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-Thalassemia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Tamary H, Dgany O

## Content

1. Alpha-Thalassemia.

Tamary H(1), Dgany O(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 Nov 1 [updated 2024 May 23].

Author information:
(1)Hematology-Oncology Department, Schneider Children's Medical Center of 
Israel, Petah Tiqva, Israel
(2)Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Petah Tiqva, Israel

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Alpha-thalassemia (α-thalassemia) has two clinically 
significant forms: hemoglobin Bart hydrops fetalis (Hb Bart) syndrome (caused by 
deletion/inactivation of all four alpha globin [α-globin] alleles; --/--), and 
hemoglobin H (HbH) disease (most frequently caused by deletion/inactivation of 
three α-globin alleles; --/-α). Hb Bart syndrome, the more severe form, is 
characterized by prenatal onset of generalized edema and pleural and pericardial 
effusions as a result of congestive heart failure induced by severe anemia. 
Extramedullary erythropoiesis, marked hepatosplenomegaly, and a massive placenta 
are common. Death usually occurs in the neonatal period. HbH disease has a broad 
phenotypic spectrum: although clinical features usually develop in the first 
years of life, HbH disease may not present until adulthood or may be diagnosed 
only during routine hematologic analysis in an asymptomatic individual. The 
majority of individuals have enlargement of the spleen (and less commonly of the 
liver), mild jaundice, and sometimes thalassemia-like bone changes. Individuals 
with HbH disease may develop gallstones and experience acute episodes of 
hemolysis in response to infections or exposure to oxidant drugs.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Hb Bart syndrome is established in a fetus 
with characteristic hematologic and hemoglobin (Hb) findings and molecular 
genetic testing that identifies biallelic pathogenic variants in both HBA1 and 
HBA2 that result in deletion or inactivation of all four α-globin alleles. The 
diagnosis of HbH disease is established in a proband with hematologic and Hb 
findings and molecular genetic testing that identifies biallelic pathogenic 
variants in HBA1 and HBA2 that result in deletion or inactivation of three 
α-globin alleles.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Hb Bart syndrome: intrauterine blood 
transfusions, improved transfusion strategies, and rarely curative hematopoietic 
stem cell transplant may allow survival of children. HbH disease: while most 
individuals are clinically well and survive without any treatment, occasional 
red blood cell transfusions may be needed during hemolytic or aplastic crises. 
Red blood cell transfusions are very rarely needed for severe anemia affecting 
cardiac function and erythroid expansion that results in severe bone changes and 
extramedullary erythropoiesis. In contrast, persons with non-deletional HbH 
disease may be more severely affected and transfusion dependent. Prevention of 
primary manifestations: Because of the severity of Hb Bart syndrome, the 
occasional presence of congenital anomalies, and the risk for maternal 
complications, prenatal testing and early termination of pregnancies at risk 
have usually been considered. However, recent advances in intrauterine and 
postnatal therapy have increased treatment options, thus complicating the 
ethical issues for health care providers and families facing an affected 
pregnancy. Prevention of secondary complications: Monitor individuals with HbH 
disease for hemolytic/aplastic crisis during febrile episodes; in those who 
require chronic red blood cell transfusions, iron chelation therapy should be 
instituted; for those who are not red blood cell transfusion dependent, iron 
chelation with deferasirox can be considered to reduce liver iron concentration. 
Surveillance: For HbH disease, hematologic evaluation every six to 12 months; 
assessment of growth and development in children every six to 12 months; 
monitoring of iron load with serum ferritin concentration and periodic 
quantitative measurement of liver iron concentration. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: In persons with HbH disease: inappropriate iron therapy and oxidant drugs 
(i.e., the same drugs to be avoided by individuals with glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficiency). Evaluation of relatives at risk: Test the sibs of a 
proband as soon as possible after birth for HbH disease so that monitoring can 
be instituted. Pregnancy management: Complications reported in pregnant women 
with HbH disease include worsening anemia, preeclampsia, congestive heart 
failure, and threatened miscarriage; monitoring for these issues during 
pregnancy is recommended.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Alpha-thalassemia is usually inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner. Hb Bart syndrome: At conception, each sib of a proband with Hb 
Bart syndrome has a 25% chance of having Hb Bart syndrome (e.g., --/--), a 50% 
chance of having α-thalassemia trait with deletion or inactivation of both 
α-globin genes on the same chromosome (e.g., --/αα), and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. HbH disease: The risk to sibs of a proband depends 
on genotype of the parents. Carrier testing: Family members, members of ethnic 
groups at risk, and gamete donors should be considered for carrier testing. 
Couples who are members of populations at risk for α-thalassemia trait with a 
two-gene deletion on the same chromosome (--/αα) can be identified prior to 
pregnancy as being at risk of conceiving a fetus with Hb Bart syndrome. Prenatal 
and preimplantation genetic testing may be carried out for couples who are at 
high risk of having a fetus with Hb Bart syndrome or for a pregnancy in which 
one parent is a known α-thalassemia carrier with a two-gene deletion one the 
same chromosome (--/αα) when the other parent is either unknown or unavailable 
for testing.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301608