---
reference_id: "PMID:17713528"
title: Cortico-striatal synaptic defects and OCD-like behaviours in Sapap3-mutant mice.
authors:
- Welch JM
- Lu J
- Rodriguiz RM
- Trotta NC
- Peca J
- Ding JD
- Feliciano C
- Chen M
- Adams JP
- Luo J
- Dudek SM
- Weinberg RJ
- Calakos N
- Wetsel WC
- Feng G
journal: Nature
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/nature06104
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Face/pathology
- "Facial Injuries/genetics, pathology"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Grooming
- Mice
- Mutation/genetics
- "Neostriatum/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder/genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/genetics, metabolism"
- "Self-Injurious Behavior/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Synapses/metabolism, pathology"
- Synaptic Transmission
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cortico-striatal synaptic defects and OCD-like behaviours in Sapap3-mutant mice.
**Authors:** Welch JM, Lu J, Rodriguiz RM, Trotta NC, Peca J, Ding JD, Feliciano C, Chen M, Adams JP, Luo J, Dudek SM, Weinberg RJ, Calakos N, Wetsel WC, Feng G
**Journal:** Nature (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature06104](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06104)

## Content

1. Nature. 2007 Aug 23;448(7156):894-900. doi: 10.1038/nature06104.

Cortico-striatal synaptic defects and OCD-like behaviours in Sapap3-mutant mice.

Welch JM(1), Lu J, Rodriguiz RM, Trotta NC, Peca J, Ding JD, Feliciano C, Chen 
M, Adams JP, Luo J, Dudek SM, Weinberg RJ, Calakos N, Wetsel WC, Feng G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Center for Translational Neuroscience, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2007 Aug 23;448(7156):871-2. doi: 10.1038/448871a.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is an anxiety-spectrum disorder 
characterized by persistent intrusive thoughts (obsessions) and repetitive 
actions (compulsions). Dysfunction of cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical circuitry 
is implicated in OCD, although the underlying pathogenic mechanisms are unknown. 
SAP90/PSD95-associated protein 3 (SAPAP3; also known as DLGAP3) is a 
postsynaptic scaffolding protein at excitatory synapses that is highly expressed 
in the striatum. Here we show that mice with genetic deletion of Sapap3 exhibit 
increased anxiety and compulsive grooming behaviour leading to facial hair loss 
and skin lesions; both behaviours are alleviated by a selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor. Electrophysiological, structural and biochemical studies of 
Sapap3-mutant mice reveal defects in cortico-striatal synapses. Furthermore, 
lentiviral-mediated selective expression of Sapap3 in the striatum rescues the 
synaptic and behavioural defects of Sapap3-mutant mice. These findings 
demonstrate a critical role for SAPAP3 at cortico-striatal synapses and 
emphasize the importance of cortico-striatal circuitry in OCD-like behaviours.

DOI: 10.1038/nature06104
PMCID: PMC2442572
PMID: 17713528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]