---
reference_id: PMID:37257508
title: Evidence for a feeding related association between melanocortin in the NTS and Neuropeptide-Y in the PVN.
authors:
- Kim EM
- Quinn JG
- Reid RE
- "O'Hare E"
journal: Appetite
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2023.106618
keywords:
- Humans
- Rats
- Animals
- Male
- Neuropeptide Y/pharmacology
- Solitary Nucleus
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- Paraventricular Hypothalamic Nucleus/physiology
- Melanocortins/pharmacology
- Eating/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence for a feeding related association between melanocortin in the NTS and Neuropeptide-Y in the PVN.
**Authors:** Kim EM, Quinn JG, Reid RE, O'Hare E
**Journal:** Appetite (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.appet.2023.106618](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2023.106618)

## Content

1. Appetite. 2023 Sep 1;188:106618. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2023.106618. Epub 2023
May  29.

Evidence for a feeding related association between melanocortin in the NTS and 
Neuropeptide-Y in the PVN.

Kim EM(1), Quinn JG(2), Reid RE(3), O'Hare E(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Ulster University, Cromore Road, Coleraine, Northern 
Ireland, UK. Electronic address: e.kim@ulster.ac.uk.
(2)School of Medicine, Queen's University Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK.
(3)School of Psychology, Dublin Business School, Ireland.
(4)School of Psychology, Queen's University Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK.

Melanocortin and neuropeptide-Y (NPY) are both involved in feeding and energy 
regulation, and they have opposite effects in the paraventricular nucleus of the 
hypothalamus (PVN). The present study examined an interaction between 
melanocortin in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) and NPY in the PVN. Male 
Sprague-Dawley rats were implanted with cannulae in the injection sites of 
interest. In Experiment 1, subjects received either the melanocortin 
3/4-receptor (MC3/4) antagonist SHU9119 (0, 10, 50 and 100 pmol/0.5 μl) or the 
MC3/4 agonist MTII (0, 10, 50, 100 and 200 pmol/0.5 μl) into the NTS. Food 
intake was measured at 1, 2, 4, 6 and 24-h post-injection. Administration of 
SHU9119 into the NTS significantly and dose-dependently increased food intake at 
1, 2, 4, 6 and 6-24-h, and administration of MTII into the NTS significantly and 
dose-dependently decreased 24-h free feeding. In Experiment 2, subjects received 
the MC3/4 agonist MTII (0, 10, 50, 100 and 200 pmol/0.5 μl) into the NTS just 
prior to NPY (0 and 1μg/0.5 μl) in the PVN. PVN injection of NPY stimulated 
feeding, and administration of MTII (50, 100 and 200 pmol) into the NTS 
significantly and dose-dependently decreased NPY-induced feeding at 2, 4, 6 and 
6-24-h. These data suggest that there could be a neuronal association between 
melanocortin in the NTS and NPY in the PVN, and that the melanocortin system in 
the NTS has an antagonistic effect on NPY-induced feeding in the PVN.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.appet.2023.106618
PMID: 37257508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper. None.