---
reference_id: "PMID:35813463"
title: Clinical and biochemical characteristics of 12 Chinese primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy patients with HPGD mutations.
authors:
- Lu Q
- Xu Y
- Li S
- Zhang Z
- Sheng J
- Zhang Z
journal: Int J Biol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7150/ijbs.71261
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- China
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Dinoprostone
- Female
- Humans
- Hydroxyprostaglandin Dehydrogenases/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- Organic Anion Transporters/genetics
- "Osteoarthropathy, Primary Hypertrophic/genetics, urine"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and biochemical characteristics of 12 Chinese primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy patients with HPGD mutations.
**Authors:** Lu Q, Xu Y, Li S, Zhang Z, Sheng J, Zhang Z
**Journal:** Int J Biol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7150/ijbs.71261](https://doi.org/10.7150/ijbs.71261)

## Content

1. Int J Biol Sci. 2022 Jun 6;18(9):3908-3917. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.71261.
eCollection  2022.

Clinical and biochemical characteristics of 12 Chinese primary hypertrophic 
osteoarthropathy patients with HPGD mutations.

Lu Q(1), Xu Y(1), Li S(1), Zhang Z(1), Sheng J(2), Zhang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Clinical Research Center of Bone Disease, Department of Osteoporosis 
and Bone Diseases, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's 
Hospital, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated 
Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO) is a rare genetic disease mainly 
affecting the skeletal and skin. Two genes involved in prostaglandin degradation 
are known to be responsible for PHO: HPGD and SLCO2A1. HPGD gene mutation can 
cause PHO autosomal recessive 1 (PHOAR1). The purpose of the present study is to 
analyze the clinical and biochemical characteristics and HPGD gene mutations of 
12 Chinese PHOAR1 patients. Twelve PHOAR1 patients from eleven families, 
including eleven males and one female, were enrolled in this study. Digital 
clubbing and periostosis came out to be the most common features, which always 
occur in the early childhood. We performed HPGD gene analysis and identified six 
novel (c.1A>G, c.34G>T, c.317T>A, c.475G>T, c.548C>T and c.421+1G>T) and one 
known (c.310_311delCT) HPGD mutations. The recurrent mutation c.310_311delCT 
were found in all eleven patients, suggesting it is a hotspot mutation. PHOAR1 
patients are considered to have an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. 
Here, in addition to nine compound heterozygous patients and two homozygous 
patients, we found one heterozygous patient and reviewed two heterozygous 
patients reported in other studies. In terms of biochemical characteristics, our 
PHOAR1 patients have elevated urinary prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) levels (P<0.001) 
and decreased urinary prostaglandin E metabolite (PGE-M) levels (P=0.04) 
compared with healthy controls. The patients' PGE2/PGE-M (E/M) ratio came out to 
be lower than normal subjects (P<0.001). This study provides a comprehensive 
description of the clinical phenotypes of Chinese PHOAR1 patients and expands 
the genotypic spectrum of the disease.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.71261
PMCID: PMC9254467
PMID: 35813463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.