---
reference_id: "PMID:37096129"
title: In Vitro Characterization of Motor Neurons and Purkinje Cells Differentiated from Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Generated from Patients with Autosomal Recessive Spastic Ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay.
authors:
- Louit A
- Beaudet MJ
- Blais M
- Gros-Louis F
- Dupré N
- Berthod F
journal: Stem Cells Int
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1155/2023/1496597
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In Vitro Characterization of Motor Neurons and Purkinje Cells Differentiated from Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Generated from Patients with Autosomal Recessive Spastic Ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay.
**Authors:** Louit A, Beaudet MJ, Blais M, Gros-Louis F, Dupré N, Berthod F
**Journal:** Stem Cells Int (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2023/1496597](https://doi.org/10.1155/2023/1496597)

## Content

1. Stem Cells Int. 2023 Apr 15;2023:1496597. doi: 10.1155/2023/1496597.
eCollection  2023.

In Vitro Characterization of Motor Neurons and Purkinje Cells Differentiated 
from Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Generated from Patients with Autosomal 
Recessive Spastic Ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay.

Louit A(1), Beaudet MJ(1), Blais M(1), Gros-Louis F(1)(2), Dupré N(1)(3), 
Berthod F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)LOEX, Centre de recherche du CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Quebec City, 
Quebec, Canada.
(2)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval, Quebec City, 
Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval, Quebec City, 
Quebec, Canada.

Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is an 
early-onset neurodegenerative disease mainly characterized by spasticity in the 
lower limbs and poor muscle control. The disease is caused by mutations in the 
SACS gene leading in most cases to a loss of function of the sacsin protein, 
which is highly expressed in motor neurons and Purkinje cells. To investigate 
the impact of the mutated sacsin protein in these cells in vitro, induced 
pluripotent stem cell- (iPSC-) derived motor neurons and iPSC-derived Purkinje 
cells were generated from three ARSACS patients. Both types of iPSC-derived 
neurons expressed the characteristic neuronal markers β3-tubulin, neurofilaments 
M and H, as well as specific markers like Islet-1 for motor neurons, and 
parvalbumin or calbindin for Purkinje cells. Compared to controls, iPSC-derived 
mutated SACS neurons expressed lower amounts of sacsin. In addition, 
characteristic neurofilament aggregates were detected along the neurites of both 
iPSC-derived neurons. These results indicate that it is possible to recapitulate 
in vitro, at least in part, the ARSACS pathological signature in vitro using 
patient-derived motor neurons and Purkinje cells differentiated from iPSCs. Such 
an in vitro personalized model of the disease could be useful for the screening 
of new drugs for the treatment of ARSACS.

Copyright © 2023 Aurélie Louit et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/1496597
PMCID: PMC10122584
PMID: 37096129

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.