---
reference_id: "PMID:37024122"
title: Validating organoid-derived human intestinal monolayers for personalized therapy in cystic fibrosis.
authors:
- Birimberg-Schwartz L
- Ip W
- Bartlett C
- Avolio J
- Vonk AM
- Gunawardena T
- Du K
- Esmaeili M
- Beekman JM
- Rommens J
- Strug L
- Bear CE
- Moraes TJ
- Gonska T
journal: Life Sci Alliance
year: '2023'
doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201857
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cystic Fibrosis/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Intestines
- Organoids/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Validating organoid-derived human intestinal monolayers for personalized therapy in cystic fibrosis.
**Authors:** Birimberg-Schwartz L, Ip W, Bartlett C, Avolio J, Vonk AM, Gunawardena T, Du K, Esmaeili M, Beekman JM, Rommens J, Strug L, Bear CE, Moraes TJ, Gonska T
**Journal:** Life Sci Alliance (2023)
**DOI:** [10.26508/lsa.202201857](https://doi.org/10.26508/lsa.202201857)

## Content

1. Life Sci Alliance. 2023 Apr 5;6(6):e202201857. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201857. 
Print 2023 Jun.

Validating organoid-derived human intestinal monolayers for personalized therapy 
in cystic fibrosis.

Birimberg-Schwartz L(1)(2), Ip W(2), Bartlett C(2), Avolio J(2), Vonk AM(3)(4), 
Gunawardena T(5), Du K(5), Esmaeili M(6), Beekman JM(3)(4), Rommens J(6)(7), 
Strug L(6)(8)(9)(10), Bear CE(5)(11)(12), Moraes TJ(2)(13), Gonska T(14)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and 
Nutrition, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(2)Translational Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(3)Regenerative Medicine Utrecht, University Medical Center, Utrecht University, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Member of ERN-LUNG, 
Utrecht, The Netherland.
(5)Programme in Molecular Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Canada.
(6)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Canada.
(7)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(8)Biostatistics Division, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(9)Department of Statistical Sciences and Computer Science, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(10)The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Canada.
(11)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(12)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(13)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Respiratory Medicine, The Hospital 
for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(14)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and 
Nutrition, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada Tanja.Gonska@sickkids.ca.

Highly effective drugs modulating the defective protein encoded by the CFTR gene 
have revolutionized cystic fibrosis (CF) therapy. Preclinical drug-testing on 
human nasal epithelial (HNE) cell cultures and 3-dimensional human intestinal 
organoids (3D HIO) are used to address patient-specific variation in drug 
response and to optimize individual treatment for people with CF. This study is 
the first to report comparable CFTR functional responses to CFTR modulator 
treatment among patients with different classes of CFTR gene variants using the 
three methods of 2D HIO, 3D HIO, and HNE. Furthermore, 2D HIO showed good 
correlation to clinical outcome markers. A larger measurable CFTR functional 
range and access to the apical membrane were identified as advantages of 2D HIO 
over HNE and 3D HIO, respectively. Our study thus expands the utility of 2D 
intestinal monolayers as a preclinical drug testing tool for CF.

© 2023 Birimberg-Schwartz et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202201857
PMCID: PMC10079552
PMID: 37024122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T Gunawardena performed consultation service for 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals. T Gonska received funding from Vertex Pharmaceuticals 
for an investigator-initiated study and from AbbVie as part of a collaborative 
research project.