---
reference_id: "PMID:39337401"
title: Skeletal Muscle Involvement in Friedreich Ataxia.
authors:
- Indelicato E
- Wanschitz J
- Löscher W
- Boesch S
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25189915
keywords:
- "Friedreich Ataxia/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- Humans
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- "Mitochondria/metabolism, pathology"
- "Iron-Binding Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Frataxin
- Biomarkers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skeletal Muscle Involvement in Friedreich Ataxia.
**Authors:** Indelicato E, Wanschitz J, Löscher W, Boesch S
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25189915](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25189915)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Sep 13;25(18):9915. doi: 10.3390/ijms25189915.

Skeletal Muscle Involvement in Friedreich Ataxia.

Indelicato E(1), Wanschitz J(2), Löscher W(2), Boesch S(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Rare Movement Disorders Innsbruck, Department of Neurology,
Medical University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Unit for Neuromuscular Disorders and Clinical Neurophysiology, Department of
Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Friedreich Ataxia (FRDA) is an inherited neuromuscular disorder triggered by a
deficit of the mitochondrial protein frataxin. At a cellular level, frataxin
deficiency results in insufficient iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis and impaired
mitochondrial function and adenosine triphosphate production. The main clinical
manifestation is a progressive balance and coordination disorder which depends
on the involvement of peripheral and central sensory pathways as well as of the
cerebellum. Besides the neurological involvement, FRDA affects also the striated
muscles. The most prominent manifestation is a hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
which also represents the major determinant of premature mortality. Moreover,
FRDA displays skeletal muscle involvement, which contributes to the weakness and
marked fatigue evident throughout the course of the disease. Herein, we review
skeletal muscle findings in FRDA generated by functional imaging, histology, as
well as multiomics techniques in both disease models and in patients.
Altogether, these findings corroborate a disease phenotype in skeletal muscle
and support the notion of progressive mitochondrial damage as a driver of
disease progression in FRDA. Furthermore, we highlight the relevance of skeletal
muscle investigations in the development of biomarkers for early-phase trials
and future therapeutic strategies in FRDA.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25189915
PMCID: PMC11432698
PMID: 39337401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
