---
reference_id: "PMID:36604934"
title: "Inborn Errors of Metabolism Associated With Autism Among Children: A Multicenter Study from Iran."
authors:
- Moravej H
- Inaloo S
- Nahid S
- Mazloumi S
- Nemati H
- Moosavian T
- Nasiri J
- Ghasemi F
- Alaei MR
- Dalili S
- Aminzadeh M
- Katibeh P
- Amirhakimi A
- Yazdani N
- Ilkhanipoor H
- Afshar Z
- Hadipour F
- Hadipour Z
journal: Indian Pediatr
year: '2023'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Humans
- Child
- Iran/epidemiology
- Autistic Disorder
- Autism Spectrum Disorder/epidemiology
- Creatine
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Amino Acids
- Seizures
- "Carnitine/analogs & derivatives"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inborn Errors of Metabolism Associated With Autism Among Children: A Multicenter Study from Iran.
**Authors:** Moravej H, Inaloo S, Nahid S, Mazloumi S, Nemati H, Moosavian T, Nasiri J, Ghasemi F, Alaei MR, Dalili S, Aminzadeh M, Katibeh P, Amirhakimi A, Yazdani N, Ilkhanipoor H, Afshar Z, Hadipour F, Hadipour Z
**Journal:** Indian Pediatr (2023)

## Content

1. Indian Pediatr. 2023 Mar 15;60(3):193-196. Epub 2023 Jan 2.

Inborn Errors of Metabolism Associated With Autism Among Children: A Multicenter
Study from Iran.

Moravej H(1), Inaloo S(2), Nahid S(3), Mazloumi S(4), Nemati H(5), Moosavian
T(6), Nasiri J(7), Ghasemi F(8), Alaei MR(9), Dalili S(10), Aminzadeh M(11),
Katibeh P(12), Amirhakimi A(4), Yazdani N(13), Ilkhanipoor H(4), Afshar Z(4),
Hadipour F(14), Hadipour Z(14).

Author information:
(1)Neonatal Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran
and Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Shiraz University
of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Neonatal Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz,
Iran.
(3)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Farzanegan Lab, Shiraz, Iran.
(4)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Shiraz University
of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(5)Epilepsy Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran
and Shiraz Neuroscience Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences,
Shiraz, Iran.
(6)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Loghman Hakim Hospital, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Child Growth and Development Research Center, Research Institute for
Primordial Prevention of Non-communicable Disease, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(8)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Iran University of
Medical Sciences, Institute of Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center,
Tehran, Iran.
(9)Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Mofid Children's Hospital, Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(10)Pediatric Diseases Research Center, Guilan University of Medical Sciences,
Rasht, Iran.
(11)Professor of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Pediatric Department,
School of Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz,
Iran.
(12)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences,
Shiraz, Iran.
(13)Neonatal Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz,
Iran. Correspondence to: Dr. Negar Yazdani, Neonatal Research Center, Shiraz
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. yazdani.n2017@yahoo.com.
(14)Department of Clinical Genetics, Atieh Hospital, Tehran, Iran.

Comment in
    Indian Pediatr. 2023 Mar 15;60(3):177-178.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to find the common inborn errors of metabolism in
Iranian patients with autism spectrum disorder.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional multicenter study, 105 children and adolescents
with autism spectrum disorder from six centers in different cities of Iran were
enrolled between August, 2019 and October, 2020. Metabolic screening, including
measuring plasma levels of amino acids, acylcarnitines, creatine, and
guani-dinoacetate, and urinary levels of organic acids, purines, and pyrimidines
was performed. Other data, including age, parental consanguinity, history of
seizure, developmental mile-stones, and physical examination, were also
recorded.
RESULTS: An inborn error of metabolism was found in 13 (12.4%) patients. Five
patients (4.8%) had cerebral creatine deficiency syndrome, 4 (3.8%) had arginine
succinate aciduria, 2- methylbutyryl glycinuria, short-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency, and combined methylmalonic aciduria/malonic aciduria.
There was a strong association between positive meta-bolic evaluation and
parental consanguinity, history of seizures, microcephaly, and delayed
development.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that metabolic screening should be performed in
the cases of autism associated with parental consanguinity, developmental delay,
and a history of seizures. The assays to be considered as a screening panel
include plasma or blood amino acids, acylcarnitines, creatine and
guanidinoacetate, and urinary levels of organic acids.

PMID: 36604934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
