---
reference_id: "PMID:27048506"
title: "Phenotype and genotype in patients with Larsen syndrome: clinical homogeneity and allelic heterogeneity in seven patients."
authors:
- Girisha KM
- Bidchol AM
- Graul-Neumann L
- Gupta A
- Hehr U
- Lessel D
- Nader S
- Shah H
- Wickert J
- Kutsche K
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-016-0290-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotype and genotype in patients with Larsen syndrome: clinical homogeneity and allelic heterogeneity in seven patients.
**Authors:** Girisha KM, Bidchol AM, Graul-Neumann L, Gupta A, Hehr U, Lessel D, Nader S, Shah H, Wickert J, Kutsche K
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-016-0290-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-016-0290-6)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2016 Apr 6;17:27. doi: 10.1186/s12881-016-0290-6.

Phenotype and genotype in patients with Larsen syndrome: clinical homogeneity 
and allelic heterogeneity in seven patients.

Girisha KM(1), Bidchol AM(1), Graul-Neumann L(2), Gupta A(1), Hehr U(3), Lessel 
D(4), Nader S(5), Shah H(6), Wickert J(4), Kutsche K(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal University, 
Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(2)Ambulantes Gesundheitszentrum der Charité, Campus Virchow, Humangenetik, 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Center for and Department of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, 
Regensburg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Martinistraße 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Kinderorthopädie, Schön Klinik Vogtareuth, Prien am Chiemsee, Germany.
(6)Pediatric Orthopedic Services, Department of Orthopedics, Kasturba Medical 
College, Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Martinistraße 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany. kkutsche@uke.de.

BACKGROUND: Larsen syndrome is an autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia 
characterized by large joint dislocations and craniofacial dysmorphism. It is 
caused by missense or small in-frame deletions in the FLNB gene. To further 
characterize the phenotype and the mutation spectrum of this condition, we 
investigated seven probands, five sporadic individuals and a mother-son-duo with 
Larsen syndrome.
METHODS: The seven patients from six unrelated families were clinically and 
radiologically evaluated. All patients were screened for mutations in selected 
exons and exon-intron boundaries of the FLNB gene by Sanger sequencing. FLNB 
transcript analysis was carried out in one patient to analyse the effect of the 
sequence variant on pre-mRNA splicing.
RESULTS: All patients exhibited typical facial features and joint dislocations. 
Contrary to the widely described advanced carpal ossification, we noted delay in 
two patients. We identified the five novel mutations c.4927G  A/p.(Gly1643Ser), 
c.4876G > T / p.(Gly1626Trp), c.4664G > A / p.(Gly1555Asp), c.2055G > C / 
p.Gln685delins10 and c.5021C > T / p.(Ala1674Val) as well as a frequently 
observed mutation in Larsen syndrome [c.5164G > A/p.(Gly1722Ser)] in the hotspot 
regions. FLNB transcript analysis of the c.2055G > C variant revealed insertion 
of 27 bp intronic sequence between exon 13 and 14 which gives rise to in-frame 
deletion of glutamine 685 and insertion of ten novel amino acid residues 
(p.Gln685delins10).
CONCLUSIONS: All seven individuals with Larsen syndrome had a uniform clinical 
phenotype except for delayed carpal ossification in two of them. Our study 
reveals five novel FLNB mutations and confirms immunoglobulin-like (Ig) repeats 
14 and 15 as major hotspot regions. The p.Gln685delins10 mutation is the first 
Larsen syndrome-associated alteration located in Ig repeat 5. All mutations 
reported so far leave the filamin B protein intact in accordance with a 
gain-of-function effect. Our findings underscore the characteristic clinical 
picture of FLNB-associated Larsen syndrome and add Ig repeat 5 to the filamin B 
domains affected by the clustered mutations.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-016-0290-6
PMCID: PMC4822278
PMID: 27048506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]