---
reference_id: "PMID:38604995"
title: "Characterization of patients with aHUS and associated triggers or clinical conditions: A Global aHUS Registry analysis."
authors:
- Licht C
- Al-Dakkak I
- Anokhina K
- Isbel N
- Frémeaux-Bacchi V
- Gilbert RD
- Greenbaum LA
- Ariceta G
- Ardissino G
- Schaefer F
- Rondeau E
journal: Nephrology (Carlton)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/nep.14304
keywords:
- Humans
- Registries
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/genetics, epidemiology, diagnosis, immunology"
- Female
- Male
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
- Pregnancy
- "Complement Factor H/genetics, immunology"
- Child
- Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Age of Onset
- "Child, Preschool"
- Risk Factors
- Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of patients with aHUS and associated triggers or clinical conditions: A Global aHUS Registry analysis.
**Authors:** Licht C, Al-Dakkak I, Anokhina K, Isbel N, Frémeaux-Bacchi V, Gilbert RD, Greenbaum LA, Ariceta G, Ardissino G, Schaefer F, Rondeau E
**Journal:** Nephrology (Carlton) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nep.14304](https://doi.org/10.1111/nep.14304)

## Content

1. Nephrology (Carlton). 2024 Aug;29(8):519-527. doi: 10.1111/nep.14304. Epub
2024  Apr 11.

Characterization of patients with aHUS and associated triggers or clinical
conditions: A Global aHUS Registry analysis.

Licht C(1), Al-Dakkak I(2), Anokhina K(2), Isbel N(3), Frémeaux-Bacchi V(4),
Gilbert RD(5), Greenbaum LA(6), Ariceta G(7), Ardissino G(8), Schaefer F(9),
Rondeau E(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(2)Alexion, AstraZeneca Rare Disease, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia.
(4)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France.
(5)Regional Paediatric Nephro-Urology Unit, Southampton Children's Hospital,
Southampton, UK.
(6)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Emory University School of Medicine and
Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Autonomous
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Centro per la Cura e lo Studio della Sindrome Emolitico-Uremica, Fondazione
IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(9)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(10)Urgences Néphrologiques et Transplantation Rénale, Hôpital Tenon, Paris,
France.

INTRODUCTION: Atypical haemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a rare form of
thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) associated with complement dysregulation; aHUS
may be associated with other 'triggers' or 'clinical conditions'. This study
aimed to characterize this patient population using data from the Global aHUS
Registry, the largest collection of real-world data on patients with aHUS.
METHODS: Patients enrolled in the Global aHUS Registry between April 2012 and
June 2021 and with recorded aHUS-associated triggers or clinical conditions
prior/up to aHUS onset were analysed. aHUS was diagnosed by the treating
physician. Data were classified by age at onset of aHUS (< or ≥18 years) and
additionally by the presence/absence of identified pathogenic complement genetic
variant(s) and/or anti-complement factor H (CFH) antibodies.
Genetically/immunologically untested patients were excluded.
RESULTS: 1947 patients were enrolled in the Global aHUS Registry by June 2021,
and 349 (17.9%) met inclusion criteria. 307/349 patients (88.0%) had a single
associated trigger or clinical condition and were included in the primary
analysis. Malignancy was most common (58/307, 18.9%), followed by pregnancy and
acute infections (both 53/307, 17.3%). Patients with an associated trigger or
clinical condition were generally more likely to be adults at aHUS onset.
CONCLUSION: Our analysis suggests that aHUS-associated triggers or clinical
conditions may be organized into clinically relevant categories, and their
presence does not exclude the concurrent presence of pathogenic complement
genetic variants and/or anti-CFH antibodies. Considering a diagnosis of aHUS
with associated triggers or clinical conditions in patients presenting with TMA
may allow faster and more appropriate treatment.

© 2024 The Authors. Nephrology published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on
behalf of Asian Pacific Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1111/nep.14304
PMID: 38604995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
