---
reference_id: "PMID:23738509"
title: Central precocious puberty caused by mutations in the imprinted gene MKRN3.
authors:
- Abreu AP
- Dauber A
- Macedo DB
- Noel SD
- Brito VN
- Gill JC
- Cukier P
- Thompson IR
- Navarro VM
- Gagliardi PC
- Rodrigues T
- Kochi C
- Longui CA
- Beckers D
- de Zegher F
- Montenegro LR
- Mendonca BB
- Carroll RS
- Hirschhorn JN
- Latronico AC
- Kaiser UB
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1302160
keywords:
- Animals
- Arcuate Nucleus of Hypothalamus/chemistry
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exome
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Genetic Association Studies
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Hypothalamus/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Puberty, Precocious/genetics"
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis"
- "Ribonucleoproteins/deficiency, genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central precocious puberty caused by mutations in the imprinted gene MKRN3.
**Authors:** Abreu AP, Dauber A, Macedo DB, Noel SD, Brito VN, Gill JC, Cukier P, Thompson IR, Navarro VM, Gagliardi PC, Rodrigues T, Kochi C, Longui CA, Beckers D, de Zegher F, Montenegro LR, Mendonca BB, Carroll RS, Hirschhorn JN, Latronico AC, Kaiser UB
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1302160](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1302160)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2013 Jun 27;368(26):2467-75. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1302160. Epub
2013  Jun 5.

Central precocious puberty caused by mutations in the imprinted gene MKRN3.

Abreu AP(1), Dauber A, Macedo DB, Noel SD, Brito VN, Gill JC, Cukier P, Thompson 
IR, Navarro VM, Gagliardi PC, Rodrigues T, Kochi C, Longui CA, Beckers D, de 
Zegher F, Montenegro LR, Mendonca BB, Carroll RS, Hirschhorn JN, Latronico AC, 
Kaiser UB.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Jun 27;368(26):2513-5. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1306743.
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2013 Aug;9(8):440. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2013.127.

BACKGROUND: The onset of puberty is first detected as an increase in pulsatile 
secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Early activation of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis results in central precocious puberty. The 
timing of pubertal development is driven in part by genetic factors, but only a 
few, rare molecular defects associated with central precocious puberty have been 
identified.
METHODS: We performed whole-exome sequencing in 40 members of 15 families with 
central precocious puberty. Candidate variants were confirmed with Sanger 
sequencing. We also performed quantitative real-time polymerase-chain-reaction 
assays to determine levels of messenger RNA (mRNA) in the hypothalami of mice at 
different ages.
RESULTS: We identified four novel heterozygous mutations in MKRN3, the gene 
encoding makorin RING-finger protein 3, in 5 of the 15 families; both sexes were 
affected. The mutations included three frameshift mutations, predicted to encode 
truncated proteins, and one missense mutation, predicted to disrupt protein 
function. MKRN3 is a paternally expressed, imprinted gene located in the 
Prader-Willi syndrome critical region (chromosome 15q11-q13). All affected 
persons inherited the mutations from their fathers, a finding that indicates 
perfect segregation with the mode of inheritance expected for an imprinted gene. 
Levels of Mkrn3 mRNA were high in the arcuate nucleus of prepubertal mice, 
decreased immediately before puberty, and remained low after puberty.
CONCLUSIONS: Deficiency of MKRN3 causes central precocious puberty in humans. 
(Funded by the National Institutes of Health and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1302160
PMCID: PMC3808195
PMID: 23738509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]