---
reference_id: "PMID:37388159"
title: "Impact of traveling on transmission trends of human monkeypox disease: worldwide data based observational analysis."
authors:
- Meo SA
- Al-Khlaiwi T
- Al Jassir FF
- Meo AS
journal: Front Public Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2023.1029215
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of traveling on transmission trends of human monkeypox disease: worldwide data based observational analysis.
**Authors:** Meo SA, Al-Khlaiwi T, Al Jassir FF, Meo AS
**Journal:** Front Public Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fpubh.2023.1029215](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2023.1029215)

## Content

1. Front Public Health. 2023 Jun 14;11:1029215. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2023.1029215. 
eCollection 2023.

Impact of traveling on transmission trends of human monkeypox disease: worldwide 
data based observational analysis.

Meo SA(1), Al-Khlaiwi T(1), Al Jassir FF(2), Meo AS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(3)College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Human monkeypox is an emerging viral zoonotic disease caused by a 
monkeypox virus (MPXV). This year since early May 2022, the virus swiftly spread 
involved 94 countries, and 41,358 people, and has developed a highly challenging 
and threatening situation worldwide. This study aimed to investigate the impact 
of traveling on the transmission of human monkeypox disease and comprehend the 
link between monkeypox exported cases in the context of the global outbreak.
METHODS: In this study, we identified data from two leading health 
organizations, the World Health Organization (WHO), and the Centers for Disease 
Control Prevention (CDC), as well as 40 documents that were identified through 
the search engines Web of Science, Pub-Med, Medline, EMBASE, Scopus, and Google 
Scholar using the keywords "monkeypox," "human monkeypox," "imported"', 
"exportation" "travelers," and "prevalence." Finally, two international 
organizations WHO, and CDC, and out of 40 documents, 10 (25.0%) were included in 
the analysis, and the remaining 30 (75.0%) documents were excluded. The studies 
originated from the United Kingdom, the United States of America, Singapore, 
Israel, the Republic of Korea, Taiwan, and India. The data on transmission 
trends and human monkeypox was recorded and analyzed.
RESULTS: The epidemiological data for exported monkeypox cases were analyzed 
jointly for understanding the transmission trends of exportations and the 
geographic context of the monkeypox outbreak. Ten people had a travel history, 
six had a travel history from Nigeria to the United Kingdom (2), Nigeria to the 
United States of America (2), Nigeria to Singapore (1) and Nigeria to Israel 
(1). Moreover, from Germany to Taiwan (1), Germany to the Republic of Korea (1) 
and the United Arab Emirates to India (2). Among these 10 people, all travelers 
were male (100%), with age ranges of 20-38 years, seven people (70%) developed 
clinical symptoms before the start of travel, three people (30%) developed 
symptoms 2-6 days after the travel, and one person (10%) developed clinical 
symptoms in the flight during the journey.
CONCLUSION: The study findings conclude that traveling can cause the spread of 
human monkeypox disease in various countries. The findings support the 
hypothesis that virus sources can travel and spread the disease from person to 
person and from region to region. The international health authorities must 
implement global preventive policies to control the burden of the disease both 
at regional and international levels.

Copyright © 2023 Meo, Al-Khlaiwi, Al Jassir and Meo.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2023.1029215
PMCID: PMC10303924
PMID: 37388159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.