---
reference_id: "PMID:38200289"
title: "Intellectual disability and autism in propionic acidemia: a biomarker-behavioral investigation implicating dysregulated mitochondrial biology."
authors:
- Shchelochkov OA
- Farmer CA
- Chlebowski C
- Adedipe D
- Ferry S
- Manoli I
- Pass A
- McCoy S
- Van Ryzin C
- Sloan J
- Thurm A
- Venditti CP
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02385-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intellectual disability and autism in propionic acidemia: a biomarker-behavioral investigation implicating dysregulated mitochondrial biology.
**Authors:** Shchelochkov OA, Farmer CA, Chlebowski C, Adedipe D, Ferry S, Manoli I, Pass A, McCoy S, Van Ryzin C, Sloan J, Thurm A, Venditti CP
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-023-02385-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-023-02385-5)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2024 Apr;29(4):974-981. doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02385-5. Epub 
2024 Jan 11.

Intellectual disability and autism in propionic acidemia: a biomarker-behavioral 
investigation implicating dysregulated mitochondrial biology.

Shchelochkov OA(1), Farmer CA(2), Chlebowski C(2), Adedipe D(2), Ferry S(1), 
Manoli I(1), Pass A(1), McCoy S(1), Van Ryzin C(1), Sloan J(1), Thurm A(2), 
Venditti CP(3).

Author information:
(1)Organic Acid Research Section, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(2)Neurodevelopmental and Behavioral Phenotyping Service, National Institute of 
Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(3)Organic Acid Research Section, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. venditti@mail.nih.gov.

Propionic acidemia (PA) is an autosomal recessive condition (OMIM #606054), 
wherein pathogenic variants in PCCA and PCCB impair the activity of 
propionyl-CoA carboxylase. PA is associated with neurodevelopmental disorders, 
including intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD); 
however, the correlates and mechanisms of these outcomes remain unknown. Using 
data from a subset of participants with PA enrolled in a dedicated natural 
history study (n = 33), we explored associations between neurodevelopmental 
phenotypes and laboratory parameters. Twenty (61%) participants received an ID 
diagnosis, and 12 of the 31 (39%) who were fully evaluated received the 
diagnosis of ASD. A diagnosis of ID, lower full-scale IQ (sample 
mean = 65 ± 26), and lower adaptive behavior composite scores (sample 
mean = 67 ± 23) were associated with several biomarkers. Higher concentrations 
of plasma propionylcarnitine, plasma total 2-methylcitrate, serum 
erythropoietin, and mitochondrial biomarkers plasma FGF21 and GDF15 were 
associated with a more severe ID profile. Reduced 1-13C-propionate oxidative 
capacity and decreased levels of plasma and urinary glutamine were also 
associated with a more severe ID profile. Only two parameters, increased serum 
erythropoietin and decreased plasma glutamine, were associated with ASD. Plasma 
glycine, one of the defining features of PA, was not meaningfully associated 
with either ID or ASD. Thus, while both ID and ASD were commonly observed in our 
PA cohort, only ID was robustly associated with metabolic parameters. Our 
results suggest that disease severity and associated mitochondrial dysfunction 
may play a role in CNS complications of PA and identify potential biomarkers and 
candidate surrogate endpoints.

© 2024. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-023-02385-5
PMCID: PMC11176071
PMID: 38200289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.