---
reference_id: "PMID:39924437"
title: "Family-based interventions for adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Matrook KA
- Whitford DL
- Smith SM
- McGilloway S
- Piyasena MP
- Cowman S
journal: Prim Care Diabetes
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.pcd.2025.01.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Family-based interventions for adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Matrook KA, Whitford DL, Smith SM, McGilloway S, Piyasena MP, Cowman S
**Journal:** Prim Care Diabetes (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pcd.2025.01.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcd.2025.01.006)

## Content

1. Prim Care Diabetes. 2025 Apr;19(2):111-119. doi: 10.1016/j.pcd.2025.01.006.
Epub  2025 Feb 8.

Family-based interventions for adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Matrook KA(1), Whitford DL(2), Smith SM(3), McGilloway S(4), Piyasena MP(5), 
Cowman S(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 
Adliya, Bahrain. Electronic address: Kmatrook@rcsi.com.
(2)Vice-Chancellor Office, University of Cyberjaya, Cyberjaya, Selangor 63000, 
Malaysia.
(3)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 
2, Ireland.
(4)Centre for Mental Health and Community Research, Department of Psychology, 
Maynooth University Maynooth, Ireland.
(5)Faculty of Health, Medicine and Social Care, Anglia Ruskin University, 
Cambridge, UK.
(6)Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland Faculty of Nursing & Midwifery, Dublin 
2, Ireland.

Family-based interventions involve family members in caring for patients with 
diabetes, but it is unclear whether they are effective in improving outcomes for 
type 2 diabetes (T2DM). This systematic review and meta-analysis aim to 
determine the effectiveness of family-based interventions in improving glycaemic 
control in T2DM patients. We identified 6163 abstracts. Eleven RCTs (n = 1421) 
met our inclusion criteria. The overall findings suggest that family-based 
interventions are effective in improving HbA1c, at 3-4 months follow-up and when 
the intervention is delivered by nurses, with modest effects. Consideration 
should be given to integrating family-based interventions in the primary care 
among cultures with greater family cohesion.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcd.2025.01.006
PMID: 39924437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest All authors 
declare no conflicting interests.