---
reference_id: "PMID:15529622"
title: Strong association of insulin gene INS-VNTR polymorphisms with type 1 diabetes in the Romanian population.
authors:
- Guja C
- Guja L
- Nutland S
- Rance H
- Todd JA
- Ionescu-Tîrgovişte C
journal: Rom J Intern Med
year: '2004'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Strong association of insulin gene INS-VNTR polymorphisms with type 1 diabetes in the Romanian population.
**Authors:** Guja C, Guja L, Nutland S, Rance H, Todd JA, Ionescu-Tîrgovişte C
**Journal:** Rom J Intern Med (2004)

## Content

1. Rom J Intern Med. 2004;42(2):313-23.

Strong association of insulin gene INS-VNTR polymorphisms with type 1 diabetes 
in the Romanian population.

Guja C(1), Guja L, Nutland S, Rance H, Todd JA, Ionescu-Tîrgovişte C.

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Diabetes, Institute of Diabetes, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases 
N. Paulescu, Bucharest, Romania. cristi_guja@fx.ro

Type 1 diabetes (T1DM) is a common, chronic disease with autoimmune pathogeny, 
conditioned by genetic factors. Class II HLA DR and DQ and insulin gene 
polymorphisms encode for most of the T1DM genetic susceptibility. We have 
previously shown that class I alleles of the insulin gene INS-VNTR locus are 
strongly associated with T1DM in the Romanian population. The aim of our study 
was to confirm the contribution of INS-VNTR to T1DM genetic susceptibility in 
Romania. For this we typed the insulin gene -23HphI A/T polymorphism (an 
accurate marker for the INS-VNTR alleles) on 219 Romanian T1DM families using 
Taqman. Allele transmission to diabetics and unaffected siblings was assessed 
using the Transmission Disequilibrium Test (TDT). We found a significantly 
increased transmission of -23HphI A allele to diabetics (78.31% transmission, 
pTDT = 2.4 e-07) which confirms our previous findings. Combined with the data 
from the first 204 Romanian T1DM families, the transmission of -23HphI A allele 
to diabetics is almost 80% (79.78%, pTDT = 2.8 e-15). This percentage indicates 
the same level of predisposition as for the most diabetogenic HLA's. In 
conclusion, our results indicate an exceptionally strong association of the 
class I INS-VNTR alleles with T1DM for the Romanian population.

PMID: 15529622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]