---
reference_id: "PMID:32608308"
title: "Characteristics of patients with familial Mediterranean fever in Denmark: a retrospective nationwide register-based cohort study."
authors:
- Mortensen SB
- Hansen AE
- Lundgren J
- Barfod TS
- Ambye L
- Dunø M
- Schade Larsen C
- Andersen DC
- Jakobsen MA
- Johansen IS
journal: Scand J Rheumatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/03009742.2020.1756400
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristics of patients with familial Mediterranean fever in Denmark: a retrospective nationwide register-based cohort study.
**Authors:** Mortensen SB, Hansen AE, Lundgren J, Barfod TS, Ambye L, Dunø M, Schade Larsen C, Andersen DC, Jakobsen MA, Johansen IS
**Journal:** Scand J Rheumatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/03009742.2020.1756400](https://doi.org/10.1080/03009742.2020.1756400)

## Content

1. Scand J Rheumatol. 2020 Nov;49(6):489-497. doi: 10.1080/03009742.2020.1756400.
 Epub 2020 Jul 1.

Characteristics of patients with familial Mediterranean fever in Denmark: a 
retrospective nationwide register-based cohort study.

Mortensen SB(1)(2)(3)(4), Hansen AE(5), Lundgren J(6), Barfod TS(7), Ambye L(8), 
Dunø M(9), Schade Larsen C(10), Andersen DC(4)(11), Jakobsen MA(2)(4), Johansen 
IS(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Odense University Hospital , Odense, 
Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Immunology, Odense University Hospital , Odense, 
Denmark.
(3)Odense Patient Exploratory Network (OPEN), Odense University Hospital , 
Odense, Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark , Odense, 
Denmark.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital , Hvidovre, 
Denmark.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Rigshospitalet , Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Zealand University 
Hospital , Roskilde, Denmark.
(8)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Copenhagen University Hospital , 
Hvidovre, Denmark.
(9)Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Rigshospitalet , Copenhagen, Denmark.
(10)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital , Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(11)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Cardiology, Department of Clinical 
Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Odense University Hospital , Odense, Denmark.

Objectives: To investigate epidemiology, demography, and genetic and clinical 
characteristics of patients with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) in Denmark. 
Method: In this population-based, cross-sectional cohort study, we identified 
FMF patients from discharge diagnoses using ICD-10 codes in the Danish National 
Patient Register, and linked data from the Danish Civil Registration System and 
laboratory databases for results of MEFV gene variant screening. Results: We 
identified 495 FMF patients (prevalence 1:11 680) with a median age of 29 years 
and a female ratio of 51%. The median age at diagnosis of FMF was 13 (IQR 7-22) 
years, with an estimated median diagnostic delay of 3 (IQR 0.7-6.9) years. The 
predominant ethnicities were Turkish (41.8%), Lebanese (15.8%), Syrian (6.5%), 
South-West Asian (7.9%), and South-East Asian (3.0%). The MEFV genotype 
distribution was 18.7% homozygous, 21.2% compound heterozygous, 32.0% 
heterozygous, 11.0% with complex alleles or unresolved zygosity, and 17.1% with 
no detected variants. M694V was the most prevalent variant in the overall cohort 
(32.5%). Homozygous or compound heterozygous MEFV exon 10 variants were 
associated with younger age at diagnosis (p < 0.001) and reduced number of 
hospital contacts before diagnosis (p = 0.008). The Charlson Comorbidity Index 
was ≥ 2 in 8.1% of patients. The prevalence of amyloidosis was 1.0%. 
Conclusions: FMF in Denmark is rare and patients are mainly of Eastern 
Mediterranean ethnicity. Diagnostic delay was long but patients with exon 10 
MEFV variants were diagnosed at a younger age. Prolonged diagnostic delay is 
probably caused by lack of FMF awareness in the Danish healthcare system.

DOI: 10.1080/03009742.2020.1756400
PMID: 32608308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]