---
reference_id: "PMID:39440965"
title: Diversity of Campylobacter spp. circulating in a rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta) breeding colony using culture and molecular methods.
authors:
- Bacon RL
- Hodo CL
- Wu J
- Welch S
- Nickodem C
- Vinasco J
- Threadgill D
- Gray SB
- Norman KN
- Lawhon SD
journal: mSphere
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1128/msphere.00560-24
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diversity of Campylobacter spp. circulating in a rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta) breeding colony using culture and molecular methods.
**Authors:** Bacon RL, Hodo CL, Wu J, Welch S, Nickodem C, Vinasco J, Threadgill D, Gray SB, Norman KN, Lawhon SD
**Journal:** mSphere (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1128/msphere.00560-24](https://doi.org/10.1128/msphere.00560-24)

## Content

1. mSphere. 2024 Nov 21;9(11):e0056024. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00560-24. Epub 2024 
Oct 23.

Diversity of Campylobacter spp. circulating in a rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta) 
breeding colony using culture and molecular methods.

Bacon RL(1), Hodo CL(2), Wu J(1)(3), Welch S(3), Nickodem C(4), Vinasco J(1), 
Threadgill D(5), Gray SB(2), Norman KN(6), Lawhon SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine & 
Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA.
(2)Michale E. Keeling Center for Comparative Medicine and Research, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Bastrop, Texas, USA.
(3)Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, School of Veterinary Medicine & 
Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(5)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, School of Medicine, Texas A&M 
University, College Station, Texas, USA.
(6)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, School of Veterinary 
Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, 
USA.

Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli represent the leading causes of 
bacterial gastroenteritis in humans, and infections can produce post-infectious 
irritable bowel syndrome (PI-IBS). Rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) (RM) are 
similarly susceptible to acute campylobacteriosis and represent a potential 
model of PI-IBS. We characterized the Campylobacter species circulating in an RM 
breeding colony using culture, qPCR, and whole genome sequencing (WGS). We also 
compared the C. jejuni and C. coli prevalence in RM as detected with qPCR versus 
culture and identified risk factors for bacteria presence and intestinal 
disease. Culture of 275 samples yielded C. coli (103) and C. jejuni (8), of 
which 21.6% were resistant to quinolones and 3.6% were resistant to macrolides. 
Multidrug-resistant isolates were obtained exclusively from animals exhibiting 
diarrhea or with histologically confirmed chronic enterocolitis. WGS revealed a 
non-clonal population of Campylobacter spp. Genotypic predictions of resistance 
were excellent except for aminoglycosides. All sequenced isolates contained 
genes for all subunits of cytolethal distending toxin. qPCR detected a 
prevalence of 45.9% for C. coli and 29.6% for C. jejuni. The quantity of either 
bacteria was significantly higher (P < 0.05) in animals with intestinal disease 
compared to healthy animals, though only young age was significantly associated 
with the presence of Campylobacter sp. or intestinal disease. Significantly more 
C. jejuni positive animals were detected with qPCR than with culture. These 
results provide a comprehensive characterization of Campylobacter spp. 
circulating in a breeding colony of RM in the United States and suggest that 
qPCR is superior for the detection of C. jejuni in RM.
IMPORTANCE: Gastrointestinal disease is one of the most common reasons for 
hospitalization in non-human primate colonies and accounts for over one-third of 
non-research related euthanasia. In rhesus macaques, this manifests as both 
acute diarrhea and chronic enterocolitis (CE), a syndrome of chronic diarrhea 
resulting in poor weight gain or weight loss which is minimally responsive to 
treatment. Campylobacter spp. are major causes of acute enterocolitis in rhesus 
macaques and may predispose individuals to the development of CE, similar to 
post-infectious irritable bowel syndrome in humans. Despite these concerns, 
there are few studies characterizing Campylobacter in rhesus macaque colonies, 
in particular utilizing whole genome sequencing and assessing findings with 
respect to the health status of the host. Our findings provide insight into 
Campylobacter strains circulating in rhesus macaque colonies, which can improve 
clinical monitoring, assist in treatment decisions, and provide new avenues of 
investigation into campylobacteriosis as a catalyst for CE.

DOI: 10.1128/msphere.00560-24
PMCID: PMC11580467
PMID: 39440965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.