---
reference_id: "PMID:22846458"
title: "Cogan's syndrome: an autoimmune inner ear disease."
authors:
- Greco A
- Gallo A
- Fusconi M
- Magliulo G
- Turchetta R
- Marinelli C
- Macri GF
- De Virgilio A
- de Vincentiis M
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2012.07.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cogan's syndrome: an autoimmune inner ear disease.
**Authors:** Greco A, Gallo A, Fusconi M, Magliulo G, Turchetta R, Marinelli C, Macri GF, De Virgilio A, de Vincentiis M
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2012.07.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2012.07.012)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2013 Jan;12(3):396-400. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2012.07.012. Epub
 2012 Jul 28.

Cogan's syndrome: an autoimmune inner ear disease.

Greco A(1), Gallo A, Fusconi M, Magliulo G, Turchetta R, Marinelli C, Macri GF, 
De Virgilio A, de Vincentiis M.

Author information:
(1)ENT Department, Policlinico Umberto I, University of Rome Sapienza, Italy. 
jaja1978@hotmail.it

OBJECTIVES: The objective of our study was to review our current knowledge of 
the aetiopathogenesis of Cogan's syndrome, including viral infection and 
autoimmunity, and to discuss disease pathogenesis with relevance to 
pharmacotherapy.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW METHODOLOGY: Relevant publications on the aetiopathogenesis 
and pharmacotherapy of Cogan's syndrome from 1945 to 2012 were analysed.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Cogan's syndrome is a rare autoimmune vasculitis, and 
its pathogenesis is unknown. Infection, but primarily autoimmunity, may play 
contributing roles in the pathogenesis of this disease. It is characterised by 
ocular and audiovestibular symptoms similar to those of Meniere's syndrome. 
Approximately 70% of patients have systemic disease, of which vasculitis is 
considered the pathological mechanism. The immunologic theory is based on the 
release of auto-antibodies against corneal, inner ear and endothelial antigens, 
and of anti-nuclear cytoplasmic auto-antibodies (ANCA). Corticosteroids are the 
first line of treatment, and multiple immunosuppressive drugs have been tried 
with varying degrees of success. Tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha blockers are 
a category of immunosuppressive agents representing a recent novel therapeutic 
option in Cogan's syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2012.07.012
PMID: 22846458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]