---
reference_id: "PMID:29707122"
title: "Laser ablation is superior to TACE in large-sized hepatocellular carcinoma: a pilot case-control study."
authors:
- Morisco F
- Camera S
- Guarino M
- Tortora R
- Cossiga V
- Vitiello A
- Cordone G
- Caporaso N
- Di Costanzo GG
- Italian Liver Cancer (ITA.LI.CA) group
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2018'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.24756
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laser ablation is superior to TACE in large-sized hepatocellular carcinoma: a pilot case-control study.
**Authors:** Morisco F, Camera S, Guarino M, Tortora R, Cossiga V, Vitiello A, Cordone G, Caporaso N, Di Costanzo GG, Italian Liver Cancer (ITA.LI.CA) group
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2018)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.24756](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.24756)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2018 Apr 3;9(25):17483-17490. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.24756. 
eCollection 2018 Apr 3.

Laser ablation is superior to TACE in large-sized hepatocellular carcinoma: a 
pilot case-control study.

Morisco F(1), Camera S(1), Guarino M(1), Tortora R(2), Cossiga V(1), Vitiello 
A(1), Cordone G(2), Caporaso N(1), Di Costanzo GG(2); Italian Liver Cancer 
(ITA.LI.CA) group.

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(2)Hepatology Unit, "Cardarelli" Hospital, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Limited therapies are available for large (≥40 mm) unresectable 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Currently, the standard treatment with 
transarterial chemoembolisation (TACE) is unsatisfactory with high recurrence 
rate and limited effect on survival. Laser Ablation (LA) has emerged as a 
relatively new technique characterized by high efficacy and good safety. This 
study is aimed to evaluate the efficacy of LA in comparison to TACE in patients 
with large HCC.
METHODS: Eighty-two patients with a single HCC nodule ≥40 mm (BCLC stage A or B) 
were enrolled in this case-control study. Forty-one patients were treated with 
LA and 41 patients were treated with TACE. Response to therapy was evaluated 
according to the mRECIST criteria. Survival was calculated with Kaplan-Meier 
from the time of cancer diagnosis to death with values censored at the date of 
the last follow-up.
RESULTS: Twenty-six (63.4%) and 8 (19.5%) patients had a complete response after 
LA and TACE, respectively (p < 0.001). Subsequently we stratified the HCCs in 3 
categories according to the nodule size: 40-50 mm, 51-60 mm, and >60 mm. LA 
resulted superior to TACE especially in nodules ranging between 51 and 60 mm in 
diameter, with a complete response rate post-LA and post-TACE of 75% and 14.3%, 
respectively (p = 0.0133). The 36 months cumulative survival rate in patients 
treated with LA and TACE was 55.4% and 48.8%, respectively. The disease 
recurrence rates after LA and TACE were 19.5% and 75.0%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: LA is a more effective therapeutic option than TACE in patients 
with solitary large HCC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.24756
PMCID: PMC5915130
PMID: 29707122

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST None.