---
reference_id: "PMID:38300898"
title: Efficacy and Safety of Glucagon-Like Peptide 1 Agonists in a Retrospective Study of Patients With Familial Partial Lipodystrophy.
authors:
- Foss-Freitas MC
- Imam S
- Neidert A
- Gomes AD
- Broome DT
- Oral EA
journal: Diabetes Care
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2337/dc23-1614
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Hypoglycemic Agents/adverse effects
- Retrospective Studies
- Blood Glucose
- "Lipodystrophy, Familial Partial/drug therapy, genetics"
- Acute Disease
- Glycated Hemoglobin
- Pancreatitis/chemically induced
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/drug therapy, chemically induced"
- Glucagon-Like Peptide 1
- Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor Agonists
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and Safety of Glucagon-Like Peptide 1 Agonists in a Retrospective Study of Patients With Familial Partial Lipodystrophy.
**Authors:** Foss-Freitas MC, Imam S, Neidert A, Gomes AD, Broome DT, Oral EA
**Journal:** Diabetes Care (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2337/dc23-1614](https://doi.org/10.2337/dc23-1614)

## Content

1. Diabetes Care. 2024 Apr 1;47(4):653-659. doi: 10.2337/dc23-1614.

Efficacy and Safety of Glucagon-Like Peptide 1 Agonists in a Retrospective Study 
of Patients With Familial Partial Lipodystrophy.

Foss-Freitas MC(1), Imam S(1)(2), Neidert A(1), Gomes AD(1), Broome DT(1), Oral 
EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Diabetes, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.
(2)Mercy Health Anderson Hospital (Family Medicine Residency), Cincinnati, OH.

OBJECTIVE: Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists (GLP-1RA) are widely used 
for the management of diabetes mellitus (DM), but their efficacy in familial 
partial lipodystrophy (FPLD) is unknown. In this retrospective study, we 
evaluated the effect of GLP-1RA in patients with FPLD.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed data, reported with SDs, from 14 
patients with FPLD (aged 58 ± 12 years; 76.47% female) and 14 patients with type 
2 DM (aged 58 ± 13 years; 71% female) before and 6 months after starting 
GLP-1RA.
RESULTS: We observed reduction in weight (95 ± 23 to 91 ± 22 kg; P = 0.002), BMI 
(33 ± 6 to 31 ± 6 kg/m2; P = 0.001), HbA1c (8.2% ± 1.4% to 7.7% ± 1.4%; P = 
0.02), and fasting glucose (186 ± 64 to 166 ± 53 mg/dL; P = 0.04) in patients 
with FPLD. The change in triglycerides after treatment was greater in the FPLD 
group compared with the DM group (P = 0.02). We noted acute pancreatitis in two 
case subjects with FPLD with longer therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates the relative safety and effectiveness of 
GLP-1RA in patients with FPLD.

© 2024 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/dc23-1614
PMCID: PMC10973902
PMID: 38300898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Duality of Interest. E.A.O. has received grant 
support from Aegerion Pharmaceuticals (manufacturer of metreleptin), Akcea 
Therapeutics, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Gemphire 
Therapeutics, Novo Nordisk, Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Fractyl Health Laboratories, 
and GI Dynamics and has served as an advisor and/or a consultant to Aegerion 
Pharmaceuticals, Akcea Therapeutics, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, and Regeneron. 
E.A.O. has royalty rights from the use of metreleptin in lipodystrophy. D.T.B. 
receives grant funding from Novo Nordisk, Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and 
Fractyl Health Laboratories, Inc., and serves as a consultant for Tayco, Inc. No 
other potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported.