---
reference_id: "PMID:35690460"
title: Hirschsprung's disease in low- and middle-income countries.
authors:
- Trinidad S
- Kayima P
- Kotecha V
- Massenga A
- Rymeski B
- Frischer JS
- Situma M
- Kotagal M
journal: Semin Pediatr Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151163
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirschsprung's disease in low- and middle-income countries.
**Authors:** Trinidad S, Kayima P, Kotecha V, Massenga A, Rymeski B, Frischer JS, Situma M, Kotagal M
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151163](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151163)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2022 Apr;31(2):151163. doi: 
10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151163. Epub 2022 Apr 8.

Hirschsprung's disease in low- and middle-income countries.

Trinidad S(1), Kayima P(2), Kotecha V(3), Massenga A(3), Rymeski B(4), Frischer 
JS(4), Situma M(5), Kotagal M(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric General and Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, MLC 2023, Cincinnati, OH 45229, 
United States.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, COSECSA and Mulago National Referral 
Hospital, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Catholic University of Health and Allied 
Sciences Bugando, Mwanza, Tanzania.
(4)Division of Pediatric General and Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, MLC 2023, Cincinnati, OH 45229, 
United States; Department of Surgery, University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(5)Department of Surgery, Pediatric Surgical Unit, Mbarara University Teaching 
Hospital, Mbarara University for Science and Technology, Mbarara, Uganda.
(6)Division of Pediatric General and Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, MLC 2023, Cincinnati, OH 45229, 
United States; Department of Surgery, University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, United States. Electronic address: 
meera.kotagal@cchmc.org.

Hirschsprung's disease (HD) is one of the most common causes of pediatric bowel 
obstruction in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). This paper describes 
the unique aspects of presentation, diagnosis, management and post-operative 
care and outcomes of HD in LMICs. In LMICs, patients with HD are much more 
likely to present in a delayed fashion with subsequent increased morbidity and 
mortality including higher rates of chronic obstruction, malnutrition with 
failure to thrive, complete obstruction and perforation. There are 
multifactorial causes for delay, with opportunities to improve initial timely 
diagnosis and referral, support families to address socioeconomic and cultural 
barriers, and improve workforce and infrastructure resources to provide 
definitive care. In LMICs, the diagnosis is often made based on clinical 
presentation and radiographic findings as pathological services may be limited. 
Initial diversion with multi-stage procedure, instead of a single-stage 
pull-through, predominates. This is also a result of multifactorial causes, 
including initial presentation to general surgeons at first-level hospitals 
instead of pediatric surgeons, delayed presentation with sick, malnourished 
children with significantly distended bowel, and a lack of fresh-frozen 
pathological services to guide the extent of resection. Post-operatively, HD 
patients in LMICs experience higher complication and mortality rates - likely 
stemming from sicker baseline presentations and more limited resources. 
Significant recent advances in care have occurred for patients with HD in LMICs, 
while opportunities to continue to improve care remain.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151163
PMID: 35690460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]