---
reference_id: "PMID:27409069"
title: "Increased bone turnover, osteoporosis, progressive tibial bowing, fractures, and scoliosis in a patient with a final-exon SATB2 frameshift mutation."
authors:
- Boone PM
- Chan YM
- Hunter JV
- Pottkotter LE
- Davino NA
- Yang Y
- Beuten J
- Bacino CA
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37847
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Biomarkers
- Bone Remodeling/genetics
- Brain/pathology
- Exons
- "Fractures, Bone/genetics"
- Frameshift Mutation
- Haploinsufficiency
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Matrix Attachment Region Binding Proteins/genetics
- Osteoporosis/genetics
- Phenotype
- Radiography
- Scoliosis/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased bone turnover, osteoporosis, progressive tibial bowing, fractures, and scoliosis in a patient with a final-exon SATB2 frameshift mutation.
**Authors:** Boone PM, Chan YM, Hunter JV, Pottkotter LE, Davino NA, Yang Y, Beuten J, Bacino CA
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37847](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37847)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Nov;170(11):3028-3032. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37847. Epub 
2016 Jul 13.

Increased bone turnover, osteoporosis, progressive tibial bowing, fractures, and 
scoliosis in a patient with a final-exon SATB2 frameshift mutation.

Boone PM(1), Chan YM(2), Hunter JV(3), Pottkotter LE(3), Davino NA(4), Yang 
Y(1)(5), Beuten J(1)(5), Bacino CA(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(3)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, UT Health Science Center at Houston, 
Houston, Texas.
(5)Medical Genetics Laboratories, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine. 
cbacino@bcm.edu.
(7)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas. cbacino@bcm.edu.
(8)Medical Genetics Laboratories, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. 
cbacino@bcm.edu.

Haploinsufficiency of SATB2 causes cleft palate, intellectual disability with 
deficient speech, facial and dental abnormalities, and other variable features 
known collectively as SATB2-associated syndrome. This phenotype was accompanied 
by osteoporosis, fractures, and tibial bowing in two previously reported adult 
patients; each possessed SATB2 mutations either predicted or demonstrated to 
escape nonsense-mediated decay, suggesting that the additional bone defects 
result from a dominant negative effect and/or age-dependent penetrance. These 
hypotheses remain to be confirmed, as do the specific downstream defects causing 
bone abnormalities. We report a SATB2 mutation (c.2018dupA; p.(H673fs)) in a 
15-year-old patient whose SATB2-associated syndrome phenotype is accompanied by 
osteoporosis, fractures, progressive tibial bowing, and scoliosis. As this 
homeodomain-disrupting and predicted truncating mutation resides within the 
final exon of SATB2, escape from nonsense-mediated decay is likely. Thus, we 
provide further evidence of bone phenotypes beyond those typically associated 
with SATB2-associated syndrome in individuals with potential dominant-negative 
SATB2 alleles, as well as evidence for age-dependence of bone features. 
Elevations in alkaline phosphatase, urinary N-telopeptide/creatinine ratio, and 
osteocalcin in the patient indicate increased bone turnover. We propose 
surveillance and treatment with osteoclast inhibitors to prevent fractures and 
to slow progressive bone deformities. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37847
PMCID: PMC10080586
PMID: 27409069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]