---
reference_id: "PMID:39372971"
title: "Spinal cord infarction: A systematic review and meta-analysis of patient's characteristics, diagnosis accuracy, management, and outcome."
authors:
- Dokponou YCH
- Ontsi Obame FL
- Takoutsing B
- Mustapha MJ
- Nyalundja AD
- Elmi Saad M
- Badirou OBA
- Adjiou DKFP
- Agada Kpègnon N
- Djimrabeye A
- Bankole NDA
journal: Surg Neurol Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.25259/SNI_477_2024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal cord infarction: A systematic review and meta-analysis of patient's characteristics, diagnosis accuracy, management, and outcome.
**Authors:** Dokponou YCH, Ontsi Obame FL, Takoutsing B, Mustapha MJ, Nyalundja AD, Elmi Saad M, Badirou OBA, Adjiou DKFP, Agada Kpègnon N, Djimrabeye A, Bankole NDA
**Journal:** Surg Neurol Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.25259/SNI_477_2024](https://doi.org/10.25259/SNI_477_2024)

## Content

1. Surg Neurol Int. 2024 Sep 13;15:325. doi: 10.25259/SNI_477_2024. eCollection
2024.

Spinal cord infarction: A systematic review and meta-analysis of patient's
characteristics, diagnosis accuracy, management, and outcome.

Dokponou YCH(1)(2), Ontsi Obame FL(1)(2), Takoutsing B(2)(3), Mustapha MJ(2)(4),
Nyalundja AD(2)(5), Elmi Saad M(1)(2), Badirou OBA(1)(2), Adjiou DKFP(1)(2),
Agada Kpègnon N(2)(6), Djimrabeye A(1)(2), Bankole NDA(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Mohammed V
University of Rabat, Rabat, Morocco.
(2)Department of Research, SubSaharan Africa Future Neurosurgeon Association,
Cotonou, Bénin.
(3)Department of Research, Association of Future African Neurosurgeons, Yaounde,
Cameroon.
(4)Faculty of Basic Medical Science, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria.
(5)Department of Surgery, Catholic University, Bukavu, Democratic Republic of
Congo.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Abdou Moumouni
University, Niamey, Niger.
(7)Department of Interventional Neuroradiology, Clinical Investigation Center,
INSERM, Teaching Hospital of Tours, Tours, France.

BACKGROUND: Acute spinal cord infarction (SCI) is a rare ischemic vascular
lesion. It is difficult to diagnose during the acute phase because the clinical
features can vary widely, and the diffusion-weighted imaging of spinal cord
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) often fails to detect any obvious abnormality.
The first aim of this study was to describe the SCI patients' characteristics,
evaluate the accuracy of its diagnosis tools and management, and then find the
strength of the effect of spinal surgical decompression on the patient's
outcome.
METHODS: A PubMed keyword and Boolean search using ("spinal cord infarction" OR
"spinal cord ischemia" AND diagnosis OR management OR outcome) returned 221,571
results by applying filters. We added 17,400 results from Google Scholar.
Fourteen studies were included in the quantitative meta-analysis of mean
differences.
RESULTS: The Time to Nadir was <6 h (56.1%), 6-12 h (30.7%), 12-72 h (5.4%), and
more than 72 h (7.8%). The higher proportion of Owl's eye findings in the MRI
was reported at the cervical level (39.6%) and thoracic level (22.9%) P = 0.031.
The T2DWI has a moderate accuracy (area under the curve = 0.835) in detecting
the T2 hypersignal intensity (T2HSI) at the hyperacute time to NADIR (<6 h). The
median modified Rankin Scale (mRS) at admission was 3 (2-3), and after a
follow-up duration of 12 months (6-15.5), the median mRS was reported to be 1
(1-2). About 68.9% benefited from medical treatment and physiotherapy, whereas
spinal surgical decompression was done in 22.8%. Seventy percent of the overall
studies favor spinal surgical decompression, with the estimated average
standardized mean difference between medical and surgical treatment being =
1.2083 (95% confidence interval: 1.0250-1.3917).
CONCLUSION: The T2DWI has moderate accuracy in detecting the T2HSI at the
hyperacute time (NADIR <6 h). Even though surgical decompression favored good
outcomes, medical treatment with physiotherapy was mostly used for the
management of SCI.

Copyright: © 2024 Surgical Neurology International.

DOI: 10.25259/SNI_477_2024
PMCID: PMC11450783
PMID: 39372971

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.