---
reference_id: "PMID:20709720"
title: Cardiovascular manifestations in men and women carrying a FBN1 mutation.
authors:
- Détaint D
- Faivre L
- Collod-Beroud G
- Child AH
- Loeys BL
- Binquet C
- Gautier E
- Arbustini E
- Mayer K
- Arslan-Kirchner M
- Stheneur C
- Halliday D
- Beroud C
- Bonithon-Kopp C
- Claustres M
- Plauchu H
- Robinson PN
- Kiotsekoglou A
- De Backer J
- Adès L
- Francke U
- De Paepe A
- Boileau C
- Jondeau G
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq258
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiovascular manifestations in men and women carrying a FBN1 mutation.
**Authors:** Détaint D, Faivre L, Collod-Beroud G, Child AH, Loeys BL, Binquet C, Gautier E, Arbustini E, Mayer K, Arslan-Kirchner M, Stheneur C, Halliday D, Beroud C, Bonithon-Kopp C, Claustres M, Plauchu H, Robinson PN, Kiotsekoglou A, De Backer J, Adès L, Francke U, De Paepe A, Boileau C, Jondeau G
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/ehq258](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehq258)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J. 2010 Sep;31(18):2223-9. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq258. Epub 2010 
Aug 13.

Cardiovascular manifestations in men and women carrying a FBN1 mutation.

Détaint D(1), Faivre L, Collod-Beroud G, Child AH, Loeys BL, Binquet C, Gautier 
E, Arbustini E, Mayer K, Arslan-Kirchner M, Stheneur C, Halliday D, Beroud C, 
Bonithon-Kopp C, Claustres M, Plauchu H, Robinson PN, Kiotsekoglou A, De Backer 
J, Adès L, Francke U, De Paepe A, Boileau C, Jondeau G.

Author information:
(1)AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat, Consultation pluridisciplinaire Syndrome de Marfan et 
apparentés, Paris F-75018, France. delphine.detaint@bch.aphp.fr

Comment in
    Eur Heart J. 2010 Sep;31(18):2194-6. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq187.

AIMS: In patients with Marfan syndrome and other type-1 fibrillinopathies, 
genetic testing is becoming more easily available, leading to the identification 
of mutations early in the course of the disease. This study evaluates the 
cardiovascular (CV) risk associated with the discovery of a fibrillin-1 (FBN1) 
mutation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A total of 1,013 probands with pathogenic FBN1 mutations 
were included, among whom 965 patients [median age: 22 years (11-34), male 
gender 53%] had data suitable for analysis. The percentage of patients with an 
ascending aortic (AA) dilatation increased steadily with increasing age and 
reached 96% (95% CI: 94-97%) by 60 years. The presence of aortic events 
(dissection or prophylactic surgery) was rare before 20 years and then increased 
progressively, reaching 74% (95% CI: 67-81%) by 60 years. Compared with women, 
men were at higher risk for AA dilatation [≤ 30 years: 57% (95% CI: 52-63) vs. 
50% (95% CI: 45-55), P = 0.0076] and aortic events [≤ 30 years: 21% (95% CI: 
17-26) vs. 11% (95% CI: 8-16), P < 0.0001; adjusted HR: 1.4 (1.1-1.8), P = 
0.005]. The prevalence of mitral valve (MV) prolapse [≤ 60 years: 77% (95% CI: 
72-82)] and MV regurgitation [≤ 60 years: 61% (95% CI: 53-69)] also increased 
steadily with age, but surgery limited to the MV remained rare [≤ 60 years: 13% 
(95% CI: 8-21)]. No difference between genders was observed (for all P> 0.20). 
From 1985 to 2005 the prevalence of AA dilatation remained stable (P for trend = 
0.88), whereas the percentage of patients with AA dissection significantly 
decreased (P for trend = 0.01).
CONCLUSION: The CV risk remains important in patients with an FBN1 gene mutation 
and is present throughout life, justifying regular aortic monitoring. Aortic 
dilatation or dissection should always trigger suspicion of a genetic background 
leading to thorough examination for extra-aortic features and comprehensive 
pedigree investigation.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq258
PMID: 20709720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]