---
reference_id: "PMID:15727225"
title: Lessons from the neuropathology of atypical forms of multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Stadelmann C
- Brück W
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-004-0333-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lessons from the neuropathology of atypical forms of multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Stadelmann C, Brück W
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-004-0333-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-004-0333-1)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2004 Nov;25 Suppl 4:S319-22. doi: 10.1007/s10072-004-0333-1.

Lessons from the neuropathology of atypical forms of multiple sclerosis.

Stadelmann C(1), Brück W.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, Georg-August-Universität, Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 
D-37075 Göttingen, Germany.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is characterized by multiple demyelinated inflammatory 
lesions disseminated in the central nervous system (CNS). Additional features of 
MS pathology include axonal loss and gliosis. Remyelination may take place 
predominantly in the early stages of lesion formation. Pathologically, important 
inter-individual differences have been observed with respect to oligodendrocyte 
preservation. Furthermore, different mechanisms of demyelination, such as 
T-cell/macrophage-mediated demyelination, antibody/complement-mediated 
demyelination, and primary damage of the oligodendrocyte have been observed in 
individual MS patients. Atypical MS forms, such as Marburg's acute MS, Devic's 
neuromyelits optica, Balò's concentric sclerosis, and Schilder's diffuse 
sclerosis share key aspects of MS pathology, however, each of them harbors 
characteristic discriminative features. Devic's neuromyelitis optica may 
represent the prototypical disease with antibody/complement-mediated 
demyelination, whereas cases with Balò's concentric sclerosis show 
oligodendrocyte dystrophy. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) may be 
regarded as a related condition lacking extensive demyelination. Thus, atypical 
MS forms may help to elucidate pathogenic mechanisms in MS.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-004-0333-1
PMID: 15727225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]