---
reference_id: "PMID:20170754"
title: "The autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome: A rare disorder providing clues about normal tolerance."
authors:
- Turbyville JC
- Rao VK
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2010.02.007
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology, physiopathology"
- Autoimmunity
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Endothelium/immunology
- Humans
- Immune Tolerance
- Inflammation
- Lymphatic Diseases
- National Institutes of Health (U.S.)
- "Rare Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology, physiopathology"
- Splenomegaly
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome: A rare disorder providing clues about normal tolerance.
**Authors:** Turbyville JC, Rao VK
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2010.02.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2010.02.007)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2010 May;9(7):488-93. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2010.02.007. Epub
2010 Feb 17.

The autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome: A rare disorder providing clues
about normal tolerance.

Turbyville JC(1), Rao VK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy-Immunology, Walter Reed Army Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20307, USA. joseph.c.turbyville@us.army.mil
<joseph.c.turbyville@us.army.mil>

The autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is characterized by chronic,
non-malignant lymphoproliferation, autoimmunity often manifesting as
multilineage cytopenias, and an increased risk of lymphoma. While considered a
rare disease, there are currently over 250 patients with ALPS being followed at
the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland. Most of these patients
have a mutation in the gene for the TNF receptor-family member Fas (CD 95,
Apo-1), and about one-third have an unknown defect or mutations affecting
function of other signaling proteins involved in the apoptotic pathway. While
ALPS is one of the few autoimmune diseases with a known genetic defect, there
remain unanswered questions regarding how a defect in apoptosis results in the
observed phenotype. In addition to shedding light on the pathophysiology of this
rare and fascinating condition, studying ALPS may improve our understanding of
normal tolerance and more common, sporadic autoimmune disorders.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2010.02.007
PMID: 20170754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
