---
reference_id: "PMID:23933820"
title: GRIN2A mutations in acquired epileptic aphasia and related childhood focal epilepsies and encephalopathies with speech and language dysfunction.
authors:
- Lesca G
- Rudolf G
- Bruneau N
- Lozovaya N
- Labalme A
- Boutry-Kryza N
- Salmi M
- Tsintsadze T
- Addis L
- Motte J
- Wright S
- Tsintsadze V
- Michel A
- Doummar D
- Lascelles K
- Strug L
- Waters P
- de Bellescize J
- Vrielynck P
- de Saint Martin A
- Ville D
- Ryvlin P
- Arzimanoglou A
- Hirsch E
- Vincent A
- Pal D
- Burnashev N
- Sanlaville D
- Szepetowski P
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/ng.2726
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Cell Line
- Electroencephalography
- "Epilepsies, Partial/genetics"
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Genotype
- Humans
- Landau-Kleffner Syndrome/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GRIN2A mutations in acquired epileptic aphasia and related childhood focal epilepsies and encephalopathies with speech and language dysfunction.
**Authors:** Lesca G, Rudolf G, Bruneau N, Lozovaya N, Labalme A, Boutry-Kryza N, Salmi M, Tsintsadze T, Addis L, Motte J, Wright S, Tsintsadze V, Michel A, Doummar D, Lascelles K, Strug L, Waters P, de Bellescize J, Vrielynck P, de Saint Martin A, Ville D, Ryvlin P, Arzimanoglou A, Hirsch E, Vincent A, Pal D, Burnashev N, Sanlaville D, Szepetowski P
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2726](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2726)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2013 Sep;45(9):1061-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.2726. Epub 2013 Aug 11.

GRIN2A mutations in acquired epileptic aphasia and related childhood focal 
epilepsies and encephalopathies with speech and language dysfunction.

Lesca G(1), Rudolf G, Bruneau N, Lozovaya N, Labalme A, Boutry-Kryza N, Salmi M, 
Tsintsadze T, Addis L, Motte J, Wright S, Tsintsadze V, Michel A, Doummar D, 
Lascelles K, Strug L, Waters P, de Bellescize J, Vrielynck P, de Saint Martin A, 
Ville D, Ryvlin P, Arzimanoglou A, Hirsch E, Vincent A, Pal D, Burnashev N, 
Sanlaville D, Szepetowski P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University Hospitals of Lyon, Lyon, France.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2013 Oct;9(10):541. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2013.181.

Epileptic encephalopathies are severe brain disorders with the epileptic 
component contributing to the worsening of cognitive and behavioral 
manifestations. Acquired epileptic aphasia (Landau-Kleffner syndrome, LKS) and 
continuous spike and waves during slow-wave sleep syndrome (CSWSS) represent 
rare and closely related childhood focal epileptic encephalopathies of unknown 
etiology. They show electroclinical overlap with rolandic epilepsy (the most 
frequent childhood focal epilepsy) and can be viewed as different clinical 
expressions of a single pathological entity situated at the crossroads of 
epileptic, speech, language, cognitive and behavioral disorders. Here we 
demonstrate that about 20% of cases of LKS, CSWSS and electroclinically atypical 
rolandic epilepsy often associated with speech impairment can have a genetic 
origin sustained by de novo or inherited mutations in the GRIN2A gene (encoding 
the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor α2 subunit, GluN2A). The 
identification of GRIN2A as a major gene for these epileptic encephalopathies 
provides crucial insights into the underlying pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2726
PMID: 23933820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]