---
reference_id: "PMID:38480892"
title: "APOE4/4 is linked to damaging lipid droplets in Alzheimer's disease microglia."
authors:
- Haney MS
- Pálovics R
- Munson CN
- Long C
- Johansson PK
- Yip O
- Dong W
- Rawat E
- West E
- Schlachetzki JCM
- Tsai A
- Guldner IH
- Lamichhane BS
- Smith A
- Schaum N
- Calcuttawala K
- Shin A
- Wang YH
- Wang C
- Koutsodendris N
- Serrano GE
- Beach TG
- Reiman EM
- Glass CK
- Abu-Remaileh M
- Enejder A
- Huang Y
- Wyss-Coray T
journal: Nature
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07185-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# APOE4/4 is linked to damaging lipid droplets in Alzheimer's disease microglia.
**Authors:** Haney MS, Pálovics R, Munson CN, Long C, Johansson PK, Yip O, Dong W, Rawat E, West E, Schlachetzki JCM, Tsai A, Guldner IH, Lamichhane BS, Smith A, Schaum N, Calcuttawala K, Shin A, Wang YH, Wang C, Koutsodendris N, Serrano GE, Beach TG, Reiman EM, Glass CK, Abu-Remaileh M, Enejder A, Huang Y, Wyss-Coray T
**Journal:** Nature (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-024-07185-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07185-7)

## Content

1. Nature. 2024 Apr;628(8006):154-161. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07185-7. Epub 2024
 Mar 13.

APOE4/4 is linked to damaging lipid droplets in Alzheimer's disease microglia.

Haney MS(#)(1)(2), Pálovics R(#)(1)(2), Munson CN(1)(2), Long C(3), Johansson 
PK(3), Yip O(4), Dong W(5), Rawat E(5), West E(6), Schlachetzki JCM(6), Tsai 
A(1)(2), Guldner IH(1)(2), Lamichhane BS(1)(2), Smith A(1)(2), Schaum N(1)(2), 
Calcuttawala K(1)(2), Shin A(1)(2), Wang YH(4), Wang C(4), Koutsodendris 
N(4)(7), Serrano GE(8), Beach TG(9), Reiman EM(9), Glass CK(7), Abu-Remaileh 
M(5), Enejder A(3), Huang Y(4)(7)(10)(11), Wyss-Coray T(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Materials Science & Engineering Department, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, Gladstone Institutes, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)The Institute for Chemistry, Engineering & Medicine for Human Health 
(ChEM-H), Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(7)Development and Stem Cell Biology Graduate Program, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Laboratory of Neuropathology, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, 
AZ, USA.
(9)Banner Alzheimer's Institute and Arizona Alzheimer's Consortium, Phoenix, AZ, 
USA.
(10)Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(11)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(12)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. twc@stanford.edu.
(13)Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 
twc@stanford.edu.
(14)The Phil and Penny Knight Initiative for Brain Resilience, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, USA. twc@stanford.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jul 25:2023.07.21.549930. doi: 10.1101/2023.07.21.549930.

Several genetic risk factors for Alzheimer's disease implicate genes involved in 
lipid metabolism and many of these lipid genes are highly expressed in glial 
cells1. However, the relationship between lipid metabolism in glia and 
Alzheimer's disease pathology remains poorly understood. Through single-nucleus 
RNA sequencing of brain tissue in Alzheimer's disease, we have identified a 
microglial state defined by the expression of the lipid droplet-associated 
enzyme ACSL1 with ACSL1-positive microglia being most abundant in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease having the APOE4/4 genotype. In human induced pluripotent 
stem cell-derived microglia, fibrillar Aβ induces ACSL1 expression, triglyceride 
synthesis and lipid droplet accumulation in an APOE-dependent manner. 
Additionally, conditioned media from lipid droplet-containing microglia lead to 
Tau phosphorylation and neurotoxicity in an APOE-dependent manner. Our findings 
suggest a link between genetic risk factors for Alzheimer's disease with 
microglial lipid droplet accumulation and neurotoxic microglia-derived factors, 
potentially providing therapeutic strategies for Alzheimer's disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-024-07185-7
PMCID: PMC10990924
PMID: 38480892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T.G.B. is a paid consultant to Aprinoia 
Therapeutics and Biogen. E.M.R. is a scientific advisor to Alzheon, Aural 
Analytics, Denali, Retromer Therapeutics and Vaxxinity and a cofounder and 
advisor to ALZPath. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.