---
reference_id: "PMID:12618519"
title: "Excess placental soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt1) may contribute to endothelial dysfunction, hypertension, and proteinuria in preeclampsia."
authors:
- Maynard SE
- Min JY
- Merchan J
- Lim KH
- Li J
- Mondal S
- Libermann TA
- Morgan JP
- Sellke FW
- Stillman IE
- Epstein FH
- Sukhatme VP
- Karumanchi SA
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1172/JCI17189
keywords:
- "Endothelial Growth Factors/analysis, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Endothelium, Vascular/physiology"
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Female
- Humans
- Hypertension/etiology
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/analysis
- Kidney/pathology
- "Lymphokines/analysis, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Neovascularization, Physiologic"
- Placenta Growth Factor
- "Pre-Eclampsia/etiology, therapy"
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Proteins/analysis, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Proteinuria/etiology
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-1/physiology
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Excess placental soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt1) may contribute to endothelial dysfunction, hypertension, and proteinuria in preeclampsia.
**Authors:** Maynard SE, Min JY, Merchan J, Lim KH, Li J, Mondal S, Libermann TA, Morgan JP, Sellke FW, Stillman IE, Epstein FH, Sukhatme VP, Karumanchi SA
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI17189](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI17189)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2003 Mar;111(5):649-58. doi: 10.1172/JCI17189.

Excess placental soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt1) may contribute to 
endothelial dysfunction, hypertension, and proteinuria in preeclampsia.

Maynard SE(1), Min JY, Merchan J, Lim KH, Li J, Mondal S, Libermann TA, Morgan 
JP, Sellke FW, Stillman IE, Epstein FH, Sukhatme VP, Karumanchi SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2003 Mar;111(5):600-2. doi: 10.1172/JCI18015.

Preeclampsia, a syndrome affecting 5% of pregnancies, causes substantial 
maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality. The pathophysiology of preeclampsia 
remains largely unknown. It has been hypothesized that placental ischemia is an 
early event, leading to placental production of a soluble factor or factors that 
cause maternal endothelial dysfunction, resulting in the clinical findings of 
hypertension, proteinuria, and edema. Here, we confirm that placental soluble 
fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt1), an antagonist of VEGF and placental growth 
factor (PlGF), is upregulated in preeclampsia, leading to increased systemic 
levels of sFlt1 that fall after delivery. We demonstrate that increased 
circulating sFlt1 in patients with preeclampsia is associated with decreased 
circulating levels of free VEGF and PlGF, resulting in endothelial dysfunction 
in vitro that can be rescued by exogenous VEGF and PlGF. Additionally, VEGF and 
PlGF cause microvascular relaxation of rat renal arterioles in vitro that is 
blocked by sFlt1. Finally, administration of sFlt1 to pregnant rats induces 
hypertension, proteinuria, and glomerular endotheliosis, the classic lesion of 
preeclampsia. These observations suggest that excess circulating sFlt1 
contributes to the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI17189
PMCID: PMC151901
PMID: 12618519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]