---
reference_id: "PMID:12657365"
title: Apoptosis in Huntington's disease.
authors:
- Hickey MA
- Chesselet MF
journal: Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/S0278-5846(03)00021-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Apoptosis in Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Hickey MA, Chesselet MF
**Journal:** Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0278-5846(03)00021-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0278-5846(03)00021-6)

## Content

1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2003 Apr;27(2):255-65. doi: 
10.1016/S0278-5846(03)00021-6.

Apoptosis in Huntington's disease.

Hickey MA(1), Chesselet MF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Reed Neurological Research Center, B114, The David 
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 710 Westwood Plaza, 90095, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.

Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant, fatal disorder. Patients 
display increasing motor, psychiatric and cognitive impairment and at autopsy, 
late-stage patient brains show extensive striatal (caudate and putamen), 
pallidal and cortical atrophy. The initial and primary target of degeneration in 
HD is the striatal medium spiny GABAergic neuron, and by end stages of the 
disease up to 95% of these neurons are lost [J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 57 
(1998) 369]. The disease is caused by an elongation of a polyglutamine tract in 
the N-terminal of the huntingtin gene, but it is not known how this mutation 
leads to such extensive, but selective, cell death [Cell 72 (1993) 971]. There 
is substantial evidence from in vitro studies that connects apoptotic pathways 
and apoptosis with the mutant protein, and theories linking apoptosis to 
neuronal death in HD have existed for several years. Despite this, evidence of 
apoptotic neuronal death in HD is scarce. It may be that the processes involved 
in apoptosis, rather than apoptosis per se, are more important for HD 
pathogenesis. Upregulation of the proapoptotic proteins could lead to cleavage 
of huntingtin and as recent data has shown, the consequent toxic fragment may 
itself elicit toxic effects on the cell by disrupting transcription. In 
addition, the increased levels of proapoptotic proteins could contribute to 
slowly developing cell death in HD, selective for the striatal medium spiny 
GABAergic neurons and later spreading to other areas. Here we review the 
evidence supporting these mechanisms of pathogenesis in HD.

DOI: 10.1016/S0278-5846(03)00021-6
PMID: 12657365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]