---
reference_id: "PMID:39398333"
title: "Familial partial lipodystrophy resulting from loss-of-function PPARγ pathogenic variants: phenotypic, clinical, and genetic features."
authors:
- Soares RMV
- da Silva MA
- Campos JTAM
- Lima JG
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1394102
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lipodystrophy, Familial Partial/genetics, pathology"
- PPAR gamma/genetics
- Phenotype
- Female
- Loss of Function Mutation
- "Adipose Tissue/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial partial lipodystrophy resulting from loss-of-function PPARγ pathogenic variants: phenotypic, clinical, and genetic features.
**Authors:** Soares RMV, da Silva MA, Campos JTAM, Lima JG
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2024.1394102](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2024.1394102)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024 Sep 27;15:1394102. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2024.1394102. eCollection 2024.

Familial partial lipodystrophy resulting from loss-of-function PPARγ pathogenic 
variants: phenotypic, clinical, and genetic features.

Soares RMV(1), da Silva MA(2), Campos JTAM(2)(3), Lima JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Hospital Universitário Onofre Lopes (HUOL), 
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN), Natal, RN, Brazil.
(2)Molecular Biology and Genomics Laboratory, Federal University of Rio Grande 
do Norte (UFRN), Natal, RN, Brazil.
(3)Department of Morphology (DMOR), Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte 
(UFRN), Natal, RN, Brazil.

Erratum in
    Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024 Dec 03;15:1508146. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2024.1508146.

The PPARG gene encodes a member of a nuclear receptor superfamily known as 
peroxisome proliferator-activated gamma (PPARγ). PPARγ plays an essential role 
in adipogenesis, stimulating the differentiation of preadipocytes into 
adipocytes. Loss-of-function pathogenic variants in PPARG reduce the activity of 
the PPARγ receptor and can lead to severe metabolic consequences associated with 
familial partial lipodystrophy type 3 (FPLD3). This review focuses on recent 
scientific data related to FPLD3, including the role of PPARγ in adipose tissue 
metabolism and the phenotypic and clinical consequences of loss-of-function 
variants in the PPARG gene. The clinical features of 41 PPARG pathogenic 
variants associated with FPLD3 patients were reviewed, highlighting the genetic 
and clinical heterogeneity observed among 91 patients. Most of them were female, 
and the average age at the onset and diagnosis of lipoatrophy was 21 years and 
33 years, respectively. Considering the metabolic profile, hypertriglyceridemia 
(91.9% of cases), diabetes (77%), hypertension (59.5%), polycystic ovary 
syndrome (58.2% of women), and metabolic-dysfunction-associated fatty liver 
disease (87,5%). We also discuss the current treatment for FPLD3. This review 
provides new data concerning the genetic and clinical heterogeneity in FPLD3 and 
highlights the importance of further understanding the genetics of this rare 
disease.

Copyright © 2024 Soares, da Silva, Campos and Lima.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1394102
PMCID: PMC11466747
PMID: 39398333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.