---
reference_id: "PMID:36293428"
title: The Molecular Mechanisms of Liver Fibrosis and Its Potential Therapy in Application.
authors:
- Zhang D
- Zhang Y
- Sun B
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms232012572
keywords:
- Humans
- Liver Cirrhosis/metabolism
- Hepatic Stellate Cells/metabolism
- Liver Diseases/pathology
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Collagen/metabolism
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- Liver/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Molecular Mechanisms of Liver Fibrosis and Its Potential Therapy in Application.
**Authors:** Zhang D, Zhang Y, Sun B
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms232012572](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232012572)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Oct 20;23(20):12572. doi: 10.3390/ijms232012572.

The Molecular Mechanisms of Liver Fibrosis and Its Potential Therapy in
Application.

Zhang D(1)(2), Zhang Y(2), Sun B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, Shanghai Tech University, Shanghai
201210, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and
Cell Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Liver fibrosis results from repeated and persistent liver damage. It can start
with hepatocyte injury and advance to inflammation, which recruits and activates
additional liver immune cells, leading to the activation of the hepatic stellate
cells (HSCs). It is the primary source of myofibroblasts (MFs), which result in
collagen synthesis and extracellular matrix protein accumulation. Although there
is no FDA and EMA-approved anti-fibrotic drug, antiviral therapy has made
remarkable progress in preventing or even reversing the progression of liver
fibrosis, but such a strategy remains elusive for patients with viral, alcoholic
or nonalcoholic steatosis, genetic or autoimmune liver disease. Due to the
complexity of the etiology, combination treatments affecting two or more targets
are likely to be required. Here, we review the pathogenic mechanisms of liver
fibrosis and signaling pathways involved, as well as various molecular targets
for liver fibrosis treatment. The development of efficient drug delivery systems
that target different cells in liver fibrosis therapy is also summarized. We
highlight promising anti-fibrotic events in clinical trial and preclinical
testing, which include small molecules and natural compounds. Last, we discuss
the challenges and opportunities in developing anti-fibrotic therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232012572
PMCID: PMC9604031
PMID: 36293428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
