---
reference_id: "PMID:29105322"
title: Clinical characteristics and outcomes of 61 patients with chronic periaortitis including IgG4-related and non-IgG4-related cases.
authors:
- Kim IY
- Eun YH
- Jeong H
- Park TK
- Kim H
- Lee J
- Jang SY
- Kim JS
- Koh EM
- Kim DK
- Cha HS
journal: Int J Rheum Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.13194
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aorta, Abdominal/immunology"
- "Aorta, Thoracic/immunology"
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Abdominal/blood, diagnosis, immunology, therapy"
- "Aortitis/blood, diagnosis, immunology, therapy"
- Autoimmunity
- Biomarkers/blood
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin G/blood, immunology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pancreatic Diseases/immunology
- Prognosis
- "Retroperitoneal Fibrosis/blood, diagnosis, immunology, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics and outcomes of 61 patients with chronic periaortitis including IgG4-related and non-IgG4-related cases.
**Authors:** Kim IY, Eun YH, Jeong H, Park TK, Kim H, Lee J, Jang SY, Kim JS, Koh EM, Kim DK, Cha HS
**Journal:** Int J Rheum Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1756-185X.13194](https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-185X.13194)

## Content

1. Int J Rheum Dis. 2017 Nov;20(11):1751-1762. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.13194. Epub
 2017 Nov 3.

Clinical characteristics and outcomes of 61 patients with chronic periaortitis
including IgG4-related and non-IgG4-related cases.

Kim IY(1), Eun YH(1), Jeong H(1), Park TK(2), Kim H(1), Lee J(1), Jang SY(2),
Kim JS(3), Koh EM(1), Kim DK(2), Cha HS(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Heart Vascular Stroke
Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology and Translational Genomics, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

AIM: Chronic periaortitis (CP) is a disease characterized by a
fibro-inflammatory periaortic cuff and adventitia-predominant fibrosis. CP
encompasses idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis and inflammatory abdominal
aortic aneurysm (AAA), and recent studies have documented overlap between CP and
immunoglobulin G4-related disease (IgG4-RD). This study aimed to investigate
clinical characteristics and treatment outcomes of patients with CP.
METHOD: CP patients were identified by retrospective review of 1245 patients
with International Classification of Diseases 10th edition code of aortitis or
aortic disease. Patients were further classified into IgG4-related and
non-IgG4-related CP according to the criteria proposed by a Japanese study.
RESULTS: A total of 61 CP patients were identified. Patients showed a male
predominance (70%) with median age of 61 at diagnosis. The abdominal aorta was
most commonly involved (84%), while the thoracic aorta was affected in 46% of
patients. Twenty-three (38%) patients had accompanying aortic aneurysm.
Approximately 60% of patients achieved remission without further relapse during
the course. Ten patients were classified as IgG4-related and 25 as
non-IgG4-related. There was no significant difference in clinical features and
outcomes between groups, with the exception of older age and greater pancreas
involvement in IgG4-related patients.
CONCLUSION: We documented 61 CP patients including 10 IgG4-related cases. CP
involved the abdominal aorta in most patients and the thoracic aorta in
approximately 50% of patients. IgG4-related CP patients were older and had
greater pancreas involvement, but disease outcomes appeared to be similar
between IgG4-related and non-IgG4-related CP.

© 2017 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1756-185X.13194
PMID: 29105322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
