---
reference_id: "PMID:41466885"
title: "\"CANDLE syndrome: A closer look at a rare autoinflammatory disorder\"."
authors:
- Singh S
- Sharma AK
journal: J Transl Autoimmun
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtauto.2025.100339
content_type: abstract_only
---

# "CANDLE syndrome: A closer look at a rare autoinflammatory disorder".
**Authors:** Singh S, Sharma AK
**Journal:** J Transl Autoimmun (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtauto.2025.100339](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtauto.2025.100339)

## Content

1. J Transl Autoimmun. 2025 Dec 6;12:100339. doi: 10.1016/j.jtauto.2025.100339.
eCollection 2026 Jun.

"CANDLE syndrome: A closer look at a rare autoinflammatory disorder".

Singh S(1), Sharma AK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Nims Institute of Pharmacy, Nims University
Rajasthan, Jaipur, 303121, Rajasthan, India.

A newly identified autoinflammatory condition called CANDLE syndrome (chronic
atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and increased temperature)
is characterized by early onset, recurring fever, skin lesions, and
multisystemic inflammatory symptoms. It has been demonstrated that the majority
of patients had PSMB8 gene mutations. It leads to dysfunction in the
proteasome/immunoproteasome system and subsequent overproduction of type 1
interferons. Patients usually exhibit lipodystrophy, fever, rashes on the skin,
and malnutrition in the early stages of infancy. The results of skin biopsies,
laboratory tests, and clinical symptoms all support the diagnosis of CANDLE
syndrome. Although there isn't a specific treatment for CANDLE syndrome, JAK
inhibitors like baricitinib have demonstrated some effectiveness in treating its
symptoms. For CANDLE syndrome patients to receive the right therapeutic
interventions, early diagnosis and molecular testing are essential. A positive
interferon signature has also been found to be a diagnostic indicator for the
condition. Although there are no particular treatments for CANDLE syndrome,
research is still being done to determine how well immunosuppressive
medications, biological agents, and glucocorticoids work in treating the
condition. Current research generally aims to improve the quality of life for
individuals with CANDLE syndrome through the development of targeted
medications, the elucidation of genetic determinants, and the advancement of
diagnostic methods.

© 2025 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtauto.2025.100339
PMCID: PMC12744253
PMID: 41466885

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this manuscript. All revisions made were
solely in response to the reviewer's scientific comments, and no external
funding, commercial involvement, or conflicts of interest were associated with
the preparation of this manuscript.
