---
reference_id: "PMID:39195517"
title: Factors Affecting Non-Enzymatic Protein Acylation by trans-3-Methylglutaconyl Coenzyme A.
authors:
- Jennings EA
- Macdonald MM
- Romenskaia I
- Yang H
- Mitchell GA
- Ryan RO
journal: Metabolites
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/metabo14080421
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factors Affecting Non-Enzymatic Protein Acylation by trans-3-Methylglutaconyl Coenzyme A.
**Authors:** Jennings EA, Macdonald MM, Romenskaia I, Yang H, Mitchell GA, Ryan RO
**Journal:** Metabolites (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/metabo14080421](https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo14080421)

## Content

1. Metabolites. 2024 Jul 31;14(8):421. doi: 10.3390/metabo14080421.

Factors Affecting Non-Enzymatic Protein Acylation by trans-3-Methylglutaconyl 
Coenzyme A.

Jennings EA(1), Macdonald MM(1), Romenskaia I(1), Yang H(2), Mitchell GA(2), 
Ryan RO(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV 89557, USA.
(2)Medical Genetics Service, Department of Pediatrics and Research Center, CHU 
Sainte-Justine and Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC H3T 1C5, Canada.

The leucine catabolism pathway intermediate, trans-3-methylglutaconyl (3MGC) 
CoA, is considered to be the precursor of 3MGC acid, a urinary organic acid 
associated with specific inborn errors of metabolism (IEM). trans-3MGC CoA is an 
unstable molecule that can undergo a sequence of non-enzymatic chemical 
reactions that lead to either 3MGC acid or protein 3MGCylation. Herein, the 
susceptibility of trans-3MGC CoA to protein 3MGCylation was investigated. 
trans-3MGC CoA was generated through the activity of recombinant 
3-methylcrotonyl CoA carboxylase (3MCCCase). Following enzyme incubations, 
reaction mixtures were spin-filtered to remove 3MCCCase. The recovered 
filtrates, containing trans-3MGC CoA, were then incubated in the presence of 
bovine serum albumin (BSA). Following this, sample aliquots were subjected to 
α-3MGC IgG immunoblot analysis to probe for 3MGCylated BSA. Experiments revealed 
a positive correlation between trans-3MGC CoA incubation temperature and 
3MGCylated BSA immunoblot signal intensity. A similar correlation was observed 
between incubation time and 3MGCylated BSA immunoblot signal intensity. When 
trans-3MGC CoA hydratase (AUH) was included in incubations containing trans-3MGC 
CoA and BSA, 3MGCylated BSA immunoblot signal intensity decreased. Evidence that 
protein 3MGCylation occurs in vivo was obtained in studies with liver-specific 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl (HMG) CoA lyase knockout mice. Therefore, trans-3MGC 
CoA is a reactive, potentially toxic metabolite, and under normal physiological 
conditions, lowering trans-3MGC CoA levels via AUH-mediated hydration to HMG CoA 
protects against aberrant non-enzymatic chemical reactions that lead to protein 
3MGCylation and 3MGC acid production.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo14080421
PMCID: PMC11356580
PMID: 39195517

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.