---
reference_id: "PMID:38015625"
title: A mouse model of Weaver syndrome displays overgrowth and excess osteogenesis reversible with KDM6A/6B inhibition.
authors:
- Gao CW
- Lin W
- Riddle RC
- Kushwaha P
- Boukas L
- Björnsson HT
- Hansen KD
- Fahrner JA
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.173392
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Histone Demethylases
- Osteogenesis/physiology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- Congenital Hypothyroidism
- Animals
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital"
- Polycomb Repressive Complex 2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mouse model of Weaver syndrome displays overgrowth and excess osteogenesis reversible with KDM6A/6B inhibition.
**Authors:** Gao CW, Lin W, Riddle RC, Kushwaha P, Boukas L, Björnsson HT, Hansen KD, Fahrner JA
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.173392](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.173392)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2024 Jan 9;9(1):e173392. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.173392.

A mouse model of Weaver syndrome displays overgrowth and excess osteogenesis 
reversible with KDM6A/6B inhibition.

Gao CW(1)(2), Lin W(1), Riddle RC(3)(4)(5), Kushwaha P(3), Boukas L(1)(6), 
Björnsson HT(1)(7)(8)(9), Hansen KD(1)(6)(10), Fahrner JA(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, and.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(5)Research and Development Service, Baltimore Veterans Administration Medical 
Center, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins University School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(8)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavík, Iceland.
(9)Landspítali University Hospital, Reykjavík, Iceland.
(10)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jun 30:2023.06.23.546270. doi: 10.1101/2023.06.23.546270.

Weaver syndrome is a Mendelian disorder of the epigenetic machinery (MDEM) 
caused by germline pathogenic variants in EZH2, which encodes the predominant 
H3K27 methyltransferase and key enzymatic component of Polycomb repressive 
complex 2 (PRC2). Weaver syndrome is characterized by striking overgrowth and 
advanced bone age, intellectual disability, and distinctive facies. We generated 
a mouse model for the most common Weaver syndrome missense variant, EZH2 
p.R684C. Ezh2R684C/R684C mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) showed global 
depletion of H3K27me3. Ezh2R684C/+ mice had abnormal bone parameters, indicative 
of skeletal overgrowth, and Ezh2R684C/+ osteoblasts showed increased osteogenic 
activity. RNA-Seq comparing osteoblasts differentiated from Ezh2R684C/+, and 
Ezh2+/+ BM-mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) indicated collective dysregulation 
of the BMP pathway and osteoblast differentiation. Inhibition of the opposing 
H3K27 demethylases KDM6A and KDM6B substantially reversed the excessive 
osteogenesis in Ezh2R684C/+ cells both at the transcriptional and phenotypic 
levels. This supports both the ideas that writers and erasers of histone marks 
exist in a fine balance to maintain epigenome state and that epigenetic 
modulating agents have therapeutic potential for the treatment of MDEMs.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.173392
PMCID: PMC10906465
PMID: 38015625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]