---
reference_id: "PMID:36729830"
title: LEPREL1 -RELATED GIANT RETINAL TEAR DETACHMENTS MIMIC THE PHENOTYPE OF OCULAR STICKLER SYNDROME.
authors:
- Magliyah MS
- Almarek F
- Nowilaty SR
- Al-Abdi L
- Alkuraya FS
- Alowain M
- Schatz P
- Alfaadhel T
- Khan AO
- Alsulaiman SM
journal: Retina
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000003691
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LEPREL1 -RELATED GIANT RETINAL TEAR DETACHMENTS MIMIC THE PHENOTYPE OF OCULAR STICKLER SYNDROME.
**Authors:** Magliyah MS, Almarek F, Nowilaty SR, Al-Abdi L, Alkuraya FS, Alowain M, Schatz P, Alfaadhel T, Khan AO, Alsulaiman SM
**Journal:** Retina (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IAE.0000000000003691](https://doi.org/10.1097/IAE.0000000000003691)

## Content

1. Retina. 2023 Mar 1;43(3):498-505. doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000003691.

LEPREL1 -RELATED GIANT RETINAL TEAR DETACHMENTS MIMIC THE PHENOTYPE OF OCULAR 
STICKLER SYNDROME.

Magliyah MS(1)(2), Almarek F(3), Nowilaty SR(1), Al-Abdi L(4)(5), Alkuraya 
FS(4)(5), Alowain M(6), Schatz P(1)(7), Alfaadhel T(8), Khan AO(9)(10), 
Alsulaiman SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Vitreoretinal Division, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Prince Mohammed Medical City, AlJouf, Saudi 
Arabia.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Imam Mohammed Bin Saud Islamic University, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Translational Genomics, Center for Genomic Medicine, King 
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Clinical Sciences, Skane University Hospital, 
Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(8)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(9)Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates; 
and.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of 
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.

PURPOSE: To describe the features of retinal detachments and high myopia in 
patients with novel pathogenic variants in LEPREL1 and report a possible 
association with nephropathy.
METHODS: Retrospective study of 10 children with biallelic LEPREL1 pathogenic 
variants. Data included ophthalmic features, surgical interventions, and genetic 
and laboratory findings.
RESULTS: 10 patients (8 females) from three families with homozygous (2) or 
compound heterozygous (1) variants in LEPREL1 were included. At presentation, 
mean age was 9.9 ± 2.6 years. Mean axial length was 28.9 ± 1.9 mm and mean 
refraction was -13.9 ± 2.8 diopters. Bilateral posterior subcapsular cataracts 
were present in eight patients (80%), with lens subluxation in five eyes of 
three patients (30%). Rhegmatogenous retinal detachments (RRD), associated with 
giant retinal tears (GRT), developed in seven eyes of five patients (50%) at a 
mean age of 14.14 ± 5.9 years. Six were successfully reattached with mean 
Snellen best-corrected visual acuity improving from 20/120 preoperatively to 
20/60 at last follow-up. Urinalysis in nine patients revealed microhematuria 
and/or mild proteinuria in six patients (67%).
CONCLUSION: LEPREL1 -related high myopia confers a high risk of early-onset 
GRT-related RRD. The ocular phenotype may be confused with that of ocular 
Stickler syndrome if genetic testing is not performed. Further investigations 
into a potential association with renal dysfunction are warranted.

DOI: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000003691
PMID: 36729830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]