---
reference_id: "PMID:31850715"
title: The Role of Human Parvovirus B19 in the Pediatric Patients with Pancytopenia?
authors:
- Colak M
- Kocak AA
- Dinc B
- Kaya Z
- Kocak U
- Yenicesu İ
- Bozdayi G
journal: Clin Lab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2019.190311
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Human Parvovirus B19 in the Pediatric Patients with Pancytopenia?
**Authors:** Colak M, Kocak AA, Dinc B, Kaya Z, Kocak U, Yenicesu İ, Bozdayi G
**Journal:** Clin Lab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.7754/Clin.Lab.2019.190311](https://doi.org/10.7754/Clin.Lab.2019.190311)

## Content

1. Clin Lab. 2019 Dec 1;65(12). doi: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2019.190311.

The Role of Human Parvovirus B19 in the Pediatric Patients with Pancytopenia?

Colak M, Kocak AA, Dinc B, Kaya Z, Kocak U, Yenicesu İ, Bozdayi G.

BACKGROUND: Parvoviruses are small DNA viruses causing erythema infectiosum, 
which is known as the fifth disease. The aim of this study was to investigate 
the presence of Parvovirus B19 DNA by Real-Time-PCR retrospectively in clinical 
samples of children diagnosed as acute leukemia and aplastic anemia when 
investigating the cause of pancytopenia and to investigate its relationship with 
the clinical manifestations.
METHODS: The study samples were collected between March 2014 and March 2018 in 
Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Hematology. Sixty 
pediatric patients; 37 males and 23 females, were included in the study. Nucleic 
acid isolation was performed by using MagNA-Pure Compact Nucleic Acid Isolation 
Kit (Roche, Germany). Extracted DNA was studied with LightCycler® 2.0 using the 
Real-Time PCR method and LightCycler® Parvovirus B19 Quantification Kit (Roche, 
Germany), and the results were evaluated quantitatively. Parvovirus B19 DNA 
detection interval of the kit was 101 - 106 copies/mL.
RESULTS: Sixty serum samples were investigated and 8.3% (5/60) Parvovirus B19 
DNA positivity was determined. Of the five patients with Parvovirus B19 DNA 
positivity, three had acute lymphoblastic leukemia and two were diagnosed as 
aplastic anemia. Regarding viral load; 2/5, 1/5, 1/5, and 1/5 of the samples had 
a viral load of 102, 103, 104, and 105 copies/mL, respectively. Parvovirus B19 
DNA positivity was detected in samples from March (2/5), April (2/5), and August 
(1/5).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with acute leukemia and aplastic anemia in childhood using 
immunosuppressive drugs, blood, and blood products during chemotherapy, 
encounter Parvovirus B19 infections in the follow-up period and are diagnosed by 
serological and molecular methods. As a result of the study, we suggest that the 
detection of Parvovirus B19 DNA by Real-Time PCR method in children being 
admitted with pancytopenia and diagnosed as acute leukemia and aplastic anemia 
is useful in the follow-up and treatment.

DOI: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2019.190311
PMID: 31850715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]