---
reference_id: "PMID:31905445"
title: A novel compound heterozygous mutation of the AIRE gene in a patient with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1.
authors:
- Suh J
- Choi HS
- Kwon A
- Chae HW
- Lee JS
- Kim HS
journal: Ann Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.6065/apem.2019.24.4.248
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel compound heterozygous mutation of the AIRE gene in a patient with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1.
**Authors:** Suh J, Choi HS, Kwon A, Chae HW, Lee JS, Kim HS
**Journal:** Ann Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.6065/apem.2019.24.4.248](https://doi.org/10.6065/apem.2019.24.4.248)

## Content

1. Ann Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2019 Dec;24(4):248-252. doi: 
10.6065/apem.2019.24.4.248. Epub 2019 Dec 31.

A novel compound heterozygous mutation of the AIRE gene in a patient with 
autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1.

Suh J(1), Choi HS(1), Kwon A(1), Chae HW(1), Lee JS(2), Kim HS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Severance Children's Hospital, Endocrine Research 
Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1), or autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy is a rare, autosomal 
recessive autoimmune disease caused by a mutation of the autoimmune regulator 
(AIRE) gene. The main symptom triad in APS-1 comprises chronic mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, adrenal insufficiency, and hypoparathyroidism. Various autoimmune 
diseases and ectodermal abnormalities are also commonly associated with the 
syndrome. The treatment of APS-1 includes hormone replacement and symptom 
control. It is important to monitor such patients for clinical manifestations of 
their disease through regular follow-up. We report the case of a 10-year-old 
Korean girl with APS-1 due to a novel compound heterozygous mutation of the AIRE 
gene. This patient&apos;s main clinical manifestations were adrenal 
insufficiency and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. The patient had a 
previously known pathogenic variant of c.1513delG (p.Ala505ProfsTer16), and a 
newly discovered variant of c.1360dupC (p.His454ProfsTer50).

DOI: 10.6065/apem.2019.24.4.248
PMCID: PMC6944864
PMID: 31905445

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.