---
reference_id: PMID:20861605
title: Association study of tumor necrosis factor receptor type 2 M196R and toll-like receptor 2 Arg753Gln polymorphisms with acne vulgaris in a Chinese Han ethnic group.
authors:
- Tian LM
- Xie HF
- Yang T
- Hu YH
- Li J
- Wang WZ
journal: Dermatology
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1159/000319851
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association study of tumor necrosis factor receptor type 2 M196R and toll-like receptor 2 Arg753Gln polymorphisms with acne vulgaris in a Chinese Han ethnic group.
**Authors:** Tian LM, Xie HF, Yang T, Hu YH, Li J, Wang WZ
**Journal:** Dermatology (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000319851](https://doi.org/10.1159/000319851)

## Content

1. Dermatology. 2010;221(3):276-84. doi: 10.1159/000319851.

Association study of tumor necrosis factor receptor type 2 M196R and toll-like 
receptor 2 Arg753Gln polymorphisms with acne vulgaris in a Chinese Han ethnic 
group.

Tian LM(1), Xie HF, Yang T, Hu YH, Li J, Wang WZ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China. jolly180@yahoo.cn

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 
(TNFR2) and Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) are the main responsible mediators of 
inflammatory acne. Factors affecting their production may possibly influence the 
degree of inflammatory response and hence may account for the clinical severity 
of acne. However, the roles of TNFR2 and TLR2 in the pathophysiology of acne 
vulgaris are poorly understood. We therefore investigated the relationship 
between acne vulgaris susceptibility and the polymorphisms in the TNFR2 M196R as 
well as TLR2 Arg753Gln gene.
METHODS: A total of 93 acne vulgaris patients and 90 healthy subjects from the 
Chinese Han ethnic group were enrolled in the study. The polymerase chain 
reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism technique was adopted to 
analyze the single-nucleotide polymorphisms of the TNFR2 M196R and TLR2 
Arg753Gln gene, and to examine the association between acne vulgaris and the 
polymorphisms in the TNFR2 M196R as well as TLR2 Arg753Gln gene. The 
relationship between different genotypes and the susceptibility to acne vulgaris 
was analyzed.
RESULTS: There is a significant difference in the frequency of TNFR2 M196R 
genetic polymorphisms between the moderate-acne to severe-acne subgroups and the 
control group (p < 0.05), and there is also a significant difference in the 
frequency of TLR2 Arg753Gln genetic polymorphisms between the severe-acne 
subgroup and control group (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The 196R allele of TNFR2 M196R as well as the 753Gln allele of TLR2 
Arg753Gln are risk factors for acne vulgaris in Chinese Han patients, further 
supporting the contribution of inflammatory cytokines to the pathogenesis of 
acne.

DOI: 10.1159/000319851
PMID: 20861605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]