---
reference_id: "PMID:28206724"
title: Vitiligo susceptibility and catalase gene polymorphisms in Sicilian population.
authors:
- Caputo V
- Niceta M
- Fiorella S
- La Vecchia M
- Bastonini E
- Bongiorno MR
- Pistone G
journal: G Ital Dermatol Venereol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.23736/S0392-0488.17.05488-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitiligo susceptibility and catalase gene polymorphisms in Sicilian population.
**Authors:** Caputo V, Niceta M, Fiorella S, La Vecchia M, Bastonini E, Bongiorno MR, Pistone G
**Journal:** G Ital Dermatol Venereol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S0392-0488.17.05488-8](https://doi.org/10.23736/S0392-0488.17.05488-8)

## Content

1. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2018 Oct;153(5):619-623. doi: 
10.23736/S0392-0488.17.05488-8. Epub 2017 Feb 15.

Vitiligo susceptibility and catalase gene polymorphisms in Sicilian population.

Caputo V(1), Niceta M(2), Fiorella S(3), La Vecchia M(3), Bastonini E(4), 
Bongiorno MR(3), Pistone G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy - 
valentina.caputo@unipa.it.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Villa Sofia V. Cervello Hospital, Palermo, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Cutaneous Physiopathology and Integrated Center of 
Metabolomics, San Gallicano Dermatologic Institute (IRCCS), Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Catalase gene (CAT) polymorphisms were analyzed as responsible for 
the deficiency of catalase enzyme activity and concomitant accumulation of 
excessive hydrogen peroxide in vitiligo patients. Catalase is a well-known 
oxidative stress regulator that could play an important role in the pathogenesis 
of vitiligo. This study was conducted to evaluate three CAT gene polymorphisms 
(-89A/T, 389C/T, 419C/T) and their association with vitiligo susceptibility in 
Sicilian population.
METHODS: Sixty out of 73 Sicilian patients with vitiligo were enrolled and 
submitted to CAT gene analysis.
RESULTS: Contrary to the Northern part of Europe but likewise to the 
Mediterranean area, the frequency of the CAT genotypes in Sicily is equally 
distributed. Out of all CAT genotypes, only CAT-89 T/T frequency was found to be 
significantly higher amongst vitiligo patients than controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the involvement of the CAT enzyme in the pathogenesis of 
vitiligo, the biological significance of CAT gene polymorphisms is still 
controversial. With the only exception for CAT variant -89A/T, the other studied 
CAT gene polymorphisms (389C/T and 419C/T) might not to be associated with 
vitiligo in Sicilian population.

DOI: 10.23736/S0392-0488.17.05488-8
PMID: 28206724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]