---
reference_id: "PMID:18304168"
title: Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome in a 1-year-old boy and his mother.
authors:
- Barcelos AC
- Nico MM
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1525-1470.2007.00596.x
keywords:
- "Acrodermatitis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Adolescent
- "Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic"
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Hypohidrosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Hypotrichosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Infant
- Male
- Mothers
- Pedigree
- Precancerous Conditions/pathology
- Prognosis
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome in a 1-year-old boy and his mother.
**Authors:** Barcelos AC, Nico MM
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1525-1470.2007.00596.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1525-1470.2007.00596.x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2008 Jan-Feb;25(1):112-3. doi:
10.1111/j.1525-1470.2007.00596.x.

Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome in a 1-year-old boy and his mother.

Barcelos AC(1), Nico MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil. zza@ig.com.br

Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome is a rare genodermatosis with cancer
predisposition, characterized by follicular atrophoderma, multiple milia,
congenital hypotrichosis, hypohidrosis and basal cell malformations that include
nevoid basal cell carcinomas of early onset. We present two patients with this
syndrome, a 1-year-old boy with diffuse scalp and eyebrows alopecia, milia
papules on the face, ears, trunk, and limbs. Hypohidrosis was observed on his
trunk and head. His 16-year-old mother had identical changes since childhood,
with hair fragility, and multiple atrophic "ice pick" follicular depressions on
the dorsa of her hands. She also had a basal cell carcinoma on her face.
Microscopic examination of hairs from the mother revealed abnormalities such as
diameter irregularities, broken shafts, trichorrexis nodosa and pili bifurcatti.
Pili bifurcatti is an uncommon hair shaft dysplasia that has not before been
observed in Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1525-1470.2007.00596.x
PMID: 18304168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
