---
reference_id: "PMID:23283289"
title: Advances in the treatment of Kawasaki disease.
authors:
- Dominguez SR
- Anderson MS
journal: Curr Opin Pediatr
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e32835c1122
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in the treatment of Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Dominguez SR, Anderson MS
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pediatr (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOP.0b013e32835c1122](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0b013e32835c1122)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2013 Feb;25(1):103-9. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e32835c1122.

Advances in the treatment of Kawasaki disease.

Dominguez SR(1), Anderson MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Infectious Diseases, Children's Hospital 
Colorado, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado 80045, 
USA. Samuel.dominguez@ucdenver.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and aspirin is the standard 
initial therapy in the treatment of Kawasaki disease. Some patients have 
persistent or recrudescent fever despite this therapy. Although there is no 
conclusive body of evidence defining the best second and third-line therapies 
for Kawasaki patients, there have been several recent studies published 
describing the results of these therapies.
RECENT FINDINGS: This review summarizes the current recommendations for the 
initial therapy and describes the second and third-line therapies studied in 
Japan and the United States. A recent study in a Japanese population of Kawasaki 
disease patients at high risk for IVIG resistance found that the group receiving 
steroids, in addition to IVIG and aspirin, had fewer coronary artery 
abnormalities than the group receiving IVIG and aspirin alone. Small studies of 
etanercept and infliximab have showed these TNF-alpha blockers to be well 
tolerated and effective in the resolution of fever.
SUMMARY: Although most practitioners in the USA use IVIG as a second-line 
therapy for those Kawasaki disease patients who have persistent or recrudescent 
fever, promising new therapies are under study. Infliximab and steroids are 
currently the two agents that have been most studied. However, larger studies 
and studies in genetically diverse populations are needed.

DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e32835c1122
PMID: 23283289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]