---
reference_id: "PMID:37340913"
title: A Neonate With a Rash.
authors:
- Kazemi-Butterfield N
- Asamoah EM
- Little JT
- Schimmenti LA
- Scruggs BA
- Ristagno EH
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2022-060571
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Neonate With a Rash.
**Authors:** Kazemi-Butterfield N, Asamoah EM, Little JT, Schimmenti LA, Scruggs BA, Ristagno EH
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2022-060571](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2022-060571)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2023 Jul 1;152(1):e2022060571. doi: 10.1542/peds.2022-060571.

A Neonate With a Rash.

Kazemi-Butterfield N(1), Asamoah EM(2), Little JT(3), Schimmenti LA(4)(5), 
Scruggs BA(5), Ristagno EH(6).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine Medical Scientist Training Program, 
Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Division of Pediatric Dermatology, Department of Dermatology.
(3)Division of Neuroradiology, Department of Radiology.
(4)Clinical Genomics, Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology.
(5)Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(6)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, and Departments of Pediatric and 
Adolescent Medicine.

A full-term female was admitted at 3 days of life with a worsening rash since 
birth, concerning for infection. She developed clinical seizures and was 
transferred to our facility. She was admitted to the pediatric hospital medicine 
service and diagnostic workup was expanded with several specialists consulted. 
Presumptive diagnosis was made clinically, with definitive diagnosis established 
thereafter.

Copyright © 2023 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2022-060571
PMID: 37340913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]