---
reference_id: PMID:24738885
title: Insights into desmosome biology from inherited human skin disease and cardiocutaneous syndromes.
authors:
- Nitoiu D
- Etheridge SL
- Kelsell DP
journal: Cell Commun Adhes
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3109/15419061.2014.908854
keywords:
- "ADAM Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- ADAM17 Protein
- "Desmoplakins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Desmosomes/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "LEOPARD Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Skin Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights into desmosome biology from inherited human skin disease and cardiocutaneous syndromes.
**Authors:** Nitoiu D, Etheridge SL, Kelsell DP
**Journal:** Cell Commun Adhes (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3109/15419061.2014.908854](https://doi.org/10.3109/15419061.2014.908854)

## Content

1. Cell Commun Adhes. 2014 Jun;21(3):129-40. doi: 10.3109/15419061.2014.908854. 
Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Insights into desmosome biology from inherited human skin disease and 
cardiocutaneous syndromes.

Nitoiu D(1), Etheridge SL, Kelsell DP.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute, Barts and the London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London , London , UK.

The importance of desmosomes in tissue homeostasis is highlighted by natural and 
engineered mutations in desmosomal genes, which compromise the skin or heart and 
in some instances both. Desmosomal gene mutations account for 45-50% of cases of 
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, and are mutated in an array of 
other disorders such as striate palmoplantar keratoderma, hypotrichosis with or 
without skin vesicles and lethal acantholytic epidermolysis bullosa. Recently, 
we reported loss-of-function mutations in the human ADAM17 gene, encoding for 
the 'sheddase' ADAM17, a transmembrane protein which cleaves extracellular 
domains of substrate proteins including TNF-α, growth factors and desmoglein 
(DSG) 2. Patients present with cardiomyopathy and an inflammatory skin and bowel 
syndrome with defective DSG processing. In contrast, the dominantly inherited 
tylosis with oesophageal cancer appears to result from gain-of-function in 
ADAM17 due to increased processing via iRHOM2. This review discusses the 
heterogeneity of mutations in desmosomes and their regulatory proteins.

DOI: 10.3109/15419061.2014.908854
PMID: 24738885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]