---
reference_id: "PMID:35084720"
title: "Stiff-person Syndrome and GAD Antibody-spectrum Disorders: GABAergic Neuronal Excitability, Immunopathogenesis and Update on Antibody Therapies."
authors:
- Dalakas MC
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s13311-022-01188-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stiff-person Syndrome and GAD Antibody-spectrum Disorders: GABAergic Neuronal Excitability, Immunopathogenesis and Update on Antibody Therapies.
**Authors:** Dalakas MC
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13311-022-01188-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-022-01188-w)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2022 Apr;19(3):832-847. doi: 10.1007/s13311-022-01188-w.
Epub  2022 Jan 27.

Stiff-person Syndrome and GAD Antibody-spectrum Disorders: GABAergic Neuronal 
Excitability, Immunopathogenesis and Update on Antibody Therapies.

Dalakas MC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
marinos.dalakas@jefferson.edu.
(2)Neuroimmunology Unit National and Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical 
School, Athens, Greece. marinos.dalakas@jefferson.edu.

Although antibodies against Glutamic Acid Decarboxylase (GAD) were originally 
associated with Stiff Person Syndrome (SPS), they now denote the "GAD 
antibody-spectrum disorders (GAD-SD)" that include Cerebellar Ataxia, Autoimmune 
Epilepsy, Limbic Encephalitis, PERM and eye movement disorder. In spite of the 
unique clinical phenotype that each of these disorders has, there is significant 
overlapping symptomatology characterized by autoimmune neuronal excitability. In 
addition to GAD, three other autoantibodies, against glycine receptors, 
amphiphysin and gephyrin, are less frequently or rarely associated with SPS-SD. 
Very high serum anti-GAD antibody titers are a key diagnostic feature for all 
GAD-SD, commonly associated with the presence of GAD antibodies in the CSF, a 
reduced CSF GABA level and increased anti-GAD-specific IgG intrathecal synthesis 
denoting stimulation of B-cell clones in the CNS. Because anti-GAD antibodies 
from the various hyperexcitability syndromes recognize the same dominant GAD 
epitope, the clinical heterogeneity among GAD-SD patients remains unexplained. 
The paper highlights the biologic basis of autoimmune hyperexcitability 
connected with the phenomenon of reciprocal inhibition as the fundamental 
mechanism of the patients' muscle stiffness and spasms; addresses the importance 
of high-GAD antibody titers in diagnosis, pinpointing the diagnostic challenges 
in patients with low-GAD titers or their distinction from functional disorders; 
and discusses whether high GAD-antibodies are disease markers or pathogenic in 
the context of their association with reduced GABA level in the brain and CSF. 
Finally, it focuses on therapies providing details on symptomatic GABA-enhancing 
drugs and the currently available immunotherapies in a step-by-step approach. 
The prospects of future immunotherapeutic options with antibody therapies are 
also summarized.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-022-01188-w
PMCID: PMC9294130
PMID: 35084720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]