---
reference_id: "PMID:33626253"
title: Idecabtagene Vicleucel in Relapsed and Refractory Multiple Myeloma.
authors:
- Munshi NC
- Anderson LD Jr
- Shah N
- Madduri D
- Berdeja J
- Lonial S
- Raje N
- Lin Y
- Siegel D
- Oriol A
- Moreau P
- Yakoub-Agha I
- Delforge M
- Cavo M
- Einsele H
- Goldschmidt H
- Weisel K
- Rambaldi A
- Reece D
- Petrocca F
- Massaro M
- Connarn JN
- Kaiser S
- Patel P
- Huang L
- Campbell TB
- Hege K
- San-Miguel J
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2024850
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Idecabtagene Vicleucel in Relapsed and Refractory Multiple Myeloma.
**Authors:** Munshi NC, Anderson LD Jr, Shah N, Madduri D, Berdeja J, Lonial S, Raje N, Lin Y, Siegel D, Oriol A, Moreau P, Yakoub-Agha I, Delforge M, Cavo M, Einsele H, Goldschmidt H, Weisel K, Rambaldi A, Reece D, Petrocca F, Massaro M, Connarn JN, Kaiser S, Patel P, Huang L, Campbell TB, Hege K, San-Miguel J
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2024850](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2024850)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2021 Feb 25;384(8):705-716. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2024850.

Idecabtagene Vicleucel in Relapsed and Refractory Multiple Myeloma.

Munshi NC(1), Anderson LD Jr(1), Shah N(1), Madduri D(1), Berdeja J(1), Lonial 
S(1), Raje N(1), Lin Y(1), Siegel D(1), Oriol A(1), Moreau P(1), Yakoub-Agha 
I(1), Delforge M(1), Cavo M(1), Einsele H(1), Goldschmidt H(1), Weisel K(1), 
Rambaldi A(1), Reece D(1), Petrocca F(1), Massaro M(1), Connarn JN(1), Kaiser 
S(1), Patel P(1), Huang L(1), Campbell TB(1), Hege K(1), San-Miguel J(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Jerome Lipper Multiple Myeloma Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 
(N.C.M.), the Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System, Harvard Medical School 
(N.C.M.), and Massachusetts General Hospital (N.R.), Boston, and bluebird bio, 
Cambridge (F.P., M.M.) - all in Massachusetts; Simmons Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas (L.D.A.); the 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco (N.S.); Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York (D.M.); Sarah Cannon Research Institute and 
Tennessee Oncology, Nashville (J.B.); Emory School of Medicine, Atlanta (S.L.); 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (Y.L.); Hackensack University Medical Center, 
Hackensack (D.S.), and Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton (J.N.C., S.K., P.P., 
L.H., T.B.C., K.H.) - both in New Jersey; Institut Josep Carreras and Institut 
Catala d'Oncologia, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona (A.O.), and Clinica 
Universidad de Navarra, Centro de Investigación Médica Aplicada, Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria de Navarra, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Cáncer, Pamplona (J.S.-M.) - both in Spain; Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
(CHU) de Nantes, Nantes (P.M.), and CHU de Lille, University of Lille, INSERM 
Unité 1286, Institute for Translational Research in Inflammation, Lille 
(I.Y.-A.) - both in France; University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium (M.D.); 
"Seràgnoli" Institute of Hematology, Bologna University School of Medicine, 
Bologna (M.C.), the Department of Oncology and Hematology, University of Milan, 
Milan (A.R.), and Azienda Socio Sanitaria Territoriale Papa Giovanni XXIII, 
Bergamo (A.R.) - all in Italy; University Hospital of Würzburg, Würzburg (H.E.), 
University Hospital Heidelberg (H.G.) and the National Center for Tumor Diseases 
(H.G.), Heidelberg, the University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg 
(K.W.), and Universitätsklinikum Tübingen, Tübingen (K.W.) - all in Germany; and 
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto (D.R.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Jun 17;384(24):2356-2357. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2105069.
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Jun 17;384(24):2357. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2105069.

BACKGROUND: Idecabtagene vicleucel (ide-cel, also called bb2121), a B-cell 
maturation antigen-directed chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy, has 
shown clinical activity with expected CAR T-cell toxic effects in patients with 
relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma.
METHODS: In this phase 2 study, we sought to confirm the efficacy and safety of 
ide-cel in patients with relapsed and refractory myeloma. Patients with disease 
after at least three previous regimens including a proteasome inhibitor, an 
immunomodulatory agent, and an anti-CD38 antibody were enrolled. Patients 
received ide-cel target doses of 150 × 106 to 450 × 106 CAR-positive (CAR+) T 
cells. The primary end point was an overall response (partial response or 
better); a key secondary end point was a complete response or better (comprising 
complete and stringent complete responses).
RESULTS: Of 140 patients enrolled, 128 received ide-cel. At a median follow-up 
of 13.3 months, 94 of 128 patients (73%) had a response, and 42 of 128 (33%) had 
a complete response or better. Minimal residual disease (MRD)-negative status 
(<10-5 nucleated cells) was confirmed in 33 patients, representing 26% of all 
128 patients who were treated and 79% of the 42 patients who had a complete 
response or better. The median progression-free survival was 8.8 months (95% 
confidence interval, 5.6 to 11.6). Common toxic effects among the 128 treated 
patients included neutropenia in 117 patients (91%), anemia in 89 (70%), and 
thrombocytopenia in 81 (63%). Cytokine release syndrome was reported in 107 
patients (84%), including 7 (5%) who had events of grade 3 or higher. Neurotoxic 
effects developed in 23 patients (18%) and were of grade 3 in 4 patients (3%); 
no neurotoxic effects higher than grade 3 occurred. Cellular kinetic analysis 
confirmed CAR+ T cells in 29 of 49 patients (59%) at 6 months and 4 of 11 
patients (36%) at 12 months after infusion.
CONCLUSIONS: Ide-cel induced responses in a majority of heavily pretreated 
patients with refractory and relapsed myeloma; MRD-negative status was achieved 
in 26% of treated patients. Almost all patients had grade 3 or 4 toxic effects, 
most commonly hematologic toxic effects and cytokine release syndrome. (Funded 
by bluebird bio and Celgene, a Bristol-Myers Squibb company; KarMMa 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03361748.).

Copyright © 2021 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2024850
PMID: 33626253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]