---
reference_id: "PMID:31420886"
title: "Nonimmune hydrops fetalis and congenital disorders of glycosylation: A systematic literature review."
authors:
- Makhamreh MM
- Cottingham N
- Ferreira CR
- Berger S
- Al-Kouatly HB
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12162
keywords:
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Fetal Death
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Hydrops Fetalis/diagnosis
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Phosphotransferases (Phosphomutases)/analysis, genetics, metabolism"
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonimmune hydrops fetalis and congenital disorders of glycosylation: A systematic literature review.
**Authors:** Makhamreh MM, Cottingham N, Ferreira CR, Berger S, Al-Kouatly HB
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12162](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12162)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2020 Mar;43(2):223-233. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12162. Epub
2019  Nov 8.

Nonimmune hydrops fetalis and congenital disorders of glycosylation: A 
systematic literature review.

Makhamreh MM(1), Cottingham N(2), Ferreira CR(3), Berger S(3), Al-Kouatly HB(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(2)Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(3)Center for Genetic Medicine Research & Rare Disease Institute, Children's 
National Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia.

Numerous etiologies may lead to nonimmune hydrops fetalis (NIHF) including 
congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG). Recognition of CDG in NIHF is 
challenging. This study reviews prenatal and neonatal characteristics of CDG 
presenting with NIHF. A systematic literature search was performed. Thirteen 
articles met the inclusion criteria. Twenty-one cases with NIHF associated with 
a CDG were reported. There were 17 live births, three pregnancy terminations, 
and one fetal demise. Timing of CDG diagnosis was reported mostly postnatally 
(90%; 10/11). Postnatal genetic testing was reported in 18 patients; three 
patients were diagnosed by isoelectric focusing of serum transferrin that showed 
a type 1 pattern. The genes reported for CDG with NIHF for 15 distinct families 
include: PMM2 in 47% (7/15), ALG9 in 20% (3/15), ALG8 in 13% (2/15), ALG1 in 7% 
(1/15), MGAT2 in 7% (1/15), and COG6 7% (1/15). In our review, 81% (17/21) 
reported facial dysmorphism, 52% (11/21) reported CNS abnormalities, most 
commonly cerebellar atrophy (64%; 7/11), and 38% (8/21) reported cardiovascular 
abnormalities, most commonly hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (63%; 5/8). Among live 
births, 71% (12/17) infants died at a median age of 34 days (range 1-185). 
Thrombocytopenia was reported in 53% (9/17) patients. Of those who survived past 
the neonatal period, 80% (4/5) had significant reported developmental delays. 
CDG should be on the differential diagnosis of NIHF in the presence of 
cerebellar atrophy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or thrombocytopenia. Our review 
highlights the poor prognosis in infants with NIHF due to CDG and demonstrates 
the importance of identifying these disorders prenatally to guide providers in 
their counseling with families regarding pregnancy management. SYNOPSIS: Poor 
prognosis in fetuses and infants with nonimmune hydrops fetalis due to 
congenital disorders of glycosylation highlights the importance of prenatal 
diagnosis of this disorder.

© 2019 SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12162
PMCID: PMC11894479
PMID: 31420886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Mona M. Makhamreh, Naiga Cottingham, 
Carlos R. Ferreira, Seth Berger and Huda B. Al-Kouatly declare no conflict of 
interest.