---
reference_id: "PMID:38840186"
title: "Novel homozygous frameshift insertion variant in the last exon of the EDARADD causing hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in two siblings: case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Kablan A
- Tasdelen E
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-024-01681-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Frameshift Mutation
- Edar-Associated Death Domain Protein/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exons
- Homozygote
- Siblings
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel homozygous frameshift insertion variant in the last exon of the EDARADD causing hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in two siblings: case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Kablan A, Tasdelen E
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-024-01681-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-024-01681-2)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2024 Jun 5;50(1):112. doi: 10.1186/s13052-024-01681-2.

Novel homozygous frameshift insertion variant in the last exon of the EDARADD 
causing hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in two siblings: case report and 
review of the literature.

Kablan A(1)(2), Tasdelen E(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Sanliurfa Research and Training Hospital, 
Sanliurfa, Turkey. kablanmd@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Etlik City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. 
kablanmd@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Sanliurfa Research and Training Hospital, 
Sanliurfa, Turkey.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Etlik City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is a genetic disorder that 
results in the abnormal development of structures derived from ectodermal 
tissue. This rare condition predominantly affects the hair, nails, eccrine 
glands, and teeth. While HED can be caused by various genes, the EDA, EDAR, 
EDARADD, and WNT10A genes account for approximately 90% of cases. Notably, HED 
forms associated with variants in the EDA, EDAR, or EDARADD genes may exhibit 
similar phenotypes due to defects in a common signaling pathway. Proper 
interaction among the products of these genes is crucial for the activation of 
the nuclear factor (NF-κB) signaling pathway, which subsequently regulates the 
transcription of targeted genes. The EDARADD gene, in particular, harbors one of 
the rarest reported variants associated with HED.
CASE PRESENTATION: Five-and two-years-old brothers born into consanguineous 
parents were examined at our outpatient medical genetics clinic at Sanliurfa 
Training and Research Hospital, Turkey. Both displayed the same classical 
phenotypic features of HED. The elder had a very sparse dark and brittle hair, 
sparse eyebrows and eyelashes, conical upper and lower premolar teeth with 
hypodontia, widely spaced teeth, very dry skin, mildly prominent forehead, and 
periorbital wrinkles. The younger one showed the same, but less severe, clinical 
features. After thorough examination and patient history evaluation, targeted 
next-generation sequencing analysis yielded the novel homozygous insertion 
variant c.322_323insCGGGC p.(Arg108ProfsTer7) in EDARADD. The mutation has not 
been reported to date in the literature.
CONCLUSIONS: In this report, we present two siblings exhibiting classical HED 
symptoms and a novel insertion variant of the EDARADD gene, which leads to a 
frameshift introducing a stop codon. Both brothers inherited such mutation from 
their parents, who were heterozygous carriers of the same variant. The present 
study may shed light about the pathogenic mechanisms underlying HED, and expand 
the spectrum of EDARADD gene variants associated with this condition.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-024-01681-2
PMCID: PMC11155060
PMID: 38840186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.