---
reference_id: "PMID:27025942"
title: "The Natural History of Flare-Ups in Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP): A Comprehensive Global Assessment."
authors:
- Pignolo RJ
- Bedford-Gay C
- Liljesthröm M
- Durbin-Johnson BP
- Shore EM
- Rocke DM
- Kaplan FS
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2728
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Demography
- Disability Evaluation
- Disease Progression
- Female
- "Health Knowledge, Attitudes, Practice"
- Humans
- Infant
- Internationality
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myositis Ossificans/pathology
- Symptom Flare Up
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Natural History of Flare-Ups in Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP): A Comprehensive Global Assessment.
**Authors:** Pignolo RJ, Bedford-Gay C, Liljesthröm M, Durbin-Johnson BP, Shore EM, Rocke DM, Kaplan FS
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.2728](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.2728)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 Mar;31(3):650-6. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2728. Epub 2015 Nov
14.

The Natural History of Flare-Ups in Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP):
A Comprehensive Global Assessment.

Pignolo RJ(1)(2)(3), Bedford-Gay C(4), Liljesthröm M(4), Durbin-Johnson
BP(5)(6), Shore EM(2)(3)(7), Rocke DM(5)(6), Kaplan FS(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)The Center for Research in FOP and Related Disorders, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)International FOP Association, Winter Springs, FL, USA.
(5)Department of Public Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California, Davis, Davis,
CA, USA.
(7)Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) leads to disabling heterotopic
ossification (HO) from episodic flare-ups. However, the natural history of FOP
flare-ups is poorly understood. A 78-question survey on FOP flare-ups,
translated into 15 languages, was sent to 685 classically-affected patients in
45 countries (six continents). Five hundred patients or knowledgeable informants
responded (73%; 44% males, 56% females; ages: 1 to 71 years; median: 23 years).
The most common presenting symptoms of flare-ups were swelling (93%), pain
(86%), or decreased mobility (79%). Seventy-one percent experienced a flare-up
within the preceding 12 months (52% spontaneous; 48% trauma-related).
Twenty-five percent of those who had received an intramuscular injection
reported an immediate flare-up at the injection site, 84% of whom developed HO.
Axial flare-ups most frequently involved the back (41.6%), neck (26.4%), or jaw
(19.4%). Flare-ups occurred more frequently in the upper limbs before 8 years of
age, but more frequently in the lower limbs thereafter. Appendicular flare-ups
occurred more frequently at proximal than at distal sites without preferential
sidedness. Seventy percent of patients reported functional loss from a flare-up.
Thirty-two percent reported complete resolution of at least one flare-up and 12%
without any functional loss (mostly in the head or back). The most disabling
flare-ups occurred at the shoulders or hips. Surprisingly, 47% reported
progression of FOP without obvious flare-ups. Worldwide, 198 treatments were
reported; anti-inflammatory agents were most common. Seventy-five percent used
short-term glucocorticoids as a treatment for flare-ups at appendicular sites.
Fifty-five percent reported that glucocorticoids improved symptoms occasionally
whereas 31% reported that they always did. Only 12% reported complete resolution
of a flare-up with glucocorticoids. Forty-three percent reported rebound
symptoms within 1 to 7 days after completing a course of glucocorticoids. This
study is the first comprehensive global assessment of FOP flare-ups and
establishes a critical foundation for the design and evaluation of future
clinical trials.

© 2015 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2728
PMCID: PMC4829946
PMID: 27025942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
