---
reference_id: "PMID:8396604"
title: IgG and IgM antibodies to human parvovirus B19 in the serum of patients with a clinical diagnosis of infection with the virus and in the general population of Saudi Arabia.
authors:
- al-Frayh AR
- Bahakim H
- Kidess E
- Ramia S
journal: J Infect
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1016/0163-4453(93)93733-k
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IgG and IgM antibodies to human parvovirus B19 in the serum of patients with a clinical diagnosis of infection with the virus and in the general population of Saudi Arabia.
**Authors:** al-Frayh AR, Bahakim H, Kidess E, Ramia S
**Journal:** J Infect (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0163-4453(93)93733-k](https://doi.org/10.1016/0163-4453(93)93733-k)

## Content

1. J Infect. 1993 Jul;27(1):51-5. doi: 10.1016/0163-4453(93)93733-k.

IgG and IgM antibodies to human parvovirus B19 in the serum of patients with a 
clinical diagnosis of infection with the virus and in the general population of 
Saudi Arabia.

al-Frayh AR(1), Bahakim H, Kidess E, Ramia S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Kind Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.

A total of 56 samples of serum from 32 patients with a clinical diagnosis of 
human parvovirus B19 infection were tested for specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) 
and M (IgM) antibodies by means of the recently available indirect enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (Parvoscan-B19, Ferring Diagnostica, Sweden). The 
assay was also used in order to determine the age-specific prevalence of 
antibodies to the virus in the general population of Saudi Arabia. Specific IgM 
antibodies were detected in 94% specimens collected 1 week after the onset of 
illness and could be detected for up to 2 months. On the other hand, specific 
IgG antibodies were detected in 85% patients from whom acute- and 
convalescent-phase serum samples were collected. Saudis begin to be exposed to 
human parvovirus B19 early in life and prevalence of exposure increases with age 
in both sexes (overall prevalence 19.0%). The availability of a commercial ELISA 
makes it possible to diagnose infection with the virus routinely and will help 
in establishing the extent of exposure to it in various communities.

DOI: 10.1016/0163-4453(93)93733-k
PMID: 8396604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]