---
reference_id: PMID:28722929
title: Celiac Disease.
authors:
- Daley SF
- Haseeb M
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Celiac Disease.
**Authors:** Daley SF, Haseeb M

## Content

1. Celiac Disease.

Daley SF(1), Haseeb M(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2025 Feb 4.

Author information:
(1)Cape Cod Hospital, Hyannis, MA
(2)University of Pittsburgh

Celiac disease is an autoimmune disorder triggered by an immune-mediated 
response of the small intestine to dietary gluten, which is a protein found in 
wheat, barley, and rye. Although traditionally viewed as a gastrointestinal 
condition primarily associated with malabsorption, it is now more accurately 
classified as an autoimmune disorder with systemic manifestations. Celiac 
disease occurs in genetically predisposed individuals and results in a lifelong 
condition characterized by immune-mediated damage to the lining of the small 
intestine due to the immune response to gluten. This damage is evidenced by 
villous atrophy, crypt hyperplasia, and infiltration of the lamina propria by 
immune cells, which in turn leads to malabsorption of essential nutrients, 
including micronutrients, fat-soluble vitamins, iron, vitamin B12, and folate. 
Typical gastrointestinal symptoms include diarrhea, abdominal discomfort, 
bloating, and constipation. However, celiac disease can also present with 
extraintestinal manifestations such as fatigue, weight loss, skin rashes, 
anemia, and osteoporosis. Growth failure is a frequent additional symptom in 
children with celiac disease (see Image. Intestinal Changes in Celiac Disease). 
Detection of disease-specific antibodies, such as anti-tissue transglutaminase 
(tTG)–immunoglobulin A (IgA) or "tTG-IgA" and anti-endomysial antibodies (EMAs), 
is a key initial step in diagnosing suspected celiac disease. Most patients 
require a small intestinal biopsy to confirm the diagnosis and assess the extent 
of mucosal damage. The only effective treatment for celiac disease is the strict 
and complete exclusion of gluten from the diet, which involves lifelong 
adherence to a strict gluten-free diet (GFD). Maintaining a GFD is essential for 
symptom resolution and the prevention of long-term complications, with most 
patients responding well to this dietary modification. Regular medical follow-up 
is necessary to monitor adherence and promptly identify and manage any 
disease-related complications.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 28722929

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Sharon Daley declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Muhammad Haseeb 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.