---
reference_id: "PMID:32125703"
title: Distinct Histopathology Characteristics in Empty Nose Syndrome.
authors:
- Wu CL
- Fu CH
- Lee TJ
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/lary.28586
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct Histopathology Characteristics in Empty Nose Syndrome.
**Authors:** Wu CL, Fu CH, Lee TJ
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.28586](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.28586)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2021 Jan;131(1):E14-E18. doi: 10.1002/lary.28586. Epub 2020 Mar
3.

Distinct Histopathology Characteristics in Empty Nose Syndrome.

Wu CL(1), Fu CH(1)(2), Lee TJ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang 
Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Xiamen Chang Gung 
Hospital, Xiamen, China.

Comment in
    Laryngoscope. 2021 Apr;131(4):E1039. doi: 10.1002/lary.29183.
    Laryngoscope. 2021 Apr;131(4):E1038. doi: 10.1002/lary.29181.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Empty nose syndrome (ENS) is a controversial disorder and 
the change of histopathology has never been discussed. This study aimed to 
conduct a structured histological review to improve the diagnosis and 
understanding of ENS. Further immunohistochemical staining of transient receptor 
potential channel melastatin 8 (TRPM8) was performed.
STUDY DESIGN: A prospective case-control study in a tertiary medical center.
METHODS: Consecutive patients with ENS who were diagnosed and received surgical 
intervention after failure of conservative management were included. Patients 
with benign pituitary gland tumor receiving transsphenoidal excision were 
enrolled as control group. Biopsy of inferior turbinate was obtained during 
surgery for histological review and immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: Seventeen patients with ENS and six patients as a control group were 
established for structured histological review. Patients with ENS presented 
significantly more squamous metaplasia, a higher rate of submucosal fibrosis, 
and a lower submucosal gland number grading. Additionally, a unique histological 
change called goblet cell metaplasia was found in the ENS group. The respiratory 
epitheliums of ENS were mostly intact with preservation of ciliated cells and 
goblet cells. The ENS group had a significantly lower expression level of TRPM8.
CONCLUSIONS: The nasal mucosa of ENS experienced some airway remodeling and 
thermoreceptors downregulation, which contribute to clinical symptoms. The 
distinct histology of ENS included preserved respiratory epithelium and goblet 
cell metaplasia, accompanying with characteristics similar to atrophic rhinitis. 
Biopsy of the inferior turbinate may help diagnose ENS.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 4 Laryngoscope, 131:E14-E18, 2021.

© 2020 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.28586
PMID: 32125703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]