---
reference_id: "PMID:9670216"
title: Ethanol and neurotransmitter interactions--from molecular to integrative effects.
authors:
- Faingold CL
- "N'Gouemo P"
- Riaz A
journal: Prog Neurobiol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0301-0082(98)00027-6
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Ethanol/adverse effects, metabolism"
- Excitatory Amino Acids/metabolism
- Humans
- Neural Inhibition/physiology
- Neurotransmitter Agents/metabolism
- Seizures/chemically induced
- Substance Withdrawal Syndrome
- gamma-Aminobutyric Acid/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ethanol and neurotransmitter interactions--from molecular to integrative effects.
**Authors:** Faingold CL, N'Gouemo P, Riaz A
**Journal:** Prog Neurobiol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0301-0082(98)00027-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0301-0082(98)00027-6)

## Content

1. Prog Neurobiol. 1998 Aug;55(5):509-35. doi: 10.1016/s0301-0082(98)00027-6.

Ethanol and neurotransmitter interactions--from molecular to integrative 
effects.

Faingold CL(1), N'Gouemo P, Riaz A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, 
Springfield 62794-1222, USA.

There is extensive evidence that ethanol interacts with a variety of 
neurotransmitters. Considerable research indicates that the major actions of 
ethanol involve enhancement of the effects of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) at 
GABAA receptors and blockade of the NMDA subtype of excitatory amino acid (EAA) 
receptor. Ethanol increases GABAA receptor-mediated inhibition, but this does 
not occur in all brain regions, all cell types in the same region, nor at all 
GABAA receptor sites on the same neuron, nor across species in the same brain 
region. The molecular basis for the selectivity of the action of ethanol on 
GaBAA receptors has been proposed to involve a combination of benzodiazepine 
subtype, beta 2 subunit, and a splice variant of the gamma 2 subunit, but 
substantial controversy on this issue currently remains. Chronic ethanol 
administration results in tolerance, dependence, and an ethanol withdrawal (ETX) 
syndrome, which are mediated, in part, by desensitization and/or down-regulation 
of GABAA receptors. This decrease in ethanol action may involve changes in 
subunit expression in selected brain areas, but these data are complex and 
somewhat contradictory at present. The sensitivity of NMDA receptors to ethanol 
block is proposed to involve the NMDAR2B subunit in certain brain regions, but 
this subunit does not appear to be the sole determinant of this interaction. 
Tolerance to ethanol results in enhanced EAA neurotransmission and NMDA receptor 
upregulation, which appears to involve selective increases in NMDAR2B subunit 
levels and other molecular changes in specific brain loci. During ETX a variety 
of symptoms are seen, including susceptibility to seizures. In rodents these 
seizures are readily triggered by sound (audiogenic seizures). The neuronal 
network required for these seizures is contained primarily in certain brain stem 
structures. Specific nuclei appear to play a hierarchical role in generating 
each stereotypical behavioral phases of the convulsion. Thus, the inferior 
colliculus acts to initiate these seizures, and a decrease in effectiveness of 
GABA-mediated inhibition in these neurons is a major initiation mechanism. The 
deep layers of superior colliculus are implicated in generation of the wild 
running behavior. The pontine reticular formation, substantia nigra and 
periaqueductal gray are implicated in generation of the tonic-clonic seizure 
behavior. The mechanisms involved in the recruitment of neurons within each 
network nucleus into the seizure circuit have been proposed to require 
activation of a critical mass of neurons. Achievement of critical mass may 
involve excess EAA-mediated synaptic neurotransmission due, in part, to 
upregulation as well as other phenomena, including volume (non-synaptic 
diffusion) neurotransmission. Effects of ETX on receptors observed in vitro may 
undergo amplification in vivo to allow the excess EAA action to be magnified 
sufficiently to produce synchronization of neuronal firing, allowing 
participation of the nucleus in seizure generation. GABA-mediated inhibition, 
which normally acts to limit excitation, is diminished in effectiveness during 
ETX, and further intensifies this excitation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0301-0082(98)00027-6
PMID: 9670216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]