---
reference_id: "PMID:35236762"
title: Long-term exposure to ambient air pollution and asthma symptom score in the CONSTANCES cohort.
authors:
- Keirsbulck M
- Savouré M
- Lequy E
- Chen J
- de Hoogh K
- Vienneau D
- Goldberg M
- Zins M
- Roche N
- Nadif R
- Jacquemin B
journal: Thorax
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2021-218344
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term exposure to ambient air pollution and asthma symptom score in the CONSTANCES cohort.
**Authors:** Keirsbulck M, Savouré M, Lequy E, Chen J, de Hoogh K, Vienneau D, Goldberg M, Zins M, Roche N, Nadif R, Jacquemin B
**Journal:** Thorax (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/thoraxjnl-2021-218344](https://doi.org/10.1136/thoraxjnl-2021-218344)

## Content

1. Thorax. 2023 Jan;78(1):9-15. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2021-218344. Epub 2022 Mar
 2.

Long-term exposure to ambient air pollution and asthma symptom score in the 
CONSTANCES cohort.

Keirsbulck M(#)(1), Savouré M(#)(1)(2), Lequy E(3), Chen J(4), de Hoogh K(5)(6), 
Vienneau D(5)(6), Goldberg M(3), Zins M(3), Roche N(1)(7), Nadif R(#)(1), 
Jacquemin B(#)(8).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, UVSQ, Univ. Paris-Sud, Inserm, Equipe 
d'Epidémiologie Respiratoire Intégrative, CESP, Villejuif, France.
(2)Agence de l'environnement et de la Maîtrise de l'Energie, Angers, France.
(3)Université Paris-Saclay, UVSQ, Inserm, Cohortes Epidémiologiques en 
population, Villejuif, France.
(4)Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, IRAS, Univ Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(7)Pneumologie, Hôpital Cochin, APHP Centre - Université de Paris, Institut 
Cochin (UMR 1016), Paris, France.
(8)Univ Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset (Institut de recherche en santé, 
environnement et travail) - UMR_S 1085, Rennes, France 
benedicte.jacquemin@inserm.fr.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The asthma symptom score allows to consider asthma as a continuum 
and to investigate its risk factors. One previous study has investigated the 
association between asthma score and air pollution and only for nitrogen dioxide 
(NO2). We aimed to study the associations between particulate matter with an 
aerodynamic diameter lower than 2.5 µm (PM2.5), black carbon (BC) and NO2 and 
the asthma symptom score in adults from CONSTANCES, a French population-based 
cohort.
METHODS: Asthma symptom score (range: 0-5) was based on the number of five 
self-reported symptoms of asthma in the last 12 months. Annual individual 
exposure to PM2.5, BC and NO2 was estimated at participants' residential address 
using hybrid land-use regression models. Cross-sectional associations of each 
pollutant with asthma symptom score were estimated using negative binomial 
regressions adjusted for age, sex, smoking status and socioeconomic position. 
Associations with each symptom were estimated using logistic regression. The 
effect of BC independent of total PM2.5 was investigated with a residual model.
RESULTS: Analyses were conducted on 135 165 participants (mean age: 47.2 years, 
53.3% women, 19.0% smokers, 13.5% ever asthma). The ratio of mean score was 1.12 
(95% CI 1.10 to 1.14), 1.14 (95% CI 1.12 to 1.16) and 1.12 (95% CI 1.10 to 1.14) 
per one IQR increase of PM2.5 (4.86 µg/m3), BC (0.88 10-5 m-1) and NO2 
(17.3 µg/m3). Positive and significant associations were also found for each 
asthma symptom separately. BC effect persisted independently of total PM2.5.
CONCLUSION: Exposure to each pollutant was associated with increased asthma 
symptom score in adults. This study highlights that BC could be one of the most 
harmful particulate matter components.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2021-218344
PMID: 35236762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: NR declares relevant 
financial activities outside the submitted work: grants or contract from GSK, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer and Novartis in the past 36 months, and 
relationship with Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Pfizer, Teva, GSK, 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Sanofi and Zambon for consulting fees and payment or 
honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or 
educational events in the past 36 months.