---
reference_id: "PMID:22368625"
title: Defining the morphologic phenotypes of atrial septal defects and interatrial communications.
authors:
- McCarthy K
- Ho S
- Anderson R
journal: Images Paediatr Cardiol
year: '2003'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defining the morphologic phenotypes of atrial septal defects and interatrial communications.
**Authors:** McCarthy K, Ho S, Anderson R
**Journal:** Images Paediatr Cardiol (2003)

## Content

1. Images Paediatr Cardiol. 2003 Apr;5(2):1-24.

Defining the morphologic phenotypes of atrial septal defects and interatrial 
communications.

McCarthy K(1), Ho S, Anderson R.

Author information:
(1)Paediatrics, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College and Royal 
Brompton Hospital, London, UK.

True atrial septal defects are limited to deficiencies totally within the 
confines of the oval fossa and its antero-inferior rim. Other communications 
between the two atriums, such as the superior or inferior sinus venosus defects, 
coronary sinus defect, and the ostium primum defect, are less frequently seen. 
They represent interatrial communications rather than septal defects, since the 
communication between the atrial chambers is outside the confines of the true 
atrial septum. The ostium primum defect, for example, has all the 
characteristics of an atrioventricular septal defect, existing only in the 
setting of a common atrioventricular junction. The unifying physiological 
feature of all these variants, whether their morphology is that of a defect 
within the area of the oval fossa, or an opening elsewhere within the atrium, is 
that mixing of the systemic and pulmonary blood occurs at atrial level. In this 
review, we emphasise the distinction between true atrial septal defects and 
defects which result in communications between the atriums, underlining the 
phenotypic characteristics, along with the notable morphological features that 
are of significance in current strategies for clinical management.

PMCID: PMC3232540
PMID: 22368625