---
reference_id: "PMID:23488769"
title: Pityriasis lichenoides in an Asian population.
authors:
- Koh WL
- Koh MJ
- Tay YK
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2012.05608.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Asian People
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phototherapy/methods
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/drug therapy, ethnology, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Skin/pathology
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pityriasis lichenoides in an Asian population.
**Authors:** Koh WL, Koh MJ, Tay YK
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-4632.2012.05608.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-4632.2012.05608.x)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2013 Dec;52(12):1495-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2012.05608.x.
 Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Pityriasis lichenoides in an Asian population.

Koh WL(1), Koh MJ, Tay YK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Changi General Hospital, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: There are few studies comparing pityriasis lichenoides (PL) in
adults and children, with fewer involving Asians. We compared the clinical
profile and treatment outcomes of 10 adults and five children diagnosed with PL.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed a series of patients diagnosed with PL at
our hospital from 2002 to 2008.
RESULTS: We identified 10 adults and five children (nine adults and four
children with pityriasis lichenoides chronica; one adult and one child with
pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta). Mean age of onset of disease was
42.2 years in adults and 12.2 years in children. Median duration of disease
before presentation was 5.5 months in adults and 6 months in children. Trunk and
limbs were the most common sites of involvement. Itch was present in the
majority. Almost all patients did not respond to topical corticosteroids. A good
response was seen in three adults and two children treated with oral
antibiotics. Three adults and two children responded to treatment with
narrow-band ultraviolet B phototherapy. The median time to resolution was 8
months in adults and 21 months in children. Postinflammatory dyspigmentation was
seen in six adults and four children.
CONCLUSION: PL presents similarly in adults and children; however, it runs a
longer course in children. In our series, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation was
common, which may be explained by our patients' darker skin phototypes. We
routinely prescribe oral antibiotics initially in patients without
contraindications. Phototherapy may be useful in patients not responding to
antibiotics.

© 2013 The International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2012.05608.x
PMID: 23488769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
