---
reference_id: "PMID:28571234"
title: "CLOVES Syndrome: Severe Neonatal Presentation."
authors:
- Acosta S
- Torres V
- Paulos M
- Cifuentes I
journal: J Clin Diagn Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2017/23801.9719
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CLOVES Syndrome: Severe Neonatal Presentation.
**Authors:** Acosta S, Torres V, Paulos M, Cifuentes I
**Journal:** J Clin Diagn Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.7860/JCDR/2017/23801.9719](https://doi.org/10.7860/JCDR/2017/23801.9719)

## Content

1. J Clin Diagn Res. 2017 Apr;11(4):TR01-TR03. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2017/23801.9719.
 Epub 2017 Apr 1.

CLOVES Syndrome: Severe Neonatal Presentation.

Acosta S(1), Torres V(2), Paulos M(3), Cifuentes I(4).

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor, Department of Plastic Surgery Section, Surgery Division, 
Medical School, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Santiago, 
Chile.
(2)Surgeon, Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Félix Bulnes, Santiago, 
Santiago, Chile.
(3)Surgeon, Department of Plastic Surgery Unit, Hospital de Niños Roberto del 
Río, Santiago, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Resident, Department of Plastic Surgery Section, Surgery Division, Medical 
School, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Santiago, Chile.

Congenital Lipomatous Overgrowth, Vascular Malformations, Epidermal Nevi and 
Spinal Abnormalities (CLOVES syndrome) is a newly described and rare overgrowth 
disorder with serious morbidity. The course of this disease is not well 
understood and few cases have been reported among neonates. Moreover, not all of 
the signs of this syndrome are present at birth, making a high index of 
suspicion necessary. We present a cohort of three newborns with CLOVES syndrome 
who died due to septic and hemodynamic complications directly related to 
extensive vascular malformations. We discuss the clinical presentation in the 
neonatal period and propose a clinical classification.

DOI: 10.7860/JCDR/2017/23801.9719
PMCID: PMC5449880
PMID: 28571234