---
reference_id: "PMID:37261522"
title: "TP53 or CDKN2A/B covariation in ALK/RET/ROS1-rearranged NSCLC is associated with a high TMB, tumor immunosuppressive microenvironment and poor prognosis."
authors:
- Jiang B
- Hu L
- Dong D
- Guo Z
- Wei W
- Wang C
- Shao W
- Ma T
- Chen Y
- Li Q
- Hu W
journal: J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00432-023-04924-7
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- "B7-H1 Antigen/genetics, metabolism"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics, metabolism"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, pathology"
- Adenocarcinoma of Lung
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- Immunosuppressive Agents
- Tumor Microenvironment/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p16
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TP53 or CDKN2A/B covariation in ALK/RET/ROS1-rearranged NSCLC is associated with a high TMB, tumor immunosuppressive microenvironment and poor prognosis.
**Authors:** Jiang B, Hu L, Dong D, Guo Z, Wei W, Wang C, Shao W, Ma T, Chen Y, Li Q, Hu W
**Journal:** J Cancer Res Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00432-023-04924-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00432-023-04924-7)

## Content

1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2023 Sep;149(12):10041-10052. doi:
10.1007/s00432-023-04924-7. Epub 2023 Jun 1.

TP53 or CDKN2A/B covariation in ALK/RET/ROS1-rearranged NSCLC is associated with
a high TMB, tumor immunosuppressive microenvironment and poor prognosis.

Jiang B(1), Hu L(2), Dong D(1), Guo Z(2), Wei W(1), Wang C(1), Shao W(3), Ma
T(3), Chen Y(3), Li Q(3), Hu W(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Guiqian International General Hospital,
Guiyang, 550000, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, No.
169 Donghu Road, Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430071, China.
(3)Genecast Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Wuxi, 214000, China.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, No.
169 Donghu Road, Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430071, China. huwd@whu.edu.cn.

INTRODUCTION: ALK-rearranged lung adenocarcinomas with TP53 mutations have more
unstable genomic features, poorer ALK-TKI efficacy and a worse prognosis than
ALK-rearranged lung adenocarcinomas with wild-type TP53. Here, we examine the
gene variations that co-occur with ALK/RET/ROS1 rearrangements in NSCLC and the
corresponding tumor immune microenvironment, as well as their association with
prognosis.
METHODS: A total of 155 patients with ALK/RET/ROS1 fusions were included
retrospectively. Tumor genome mutation analysis was performed by next-generation
sequencing. PD-L1 expression and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes were assessed by
multiplex immunohistochemistry. The correlations among gene covariation, the
tumor immune microenvironment, and clinicopathological characteristics were
analyzed.
RESULTS: Among the 155 patients, concomitant TP53 mutation appeared most
frequently (31%), followed by CDKN2A/B copy number loss (15%). The ALK/RET/ROS1
fusion and TP53 or CDKN2A/B covariation group had more males and patients with
stage IV disease (p < 0.001, p = 0.0066). Patients with TP53 or CDKN2A/B
co-occurrence had higher tumor mutation burdens and more neoantigens (p < 0.001,
p = 0.0032). PD-L1 expression was higher in the tumor areas of the TP53 or
CDKN2A/B co-occurring group (p = 0.00038). However, the levels of CD8+,
CD8+PD1-, and CD8+PD-L1- TILs were lower in the tumor areas of this group
(p = 0.043, p = 0.029, p = 0.025). In the TCGA NSCLC cohorts, the top 2 mutated
genes were CDKN2A/B (24%) and TP53 (16%). The TP53 or CDKN2A/B co-occurring
group had higher tumor mutation burdens and shorter OS (p < 0.001, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with co-occurring TP53/CDKN2A/B variations and
ALK/RET/ROS1 rearrangements are associated with high TMB, more neoantigens, an
immunosuppressive microenvironment and a worse prognosis.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-023-04924-7
PMCID: PMC11797475
PMID: 37261522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared the following potential
conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article: Weikang Shao, Ting Ma, Yanhui Chen and Qingyun Li
are employees of Genecast Biotechnology Co., Ltd. The other authors declare that
they have no competing interests.
