---
reference_id: "PMID:24531842"
title: A selective USP1-UAF1 inhibitor links deubiquitination to DNA damage responses.
authors:
- Liang Q
- Dexheimer TS
- Zhang P
- Rosenthal AS
- Villamil MA
- You C
- Zhang Q
- Chen J
- Ott CA
- Sun H
- Luci DK
- Yuan B
- Simeonov A
- Jadhav A
- Xiao H
- Wang Y
- Maloney DJ
- Zhuang Z
journal: Nat Chem Biol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1455
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A selective USP1-UAF1 inhibitor links deubiquitination to DNA damage responses.
**Authors:** Liang Q, Dexheimer TS, Zhang P, Rosenthal AS, Villamil MA, You C, Zhang Q, Chen J, Ott CA, Sun H, Luci DK, Yuan B, Simeonov A, Jadhav A, Xiao H, Wang Y, Maloney DJ, Zhuang Z
**Journal:** Nat Chem Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nchembio.1455](https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.1455)

## Content

1. Nat Chem Biol. 2014 Apr;10(4):298-304. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1455. Epub 2014
Feb  16.

A selective USP1-UAF1 inhibitor links deubiquitination to DNA damage responses.

Liang Q(1), Dexheimer TS(2), Zhang P(1), Rosenthal AS(2), Villamil MA(1), You 
C(3), Zhang Q(4), Chen J(1), Ott CA(1), Sun H(2), Luci DK(2), Yuan B(3), 
Simeonov A(2), Jadhav A(2), Xiao H(5), Wang Y(3), Maloney DJ(2), Zhuang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark, 
Delaware, USA.
(2)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of California-Riverside, Riverside, 
California, USA.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Nanchang University, 
Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.
(5)Laboratory of Macromolecular Analysis and Proteomics, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Chem Biol. 2014 Apr;10(4):243-4. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1483.

Protein ubiquitination and deubiquitination are central to the control of a 
large number of cellular pathways and signaling networks in eukaryotes. Although 
the essential roles of ubiquitination have been established in the eukaryotic 
DNA damage response, the deubiquitination process remains poorly defined. 
Chemical probes that perturb the activity of deubiquitinases (DUBs) are needed 
to characterize the cellular function of deubiquitination. Here we report ML323 
(2), a highly potent inhibitor of the USP1-UAF1 deubiquitinase complex with 
excellent selectivity against human DUBs, deSUMOylase, deneddylase and unrelated 
proteases. Using ML323, we interrogated deubiquitination in the cellular 
response to UV- and cisplatin-induced DNA damage and revealed new insights into 
the requirement of deubiquitination in the DNA translesion synthesis and Fanconi 
anemia pathways. Moreover, ML323 potentiates cisplatin cytotoxicity in non-small 
cell lung cancer and osteosarcoma cells. Our findings point to USP1-UAF1 as a 
key regulator of the DNA damage response and a target for overcoming resistance 
to the platinum-based anticancer drugs.

DOI: 10.1038/nchembio.1455
PMCID: PMC4144829
PMID: 24531842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]