---
reference_id: "PMID:25884091"
title: "Secundum atrial septal defect in adults: a practical review and recent developments."
authors:
- Kuijpers JM
- Mulder BJ
- Bouma BJ
journal: Neth Heart J
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s12471-015-0663-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secundum atrial septal defect in adults: a practical review and recent developments.
**Authors:** Kuijpers JM, Mulder BJ, Bouma BJ
**Journal:** Neth Heart J (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12471-015-0663-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12471-015-0663-z)

## Content

1. Neth Heart J. 2015 Apr;23(4):205-11. doi: 10.1007/s12471-015-0663-z.

Secundum atrial septal defect in adults: a practical review and recent 
developments.

Kuijpers JM(1), Mulder BJ, Bouma BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, j.m.kuijpers@amc.uva.nl.

Secundum atrial septal defect (ASDII) is a common congenital heart defect that 
causes shunting of blood between the systemic and pulmonary circulations. 
Patients with an isolated ASDII often remain asymptomatic during childhood and 
adolescence. If the defect remains untreated, however, the rates of exercise 
intolerance, supraventricular arrhythmias, right ventricular dysfunction and 
pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) increase with patient age, and life 
expectancy is reduced. Transcatheter and surgical techniques both provide valid 
options for ASDII closure, the former being the preferred method. With the 
exception of those with severe and irreversible PAH, closure is beneficial to, 
and thus indicated in all patients with significant shunts, regardless of age 
and symptoms. The symptomatic and survival benefits conferred by defect closure 
are inversely related to patient age and the presence of PAH, supporting timely 
closure after diagnosis. In this paper we review the management of adult 
patients with an isolated ASDII, with a focus on aspects of importance to the 
decision regarding defect closure and medical follow-up.

DOI: 10.1007/s12471-015-0663-z
PMCID: PMC4368528
PMID: 25884091