---
reference_id: "PMID:31067370"
title: Transmission of Nipah Virus - 14 Years of Investigations in Bangladesh.
authors:
- Nikolay B
- Salje H
- Hossain MJ
- Khan AKMD
- Sazzad HMS
- Rahman M
- Daszak P
- Ströher U
- Pulliam JRC
- Kilpatrick AM
- Nichol ST
- Klena JD
- Sultana S
- Afroj S
- Luby SP
- Cauchemez S
- Gurley ES
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1805376
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transmission of Nipah Virus - 14 Years of Investigations in Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Nikolay B, Salje H, Hossain MJ, Khan AKMD, Sazzad HMS, Rahman M, Daszak P, Ströher U, Pulliam JRC, Kilpatrick AM, Nichol ST, Klena JD, Sultana S, Afroj S, Luby SP, Cauchemez S, Gurley ES
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1805376](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1805376)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2019 May 9;380(19):1804-1814. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1805376.

Transmission of Nipah Virus - 14 Years of Investigations in Bangladesh.

Nikolay B(1), Salje H(1), Hossain MJ(1), Khan AKMD(1), Sazzad HMS(1), Rahman 
M(1), Daszak P(1), Ströher U(1), Pulliam JRC(1), Kilpatrick AM(1), Nichol ST(1), 
Klena JD(1), Sultana S(1), Afroj S(1), Luby SP(1), Cauchemez S(1), Gurley ES(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases Unit, Institut 
Pasteur, UMR2000, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris (B.N., 
H.S., S.C.); the Medical Research Council Unit The Gambia at the London School 
of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, Banjul, The Gambia (M.J.H.); the Infectious 
Diseases Division, icddr,b, (M.J.H., A.K.M.D.K., H.M.S.S., S.A., E.S.G.), and 
the Institute of Epidemiology Disease Control and Research (M.R., S.S.) - both 
in Dhaka, Bangladesh; the Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney 
(H.M.S.S.); the EcoHealth Alliance, New York (P.D.); the Viral Special Pathogens 
Branch, Division of High Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta (U.S., S.T.N., J.D.K.); the South 
African DST-NRF Centre of Excellence in Epidemiological Modelling and Analysis 
(SACEMA), Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa (J.R.C.P.); the 
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Santa 
Cruz (A.M.K.), and the Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine Division, 
Stanford University, Stanford (S.P.L.) - both in California; Auburn University, 
Auburn, AL (S.A.); and the Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg 
School of Public Health, Baltimore (E.S.G.).

BACKGROUND: Nipah virus is a highly virulent zoonotic pathogen that can be 
transmitted between humans. Understanding the dynamics of person-to-person 
transmission is key to designing effective interventions.
METHODS: We used data from all Nipah virus cases identified during outbreak 
investigations in Bangladesh from April 2001 through April 2014 to investigate 
case-patient characteristics associated with onward transmission and factors 
associated with the risk of infection among patient contacts.
RESULTS: Of 248 Nipah virus cases identified, 82 were caused by person-to-person 
transmission, corresponding to a reproduction number (i.e., the average number 
of secondary cases per case patient) of 0.33 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.19 
to 0.59). The predicted reproduction number increased with the case patient's 
age and was highest among patients 45 years of age or older who had difficulty 
breathing (1.1; 95% CI, 0.4 to 3.2). Case patients who did not have difficulty 
breathing infected 0.05 times as many contacts (95% CI, 0.01 to 0.3) as other 
case patients did. Serologic testing of 1863 asymptomatic contacts revealed no 
infections. Spouses of case patients were more often infected (8 of 56 [14%]) 
than other close family members (7 of 547 [1.3%]) or other contacts (18 of 1996 
[0.9%]). The risk of infection increased with increased duration of exposure of 
the contacts (adjusted odds ratio for exposure of >48 hours vs. ≤1 hour, 13; 95% 
CI, 2.6 to 62) and with exposure to body fluids (adjusted odds ratio, 4.3; 95% 
CI, 1.6 to 11).
CONCLUSIONS: Increasing age and respiratory symptoms were indicators of 
infectivity of Nipah virus. Interventions to control person-to-person 
transmission should aim to reduce exposure to body fluids. (Funded by the 
National Institutes of Health and others.).

Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1805376
PMCID: PMC6547369
PMID: 31067370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]