---
reference_id: "PMID:25652400"
title: The clinical presentation of Marfan syndrome is modulated by expression of wild-type FBN1 allele.
authors:
- Aubart M
- Gross MS
- Hanna N
- Zabot MT
- Sznajder M
- Detaint D
- Gouya L
- Jondeau G
- Boileau C
- Stheneur C
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv037
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical presentation of Marfan syndrome is modulated by expression of wild-type FBN1 allele.
**Authors:** Aubart M, Gross MS, Hanna N, Zabot MT, Sznajder M, Detaint D, Gouya L, Jondeau G, Boileau C, Stheneur C
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv037](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv037)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 May 15;24(10):2764-70. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv037. Epub 2015 
Feb 4.

The clinical presentation of Marfan syndrome is modulated by expression of 
wild-type FBN1 allele.

Aubart M(1), Gross MS(1), Hanna N(2), Zabot MT(3), Sznajder M(4), Detaint D(5), 
Gouya L(6), Jondeau G(5), Boileau C(5), Stheneur C(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Vascular Translational Science, INSERM U1148, 75018 Paris, 
France.
(2)Laboratory for Vascular Translational Science, INSERM U1148, 75018 Paris, 
France, Département de Génétique and.
(3)Laboratoire de Biotechnologies Cellulaires, Groupement Hospitalier Est, 
Hospices Civils de Lyon, 69008 Lyon, France and.
(4)Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de 
Paris, 92100 Boulogne, France.
(5)Laboratory for Vascular Translational Science, INSERM U1148, 75018 Paris, 
France, National Reference Centre for Marfan Syndrome and Related Disorders, 
Service de Cardiologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Xavier Bichat, 
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, 75018 Paris, France.
(6)National Reference Centre for Marfan Syndrome and Related Disorders, Service 
de Cardiologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Xavier Bichat, Assistance 
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, 75018 Paris, France.
(7)National Reference Centre for Marfan Syndrome and Related Disorders, Service 
de Cardiologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Xavier Bichat, Assistance 
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, 75018 Paris, France, chantal.stheneur@apr.aphp.fr.

Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder mainly caused by mutations 
within FBN1 gene. The disease displays large variability in age of onset or 
severity and very poor phenotype/genotype correlations have been demonstrated. 
We investigated the hypothesis that phenotype severity could be related to the 
variable expression level of fibrillin-1 (FBN1) synthesized from the wild-type 
(WT) allele. Quantitative reverse-transcription and polymerase chain reaction 
was used to evaluate FBN1 levels in skin fibroblasts from 80 Marfan patients 
with premature termination codons and in skin fibroblasts from 80 controls. 
Results in controls showed a 3.9-fold variation in FBN1 mRNA synthesis level 
between subjects. A similar 4.4-fold variation was found in the Marfan 
population, but the mean level of FBN1 mRNA was a half of the control 
population. Differential allelic expression analysis in Marfan fibroblasts 
showed that over 90% of FBN1 mRNA was transcribed from the wild allele and the 
mutated allele was not detected. In the control population, independently of the 
expression level of FBN1, we observed steady-state equilibrium between the two 
allelic-mRNAs suggesting that FBN1 expression mainly depends on trans-acting 
regulators. Finally, we show that a low level of residual WT FBN1 mRNA accounts 
for a high risk of ectopia lentis and pectus abnormality and tends to increase 
the risk of aortic dilatation.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv037
PMID: 25652400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]