---
reference_id: "PMID:17105689"
title: Insights in immunomodulatory therapies for ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Nguyen GC
- Harris ML
- Dassopoulos T
journal: Curr Gastroenterol Rep
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s11894-006-0040-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights in immunomodulatory therapies for ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Nguyen GC, Harris ML, Dassopoulos T
**Journal:** Curr Gastroenterol Rep (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11894-006-0040-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11894-006-0040-6)

## Content

1. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2006 Dec;8(6):499-505. doi: 10.1007/s11894-006-0040-6.

Insights in immunomodulatory therapies for ulcerative colitis and Crohn's 
disease.

Nguyen GC(1), Harris ML, Dassopoulos T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, 600 North Wolfe 
Street/Blalock 461, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Immunomodulators are a class of drugs that attenuate the underlying inflammatory 
processes of Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), the two major 
inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). These agents play a prominent role in the 
management of refractory and steroid-dependent IBD. The immunomodulatory drugs 
in the IBD arsenal include azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, methotrexate, 
cyclosporine, and tacrolimus. Azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine are considered 
first-line immunosuppressants due to their proven efficacy in both CD and UC and 
their safety profile, whereas cyclosporine occupies a niche as a surgery-sparing 
agent in the acute management of severe, steroid-refractory UC. Immunomodulators 
also appear to have a role as adjunctive therapy when used with infliximab or 
other biologic agents to reduce immunogenicity. Although data have been limited 
to observational studies, azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine may be used during 
pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1007/s11894-006-0040-6
PMID: 17105689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]