---
reference_id: "PMID:26615381"
title: Early Onset Hepatocellular Disease in an Infant with Zellweger Syndrome.
authors:
- Najafi Sani M
- Ahmadi M
- Roohani P
- Rezaei N
journal: Acta Med Iran
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early Onset Hepatocellular Disease in an Infant with Zellweger Syndrome.
**Authors:** Najafi Sani M, Ahmadi M, Roohani P, Rezaei N
**Journal:** Acta Med Iran (2015)

## Content

1. Acta Med Iran. 2015 Oct;53(10):656-8.

Early Onset Hepatocellular Disease in an Infant with Zellweger Syndrome.

Najafi Sani M(1), Ahmadi M(2), Roohani P(1), Rezaei N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, 
Children's Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. َAND Department of Immunology, 
School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. AND 
4Universal Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran.

Zellweger syndrome (ZS) is a peroxisomal disorder with a multiple congenital 
anomalies, characterized by stereotypical facies, profound hypotonia, organ 
involvement including cerebral, retinal, hepatic, and renal. Herein, a 
3-month-old female with ZS is presented who was referred because of increased 
liver enzymes (subclinical hepatitis), which was detected in work-up of her neck 
cyst, severe hypotonia, and abnormal facies. An increased concentration of very 
long chain fatty acid in lipid profile was detected. ZS should be considered in 
the list of differential diagnosis in infants with stereotypical phenotype, 
neurodevelopmental delay, and severe hypotonia in association with liver and 
other organs involvement.

PMID: 26615381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]