---
reference_id: "PMID:28132977"
title: "[Mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency: an adult patient with similar progress to Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease]."
authors:
- Yamamoto Y
- Matsui N
- Hiramatsu Y
- Miyazaki Y
- Nodera H
- Izumi Y
- Takashima H
- Kaji R
journal: Rinsho Shinkeigaku
year: '2017'
doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-000976
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency: an adult patient with similar progress to Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease].
**Authors:** Yamamoto Y, Matsui N, Hiramatsu Y, Miyazaki Y, Nodera H, Izumi Y, Takashima H, Kaji R
**Journal:** Rinsho Shinkeigaku (2017)
**DOI:** [10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-000976](https://doi.org/10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-000976)

## Content

1. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2017 Feb 25;57(2):82-87. doi: 
10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-000976. Epub 2017 Jan 28.

[Mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency: an adult patient with similar 
progress to Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamamoto Y(1), Matsui N, Hiramatsu Y, Miyazaki Y, Nodera H, Izumi Y, Takashima 
H, Kaji R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
Tokushima University Graduate School.

A 45-year-old man presented to us due to slowly progressive muscle weakness and 
sensory disturbances in his lower limbs since his 40's. He reported multiple 
episodes of exercise-induced severe muscle fatigue and brown urine in his 
childhood, which disappeared by age 20. A nerve conduction study showed 
peripheral axonal neuropathy and then Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) was 
considered as the most likely diagnosis; however, exome sequencing failed to 
identify a mutation in the known genes of CMTs. Since age 55, he recurrently 
developed severe rhabdomyolysis that required hospitalization. On suspicion of 
lipid metabolism disorders, we performed serum acylcarnitine analysis, and which 
revealed mildly elevated long-chain fatty acids. We re-examined variants 
obtained via exome sequencing and found a mutation in HADHB. Mitochondrial 
trifunctional protein (MTP) deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of 
mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation caused by HADHA or HADHB mutation. It 
can be a life-threatening multiorgan disorder with early infantile onset, but it 
can also present in childhood or adolescence with peripheral neuropathy and 
recurrent rhabdomyolysis. This case of adult-diagnosed MTP deficiency was 
characterized by slowly progressive peripheral neuropathy masquerading CMT in 
addition to muscular symptoms. MTP deficiency should be considered in patients 
with the combination of peripheral neuropathy and recurrent rhabdomyolysis.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-000976
PMID: 28132977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]