---
reference_id: "PMID:32375064"
title: Macrophages Expressing GALC Improve Peripheral Krabbe Disease by a Mechanism Independent of Cross-Correction.
authors:
- Weinstock NI
- Shin D
- Dhimal N
- Hong X
- Irons EE
- Silvestri NJ
- Reed CB
- Nguyen D
- Sampson O
- Cheng YC
- Lau JTY
- Bongarzone ER
- Kofler J
- Escolar ML
- Gelb MH
- Wrabetz L
- Feltri ML
journal: Neuron
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.03.031
keywords:
- Animals
- "Demyelinating Diseases/enzymology, pathology"
- Galactosylceramidase/metabolism
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/enzymology, pathology, therapy"
- Macrophages/enzymology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Nerve Degeneration/enzymology, pathology"
- Schwann Cells/enzymology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Macrophages Expressing GALC Improve Peripheral Krabbe Disease by a Mechanism Independent of Cross-Correction.
**Authors:** Weinstock NI, Shin D, Dhimal N, Hong X, Irons EE, Silvestri NJ, Reed CB, Nguyen D, Sampson O, Cheng YC, Lau JTY, Bongarzone ER, Kofler J, Escolar ML, Gelb MH, Wrabetz L, Feltri ML
**Journal:** Neuron (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2020.03.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.03.031)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2020 Jul 8;107(1):65-81.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.03.031. Epub
2020  May 5.

Macrophages Expressing GALC Improve Peripheral Krabbe Disease by a Mechanism
Independent of Cross-Correction.

Weinstock NI(1), Shin D(1), Dhimal N(1), Hong X(2), Irons EE(3), Silvestri
NJ(1), Reed CB(1), Nguyen D(4), Sampson O(1), Cheng YC(5), Lau JTY(3),
Bongarzone ER(4), Kofler J(6), Escolar ML(6), Gelb MH(2), Wrabetz L(1), Feltri
ML(7).

Author information:
(1)Hunter James Kelly Research Institute, Departments of Biochemistry and
Neurology, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at
Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA.
(2)Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA 98195, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
(5)F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital
Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA.
(7)Hunter James Kelly Research Institute, Departments of Biochemistry and
Neurology, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at
Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA. Electronic address: mlfeltri@buffalo.edu.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2020 Jul 8;107(1):1-3. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.05.025.

Many therapies for lysosomal storage disorders rely on cross-correction of
lysosomal enzymes. In globoid cell leukodystrophy (GLD), mutations in GALC cause
psychosine accumulation, inducing demyelination, a neuroinflammatory "globoid"
reaction and neurodegeneration. The efficiency of GALC cross-correction in vivo,
the role of the GALC substrate galactosylceramide, and the origin of psychosine
are poorly understood. Using a novel GLD model, we show that cross-correction
does not occur efficiently in vivo and that Galc-deficient Schwann cells
autonomously produce psychosine. Furthermore, macrophages require GALC to
degrade myelin, as Galc-deficient macrophages are transformed into globoid cells
by exposure to galactosylceramide and produce a more severe GLD phenotype.
Finally, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in patients reduces globoid
cells in nerves, suggesting that the phagocytic response of healthy macrophages,
rather than cross-correction, contributes to the therapeutic effect. Thus, GLD
may be caused by at least two mechanisms: psychosine-induced demyelination and
secondary neuroinflammation from galactosylceramide storage in macrophages.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.03.031
PMCID: PMC7924901
PMID: 32375064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests E.R.B. is consultant
for Lysosomal Therapeutics and for E-escape-Bio. M.L.E. consults for Passagebio
and is PI in the development of a treatment for Krabbe disease using HSCT and
gene therapy. Neither have had any decision making in this current study.
