---
reference_id: "PMID:37592722"
title: A new case of platelet-type von Willebrand disease supports the recent findings of gain-of-function GP1BA variants outside the C-terminal disulphide loop enhances affinity for von Willebrand factor.
authors:
- Monteiro C
- Gonçalves A
- Pereira M
- Lau C
- Morais S
- Santos R
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/bjh.19025
keywords:
- Humans
- von Willebrand Factor/genetics
- Gain of Function Mutation
- von Willebrand Diseases/diagnosis
- Blood Platelets
- Hemorrhage/genetics
- Platelet Glycoprotein GPIb-IX Complex/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new case of platelet-type von Willebrand disease supports the recent findings of gain-of-function GP1BA variants outside the C-terminal disulphide loop enhances affinity for von Willebrand factor.
**Authors:** Monteiro C, Gonçalves A, Pereira M, Lau C, Morais S, Santos R
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjh.19025](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjh.19025)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 2023 Nov;203(4):673-677. doi: 10.1111/bjh.19025. Epub 2023 Aug 
17.

A new case of platelet-type von Willebrand disease supports the recent findings 
of gain-of-function GP1BA variants outside the C-terminal disulphide loop 
enhances affinity for von Willebrand factor.

Monteiro C(1)(2)(3)(4), Gonçalves A(1)(3)(4), Pereira M(2)(3)(4), Lau 
C(3)(4)(5), Morais S(2)(3)(4), Santos R(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Genética Molecular, Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto 
Magalhães, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Santo António (CHUdSA), Porto, 
Portugal.
(2)Unidade de Trombose e Hemostase & Centro de Coagulopatias Congénitas, Serviço 
de Imuno-hemoterapia, CHUdSA, Porto, Portugal.
(3)UMIB - Unit for Multidisciplinary Research in Biomedicine, ICBAS - School of 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Porto (UMIB/ICBAS/UP), Porto, 
Portugal.
(4)ITR - Laboratory for Integrative and Translational Research in Population 
Health, Porto, Portugal.
(5)Unidade de Diagnóstico Hematológico Margarida Lima, Serviço de 
Imuno-hemoterapia, CHUdSA, Porto, Portugal.

Comment in
    Br J Haematol. 2023 Nov;203(4):501-503. doi: 10.1111/bjh.19094.

Platelet-type von Willebrand disease (PT-VWD) is a rare autosomal dominant 
bleeding disorder characterized by an increased ristocetin-induced platelet 
aggregation (RIPA) and enhanced affinity of platelet glycoprotein Ibα (GPIbα) to 
von Willebrand factor (VWF). To date, only seven variants have been described 
with this gain-of-function effect, most of them located in the C-terminal 
disulphide loop of the VWF-binding domain of GPIbα. We herein describe a patient 
with moderate bleeding symptoms, mild thrombocytopenia and increased RIPA. By 
direct sequencing of GP1BA, a novel leucine-rich repeat heterozygous variant was 
identified (c.580C>T; predictably p.Leu194Phe), strongly suggestive as being the 
underlying cause for the PT-VWD phenotype of our patient.

© 2023 The Authors. British Journal of Haematology published by British Society 
for Haematology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bjh.19025
PMID: 37592722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]