---
reference_id: "PMID:27055677"
title: "Early-onset glaucoma in Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly: long-term surgical results and visual outcome."
authors:
- Mandal AK
- Pehere N
journal: Eye (Lond)
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/eye.2016.66
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-onset glaucoma in Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly: long-term surgical results and visual outcome.
**Authors:** Mandal AK, Pehere N
**Journal:** Eye (Lond) (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/eye.2016.66](https://doi.org/10.1038/eye.2016.66)

## Content

1. Eye (Lond). 2016 Jul;30(7):936-42. doi: 10.1038/eye.2016.66. Epub 2016 Apr 8.

Early-onset glaucoma in Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly: long-term surgical results and 
visual outcome.

Mandal AK(1), Pehere N(2).

Author information:
(1)Jasti V Ramanamma Children's Eye Care Centre, Kallam Anji Reddy Campus, LV 
Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, India.
(2)The David Brown Children's Eye Care Centre, Kode Venkatadri Chowdary Campus, 
Vijayawada, India.

PurposeTo determine the long-term surgical and visual outcomes in Indian 
children with early-onset glaucoma associated with Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly 
(ARA).MethodsThis is a retrospective analysis of 44 eyes of 24 consecutive 
children with early-onset glaucoma (within 3 years of age) and ARA who underwent 
glaucoma surgery over a 20-year period (1991-2010) by a single surgeon. Main 
outcome measures were pre- and postoperative intraocular pressures (IOPs), 
corneal clarity, visual acuities (VAs), refractive errors, success rate, time of 
surgical failure, and complications.ResultsThe series consisted of 38 primary 
combined trabeculotomy-trabeculectomy (CTT) and 6 primary trabeculectomy 
procedures (Schlemm's canal could not be identified in these eyes). There was a 
statistically significant reduction in IOP postoperatively (27.07±4.88 vs 
14.88±3.62 mm Hg; P<0.0001) with a mean reduction of 45.14%. Success probability 
by Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was 93% till 5 years, and then 88.1%, 82.3%, 
70.5%, 56.4%, and 42.3% at year 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10, respectively. Preoperative 
corneal edema was present in 43/44 eyes (97.72%) and cleared in 42 eyes 
(97.67%). There was one case each with intraoperative hyphema and with shallow 
chamber postoperatively and both were successfully managed successfully. There 
was no incidence of endophthalmitis or any other sight-threatening complication. 
Data on VA were available in 34 eyes (77.3%). At final follow-up visit, 15 
(44.1%) eyes had best corrected VA ⩾6/18.ConclusionsPrimary CTT is safe and 
effective for early-onset glaucoma associated with ARA. It leads to excellent 
IOP control and satisfactory visual outcome.

DOI: 10.1038/eye.2016.66
PMCID: PMC4941068
PMID: 27055677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]