---
reference_id: PMID:29797825
title: "Plus Disease in Retinopathy of Prematurity: More Than Meets the ICROP?"
authors:
- Ghergherehchi L
- Kim SJ
- Campbell JP
- Ostmo S
- Chan RVP
- Chiang MF
journal: Asia Pac J Ophthalmol (Phila)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.22608/APO.201863
keywords:
- Diagnostic Imaging/methods
- "Diagnostic Techniques, Ophthalmological"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Infant, Premature"
- "Retinopathy of Prematurity/classification, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plus Disease in Retinopathy of Prematurity: More Than Meets the ICROP?
**Authors:** Ghergherehchi L, Kim SJ, Campbell JP, Ostmo S, Chan RVP, Chiang MF
**Journal:** Asia Pac J Ophthalmol (Phila) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.22608/APO.201863](https://doi.org/10.22608/APO.201863)

## Content

1. Asia Pac J Ophthalmol (Phila). 2018 May-Jun;7(3):152-155. doi: 
10.22608/APO.201863. Epub 2018 May 24.

Plus Disease in Retinopathy of Prematurity: More Than Meets the ICROP?

Ghergherehchi L(1), Kim SJ(1)(2), Campbell JP(1), Ostmo S(1), Chan RVP(3), 
Chiang MF(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, Oregon.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Illinois Eye and Ear 
Infirmary, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(4)Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology, Oregon Health & 
Science University, Portland, Oregon.

Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), a vasoproliferative retinal disease affecting 
premature infants, is a leading cause of childhood blindness throughout the 
world. Plus disease, defined as venous dilatation and arteriolar tortuosity 
within the posterior retinal vessels greater than or equal to that of a standard 
published photograph, is the most critical finding in identifying 
treatment-requiring ROP. Despite an internationally accepted definition of plus 
disease, there is significant variability in diagnostic process and outcome, 
producing variable levels of reported intra- and interexpert agreement. Several 
potential explanations for poor agreement have been proposed, including 
attention to undefined vascular features such as venous tortuosity, focus on 
narrower or wider field of view, unfamiliarity with digital images, the 
magnification and apparent severity of the standard photograph, and cut-off 
point differences among experts as to the level of tortuosity and dilation 
sufficient for "plus disease" along a continuum. Moreover, differences in 
diagnostic consistency among groups of experts separated both geographically and 
chronologically have been reported. These findings have implications for 
clinical care, research, and education, and highlight the need for a more 
precise definition of plus disease and objective diagnostic methods for ROP.

Copyright 2018 Asia-Pacific Academy of Ophthalmology.

DOI: 10.22608/APO.201863
PMCID: PMC7880619
PMID: 29797825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]