---
reference_id: "PMID:25712379"
title: "Di-sulfated Keratan Sulfate as a Novel Biomarker for Mucopolysaccharidosis II, IVA, and IVB."
authors:
- Shimada T
- Tomatsu S
- Mason RW
- Yasuda E
- Mackenzie WG
- Hossain J
- Shibata Y
- Montaño AM
- Kubaski F
- Giugliani R
- Yamaguchi S
- Suzuki Y
- Orii KE
- Fukao T
- Orii T
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_330
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Di-sulfated Keratan Sulfate as a Novel Biomarker for Mucopolysaccharidosis II, IVA, and IVB.
**Authors:** Shimada T, Tomatsu S, Mason RW, Yasuda E, Mackenzie WG, Hossain J, Shibata Y, Montaño AM, Kubaski F, Giugliani R, Yamaguchi S, Suzuki Y, Orii KE, Fukao T, Orii T
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2014_330](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2014_330)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2015;21:1-13. doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_330. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Di-sulfated Keratan Sulfate as a Novel Biomarker for Mucopolysaccharidosis II, 
IVA, and IVB.

Shimada T(1), Tomatsu S, Mason RW, Yasuda E, Mackenzie WG, Hossain J, Shibata Y, 
Montaño AM, Kubaski F, Giugliani R, Yamaguchi S, Suzuki Y, Orii KE, Fukao T, 
Orii T.

Author information:
(1)Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA.

Keratan sulfate (KS) is a storage material in mucopolysaccharidosis IV (MPS IV). 
However, no detailed analysis has been reported on subclasses of KS: 
mono-sulfated KS and di-sulfated KS. We established a novel method to 
distinguish and quantify mono- and di-sulfated KS using liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry and measured both KS levels in various 
specimens.Di-sulfated KS was dominant in shark cartilage and rat serum, while 
mono-sulfated KS was dominant in bovine cornea and human serum. Levels of both 
mono- and di-sulfated KS varied with age in the blood and urine from control 
subjects and patients with MPS II and IVA. The mean levels of both forms of KS 
in the plasma/serum from patients with MPS II, IVA, and IVB were elevated 
compared with that in age-matched controls. Di-sulfated KS provided more 
significant difference between MPS IVA and the age-matched controls than 
mono-sulfated KS. The ratio of di-sulfated KS to total KS in plasma/serum 
increased with age in control subjects and patients with MPS II but was age 
independent in MPS IVA patients. Consequently, this ratio can discriminate 
younger MPS IVA patients from controls. Levels of mono- and di-sulfated KS in 
urine of MPS IVA and IVB patients were all higher than age-matched controls for 
all ages studied.In conclusion, the level of di-sulfated KS and its ratio to 
total KS can distinguish control subjects from patients with MPS II, IVA, and 
IVB, indicating that di-sulfated KS may be a novel biomarker for these 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2014_330
PMCID: PMC4470954
PMID: 25712379