---
reference_id: "PMID:37841539"
title: "Diagnosis and Prevalence (1975-2010) of Sudden Death due to Atlantoaxial Subluxation in Cervical Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Literature Review."
authors:
- Subagio EA
- Wicaksono P
- Faris M
- Bajamal AH
- Abdillah DS
journal: ScientificWorldJournal
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1155/2023/6675489
keywords:
- Humans
- Cervical Vertebrae
- Prevalence
- Atlanto-Axial Joint
- "Joint Dislocations/complications, epidemiology"
- Chronic Disease
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/complications, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Prevalence (1975-2010) of Sudden Death due to Atlantoaxial Subluxation in Cervical Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Literature Review.
**Authors:** Subagio EA, Wicaksono P, Faris M, Bajamal AH, Abdillah DS
**Journal:** ScientificWorldJournal (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2023/6675489](https://doi.org/10.1155/2023/6675489)

## Content

1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2023 Oct 5;2023:6675489. doi: 10.1155/2023/6675489. 
eCollection 2023.

Diagnosis and Prevalence (1975-2010) of Sudden Death due to Atlantoaxial 
Subluxation in Cervical Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Literature Review.

Subagio EA(1), Wicaksono P(1), Faris M(1), Bajamal AH(1), Abdillah DS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Airlangga, Dr. 
Soetomo General Academic Hospital, Surabaya, Indonesia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Nahdlatul Ulama Surabaya, Surabaya, 
Indonesia.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), a chronic inflammatory disease primarily affecting 
synovial joints and tendons, can potentially impact various organs within the 
body. One notable complication associated with RA is upper cervical spine 
instability, medically termed atlantoaxial subluxation (AAS). This condition can 
lead to adverse consequences, including chronic myelopathy and acute mechanical 
compression of the medulla oblongata, with the potential for sudden death. While 
AAS may often remain asymptomatic, some nonspecific symptoms, such as neck pain, 
have been documented. Severe atlantoaxial subluxation can trigger more distinct 
symptoms, including delayed occipital pain attributed to the compression of the 
exiting C2 nerve root. Recent studies have elucidated a spectrum of symptoms 
preceding sudden death, encompassing vertigo, dizziness, convulsions, dysphagia, 
disorientation, and seizures. Remarkably, some cases have reported sudden death 
occurring during sleep. Historical data reveal a fluctuating incidence of this 
phenomenon, with eleven cases reported between 1969 and 1975 and six cases 
documented between 1990 and 2010. Notably, one of the most prevalent causes of 
sudden mortality in individuals with RA is the acute mechanical damage inflicted 
upon the medulla oblongata due to atlantoaxial subluxation.

Copyright © 2023 Eko Agus Subagio et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/6675489
PMCID: PMC10569890
PMID: 37841539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.