---
reference_id: "PMID:20127975"
title: Review and update of mutations causing Waardenburg syndrome.
authors:
- Pingault V
- Ente D
- Dastot-Le Moal F
- Goossens M
- Marlin S
- Bondurand N
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21211
keywords:
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/classification, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review and update of mutations causing Waardenburg syndrome.
**Authors:** Pingault V, Ente D, Dastot-Le Moal F, Goossens M, Marlin S, Bondurand N
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21211](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21211)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Apr;31(4):391-406. doi: 10.1002/humu.21211.

Review and update of mutations causing Waardenburg syndrome.

Pingault V(1), Ente D, Dastot-Le Moal F, Goossens M, Marlin S, Bondurand N.

Author information:
(1)INSERM Unité U955, Département de Génétique, Laboratoire de Biochimie et
Génétique, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France. veronique.pingault@inserm.fr

Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is characterized by the association of pigmentation
abnormalities, including depigmented patches of the skin and hair, vivid blue
eyes or heterochromia irides, and sensorineural hearing loss. However, other
features such as dystopia canthorum, musculoskeletal abnormalities of the limbs,
Hirschsprung disease, or neurological defects are found in subsets of patients
and used for the clinical classification of WS. Six genes are involved in this
syndrome: PAX3 (encoding the paired box 3 transcription factor), MITF
(microphthalmia-associated transcription factor), EDN3 (endothelin 3), EDNRB
(endothelin receptor type B), SOX10 (encoding the Sry bOX10 transcription
factor), and SNAI2 (snail homolog 2), with different frequencies. In this review
we provide an update on all WS genes and set up mutation databases, summarize
molecular and functional data available for each of them, and discuss the
applications in diagnostics and genetic counseling.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21211
PMID: 20127975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
