---
reference_id: "PMID:35190215"
title: "Diuretics in States of Volume Overload: Core Curriculum 2022."
authors:
- Novak JE
- Ellison DH
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2021.09.029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diuretics in States of Volume Overload: Core Curriculum 2022.
**Authors:** Novak JE, Ellison DH
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.ajkd.2021.09.029](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2021.09.029)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2022 Aug;80(2):264-276. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2021.09.029. Epub
 2022 Feb 19.

Diuretics in States of Volume Overload: Core Curriculum 2022.

Novak JE(1), Ellison DH(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, 
MI. Electronic address: jnovak2@hfhs.org.
(2)Oregon Clinical & Translational Research Institute and Departments of 
Medicine and Chemical Physiology and Biochemistry, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, Oregon; Renal Section, Veterans Affairs Portland Health 
Care System, Portland, Oregon.

Volume overload, defined as excess total body sodium and water with expansion of 
extracellular fluid volume, characterizes common disorders such as congestive 
heart failure, end-stage liver disease, chronic kidney disease, and nephrotic 
syndrome. Diuretics are the cornerstone of therapy for volume overload and 
comprise several classes whose mechanisms of action, pharmacokinetics, 
indications, and adverse effects are essential principles of nephrology. Loop 
diuretics are typically the first-line treatment in the management of 
hypervolemia, with additional drug classes indicated in cases of diuretic 
resistance and electrolyte or acid-base disorders. Separately, clinical trials 
highlight improved outcomes in some states of volume overload, such as loop 
diuretics and sodium/glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors in patients with 
congestive heart failure. Resistance to diuretics is a frequent, multifactorial 
clinical challenge that requires creative and physiology-based solutions. In 
this installment of AJKD's Core Curriculum in Nephrology, we discuss the 
pharmacology and therapeutic use of diuretics in states of volume overload and 
strategies to overcome diuretic resistance.

Copyright © 2021 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2021.09.029
PMID: 35190215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]