---
reference_id: "PMID:16750466"
title: "A randomized, investigator-masked, 4-week study comparing timolol maleate 0.5%, brinzolamide 1%, and brimonidine tartrate 0.2% as adjunctive therapies to travoprost 0.004% in adults with primary open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension"
authors:
- Reis R
- Queiroz CF
- Santos LC
- Avila MP
- Magacho L
journal: Clin Ther
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2006.04.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A randomized, investigator-masked, 4-week study comparing timolol maleate 0.5%, brinzolamide 1%, and brimonidine tartrate 0.2% as adjunctive therapies to travoprost 0.004% in adults with primary open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension
**Authors:** Reis R, Queiroz CF, Santos LC, Avila MP, Magacho L
**Journal:** Clin Ther (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinthera.2006.04.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinthera.2006.04.007)

## Content

1. Clin Ther. 2006 Apr;28(4):552-9. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2006.04.007.

A randomized, investigator-masked, 4-week study comparing timolol maleate
0.5%, brinzolamide 1%, and brimonidine tartrate 0.2% as adjunctive therapies
to travoprost 0.004% in adults with primary open-angle glaucoma or ocular
hypertension.

Reis R, Queiroz CF, Santos LC, Avila MP, Magacho L.

Objective: The objective of this study was to assess the hypotensive efficacy
of timolol maleate 0.5%, brinzolamide 1%, or brimonidine tartrate 0.2%
ophthalmic solution, administered in conjunction with travoprost 0.004%, in
patients with primary open-angle laucoma (OAG) or ocular hypertension (OHT)
whose intraocular pressure (IOP) did not meet the treatment target using
travoprost 0.004% monotherapy. Methods: This was a randomized, comparative,
investigator-masked study. Patients with OAG or OHT treated with travoprost
0.004% monotherapy were randomized to receive 1 of the 3 adjunctive therapies
(timolol maleate 0.5%, brinzolamide 1%, or brimonidine tartrate 0.2%), 1 drop
BID in each randomized eye, in addition to 1 drop QD of travoprost for a
period of 4 weeks. IOP was measured on days 0 (travoprost 0.004%) and 28
(travoprost 0.004% and adjunctive treatment). Adverse events were monitored on
days 0 and 28 by patient interview. Results: Twenty-nine patients with OAG (46
eyes) and 3 patients with OHT (6 eyes), with a total of 52 eligible eyes,
completed the study; 28 eyes were from male patients and 24 were from female
patients. In addition to continuing travoprost treatment, 20 eyes received
timolol, 16 eyes received brinzolamide, and 16 eyes were treated with
brimonidine. There were no significant differences among the groups in the mean
(SD) IOP at baseline on day 0 (19.0 [4.1], 17.2 [3.5], and 17.0 [3.1] mm Hg,
respectively; P=NS). On day 28, the reduction in mean (SD) IOP in eyes treated
with brimonidine tartrate 0.2% was significantly smaller (2.3 [1.8] mm Hg vs
3.9 [1.8] mm Hg [P=0.01]) and the mean (SD) percentage reduction in IOP was
significantly smaller (13.4% [9.1%] vs 20.2% [7.5%] [P=0.01]) when compared
with timolol maleate 0.5%, and likewise when compared with brinzolamide 1% (4.0
[2.1] mm Hg [P=0.02] and 22.7% [8.6%] [P=0.006], respectively). The group
treated with brinzolamide was associated with a similar reduction in IOP to
timolol (P=NS for both mean [SD] IOP and percentage reduction in IOP compared
with timolol monotherapy). Barring the occasional conjunctival hyperemia, which
was excluded as an adverse event for the purposes of this study, no adverse
events were recorded. Conclusion: Brinzolamide 1% and timolol maleate 0.5%
treatment were both associated with a significantly greater reduction in IOP
compared with brimonidine 0.2% when administered as a nonfixed adjuvant to
travoprost 0.004% in the treatment of patients with OAG and OHT whose IOP was
inadequately controlled with travoprost monotherapy. All treatments were well
tolerated.

PMID: 16750466
