---
reference_id: "PMID:37701383"
title: Evolution of Plasmodium vivax and resistance patterns for infection based on Duffy genotype and phenotype.
authors:
- Picón-Jaimes YA
- Lozada-Martinez ID
- Forero Buelvas MC
- Ardila Sarmiento AF
- Serrano Baez GA
- Nazareno Erazo DY
- Cuastumal Martínez JD
- Ruiz-Gutierrez FK
- Carreño Barrera VD
journal: Infez Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.53854/liim-3103-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evolution of Plasmodium vivax and resistance patterns for infection based on Duffy genotype and phenotype.
**Authors:** Picón-Jaimes YA, Lozada-Martinez ID, Forero Buelvas MC, Ardila Sarmiento AF, Serrano Baez GA, Nazareno Erazo DY, Cuastumal Martínez JD, Ruiz-Gutierrez FK, Carreño Barrera VD
**Journal:** Infez Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.53854/liim-3103-8](https://doi.org/10.53854/liim-3103-8)

## Content

1. Infez Med. 2023 Sep 1;31(3):350-358. doi: 10.53854/liim-3103-8. eCollection 
2023.

Evolution of Plasmodium vivax and resistance patterns for infection based on 
Duffy genotype and phenotype.

Picón-Jaimes YA(1), Lozada-Martinez ID(2), Forero Buelvas MC(3), Ardila 
Sarmiento AF(3), Serrano Baez GA(4), Nazareno Erazo DY(5), Cuastumal Martínez 
JD(5), Ruiz-Gutierrez FK(6), Carreño Barrera VD(7).

Author information:
(1)Fac Ciències Salut Blanquerna, Univ Ramon Llul, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Epidemiology Program, Department of Graduate Studies in Health Sciences, 
Universidad Autónoma de Bucaramanga, Bucaramanga, Colombia.
(3)School of Medicine, Universidad Autónoma de Bucaramanga, Bucaramanga, 
Colombia.
(4)Department of Intensive Care, Clínica de Urgencias Bucaramanga, Bucaramanga, 
Colombia.
(5)Departament of Medicine, Universidad del Cauca, Popayán, Colombia.
(6)Department of Intensive Care, Hospital Felix Bulnes Cerda, Santiago de Chile, 
Chile.
(7)Department of Medicine, Universidad de Santander, Bucaramanga, Colombia.

The Duffy protein, a transmembrane molecule, acts as a receptor for various 
chemokines and facilitates binding between reticulocytes and the Plasmodium 
Duffy antigen binding protein. Duffy expression is associated with the Duffy 
chemokine receptor antigen genotype on chromosome 1 and exhibits variation 
across different geographic regions. Traditionally, the Duffy negative genotype 
and phenotype have been described to confer a certain level of protection 
against infection and symptom development. However, recent data suggest a shift 
in this behavior, with significantly higher prevalence observed in individuals 
with Duffy negative genotype or phenotype. Given that malaria is an endemic 
vector-borne disease in regions of Asia, Africa, and Latin America, posing a 
substantial global burden of disease and prioritizing public and global health, 
identifying evolutionary changes in infection and resistance patterns holds 
great importance for the design of strategies and reevaluation of conventional 
interventions. Hence, the aim of this review was to analyze the evolution of 
Plasmodium vivax and infection resistance patterns based on Duffy genotype and 
phenotype. The distribution of genotypes, phenotypes, and polymorphisms of P. 
vivax ligands and erythrocyte receptors varies geographically, notably 
resistance patterns of this microorganism in individuals with Duffy negative 
genotype and phenotype have significantly changed compared to studies conducted 
30 years ago. The prevalence of vivax malaria in individuals with a Duffy 
negative status can reach up to 100%. Consequently, prioritizing research on 
this topic is essential for public health.

DOI: 10.53854/liim-3103-8
PMCID: PMC10495050
PMID: 37701383

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest in regard to this work.