---
reference_id: "PMID:17200151"
title: "SGCE missense mutations that cause myoclonus-dystonia syndrome impair epsilon-sarcoglycan trafficking to the plasma membrane: modulation by ubiquitination and torsinA."
authors:
- Esapa CT
- Waite A
- Locke M
- Benson MA
- Kraus M
- McIlhinney RA
- Sillitoe RV
- Beesley PW
- Blake DJ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl472
keywords:
- Animals
- COS Cells
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Dystonic Disorders/genetics
- "Embryo, Mammalian"
- Humans
- Mice
- Molecular Chaperones/physiology
- Mutant Proteins/metabolism
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Myoclonus/genetics
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational/physiology"
- Protein Transport
- Rats
- "Sarcoglycans/genetics, metabolism"
- Syndrome
- Ubiquitin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SGCE missense mutations that cause myoclonus-dystonia syndrome impair epsilon-sarcoglycan trafficking to the plasma membrane: modulation by ubiquitination and torsinA.
**Authors:** Esapa CT, Waite A, Locke M, Benson MA, Kraus M, McIlhinney RA, Sillitoe RV, Beesley PW, Blake DJ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddl472](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddl472)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Feb 1;16(3):327-42. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl472. Epub 2007 Jan
 2.

SGCE missense mutations that cause myoclonus-dystonia syndrome impair
epsilon-sarcoglycan trafficking to the plasma membrane: modulation by
ubiquitination and torsinA.

Esapa CT(1), Waite A, Locke M, Benson MA, Kraus M, McIlhinney RA, Sillitoe RV,
Beesley PW, Blake DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Mansfield Road, Oxford OX1
3QT, UK.

Myoclonus-dystonia syndrome (MDS) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder
characterized by myoclonic jerks often seen in combination with dystonia and
psychiatric co-morbidities and epilepsy. Mutations in the gene encoding
epsilon-sarcoglycan (SGCE) have been found in some patients with MDS. SGCE is a
maternally imprinted gene with the disease being inherited in an autosomal
dominant pattern with reduced penetrance upon maternal transmission. In the
central nervous system, epsilon-sarcoglycan is widely expressed in neurons of
the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, hippocampus, cerebellum and the olfactory
bulb. epsilon-Sarcoglycan is located at the plasma membrane in neurons, muscle
and transfected cells. To determine the effect of MDS-associated mutations on
the function of epsilon-sarcoglycan we examined the biosynthesis and trafficking
of wild-type and mutant proteins in cultured cells. In contrast to the wild-type
protein, disease-associated epsilon-sarcoglycan missense mutations (H36P, H36R
and L172R) produce proteins that are undetectable at the cell surface and are
retained intracellularly. These mutant proteins become polyubiquitinated and are
rapidly degraded by the proteasome. Furthermore, torsinA, that is mutated in
DYT1 dystonia, a rare type of primary dystonia, binds to and promotes the
degradation of epsilon-sarcoglycan mutants when both proteins are co-expressed.
These data demonstrate that some MDS-associated mutations in SGCE impair
trafficking of the mutant protein to the plasma membrane and suggest a role for
torsinA and the ubiquitin proteasome system in the recognition and processing of
misfolded epsilon-sarcoglycan.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddl472
PMID: 17200151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
