---
reference_id: "PMID:17671048"
title: "Chondrodysplasia punctata and maternal autoimmune disease: a new case and review of the literature."
authors:
- Shanske AL
- Bernstein L
- Herzog R
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2006-2997
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chondrodysplasia punctata and maternal autoimmune disease: a new case and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Shanske AL, Bernstein L, Herzog R
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2006-2997](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2006-2997)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2007 Aug;120(2):e436-41. doi: 10.1542/peds.2006-2997.

Chondrodysplasia punctata and maternal autoimmune disease: a new case and review 
of the literature.

Shanske AL(1), Bernstein L, Herzog R.

Author information:
(1)Center for Craniofacial Disorders, Children's Hospital at Montefiore, 3415 
Bainbridge Ave, Bronx, NY 10467, USA. ashanske@montefiore.org

Classic rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata is a rare, autosomal, recessively 
inherited disorder that is characterized by proximal shortening of the limbs, 
punctuate calcifications of the epiphyses, cataracts, developmental delay, and 
early lethality. A distinctive biochemical profile is characteristic for each of 
the several defects of peroxisomal metabolism. Recently, cases have been 
described that were not associated with peroxisomal dysfunction. These cases 
were found to be secondary to teratogen exposure or maternal conditions. Since 
1993, there have been 9 reported cases of neonates with rhizomelic 
chondrodysplasia punctata who were born to mothers with connective tissue 
disease. We followed a newborn boy with features suggestive of rhizomelic 
chondrodysplasia punctata whose biochemical studies failed to demonstrate a 
defect in either plasmalogen or cholesterol biosynthesis. His mother developed 
systemic lupus erythematosus 8 months after delivery. This case is compared with 
the previously reported 9 cases from the literature and is instructive in 
demonstrating a lesser known effect of maternal autoantibodies on the fetus.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2006-2997
PMID: 17671048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]