---
reference_id: "PMID:35766055"
title: Detection of G Protein-Coupled Receptor Autoantibodies in Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome Using Standard Methodology.
authors:
- Hall J
- Bourne KM
- Vernino S
- Hamrefors V
- Kharraziha I
- Nilsson J
- Sheldon RS
- Fedorowski A
- Raj SR
journal: Circulation
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059971
keywords:
- Adult
- Autoantibodies
- Autoimmunity
- Female
- Heart Rate
- Humans
- Male
- Orthostatic Intolerance
- Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome/diagnosis
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of G Protein-Coupled Receptor Autoantibodies in Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome Using Standard Methodology.
**Authors:** Hall J, Bourne KM, Vernino S, Hamrefors V, Kharraziha I, Nilsson J, Sheldon RS, Fedorowski A, Raj SR
**Journal:** Circulation (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059971](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059971)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2022 Aug 23;146(8):613-622. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059971.  Epub 2022 Jun 29.

Detection of G Protein-Coupled Receptor Autoantibodies in Postural Orthostatic
Tachycardia Syndrome Using Standard Methodology.

Hall J(1), Bourne KM(1), Vernino S(2), Hamrefors V(3), Kharraziha I(4), Nilsson
J(4), Sheldon RS(1), Fedorowski A(#)(4)(5), Raj SR(#)(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Sciences, Libin Cardiovascular Institute, Cumming
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Canada (J. H., K.M.B., R.S.S.,
S.R.R.).
(2)Department of Neurology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX (S.V.).
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden
(V.H.).
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden (V.H., I.K.,
J.N., A.F.).
(5)Department of Cardiology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
(A.F.).
(6)Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department
of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN (S.R.R.).
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a disorder of
orthostatic intolerance that primarily affects women of childbearing age. The
underlying pathophysiology of POTS is not fully understood, but it has been
suggested that autoimmunity may play a role. The aim of this study was to
compare concentrations of autoantibodies to cardiovascular G protein-coupled
receptors between patients with POTS and healthy controls.
METHODS: Sera were collected from 116 patients with POTS (91% female; medium
age, 29 years) and 81 healthy controls (84% female; medium age, 27 years) from
Calgary, Canada, and Malmö, Sweden. Samples were evaluated for autoantibodies to
11 receptors (adrenergic, muscarinic, angiotensin II, and endothelin) using a
commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Autoantibody concentrations against all of the receptors tested were
not significantly different between controls and patients with POTS. The
majority of patients with POTS (98.3%) and all controls (100%) had α1 adrenergic
receptor autoantibody concentrations above the seropositive threshold provided
by the manufacturer (7 units/mL). The proportion of patients with POTS versus
healthy controls who fell above the diagnostic thresholds was not different for
any tested autoantibodies. Receiver operating characteristic curves showed a
poor ability to discriminate between patients with POTS and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with POTS and healthy controls do not differ in their
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay-derived autoantibody concentrations to
cardiovascular G protein-coupled receptors. These findings suggest that these
tests are not useful for establishing the role of autoimmunity in POTS.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059971
PMCID: PMC9390234
PMID: 35766055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
