---
reference_id: "PMID:27637426"
title: ALK alterations and inhibition in lung cancer.
authors:
- Le T
- Gerber DE
journal: Semin Cancer Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2016.08.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALK alterations and inhibition in lung cancer.
**Authors:** Le T, Gerber DE
**Journal:** Semin Cancer Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semcancer.2016.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcancer.2016.08.007)

## Content

1. Semin Cancer Biol. 2017 Feb;42:81-88. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2016.08.007.
Epub  2016 Sep 13.

ALK alterations and inhibition in lung cancer.

Le T(1), Gerber DE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, United States.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, United States; Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United 
States. Electronic address: dru.gray@utsouthwestern.edu.

The advent of precision medicine in non-small cell lung cancer has remarkably 
altered the direction of research and improved clinical outcomes. The 
identification of molecular subsets with differential response to targeted 
therapies began with the identification of epidermal growth factor receptor 
mutated tumors in subsets of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Emboldened by 
unprecedented response rates to kinase inhibitors seen in that subset, the 
oncologic community searched for other molecular subsets featuring oncogene 
addiction. An early result of this search was the discovery of NSCLC driven by 
activating rearrangements of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene. In an 
astoundingly brief period following the recognition of ALK-positive NSCLC, 
details of the biology, clinicopathologic features, development of targeted 
inhibitors, mechanisms of therapeutic resistance, and new generations of 
treatment were elucidated. This review summarizes the current understanding of 
the pathologic features, diagnostic approach, treatment options, resistance 
mechanisms, and future research areas for ALK-positive NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2016.08.007
PMCID: PMC5316306
PMID: 27637426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors report no 
conflicts of interest.