---
reference_id: "PMID:27824593"
title: "The prevalence of diagnosed α1-antitrypsin deficiency and its comorbidities: results from a large population-based database."
authors:
- Greulich T
- Nell C
- Hohmann D
- Grebe M
- Janciauskiene S
- Koczulla AR
- Vogelmeier CF
journal: Eur Respir J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1183/13993003.00154-2016
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Comorbidity
- Female
- Germany/epidemiology
- "Hospitalization/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- International Classification of Diseases
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Patient Acceptance of Health Care/statistics & numerical data"
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/physiopathology"
- Respiratory Function Tests
- Retrospective Studies
- Sex Distribution
- Young Adult
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The prevalence of diagnosed α1-antitrypsin deficiency and its comorbidities: results from a large population-based database.
**Authors:** Greulich T, Nell C, Hohmann D, Grebe M, Janciauskiene S, Koczulla AR, Vogelmeier CF
**Journal:** Eur Respir J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1183/13993003.00154-2016](https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00154-2016)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J. 2017 Jan 4;49(1):1600154. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00154-2016.
Print  2017 Jan.

The prevalence of diagnosed α1-antitrypsin deficiency and its comorbidities: 
results from a large population-based database.

Greulich T(1), Nell C(2), Hohmann D(3), Grebe M(4), Janciauskiene S(5), Koczulla 
AR(2), Vogelmeier CF(2).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University Medical 
Centre Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-University, Member of the German Centre for 
Lung Research (DZL), Marburg, Germany greulich@med.uni-marburg.de.
(2)Dept of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University Medical 
Centre Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-University, Member of the German Centre for 
Lung Research (DZL), Marburg, Germany.
(3)HGC GesundheitsConsult GmbH, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Grifols Deutschland GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany.
(5)Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Biomedical Research in 
Endstage and Obstructive Lung Disease Hannover (BREATH), Member of the German 
Center for Lung Research (DZL), Hannover, Germany.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2017 Jan 4;49(1):1601941. doi: 10.1183/13993003.01941-2016.
    MMW Fortschr Med. 2018 Apr;160(6):38. doi: 10.1007/s15006-018-0376-5.

α1-Antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a genetically determined disorder that is 
associated with different clinical manifestations. We aimed to assess the 
prevalence of diagnosed AATD and its comorbidities using a large healthcare 
database.In this retrospective longitudinal observational study, we analysed 
data from 4 million insurants. Using International Classification of Diseases 
revision 10 (ICD-10) codes, we assessed the prevalence, comorbidities and 
healthcare utilisation of AATD patients (E88.0 repeatedly coded) relative to 
non-AATD patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), emphysema 
or asthma.In our study population, we identified 673 AATD patients (590 aged 
≥30 years), corresponding to a prevalence of 23.73 per 100 000 in all age groups 
and 29.36 per 100 000 in those ≥30 years. Based on the number of AATD cases 
detected in the sample size (673 out of 2 836 585), we extrapolated that there 
were 19 162 AATD cases in Germany during the years studied. AATD patients had a 
higher prevalence of arterial hypertension, chronic kidney disease and diabetes 
relative to non-AATD asthma or emphysema patients. When compared to non-AATD 
COPD patients, AATD patients had significantly more consultations and more 
frequent and longer hospitalisations.Our data strengthen the assumption that 
AATD is associated with a variety of other diseases. Healthcare utilisation 
appears to be higher among AATD patients as compared to patients with 
non-AATD-related obstructive lung diseases.

Copyright ©ERS 2017.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00154-2016
PMID: 27824593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]