---
reference_id: "PMID:41721349"
title: "ADHD and adherence to antihypertensive medication treatment: a multinational cohort study."
authors:
- Yao H
- Zhou Y
- Li L
- Gillies MB
- Brikell I
- Gao L
- Wimberley T
- Xie T
- Zhang-James Y
- Astrup A
- Dalsgaard S
- Semark BD
- Engeland A
- Faraone SV
- Klungsøyr K
- Larsson H
- Man KKC
- Snieder H
- Wong ICK
- Yuen ASC
- Zoega H
- Hartman C
- Chang Z
journal: BMC Med
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1186/s12916-026-04714-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/drug therapy, epidemiology, complications"
- Female
- Male
- Antihypertensive Agents/therapeutic use
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- "Hypertension/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Cohort Studies
- Aged
- Medication Adherence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ADHD and adherence to antihypertensive medication treatment: a multinational cohort study.
**Authors:** Yao H, Zhou Y, Li L, Gillies MB, Brikell I, Gao L, Wimberley T, Xie T, Zhang-James Y, Astrup A, Dalsgaard S, Semark BD, Engeland A, Faraone SV, Klungsøyr K, Larsson H, Man KKC, Snieder H, Wong ICK, Yuen ASC, Zoega H, Hartman C, Chang Z
**Journal:** BMC Med (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12916-026-04714-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-026-04714-1)

## Content

1. BMC Med. 2026 Feb 20;24(1):122. doi: 10.1186/s12916-026-04714-1.

ADHD and adherence to antihypertensive medication treatment: a multinational
cohort study.

Yao H(#)(1), Zhou Y(#)(2), Li L(#)(1), Gillies MB(3), Brikell I(1)(4)(5), Gao
L(6)(7)(8), Wimberley T(9)(10), Xie T(11)(12), Zhang-James Y(13), Astrup
A(9)(10), Dalsgaard S(9)(14)(15), Semark BD(9)(10), Engeland A(4)(16), Faraone
SV(13), Klungsøyr K(4)(17), Larsson H(1)(18), Man KKC(8)(19)(20)(21), Snieder
H(2), Wong ICK(8)(22)(23), Yuen ASC(19)(20), Zoega H(#)(24), Hartman C(#)(12),
Chang Z(#)(25).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institute,
Nobels Väg 12A, 171 65, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, University of Groningen, University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(3)School of Population Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of
New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of Global Public Health and Primary Care, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway.
(5)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(6)Department of Pharmacy Administration, School of Pharmacy, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Shaanxi, China.
(7)Center for Drug Safety and Policy Research, Xi'an Jiaotong University,
Shaanxi, China.
(8)Centre for Safe Medication Practice and Research, Department of Pharmacology
and Pharmacy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, Centre for Safe Medication
Practice and Research, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, Hong Kong, China.
(9)National Centre for Register-Based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(10)Centre for Integrated Register-Based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(11)Guangzhou National Laboratory, Guangzhou International Bio Island, No. 9
XingDaoHuanBei Road, Guangzhou, 510005, Guangdong Province, China.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, Interdisciplinary Center of Psychopathology and
Emotion Regulation, University of Groningen, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(13)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Norton College of Medicine
at SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA.
(14)Center for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Copenhagen University Hospital -
Mental Health Services of the Capital Region, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(15)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(16)Department of Chronic Diseases, Norwegian Institute of Public Health,
Bergen, Norway.
(17)Department of Health Promotion, Norwegian Institute of Public Health,
Bergen, Norway.
(18)School of Medical Sciences, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.
(19)Research Department of Practice and Policy, School of Pharmacy, University
College London, London, UK.
(20)Centre for Medicines Optimisation Research and Education, University College
London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(21)Laboratory of Data Discovery for Health, Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, Hong Kong, China.
(22)School of Pharmacy, Medical Sciences Division, Macau University of Science
and Technology, Macao Special Administrative Region, Macau, China.
(23)Aston Pharmacy School, Aston University, Birmingham, UK.
(24)Centre of Public Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(25)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institute,
Nobels Väg 12A, 171 65, Stockholm, Sweden. zheng.chang@ki.se.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Adherence to antihypertensive medication, alongside lifestyle
modifications, is fundamental to managing hypertension and reducing the risk of
cardiovascular disease. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a
common neurodevelopmental disorder associated with a range of cardiovascular
diseases, including hypertension. ADHD medication has also been associated with
hypertension. However, the influence of ADHD and ADHD medication on
discontinuation and adherence to antihypertensive treatments is unknown.
METHODS: We conducted a multinational cohort study using electronic health
databases from seven countries, which included adults who initiated
antihypertensive medication between 2010 and 2020. ADHD was identified by a
diagnosis of ADHD or dispensation of ADHD medications. The outcomes were (1)
time to the first discontinuation of antihypertensive medication and (2) poor
adherence, defined as the proportion of days covered (PDC) below 80% during 1-,
2-, and 5-year follow-up periods. We used Cox proportional hazards models and
logistic regression to estimate associations, adjusting for age, sex, and
calendar year of antihypertensive medication initiation. We pooled results from
different countries via random-effects meta-analysis.
RESULTS: We identified 12,174,321 adults who initiated antihypertensive
medication during the study period, including 320,691 (2.6%) with ADHD. In the
pooled analysis across all countries, ADHD was associated with an increased rate
of discontinuation in 5-year follow-up of antihypertensive medication (hazard
ratio [HR] 1.14; 95% CI, 1.02-1.27). In age-stratified analyses, ADHD was
associated with a higher rate of antihypertensive medication discontinuation in
middle-aged (HR, 1.11; 95% CI, 1.01-1.23) and older adults (HR, 1.14; 95% CI,
1.01-1.29), but not in young adults. Individuals with ADHD also had higher odds
of poor adherence across 1 year after treatment initiation (odds ratio [OR]
1.45, 95% CI 1.26-1.67) to 5 years (OR 1.64, 95% CI 1.34-2.00). Among those with
ADHD, use of ADHD medications was associated with lower odds of poor adherence
(1 year OR 0.66, 95% CI 0.60-0.73; 5 years OR 0.58, 95% CI 0.46-0.72).
CONCLUSIONS: Adults with ADHD are more likely to discontinue antihypertensive
treatment and exhibit poor medication adherence. However, ADHD medication use
appears to be associated with better adherence among individuals with ADHD.

© 2026. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12916-026-04714-1
PMCID: PMC12930603
PMID: 41721349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval approval and
consent to participate: Ethical approval was obtained from the relevant
authorities in each participating country: Australia (AIHW HREC EO2021/1/1233;
NSW PHSREC 2020/ETH02273), Denmark (Danish Data Protection Agency; Act no. 1338
of 1 September 2020), the Netherlands (Statistics Netherlands project agreement
9205), Norway (Regional Ethics Committee in Western Norway 2020/75421), Sweden
(Swedish Ethical Review Authority 2020-06540), the United Kingdom (THIN
Scientific Review Committee 17THIN102), and the United States (SUNY Upstate
Medical University IRB 1933232-2). Informed consent was waived in all countries
due to the use of de-identified or pseudonymized registry data. Not applicable,
as the study used de-identified registry data and did not involve direct patient
contact. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: HL
reports receiving grants from TAKEDA and Shire Pharmaceuticals; personal fees
from and serving as a speaker for Medice, Shire/Takeda Pharmaceuticals and
Evolan Pharma AB; all outside the submitted work. HL is editor-in-chief of JCPP
Advances. SVF reports personal fees and travel expenses from Mentavi/ADHD
Online, Axsome, Ironshore/Collegium, KemPharm/Corium, Noven, Supernus, Sandoz,
Tris and Medice; has a US patent (via his institution) for the use of
sodium-hydrogen exchange inhibitors in the treatment of ADHD (US20130217707 A1);
receives royalties from books published by Guilford Press (Straight Talk about
Your Child's Mental Health), Oxford University Press (Schizophrenia: The Facts),
and Elsevier (ADHD: Non-Pharmacologic Interventions); and is program director of
www.ADHDEvidence.org and www.ADHDinAdults.com . KKCM reports grants from the C W
Maplethorpe Fellowship, the National Institute for Health and Care Research,
Innovation and Technology Commission of the Hong Kong Special Administration
Region Government, and Hong Kong Research Grant Council; and personal fees from
IQVIA, all outside the submitted work. ICKW reports research funding from Amgen
and GSK, the Hong Kong Research Grants Council, the Hong Kong Health and Medical
Research Fund, the National Institute for Health Research in England, the
European Commission, and the National Health and Medical Research Council in
Australia, consulting fees from IQVIA and World Health Organisation, outside of
the submitted work. He is a non-executive director of Jacobson Medical, Advance
Data Analytics for Medical Science (ADAMS) Limited in Hong Kong and OCUS
Innovation Limited (HK, Ireland and UK); a former director of Therakind in
England and Asia Medicine Regulatory Affairs (AMERA) Services Limited in Hong
Kong. ZC received speaker fees from Takeda Pharmaceuticals, outside the
submitted work. All other authors declare no competing interests. ASCY reports
grant from the University College London Hospitals NIHR Biomedical Research
Centre, College of Mental Health Pharmacy, and UK Turing Scheme.
