---
reference_id: "PMID:9865703"
title: A role for dystroglycan in basement membrane assembly.
authors:
- Henry MD
- Campbell KP
journal: Cell
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81708-0
keywords:
- Animals
- Basement Membrane/physiology
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics, physiology"
- Dystroglycans
- Embryonic and Fetal Development
- Laminin
- "Membrane Glycoproteins/biosynthesis, genetics, physiology"
- Mice
- Phenotype
- Stem Cells
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A role for dystroglycan in basement membrane assembly.
**Authors:** Henry MD, Campbell KP
**Journal:** Cell (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81708-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81708-0)

## Content

1. Cell. 1998 Dec 11;95(6):859-70. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81708-0.

A role for dystroglycan in basement membrane assembly.

Henry MD(1), Campbell KP.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, The
University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City 52242, USA.

Basement membranes are composed of ordered arrays of characteristic
extracellular matrix proteins, but little is known about the assembly of these
structures in vivo. We have investigated the function of dystroglycan, a
cell-surface laminin receptor expressed by cells contacting basement membranes
in developing and adult tissues. We find that dystroglycan is required for the
formation of a basement membrane in embryoid bodies. Our results further
indicate that dystroglycanlaminin interactions are prerequisite for the
deposition of other basement membrane proteins. Dystroglycan may exert its
influence on basement membrane assembly by binding soluble laminin and
organizing it on the cell surface. These data establish a role for dystroglycan
in the assembly of basement membranes and suggest fundamental mechanisms
underlying this process.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81708-0
PMID: 9865703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
