---
reference_id: "PMID:9700201"
title: Array-based multiplex analysis of candidate genes reveals two independent and additive genetic risk factors for myocardial infarction in the Finnish population.
authors:
- Pastinen T
- Perola M
- Niini P
- Terwilliger J
- Salomaa V
- Vartiainen E
- Peltonen L
- Syvänen A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.9.1453
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Array-based multiplex analysis of candidate genes reveals two independent and additive genetic risk factors for myocardial infarction in the Finnish population.
**Authors:** Pastinen T, Perola M, Niini P, Terwilliger J, Salomaa V, Vartiainen E, Peltonen L, Syvänen A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/7.9.1453](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/7.9.1453)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Sep;7(9):1453-62. doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.9.1453.

Array-based multiplex analysis of candidate genes reveals two independent and 
additive genetic risk factors for myocardial infarction in the Finnish 
population.

Pastinen T(1), Perola M, Niini P, Terwilliger J, Salomaa V, Vartiainen E, 
Peltonen L, Syvänen A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, National Public Health Institute, 
Mannerheimintie 166, FIN 00300, Helsinki, Finland. tomi.pastinen@ktl.fi

We analysed common variants of eight genes implicated previously as risk factors 
for coronary heart disease or myocardial infarction (MI) in a cross-sectional 
study on patients with a history of MI and in carefully matched controls from 
the Finnish population. The most common low density lipoprotein receptor 
mutations in Finland were also included in our analysis. Multiplex genotyping of 
the target genes was performed using a specific and efficient array-based 
minisequencing system. The 4G allele of the plasminogen activator inhibitor gene 
(P < 0.05) and the PlA2 allele of the glycoprotein IIIa gene (P < 0.01) were 
associated with an increased risk of MI in our study population. We analysed the 
combined effect of these risk alleles and found that the concurrent carrier 
status of the two genetic variants conferred a high risk for the development of 
MI in our sample (OR = 4.5, P = 0.001), which was particularly prominent in male 
subjects (OR = 6.4, P = 0.0005). This study demonstrates the application of a 
new powerful tool for genome analysis to yield information on the inherited 
determinants of susceptibility to MI. The observation of two separate genes 
contributing an additive risk of developing MI exemplifies the advantages of 
multiplex analysis of genetic variation.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/7.9.1453
PMID: 9700201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]