---
reference_id: "PMID:39404418"
title: Role and Function of Peroxisomes in Neuroinflammation.
authors:
- Sarkar C
- Lipinski MM
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13191655
keywords:
- Peroxisomes/metabolism
- Humans
- Animals
- "Neuroinflammatory Diseases/metabolism, pathology"
- "Inflammation/pathology, metabolism"
- "Peroxisomal Disorders/metabolism, pathology"
- "Microglia/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role and Function of Peroxisomes in Neuroinflammation.
**Authors:** Sarkar C, Lipinski MM
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13191655](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13191655)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 Oct 5;13(19):1655. doi: 10.3390/cells13191655.

Role and Function of Peroxisomes in Neuroinflammation.

Sarkar C(1), Lipinski MM(2).

Author information:
(1)Shock, Trauma and Anesthesiology Research (STAR) Center, Department of 
Anesthesiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, 
USA.
(2)Shock, Trauma and Anesthesiology Research (STAR) Center, Department of 
Anesthesiology and Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Peroxisomes are organelles involved in many cellular metabolic functions, 
including the degradation of very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs; C ≥ 22), the 
initiation of ether-phospholipid synthesis, and the metabolism of reactive 
oxygen species. All of these processes are essential for the maintenance of 
cellular lipid and redox homeostasis, and their perturbation can trigger 
inflammatory response in immune cells, including in the central nervous system 
(CNS) resident microglia and astrocytes. Consistently, peroxisomal disorders, a 
group of congenital diseases caused by a block in peroxisomal biogenesis or the 
impairment of one of the peroxisomal enzymes, are associated with 
neuroinflammation. Peroxisomal function is also dysregulated in many 
neurodegenerative diseases and during brain aging, both of which are associated 
with neuroinflammation. This suggests that deciphering the role of peroxisomes 
in neuroinflammation may be important for understanding both congenital and 
age-related brain dysfunction. In this review, we discuss the current advances 
in understanding the role and function of peroxisomes in neuroinflammation.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13191655
PMCID: PMC11476013
PMID: 39404418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.