---
reference_id: "PMID:37251685"
title: "Dermatologic manifestations of thyroid disease: a literature review."
authors:
- Cohen B
- Cadesky A
- Jaggi S
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1167890
keywords:
- Humans
- Thyroid Diseases/complications
- Hypothyroidism/complications
- Hyperthyroidism/complications
- Thyroid Hormones/physiology
- Skin Diseases/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dermatologic manifestations of thyroid disease: a literature review.
**Authors:** Cohen B, Cadesky A, Jaggi S
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2023.1167890](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1167890)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 May 12;14:1167890. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1167890. eCollection 2023.

Dermatologic manifestations of thyroid disease: a literature review.

Cohen B(1), Cadesky A(1), Jaggi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at 
Hofstra/Northwell, Great Neck, NY, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Thyroid hormone is considered one of the key regulatory hormones 
for skin homeostasis. Multiple organs are affected by the release of peripheral 
thyroid hormones (T4 and T3) further regulating various functions at a cellular 
level. Specifically, skin is considered an important target organ in which the 
thyroid hormone has a significant impact. Multiple skin diseases are associated 
with thyroid hormone dysregulation. However, other striking dermatologic 
manifestations are seen in nails and hair as well. Hypothyroidism, 
hyperthyroidism, and thyroid cancer can have an array of cutaneous 
manifestations, and we present the recent updates in this field.
METHODS: A PubMed search was performed for updates in any new skin disease 
findings and treatments between 2010 and 2022. Research published in the past 
decade and previously known foundational skin findings associated with thyroid 
disease were presented in this review.
CONCLUSION: Cutaneous manifestations of thyroid disease is one of the first 
notable signs of thyroid hormone dysregulation. This article reviews the recent 
updates on the thyroid and skin interplay, and it further discusses overt 
visible findings and various available treatment modalities.

Copyright © 2023 Cohen, Cadesky and Jaggi.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1167890
PMCID: PMC10214500
PMID: 37251685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.