---
reference_id: "PMID:39328593"
title: In-depth analysis of OTC A208T case induced by OTC gene mutation and research on the prediction and simulation of the impact on protein function.
authors:
- Hu Q
- Chen H
- Liu T
- Dong X
- Hu X
- Yan W
- Li Z
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1450859
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In-depth analysis of OTC A208T case induced by OTC gene mutation and research on the prediction and simulation of the impact on protein function.
**Authors:** Hu Q, Chen H, Liu T, Dong X, Hu X, Yan W, Li Z
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2024.1450859](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2024.1450859)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2024 Sep 12;12:1450859. doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1450859. 
eCollection 2024.

In-depth analysis of OTC A208T case induced by OTC gene mutation and research on 
the prediction and simulation of the impact on protein function.

Hu Q(#)(1)(2), Chen H(#)(3), Liu T(1), Dong X(1)(2), Hu X(1)(2), Yan W(1)(2), Li 
Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Dalian Women and Children's Medical Group, Dalian, 
Liaoning, China.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning, China.
(3)Department of Emergency, Dalian Women and Children's Medical Group, Dalian, 
Liaoning, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD), a rare hereditary 
disease caused by gene mutation of ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC), is the most 
prevalent type among urea cycle disorders. OTCD typically leads to mitochondrial 
enzyme dysfunction, preventing the synthesis of citrulline from carbamoyl 
phosphate and ornithine, and is characterized by a remarkable increase in blood 
ammonia. Specific symptoms may include neurological abnormalities, growth 
retardation, and other manifestations.
METHODS: We presented a case of a child diagnosed with OTCD (OMIM: 311250). By 
using whole-genome sequencing (WGS) for the pedigree and in-depth whole-exome 
sequencing (WES), we aimed to identify the disease-causing genes. Gene mutation 
prediction tools were employed to verify the pathogenicity, and the molecular 
dynamics simulation method was utilized to assess the impact of this mutation on 
the activity and structural stability of the OTC protein.
RESULTS: Whole-exome sequencing detected an OTC variant [NM_000531: c.622 
(exon6) G > A, p.A208T]. Through comprehensive analysis with various gene 
mutation prediction tools and in line with the ACMG guidelines, this mutation 
site was firmly established as a pathogenic site. Moreover, the molecular 
dynamics simulation results clearly demonstrated that this mutation would 
significantly compromise the stability of the OTC protein structure.
CONCLUSION: This study deepens our understanding of the clinical manifestations 
and characteristics of OTCD, especially the OTC A208T gene mutation site. Given 
the lack of specific clinical manifestations in OTCD patients, early and 
accurate diagnosis is crucial for effective treatment and prognosis improvement. 
To our knowledge, this is the first case of this mutation site reported in 
China.

© 2024 Hu, Chen, Liu, Dong, Hu, Yan and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2024.1450859
PMCID: PMC11424443
PMID: 39328593

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.