---
reference_id: "PMID:11524458"
title: Functional effects of central core disease mutations in the cytoplasmic region of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor.
authors:
- Avila G
- Dirksen RT
journal: J Gen Physiol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1085/jgp.118.3.277
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Animals
- Caffeine/pharmacology
- "Calcium Channels/drug effects, physiology"
- Cytoplasm/physiology
- "Cytosol/drug effects, physiology"
- Electrophysiology
- Humans
- Mice
- Microtubules/physiology
- "Muscle Contraction/drug effects, physiology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/physiology"
- "Mutation/genetics, physiology"
- "Myopathy, Central Core/genetics, metabolism"
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Rabbits
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics, physiology"
- "Sarcoplasmic Reticulum/drug effects, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional effects of central core disease mutations in the cytoplasmic region of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor.
**Authors:** Avila G, Dirksen RT
**Journal:** J Gen Physiol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1085/jgp.118.3.277](https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.118.3.277)

## Content

1. J Gen Physiol. 2001 Sep;118(3):277-90. doi: 10.1085/jgp.118.3.277.

Functional effects of central core disease mutations in the cytoplasmic region
of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor.

Avila G(1), Dirksen RT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Central core disease (CCD) is a human myopathy that involves a dysregulation in
muscle Ca(2)+ homeostasis caused by mutations in the gene encoding the skeletal
muscle ryanodine receptor (RyR1), the protein that comprises the calcium release
channel of the SR. Although genetic studies have clearly demonstrated linkage
between mutations in RyR1 and CCD, the impact of these mutations on release
channel function and excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle is
unknown. Toward this goal, we have engineered the different CCD mutations found
in the NH(2)-terminal region of RyR1 into a rabbit RyR1 cDNA (R164C, I404M,
Y523S, R2163H, and R2435H) and characterized the functional effects of these
mutations after expression in myotubes derived from RyR1-knockout (dyspedic)
mice. Resting Ca(2)+ levels were elevated in dyspedic myotubes expressing four
of these mutants (Y523S > R2163H > R2435H R164C > I404M RyR1). A similar rank
order was also found for the degree of SR Ca(2)+ depletion assessed using
maximal concentrations of caffeine (10 mM) or cyclopiazonic acid (CPA, 30
microM). Although all of the CCD mutants fully restored L-current density,
voltage-gated SR Ca(2)+ release was smaller and activated at more negative
potentials for myotubes expressing the NH(2)-terminal CCD mutations. The shift
in the voltage dependence of SR Ca(2)+ release correlated strongly with changes
in resting Ca(2)+, SR Ca(2)+ store depletion, and peak voltage-gated release,
indicating that increased release channel activity at negative membrane
potentials promotes SR Ca(2)+ leak. Coexpression of wild-type and Y523S RyR1
proteins in dyspedic myotubes resulted in release channels that exhibited an
intermediate degree of SR Ca(2)+ leak. These results demonstrate that the
NH(2)-terminal CCD mutants enhance release channel sensitivity to activation by
voltage in a manner that leads to increased SR Ca(2)+ leak, store depletion, and
a reduction in voltage-gated Ca(2)+ release. Two fundamentally distinct cellular
mechanisms (leaky channels and EC uncoupling) are proposed to explain how
altered release channel function caused by different mutations in RyR1 could
result in muscle weakness in CCD.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.118.3.277
PMCID: PMC2229502
PMID: 11524458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
