---
reference_id: "PMID:32709178"
title: "Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: An Analysis of the Current Treatment Options."
authors:
- Song B
- Yeh P
- Nguyen D
- Ikpeama U
- Epstein M
- Harrell J
journal: Pain Physician
year: '2020'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: An Analysis of the Current Treatment Options.
**Authors:** Song B, Yeh P, Nguyen D, Ikpeama U, Epstein M, Harrell J
**Journal:** Pain Physician (2020)

## Content

1. Pain Physician. 2020 Jul;23(4):429-438.

Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: An Analysis of the Current Treatment Options.

Song B(1), Yeh P(1), Nguyen D(1), Ikpeama U(1), Epstein M(1), Harrell J(1).

Author information:
(1)H. Ben Taub Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, TX.

BACKGROUND: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a multifaceted disease that can 
present with a variety of types of pain. Unfortunately, both the mechanisms and 
treatments for pain are poorly understood. The proposed treatments for the 
various musculoskeletal pain syndromes in EDS have had variable success, and it 
becomes much more imperative to better define and evaluate the current treatment 
modalities in treating this debilitating disease.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to investigate the currently available 
treatment modalities for patients with EDS and their efficacies in pain and 
symptom relief.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
SETTING: Institutional physical medicine and rehabilitation primary care clinic.
METHODS: All patients were seen between January 2015 and April 2019, in which 98 
patients with EDS were identified through retrospective chart review. 
Institutional review board approval was obtained, and all patients provided 
written consent to be included in the study. We reviewed various treatment 
modalities, including complimentary/alternative treatments, opioids/opioid-like 
medications, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, physical therapy, occupational 
therapy, muscle relaxants, neuropathic modulators, steroids, surgery/procedures, 
and acetaminophen. Treatment methods were extracted from individual patient 
charts, and efficacy was grouped into 3 categories: improvement, no effect, or 
worsened symptoms.
RESULTS: The most common treatments used were complimentary/alternative 
treatments (n = 88). Occupational therapy and bracing were the most effective 
options with 70% of patients reporting improvement. Neuropathic modulators were 
the least well tolerated with 47% of patients reporting adverse effects.
LIMITATIONS: Men were a small percentage of the study. Patients were not 
randomized, and pain score reporting was subjective. Patient data were extracted 
from a single practice setting. Timing and symptom onset were not measured.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a relative paucity of published literature regarding the 
various treatment methods for EDS. Although our study is able to identify 
positive and negative trends with certain modalities, it is vital to understand 
that EDS is not a uniform diagnosis among patients, and that a combination of 
several different treatments usually is needed for optimal symptom control. 
Further research and investigation are necessary to develop a comprehensive 
treatment database for this complex condition.
KEY WORDS: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, pain, hypermobility, arthralgia, subluxation, 
genetic, physical therapy, interventional pain.

PMID: 32709178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]