---
reference_id: "PMID:33199626"
title: The antibiotic sorangicin A inhibits promoter DNA unwinding in a Mycobacterium tuberculosis rifampicin-resistant RNA polymerase.
authors:
- Lilic M
- Chen J
- Boyaci H
- Braffman N
- Hubin EA
- Herrmann J
- Müller R
- Mooney R
- Landick R
- Darst SA
- Campbell EA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2013706117
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The antibiotic sorangicin A inhibits promoter DNA unwinding in a Mycobacterium tuberculosis rifampicin-resistant RNA polymerase.
**Authors:** Lilic M, Chen J, Boyaci H, Braffman N, Hubin EA, Herrmann J, Müller R, Mooney R, Landick R, Darst SA, Campbell EA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2013706117](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2013706117)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Dec 1;117(48):30423-30432. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2013706117. Epub 2020 Nov 16.

The antibiotic sorangicin A inhibits promoter DNA unwinding in a Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis rifampicin-resistant RNA polymerase.

Lilic M(1), Chen J(1), Boyaci H(1), Braffman N(1), Hubin EA(1), Herrmann 
J(2)(3)(4), Müller R(2)(3)(4), Mooney R(5), Landick R(5)(6), Darst SA(1), 
Campbell EA(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 
10065.
(2)Department Microbial Natural Products, Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical 
Research Saarland, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Saarland University, 
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Saarland University, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(4)Partner Site Hannover-Braunschweig, German Center for Infection Research, 
38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 
53706.
(6)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 
53706.
(7)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 
10065; campbee@rockefeller.edu.

Rifampicin (Rif) is a first-line therapeutic used to treat the infectious 
disease tuberculosis (TB), which is caused by the pathogen Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (Mtb). The emergence of Rif-resistant (RifR) Mtb presents a need 
for new antibiotics. Rif targets the enzyme RNA polymerase (RNAP). Sorangicin A 
(Sor) is an unrelated inhibitor that binds in the Rif-binding pocket of RNAP. 
Sor inhibits a subset of RifR RNAPs, including the most prevalent clinical RifR 
RNAP substitution found in Mtb infected patients (S456>L of the β subunit). 
Here, we present structural and biochemical data demonstrating that Sor inhibits 
the wild-type Mtb RNAP by a similar mechanism as Rif: by preventing the 
translocation of very short RNAs. By contrast, Sor inhibits the RifR S456L 
enzyme at an earlier step, preventing the transition of a partially unwound 
promoter DNA intermediate to the fully opened DNA and blocking the 
template-strand DNA from reaching the active site in the RNAP catalytic center. 
By defining template-strand blocking as a mechanism for inhibition, we provide a 
mechanistic drug target in RNAP. Our finding that Sor inhibits the wild-type and 
mutant RNAPs through different mechanisms prompts future considerations for 
designing antibiotics against resistant targets. Also, we show that Sor has a 
better pharmacokinetic profile than Rif, making it a suitable starting molecule 
to design drugs to be used for the treatment of TB patients with comorbidities 
who require multiple medications.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2013706117
PMCID: PMC7720108
PMID: 33199626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.