---
reference_id: "PMID:37973552"
title: HSPA8 Activates Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling to Facilitate BRAF V600E Colorectal Cancer Progression by CMA-Mediated CAV1 Degradation.
authors:
- Li B
- Ming H
- Qin S
- Zhou L
- Huang Z
- Jin P
- Peng L
- Luo M
- Zhang T
- Wang K
- Liu R
- Liou YC
- Nice EC
- Jiang J
- Huang C
journal: Adv Sci (Weinh)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/advs.202306535
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- beta Catenin/metabolism
- "Caveolin 1/genetics, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Chaperone-Mediated Autophagy
- Colorectal Neoplasms/metabolism
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- HSC70 Heat-Shock Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HSPA8 Activates Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling to Facilitate BRAF V600E Colorectal Cancer Progression by CMA-Mediated CAV1 Degradation.
**Authors:** Li B, Ming H, Qin S, Zhou L, Huang Z, Jin P, Peng L, Luo M, Zhang T, Wang K, Liu R, Liou YC, Nice EC, Jiang J, Huang C
**Journal:** Adv Sci (Weinh) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/advs.202306535](https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202306535)

## Content

1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2024 Jan;11(3):e2306535. doi: 10.1002/advs.202306535. Epub
2023  Nov 16.

HSPA8 Activates Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling to Facilitate BRAF V600E Colorectal
Cancer Progression by CMA-Mediated CAV1 Degradation.

Li B(1), Ming H(1), Qin S(1), Zhou L(1), Huang Z(1), Jin P(1), Peng L(1), Luo
M(1), Zhang T(1), Wang K(1), Liu R(2), Liou YC(3)(4), Nice EC(5), Jiang J(6),
Huang C(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital and
West China School of Basic Medical Sciences and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan
University and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu, 610041,
P. R. China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for
Oral Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Research Unit of Oral
Carcinogenesis and Management, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, 117543, Singapore.
(4)Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, 117573, Singapore.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
VIC, 3800, Australia.
(6)West China School of Public Health and West China Fourth Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, 610041, P. R. China.

BRAF V600E attracts wide attention in the treatment of colorectal cancer (CRC)
as stratifying and predicting a refractory classification of CRC. Recent
evidence indicates that Wnt/β-catenin signaling is broadly activated and
participates in the refractoriness of BRAF V600E CRC, but the underlying
molecular mechanism needs to be elucidated. Here, heat shock 70 kDa protein 8
(HSPA8), an essential regulator in chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), is
identified as a potential therapeutic target for advanced BRAF V600E CRC. These
results show that HSPA8 is transcriptionally upregulated in BRAF V600E CRC,
which promotes CMA-dependent degradation of caveolin-1 (CAV1) to release
β-catenin into the nucleus and thus activates the Wnt/β-catenin pathway,
contributing to metastasis and progression of BRAF V600E CRC. Of note, HSPA8
directly interacts with the KIFSN motif on CAV1, the interaction can be enhanced
by p38 MAPK-mediated CAV1 S168 phosphorylation. Furthermore, pharmacological
targeting HSPA8 by VER155008 exhibits synergistic effects with BRAF inhibitors
on CRC mouse models. In summary, these findings discover the important role of
the HSPA8/CAV1/β-catenin axis in the development of refractory BRAF V600E CRC
and highlight HSPA8 as a predictive biomarker and therapeutic target in clinical
practice.

© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202306535
PMCID: PMC10797426
PMID: 37973552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
