---
reference_id: "PMID:27983969"
title: "Clinical and laboratory characteristics, epidemiology, and outcomes of murine typhus: A systematic review."
authors:
- Tsioutis C
- Zafeiri M
- Avramopoulos A
- Prousali E
- Miligkos M
- Karageorgos SA
journal: Acta Trop
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.10.018
keywords:
- Animals
- Child
- Exanthema/etiology
- Fever/etiology
- Headache/etiology
- Humans
- Treatment Outcome
- "Typhus, Endemic Flea-Borne/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and laboratory characteristics, epidemiology, and outcomes of murine typhus: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Tsioutis C, Zafeiri M, Avramopoulos A, Prousali E, Miligkos M, Karageorgos SA
**Journal:** Acta Trop (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.10.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.10.018)

## Content

1. Acta Trop. 2017 Feb;166:16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.10.018. Epub
2016  Oct 29.

Clinical and laboratory characteristics, epidemiology, and outcomes of murine
typhus: A systematic review.

Tsioutis C(1), Zafeiri M(2), Avramopoulos A(3), Prousali E(4), Miligkos M(5),
Karageorgos SA(6).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Working Group, Society of Junior Doctors, Athens, Greece;
School of Medicine, European University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus. Electronic
address: tsioutis@sni.gr.
(2)Infectious Diseases Working Group, Society of Junior Doctors, Athens, Greece;
Diabetes and Obesity Outpatient Department, Konstantopouleio General Hospital,
Nea Ionia, Athens, Greece.
(3)Infectious Diseases Working Group, Society of Junior Doctors, Athens, Greece;
School of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)Infectious Diseases Working Group, Society of Junior Doctors, Athens, Greece;
School of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece;
Charing Cross Hospital, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.
(5)Infectious Diseases Working Group, Society of Junior Doctors, Athens, Greece;
Laboratory of Biomathematics, University of Thessaly School of Medicine,
Larissa, Greece.
(6)Infectious Diseases Working Group, Society of Junior Doctors, Athens, Greece.

Murine or endemic typhus, a febrile disease caused by Rickettsia typhi, is often
misdiagnosed due to its non-specific presentation. We sought to evaluate all
available evidence in the literature regarding the clinical and laboratory
manifestations, epidemiological characteristics, and outcomes of murine typhus.
Pubmed was searched for all articles providing available data. In an effort to
incorporate contemporary data, only studies from 1980 were included.
Thirty-three case series including 2074 patients were included in final
analysis. Available evidence suggests that the classic triad of fever, headache
and rash is encountered in only one-third of patients. Other frequent symptoms
were chills, malaise, myalgia, and anorexia. A tetrad of reported laboratory
abnormalities consisting of elevated liver enzymes, lactate dehydrogenase,
erythrocyte sedimentation rate and hypoalbuminemia was detected. Complications
were observed in one-fourth of patients, reported mortality was extremely low,
but untreated patients had notably longer duration of fever. Among
epidemiological characteristics, a seasonal distribution with most cases
reported during warmer months, was the most prominent finding. Murine typhus in
children exhibits several different characteristics, with abdominal pain,
diarrhea, and sore throat reported more commonly, higher frequency of anemia,
lower frequency of hypoalbuminemia, hematuria and proteinuria and a much lower
rate of complications. This systematic review of published evidence provides a
thorough description of the clinical and laboratory features of murine typhus
and highlights important differences in children.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.10.018
PMID: 27983969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
