---
reference_id: "PMID:31329366"
title: An update on the new classification of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and review of the causes of bleeding in this population.
authors:
- Jesudas R
- Chaudhury A
- Laukaitis CM
journal: Haemophilia
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/hae.13800
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An update on the new classification of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and review of the causes of bleeding in this population.
**Authors:** Jesudas R, Chaudhury A, Laukaitis CM
**Journal:** Haemophilia (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/hae.13800](https://doi.org/10.1111/hae.13800)

## Content

1. Haemophilia. 2019 Jul;25(4):558-566. doi: 10.1111/hae.13800. Epub 2019 Jun 10.

An update on the new classification of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and review of the 
causes of bleeding in this population.

Jesudas R(1), Chaudhury A(2), Laukaitis CM(3).

Author information:
(1)Bleeding and Clotting Disorders Institute, Peoria, Illinois.
(2)Center for Inherited Blood Disorders, Orange, California.
(3)Departments of Medicine and Nutrition, University of Arizona College of 
Medicine, Tucson, Arizona.

It has long been hypothesized that bleeding symptoms in people with 
hypermobility occur as a result of abnormalities in the collagen of the vessel 
wall or the connective tissues. The bleeding symptoms, particularly in the skin, 
have been attributed to the fragility of skin and blood vessels caused by 
"defective collagen wickerwork" of the reticular layer of the skin. Collagen, 
which forms the framework of vessel walls, is altered in many patients with 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) leading to weakening of the vessel wall or the 
supporting tissues. Another important function of subendothelial collagen is its 
interaction with platelets and von Willebrand factor, which results in the 
propagation of a platelet plug. Thus, abnormalities in subendothelial collagen 
may alter its interaction with platelets and VWF. More recently, hypermobile-EDS 
(hEDS) has been associated with mast cell disorders, a condition independently 
associated with bleeding symptoms. It has also been observed that patients with 
mild bleeding disorders have a more severe bleeding phenotype when they have 
co-existing joint hypermobility.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hae.13800
PMID: 31329366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]