---
reference_id: "PMID:22507869"
title: "Familial occurrence of cervical artery dissection--coincidence or sign of familial predisposition?"
authors:
- Grond-Ginsbach C
- de Freitas GR
- Campos CR
- Thie A
- Caso V
- Machetanz J
- Kloss M
journal: Cerebrovasc Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1159/000337035
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age Factors
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Analysis of Variance
- "Carotid Artery, Internal, Dissection/epidemiology, genetics"
- Cluster Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Risk Factors
- Sex Factors
- "Vertebral Artery Dissection/epidemiology, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial occurrence of cervical artery dissection--coincidence or sign of familial predisposition?
**Authors:** Grond-Ginsbach C, de Freitas GR, Campos CR, Thie A, Caso V, Machetanz J, Kloss M
**Journal:** Cerebrovasc Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000337035](https://doi.org/10.1159/000337035)

## Content

1. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2012;33(5):466-70. doi: 10.1159/000337035. Epub 2012 Apr 11.

Familial occurrence of cervical artery dissection--coincidence or sign of
familial predisposition?

Grond-Ginsbach C(1), de Freitas GR, Campos CR, Thie A, Caso V, Machetanz J,
Kloss M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
Caspar.Grond-Ginsbach@med.uni-heidelberg.de

BACKGROUNDAND PURPOSE: The etiology of spontaneous cervical artery dissection
(CeAD) is poorly understood in most patients. Mild cervical trauma preceding the
dissection event is a common finding, but many CeAD occur spontaneously. It is
likely that genetic factors may increase the risk for CeAD. However, familial
cases are excedingly rare. Familial clustering of CeAD may be accidental or
associated with genetic or environmental risk factors shared between affected
relatives. In this explorative study, we aim to show that specific risk factors
for familial CeAD exist.
METHODS: Age of onset, sex, affected artery and number of recurrent CeAD were
documented for familial patients and compared with published findings from
patients with sporadic CeAD. Concordance of age, sex and dissected artery within
the families was analyzed by correlation analysis and by analysis of variance or
Kruskal-Wallis testing.
RESULTS: The study sample consisted of 9 new patients with a family history of
CeAD enrolled in the Neurology Department of the University of Heidelberg or
referred to Heidelberg from other centers. The study sample also included
published findings from another 23 patients, in total 32 patients. The mean age
of the patients with familial CeAD at their first dissections was 38.4 ± 13.3
years. Twenty (62.5%) patients were female and 12 patients (37.5%) suffered
multiple dissections. Four patients (12.5%) presented with recurrent dissections
after >1 year. Patients with a familial history of CeAD were younger (p = 0.023)
and presented more often with multiple dissections (p = 0.024) and recurrent
dissections (p = 0.018). Age at the first event (correlation analysis p = 0.026;
analysis of variance p = 0.029) and site of the dissection (correlation analysis
p = 0.032; Kruskal-Wallis test p = 0.018) differed between the families, and
there was no concordance of gender of affected family members (correlation
analysis p = 0.500; Kruskal-Wallis test p = 0.211).
CONCLUSIONS: The high prevalence of multiple dissection events and of long-term
(>1 year) recurrent dissections in patients with a familial history of CeAD
indicates that a specific predisposition for familial CeAD exists. Since age of
onset and affected vessel differ between families, the risk profile for familial
CeAD is heterogeneous. A large-scale (whole exome) sequencing analysis of 14
patients from 7 of the analyzed families is currently being performed in order
to identify causative genetic variants.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000337035
PMID: 22507869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
