---
reference_id: "PMID:34931621"
title: "Comprehensive Analysis of the HLA Class I and the HLA Class II Alleles in Patients with Takayasu Arteritis: Relationship with Clinical Patterns and Prognosis."
authors:
- Stojanovic M
- Andric Z
- Popadic D
- Stankovic Stanojevic M
- Miskovic R
- Jovanovic D
- Peric-Popadic A
- Bolpacic J
- Tomic-Spiric V
- Raskovic S
journal: Iran J Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.22034/IJI.2021.88846.1911
keywords:
- Alleles
- Gene Frequency
- "Genes, MHC Class I"
- "Genes, MHC Class II"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- HLA-B Antigens/genetics
- HLA-DQ beta-Chains/genetics
- HLA-DRB1 Chains/genetics
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Prognosis
- "Takayasu Arteritis/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive Analysis of the HLA Class I and the HLA Class II Alleles in Patients with Takayasu Arteritis: Relationship with Clinical Patterns and Prognosis.
**Authors:** Stojanovic M, Andric Z, Popadic D, Stankovic Stanojevic M, Miskovic R, Jovanovic D, Peric-Popadic A, Bolpacic J, Tomic-Spiric V, Raskovic S
**Journal:** Iran J Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.22034/IJI.2021.88846.1911](https://doi.org/10.22034/IJI.2021.88846.1911)

## Content

1. Iran J Immunol. 2021 Dec;18(4):354-365. doi: 10.22034/IJI.2021.88846.1911.

Comprehensive Analysis of the HLA Class I and the HLA Class II Alleles in 
Patients with Takayasu Arteritis: Relationship with Clinical Patterns and 
Prognosis.

Stojanovic M(1), Andric Z, Popadic D, Stankovic Stanojevic M, Miskovic R, 
Jovanovic D, Peric-Popadic A, Bolpacic J, Tomic-Spiric V, Raskovic S.

Author information:
(1)1Clinic of Allergy and Immunology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, 
Serbia, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.

BACKGROUND: Takayasu arteritis (TA) is a systemic vasculitis, affecting mainly 
the aorta and its branches.
OBJECTIVE: To analyze the HLA class I and class II alleles in patients with TA 
and explore their relationship with clinical and demographic characteristics, 
and potential significance in prognosis.
METHODS: Twenty-five, unrelated TA patients were genotyped for HLA-A, HLA-B, 
HLA-C, HLA-DRB1, and the HLA-DQB1 loci. The frequencies of the HLA-A, HLA-B, and 
the HLA-DRB1 were compared with a control group of 1992, while the HLA-C and the 
HLA-DQB1 were compared with a group of 159 healthy, unrelated individuals.
RESULTS: Among TA patients, 5/25 (20%) were identified as the HLA-B*52 carriers. 
There was a significant difference in the HLA-B*52 allele frequency in the TA 
patients (10%) compared with the healthy controls (1.2%). Moreover, presence of 
the HLA-B*52 was associated with significantly earlier disease onset, more 
severe clinical presentations, and a poorer response to treatment. The HLA-C*03 
was detected in 32% of patients and was present exclusively in those with a 
clinically mild form of the TA, indicating a putative protective effect.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that the HLA-B*52 allele contributes to a 
higher susceptibility to the TA whereas the HLA-C*03, can be a protective factor 
in the TA.

DOI: 10.22034/IJI.2021.88846.1911
PMID: 34931621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]