---
reference_id: "PMID:2498090"
title: Brain edema and increased intracranial pressure in the pathophysiology of bacterial meningitis.
authors:
- Niemöller UM
- Täuber MG
journal: Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1007/BF01963892
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain edema and increased intracranial pressure in the pathophysiology of bacterial meningitis.
**Authors:** Niemöller UM, Täuber MG
**Journal:** Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF01963892](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01963892)

## Content

1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 1989 Feb;8(2):109-17. doi:
10.1007/BF01963892.

Brain edema and increased intracranial pressure in the pathophysiology of 
bacterial meningitis.

Niemöller UM(1), Täuber MG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland.

A number of advances in our understanding of the pathophysiology of bacterial 
meningitis have been made in recent years. In vivo studies have shown that 
bacterial cell wall fragments and endotoxins are highly active components, 
independent of the presence of viable bacteria in the subarachnoid space. Their 
presence in the cerebrospinal fluid is associated with the induction of 
inflammation and with the development of brain edema and increased intracranial 
pressure. Antimicrobial therapy may cause an additional increase of harmful 
bacterial products in the cerebrospinal fluid and thereby potentiate these 
pathophysiological alterations. These changes may contribute to the development 
of brain damage during meningitis. Some promising experimental work has been 
directed toward counteracting the above phenomena with non-steroidal or 
steroidal anti-inflammatory agents as well as with monoclonal antibodies. 
Although considerable advances have been made, further research needs to be done 
in these areas to improve the prognosis of bacterial meningitis.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01963892
PMID: 2498090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]