---
reference_id: "PMID:23186907"
title: Stiff person syndrome.
authors:
- Ciccotto G
- Blaya M
- Kelley RE
journal: Neurol Clin
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2012.09.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stiff person syndrome.
**Authors:** Ciccotto G, Blaya M, Kelley RE
**Journal:** Neurol Clin (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ncl.2012.09.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ncl.2012.09.005)

## Content

1. Neurol Clin. 2013 Feb;31(1):319-328. doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2012.09.005.

Stiff person syndrome.

Ciccotto G(1), Blaya M(1), Kelley RE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tulane University School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane 
Avenue 8065, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Tulane University School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane 
Avenue 8065, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. Electronic address: 
rkelley2@tulane.edu.

Recognizing stiff person syndrome is clinically important. It is uncommon, 
characterized by body stiffness associated with painful muscle spasms, and 
varies in location and severity. It is subdivided into stiff trunk versus stiff 
limb presentation, and as a progressive encephalomyelitis. Stiff person-type 
syndrome also reflects a paraneoplastic picture. Most patients demonstrate 
exaggerated lumbar lordosis. Roughly 60% of patients have antiglutamic acid 
decarboxylase antibodies in the blood and the cerebrospinal fluid. The 
differential diagnosis includes many severe conditions. There are reports of 
response to muscle relaxants, immunosuppressants, intravenous gamma globulin, 
plasma exchange, a number of anticonvulsants, and botulinum toxin.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ncl.2012.09.005
PMID: 23186907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]