---
reference_id: "PMID:29880477"
title: Thalamocortical Connections and Executive Function in Pediatric Temporal and Frontal Lobe Epilepsy.
authors:
- Law N
- Smith ML
- Widjaja E
journal: AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A5691
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thalamocortical Connections and Executive Function in Pediatric Temporal and Frontal Lobe Epilepsy.
**Authors:** Law N, Smith ML, Widjaja E
**Journal:** AJNR Am J Neuroradiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3174/ajnr.A5691](https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A5691)

## Content

1. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2018 Aug;39(8):1523-1529. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A5691. Epub
 2018 Jun 7.

Thalamocortical Connections and Executive Function in Pediatric Temporal and 
Frontal Lobe Epilepsy.

Law N(1)(2)(3), Smith ML(1)(2)(3), Widjaja E(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Psychology (N.L., M.L.S.), University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology (N.L., M.L.S.).
(3)Program in Neurosciences and Mental Health (N.L., M.L.S.).
(4)Diagnostic Imaging (E.W.) elysa.widjaja@sickkids.ca.
(5)Division of Neurology (E.W.), Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Largely accepted in the literature is the role the 
interconnections between the thalamus and cortex play in generalized epilepsy. 
However, thalamocortical involvement is less understood in focal epilepsy in 
terms of the effect of seizures on thalamocortical circuitry in the developing 
brain and subsequent cognitive outcome. We investigated thalamocortical pathway 
microstructure in pediatric frontal lobe epilepsy and temporal lobe epilepsy and 
examined the associations between pathway microstructure and measures of 
executive function.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined thalamocortical connections in 24 children 
with frontal lobe epilepsy, 17 patients with temporal lobe epilepsy, and 25 
healthy children using DTI. We investigated several executive function measures 
in patients and controls, which were distilled into latent executive function 
components to compare among groups, and the associations between measures of 
thalamocortical microstructure and executive function.
RESULTS: We found no differences in thalamocortical pathway microstructure 
between the groups, but aspects of executive function (mental 
flexibility/inhibition/shifting) were impaired in the frontal lobe epilepsy 
group compared with controls. In patients with frontal lobe epilepsy, younger 
age at seizure onset and a greater number of antiepileptic drugs were associated 
with DTI indices indicative of damaged/less developed thalamocortical pathways. 
In patients with temporal lobe epilepsy, poorer performance on all measures of 
executive function was associated with DTI indices reflective of damaged/less 
developed pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results give insight into vulnerable neural networks in 
pediatric focal epilepsy and suggest thalamocortical pathway damage as a 
potential mechanism of executive function impairment in temporal lobe epilepsy 
but not frontal lobe epilepsy. Identifying structure-function relations can help 
inform how we measure functional and cognitive/behavioral outcomes in these 
populations.

© 2018 by American Journal of Neuroradiology.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A5691
PMCID: PMC7410529
PMID: 29880477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]