---
reference_id: "PMID:11038186"
title: "Transgenic mice expressing a mutant form of loricrin reveal the molecular basis of the skin diseases, Vohwinkel syndrome and progressive symmetric erythrokeratoderma."
authors:
- Suga Y
- Jarnik M
- Attar PS
- Longley MA
- Bundman D
- Steven AC
- Koch PJ
- Roop DR
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1083/jcb.151.2.401
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transgenic mice expressing a mutant form of loricrin reveal the molecular basis of the skin diseases, Vohwinkel syndrome and progressive symmetric erythrokeratoderma.
**Authors:** Suga Y, Jarnik M, Attar PS, Longley MA, Bundman D, Steven AC, Koch PJ, Roop DR
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.151.2.401](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.151.2.401)

## Content

1. J Cell Biol. 2000 Oct 16;151(2):401-12. doi: 10.1083/jcb.151.2.401.

Transgenic mice expressing a mutant form of loricrin reveal the molecular basis 
of the skin diseases, Vohwinkel syndrome and progressive symmetric 
erythrokeratoderma.

Suga Y(1), Jarnik M, Attar PS, Longley MA, Bundman D, Steven AC, Koch PJ, Roop 
DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Comment in
    J Cell Biol. 2000 Oct 16;151(2):F5-8. doi: 10.1083/jcb.151.2.f5.

Mutations in the cornified cell envelope protein loricrin have been reported 
recently in some patients with Vohwinkel syndrome (VS) and progressive symmetric 
erythrokeratoderma (PSEK). To establish a causative relationship between 
loricrin mutations and these diseases, we have generated transgenic mice 
expressing a COOH-terminal truncated form of loricrin that is similar to the 
protein expressed in VS and PSEK patients. At birth, transgenic mice (ML.VS) 
exhibited erythrokeratoderma with an epidermal barrier dysfunction. 4 d after 
birth, high-expressing transgenic animals showed a generalized scaling of the 
skin, as well as a constricting band encircling the tail and, by day 7, a 
thickening of the footpads. Histologically, ML. VS transgenic mice also showed 
retention of nuclei in the stratum corneum, a characteristic feature of VS and 
PSEK. Immunofluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy showed the mutant 
loricrin protein in the nucleus and cytoplasm of epidermal keratinocytes, but 
did not detect the protein in the cornified cell envelope. Transfection 
experiments indicated that the COOH-terminal domain of the mutant loricrin 
contains a nuclear localization signal. To determine whether the ML.VS phenotype 
resulted from dominant-negative interference of the transgene with endogenous 
loricrin, we mated the ML.VS transgenics with loricrin knockout mice. A severe 
phenotype was observed in mice that lacked expression of wild-type loricrin. 
Since loricrin knockout mice are largely asymptomatic (Koch, P.K., P. A. de 
Viragh, E. Scharer, D. Bundman, M.A. Longley, J. Bickenbach, Y. Kawachi, Y. 
Suga, Z. Zhou, M. Huber, et al., J. Cell Biol. 151:389-400, this issue), this 
phenotype may be attributed to expression of the mutant form of loricrin. Thus, 
deposition of the mutant protein in the nucleus appears to interfere with late 
stages of epidermal differentiation, resulting in a VS-like phenotype.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.151.2.401
PMCID: PMC2192631
PMID: 11038186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]