---
reference_id: "PMID:31393689"
title: Adenosine Deaminase 2 Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Aksentijevich I
- Sampaio Moura N
- Barron K
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenosine Deaminase 2 Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Aksentijevich I, Sampaio Moura N, Barron K

## Content

1. Adenosine Deaminase 2 Deficiency.

Aksentijevich I(1), Sampaio Moura N(1), Barron K(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2019 Aug 8.

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland
(2)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Adenosine deaminase 2 deficiency (DADA2) is a complex 
systemic autoinflammatory disorder in which vasculopathy/vasculitis, 
dysregulated immune function, and/or hematologic abnormalities may predominate. 
Inflammatory features include intermittent fevers, rash (often livedo 
racemosa/reticularis), and musculoskeletal involvement (myalgia/arthralgia, 
arthritis, myositis). Vasculitis, which usually begins before age ten years, may 
manifest as early-onset ischemic (lacunar) and/or hemorrhagic strokes, or as 
cutaneous or systemic polyarteritis nodosa. Hypertension and hepatosplenomegaly 
are often found. More severe involvement may lead to progressive central 
neurologic deficits (dysarthria, ataxia, cranial nerve palsies, cognitive 
impairment) or to ischemic injury to the kidney, intestine, and/or digits. 
Dysregulation of immune function can lead to immunodeficiency or autoimmunity of 
varying severity; lymphadenopathy may be present and some affected individuals 
have had lymphoproliferative disease. Hematologic disorders may begin early in 
life or in late adulthood, and can include lymphopenia, neutropenia, pure red 
cell aplasia, thrombocytopenia, or pancytopenia. Of note, both interfamilial and 
intrafamilial phenotypic variability (e.g., in age of onset, frequency and 
severity of manifestations) can be observed; also, individuals with biallelic 
ADA2 pathogenic variants may remain asymptomatic until adulthood or may never 
develop clinical manifestations of DADA2.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of DADA2 is established in a proband with 
suggestive clinical and laboratory findings and biallelic loss-of-function ADA2 
pathogenic variants identified by molecular testing and/or low (<5% of normal) 
or undetectable ADA2 catalytic activity in plasma or serum.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) agents 
(etanercept, adalimumab, golimumab, infliximab, certolizumab) are the drugs of 
choice for both symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals with biallelic ADA2 
pathogenic variants. They prevent and eliminate manifestations of 
autoinflammatory disease / vasculitis, reduce the risk of ischemic stroke, 
reduce inflammatory burden, and relieve immunodeficiency, hepatosplenomegaly, 
and neutropenia. Anti-TNF agents also improve growth and development in affected 
children, and red blood cell and platelet counts; however, anti-TNF agents 
appear to have little effect in rescuing severe bone marrow abnormalities. 
Surveillance: Routine monitoring of clinical and laboratory aspects of DADA2. 
Agents/Circumstances to avoid: Antiplatelet medications including aspirin; 
anticoagulants (except in the presence of atrial fibrillation); and smoking, 
which may exacerbate peripheral arterial disease. Evaluation of relatives at 
risk: It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic 
older and younger at-risk sibs of an affected individual in order to identify as 
early as possible those with biallelic ADA2 pathogenic variants who are 
currently symptomatic and would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and 
those who are currently asymptomatic and would benefit from treatment with 
anti-TNF agents to reduce the risk of stroke.
GENETIC COUNSELING: DADA2 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At 
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier (heterozygote), and a 
25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the ADA2 pathogenic 
variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for 
at-risk relatives, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 31393689