---
reference_id: "PMID:25675349"
title: Long-Term Results of Photodynamic Therapy for Choroidal Neovascularization in Pediatric Patients with Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy.
authors:
- Sodi A
- Murro V
- Caporossi O
- Passerini I
- Bacci GM
- Caputo R
- Menchini U
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3109/13816810.2015.1009121
keywords:
- Bestrophins
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- "Choroidal Neovascularization/drug therapy, etiology, physiopathology"
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Photochemotherapy
- Photosensitizing Agents/therapeutic use
- Porphyrins/therapeutic use
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Verteporfin
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Results of Photodynamic Therapy for Choroidal Neovascularization in Pediatric Patients with Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy.
**Authors:** Sodi A, Murro V, Caporossi O, Passerini I, Bacci GM, Caputo R, Menchini U
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3109/13816810.2015.1009121](https://doi.org/10.3109/13816810.2015.1009121)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2015 Jun;36(2):168-74. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2015.1009121.
Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Long-Term Results of Photodynamic Therapy for Choroidal Neovascularization in
Pediatric Patients with Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy.

Sodi A(1), Murro V, Caporossi O, Passerini I, Bacci GM, Caputo R, Menchini U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery and Translational Medicine, Eye Clinic, University of
Florence , Italy .

PURPOSE: To report long-term results of photodynamic therapy (PDT) in young
patients affected by Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (VMD) complicated by
choroidal neovascularization (CNV).
METHODS: We evaluated a group of 30 VMD patients with confirmed mutations in the
BEST1 gene. Five of these patients had been diagnosed with CNV when younger than
15 years of age and three of them were treated by PDT. After the treatment they
were followed for an average period of 77 months (range 62-99).
RESULTS: In all the treated eyes visual acuity was stable during the first year
of follow-up and then slowly improved even some years after the treatment. The
improvement in visual acuity was associated with the development of fibrous
tissue in the macula.
CONCLUSIONS: PDT was a safe procedure in our series of pediatric patients with
VMD complicated by CNV. It was followed by a CNV regression and a consequent
improvement in visual acuity which continued to progress even several years
after the treatment.

DOI: 10.3109/13816810.2015.1009121
PMID: 25675349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
