---
reference_id: "PMID:29416601"
title: Genetic identification and molecular modeling characterization reveal a novel PROM1 mutation in Stargardt4-like macular dystrophy.
authors:
- Imani S
- Cheng J
- Shasaltaneh MD
- Wei C
- Yang L
- Fu S
- Zou H
- Khan MA
- Zhang X
- Chen H
- Zhang D
- Duan C
- Lv H
- Li Y
- Chen R
- Fu J
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2018'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.22343
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic identification and molecular modeling characterization reveal a novel PROM1 mutation in Stargardt4-like macular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Imani S, Cheng J, Shasaltaneh MD, Wei C, Yang L, Fu S, Zou H, Khan MA, Zhang X, Chen H, Zhang D, Duan C, Lv H, Li Y, Chen R, Fu J
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2018)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.22343](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.22343)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2017 Nov 9;9(1):122-141. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.22343.
eCollection  2018 Jan 2.

Genetic identification and molecular modeling characterization reveal a novel 
PROM1 mutation in Stargardt4-like macular dystrophy.

Imani S(1)(2)(3), Cheng J(2), Shasaltaneh MD(4)(5), Wei C(2)(6), Yang L(2), Fu 
S(7)(8), Zou H(1)(2), Khan MA(2), Zhang X(2), Chen H(9), Zhang D(10), Duan 
C(11), Lv H(11), Li Y(8), Chen R(8), Fu J(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Hunan Normal University Medical College, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Epigenetics and Oncology, Research Center for Preclinical 
Medicine, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan, China.
(3)Chemical Injuries Research Center, Baqiyatallah Medical Sciences University, 
Tehran, Iran.
(4)Laboratory of Neuro-organic Chemistry, Institute of Biochemistry and 
Biophysics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Laboratory of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry 
and Biophysics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Macau 
University of Science and Technology, Macau, China.
(7)The Honors College, University of Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(8)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(9)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences & the State Key 
Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 
China.
(10)Department of Bio-Medical Sciences, Philadelphia College of Osteopathic 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, First Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical 
University, Luzhou, Sichuan, China.

Stargardt disease-4 (STGD4) is an autosomal dominant complex, genetically 
heterogeneous macular degeneration/dystrophy (MD) disorder. In this paper, we 
used targeted next generation sequencing and multiple molecular dynamics 
analyses to identify and characterize a disease-causing genetic variant in four 
generations of a Chinese family with STGD4-like MD. We found a novel 
heterozygous missense mutation, c.734T>C (p.L245P) in the PROM1 gene. 
Structurally, this mutation most likely impairs PROM1 protein stability, 
flexibility, and amino acid interaction network after changing the amino acid 
residue Leucine into Proline in the basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper 
domain. Molecular dynamic simulation and principal component analysis provide 
compelling evidence that this PROM1 mutation contributes to disease 
causativeness or susceptibility variants in patients with STGD4-like MD. Thus, 
this finding defines new approaches in genetic characterization, accurate 
diagnosis, and prevention of STGD4-like MD.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.22343
PMCID: PMC5787432
PMID: 29416601

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.