---
reference_id: "PMID:24905063"
title: "Bone mineral density in young women with primary ovarian insufficiency: results of a three-year randomized controlled trial of physiological transdermal estradiol and testosterone replacement."
authors:
- Popat VB
- Calis KA
- Kalantaridou SN
- Vanderhoof VH
- Koziol D
- Troendle JF
- Reynolds JC
- Nelson LM
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4145
keywords:
- "46, XX Disorders of Sex Development/drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Absorptiometry, Photon"
- "Administration, Cutaneous"
- Adult
- Bone Density/drug effects
- "Contraceptive Agents, Female/administration & dosage"
- Double-Blind Method
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- "Estradiol/administration & dosage, blood"
- Female
- "Femur Neck/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- Hormone Replacement Therapy/methods
- Humans
- "Medroxyprogesterone Acetate/administration & dosage"
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Prospective Studies
- "Testosterone/administration & dosage, blood"
- Therapeutics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone mineral density in young women with primary ovarian insufficiency: results of a three-year randomized controlled trial of physiological transdermal estradiol and testosterone replacement.
**Authors:** Popat VB, Calis KA, Kalantaridou SN, Vanderhoof VH, Koziol D, Troendle JF, Reynolds JC, Nelson LM
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2013-4145](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2013-4145)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Sep;99(9):3418-26. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4145.
Epub  2014 Jun 6.

Bone mineral density in young women with primary ovarian insufficiency: results
of a three-year randomized controlled trial of physiological transdermal
estradiol and testosterone replacement.

Popat VB(1), Calis KA, Kalantaridou SN, Vanderhoof VH, Koziol D, Troendle JF,
Reynolds JC, Nelson LM.

Author information:
(1)Intramural Research Program in Reproductive and Adult Endocrinology (V.B.P.,
S.N.K., V.H.V., L.M.N.) and Program in Developmental Endocrinology and Genetics
(K.A.C.), Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, and Biostatistics and Clinical Epidemiology Service (D.K.) and
Division of Nuclear Medicine (J.C.R.), Warren G. Magnuson Clinical Center,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892; and Office of Biostatistics Research (J.F.T.),
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart Lung and Blood Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

CONTEXT: Women with primary ovarian insufficiency have significantly lower serum
estradiol and T levels compared with regularly menstruating women. They also
have significantly reduced bone mineral density (BMD).
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to evaluate the efficacy of hormone
replacement in maintaining BMD in these young women.
DESIGN AND SETTING: This was a randomized, double-blind, single-center,
placebo-controlled clinical trial at the National Institutes of Health clinical
center (Bethesda, Maryland).
PARTICIPANTS: Young women with primary ovarian insufficiency participated in the
study.
INTERVENTIONS: We compared the effect of estradiol and progestin replacement (n
= 72) vs estradiol, progestin, and T replacement (n = 73) on BMD. We also
compared findings with a contemporaneous control group of normal women (n = 70).
All patients received transdermal estradiol (100 μg/d) plus oral
medroxyprogesterone acetate 10 mg/d (12 d/mo) for a 3-month run-in period before
being randomized in a double-blinded fashion to the addition of transdermal T
(150 μg/d) or placebo.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Change in BMD at the femoral neck was measured by
dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry.
RESULTS: At screening, patients had significantly lower femoral neck BMD
compared with control women (0.77 vs 0.81 g/cm(2), P = .001) and did not differ
in body mass index, age at menarche, or education level. Normal control women
lost femoral neck BMD over the study period, whereas patients on estradiol and
progestin therapy gained BMD; and at the end of the study period, femoral neck
BMD of patients on estradiol and progestin therapy did not differ from that of
control women (0.80 g/cm(2) in both groups, P = .9). The addition of T showed no
further benefit (percentage change in BMD 3.9 vs 2.4, respectively, P = .9).
Nonetheless, using a repeated-measures model, the T group achieved a mean BMD in
the femoral neck 0.015 g/cm(2) higher than the placebo group at 3 years (95%
confidence interval -0.005 to 0.034, P = .13). Similar findings were observed in
the lumbar spine BMD as well.
CONCLUSION: Long-term physiological transdermal estradiol replacement in
combination with oral medroxyprogesterone acetate restores mean femoral neck BMD
to normal in young women with spontaneous 46,XX primary ovarian insufficiency.
However, the addition of physiological transdermal T replacement did not provide
additional benefit.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2013-4145
PMCID: PMC4154086
PMID: 24905063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
