---
reference_id: "PMID:23993245"
title: Chronobiology in aortic diseases - "is this really a random phenomenon?".
authors:
- Manfredini R
- Fabbian F
- Manfredini F
- Salmi R
- Gallerani M
- Bossone E
journal: Prog Cardiovasc Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2013.04.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronobiology in aortic diseases - "is this really a random phenomenon?".
**Authors:** Manfredini R, Fabbian F, Manfredini F, Salmi R, Gallerani M, Bossone E
**Journal:** Prog Cardiovasc Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pcad.2013.04.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcad.2013.04.001)

## Content

1. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2013 Jul-Aug;56(1):116-24. doi:
10.1016/j.pcad.2013.04.001.  Epub 2013 May 23.

Chronobiology in aortic diseases - "is this really a random phenomenon?".

Manfredini R(1), Fabbian F, Manfredini F, Salmi R, Gallerani M, Bossone E.

Author information:
(1)Clinica Medica, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Italy. 
roberto.manfredini@unife.it

Although acute aortic rupture or dissection is relatively uncommon, it ranks in 
third position among necropsy-confirmed causes of out-of-hospital sudden death 
in the general population. Similar to other acute cardiovascular events (e.g., 
acute myocardial infarction, sudden death, stroke, and pulmonary embolism) there 
is a growing body of evidence regarding temporal patterns in onset, 
characterized by circadian, seasonal and weekly variations for aortic aneurysms. 
On one hand, it is possible that these cardiovascular diseases share common 
underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms, e.g., increase in blood pressure, heart 
rate, sympathetic activity, basal vascular tone, vasoconstrictive hormones, and 
prothrombotic tendency. On the other hand, the possibility exists that the 
connecting link is an internal disruption (dyssynchrony) of some molecular 
mechanisms intrinsic to the peripheral biological clock (that of cardiomyocyte 
is the most widely investigated). Such disruption may contribute to 
cardiovascular disease and biological rhythms - an intriguing hypothesis for 
future research.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcad.2013.04.001
PMID: 23993245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]