---
reference_id: "PMID:37263386"
title: "Prevalence and characteristics of paediatric X-linked hypophosphataemia in Australia and New Zealand: Results from the Australian and the New Zealand Paediatric Surveillance Units survey."
authors:
- Sandy JL
- Nunez C
- Wheeler BJ
- Jefferies C
- Morris A
- Siafarikas A
- Rodda CP
- Simm P
- Biggin A
- Aum S
- Elliot EJ
- Munns CF
journal: Bone
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2023.116791
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Australia/epidemiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/epidemiology, drug therapy"
- New Zealand/epidemiology
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and characteristics of paediatric X-linked hypophosphataemia in Australia and New Zealand: Results from the Australian and the New Zealand Paediatric Surveillance Units survey.
**Authors:** Sandy JL, Nunez C, Wheeler BJ, Jefferies C, Morris A, Siafarikas A, Rodda CP, Simm P, Biggin A, Aum S, Elliot EJ, Munns CF
**Journal:** Bone (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2023.116791](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2023.116791)

## Content

1. Bone. 2023 Aug;173:116791. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2023.116791. Epub 2023 May 30.

Prevalence and characteristics of paediatric X-linked hypophosphataemia in 
Australia and New Zealand: Results from the Australian and the New Zealand 
Paediatric Surveillance Units survey.

Sandy JL(1), Nunez C(2), Wheeler BJ(3), Jefferies C(4), Morris A(2), Siafarikas 
A(5), Rodda CP(6), Simm P(7), Biggin A(8), Aum S(3), Elliot EJ(2), Munns CF(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Endocrinology and Diabetes, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, 
Australia; Paediatrics & Child Health, School of Clinical Medicine, University 
of New South Wales, Australia. Electronic address: JessSandy@gmail.com.
(2)Australian Paediatric Surveillance Unit, Australia; Discipline of Child and 
Adolescent Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Department of Women's and Children's Health, University of Otago, New 
Zealand.
(4)Te Whatu Ora, Starship Children's Health, Auckland, New Zealand.
(5)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Perth Children's Hospital, Western 
Australia, Australia; Division of Paediatrics, Medical School and Telethon Kids 
Institute, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia; 
Institute for Health Research, University of Notre Dame, Fremantle, Western 
Australia, Australia.
(6)Australian Institute for Musculoskeletal Research, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia; Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Royal Children's Hospital, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; Centre for Hormone Research, Murdoch Children's 
Research Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(8)Discipline of Child and Adolescent Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, New 
South Wales, Australia.
(9)Child Health Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Queensland, Australia; Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Queensland 
Children's Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: X-linked hypophosphataemia (XLH) is the most common heritable form 
of rickets. Prevalence data varies across the literature between 1 in 20,000 and 
1 in 200,000 per population.
METHODS: Australian and New Zealand Paediatric Surveillance Units collected 
cross-sectional data from paediatricians on existing cases to estimate 
prevalence and characteristics of paediatric XLH in Australia and New Zealand.
RESULTS: Seventy-five cases in Australia and 18 cases in New Zealand were 
identified. Estimated minimum prevalence based on these cases was 1.33 
(1.04-1.66) per 100,000 and 1.60 per 100,000 (95%CI 0.97-2.58) in Australia and 
New Zealand respectively, with actual prevalence likely higher due to incomplete 
ascertainment. Despite a family history in most cases, delayed diagnosis was 
common, with 49 % diagnosed after 2 years of age. Delayed diagnosis was more 
common in sporadic versus familial cases. Most common clinical characteristics 
included leg bowing (89 %), bone and joint pain (68 %), abnormal gait (57 %) and 
short stature (49 %). There was a significant burden of orthopaedic disease and 
surgeries and a high rate of complications of nephrocalcinosis and 
hyperparathyroidism (32 % and 20 % respectively). Additionally, while guidelines 
stress the importance of multidisciplinary care, many did not have access to 
recommended health professionals, with only 3 % seeing a psychologist and 68 % 
seeing a dentist. This is despite the high psychological burden of XLH and a 
significant proportion (41 %) of this cohort having dental issues (tooth 
abscess, dental capping, tooth extraction). There were two cases from NZ without 
data available. Of the 91 cases with data collected, 46 % were on burosumab 
therapy. Consistent with clinical trials, those on burosumab had a higher serum 
phosphate levels (p < 0.001) at most recent follow-up. Three cases reported 
cancellation of orthopaedic surgery due to improvement in lower limb deformity 
after commencement of burosumab.
CONCLUSION: These data describe the multisystem burden of disease for children 
with XLH with care impacted by delayed diagnosis and a lack of access to many 
health professionals, especially psychological support.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2023.116791
PMID: 37263386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest This study was 
financially supported by Kyowa Kirin. Australia and New Zealand Society of 
Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes (ANZSPED) XLH Writing Group (JS, CM, AB, 
AS, PS, CR) participate in research funded by Kyowa Kirin. PS, AB, AS and CM 
have been on advisory boards and accepted speaker fees from Kyowa Kirin.