---
reference_id: "PMID:19707272"
title: Profile of mecasermin for the long-term treatment of growth failure in children and adolescents with severe primary IGF-1 deficiency.
authors:
- Fintini D
- Brufani C
- Cappa M
journal: Ther Clin Risk Manag
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2147/tcrm.s6178
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Profile of mecasermin for the long-term treatment of growth failure in children and adolescents with severe primary IGF-1 deficiency.
**Authors:** Fintini D, Brufani C, Cappa M
**Journal:** Ther Clin Risk Manag (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2147/tcrm.s6178](https://doi.org/10.2147/tcrm.s6178)

## Content

1. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2009 Jun;5(3):553-9. doi: 10.2147/tcrm.s6178. Epub 2009 
Aug 3.

Profile of mecasermin for the long-term treatment of growth failure in children 
and adolescents with severe primary IGF-1 deficiency.

Fintini D(1), Brufani C, Cappa M.

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Unit, "Bambino Gesù" Children's Hospital-IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

Growth hormone insensitivity syndrome (GHI) or insulin-like growth factor-1 
(IGF-1) deficiency (IGFD) is characterized by deficit of IGF-1 production due to 
alteration of response of growth hormone (GH) receptor to GH. This syndrome is 
due to mutation of GH receptor or IGF-1 gene and patients affected showed no 
response to GH therapy. The only treatment is recombinant IGF-1 (mecasermin), 
which has been available since 1986, but approved in the United States by the US 
Food and Drug Administration only in 2005 and in Europe by the European 
Medicines Agency in 2007. To date, few studies are available on long-term 
treatment with mecasermin in IGFD patients and some of them have a very small 
number of subjects. In this review we discuss briefly clinical features of 
severe primary IGFD, laboratory findings, and indications for treatment. Results 
of long-term therapy with rhIGF1 (mecasermin) in patients affected by severe 
primary IGFD and possible side effects are explained.

DOI: 10.2147/tcrm.s6178
PMCID: PMC2724186
PMID: 19707272