---
reference_id: "PMID:32634216"
title: STAG3 homozygous missense variant causes primary ovarian insufficiency and male non-obstructive azoospermia.
authors:
- Jaillard S
- McElreavy K
- Robevska G
- Akloul L
- Ghieh F
- Sreenivasan R
- Beaumont M
- Bashamboo A
- Bignon-Topalovic J
- Neyroud AS
- Bell K
- Veron-Gastard E
- Launay E
- van den Bergen J
- Nouyou B
- Vialard F
- Belaud-Rotureau MA
- Ayers KL
- Odent S
- Ravel C
- Tucker EJ
- Sinclair AH
journal: Mol Hum Reprod
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/molehr/gaaa050
keywords:
- Adult
- Azoospermia/genetics
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- Consanguinity
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infertility, Female/genetics"
- "Infertility, Male/genetics"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/genetics
- Siblings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# STAG3 homozygous missense variant causes primary ovarian insufficiency and male non-obstructive azoospermia.
**Authors:** Jaillard S, McElreavy K, Robevska G, Akloul L, Ghieh F, Sreenivasan R, Beaumont M, Bashamboo A, Bignon-Topalovic J, Neyroud AS, Bell K, Veron-Gastard E, Launay E, van den Bergen J, Nouyou B, Vialard F, Belaud-Rotureau MA, Ayers KL, Odent S, Ravel C, Tucker EJ, Sinclair AH
**Journal:** Mol Hum Reprod (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/molehr/gaaa050](https://doi.org/10.1093/molehr/gaaa050)

## Content

1. Mol Hum Reprod. 2020 Sep 1;26(9):665-677. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gaaa050.

STAG3 homozygous missense variant causes primary ovarian insufficiency and male 
non-obstructive azoospermia.

Jaillard S(1)(2)(3), McElreavy K(4), Robevska G(1), Akloul L(5), Ghieh F(6), 
Sreenivasan R(1), Beaumont M(3), Bashamboo A(4), Bignon-Topalovic J(4), Neyroud 
AS(7), Bell K(1)(8), Veron-Gastard E(7), Launay E(3), van den Bergen J(1), 
Nouyou B(3), Vialard F(6)(9), Belaud-Rotureau MA(2)(3)(7), Ayers KL(1)(10), 
Odent S(5), Ravel C(2)(7), Tucker EJ(1)(10), Sinclair AH(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Development, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal 
Children's Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 3052.
(2)Univ Rennes, CHU Rennes, INSERM, EHESP, IRSET (Institut de recherche en 
santé, environnement et travail) - UMR_S 1085, F-35000 Rennes, France.
(3)CHU Rennes, Service de Cytogénétique et Biologie Cellulaire, F-35033 Rennes, 
France.
(4)Institut Pasteur, CNRS - UMR_3738, Paris, France.
(5)CHU Rennes, Service de Génétique Clinique, CLAD Ouest, F-35033 Rennes, 
France.
(6)Université Paris-Saclay, UVSQ-INRA-ENVA, UMR-BREED, Montigny le Bretonneux 
78180, France.
(7)CHU Rennes, Service de Biologie de la Reproduction-CECOS, F-35033 Rennes, 
France.
(8)Bioinformatics, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's 
Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 3052.
(9)Fédération de Génétique, Laboratoire de Biologie Médicale, CHI de Poissy-St 
Germain en Laye, Poissy 78300, France.
(10)The Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia 3052.

Infertility, a global problem affecting up to 15% of couples, can have varied 
causes ranging from natural ageing to the pathological development or function 
of the reproductive organs. One form of female infertility is premature ovarian 
insufficiency (POI), affecting up to 1 in 100 women and characterised by 
amenorrhoea and elevated FSH before the age of 40. POI can have a genetic basis, 
with over 50 causative genes identified. Non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA), a 
form of male infertility characterised by the absence of sperm in semen, has an 
incidence of 1% and is similarly heterogeneous. The genetic basis of male and 
female infertility is poorly understood with the majority of cases having no 
known cause. Here, we study a case of familial infertility including a proband 
with POI and her brother with NOA. We performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) and 
identified a homozygous STAG3 missense variant that segregated with infertility. 
STAG3 encodes a component of the meiosis cohesin complex required for sister 
chromatid separation. We report the first pathogenic homozygous missense variant 
in STAG3 and the first STAG3 variant associated with both male and female 
infertility. We also demonstrate limitations of WES for the analysis of 
homologous DNA sequences, with this variant being ambiguous or missed by 
independent WES protocols and its homozygosity only being established via 
long-range nested PCR.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molehr/gaaa050
PMID: 32634216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]