---
reference_id: "PMID:28727885"
title: "Sustained Activation of the Unfolded Protein Response Induces Cell Death in Fuchs' Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy."
authors:
- Okumura N
- Kitahara M
- Okuda H
- Hashimoto K
- Ueda E
- Nakahara M
- Kinoshita S
- Young RD
- Quantock AJ
- Tourtas T
- Schlötzer-Schrehardt U
- Kruse F
- Koizumi N
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.16-21023
keywords:
- Agrin/metabolism
- Apoptosis
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Collagen Type I/metabolism
- "Descemet Membrane/metabolism, pathology"
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism, pathology"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Chaperone BiP
- "Endothelium, Corneal/metabolism"
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Fibronectins/metabolism
- "Fuchs' Endothelial Dystrophy/metabolism, pathology"
- Heat-Shock Proteins/metabolism
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Membrane Potential, Mitochondrial/physiology"
- Middle Aged
- Oxidative Stress
- "Protein Aggregation, Pathological/metabolism, pathology"
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Unfolded Protein Response/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sustained Activation of the Unfolded Protein Response Induces Cell Death in Fuchs' Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy.
**Authors:** Okumura N, Kitahara M, Okuda H, Hashimoto K, Ueda E, Nakahara M, Kinoshita S, Young RD, Quantock AJ, Tourtas T, Schlötzer-Schrehardt U, Kruse F, Koizumi N
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.16-21023](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.16-21023)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2017 Jul 1;58(9):3697-3707. doi:
10.1167/iovs.16-21023.

Sustained Activation of the Unfolded Protein Response Induces Cell Death in
Fuchs' Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy.

Okumura N(1), Kitahara M(1), Okuda H(1), Hashimoto K(1), Ueda E(1), Nakahara
M(1), Kinoshita S(2), Young RD(3), Quantock AJ(3), Tourtas T(4),
Schlötzer-Schrehardt U(4), Kruse F(4), Koizumi N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Life and Medical Sciences,
Doshisha University, Kyotanabe, Japan.
(2)Department of Frontier Medical Science and Technology for Ophthalmology,
Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Structural Biophysics Group, School of Optometry and Vision Sciences, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen,
Germany.

PURPOSE: The unfolded protein response (UPR) is believed to play a role in the
pathogenesis of Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD). The purpose of this
study was to investigate whether unfolded proteins accumulate in the corneal
endothelium in FECD and if they are involved in triggering cell death.
METHODS: Descemet's membranes with corneal endothelial cells (CECs) were
obtained during keratoplasty, and expression of aggresomes, type 1 collagen,
fibronectin, and agrin was evaluated. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress of
immortalized human CECs from non-FECD subjects and from FECD patients (iHCEC and
iFECD, respectively) were evaluated. The effect of MG132-mediated aggresome
formation on the UPR and intrinsic pathway and the effect of mitochondrial
damage on UPR were also examined. The effect of CHOP knockdown on the ER
stress-mediated intrinsic pathway was also evaluated.
RESULTS: Aggresome formation was higher in iFECD than in iHCEC and was
colocalized with type 1 collagen, fibronectin, and agrin. GRP78, phosphorylated
IRE1, PERK, and CHOP showed higher activation in iFECD than in iHCEC.
MG132-mediated aggresome formation upregulated ER stress sensors, the
mitochondrial membrane potential drop, cytochrome c release to the cytoplasm,
and activation of caspase-9 and -3. By contrast, staurosporine-mediated
mitochondrial damage did not induce ER stress. Knockdown of CHOP attenuated the
ER stress-induced cleavage of caspase-9, which is caused by intrinsic pathway
activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Excessive synthesis of extracellular matrix proteins induced
unfolded protein accumulation in FECD. Prolonged ER stress-mediated cell death,
occurring via the intrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway, therefore might be
associated with the pathogenesis of FECD.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.16-21023
PMID: 28727885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
