---
reference_id: "PMID:39321764"
title: Developmental Defects of Enamel.
authors:
- Martins DDS
- Ionta FQ
- Pompermaier Garlet G
- Lima RR
- Neves AA
- Rios D
- Lussi A
journal: Monogr Oral Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000538850
keywords:
- Humans
- "Amelogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- "Dental Enamel Hypoplasia/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Fluorosis, Dental/etiology, pathology"
- Amelogenesis/genetics
- "Dental Enamel/abnormalities, pathology"
- Developmental Defects of Enamel
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developmental Defects of Enamel.
**Authors:** Martins DDS, Ionta FQ, Pompermaier Garlet G, Lima RR, Neves AA, Rios D, Lussi A
**Journal:** Monogr Oral Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000538850](https://doi.org/10.1159/000538850)

## Content

1. Monogr Oral Sci. 2024;32:10-34. doi: 10.1159/000538850. Epub 2024 Jul 1.

Developmental Defects of Enamel.

Martins DDS(1), Ionta FQ(1)(2), Pompermaier Garlet G(3), Lima RR(4), Neves 
AA(5), Rios D(1), Lussi A(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Orthodontics and Public Health, Bauru 
School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil.
(2)Department of Dentistry, University of Marília, Marília, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Bauru School of Dentistry, University of 
São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Functional and Structural Biology, Institute of Biological 
Sciences, Federal University of Pará, Belém, Brazil.
(5)Department of Paediatric Dentistry and Orthodontics, School of Dentistry, 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(6)University Hospital for Conservative Dentistry and Periodontology, Medical 
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(7)School of Dental Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

Amelogenesis, the intricate process governing enamel formation, is susceptible 
to a range of genetic, systemic, and environmental influences, resulting in 
distinct developmental defects of enamel (DDE), such as molar incisor 
hypomineralisation (MIH), enamel hypoplasia, dental fluorosis, and amelogenesis 
imperfecta (AI). This chapter aims to provide a comprehensive overview of 
amelogenesis and DDE, establishing correlations between histopathological 
findings and clinical manifestations. MIH, a qualitative enamel defect, occurs 
during the mineralisation and maturation phases, affecting first permanent 
molars and eventually incisors. Diagnostic challenges in MIH arise from the 
disorder's unique features, including variable tooth involvement and severity, 
influenced by a complex interplay of genetic, systemic, and environmental 
factors. Enamel hypoplasia, a quantitative defect, manifests in any tooth during 
enamel matrix secretion. Etiological factors include local, systemic, 
environmental, and genetic influences, with variable enamel matrix abnormalities 
depending on the stage of amelogenesis when aggression occurred. Dental 
fluorosis, a toxicological concern from chronic and excessive fluoride exposure, 
affects ameloblasts and compromises crystal growth of the homologous teeth 
during enamel development. Lastly, AI, an inherited condition, encompasses 
diverse phenotypes in enamel development. AI phenotypes, whether hypoplastic or 
hypomineralised, entail mutations in genes, such as AMELX, ENAM, MMP20, KLK4, 
WDR72, FAM83H, C4ORF26, amelotin, GPR68, and ACPT. Diagnosing AI involves 
considering family history and clinical observation. In conclusion, navigating 
the intricacies of amelogenesis, from MIH to AI, underscores the critical 
importance of accurate diagnosis for proper clinical management of DDE.

© 2024 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000538850
PMID: 39321764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]