---
reference_id: "PMID:32086340"
title: "Problem solving in clinical practice: the sick infant with low sodium and high potassium."
authors:
- Tse Y
- Singhal N
- McDonald L
- Gopal M
- Lall A
- Johnstone H
- Cheetham T
journal: Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2019-317756
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Problem solving in clinical practice: the sick infant with low sodium and high potassium.
**Authors:** Tse Y, Singhal N, McDonald L, Gopal M, Lall A, Johnstone H, Cheetham T
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1136/archdischild-2019-317756](https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2019-317756)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2021 Feb;106(1):23-27. doi: 
10.1136/archdischild-2019-317756. Epub 2020 Feb 21.

Problem solving in clinical practice: the sick infant with low sodium and high 
potassium.

Tse Y(1)(2), Singhal N(3), McDonald L(4), Gopal M(5), Lall A(5), Johnstone H(6), 
Cheetham T(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Great North Children's Hospital, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK yincenttse@nhs.net.
(2)Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(3)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Great North Children's Hospital, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(4)Department of Radiology, Great North Children's Hospital, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, UK.
(5)Department of Paediatric Urology, Great North Children's Hospital, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, UK.
(6)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Great North Childrens Hospital, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(7)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University c/o 
Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Great North Children's Hospital, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Many paediatricians will be faced with a sick infant who on investigation is 
found to have hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia at some time in their career. The 
focus of initial management includes the treatment of potentially 
life-threatening hyperkalaemia with concurrent investigation aiming to elucidate 
whether the underlying cause reflects a primarily renal or endocrine pathology. 
We describe the presentation of two infants who each presented with one of the 
more common underlying diagnoses that led to this biochemical disturbance and 
discuss the approach to immediate treatment, diagnostic work-up and longer term 
management.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2019-317756
PMID: 32086340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.