---
reference_id: "PMID:15554949"
title: "The contribution of classical risk factors to cardiovascular disease in familial hypercholesterolaemia: data in 2400 patients."
authors:
- Jansen AC
- van Aalst-Cohen ES
- Tanck MW
- Trip MD
- Lansberg PJ
- Liem AH
- van Lennep HW
- Sijbrands EJ
- Kastelein JJ
journal: J Intern Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2004.01405.x
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/etiology, genetics, mortality"
- "Cholesterol, HDL/blood"
- "Diabetic Angiopathies/etiology, genetics, mortality"
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II/blood, complications, genetics"
- Hypertension/complications
- Lipoprotein(a)/blood
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Sex Factors
- Smoking/adverse effects
- Survival Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The contribution of classical risk factors to cardiovascular disease in familial hypercholesterolaemia: data in 2400 patients.
**Authors:** Jansen AC, van Aalst-Cohen ES, Tanck MW, Trip MD, Lansberg PJ, Liem AH, van Lennep HW, Sijbrands EJ, Kastelein JJ
**Journal:** J Intern Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2796.2004.01405.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2004.01405.x)

## Content

1. J Intern Med. 2004 Dec;256(6):482-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2004.01405.x.

The contribution of classical risk factors to cardiovascular disease in familial 
hypercholesterolaemia: data in 2400 patients.

Jansen AC(1), van Aalst-Cohen ES, Tanck MW, Trip MD, Lansberg PJ, Liem AH, van 
Lennep HW, Sijbrands EJ, Kastelein JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Centre, University of 
Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the contribution of classical risk factors to the 
development of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in patients with heterozygous 
familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH).
DESIGN: A retrospective, multi-centre, cohort study. Extensive data were 
collected by scrutinizing medical records and the use of questionnaires. 
Multivariate Cox regression was used to study the relationship between potential 
risk factors and the occurrence of CVD.
SETTING AND SUBJECTS: We included 2400 FH patients from 27 Dutch lipid clinics. 
The diagnosis of FH was based upon the presence of a low-density lipoprotein 
receptor mutation or upon strict clinical criteria.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Cardiovascular mortality and CVD.
RESULTS: During 112.943 person-years, 782 (32.6%) patients had had at least one 
cardiovascular event. Male gender (RR 2.82, 95% CI 2.37-3.36), smoking (RR 1.67, 
95% CI 1.40-1.99), hypertension (RR 1.36, 95% CI 1.06-1.75), diabetes mellitus 
(RR 2.19, 95% CI 1.36-3.54), low HDL-C (RR 1.37, 95% CI 1.15-1.63) and elevated 
lipoprotein(a) levels (RR 1.50, 95% CI 1.20-1.79) proved to be independent CVD 
risk factors. These six risk factors explained 18.7% of the variation in the 
occurrence of CVD.
CONCLUSIONS: Male gender, smoking, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, HDL 
cholesterol and lipoprotein(a) levels proved to be important risk factors for 
CVD in FH patients. In addition to the routine institution of statin therapy, 
controlling these factors needs special attention in the management of this 
disorder.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2004.01405.x
PMID: 15554949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]