---
reference_id: "PMID:2095178"
title: "Fibroblast-keratinocyte interactions in psoriasis: failure of psoriatic fibroblasts to stimulate keratinocyte proliferation in vitro."
authors:
- Priestley GC
- Lord R
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.1990.tb01451.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibroblast-keratinocyte interactions in psoriasis: failure of psoriatic fibroblasts to stimulate keratinocyte proliferation in vitro.
**Authors:** Priestley GC, Lord R
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.1990.tb01451.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.1990.tb01451.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 1990 Oct;123(4):467-72. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2133.1990.tb01451.x.

Fibroblast-keratinocyte interactions in psoriasis: failure of psoriatic 
fibroblasts to stimulate keratinocyte proliferation in vitro.

Priestley GC(1), Lord R.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Dermatology, Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, U.K.

We have tested in two ways the hypothesis that dermal fibroblasts direct the 
hyperproliferation of the overlying epidermis in psoriasis. First, culture 
medium from psoriatic and from normal skin fibroblasts was added to monolayer 
cultures of foreskin keratinocytes. Second, psoriatic and normal fibroblasts 
embedded in hydrated collagen lattices were co-cultured with monolayers of 
foreskin keratinocytes. There was no evidence in either study that psoriatic 
fibroblast products could stimulate the proliferation of the keratinocytes, or 
that normal fibroblast products inhibited their proliferation. A positive 
control for the fibroblasts was provided by leucocyte supernatants, which 
stimulated keratinocyte proliferation by up to 65%. Our data do not support a 
primary role for dermal fibroblasts in psoriasis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.1990.tb01451.x
PMID: 2095178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]