---
reference_id: "PMID:22463839"
title: Effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and/or beta blockers on the cardiomyopathy in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Viollet L
- Thrush PT
- Flanigan KM
- Mendell JR
- Allen HD
journal: Am J Cardiol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.02.064
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and/or beta blockers on the cardiomyopathy in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Viollet L, Thrush PT, Flanigan KM, Mendell JR, Allen HD
**Journal:** Am J Cardiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.02.064](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.02.064)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiol. 2012 Jul 1;110(1):98-102. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.02.064.
Epub  2012 Mar 29.

Effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and/or beta blockers on the 
cardiomyopathy in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

Viollet L(1), Thrush PT, Flanigan KM, Mendell JR, Allen HD.

Author information:
(1)Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.

Cardiomyopathy is a consequence of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). Suggested 
treatments include angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and/or β 
blockers (BBs), but few large series have been reported. We present 42 patients 
with DMD and cardiomyopathy treated with an ACE inhibitor or an ACE inhibitor 
plus a BB. Serial echocardiograms were recorded. Adequate ejection fractions 
(EFs) were obtained at initiation of therapy (EF <55%). ACE inhibitor dosage 
adjustments were made if a continued decrease in EF was noted. BB therapy was 
initiated when average heart rate on Holter monitoring exceeded 100 beats/min. 
Data were analyzed using paired t test and linear regression. Before ACE 
inhibition, patients (n = 22) demonstrated decreased EF over time (r(2) = 0.23). 
At ACE inhibitor therapy initiation, mean age was 14.1 ± 4.6 years and mean EF 
was 44.2 ± 6.8%. BB therapy was used in 24 of 42 patients. Mean age for the ACE 
inhibitor + BB group was 15.7 ± 3.9 years. The 2 groups showed significant 
improvement (p <0.0001 for ACE inhibitor and ACE inhibitor plus BB) compared to 
the pretherapy group. No significant differences were noted between treatment 
groups. Patients with DMD demonstrated a gradual decrease in myocardial 
function. Treatment with ACE inhibitor or ACE inhibitor plus BB resulted in 
significant improvement compared to pretherapy. No significant difference 
occurred in EF improvement between treatment groups. In conclusion, treatment 
with ACE inhibitor or ACE inhibitor plus BB can delay progression of 
cardiomyopathy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.02.064
PMID: 22463839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]