---
reference_id: "PMID:2203596"
title: Antinuclear antibody profiles in relation to specific disease manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Swaak AJ
- Huysen V
- Nossent JC
- Smeenk RJ
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1007/BF02205555
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antinuclear antibody profiles in relation to specific disease manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Swaak AJ, Huysen V, Nossent JC, Smeenk RJ
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02205555](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02205555)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 1990 Mar;9(1 Suppl 1):82-94. doi: 10.1007/BF02205555.

Antinuclear antibody profiles in relation to specific disease manifestations of 
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Swaak AJ(1), Huysen V, Nossent JC, Smeenk RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Dr Daniel den Hoed Clinic, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

The aim of the study was to investigate the prevalence of antinuclear and 
associated antibodies (anti-dsDNA, anticardiolipin, anti-RNP, anti-Sm, anti-SSA 
and anti-SSB) and/or combinations thereof in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 
patients with respect to their diagnostic and pathogenetic significance. The 
prevalence of anti-dsDNA antibodies was strongly influenced by the selection 
criteria of the patient; the lowest prevalence was found in SLE patients with 
central nervous system (CNS) involvement; the highest prevalence in patients 
with nephritis. The results were also influenced by the different assays. 
Combinding different assays (Farr/PEG ratio) quantitative as well as qualitative 
differences could be shown between patients with nephritis (Farr/PEG ratio 
greater than or equal to 5) and with CNS involvement (Farr/PEG ratio less than 
5). No difference in anticardiolipin antibody prevalence between the different 
SLE patient groups could be demonstrated. Regarding antibodies against RNP, Sm, 
SSA and SSB, the prevalence was found to be strongly influenced by the criteria 
used for patient selection. Only in CNS patients and association with anti-RNP 
and anti-SSB antibodies alone or in combination was found. In pleuropericarditis 
a weak association with RNP antibodies existed.
IN CONCLUSION: studying the prevalence and possible pathogenetic significance of 
antibodies one should always consider patient selection criteria and the effect 
of the different assays used when analysing the results.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02205555
PMID: 2203596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]