---
reference_id: "PMID:21684692"
title: "Possible role for glutamic acid decarboxylase in fibromyalgia symptoms: a conceptual model for chronic pain."
authors:
- Fitzgerald CT
- Carter LP
journal: Med Hypotheses
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.05.031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Possible role for glutamic acid decarboxylase in fibromyalgia symptoms: a conceptual model for chronic pain.
**Authors:** Fitzgerald CT, Carter LP
**Journal:** Med Hypotheses (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mehy.2011.05.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mehy.2011.05.031)

## Content

1. Med Hypotheses. 2011 Sep;77(3):409-15. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.05.031.

Possible role for glutamic acid decarboxylase in fibromyalgia symptoms: a 
conceptual model for chronic pain.

Fitzgerald CT(1), Carter LP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 4301 
W. Markham St. #843, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.

Fibromyalgia (FM) is a condition of chronic generalized musculoskeletal pain 
that is thought to be a disorder of central pain sensitization. A number of 
neurotransmitters in the ascending and descending pain pathways have been 
implicated in FM including glutamate and GABA. Glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) 
is the rate-limiting enzyme in the conversion of glutamate to GABA and decreased 
expression or activity of this enzyme could result in an imbalance of excitatory 
and inhibitory neurotransmission in the ascending and descending pain pathways. 
Specifically, the expression and activity of the predominant isoform of GAD 
(GAD65) is influenced by several factors that are associated with FM such as 
female sex, poor diet, obesity, sedentary lifestyle, and stress. We hypothesize 
that decreased GAD expression and/or activity plays a role in the development 
and exacerbation of FM leading to impairments in the three common domains of FM 
symptomatology: increased pain (hyperalgesia and allodynia), disrupted sleep, 
and disturbances in mood (anxiety and depression). There are several lines of 
evidence that appear to support a role of GAD in FM. First, the defining symptom 
of FM is pain and GAD65 knockout mice have been shown to exhibit supraspinal 
hyperalgesia. Second, GAD has been implicated in disorders of muscle stiffness 
and rigidity and morning stiffness is a common symptom of FM. Third, stress, 
depression, and anxiety, which are often comorbid with FM, decrease GAD 
activity. Fourth, FM is associated with poor sleep, specifically disrupted 
non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, and the pharmacological induction of NREM 
sleep is associated with the activation of GAD-containing neurons in the 
preoptic hypothalamus. Fifth, FM is more commonly diagnosed in women than men 
and the activity of GAD is reduced by low levels of its cofactor pyroxidine, 
which is less well-absorbed by women and can be further lowered by diet, 
tobacco, and alcohol intake. Sixth, FM patients tend to be overweight or obese 
and caloric restriction and exercise have been shown to increase GAD expression 
and activity. These six general lines of evidence suggest that GAD expression 
and/or activity might underlie the pathophysiology of FM. If this hypothesis is 
supported by future empirical studies, our understanding of the etiology of FM 
could be greatly improved. Moreover, behavioral and pharmacological therapies 
that modulate or mimic the effects of GAD might hold promise for the treatment 
of this debilitating and poorly understood disorder.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.05.031
PMID: 21684692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]