---
reference_id: "PMID:20301358"
title: Mitochondrial Neurogastrointestinal Encephalopathy Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Hirano M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial Neurogastrointestinal Encephalopathy Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Hirano M

## Content

1. Mitochondrial Neurogastrointestinal Encephalopathy Disease.

Hirano M(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 Apr 22 [updated 2016 Jan 14].

Author information:
(1)H Houston Merritt Center Department of Neurology Columbia University Medical 
Center New York, New York

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy 
(MNGIE) disease is characterized by progressive gastrointestinal dysmotility 
(manifesting as early satiety, nausea, dysphagia, gastroesophageal reflux, 
postprandial emesis, episodic abdominal pain and/or distention, and diarrhea); 
cachexia; ptosis/ophthalmoplegia or ophthalmoparesis; leukoencephalopathy; and 
demyelinating peripheral neuropathy (manifesting as paresthesias (tingling, 
numbness, and pain) and symmetric and distal weakness more prominently affecting 
the lower extremities). The order in which manifestations appear is 
unpredictable. Onset is usually between the first and fifth decades; in about 
60% of individuals, symptoms begin before age 20 years.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of MNGIE disease is based on the 
presence of severe gastrointestinal dysmotility, cachexia, ptosis, external 
ophthalmoplegia, sensorimotor neuropathy, asymptomatic leukoencephalopathy as 
observed on brain MRI, and family history consistent with autosomal recessive 
inheritance. The diagnosis of MNGIE disease can be established in a proband by 
detection of one of the following: (1) biallelic pathogenic variants in TYMP 
(formerly known as ECGF1); (2) markedly reduced levels of thymidine 
phosphorylase enzyme activity; or (3) elevated plasma concentrations of 
thymidine and deoxyuridine.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management is primarily supportive and 
includes attention to swallowing difficulties and airway protection; 
dromperidone for nausea and vomiting; gastrostomy, and parenteral feeding for 
nutritional support; antibiotics for intestinal bacterial overgrowth; 
amitriptyline, nortriptyline, and gabapentin for neuropathic symptoms; 
specialized schooling arrangements; and physical and occupational therapy. 
Prevention of secondary complications: Attention to swallowing abnormalities and 
diverticulosis, respectively, may help prevent aspiration pneumonia and ruptured 
diverticula. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Drugs that interfere with 
mitochondrial function should be avoided; medications primarily metabolized in 
the liver should be used with caution.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MNGIE disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. 
The parents of an affected individual are obligate heterozygotes and therefore 
carry one mutated allele; heterozygotes are asymptomatic. Unless an individual 
with MNGIE disease has offspring with either an affected individual or a 
carrier, his/her offspring will be obligate heterozygotes for a pathogenic 
variant in TYMP. Carrier testing for at-risk family members and prenatal testing 
for pregnancies at increased risk are possible once the TYMP pathogenic variants 
in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301358