---
reference_id: "PMID:38619053"
title: "Vestibular migraine: an update."
authors:
- Villar-Martinez MD
- Goadsby PJ
journal: Curr Opin Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000001257
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vestibular migraine: an update.
**Authors:** Villar-Martinez MD, Goadsby PJ
**Journal:** Curr Opin Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WCO.0000000000001257](https://doi.org/10.1097/WCO.0000000000001257)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Neurol. 2024 Jun 1;37(3):252-263. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000001257.
 Epub 2024 Apr 15.

Vestibular migraine: an update.

Villar-Martinez MD(1), Goadsby PJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)NIHR King's Clinical Research Facility, SLaM Biomedical Research Centre and 
Wolfson Sensory Pain and Regeneration, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, UK.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles, California, 
USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: We performed a narrative review of the recent findings in 
epidemiology, clinical presentation, mechanisms and treatment of vestibular 
migraine.
RECENT FINDINGS: Vestibular migraine is an underdiagnosed condition that has a 
high prevalence among general, headache and neuro-otology clinics. Vestibular 
migraine has a bimodal presentation probably associated with a hormonal 
component in women. These patients could have a complex clinical phenotype 
including concomitant autonomic, inflammatory or connective tissue conditions 
that have a higher prevalence of psychological symptoms, which may mistakenly 
lead to a diagnosis of a functional neurological disorder. A high proportion of 
patients with postural perceptual persistent dizziness have a migraine 
phenotype. Independently of the clinical presentation and past medical history, 
patients with the vestibular migraine phenotype can respond to regular migraine 
preventive treatments, including those targeting the calcitonin gene-related 
peptide pathways.
SUMMARY: Vestibular migraine is an underdiagnosed migraine phenotype that shares 
the pathophysiological mechanisms of migraine, with growing interest in recent 
years. A thorough anamnesis is essential to increase sensitivity in patients 
with unknown cause of dizziness and migraine treatment should be considered (see 
supplemental video-abstract).

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000001257
PMCID: PMC11064914
PMID: 38619053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PJG reports, over the last 36 months, grants 
from Celgene and Kallyope, and personal fees from Aeon Biopharma, Abbvie, Amgen, 
eNeura, CoolTech LLC, Dr Reddys’, Eli-Lilly and Company, Epalex, Linpharma, 
Lundbeck, Man&Science, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi, Satsuma, Shiratronics, and Teva 
Pharmaceuticals, and personal fees for advice through Gerson Lehrman Group, 
Guidepoint, SAI Med Partners, Vector Metric, and fees for educational materials 
from CME Outfitters, and publishing royalties or fees from Massachusetts Medical 
Society, Oxford University Press, UptoDate and Wolters Kluwer, and a patent 
magnetic stimulation for headache (No. WO2016090333 A1) assigned to eNeura 
without fee. M.D.V.M. has no conflicts of interest.