---
reference_id: "PMID:29861296"
title: The SS18-SSX Fusion Oncoprotein Hijacks BAF Complex Targeting and Function to Drive Synovial Sarcoma.
authors:
- McBride MJ
- Pulice JL
- Beird HC
- Ingram DR
- "D'Avino AR"
- Shern JF
- Charville GW
- Hornick JL
- Nakayama RT
- Garcia-Rivera EM
- Araujo DM
- Wang WL
- Tsai JW
- Yeagley M
- Wagner AJ
- Futreal PA
- Khan J
- Lazar AJ
- Kadoch C
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2018.05.002
keywords:
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Chromatin/genetics, metabolism"
- "Enhancer Elements, Genetic/genetics"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Gene Knockdown Techniques/methods
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "SMARCB1 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sarcoma, Synovial/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Exome Sequencing/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The SS18-SSX Fusion Oncoprotein Hijacks BAF Complex Targeting and Function to Drive Synovial Sarcoma.
**Authors:** McBride MJ, Pulice JL, Beird HC, Ingram DR, D'Avino AR, Shern JF, Charville GW, Hornick JL, Nakayama RT, Garcia-Rivera EM, Araujo DM, Wang WL, Tsai JW, Yeagley M, Wagner AJ, Futreal PA, Khan J, Lazar AJ, Kadoch C
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2018.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2018.05.002)

## Content

1. Cancer Cell. 2018 Jun 11;33(6):1128-1141.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2018.05.002.
 Epub 2018 May 31.

The SS18-SSX Fusion Oncoprotein Hijacks BAF Complex Targeting and Function to
Drive Synovial Sarcoma.

McBride MJ(1), Pulice JL(2), Beird HC(3), Ingram DR(4), D'Avino AR(2), Shern
JF(5), Charville GW(6), Hornick JL(7), Nakayama RT(8), Garcia-Rivera EM(2),
Araujo DM(9), Wang WL(4), Tsai JW(4), Yeagley M(9), Wagner AJ(10), Futreal
PA(3), Khan J(5), Lazar AJ(11), Kadoch C(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Epigenomics
Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA; Program in
Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Epigenomics
Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Genomic Medicine, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA;
Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda,
MD, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Ludwig Center at
Dana-Farber/Harvard and Center for Sarcoma and Bone Oncology, Department of
Medical Oncology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA.
(9)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, USA.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Department of Genomic Medicine, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA;
Department of Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA; Department
of Translational Molecular Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX,
USA.
(12)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Epigenomics
Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. Electronic
address: cigall_kadoch@dfci.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2018 Jun 11;33(6):951-953. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2018.05.011.

Synovial sarcoma (SS) is defined by the hallmark SS18-SSX fusion oncoprotein,
which renders BAF complexes aberrant in two manners: gain of SSX to the SS18
subunit and concomitant loss of BAF47 subunit assembly. Here we demonstrate that
SS18-SSX globally hijacks BAF complexes on chromatin to activate an SS
transcriptional signature that we define using primary tumors and cell lines.
Specifically, SS18-SSX retargets BAF complexes from enhancers to broad polycomb
domains to oppose PRC2-mediated repression and activate bivalent genes. Upon
suppression of SS18-SSX, reassembly of BAF47 restores enhancer activation, but
is not required for proliferative arrest. These results establish a global
hijacking mechanism for SS18-SSX on chromatin, and define the distinct
contributions of two concurrent BAF complex perturbations.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2018.05.002
PMCID: PMC6791822
PMID: 29861296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
