---
reference_id: "PMID:32939280"
title: Deep learning enables the atomic structure determination of the Fanconi Anemia core complex from cryoEM.
authors:
- Farrell DP
- Anishchenko I
- Shakeel S
- Lauko A
- Passmore LA
- Baker D
- DiMaio F
journal: IUCrJ
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1107/S2052252520009306
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deep learning enables the atomic structure determination of the Fanconi Anemia core complex from cryoEM.
**Authors:** Farrell DP, Anishchenko I, Shakeel S, Lauko A, Passmore LA, Baker D, DiMaio F
**Journal:** IUCrJ (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1107/S2052252520009306](https://doi.org/10.1107/S2052252520009306)

## Content

1. IUCrJ. 2020 Aug 20;7(Pt 5):881-892. doi: 10.1107/S2052252520009306.
eCollection  2020 Sep 1.

Deep learning enables the atomic structure determination of the Fanconi Anemia 
core complex from cryoEM.

Farrell DP(1)(2), Anishchenko I(1)(2), Shakeel S(3), Lauko A(1), Passmore LA(3), 
Baker D(1)(2), DiMaio F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.
(2)Institute for Protein Design, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, 
USA.
(3)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Cryo-electron microscopy of protein complexes often leads to moderate resolution 
maps (4-8 Å), with visible secondary-structure elements but poorly resolved 
loops, making model building challenging. In the absence of high-resolution 
structures of homologues, only coarse-grained structural features are typically 
inferred from these maps, and it is often impossible to assign specific regions 
of density to individual protein subunits. This paper describes a new method for 
overcoming these difficulties that integrates predicted residue distance 
distributions from a deep-learned convolutional neural network, computational 
protein folding using Rosetta, and automated EM-map-guided complex assembly. We 
apply this method to a 4.6 Å resolution cryoEM map of Fanconi Anemia core 
complex (FAcc), an E3 ubiquitin ligase required for DNA interstrand crosslink 
repair, which was previously challenging to interpret as it comprises 6557 
residues, only 1897 of which are covered by homology models. In the published 
model built from this map, only 387 residues could be assigned to the specific 
subunits with confidence. By building and placing into density 42 
deep-learning-guided models containing 4795 residues not included in the 
previously published structure, we are able to determine an almost-complete 
atomic model of FAcc, in which 5182 of the 6557 residues were placed. The 
resulting model is consistent with previously published biochemical data, and 
facilitates interpretation of disease-related mutational data. We anticipate 
that our approach will be broadly useful for cryoEM structure determination of 
large complexes containing many subunits for which there are no homologues of 
known structure.

© Daniel P. Farrell et al. 2020.

DOI: 10.1107/S2052252520009306
PMCID: PMC7467173
PMID: 32939280