---
reference_id: "PMID:34061124"
title: "Brain dysfunction and thyroid antibodies: autoimmune diagnosis and misdiagnosis."
authors:
- Valencia-Sanchez C
- Pittock SJ
- Mead-Harvey C
- Dubey D
- Flanagan EP
- Lopez-Chiriboga S
- Trenerry MR
- Zalewski NL
- Zekeridou A
- McKeon A
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaa233
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain dysfunction and thyroid antibodies: autoimmune diagnosis and misdiagnosis.
**Authors:** Valencia-Sanchez C, Pittock SJ, Mead-Harvey C, Dubey D, Flanagan EP, Lopez-Chiriboga S, Trenerry MR, Zalewski NL, Zekeridou A, McKeon A
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcaa233](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcaa233)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2021 Jan 5;3(2):fcaa233. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaa233. 
eCollection 2021.

Brain dysfunction and thyroid antibodies: autoimmune diagnosis and misdiagnosis.

Valencia-Sanchez C(1), Pittock SJ(1)(2), Mead-Harvey C(3), Dubey D(1)(2), 
Flanagan EP(1)(2), Lopez-Chiriboga S(4), Trenerry MR(5), Zalewski NL(6), 
Zekeridou A(1)(2), McKeon A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Neuroimmunology Laboratory, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Health Science Research, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.

Comment in
    Brain Commun. 2021 Mar 10;3(2):fcab030. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab030.

Hashimoto encephalopathy, also known as steroid-responsive encephalopathy 
associated with autoimmune thyroiditis, has been defined by sub-acute onset 
encephalopathy, with elevated thyroid antibodies, and immunotherapy 
responsiveness, in the absence of specific neural autoantibodies. We aimed to 
retrospectively review 144 cases referred with suspected Hashimoto 
encephalopathy over a 13-year period, and to determine the clinical utility of 
thyroid antibodies in the course of evaluation of those patients. One hundred 
and forty-four patients (all thyroid antibody positive) were included; 72% were 
women. Median age of symptom onset was 44.5 years (range, 10-87). After 
evaluation of Mayo Clinic, 39 patients (27%) were diagnosed with an autoimmune 
CNS disorder [autoimmune encephalopathy (36), dementia (2) or epilepsy (1)]. 
Three of those 39 patients had neural-IgGs detected (high glutamic acid 
decarboxylase-65, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid 
receptor-receptor and neural-restricted unclassified antibody), and 36 were 
seronegative. Diagnoses among the remaining 105 patients (73%) were functional 
neurological disorder (n = 20), neurodegenerative disorder (n = 18), subjective 
cognitive complaints (n = 14), chronic pain syndrome (n = 12), primary 
psychiatric (n = 11), sleep disorder (n = 10), genetic/developmental (n = 8), 
non-autoimmune seizure disorders (n = 2) and other (n = 10). More patients with 
autoimmune CNS disorders presented with sub-acute symptom onset (P < 0.001), 
seizures (P = 0.008), stroke-like episodes (P = 0.007), aphasia (P = 0.04) and 
ataxia (P = 0.02), and had a prior autoimmune history (P = 0.04). Abnormal brain 
MRI (P = 0.003), abnormal EEG (P = 0.007) and CSF inflammatory findings 
(P = 0.002) were also more frequent in the autoimmune CNS patients. Patients 
with an alternative diagnosis had more depressive symptoms (P = 0.008), anxiety 
(P = 0.003) and chronic pain (P = 0.002). Thyoperoxidase antibody titre was not 
different between the groups (median, 312.7 versus 259.4 IU/ml; P = 0.44; normal 
range, <9 IU/ml). None of the non-autoimmune group and all but three of the CNS 
autoimmune group (two with insidious dementia presentation, one with seizures 
only) fulfilled the autoimmune encephalopathy criteria proposed by Graus et al. 
(A clinical approach to diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis. Lancet Neurol 
2016; 15: 391-404.) (sensitivity, 92%; specificity, 100%). Among patients who 
received an immunotherapy trial at our institution and had objective 
post-treatment evaluations, the 16 responders with autoimmune CNS disorders more 
frequently had inflammatory CSF, compared to 12 non-responders, all eventually 
given an alternative diagnosis (P = 0.02). In total, 73% of the patients 
referred with suspected Hashimoto encephalopathy had an alternative 
non-immune-mediated diagnosis, and more than half had no evidence of a primary 
neurological disorder. Thyroid antibody prevalence is high in the general 
population, and does not support a diagnosis of autoimmune encephalopathy in the 
absence of objective neurological and CNS-specific immunological abnormalities. 
Thyroid antibody testing is of little value in the contemporary evaluation and 
diagnosis of autoimmune encephalopathies.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaa233
PMCID: PMC8152924
PMID: 34061124