---
reference_id: "PMID:38967885"
title: "Increased incidence of myxedema coma during the COVID-19 pandemic and in the post pandemic era: a single-center case series."
authors:
- Sokołowski G
- Studen KB
- Opalinska M
- Wegrzyn K
- Motyka M
- Gilis-Januszewska A
- Hubalewska-Dydejczyk A
journal: Intern Emerg Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11739-024-03690-9
keywords:
- Humans
- "COVID-19/complications, epidemiology"
- Myxedema/epidemiology
- Male
- Female
- Incidence
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Coma/etiology, epidemiology"
- Poland/epidemiology
- "Hypothyroidism/epidemiology, complications"
- Thyroxine/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Pandemics
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased incidence of myxedema coma during the COVID-19 pandemic and in the post pandemic era: a single-center case series.
**Authors:** Sokołowski G, Studen KB, Opalinska M, Wegrzyn K, Motyka M, Gilis-Januszewska A, Hubalewska-Dydejczyk A
**Journal:** Intern Emerg Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11739-024-03690-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11739-024-03690-9)

## Content

1. Intern Emerg Med. 2024 Oct;19(7):1921-1928. doi: 10.1007/s11739-024-03690-9. 
Epub 2024 Jul 5.

Increased incidence of myxedema coma during the COVID-19 pandemic and in the 
post pandemic era: a single-center case series.

Sokołowski G(#)(1), Studen KB(#)(2)(3), Opalinska M(1), Wegrzyn K(4), Motyka 
M(4), Gilis-Januszewska A(1), Hubalewska-Dydejczyk A(5).

Author information:
(1)Chair and Department of Endocrinology, Jagiellonian University Medical 
College, ul. Jakubowskiego 2, 30-688, Kraków, Poland.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, 
Slovenia.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Oncological Endocrinology, Nuclear Medicine and 
Internal Medicine, University Hospital, Kraków, Poland.
(5)Chair and Department of Endocrinology, Jagiellonian University Medical 
College, ul. Jakubowskiego 2, 30-688, Kraków, Poland. 
alicja.hubalewska-dydejczyk@uj.edu.pl.
(#)Contributed equally

The COVID-19 pandemic was a major challenge for all health care employees, but 
it was also difficult for patients to gain access to health care services. 
Myxedema coma (MC) is an extremely rare but potentially fatal endocrine 
emergency. The aim of the study was to report an increased incidence of 
life-threatening myxedema coma that occurred in relation to the COVID-19 
pandemic. In this paper, we report a cohort of 11 patients with MC who were 
treated at the University Hospital in Krakow, Poland, in the period from 2015 to 
2023. Only 1 case of MC was recorded in the period from 2015 to 2019, and, in 
the same area, 10 cases of MC were recorded after the start of COVID-19 pandemic 
until present. Hypothyroidism was diagnosed de novo in 2 (18%) patients; the 
remaining patients were severely hypothyroid due to therapy non-compliance. Nine 
patients had primary hypothyroidism, and 2 had central hypothyroidism. Besides 
longstanding hypothyroidism, an additional precipitating factor for MC was 
identified in 4 (36%) of the patients. Due to the inaccessibility of parenteral 
levothyroxine, patients were treated with oral, mostly liquid, form of 
levothyroxine. The mortality rate in this cohort was 27.2%. In conclusion, the 
increase of the incidence of MC, which is a life-threatening complication of 
inadequately treated hypothyroidism, during the COVID-19 pandemic, when 
resources were limited, and in the post-pandemic era, underlines the importance 
of adequate communication with patients and of long-term availability of primary 
care for patients with thyroid disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11739-024-03690-9
PMCID: PMC11467063
PMID: 38967885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.