---
reference_id: "PMID:35970273"
title: Craniofacial and dental phenotype of two girls with osteogenesis imperfecta due to mutations in CRTAP.
authors:
- Marulanda J
- Ludwig K
- Glorieux F
- Lee B
- Sutton VR
- Members of the BBD Consortium
- Retrouvey JM
- Rauch F
journal: Bone
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2022.116516
keywords:
- Amino Acids
- Animals
- Child
- Diphosphonates
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Malocclusion/genetics
- Mice
- "Molecular Chaperones/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- RNA Splice Sites
- Skull/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Craniofacial and dental phenotype of two girls with osteogenesis imperfecta due to mutations in CRTAP.
**Authors:** Marulanda J, Ludwig K, Glorieux F, Lee B, Sutton VR, Members of the BBD Consortium, Retrouvey JM, Rauch F
**Journal:** Bone (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2022.116516](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2022.116516)

## Content

1. Bone. 2022 Nov;164:116516. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2022.116516. Epub 2022 Aug 12.

Craniofacial and dental phenotype of two girls with osteogenesis imperfecta due 
to mutations in CRTAP.

Marulanda J(1), Ludwig K(1), Glorieux F(2), Lee B(3), Sutton VR(3); Members of 
the BBD Consortium; Retrouvey JM(4), Rauch F(5).

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children - Canada, Montreal, QC, Canada; Department of 
Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Shriners Hospital for Children - Canada, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(4)University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO, USA.
(5)Shriners Hospital for Children - Canada, Montreal, QC, Canada; Department of 
Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. Electronic address: 
frank.rauch@mcgill.ca.

Mutations in CRTAP lead to an extremely rare form of recessive osteogenesis 
imperfecta (OI). CRTAP deficient mice have a brachycephalic skull, fusion of 
facial bones, midface retrusion and class III dental malocclusion, but in 
humans, the craniofacial and dental phenotype has not been reported in detail. 
Here, we describe craniofacial and dental findings in two 11-year-old girls with 
biallelic CRTAP mutations. Patient 1 has a homozygous c.472-1021C>G variant in 
CRTAP intron 1 and a moderately severe OI phenotype. The variant is known to 
create a cryptic splice site, leading to a frameshift and nonsense-mediated RNA 
decay. Patient 1 started intravenous bisphosphonate treatment at 2 years of age. 
At age 11 years, height Z-score was +0.6. She had a short and wide face, concave 
profile and class III malocclusion, with a prognathic mandible and an 
antero-posterior crossbite. A panoramic radiograph showed a poor angulation of 
the second upper right premolar, and no dentinogenesis imperfecta or dental 
agenesis. Cone-beam computed tomography confirmed these findings and did not 
reveal any other abnormalities. Patient 2 has a homozygous CRTAP deletion of two 
amino acids (c.804_809del, p.Glu269_Val270del) and a severe OI phenotype. As 
previously established, the variant leads to instability of CRTAP protein. 
Intravenous bisphosphonate treatment was started at the age of 15 months. At 
11 years of age her height Z-score was -9.7. She had a long and narrow face and 
convex profile, maxillary retrusion leading to a class III malocclusion, an 
edge-to-edge overjet and lateral open bite. Panoramic radiographs showed no 
dental abnormalities. Cone-beam computed tomography showed occipital bossing, 
platybasia and wormian bones. In these two girls with CRTAP mutations, the 
severity of the skeletal phenotype was mirrored in the severity of the 
craniofacial phenotype. Class III malocclusion and antero-posterior crossbite 
were a common trait, while dental agenesis or dentinogenesis imperfecta were not 
detected.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2022.116516
PMCID: PMC10408670
PMID: 35970273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Juliana 
Marulanda: None. Karissa Ludwig: None. Francis Glorieux: Novartis, Amgen and 
Mereo Biopharma: consulting fees and research grants. Brendan Lee: Sanofi 
research grant; Biomarin consulting fees. Reid Sutton: Ultragenyx research 
funding. Jean-Marc Retrouvey: Ultragenyx consulting fees. Frank Rauch: Mereo 
Biopharma, Ultragenyx, Sanofi, Ibsen: consulting fees; Catabasis: Study grant to 
institution.