---
reference_id: "PMID:28642796"
title: "Riverbed Sediments as Reservoirs of Multiple Vibrio cholerae Virulence-Associated Genes: A Potential Trigger for Cholera Outbreaks in Developing Countries."
authors:
- Abia ALK
- Ubomba-Jaswa E
- Momba MNB
journal: J Environ Public Health
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1155/2017/5646480
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Riverbed Sediments as Reservoirs of Multiple Vibrio cholerae Virulence-Associated Genes: A Potential Trigger for Cholera Outbreaks in Developing Countries.
**Authors:** Abia ALK, Ubomba-Jaswa E, Momba MNB
**Journal:** J Environ Public Health (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2017/5646480](https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/5646480)

## Content

1. J Environ Public Health. 2017;2017:5646480. doi: 10.1155/2017/5646480. Epub
2017  May 31.

Riverbed Sediments as Reservoirs of Multiple Vibrio cholerae 
Virulence-Associated Genes: A Potential Trigger for Cholera Outbreaks in 
Developing Countries.

Abia ALK(1), Ubomba-Jaswa E(2), Momba MNB(3).

Author information:
(1)AMBIO Environmental Management, Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of 
Applied and Computer Sciences, Vaal University of Technology, Vanderbijlpark 
1900, South Africa.
(2)Natural Resources and the Environment, CSIR, P.O. Box 395, Pretoria 0001, 
South Africa.
(3)Department of Environmental, Water and Earth Science, Tshwane University of 
Technology, Arcadia Campus, 175 Nelson Mandela Drive, Private Bag X 680, 
Pretoria 0001, South Africa.

Africa remains the most cholera stricken continent in the world as many people 
lacking access to safe drinking water rely mostly on polluted rivers as their 
main water sources. However, studies in these countries investigating the 
presence of Vibrio cholerae in aquatic environments have paid little attention 
to bed sediments. Also, information on the presence of virulence-associated 
genes (VAGs) in environmental ctx-negative V. cholerae strains in this region is 
lacking. Thus, we investigated the presence of V. cholerae VAGs in water and 
riverbed sediment of the Apies River, South Africa. Altogether, 120 samples (60 
water and 60 sediment samples) collected from ten sites on the river (January 
and February 2014) were analysed using PCR. Of the 120 samples, 37 sediment and 
31 water samples were positive for at least one of the genes investigated. The 
haemolysin gene (hlyA) was the most isolated gene. The cholera toxin (ctxAB) and 
non-O1 heat-stable (stn/sto) genes were not detected. Genes were frequently 
detected at sites influenced by human activities. Thus, identification of V. 
cholerae VAGs in sediments suggests the possible presence of V. cholerae and 
identifies sediments of the Apies River as a reservoir for potentially 
pathogenic V. cholerae with possible public health implications.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/5646480
PMCID: PMC5470021
PMID: 28642796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]