---
reference_id: "PMID:34824934"
title: "Infliximab Rescue in Acute Severe Ulcerative Colitis Complicated by Clostridium Difficile Infection: A Case Series."
authors:
- Markovic S
- Jankovic M
- Kalaba A
- Zogovic B
- Sreckovic SS
journal: Cureus
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.19019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infliximab Rescue in Acute Severe Ulcerative Colitis Complicated by Clostridium Difficile Infection: A Case Series.
**Authors:** Markovic S, Jankovic M, Kalaba A, Zogovic B, Sreckovic SS
**Journal:** Cureus (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.19019](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.19019)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 25;13(10):e19019. doi: 10.7759/cureus.19019. eCollection 2021
 Oct.

Infliximab Rescue in Acute Severe Ulcerative Colitis Complicated by Clostridium 
Difficile Infection: A Case Series.

Markovic S(1), Jankovic M(1), Kalaba A(1), Zogovic B(2), Sreckovic SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Medical Center 
"Zvezdara", Belgrade, SRB.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, New South Wales, 
AUS.

Relapses in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) complicated by Clostridium 
difficile infection (CDI) are associated with significant morbidity and 
mortality. CDI can exacerbate the course of IBD and may result in prolonged 
hospitalizations, admissions to intensive care, surgical interventions, or even 
death. Early detection and aggressive treatment with systemic corticosteroids or 
biologics such as infliximab are often needed in severe presentations. Five 
cases of relapsed ulcerative colitis complicated by fulminant CDI were 
retrospectively reviewed. Biological therapy with infliximab was initiated upon 
multidisciplinary team assessment as the cases were resistant to standard IBD 
therapy. All five patients improved clinically and avoided early surgical 
intervention. Some required prolonged therapy with infliximab to achieve 
remission. Early recognition of CDI and aggressive therapy with biologics may be 
required to avoid complications in the IBD patients experiencing a relapse. 
Infliximab therapy should be considered early on, especially where the disease 
is resistant to standard therapy.

Copyright © 2021, Markovic et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.19019
PMCID: PMC8611478
PMID: 34824934

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.