---
reference_id: "PMID:39692912"
title: "SARS-CoV-2 pathophysiology and post-vaccination severity: a systematic review."
authors:
- Rustagi V
- Gupta SRR
- Talwar C
- Singh A
- Xiao ZZ
- Jamwal R
- Bala K
- Bhaskar AK
- Nagar S
- Singh IK
journal: Immunol Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12026-024-09553-x
keywords:
- Humans
- "COVID-19/immunology, prevention & control"
- "COVID-19 Vaccines/adverse effects, immunology, administration & dosage"
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/etiology, immunology"
- Vaccination/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SARS-CoV-2 pathophysiology and post-vaccination severity: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Rustagi V, Gupta SRR, Talwar C, Singh A, Xiao ZZ, Jamwal R, Bala K, Bhaskar AK, Nagar S, Singh IK
**Journal:** Immunol Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12026-024-09553-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12026-024-09553-x)

## Content

1. Immunol Res. 2024 Dec 18;73(1):17. doi: 10.1007/s12026-024-09553-x.

SARS-CoV-2 pathophysiology and post-vaccination severity: a systematic review.

Rustagi V(#)(1), Gupta SRR(#)(1), Talwar C(2), Singh A(3), Xiao ZZ(4), Jamwal 
R(1), Bala K(1), Bhaskar AK(5), Nagar S(6), Singh IK(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Deshbandhu College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, 
110019, India.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX, 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Plant Molecular Biology, University of Delhi (South Campus), 
New Delhi, 110021, India.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, The George Washington University, 
Washington, D.C, 20052, USA.
(5)CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, Mathura Road, New Delhi, 
110025, India.
(6)Department of Zoology, Deshbandhu College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, 
110019, India. snagar@db.du.ac.in.
(7)Department of Zoology, Deshbandhu College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, 
110019, India. iksingh@db.du.ac.in.
(8)Delhi School of Public Health, Institute of Eminence, University of Delhi, 
Delhi, 110007, India. iksingh@db.du.ac.in.
(#)Contributed equally

Currently, COVID-19 is still striking after 4 years of prevalence, with millions 
of cases and thousands of fatalities being recorded every month. The virus can 
impact other major organ systems, including the gastrointestinal tract (GIT), 
cardiovascular, central nervous system, renal, and hepatobiliary systems. The 
resulting organ dysfunction from SARS-CoV-2 may be attributed to one or a 
combination of mechanisms, such as direct viral toxicity, disruptions in the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), thrombosis, immune dysregulation, 
and ischemic injury due to vasculitis. SARS-CoV-2 vaccines effectively reduce 
the severity of the disease, hospitalizations, and mortality. As of October 
2024, 13.58 billion vaccine doses have been administered, with an average of 
6959 daily doses. Also, the boosters are given after the primary immunization in 
a homologous and heterologous manner. The vaccines imposed severe potential 
health side effects such as clotting or obstruction of blood vessels termed 
arterial or venous thrombosis, autoimmune damage of nerve cells (Guillain-Barré 
syndrome; GBS), intense activation of coagulation system (vaccine-induced 
thrombotic thrombocytopenia), acute ischemic stroke (AIS) and cerebral venous 
sinus thrombosis (CVST), myocarditis, pericarditis, and glomerular disease. 
Overall, it is essential to highlight that the significant benefits of COVID-19 
vaccination far outweigh the low risk of conditions. mRNA-based vaccine 
technology has emerged as a rapidly deployable vaccine candidate and a viable 
alternative to existing vaccines. It has a very low probability of adverse 
health effects, confirmed by data represented by Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses, Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System 
(VAERS), Yellow card approved under CDC, WHO.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-024-09553-x
PMID: 39692912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
declare no competing interests.