---
reference_id: "PMID:36726215"
title: "Guanidinoacetate (GAA) is a potent GABA(A) receptor GABA mimetic: Implications for neurological disease pathology."
authors:
- Meera P
- Uusi-Oukari M
- Wallner M
- Lipshutz GS
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/jnc.15774
keywords:
- "Glycine/pharmacology, analogs & derivatives"
- gamma-Aminobutyric Acid
- Animals
- Muscimol
- "Receptors, GABA-A"
- Arginine
- Creatine/pharmacology
- Mice
- Guanidines
- Language Development Disorders
- Movement Disorders/congenital
- Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Guanidinoacetate (GAA) is a potent GABA(A) receptor GABA mimetic: Implications for neurological disease pathology.
**Authors:** Meera P, Uusi-Oukari M, Wallner M, Lipshutz GS
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jnc.15774](https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.15774)

## Content

1. J Neurochem. 2023 May;165(3):445-454. doi: 10.1111/jnc.15774. Epub 2023 Feb
16.

Guanidinoacetate (GAA) is a potent GABA(A) receptor GABA mimetic: Implications
for neurological disease pathology.

Meera P(1), Uusi-Oukari M(2), Wallner M(3), Lipshutz GS(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of California, Los Angeles,
California, USA.
(2)Integrative Physiology and Pharmacology, Institute of Biomedicine, University
of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(3)Departments of Surgery, University of California, Los Angeles, California,
USA.
(4)Molecular & Medical Pharmacology, University of California, Los Angeles,
California, USA.
(5)Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, University of
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(6)Semel Institute for Neuroscience, University of California, Los Angeles,
California, USA.

Impairment of excretion and enzymatic processing of nitrogen, for example,
because of liver or kidney failure, or with urea cycle and creatine synthesis
enzyme defects, surprisingly leads to primarily neurologic symptoms, yet the
exact mechanisms remain largely mysterious. In guanidinoacetate
N-methyltransferase (GAMT) deficiency, the guanidino compound guanidinoacetate
(GAA) increases dramatically, including in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and
has been implicated in mediating the neurological symptoms in GAMT-deficient
patients. GAA is synthesized by arginine-glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT), a
promiscuous enzyme that not only transfers the amidino group from arginine to
glycine, but also to primary amines in, for example, GABA and taurine to
generate γ-guanidinobutyric acid (γ-GBA) and guanidinoethanesulfonic acid (GES),
respectively. We show that GAA, γ-GBA, and GES share structural similarities
with GABA, evoke GABAA receptor (GABAA R) mediated currents (whereas creatine
[methylated GAA] and arginine failed to evoke discernible currents) in
cerebellar granule cells in mouse brain slices and displace the high-affinity
GABA-site radioligand [3 H]muscimol in total brain homogenate GABAA Rs. While
γ-GBA and GES are GABA agonists and displace [3 H]muscimol (EC50 /IC50 between
10 and 40 μM), GAA stands out as particularly potent in both activating GABAA Rs
(EC50 ~6 μM) and also displacing the GABAA R ligand [3 H]muscimol (IC50 ~3 μM)
at pathophysiologically relevant concentrations. These findings stress the role
of substantially elevated GAA as a primary neurotoxic agent in GAMT deficiency
and we discuss the potential role of GAA in arginase (and creatine transporter)
deficiency which show a much more modest increase in GAA concentrations yet
share the unique hyperexcitability neuropathology with GAMT deficiency. We
conclude that orthosteric activation of GABAA Rs by GAA, and potentially other
GABAA R mimetic guanidino compounds (GCs) like γ-GBA and GES, interferes with
normal inhibitory GABAergic neurotransmission which could mediate, and
contribute to, neurotoxicity.

© 2023 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.15774
PMID: 36726215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
