---
reference_id: "PMID:27929686"
title: "Hematopoietic cell transplantation in Fanconi anemia: current evidence, challenges and recommendations."
authors:
- Ebens CL
- MacMillan ML
- Wagner JE
journal: Expert Rev Hematol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/17474086.2016.1268048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematopoietic cell transplantation in Fanconi anemia: current evidence, challenges and recommendations.
**Authors:** Ebens CL, MacMillan ML, Wagner JE
**Journal:** Expert Rev Hematol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17474086.2016.1268048](https://doi.org/10.1080/17474086.2016.1268048)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Hematol. 2017 Jan;10(1):81-97. doi: 10.1080/17474086.2016.1268048. 
Epub 2016 Dec 21.

Hematopoietic cell transplantation in Fanconi anemia: current evidence, 
challenges and recommendations.

Ebens CL(1), MacMillan ML(1), Wagner JE(1).

Author information:
(1)a Division of Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Department of 
Pediatrics , University of Minnesota Medical School , Minneapolis , MN , USA.

Hematopoietic cell transplantation for Fanconi Anemia (FA) has improved 
dramatically over the past 40 years. With an enhanced understanding of the 
intrinsic DNA-repair defect and pathophysiology of hematopoietic failure and 
leukemogenesis, sequential changes to conditioning and graft engineering have 
significantly improved the expectation of survival after allogeneic 
hematopoietic cell transplantation (alloHCT) with incidence of graft failure 
decreased from 35% to <10% and acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) from >40% 
to <10%. Today, five-year overall survival exceeds 90% in younger FA patients 
with bone marrow failure but remains about 50% in those with hematologic 
malignancy. Areas covered: We review the evolution of alloHCT contributing to 
decreased rates of transplant related complications; highlight current 
challenges including poorer outcomes in cases of clonal hematologic disorders, 
alloHCT impact on endocrine function and intrinsic FA risk of epithelial 
malignancies; and describe investigational therapies for prevention and 
treatment of the hematologic manifestations of FA. Expert commentary: Current 
methods allow for excellent survival following alloHCT for FA associated BMF 
irrespective of donor hematopoietic cell source. Alternative curative 
approaches, such as gene therapy, are being explored to eliminate the risks of 
GVHD and minimize therapy-related adverse effects.

DOI: 10.1080/17474086.2016.1268048
PMCID: PMC6089510
PMID: 27929686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]