---
reference_id: "PMID:21228398"
title: Carrier testing for severe childhood recessive diseases by next-generation sequencing.
authors:
- Bell CJ
- Dinwiddie DL
- Miller NA
- Hateley SL
- Ganusova EE
- Mudge J
- Langley RJ
- Zhang L
- Lee CC
- Schilkey FD
- Sheth V
- Woodward JE
- Peckham HE
- Schroth GP
- Kim RW
- Kingsmore SF
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001756
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Genetic Carrier Screening/methods
- "Genetic Testing/economics, methods"
- "Genome, Human"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/economics, methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carrier testing for severe childhood recessive diseases by next-generation sequencing.
**Authors:** Bell CJ, Dinwiddie DL, Miller NA, Hateley SL, Ganusova EE, Mudge J, Langley RJ, Zhang L, Lee CC, Schilkey FD, Sheth V, Woodward JE, Peckham HE, Schroth GP, Kim RW, Kingsmore SF
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.3001756](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3001756)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2011 Jan 12;3(65):65ra4. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001756.

Carrier testing for severe childhood recessive diseases by next-generation
sequencing.

Bell CJ(1), Dinwiddie DL, Miller NA, Hateley SL, Ganusova EE, Mudge J, Langley
RJ, Zhang L, Lee CC, Schilkey FD, Sheth V, Woodward JE, Peckham HE, Schroth GP,
Kim RW, Kingsmore SF.

Author information:
(1)National Center for Genome Resources, Santa Fe, NM 87505, USA.

Comment in
    Sci Transl Med. 2011 Jan 12;3(65):65ps2. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3002064.
    Clin Genet. 2011 Jul;80(1):25-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01677.x.

Of 7028 disorders with suspected Mendelian inheritance, 1139 are recessive and
have an established molecular basis. Although individually uncommon, Mendelian
diseases collectively account for ~20% of infant mortality and ~10% of pediatric
hospitalizations. Preconception screening, together with genetic counseling of
carriers, has resulted in remarkable declines in the incidence of several severe
recessive diseases including Tay-Sachs disease and cystic fibrosis. However,
extension of preconception screening to most severe disease genes has hitherto
been impractical. Here, we report a preconception carrier screen for 448 severe
recessive childhood diseases. Rather than costly, complete sequencing of the
human genome, 7717 regions from 437 target genes were enriched by hybrid capture
or microdroplet polymerase chain reaction, sequenced by next-generation
sequencing (NGS) to a depth of up to 2.7 gigabases, and assessed with stringent
bioinformatic filters. At a resultant 160x average target coverage, 93% of
nucleotides had at least 20x coverage, and mutation detection/genotyping had
~95% sensitivity and ~100% specificity for substitution, insertion/deletion,
splicing, and gross deletion mutations and single-nucleotide polymorphisms. In
104 unrelated DNA samples, the average genomic carrier burden for severe
pediatric recessive mutations was 2.8 and ranged from 0 to 7. The distribution
of mutations among sequenced samples appeared random. Twenty-seven percent of
mutations cited in the literature were found to be common polymorphisms or
misannotated, underscoring the need for better mutation databases as part of a
comprehensive carrier testing strategy. Given the magnitude of carrier burden
and the lower cost of testing compared to treating these conditions, carrier
screening by NGS made available to the general population may be an economical
way to reduce the incidence of and ameliorate suffering associated with severe
recessive childhood disorders.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001756
PMCID: PMC3740116
PMID: 21228398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: L.Z. is an employee of
Illumina Inc. At the time the research was performed, G.P.S. was an employee of
Illumina Inc. C.C.L., H.E.P., and V.S. are employees of Life Technologies. U.S.
patent application 20090183268 entitled “Methods and systems for medical
sequencing analysis” was filed by the National Center for Genome Resources on
July 16, 2009. This application has claims related to this work. The other
authors declare no competing interests.
