---
reference_id: "PMID:28483382"
title: Modeling Key Drivers of Cholera Transmission Dynamics Provides New Perspectives for Parasitology.
authors:
- Rinaldo A
- Bertuzzo E
- Blokesch M
- Mari L
- Gatto M
journal: Trends Parasitol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2017.04.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling Key Drivers of Cholera Transmission Dynamics Provides New Perspectives for Parasitology.
**Authors:** Rinaldo A, Bertuzzo E, Blokesch M, Mari L, Gatto M
**Journal:** Trends Parasitol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pt.2017.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pt.2017.04.002)

## Content

1. Trends Parasitol. 2017 Aug;33(8):587-599. doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2017.04.002. Epub 
2017 May 5.

Modeling Key Drivers of Cholera Transmission Dynamics Provides New Perspectives 
for Parasitology.

Rinaldo A(1), Bertuzzo E(2), Blokesch M(3), Mari L(4), Gatto M(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Ecohydrology, School of Architecture, Civil and Environmental 
Engineering, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, 
Switzerland; Dipartimento ICEA, Università di Padova, Padova, Italy. Electronic 
address: andrea.rinaldo@epfl.ch.
(2)Laboratory of Ecohydrology, School of Architecture, Civil and Environmental 
Engineering, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, 
Switzerland; Department of Environmental Sciences, Informatics and Statistics, 
University Cà Foscari Venice, Venezia Mestre, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, Ecole 
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di 
Milano, Milano, Italy.

Hydroclimatological and anthropogenic factors are key drivers of waterborne 
disease transmission. Information on human settlements and host mobility on 
waterways along which pathogens and hosts disperse, and relevant 
hydroclimatological processes, can be acquired remotely and included in 
spatially explicit mathematical models of disease transmission. In the case of 
epidemic cholera, such models allowed the description of complex disease 
patterns and provided insight into the course of ongoing epidemics. The 
inclusion of spatial information in models of disease transmission can aid in 
emergency management and the assessment of alternative interventions. Here, we 
review the study of drivers of transmission via spatially explicit approaches 
and argue that, because many parasitic waterborne diseases share the same 
drivers as cholera, similar principles may apply.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pt.2017.04.002
PMID: 28483382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]