---
reference_id: "PMID:38711089"
title: Aberrant activation of TGF-β/ROCK1 enhances stemness during prostatic stromal hyperplasia.
authors:
- Li Y
- Li J
- Zhou L
- Wang Z
- Jin L
- Cao J
- Xie H
- Wang L
journal: Cell Commun Signal
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12964-024-01644-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aberrant activation of TGF-β/ROCK1 enhances stemness during prostatic stromal hyperplasia.
**Authors:** Li Y, Li J, Zhou L, Wang Z, Jin L, Cao J, Xie H, Wang L
**Journal:** Cell Commun Signal (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12964-024-01644-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12964-024-01644-4)

## Content

1. Cell Commun Signal. 2024 May 6;22(1):257. doi: 10.1186/s12964-024-01644-4.

Aberrant activation of TGF-β/ROCK1 enhances stemness during prostatic stromal 
hyperplasia.

Li Y(1), Li J(1), Zhou L(1), Wang Z(2), Jin L(2), Cao J(2), Xie H(3), Wang L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, 410013, Hunan, China.
(2)Movement System Injury and Repair Research Center, Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China.
(3)Movement System Injury and Repair Research Center, Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China. huixie@csu.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Urology, The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, 410013, Hunan, China. wanglong@csu.edu.cn.

Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a multifactorial disease in which abnormal 
growth factor activation and embryonic reawakening are considered important 
factors. Here we demonstrated that the aberrant activation of transforming 
growth factor β (TGF-β)/Rho kinase 1 (ROCK1) increased the stemness of BPH 
tissue by recruiting mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), indicating the important 
role of embryonic reawakening in BPH. When TGF-β/ROCK1 is abnormally activated, 
MSCs are recruited and differentiate into fibroblasts/myofibroblasts, leading to 
prostate stromal hyperplasia. Further research showed that inhibition of ROCK1 
activation suppressed MSC migration and their potential for stromal 
differentiation. Collectively, our findings suggest that abnormal activation of 
TGF-β/ROCK1 regulates stem cell lineage specificity, and the small molecule 
inhibitor GSK269962A could target ROCK1 and may be a potential treatment for 
BPH.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12964-024-01644-4
PMCID: PMC11071275
PMID: 38711089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.