---
reference_id: "PMID:29374629"
title: Cross-phenotype analysis of Immunochip data identifies KDM4C as a relevant locus for the development of systemic vasculitis.
authors:
- Ortiz-Fernández L
- Carmona FD
- López-Mejías R
- González-Escribano MF
- Lyons PA
- Morgan AW
- Sawalha AH
- Merkel PA
- Smith KGC
- González-Gay MA
- Martín J
- "Spanish GCA Study Group, UK GCA Consortium, Turkish Takayasu Study Group, Vasculitis Clinical Research Consortium, IgAV Study Group, AAV Study group"
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212372
keywords:
- "Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibody-Associated Vasculitis/genetics, immunology"
- Case-Control Studies
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Female
- "Genetic Loci/genetics, immunology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/genetics, immunology"
- "HLA-DQ Antigens/genetics, immunology"
- "HLA-DQ beta-Chains/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- "Jumonji Domain-Containing Histone Demethylases/genetics, immunology"
- Linkage Disequilibrium
- Male
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Protein Array Analysis
- "Systemic Vasculitis/genetics, immunology"
- "Takayasu Arteritis/genetics, immunology"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Cross-phenotype analysis of Immunochip data identifies KDM4C as a relevant locus for the development of systemic vasculitis.
**Authors:** Ortiz-Fernández L, Carmona FD, López-Mejías R, González-Escribano MF, Lyons PA, Morgan AW, Sawalha AH, Merkel PA, Smith KGC, González-Gay MA, Martín J, Spanish GCA Study Group, UK GCA Consortium, Turkish Takayasu Study Group, Vasculitis Clinical Research Consortium, IgAV Study Group, AAV Study group
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212372](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212372)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2018 Apr;77(4):589-595. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212372. 
Epub 2018 Jan 27.

Cross-phenotype analysis of Immunochip data identifies KDM4C as a relevant locus 
for the development of systemic vasculitis.

Ortiz-Fernández L(1), Carmona FD(2), López-Mejías R(3), González-Escribano 
MF(4), Lyons PA(5), Morgan AW(6), Sawalha AH(7), Merkel PA, Smith KGC(5), 
González-Gay MA(3)(8), Martín J(1); Spanish GCA Study Group, UK GCA Consortium, 
Turkish Takayasu Study Group, Vasculitis Clinical Research Consortium, IgAV 
Study Group, AAV Study group.

Collaborators: Alegre-Sancho JJ, Blanco R, Callejas JL, Caminal-Montero L, 
Castañeda S, Cid MC, Corberabellalta M, Miguel E, Díaz-López JB, Escalante B, 
Mateo PF, Fernández-Gutiérrez B, Fernández-Nebro A, García-Villanueva MJ, 
Gómez-Vaquero C, Grau E, Rojas MG, Hernández-Rodríguez J, Hidalgo-Conde A, 
López-Longo FJ, Madroñero Vuelta AB, Marí-Alfonso B, Martínez L, 
Martínezberriochoa A, Martínez-Taboada VM, Martínez-Zapico A, Miranda-Filloy JA, 
Monfort J, Morado IC, Narváez J, Ordóñez-Cañizares MC, Ortego-Centeno N, 
Pérez-Conesa M, Prieto-González S, Ramentol-Sintas M, Raya E, Fernández RR, 
Rodríguez-Rodríguez L, Román JA, Sáez-Comet L, Sánchez-Martín J, 
Sánchez-Pernaute O, Solans R, Sopeña B, Tío L, Unzurrunzaga A, Vicente Bhaskar 
Dasgupta EF, Eyre S, Green M, Gough A, Hordon L, Jarret S, Kamath S, Levy S, 
Mackie SL, Patel Y, Pease CT, Taylor JC, Watts R, Worthington J, Alibaz-Oner F, 
Akar S, Akkoc N, Aksu K, Ates A, Aydin SZ, Bıcakcıgil M, Cefle A, Cobankara V, 
Coit P, Dalkilic E, Direskeneli H, Duzgun N, Erken E, Fresko I, Inanc M, Kamali 
S, Karaaslan Y, Karadag O, Kaşifoğlu T, Keser G, Kısacık B, Kiraz S, Onat AM, 
Onen F, Ozbalkan Z, Ozer HT, Ozturk MA, Pamuk ÖN, Saruhan-Direskeneli G, Seyahi 
E, Tunc E, Yazici A, Yentür Maximiliano Aragües SP, Blanco R, Blanco-Madrigal 
JM, Castañeda S, Argila D, Galíndez-Aguirregoikoa E, Genre F, Luque ML, Llorca 
J, Mijares V, Miranda-Filloy JA, Parejo AN, Ortego-Centeno N, Pina T, 
Remuzgo-Martínez S, Rubio E, Sevilla-Perez B, Ubilla B, Brenchley P, Chaundrhy 
AN, Clayton Panos Deloukas DG, Harper L, Jayne DR, Little MA, Padmanabhan S, 
Pusey CD, Rayner TF, Salamana AD, Savage CO, Trivedi S, Watts RA.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Parasitologia y Biomedicina Lopez-Neyra, Granada, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Genética e Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad de 
Granada, Granada, Spain.
(3)Epidemiology, Genetics and Atherosclerosis Research Group on Systemic 
Inflammatory Diseases, Rheumatology Division, Hospital Universitario Marqués de 
Valdecilla, IDIVAL, Santander, Spain.
(4)Department of Immunology, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío (IBiS,CSIC, 
US), Sevilla, Spain.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, 
Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Leeds Institute of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Medicine, University of 
Leeds, and NIHR Leeds Biomedical Research Centre, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS 
Trust, Leeds, UK.
(7)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(8)School of Medicine, University of Cantabria, Santander, Spain.

Erratum in
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2018 Jun;77(6):950. doi: 
10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212372corr1.

OBJETIVE: Systemic vasculitides represent a heterogeneous group of rare complex 
diseases of the blood vessels with a poorly understood aetiology. To investigate 
the shared genetic component underlying their predisposition, we performed the 
first cross-phenotype meta-analysis of genetic data from different clinically 
distinct patterns of vasculitis.
METHODS: Immunochip genotyping data from 2465 patients diagnosed with giant cell 
arteritis, Takayasu's arteritis, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated 
vasculitis or IgA vasculitis as well as 4632 unaffected controls were analysed 
to identify common susceptibility loci for vasculitis development. The possible 
functional consequences of the associated variants were interrogated using 
publicly available annotation data.
RESULTS: The strongest association signal corresponded with an intergenic 
polymorphism located between HLA-DQB1 and HLA-DQA2 (rs6932517, P=4.16E-14, 
OR=0.74). This single nucleotide polymorphism is in moderate linkage 
disequilibrium with the disease-specific human leucocyte antigen (HLA) class II 
associations of each type of vasculitis and could mark them. Outside the HLA 
region, we identified the KDM4C gene as a common risk locus for vasculitides 
(highest peak rs16925200, P=6.23E-07, OR=1.75). This gene encodes a histone 
demethylase involved in the epigenetic control of gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Through a combined analysis of Immunochip data, we have identified 
KDM4C as a new risk gene shared between systemic vasculitides, consistent with 
the increasing evidences of the crucial role that the epigenetic mechanisms have 
in the development of complex immune-mediated conditions.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212372
PMCID: PMC5849568
PMID: 29374629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

The vasculitides constitute a heterogeneous group of diseases of complex
aetiology characterised by a chronic inflammation of the blood vessels. They show a
wide spectrum of clinical manifestations that depend on the affected vessels in the
arterial or venous system. As a consequence, overlapping of pathophysiological
mechanisms is frequent among them.1
To better define the different clinical forms of vasculitis, the Chapel Hill
Consensus Conference proposed a nomenclature system in which the most common
vasculitides were subdivided into three main categories, that is. large vessel
vasculitis (LVV), medium vessel vasculitis and small vessel vasculitis (SVV), based
on the distribution of vessel involvement. 2 In this regard, two diseases account for most cases of LVV,
that is, giant cell arteritis (GCA) and Takayasu’s arteritis (TAK), which
mainly involve arteries of large calibre such as the aorta and its major branches.
On the other hand, IgA vasculitis (IgAV) and antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibody-associated vasculitis (AAV) are classified as SVV, as inflammation
predominantly affects arterioles, small arteries, capillaries and venules.23

Although the aetiology of vasculitides remains unclear, cumulating data
suggest that they are triggered in genetically predisposed individuals by the
concurrence of certain environmental factors.4 The importance of the genetic component has been
consistently supported by evidence of familial aggregation, differential prevalence
depending on the ethnicity, and multiple genetic associations with disease
susceptibility and progression reported during the last years.5 In this regard, the strongest association
signals in most vasculitides correspond with genetic variants within the human
leucocyte antigen (HLA) region, which suggests an important role of the immune
system in their pathophysiology. However, each form of vasculitis has distinct HLA
association markers that define them, most likely due to disease-specific
differences in antigenic drivers.5

Despite the considerable increase in our understanding of the genetic basis
of systemic vasculitis during the last decade, the number of identified risk
loci for most types of vasculitis remains significantly lower
than other immune-mediated diseases.56 Taking into account the low
prevalence of these pathologies in the general population,1 one of the main limitations is the lack of
statistical power to identify susceptibility signals with modest effects, given the
large sample size required for that. Therefore, additional strategies are necessary
to unravel the genetic background underlying these disorders. In this sense, the
combination of the genetic data from different clinical syndromes with vasculitis as
a single underpinning phenotype has been successfully applied for identifying shared
genetic components.7–10 One of the most successful genetic
platforms to study immune-mediated diseases is the Immunochip, which is a custom
high-density array that allows the analysis of genetic variants across multiple
known susceptibility loci for autoimmune and autoinflammatory
disorders.11 This platform
has been successful in identifying specific and common risk variants for many
autoimmune and autoinflammatory diseases,12 including GCA and TAK.91314

Considering the above, and with the aim to improve the knowledge of the
genetic component of vasculitides, we performed a cross-phenotype meta-analysis by
combining Immunochip data of individuals diagnosed with four different forms of
vasculitis.

The study population comprised 2465 cases from four vasculitides (GCA,
TAK, AAV and IgAV) and 4632 unaffected controls. A detailed description of the
study population can be found in the online supplementary material.

The GCA and TAK raw datasets were obtained from previously published
Immunochip studies.1314 For AAV and IgAV, new
genotyping data were generated. In this case, genomic DNA was extracted from
peripheral blood samples with standard methods. Genotyping was performed using
the Illumina Immunochip custom genotyping array (Infinium ImmunoArray-24 V.1.0
and V.2.0 BeadChip, respectively) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. To ensure consistency among datasets, we obtained the raw data of
each of them and applied the same quality control procedures in parallel
(including both the previously published studies and the newly genotyped data)
using PLINK V.1.07.15 In this
regard, low-quality single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were filtered out if
they had call rates <98%, minor allele frequencies (MAF) <0.01 and
deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE; P<0.001). Samples were also
removed if they showed a genotyping calling <95%, had a pair of
first-degree relatives (identity by descent >0.4) or were considered outliers
by plotting at >4 SD from the cluster centroids of each population using the
first 10 principal components (PC; estimated using the ancestry markers included
in the Immunochip). Sex chromosomes were not analysed.

SNP genotype imputation of whole-genome data after QC was performed
separately for each dataset as implemented in IMPUTE V.2.16 The 1000 Genome Project Phase 3 data
were used as reference panel.17 Briefly, we updated the SNP IDs and positions to
rs# and build 37 (HG19), respectively, with PLINK. Chunks of 50 000 Mbp
were then generated and imputed considering the most likely call for merging
genotypes (>0.9 probability threshold). Imputed data were also subjected to
stringent quality filters as follows: call rate <0.98, MAF<0.01, HWE
P<0.001.

We performed a more comprehensive imputation of this genomic region to
generate imputed data of classical HLA alleles (with two and four digits),
polymorphic amino acid positions and additional SNPs. In this case, we extracted
the non-imputed genotyping data from 20 000 000 to 40 000 000 base pairs at
chromosome 6 (which comprises the extended HLA region) and used the SNP2HLA
V.1.0.3 package18 with a
reference panel of 5225 individuals of European ancestry with available
genotyping data for 8961 genetic variants (common SNPs and INDEL polymorphisms)
as well as types for HLA class I and II molecules at four-digit resolution, as
described.1319

PLINK and the R-base software under GNU Public license V.2 were used to
analyse the imputed data. First, we used logistic regression on the best-guess
genotypes (>0.9 probability), assuming an additive model and using the 10
first PCs and gender as covariates, to analyse each dataset separately. The
results were then meta-analysed by means of the inverse variance method under a
fixed effects model, except for the HLA region in which a random effects model
was considered. Heterogeneity of the OR across the different datasets was
estimated using both Cochran’s Q test and I2. The study-wide
threshold for both statistical significance and trends of association were set
at 1.28E-06 and 2.55E-05, respectively, according to the estimation by the
Genetic Type I Error Calculator (CEG) software,20 which implements a Bonferroni-based
validated method to control the genome-wide type I error rate at 0.05. R was
used to generate the overall Manhattan plots, and the LocusZoom V.1.1 tool
(http://csg.sph.umich.edu/locuszoom/)21 was used to obtain the regional
association plots. Finally, the possible functional implication of the
association signals was estimated using the publicly available browser resources
RegulomeDB,22 HaploReg
V.4.123 and Blood
NESDA NTR Conditional eQTL Catalog.24

A total of 2425 vasculitis cases (1008 GCA cases, 437 TAK cases, 303 IgAV
cases and 677 AAV cases) and 4526 controls, as well as 191 948 genetic markers
remained after QC filtering and were included in the analyses.

The combined analysis of the Immunochip data from all four pathologies
showed evidence for common genetic associations in two loci,
that is, HLA and lysine demethylase 4C
(KDM4C), both surpassing the study-wide level of significance
(figure 1).

As the strongest association signals were located within the HLA region,
we decided to carry out a more robust analysis of this genomic region in order
to fine-map and localise the putative causal variants. Therefore, we conducted
another meta-analysis of imputed data of SNPs, classical alleles and polymorphic
amino acid positions. Due to the complex linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure
and disease-specific associations of this region, we used a random effect model.
As shown in online
supplementary figure 1 and table 1, several variants in high LD were
significantly associated to vasculitis predisposition, with an intergenic
polymorphism located between HLAD-QB1 and
HLA-DQA2 representing the peak signal (rs6932517,
P=4.16E-14, OR=0.74). This marker showed both evidence of
nominal association with each disease separately and consistent ORs across
studies (GCASpain, P=1.26E-04, OR=0.73;
GCAUK, P=1.52E-03, OR=0.78; TAKTurkey,
P=3.91E-02, OR=0.78; TAKUSA=4.03E-03,
OR=0.60; IgAV, P=1.51E-04, OR=0.67; AAV,
P=3.80E-04, OR=0.77). The remaining association peaks of the HLA
lost their statistical significance after conditioning on rs6932517, thus
suggesting that this SNP was sufficient to explain most of the observed HLA
signals.

In order to evaluate whether rs6932517 represented a true novel
susceptibility marker for the analysed vasculitides or just a marker of the
established risk variants for each type of vasculitis, we decided to calculate
the LD between them.13142526 As shown in online supplementary table 2,
evidence of moderate LD was observed in all cases (D’>0.8).

Outside the HLA region, the most strongly associated polymorphism
corresponded with the KDM4C SNP rs16925200 (P=6.23E-07,
OR=1.75; table 1). No
heterogeneity among the ORs and consistent OR directions were observed across
studies (online supplementary
table 3). This genomic region also harboured additional polymorphisms
with significant P values, all of them in high LD with rs16925200, which
suggests that they represent genetic markers of the same signal (supplementary figure S2). In
addition, the association of this locus remained significant
when the association test was performed under a random effects model (online supplementary table
3). Interestingly, one of these polymorphisms (rs12003023) showed a
nominal association with Behçet’s disease (BD), a variable
vessel vasculitis, in a previously published Immunochip study of this form of
vasculitis (P=1.11E-02, OR=1.78, 95% CI=1.14 to
2.79).27 Consistent
with this, the statistical significance of the overall meta-analysis for the
KDM4C rs12003023 variant increased after including the BD
data (rs10203023, P=4.08E-08, OR=1.69, P(Q)=7.70E-01,
I2=0).

Trend of associations (P<2.55E-5) were also observed for additional
SNPs located in different genomic regions (table
1), including RGS21/RGS1 (rs6704162,
P=4.48E-06, OR=1.25), protein kinase C theta
(PRKCQ; rs7895774, P=1.40E-05, OR=0.83),
LOC10012963/TNFSF15 (rs4574921; P=1.47E-05;
OR=0.83), Nedd4 family interacting protein 1 (NDFIP1;
rs116760964, P=1.72E-05, OR=1.71),
TMEM174/FOXD1 region (rs12517414, P=2.96E-05,
OR=1.27), KIAA1841 (rs74995325, P=3.29E-05,
OR=1.64), AC008703.1 (rs6869688, P=3.54E-05, OR=0.85),
zinc finger MIZ-type containing 1 (ZMIZ1; rs1250544,
P=3.90E-05, OR=0.85) and SERPINE1 mRNA binding protein 1
(SERBP1, rs1890928, P=4.91E-05,
OR=0.80).

Variants from known susceptibility loci for each
individual form of vasculitis were checked in our cross-phenotype meta-analysis.
Although no associations at the genome-wide level of significance were observed
within those genes, three out of the five genes examined harboured at least one
SNP with suggestive P values (P<0.05; online supplementary table 4).

Given that the associated KDM4C polymorphisms were
located in non-coding regions, we decided to further evaluate their possible
functional implications using bioinformatics approaches. First, we identified
all the SNP taggers (r2>0.8) of the lead variant (rs16925200) in
the European populations of the 1000 genomes project. Fourteen SNPs met this
criterion, with eight of them not being included in our merged dataset. Some of
these KDM4C variants showed functional annotations of interest,
such as overlapping with histone marks and DNAse hypersensitivity peaks enriched
at enhancers as well as possible influence to protein binding and regulatory
motifs (table 2). In addition, seven
variants have been described as cis-expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs)
regulating KDM4C expression in whole blood. Specifically,
rs10975993 had a score 2b in Regulome DB indicating that this SNP likely affects
transcription factor binding, in particular that of small MAF proteins like MAF
bZIP transcription factor K. These proteins are induced by the TGF-β
pathway and seem to influence the metabolism of antioxidant and xenobiotic
metabolism, being implicated in the susceptibility to various type of
cancer.28 However,
none of these marks were reported in cell types or tissues related to vasculitis
pathology.

The results of this study suggest the existence of a common genetic
component that may influence the susceptibility to develop different forms of
vasculitis. Particularly, besides the widely known association with the HLA region,
we have identified KDM4C, also known as JHDM3C or
JMJD2C, as a new shared locus between GCA,
TAK, AAV and IgAV, which could be also shared with BD. To our knowledge, this is the
first time that this gene has been implicated in the genetic predisposition to any
immune-mediated disease.

KDM4C is a member of the Jumonji domain 2 (JMJD2) family.
It is located on chromosome 9p24.1 and encodes a trimethylation-specific demethylase
that controls the methylation state of histone residues, affecting gene expression
and chromatin structure. 29 The
main function of KDM4C is the activation of genes by removing methyl groups from the
repressive histone mark trimethylated lysine 9 of the N-terminal tail of H3
(H3K9me3). Consistent with this, KDM4C has been related to cell
growth in different types of cancer, and it has been reported to influence
concentrations of both circulating growth factors, such as stem cell growth factor
beta, and cytokines like cutaneous T-cell attracting chemokine (CCL27).3031 Moreover, a recent GWAS
performed in an Ameridian ancestry population evidenced a suggestive association of
a KDM4C variant with systemic lupus erythematosus.32

Interestingly, it has been described that the H3K9me3 mark was significantly
enriched in the promoters of both systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid
arthritis (RA)-associated genes from GWAS in the Gm12878 EBV-transformed B
lymphoblastoid cell line, suggesting that epigenetics may have a relevant role in
autoimmunity.33 Indeed,
H3K9me3 and other histone marks (including H3K4Me3, H3K4Me2 and H3R17Me2) seem to be
introduced in a transcription-coupled manner during the IFN-γ-induced
activation of HLA class II genes, and it has been proposed that they may be
implicated in the transcription elongation and the establishment of transcriptional
memory of the HLA-DRA gene.34

On the other hand, it has been described that intronic polymorphisms located
near the 3′ end of KDM4C affect the expression of this gene
and, consequently, the expression levels of its target genes. Hence, genetic
variation within KDM4C may have an impact on the epigenetic
regulation of other genes, which evidences the close link that exists between
genetic and epigenetic mechanisms.30

Genetic–epigenetic relationships like the one described above could
explain many genetic associations of non-coding variants with complex diseases for
which no functional implication has been established yet. In this sense, the role of
epigenetics in the pathogenesis of immune-mediated diseases seems now undeniable.
35 Regarding vasculitides,
insights into the high relevance of the epigenetic mechanisms for disease
susceptibility have been published during the last years.36 A recent study, in which chromatin signature
patterns within genetic susceptibility regions in four types of systemic vasculitis
(including TAK, AAV, BD and Kawasaki disease) were analysed, identified potential
specific immune cells involved in vasculitis pathogenesis through epigenetic
alterations caused by genetic risk variants. Interestingly, the epigenetic changes
mediating disease risk included different methylation states in different immune
cells of the histone H3 such as H3K27me3 and H3K4me1 (associated with AAV and TAK,
respectively).37
Additionally, it has been described that AAV patients show an increased expression
of the JMJD3 protein (a histone demethylase similar to KDM4C), which lead to a
decreased histone methylation within the AAV-associated genes myeloperoxidase and
proteinase 3, thus resulting in a transcriptionally permissive chromatin structure
at these loci.38
Furthermore, a decreased expression of histone demethylases in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells, including KDM3A, was observed in IgAV patients.39 However, depletion of this gene in
heterozygous mouse models does not seem to cause phenotypes that may resemble the
clinical features of the vasculitides included in our study (MGI:1924054). Further
studies aimed at improving the understanding of the association of
KDM4C with the predisposition to vasculitis development may
definitively shed light into our understanding of the molecular basis underlying
these complex pathologies.

On the other hand, our analyses confirm the pivotal role of the HLA region
in the genetic susceptibility to systemic vasculitis. 5 However, the fact that an HLA polymorphism
represented the strongest association signal in our meta-analysis is intriguing, as
specific HLA associations use to define each disease entity.5 Our results suggest the existence of a shared
genetic marker for vasculitides within the HLA in an intergenic region between
HLA-DQB1 and HLA-DQA2. The most significant
SNP within this region, rs6932517, is in moderate LD (D’>0.8) with the
different peak variants of the individual archetypal HLA class II vasculitides
analysed here (GCA, AAV and IgAV; online supplementary table 2).132526 Although TAK is mainly linked to
HLA class I genes, previous studies suggest that some less relevant class II SNPs
between HLA-DQB1 and HLA-DRB1, like rs113452171,
may be also involved in its predisposition.914 This SNP has also a considerable
LD relationship with rs6932517 (D’=1). Therefore, it is likely that
the apparently shared association signal that we observed within the HLA region
corresponded to a tag SNP that marks the different disease-specific associations.
Despite this, rs6932517 could have a potential value as a possible diagnostic marker
of vasculitides. In any case, due to the broad LD structure throughout the HLA
region, more comprehensive studies interrogating this question will be necessary to
establish the attribution of common susceptibility locus for
vasculitides to a specific causal variant within the HLA system.

Finally, other interesting genes that have been previously related with
immune-mediated diseases were suggested as shared risk factors for vasculitides in
our study (table 1). Among them, it is worth
mentioning the genes zinc finger, MIZ-type containing 1 (ZIMZ1),
which has been described as a shared risk gene for Crohn’s disease and
psoriasis,40 and protein
kinase C theta (PRKCQ), a relevant locus for RA
susceptibility.41 The
latter, which encodes a calcium-independent and
phospholipid-dependent protein kinase important for T-cell activation, has been
described as a suggestive genetic marker for GCA development in a previous
study.1342 Future replication studies will
be necessary to validate these suggested associations with vasculitides. In summary,
we have identified KDM4C as a common risk locus
for vasculitides, highlighting the relevance of the epigenetic mechanisms in the
development of these complex diseases. In addition, our data suggest that genetic
variation between HLA-DQB1 and HLA-DQA2 could have
a high value in the understanding of the aetiological mechanisms underlying systemic
vasculitides, and support the notion that the HLA class II region is also relevant
in TAK.