---
reference_id: "PMID:37054692"
title: Clinical Guidelines for Diagnosis and Management of Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome in Children and Adults.
authors:
- Yamamoto H
- Sakamoto H
- Kumagai H
- Abe T
- Ishiguro S
- Uchida K
- Kawasaki Y
- Saida Y
- Sano Y
- Takeuchi Y
- Tajika M
- Nakajima T
- Banno K
- Funasaka Y
- Hori S
- Yamaguchi T
- Yoshida T
- Ishikawa H
- Iwama T
- Okazaki Y
- Saito Y
- Matsuura N
- Mutoh M
- Tomita N
- Akiyama T
- Yamamoto T
- Ishida H
- Nakayama Y
journal: Digestion
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000529799
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Guidelines for Diagnosis and Management of Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome in Children and Adults.
**Authors:** Yamamoto H, Sakamoto H, Kumagai H, Abe T, Ishiguro S, Uchida K, Kawasaki Y, Saida Y, Sano Y, Takeuchi Y, Tajika M, Nakajima T, Banno K, Funasaka Y, Hori S, Yamaguchi T, Yoshida T, Ishikawa H, Iwama T, Okazaki Y, Saito Y, Matsuura N, Mutoh M, Tomita N, Akiyama T, Yamamoto T, Ishida H, Nakayama Y
**Journal:** Digestion (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000529799](https://doi.org/10.1159/000529799)

## Content

1. Digestion. 2023;104(5):335-347. doi: 10.1159/000529799. Epub 2023 Apr 13.

Clinical Guidelines for Diagnosis and Management of Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome in 
Children and Adults.

Yamamoto H(1), Sakamoto H(1), Kumagai H(2), Abe T(3), Ishiguro S(4), Uchida 
K(5), Kawasaki Y(6), Saida Y(7), Sano Y(8), Takeuchi Y(9), Tajika M(10), 
Nakajima T(11), Banno K(12), Funasaka Y(13), Hori S(14), Yamaguchi T(15), 
Yoshida T(16), Ishikawa H(17)(18), Iwama T(19), Okazaki Y(20), Saito Y(21), 
Matsuura N(22), Mutoh M(17), Tomita N(23), Akiyama T(24), Yamamoto T(25), Ishida 
H(19), Nakayama Y(26).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical 
University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Hanwa Sumiyoshi General Hospital, Osaka, 
Japan.
(4)PCL JAPAN, INC, Kawagoe, Saitama, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Mie University Hospital, Tsu, Japan.
(6)University of Hyogo, College of Nursing, Akashi, Japan.
(7)Department of Surgery, Toho University Ohashi Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Gastrointestinal Center & Institute of Minimally-invasive Endoscopic Care, 
Sano Hospital, Kobe, Japan.
(9)Division of Hereditary Tumors, Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology, And 
Department of Genetic Oncology, Osaka International Cancer Institute, Osaka, 
Japan.
(10)Department of Endoscopy, Aichi Cancer Center, Nagoya, Japan.
(11)Department of Clinical Genetic Oncology, Cancer Institute Hospital of JFCR, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Keio University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(13)Department of Dermatology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.
(14)Department of Cancer Genomic Medicine, NHO Shikoku Cancer Center, Matsuyama, 
Japan.
(15)Department of Clinical Genetics, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious 
Diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(16)Department of Genetic Medicine and Services, National Cancer Center 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(17)Department of Molecular-Targeting Prevention, Kyoto Prefectural University 
of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(18)Ishikawa Gastroenterology Clinic, Osaka, Japan.
(19)Department of Digestive Tract and General Surgery, Saitama Medical Center, 
Saitama Medical University, Kawagoe, Japan.
(20)Intractable Disease Research Center, Graduate School of Medicine, Juntendo 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(21)Endoscopy Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(22)Osaka International Cancer Institute, Osaka, Japan.
(23)Cancer Treatment Center, Toyonaka Municipal Hospital, Toyonaka, Osaka, 
Japan.
(24)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Chuden Hospital, Hiroshima, Hiroshima, 
Japan.
(25)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Nihon 
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(26)Department of Pediatrics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, 
Nagano, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare disease characterized by the 
presence of hamartomatous polyposis throughout the gastrointestinal tract, 
except for the esophagus, along with characteristic mucocutaneous pigmentation. 
It is caused by germline pathogenic variants of the STK11 gene, which exhibit an 
autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. Some patients with PJS develop 
gastrointestinal lesions in childhood and require continuous medical care until 
adulthood and sometimes have serious complications that significantly reduce 
their quality of life. Hamartomatous polyps in the small bowel may cause 
bleeding, intestinal obstruction, and intussusception. Novel diagnostic and 
therapeutic endoscopic procedures such as small-bowel capsule endoscopy and 
balloon-assisted enteroscopy have been developed in recent years.
SUMMARY: Under these circumstances, there is growing concern about the 
management of PJS in Japan, and there are no practice guidelines available. To 
address this situation, the guideline committee was organized by the Research 
Group on Rare and Intractable Diseases granted by the Ministry of Health, Labour 
and Welfare with specialists from multiple academic societies. The present 
clinical guidelines explain the principles in the diagnosis and management of 
PJS together with four clinical questions and corresponding recommendations 
based on a careful review of the evidence and involved incorporating the concept 
of the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation system.
KEY MESSAGES: Herein, we present the English version of the clinical practice 
guidelines of PJS to promote seamless implementation of accurate diagnosis and 
appropriate management of pediatric, adolescent, and adult patients with PJS.

© 2023 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000529799
PMID: 37054692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]