---
reference_id: PMID:37958272
title: Structural and Functional Changes in Non-Paraneoplastic Autoimmune Retinopathy.
authors:
- Akhavanrezayat A
- Khatri A
- Onghanseng NGL
- Halim MS
- Or C
- Sredar N
- Razeen M
- Hasanreisoglu M
- Regenold J
- Thng ZX
- Mohammadi SS
- Jain T
- Yavari N
- Bazojoo V
- Gupta AS
- Mobasserian A
- Yasar C
- Than NTT
- Uludag Kirimli G
- Karaca I
- Shin YU
- Yoo WS
- Ghoraba H
- Do DV
- Dubra A
- Nguyen QD
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13213376
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural and Functional Changes in Non-Paraneoplastic Autoimmune Retinopathy.
**Authors:** Akhavanrezayat A, Khatri A, Onghanseng NGL, Halim MS, Or C, Sredar N, Razeen M, Hasanreisoglu M, Regenold J, Thng ZX, Mohammadi SS, Jain T, Yavari N, Bazojoo V, Gupta AS, Mobasserian A, Yasar C, Than NTT, Uludag Kirimli G, Karaca I, Shin YU, Yoo WS, Ghoraba H, Do DV, Dubra A, Nguyen QD
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics13213376](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13213376)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Nov 3;13(21):3376. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13213376.

Structural and Functional Changes in Non-Paraneoplastic Autoimmune Retinopathy.

Akhavanrezayat A(1), Khatri A(1)(2)(3), Onghanseng NGL(1)(4), Halim MS(1)(5), Or 
C(1), Sredar N(1), Razeen M(1), Hasanreisoglu M(6)(7), Regenold J(1), Thng 
ZX(1)(8), Mohammadi SS(1), Jain T(1)(9), Yavari N(1), Bazojoo V(1), Gupta AS(1), 
Mobasserian A(1), Yasar C(1), Than NTT(1), Uludag Kirimli G(1)(10), Karaca I(1), 
Shin YU(1)(11), Yoo WS(1)(12), Ghoraba H(1), Do DV(1), Dubra A(1), Nguyen QD(1).

Author information:
(1)Spencer Center for Vision Research, Byers Eye Institute, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, 2370 Watson Court, Palo Alto, CA 94303, USA.
(2)Birat Aankha Aspatal, Biratnagar 56613, Nepal.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Birat Medical College and Teaching Hospital, 
Kathmandu University, Biratnagar 45200, Nepal.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Makati Medical Center, Manila 1229, Philippines.
(5)Ocular Imaging Research and Reading Center, Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Koc University School of Medicine, 34450 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(7)Koc University Research Center for Translational Medicine, Koc University, 
34450 Istanbul, Turkey.
(8)National Healthcare Group Eye Institute, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore 
308433, Singapore.
(9)Dr. Shroff Charity Eye Hospital, New Delhi 110002, India.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27705, USA.
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, Hanyang University Guri Hospital, Hanyang 
University College of Medicine, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea.
(12)Department of Ophthalmology, Gyeongsang National University College of 
Medicine, and Gyeongsang National University Hospital, Jinju 52727, Republic of 
Korea.

BACKGROUND: To describe longitudinal changes in patients with non-paraneoplastic 
autoimmune retinopathy (npAIR) by utilizing different diagnostic 
modalities/tests.
METHODS: The index study is a retrospective longitudinal review of sixteen eyes 
of eight patients from a tertiary care eye hospital diagnosed with npAIR. 
Multiple diagnostic modalities such as wide-angle fundus photography (WAFP), WA 
fundus autofluorescence (WAFAF), spectral-domain optical coherence tomography 
(SD-OCT), Goldmann visual field (GVF) perimetry, microperimetry (MP), 
electrophysiologic testing, and adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscopy 
(AOSLO) were reviewed and analyzed.
RESULTS: At the baseline visits, anomalies were detected by multimodal 
diagnostic tests on all patients. Subjects were followed up for a median 
duration of 11.5 [3.0-18.7] months. Structural changes at the baseline were 
detected in 14 of 16 (87.5%) eyes on WAFP and WAFAF and 13 of 16 (81.2%) eyes on 
SD-OCT. Eight of the ten (80%) eyes that underwent AOSLO imaging depicted 
structural changes. Functional changes were detected in 14 of 16 (87.5%) eyes on 
GVF, 15 of 16 (93.7%) eyes on MP, and 11 of 16 (68.7%) eyes on full-field 
electroretinogram (ff-ERG). Multifocal electroretinogram (mf-ERG) and visual 
evoked potential (VEP) tests were performed in 14 eyes, of which 12 (85.7%) and 
14 (100%) of the eyes demonstrated functional abnormalities, respectively, at 
baseline. Compared to all the other structural diagnostic tools, AOSLO had a 
better ability to demonstrate deterioration in retinal microstructures occurring 
at follow-ups. Functional deterioration at follow-up was detected on GVF in 8 of 
10 (80%) eyes, mf-ERG in 4 of 8 (50%) eyes, and MP in 7 of 16 (43.7%) eyes. The 
ff-ERG and VEP were stable in the majority of cases at follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: The utilization of multimodal imaging/tests in the diagnosing and 
monitoring of npAIR patients can aid in identifying anomalous changes over time. 
Analysis of both the anatomical and functional aspects by these devices can be 
supportive of detecting the changes early in such patients. AOSLO shows promise 
as it enables the capture of high-resolution images demonstrating quantifiable 
changes to retinal microstructure.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13213376
PMCID: PMC10649684
PMID: 37958272

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.