---
reference_id: "PMID:29555355"
title: Clinical and electrographic features of sunflower syndrome.
authors:
- Baumer FM
- Porter BE
journal: Epilepsy Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2018.03.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and electrographic features of sunflower syndrome.
**Authors:** Baumer FM, Porter BE
**Journal:** Epilepsy Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2018.03.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2018.03.002)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Res. 2018 May;142:58-63. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2018.03.002. Epub 
2018 Mar 3.

Clinical and electrographic features of sunflower syndrome.

Baumer FM(1), Porter BE(2).

Author information:
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Division of 
Child Neurology, United States. Electronic address: fbaumer@stanford.edu.
(2)Stanford University School of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Division of 
Child Neurology, United States. Electronic address: brenda2@stanford.edu.

BACKGROUND: Sunflower Syndrome describes reflex seizures - typically eyelid 
myoclonia with or without absence seizures - triggered when patients wave their 
hands in front of the sun. While valproate has been recognized as the best 
treatment for photosensitive epilepsy, many clinicians now initially treat with 
newer medications; the efficacy of these medications in Sunflower Syndrome has 
not been investigated. We reviewed all cases of Sunflower Syndrome seen at our 
institution over 15 years to describe the clinical course, electroencephalogram 
(EEG), and treatment response in these patients.
METHODS: Search of the electronic medical record and EEG database, as well as 
survey of epilepsy providers at our institution, yielded 13 cases of Sunflower 
Syndrome between 2002 and 2017. We reviewed the records and EEG tracings.
RESULTS: Patients were mostly young females, with an average age of onset of 5.5 
years. Seven had intellectual, attentional or academic problems. Self-induced 
seizures were predominantly eyelid myoclonia ± absences and 6 subjects also had 
spontaneous seizures. EEG demonstrated a normal background with 3-4 Hz spike 
waves ± polyspike waves as well as a photoparoxysmal response. Based on both 
clinical and EEG response, valproate was the most effective treatment for 
reducing or eliminating seizures and improving the EEG; 9 patients tried 
valproate and 66% had significant improvement or resolution of seizures. None of 
the nine patients on levetiracetam or seven patients on lamotrigine monotherapy 
achieved seizure control, though three patients had improvement with 
polypharmacy.
CONCLUSIONS: Valproate monotherapy continues to be the most effective treatment 
for Sunflower Syndrome and should be considered early. For patients who cannot 
tolerate valproate, higher doses of lamotrigine or polypharmacy should be 
considered. Levetiracetam monotherapy, even at high doses, is unlikely to be 
effective.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2018.03.002
PMCID: PMC6051521
PMID: 29555355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]