---
reference_id: "PMID:11127846"
title: "Osteogenesis imperfecta: practical treatment guidelines."
authors:
- Antoniazzi F
- Mottes M
- Fraschini P
- Brunelli PC
- Tatò L
journal: Paediatr Drugs
year: '2000'
doi: 10.2165/00128072-200002060-00005
keywords:
- Child
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- "Fractures, Bone/etiology, prevention & control"
- Genetic Therapy
- Growth Hormone/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Immobilization
- Orthopedic Procedures/methods
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/classification, diagnosis, therapy"
- Physical Therapy Modalities
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta: practical treatment guidelines.
**Authors:** Antoniazzi F, Mottes M, Fraschini P, Brunelli PC, Tatò L
**Journal:** Paediatr Drugs (2000)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00128072-200002060-00005](https://doi.org/10.2165/00128072-200002060-00005)

## Content

1. Paediatr Drugs. 2000 Nov-Dec;2(6):465-88. doi:
10.2165/00128072-200002060-00005.

Osteogenesis imperfecta: practical treatment guidelines.

Antoniazzi F(1), Mottes M, Fraschini P, Brunelli PC, Tatò L.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento Materno-Infantile e di Biologia-Genetica, Università degli Studi
di Verona, Italy. francoa@borgoroma.univr.it

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), an inherited connective tissue disorder of
remarkable clinical variability, is caused by a quantitative or qualitative
defect in collagen synthesis and is characterised by bone fragility. The number
of fractures and deformities, and the age at which they begin greatly influence
the prognosis and the achievement of walking and autonomy. A multidisciplinary
team approach is essential for diagnosis, for communication with patient and
parents, and to tailor treatment needs to the severity of the disease and the
age of the patient. Three types of treatment are available: nonsurgical
management (physical therapy, rehabilitation, bracing and splinting), surgery
(intramedullary rod positioning, spinal and basilar impression surgery), and
drugs to increase the strength of bone and decrease the number of fractures. An
aggressive rehabilitative approach is indicated to optimise functional ability
and walking capacity; appropriately timed surgery to insert intramedullary rods
provides improved function of extremities. Despite a high rate of complications,
intramedullary telescopic roding has proven to be the most successful method for
preventing and correcting fractures and deformities of long bones, improving
walking capability and leading to successful rehabilitation of even severely
affected patients. Surgery may be required in patients with progressive spinal
deformity and in those with symptomatic basilar impression. Hearing function,
dentinogenesis imperfecta, cardiac and respiratory function, and neurological
changes must be monitored. The causal defect of the disease cannot be corrected
with medical treatment and, currently, only symptomatic therapy is available. In
recent years growth hormone (GH) and bisphosphonate agents have been used in OI
therapy. GH is beneficial in patients with moderate forms of OI, showing a
positive effect on bone turnover, bone mineral density and height velocity rate.
Bisphosphonates have proved beneficial in children with severe OI, increasing
bone mineral density and reducing the fracture rate and pain with no adverse
effects reported. These data require confirmation in double-blind controlled
studies; however, bisphosphonates have markedly improved morbidity in patients
with OI. Future developments in genetic therapy may be directed towards either
replacing cells carrying the mutant gene with normal cells or silencing the
mutant allele using antisense suppression therapy, thus transforming a
biochemically severe form of OI into a mild form.

DOI: 10.2165/00128072-200002060-00005
PMID: 11127846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
