---
reference_id: "PMID:38484105"
title: Classic Isovaleric Acidemia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Mütze U
- Reischl-Hajiabadi A
- Kölker S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Classic Isovaleric Acidemia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Mütze U, Reischl-Hajiabadi A, Kölker S

## Content

1. Classic Isovaleric Acidemia.

Mütze U(1), Reischl-Hajiabadi A(1), Kölker S(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2024 Mar 14.

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Neurology and Metabolic MedicineCenter for Child and
Adolescent MedicineUniversity Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Individuals with clinical manifestations of isovaleric
acidemia (IVA) have either classic IVA identified on newborn screening or
classic IVA with a later diagnosis due to a missed diagnosis or later onset of
clinical manifestations. Classic IVA is characterized by acute metabolic
decompensations (vomiting, poor feeding, lethargy, hypotonia, seizures, and a
distinct odor of sweaty feet). Acute metabolic decompensations are typically
triggered by fasting, (febrile) illness (especially gastroenteritis), or
increased protein intake. Clinical deterioration often occurs within hours to
days after birth. Additional manifestations of classic IVA include developmental
delay, intellectual disability and/or impaired cognition, epilepsy, and movement
disorder (tremor, dysmetria, extrapyramidal movements). Early treatment in those
identified by newborn screening can significantly reduce morbidity and mortality
in individuals with classic IVA.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of classic IVA is established in a proband by
identification of C5-carnitine metabolites by tandem mass spectrometry and
isovalerylglycine (IVG) and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid (3-HIVA) on analysis of
urinary organic acids by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, or identification
of biallelic pathogenic variants in IVD by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Low-leucine/protein-reduced diet and the
supplementation of a leucine-free formula in infants or leucine-free amino acid
mixture in older children; carnitine and/or glycine supplementation. Supportive
care: Routine daily treatment includes education of affected individuals and
caregivers about the natural history, maintenance and emergency treatment,
prognosis, and risks of acute encephalopathic crises; emergency treatment letter
and MedicAlert®; management of movement disorder per neurologist; physical
therapy and aggressive rehabilitation therapy for gross motor delay; notify
metabolic center prior to planned surgeries; consult metabolic disease
specialist with any emergency surgery/procedure. Emergency outpatient treatment
includes carbohydrate supplementation orally or via tube feeding, transient
reduction of natural protein intake, elevation of carnitine supplementation, and
glycine; antipyretics for fever; antiemetics for vomiting. Acute inpatient
treatment includes stopping protein intake, intravenous glucose, and hydration
with normal saline; adjusting treatments for new or evolving neurologic
manifestations; consider buffers as needed for life-threatening metabolic
acidosis; nitrogen scavengers for hyperammonemia. Surveillance: Quantitative
analysis of plasma amino acids at least every three months until age one year,
every six months from age one to six years, and annually in those age six years
and older; blood gases, albumin, calcium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone,
complete blood count, and vitamin B12 at least annually in those on a
protein-restricted diet; measurement of growth and head circumference at each
visit throughout childhood; monitor weight throughout adulthood; monitor
developmental milestones at each visit; neuropsychological testing and
standardized quality-of-life assessments as needed; assessment of movement
disorder at each visit. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Excess of dietary protein
or protein malnutrition inducing catabolic state; prolonged fasting; catabolism
during illness. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Biochemical or molecular
genetic testing of all at-risk sibs of any age is warranted to allow for early
diagnosis and treatment of classic IVA.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Classic IVA is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an IVD pathogenic variant, each
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected,
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the IVD pathogenic variants have been
identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives
and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 38484105
