---
reference_id: "PMID:39979629"
title: "Non-melanoma skin cancer of the external auditory canal: long-term outcomes of a tertiary head and neck unit."
authors:
- Apthorp E
- Lam R
- Obholzer R
- Jeannon JP
- Oakley R
- Rovira A
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-025-09274-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Ear Canal/pathology
- Retrospective Studies
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Skin Neoplasms/therapy, pathology, mortality"
- "Ear Neoplasms/therapy, pathology, mortality"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Adult
- Survival Rate
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/therapy, pathology, mortality"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-melanoma skin cancer of the external auditory canal: long-term outcomes of a tertiary head and neck unit.
**Authors:** Apthorp E, Lam R, Obholzer R, Jeannon JP, Oakley R, Rovira A
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-025-09274-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-025-09274-3)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2025 Jul;282(7):3657-3667. doi:
10.1007/s00405-025-09274-3. Epub 2025 Feb 20.

Non-melanoma skin cancer of the external auditory canal: long-term outcomes of a
tertiary head and neck unit.

Apthorp E(1)(2), Lam R(3), Obholzer R(4), Jeannon JP(4), Oakley R(4), Rovira
A(4).

Author information:
(1)GKT School of Medical Education, King's College London, Guy's Campus, Great
Maze Pond, London, SE1 1UL, UK. ellieapthorp@gmail.com.
(2)Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, Westminster Bridge Road, London,
SE1 7EH, UK. ellieapthorp@gmail.com.
(3)GKT School of Medical Education, King's College London, Guy's Campus, Great
Maze Pond, London, SE1 1UL, UK.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Guy's and St Thomas'
NHS Foundation Trust, Great Maze Pond, London, SE1 9RT, UK.

PURPOSE: External auditory canal (EAC) skin cancer is often diagnosed at
advanced stages, leading to poor survival outcomes. Our study aims to describe
disease characteristics, treatments and outcomes of patients with EAC cancer,
increasing understanding of the management of this rare disease.
METHODS: Retrospective, observational study including patients with non-melanoma
EAC skin cancer treated at Guy's and St Thomas' Head and Neck Unit from 2012 to
2021, with follow-up until October 2023. Patient with EAC or auricular primaries
extending into the EAC were included. Demographic, histopathological, and
surgical data were obtained from electronic records.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight patients were included, 86.8% treated with curative
intent. The median follow-up was 49.9 months. One, three, and five-year overall
survival for patients treated curatively were 100%, 96.9% and 75.3%,
respectively, versus 40.0%, 0.0% and 0.0% for palliative. 68.4% had advanced
disease (Pittsburgh staging, III: 18.4%, IV: 50.0%). 39.5% were treated after
recurrent or persistent disease. Histological subtypes included squamous cell
carcinoma (60.5%), basal cell carcinoma (26.3%) and others (13.2%). Among those
treated surgically (n = 31), 74.2% underwent lateral temporal bone resection and
29.0% wide local excision. 83.9% had parotidectomy, neck dissection or both.
51.6% received post-operative radiotherapy/chemoradiotherapy. Advanced stage was
significantly associated with reduced overall survival (p = 0.05) but not
disease-free survival (p = 0.25). No primary site features, regional metastasis
(p = 0.63), direct parotid invasion (p = 0.71) or age (p = 0.15) significantly
impacted survival.
CONCLUSION: According to the good outcomes reported, this study suggests
lowering the threshold for radical treatment may improve outcomes for patients
with potentially poor prognostic features.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-025-09274-3
PMCID: PMC12321918
PMID: 39979629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval: As determined by
the NHS Health Research Authority decision tool, this study qualified as a
service evaluation and did not require formal ethical approval. Approval was
granted as an audit under project number 14378 at Guy’s and St Thomas’ Hospital.
Patient confidentiality was ensured, and all data were anonymized before
analysis. Competing interests: The authors have no competing interests to
declare that are relevant to the content of this article.
