---
reference_id: "PMID:21083385"
title: Effect of VX-770 in persons with cystic fibrosis and the G551D-CFTR mutation.
authors:
- Accurso FJ
- Rowe SM
- Clancy JP
- Boyle MP
- Dunitz JM
- Durie PR
- Sagel SD
- Hornick DB
- Konstan MW
- Donaldson SH
- Moss RB
- Pilewski JM
- Rubenstein RC
- Uluer AZ
- Aitken ML
- Freedman SD
- Rose LM
- Mayer-Hamblett N
- Dong Q
- Zha J
- Stone AJ
- Olson ER
- Ordoñez CL
- Campbell PW
- Ashlock MA
- Ramsey BW
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0909825
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of VX-770 in persons with cystic fibrosis and the G551D-CFTR mutation.
**Authors:** Accurso FJ, Rowe SM, Clancy JP, Boyle MP, Dunitz JM, Durie PR, Sagel SD, Hornick DB, Konstan MW, Donaldson SH, Moss RB, Pilewski JM, Rubenstein RC, Uluer AZ, Aitken ML, Freedman SD, Rose LM, Mayer-Hamblett N, Dong Q, Zha J, Stone AJ, Olson ER, Ordoñez CL, Campbell PW, Ashlock MA, Ramsey BW
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa0909825](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0909825)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2010 Nov 18;363(21):1991-2003. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0909825.

Effect of VX-770 in persons with cystic fibrosis and the G551D-CFTR mutation.

Accurso FJ(1), Rowe SM, Clancy JP, Boyle MP, Dunitz JM, Durie PR, Sagel SD, 
Hornick DB, Konstan MW, Donaldson SH, Moss RB, Pilewski JM, Rubenstein RC, Uluer 
AZ, Aitken ML, Freedman SD, Rose LM, Mayer-Hamblett N, Dong Q, Zha J, Stone AJ, 
Olson ER, Ordoñez CL, Campbell PW, Ashlock MA, Ramsey BW.

Author information:
(1)University of Colorado Denver and Children's Hospital, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. 
accurso.frank@tchden.org

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Nov 18;363(21):2056-7. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1010123.
    Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2011 Mar;20(3):423-5. doi: 
10.1517/13543784.2011.554823.

BACKGROUND: A new approach in the treatment of cystic fibrosis involves 
improving the function of mutant cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator (CFTR). VX-770, a CFTR potentiator, has been shown to increase the 
activity of wild-type and defective cell-surface CFTR in vitro.
METHODS: We randomly assigned 39 adults with cystic fibrosis and at least one 
G551D-CFTR allele to receive oral VX-770 every 12 hours at a dose of 25, 75, or 
150 mg or placebo for 14 days (in part 1 of the study) or VX-770 every 12 hours 
at a dose of 150 or 250 mg or placebo for 28 days (in part 2 of the study).
RESULTS: At day 28, in the group of subjects who received 150 mg of VX-770, the 
median change in the nasal potential difference (in response to the 
administration of a chloride-free isoproterenol solution) from baseline was -3.5 
mV (range, -8.3 to 0.5; P=0.02 for the within-subject comparison, P=0.13 vs. 
placebo), and the median change in the level of sweat chloride was -59.5 mmol 
per liter (range, -66.0 to -19.0; P=0.008 within-subject, P=0.02 vs. placebo). 
The median change from baseline in the percent of predicted forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second was 8.7% (range, 2.3 to 31.3; P=0.008 for the within-subject 
comparison, P=0.56 vs. placebo). None of the subjects withdrew from the study. 
Six severe adverse events occurred in two subjects (diffuse macular rash in one 
subject and five incidents of elevated blood and urine glucose levels in one 
subject with diabetes). All severe adverse events resolved without the 
discontinuation of VX-770.
CONCLUSIONS: This study to evaluate the safety and adverse-event profile of 
VX-770 showed that VX-770 was associated with within-subject improvements in 
CFTR and lung function. These findings provide support for further studies of 
pharmacologic potentiation of CFTR as a means to treat cystic fibrosis. (Funded 
by Vertex Pharmaceuticals and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00457821.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0909825
PMCID: PMC3148255
PMID: 21083385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No other potential conflict of interest relevant 
to this article was reported.