---
reference_id: "PMID:26408396"
title: Different Expression of Hypoxic and Angiogenic Factors in Human Endometriotic Lesions.
authors:
- Filippi I
- Carrarelli P
- Luisi S
- Batteux F
- Chapron C
- Naldini A
- Petraglia F
journal: Reprod Sci
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1177/1933719115607978
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Different Expression of Hypoxic and Angiogenic Factors in Human Endometriotic Lesions.
**Authors:** Filippi I, Carrarelli P, Luisi S, Batteux F, Chapron C, Naldini A, Petraglia F
**Journal:** Reprod Sci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1933719115607978](https://doi.org/10.1177/1933719115607978)

## Content

1. Reprod Sci. 2016 Apr;23(4):492-7. doi: 10.1177/1933719115607978. Epub 2015 Sep
 25.

Different Expression of Hypoxic and Angiogenic Factors in Human Endometriotic 
Lesions.

Filippi I(1), Carrarelli P(2), Luisi S(2), Batteux F(3), Chapron C(4), Naldini 
A(1), Petraglia F(5).

Author information:
(1)Cellular and Molecular Physiology Unit, Department of Molecular and 
Developmental Medicine, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(2)Obstetrics and Gynecology Unit, Department of Molecular and Developmental 
Medicine, "S. Maria alle Scotte" Hospital, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(3)Department of Immunology, Hôpital Cochin, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Paris, France Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Inserm, 
Unité de Recherche, Institut Cochin, CNRS, Paris, France.
(4)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Inserm, Unité de Recherche, 
Institut Cochin, CNRS, Paris, France Department of Gynecology Obstetrics II and 
Reproductive Medicine, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbone Paris Cité, Faculté 
de Médecine, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Groupe Hospitalier 
Universitaire Ouest, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Cochin, Paris, France.
(5)Obstetrics and Gynecology Unit, Department of Molecular and Developmental 
Medicine, "S. Maria alle Scotte" Hospital, University of Siena, Siena, Italy 
felice.petraglia@unisi.it.

Endometriosis is associated with local angiogenic and hypoxic mechanisms. 
Indeed, peritoneal fluid of women with endometriosis generates a specific 
microenvironment to support the growth and development of ectopic endometrial 
tissues. The association between proangiogenic markers and hypoxic processes in 
different endometriosis phenotypes was investigated in the present study, 
analyzing the expression of several genes, related to hypoxic signaling pathway 
and involved in angiogenic processes, in nonpregnant women with different forms 
of endometriosis. Samples of ovarian endometrioma (OMA; n = 16) or deep 
infiltrating endometriosis (DIE; n = 11) were collected, and in addition, 
control endometrium was collected from healthy women by hysteroscopy. The gene 
expression of the hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF) 1/2α, protease-activated 
receptors (PARs) ¼, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) A was 
evaluated by quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. 
Ovarian endometrioma expresses high levels of HIF-1/2α, PAR-1/4, and VEGF-A, 
while DIE did not show significantly different gene expression compared to 
endometrium from unaffected women. A positive correlation between the expression 
of HIF-1/2α and VEGF-A mRNA was observed in OMA. The overall data point out that 
the heterogeneity of the disease reflects differences in expression levels of 
genes associated with hypoxia and angiogenesis, suggesting that such conditions 
may have an active role in the development of the disease.

© The Author(s) 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1933719115607978
PMID: 26408396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]