---
reference_id: "PMID:27191684"
title: "Optimizing Stimulation in a Case of Facial Pain Through \"Cross-Talk\" of Peripheral and Central Leads: A Case Report."
authors:
- McRoberts WP
journal: Neuromodulation
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/ner.12443
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optimizing Stimulation in a Case of Facial Pain Through "Cross-Talk" of Peripheral and Central Leads: A Case Report.
**Authors:** McRoberts WP
**Journal:** Neuromodulation (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ner.12443](https://doi.org/10.1111/ner.12443)

## Content

1. Neuromodulation. 2016 Dec;19(8):885-888. doi: 10.1111/ner.12443. Epub 2016 May
 18.

Optimizing Stimulation in a Case of Facial Pain Through "Cross-Talk" of 
Peripheral and Central Leads: A Case Report.

McRoberts WP.

OBJECTIVES: To describe inter-lead (cross-talk) stimulation between a trigeminal 
nerve lead and a cervical epidural lead for the treatment of facial pain in a 
69-year-old patient with empty nose syndrome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A trial implant was performed with a peripheral V2 
trigeminal lead and a C1-C2 lead in cross-talk configuration. During permanent 
implant, the V2 lead was placed uneventfully while the central lead could only 
be advanced to C3-C4.
RESULTS: During the trial, pain decreased by 70%. One month after permanent 
implant, the patient still experienced a 60-70% reduction in pain levels and a 
decrease from ten to two weekly pain episodes. Nine months post implant, the 
patient reported complete pain relief (0/10 on a numeric rating scale ranging 
from 0 to 10) and medications were discontinued. Infrequent exacerbations (3/10) 
were controlled by increasing stimulation. Three years post implant, the patient 
continued to have no baseline pain and could easily control exacerbations.
CONCLUSION: Cross-talk configuration between a peripheral and a central lead 
created a more efficient stimulation technique. The resulting paresthesia was 
superior to that obtained from either lead alone and exceeded the paresthesia 
obtained from the combination of the two leads when used simultaneously, without 
an inter-lead configuration.

© 2016 International Neuromodulation Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ner.12443
PMID: 27191684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]