---
reference_id: "PMID:34518987"
title: The genetics of cardiac amyloidosis.
authors:
- Arno S
- Cowger J
journal: Heart Fail Rev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10741-021-10164-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genetics of cardiac amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Arno S, Cowger J
**Journal:** Heart Fail Rev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10741-021-10164-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10741-021-10164-z)

## Content

1. Heart Fail Rev. 2022 Sep;27(5):1485-1492. doi: 10.1007/s10741-021-10164-z.
Epub  2021 Sep 13.

The genetics of cardiac amyloidosis.

Arno S(1), Cowger J(2).

Author information:
(1)Henry Ford Hospitals, 2799 W. Grand Blvd, K14 Cardiology, Detroit, MI, 48202, 
USA.
(2)Henry Ford Hospitals, 2799 W. Grand Blvd, K14 Cardiology, Detroit, MI, 48202, 
USA. Jennifercowger@gmail.com.

Heritable cardiac amyloidosis (CA) is an underrecognized cause of morbidity and 
mortality in the USA. It results from the accumulation of the misfolded protein 
transthyretin within the myocardium, resulting in amyloid 
transthyretin-associated cardiomyopathy (ATTR-CM). Over 150 different pathologic 
point mutations within the transthyretin gene have been identified, each 
carrying variable clinical phenotypes and penetrance. In the USA, the most 
common cause of hereditary ATTR is the Val122Ile point mutation, with a 
prevalence of 3.4-4.0% in North Americans of African and Caribbean descent. 
Among Caucasians with hereditary ATTR-CM, the V30M mutation is the most commonly 
identified variant. Overall, the incidence of ATTR disease in the USA has been 
increasing, likely due to an increase in practitioner awareness, utilization of 
new non-invasive imaging technologies for ATTR diagnosis, and the growth of 
multidisciplinary amyloid programs across the country. Yet significant numbers 
of patients with evidence of left ventricular thickening on cardiac imaging, 
senile aortic stenosis, and/or symptoms of heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction likely have undiagnosed CA, especially within the African American 
population. With the emergence of new disease-modifying therapies for ATTR, 
recognition and the prompt diagnosis of CA is important for patients and their 
potentially affected progeny. Herein, we review the genetics of heritable CA as 
well as the importance of genetic counseling and testing for patients and their 
families.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10741-021-10164-z
PMID: 34518987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]