---
reference_id: "PMID:28895088"
title: Prevalence of a history of prior varicella/herpes zoster infection in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Manouchehrinia A
- Tanasescu R
- Kareem H
- Jerca OP
- Jabeen F
- Shafei R
- Breuer J
- Neal K
- Irving W
- Constantinescu CS
journal: J Neurovirol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s13365-017-0569-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of a history of prior varicella/herpes zoster infection in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Manouchehrinia A, Tanasescu R, Kareem H, Jerca OP, Jabeen F, Shafei R, Breuer J, Neal K, Irving W, Constantinescu CS
**Journal:** J Neurovirol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13365-017-0569-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13365-017-0569-1)

## Content

1. J Neurovirol. 2017 Dec;23(6):839-844. doi: 10.1007/s13365-017-0569-1. Epub
2017  Sep 11.

Prevalence of a history of prior varicella/herpes zoster infection in multiple 
sclerosis.

Manouchehrinia A(1)(2), Tanasescu R(1)(3), Kareem H(1), Jerca OP(1), Jabeen 
F(4), Shafei R(1), Breuer J(5), Neal K(6), Irving W(4), Constantinescu CS(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Neuroscience, Section of Clinical Neurology, University 
of Nottingham, Nottingham University Hospital NHS Trust, Queen's Medical Centre, 
C Floor S Block, Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience (CNS), Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Colentina 
Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Division of Microbiology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham University 
Hospital NHS Trust, Nottingham, UK.
(5)Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London, London, UK.
(6)Division of Epidemiology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(7)Division of Clinical Neuroscience, Section of Clinical Neurology, University 
of Nottingham, Nottingham University Hospital NHS Trust, Queen's Medical Centre, 
C Floor S Block, Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK. Cris.constantinescu@nottingham.ac.uk.

Varicella zoster virus (VZV) infection has been implicated in multiple sclerosis 
(MS), but direct causal involvement has been disputed. Nevertheless, knowledge 
of VZV exposure is important, given the risk of serious complications of first 
exposure while undergoing immunosuppressive treatment, in particular with 
fingolimod. We distributed questionnaires to MS clinic patients, requesting 
information about history of chickenpox, sibling/household/occupational 
exposure, history of zoster (shingles), and disease-modifying treatment. A 
random, proportionally representative sample of 51 patients that included 
patients with positive, negative, and unknown chickenpox history were selected 
for determination of VZV IgG by ELISA. Of 1206 distributed questionnaires, 605 
were returned (50% response rate). Of these, 86% reported history of chickenpox, 
5.6% gave negative history, and 8.5% did not know. Of 594 who answered the 
zoster question, 78% gave a negative response, 4% did not know, and 104 (17%) 
answered yes. Of these, 83 reported 1 episode; 12 had 2; 5 had 3; and 1 each 
reported 5, 6, and 15 episodes. Of 51 patients tested for VZV IgG (44 "yes," 4 
"no," and 3 "I don't know" answers to the question of whether they had 
chickenpox), 48 were seropositive; the 3 seronegative all had reported having 
had chickenpox. The high rate of MS patients reporting prior chickenpox 
infection is comparable with previous reports. A substantial proportion of MS 
patients, estimated to be higher than an age-matched general population, report 
single or multiple episodes of zoster. These data are useful for consideration 
of immunosuppressive treatments and/or VZV and zoster vaccination.

DOI: 10.1007/s13365-017-0569-1
PMCID: PMC5725504
PMID: 28895088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.