---
reference_id: "PMID:37724713"
title: "Clinical, imaging, and management features of symptomatic carotid web: Insight from CAROWEB registry."
authors:
- Olindo S
- Gaillard N
- Chausson N
- Turpinat C
- Dargazanli C
- Bourgeois-Beauvais Q
- Signate A
- Joux J
- Mejdoubi M
- Piotin M
- Obadia M
- Desilles JP
- Delvoye F
- Holay Q
- Gory B
- Richard S
- Denier C
- Robinet-Borgomano E
- Carle X
- Desal H
- Guillon B
- Viguier A
- Lamy M
- Pico F
- Landais A
- Boulanger M
- Renou P
- Gariel F
- Jean P
- Yann L
- Papillon L
- Marnat G
- Smadja D
journal: Int J Stroke
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/17474930231204343
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Brain Ischemia/complications
- Carotid Arteries
- Carotid Stenosis/surgery
- "Endarterectomy, Carotid/adverse effects"
- "Ischemic Attack, Transient/epidemiology, therapy, diagnosis"
- Ischemic Stroke/complications
- Retrospective Studies
- "Stroke/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, imaging, and management features of symptomatic carotid web: Insight from CAROWEB registry.
**Authors:** Olindo S, Gaillard N, Chausson N, Turpinat C, Dargazanli C, Bourgeois-Beauvais Q, Signate A, Joux J, Mejdoubi M, Piotin M, Obadia M, Desilles JP, Delvoye F, Holay Q, Gory B, Richard S, Denier C, Robinet-Borgomano E, Carle X, Desal H, Guillon B, Viguier A, Lamy M, Pico F, Landais A, Boulanger M, Renou P, Gariel F, Jean P, Yann L, Papillon L, Marnat G, Smadja D
**Journal:** Int J Stroke (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/17474930231204343](https://doi.org/10.1177/17474930231204343)

## Content

1. Int J Stroke. 2024 Feb;19(2):180-188. doi: 10.1177/17474930231204343. Epub
2023  Oct 9.

Clinical, imaging, and management features of symptomatic carotid web: Insight 
from CAROWEB registry.

Olindo S(1), Gaillard N(2), Chausson N(3), Turpinat C(2), Dargazanli C(4), 
Bourgeois-Beauvais Q(5), Signate A(5), Joux J(5), Mejdoubi M(6), Piotin M(7), 
Obadia M(8), Desilles JP(7), Delvoye F(7), Holay Q(7), Gory B(9), Richard S(10), 
Denier C(11), Robinet-Borgomano E(12), Carle X(12), Desal H(13), Guillon B(14), 
Viguier A(15), Lamy M(16), Pico F(17), Landais A(18), Boulanger M(19), Renou 
P(20), Gariel F(21), Jean P(21), Yann L(3), Papillon L(20), Marnat G(21), Smadja 
D(3).

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurovasculaire, Hôpital Pellegrin, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(2)Department of Neurology, Montpellier University Hospital, Montpellier, 
France.
(3)Department of Neurology, Sud Francilien Hospital, Corbeil-Essonnes, France.
(4)Department of Neuroradiology, Montpellier University Hospital, Montpellier, 
France.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Martinique, Fort-de-France, 
France.
(6)Department of Neuroradiology, University Hospital of Martinique, 
Fort-de-France, France.
(7)Department of Interventional Neuroradiology, Rothschild Foundation Hospital, 
Paris, France.
(8)Department of Neurology, Rothschild Foundation Hospital, Paris, France.
(9)Department of Interventional and Diagnostic Neuroradiology, University 
Hospital of Nancy, Nancy, France.
(10)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Nancy, Nancy, France.
(11)Department of Neurology, CHU Kremlin Bicêtre, Paris, France.
(12)Department of Neurology, Hôpital de La Timone, Marseille University 
Hospital, Marseille, France.
(13)Department of Neuroradiology, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France.
(14)Department of Neurology, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France.
(15)Department of Neurology, Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, France.
(16)Department of Neurology, Poitiers University Hospital, Poitiers, France.
(17)Department of Neurology, Versailles Hospital, Versailles, France.
(18)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Guadeloupe, Pointe-à-Pitre, 
France.
(19)Department of Neurology, Caen University Hospital, Caen, France.
(20)Stroke Unit, University Hospital of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(21)Department of Interventional and Diagnostic Neuroradiology, University 
Hospital of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.

BACKGROUND: Although carotid web (CaW) is increasingly diagnosed as a cause of 
cryptogenic stroke, data are still limited to monocentric small sample cohort. 
To broaden knowledge on symptomatic CaW, CAROWEB registry has been recently 
implemented.
AIMS: In a large cohort of symptomatic CaW patients, we described epidemiologic 
characteristics, admission clinical and imaging features, and the current 
management including the secondary preventive strategy choice made in 
comprehensive French Stroke Units.
METHODS: CAROWEB is an ongoing French observational multicenter registry 
enrolling consecutive CaW patients diagnosed after an ipsilateral ischemic 
stroke (IS) or transient ischemic attack (TIA). Submitted cases were validated 
by two experienced neurologist and neuroradiologist. Clinical, imaging, and 
management features were collected for this study.
RESULTS: Between June 2019 and December 2021, 244 cases were submitted by 14 
centers, 42 rejected, and 202 included (IS, 91.6%; TIA, 7.9%; retinal 
infarction, 0.5%; mean age, 50.8 ± 12.2 years; female, 62.9%; Caucasian, 47.5%; 
Afro-Caribbean, 20.3%). IS patients showed median (interquartile range (IQR)) 
admission National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score, 8 (2-15); 
intracranial artery occlusion, 71.8%; ipsilateral chronic cerebral infarction 
(CCI), 16.3%; and reperfusion treatment, 57.3%. CaW was not identified during 
the mechanical thrombectomy procedure in 30 of 85 (35.3%) patients. Secondary 
prevention was invasive in 55.6% (stenting, n = 80; surgery, n = 30). In 
multivariable analysis, the invasive therapeutic option was associated with 
ipsilateral CCI (odds ratio (OR): 4.24 (1.27-14.2), p = 0.019) and inversely 
associated with risk factors (OR: 0.47 (0.24-0.91), p = 0.025) and admission 
NIHSS score (OR: 0.93 (0.89-0.97), p = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: CaW must be considered in all ethnic groups including Caucasians. 
Secondary prevention is heterogeneous in large French Stroke Centers. The 
absence of risk factors, milder severity strokes, and ipsilateral CCI were 
predictive variables of secondary invasive treatment. The high rate of invasive 
treatment suggests that medical treatment alone is deemed ineffective to avoid 
recurrence and emphasize the need of randomized trials.

DOI: 10.1177/17474930231204343
PMID: 37724713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.