---
reference_id: "PMID:37662507"
title: Genetic Variants Associated with Acne Vulgaris.
authors:
- Zhang H
- Zhang Z
journal: Int J Gen Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2147/IJGM.S421835
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Variants Associated with Acne Vulgaris.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Zhang Z
**Journal:** Int J Gen Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2147/IJGM.S421835](https://doi.org/10.2147/IJGM.S421835)

## Content

1. Int J Gen Med. 2023 Aug 28;16:3843-3856. doi: 10.2147/IJGM.S421835.
eCollection  2023.

Genetic Variants Associated with Acne Vulgaris.

Zhang H(1), Zhang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical 
College, Nanchong, Sichuan Province, People's Republic of China.

Acne vulgaris (AV) ranks among the common chronic inflammatory disorders that 
impact the sebaceous components of hair follicles. Acne vulgaris is 
characterised by cardinal manifestations such as the presence of pimples, 
nodules, pustules, and cysts, which have the potential to lead to the 
development of acne scarring and pigmentation. The phenomenon is influenced by 
polygenic inheritance or can be ascribed to the interplay between multiple genes 
and environmental factors. In recent years, some researchers have found that 
some genes (such as IL, TNF, RETN, CYP family, MMPs and TIMPs genes et al) are 
associated with acne vulgaris and may affect the progression and prognosis of 
the disease. The number of reviews addressing acne-associated genetic variants, 
however, is limited. In that case, we have compiled a list of prevalent genes 
associated with acne in recent times. This helps us understand acne's genetic 
basis and lets us step in early for people prone to severe acne, lowering the 
chance of acne scars.

© 2023 Zhang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.2147/IJGM.S421835
PMCID: PMC10473401
PMID: 37662507

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.