---
reference_id: "PMID:12915477"
title: An unusual N-terminal deletion of the laminin alpha3a isoform leads to the chronic granulation tissue disorder laryngo-onycho-cutaneous syndrome.
authors:
- McLean WH
- Irvine AD
- Hamill KJ
- Whittock NV
- Coleman-Campbell CM
- Mellerio JE
- Ashton GS
- Dopping-Hepenstal PJ
- Eady RA
- Jamil T
- Phillips R
- Shabbir SG
- Haroon TS
- Khurshid K
- Moore JE
- Page B
- Darling J
- Atherton DJ
- Van Steensel MA
- Munro CS
- Smith FJ
- McGrath JA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg234
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18"
- Chronic Disease
- "Codon, Terminator"
- Consanguinity
- DNA/genetics
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/genetics, pathology"
- Exons
- Family
- Frameshift Mutation
- France/ethnology
- Genetic Linkage
- Granulation Tissue/pathology
- Haplotypes
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Keratinocytes/metabolism
- "Laminin/chemistry, genetics"
- Lod Score
- Pakistan
- Protein Biosynthesis
- "Protein Isoforms/chemistry, genetics"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Syndrome
- United Kingdom/ethnology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An unusual N-terminal deletion of the laminin alpha3a isoform leads to the chronic granulation tissue disorder laryngo-onycho-cutaneous syndrome.
**Authors:** McLean WH, Irvine AD, Hamill KJ, Whittock NV, Coleman-Campbell CM, Mellerio JE, Ashton GS, Dopping-Hepenstal PJ, Eady RA, Jamil T, Phillips R, Shabbir SG, Haroon TS, Khurshid K, Moore JE, Page B, Darling J, Atherton DJ, Van Steensel MA, Munro CS, Smith FJ, McGrath JA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddg234](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddg234)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Sep 15;12(18):2395-409. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg234. Epub 2003
 Jul 15.

An unusual N-terminal deletion of the laminin alpha3a isoform leads to the 
chronic granulation tissue disorder laryngo-onycho-cutaneous syndrome.

McLean WH(1), Irvine AD, Hamill KJ, Whittock NV, Coleman-Campbell CM, Mellerio 
JE, Ashton GS, Dopping-Hepenstal PJ, Eady RA, Jamil T, Phillips R, Shabbir SG, 
Haroon TS, Khurshid K, Moore JE, Page B, Darling J, Atherton DJ, Van Steensel 
MA, Munro CS, Smith FJ, McGrath JA.

Author information:
(1)University of Dundee, Ninewells Medical School, Dundee, UK. 
wmclean@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Feb 1;13(3):365. Phillips Rodney J [corrected to 
Phillips Roderic J].

Laryngo-onycho-cutaneous (LOC or Shabbir) syndrome (OMIM 245660) is an autosomal 
recessive epithelial disorder confined to the Punjabi Muslim population. The 
condition is characterized by cutaneous erosions, nail dystrophy and exuberant 
vascular granulation tissue in certain epithelia, especially conjunctiva and 
larynx. Genome-wide homozygosity mapping localized the gene to a 2 Mb region on 
chromosome 18q11.2 with an LOD score of 19.8 at theta=0. This region includes 
the laminin alpha3 gene (LAMA3), in which loss-of-expression mutations cause the 
lethal skin blistering disorder Herlitz junctional epidermolysis bullosa. 
Detailed investigation showed that this gene possesses a further 38 exons (76 
exons in total) spanning 318 kb of genomic DNA, and encodes three distinct 
proteins, designated laminin alpha3a, alpha3b1 and alpha3b2. The causative 
mutation in 15 families was a frameshift mutation 151insG predicting a stop 
codon 7 bp downstream in an exon that is specific to laminin alpha3a. This 
protein is secreted only by the basal keratinocytes of stratified epithelia, 
implying that LOC is caused by dysfunction of keratinocyte-mesenchymal 
communication. Surprisingly, the 151insG mutation does not result in 
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay due to rescue of the transcript by an alternative 
translation start site 6 exons downstream. The resultant N-terminal deletion of 
laminin alpha3a was confirmed by immunoprecipitation of secreted proteins from 
LOC keratinocytes. These studies show that the laminin alpha3a N-terminal domain 
is a key regulator of the granulation tissue response, with important 
implications not only in LOC but in a range of other clinical conditions 
associated with abnormal wound healing.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddg234
PMID: 12915477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]