---
reference_id: "PMID:37684520"
title: A population-based survey of FBN1 variants in Iceland reveals underdiagnosis of Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Klemenzdottir EO
- Arnadottir GA
- Jensson BO
- Jonasdottir A
- Katrinardottir H
- Fridriksdottir R
- Jonasdottir A
- Sigurdsson A
- Gudjonsson SA
- Jonsson JJ
- Stefansdottir V
- Danielsen R
- Palsdottir A
- Jonsson H
- Helgason A
- Magnusson OT
- Thorsteinsdottir U
- Bjornsson HT
- Stefansson K
- Sulem P
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-023-01455-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A population-based survey of FBN1 variants in Iceland reveals underdiagnosis of Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Klemenzdottir EO, Arnadottir GA, Jensson BO, Jonasdottir A, Katrinardottir H, Fridriksdottir R, Jonasdottir A, Sigurdsson A, Gudjonsson SA, Jonsson JJ, Stefansdottir V, Danielsen R, Palsdottir A, Jonsson H, Helgason A, Magnusson OT, Thorsteinsdottir U, Bjornsson HT, Stefansson K, Sulem P
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-023-01455-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-023-01455-0)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2024 Jan;32(1):44-51. doi: 10.1038/s41431-023-01455-0. Epub 
2023 Sep 8.

A population-based survey of FBN1 variants in Iceland reveals underdiagnosis of 
Marfan syndrome.

Klemenzdottir EO(#)(1), Arnadottir GA(#)(2)(3), Jensson BO(#)(2), Jonasdottir 
A(2), Katrinardottir H(2), Fridriksdottir R(2), Jonasdottir A(2), Sigurdsson 
A(2), Gudjonsson SA(2), Jonsson JJ(3)(4), Stefansdottir V(4), Danielsen R(5), 
Palsdottir A(6), Jonsson H(2), Helgason A(2)(7), Magnusson OT(2), 
Thorsteinsdottir U(2)(3), Bjornsson HT(1)(3)(4)(8), Stefansson K(9)(10), Sulem 
P(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, 
Iceland.
(2)deCODE Genetics/Amgen, Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(4)Department of Genetics, Landspitali Universtity Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, 
Iceland.
(6)Institute for Experimental Pathology at Keldur, University of Iceland, 
Reykjavik, Iceland.
(7)Department of Anthropology, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(8)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(9)deCODE Genetics/Amgen, Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland. kstefans@decode.is.
(10)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. 
kstefans@decode.is.
(11)deCODE Genetics/Amgen, Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland. patrick.sulem@decode.is.
(#)Contributed equally

Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by aortic 
aneurysm, skeletal abnormalities, and lens dislocation, and is caused by 
variants in the FBN1 gene. To explore causes of MFS and the prevalence of the 
disease in Iceland we collected information from all living individuals with a 
clinical diagnosis of MFS in Iceland (n = 32) and performed whole-genome 
sequencing of those who did not have a confirmed genetic diagnosis (27/32). 
Moreover, to assess a potential underdiagnosis of MFS in Iceland we attempted a 
genotype-based approach to identify individuals with MFS. We interrogated deCODE 
genetics' database of 35,712 whole-genome sequenced individuals to search for 
rare sequence variants in FBN1. Overall, we identified 15 pathogenic or likely 
pathogenic variants in FBN1 in 44 individuals, only 22 of whom were previously 
diagnosed with MFS. The most common of these variants, NM_000138.4:c.8038 C > T 
p.(Arg2680Cys), is present in a multi-generational pedigree, and was found to 
stem from a single forefather born around 1840. The p.(Arg2680Cys) variant 
associates with a form of MFS that seems to have an enrichment of abdominal 
aortic aneurysm, suggesting that this may be a particularly common feature of 
p.(Arg2680Cys)-associated MFS. Based on these combined genetic and clinical 
data, we show that MFS prevalence in Iceland could be as high as 1/6,600 in 
Iceland, compared to 1/10,000 based on clinical diagnosis alone, which indicates 
underdiagnosis of this actionable genetic disorder.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-023-01455-0
PMCID: PMC10772070
PMID: 37684520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors affiliated with deCODE Genetics/Amgen 
declare competing interests as employees. HTB is a Consultant for Mahzi 
therapeutics. The remaining authors declare no competing financial interest.