---
reference_id: "PMID:23850805"
title: Sequential decisions on FAS sequencing guided by biomarkers in patients with lymphoproliferation and autoimmune cytopenia.
authors:
- Rensing-Ehl A
- Janda A
- Lorenz MR
- Gladstone BP
- Fuchs I
- Abinun M
- Albert M
- Butler K
- Cant A
- Cseh AM
- Ebinger M
- Goldacker S
- Hambleton S
- Hebart H
- Houet L
- Kentouche K
- Kühnle I
- Lehmberg K
- Mejstrikova E
- Niemeyer C
- Minkov M
- Neth O
- Dückers G
- Owens S
- Rösler J
- Schilling FH
- Schuster V
- Seidel MG
- Smisek P
- Sukova M
- Svec P
- Wiesel T
- Gathmann B
- Schwarz K
- Vach W
- Ehl S
- Speckmann C
journal: Haematologica
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.081901
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Autoimmune Diseases/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Biomarkers/blood
- Cohort Studies
- "Fas Ligand Protein/blood, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- "Lymphoproliferative Disorders/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Vitamin B 12/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sequential decisions on FAS sequencing guided by biomarkers in patients with lymphoproliferation and autoimmune cytopenia.
**Authors:** Rensing-Ehl A, Janda A, Lorenz MR, Gladstone BP, Fuchs I, Abinun M, Albert M, Butler K, Cant A, Cseh AM, Ebinger M, Goldacker S, Hambleton S, Hebart H, Houet L, Kentouche K, Kühnle I, Lehmberg K, Mejstrikova E, Niemeyer C, Minkov M, Neth O, Dückers G, Owens S, Rösler J, Schilling FH, Schuster V, Seidel MG, Smisek P, Sukova M, Svec P, Wiesel T, Gathmann B, Schwarz K, Vach W, Ehl S, Speckmann C
**Journal:** Haematologica (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.2012.081901](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.2012.081901)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2013 Dec;98(12):1948-55. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.081901.
Epub  2013 Jul 12.

Sequential decisions on FAS sequencing guided by biomarkers in patients with
lymphoproliferation and autoimmune cytopenia.

Rensing-Ehl A(1), Janda A, Lorenz MR, Gladstone BP, Fuchs I, Abinun M, Albert M,
Butler K, Cant A, Cseh AM, Ebinger M, Goldacker S, Hambleton S, Hebart H, Houet
L, Kentouche K, Kühnle I, Lehmberg K, Mejstrikova E, Niemeyer C, Minkov M, Neth
O, Dückers G, Owens S, Rösler J, Schilling FH, Schuster V, Seidel MG, Smisek P,
Sukova M, Svec P, Wiesel T, Gathmann B, Schwarz K, Vach W, Ehl S, Speckmann C.

Author information:
(1)stephan.ehl@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Clinical and genetic heterogeneity renders confirmation or exclusion of
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome difficult. To re-evaluate and improve
the currently suggested diagnostic approach to patients with suspected FAS
mutation, the most frequent cause of autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, we
prospectively determined 11 biomarkers in 163 patients with splenomegaly or
lymphadenopathy and presumed or proven autoimmune cytopenia(s). Among 98
patients sequenced for FAS mutations in CD3(+)TCRα/β(+)CD4(-)CD8(-) "double
negative" T cells, 32 had germline and six had somatic FAS mutations. The best a
priori predictor of FAS mutations was the combination of vitamin B12 and soluble
FAS ligand (cut-offs 1255 pg/mL and 559 pg/mL, respectively), which had a
positive predictive value of 92% and a negative predictive value of 97%. We used
these data to develop a web-based probability calculator for FAS mutations using
the three most discriminatory biomarkers (vitamin B12, soluble FAS ligand,
interleukin-10) of the 11 tested. Since more than 60% of patients with
lymphoproliferation and autoimmune cytopenia(s) in our cohort did not harbor FAS
mutations, 15% had somatic FAS mutations, and the predictive value of
double-negative T-cell values was rather low (positive and negative predictive
values of 61% and 77%, respectively), we argue that the previously suggested
diagnostic algorithm based on determination of double-negative T cells and
germline FAS sequencing, followed by biomarker analysis, is not efficient. We
propose vitamin B12 and soluble FAS ligand assessment as the initial diagnostic
step with subsequent decision on FAS sequencing supported by a
probability-calculating tool.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2012.081901
PMCID: PMC3856970
PMID: 23850805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
