---
reference_id: "PMID:33954810"
title: Outcomes of solitary functioning kidneys-renal agenesis is different than multicystic dysplastic kidney disease.
authors:
- Matsell DG
- Bao C
- Po White T
- Chan E
- Matsell E
- Cojocaru D
- Catapang M
- Pediatric Nephrology Clinical Pathway Development Team
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-021-05064-1
keywords:
- Congenital Abnormalities/epidemiology
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Kidney/abnormalities
- "Kidney Diseases/congenital, epidemiology"
- Multicystic Dysplastic Kidney/epidemiology
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Solitary Kidney/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes of solitary functioning kidneys-renal agenesis is different than multicystic dysplastic kidney disease.
**Authors:** Matsell DG, Bao C, Po White T, Chan E, Matsell E, Cojocaru D, Catapang M, Pediatric Nephrology Clinical Pathway Development Team
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-021-05064-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-021-05064-1)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2021 Nov;36(11):3673-3680. doi: 10.1007/s00467-021-05064-1. 
Epub 2021 May 5.

Outcomes of solitary functioning kidneys-renal agenesis is different than 
multicystic dysplastic kidney disease.

Matsell DG(1), Bao C(2), Po White T(2), Chan E(2), Matsell E(2), Cojocaru D(2), 
Catapang M(2); Pediatric Nephrology Clinical Pathway Development Team.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, British Columbia Children's Hospital, University of 
British Columbia, 4480 Oak St, K4-150, Vancouver, BC, V6H 2V2, Canada. 
dmatsell@cw.bc.ca.
(2)Division of Nephrology, British Columbia Children's Hospital, University of 
British Columbia, 4480 Oak St, K4-150, Vancouver, BC, V6H 2V2, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK) disease and unilateral renal 
agenesis (URA) are well-known causes of a solitary functioning kidney (SFK) and 
are associated with long-term kidney injury. The aims of this study were to 
characterize the natural history of SFK at our center, define the risk factors 
associated with chronic kidney injury, and identify distinguishing features 
between URA and MCDK that predict outcome.
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study of 230 SFK patients. We compared 
MCDK (n=160) and URA (n=70) according to clinical features at diagnosis and 
kidney outcomes over follow-up. Univariate and multivariate binary regression 
analysis was used to determine independent risk factors for chronic kidney 
injury, defined as the composite outcome of hypertension, proteinuria, or 
chronic kidney disease (eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73m2).
RESULTS: URA had a higher prevalence of comorbid genetic syndromes (15 vs. 6%, 
p=0.04), non-renal anomalies (39 vs. 11%, p<0.001), and congenital anomalies of 
the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) (51 vs. 26%, p<0.001) than MCDK. Over 
follow-up, URA experienced more hypertension (19 vs. 3%, p=0.002), proteinuria 
(12 vs. 3%, p=0.03), and the composite outcome (19 vs. 6%, p=0.003) than MCDK. 
Independent risk factors for chronic kidney injury included CAKUT (OR 5.01, 
p=0.002) and URA (OR 2.71, p=0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: In our population, URA was more likely to have associated syndromes 
or anomalies, and to have worse outcomes over time than MCDK. URA diagnosis was 
an independent risk factor for chronic kidney injury. Our results will be used 
to develop a standardized clinical pathway for SFK management. A higher 
resolution version of the Graphical abstract is available as Supplementary 
information.

© 2021. IPNA.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-021-05064-1
PMID: 33954810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]