---
reference_id: "PMID:37944093"
title: "Ludwig's Angina: Higher Incidence and Worse Outcomes Associated With the Onset of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pandemic."
authors:
- Canas M
- Fonseca R
- De Filippis A
- Diaz L
- Afzal H
- Day A
- Leonard J
- Bochicchio K
- Bochicchio GV
- Hoofnagle M
journal: Surg Infect (Larchmt)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1089/sur.2023.163
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ludwig's Angina: Higher Incidence and Worse Outcomes Associated With the Onset of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pandemic.
**Authors:** Canas M, Fonseca R, De Filippis A, Diaz L, Afzal H, Day A, Leonard J, Bochicchio K, Bochicchio GV, Hoofnagle M
**Journal:** Surg Infect (Larchmt) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1089/sur.2023.163](https://doi.org/10.1089/sur.2023.163)

## Content

1. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2023 Nov;24(9):782-787. doi: 10.1089/sur.2023.163. Epub
 2023 Nov 10.

Ludwig's Angina: Higher Incidence and Worse Outcomes Associated With the Onset 
of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pandemic.

Canas M(1), Fonseca R(1), De Filippis A(1), Diaz L(1), Afzal H(1), Day A(1), 
Leonard J(1), Bochicchio K(1), Bochicchio GV(1), Hoofnagle M(1).

Author information:
(1)Acute and Critical Care Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

Background: Ludwig's angina (LA) is a diffuse cellulitis of the submandibular 
space and adjacent tissues. During the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
pandemic, odontogenic treatments were often delayed because of the 
implementation of safety measures to avoid the spread of the virus. We 
hypothesized that delayed odontogenic treatments associated with the onset of 
the COVID-19 pandemic would be associated with an increase in the incidence of 
LA and worse outcomes related to these infections. Patients and Methods: 
Patients from June 2018 to June 2022 with computed tomography images suggestive 
of LA and confirmed by ear, nose, throat (ENT) consult were included. We 
abstracted demographics, outcomes, clinical management, and microbiology. 
Patients were stratified into pre-COVID and COVID-onset. Our primary outcome, 
incidence of LA, was defined as: (new LA cases) ÷ (ED evaluations of oral or 
dental infections × 1.5 years). Results: In the pre-COVID group, we identified 
32 of 1,301 patients with LA for an incidence of 0.02 per year. The COVID-onset 
group consisted of 41 of 641 patients, with an incidence of 0.04 per year. In 
the COVID-onset group, progression to necrotizing fasciitis was more likely (0% 
vs. 15%; p < 0.024), and they returned to the operating room for repeated 
debridement (3% vs. 22%; p < 0.020). Likewise, hospital length of stay, 
intensive care unit (ICU) length of stay, and ventilator days were higher 
(4.3 ± 3.5 vs. 9.5 ± 11.3; 1.1 ± 1.2 vs. 9.5 ± 7.1; 0.3 ± 1 vs. 3.6 ± 7.1; 
p < 0.001). Conclusions: Although the prognosis for dental infections diagnosed 
early is generally favorable, we observed a notable increase in the incidence of 
LA after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, complications stemming 
from these infections became more severe in the COVID-onset era. Specifically, 
the likelihood of necrotizing fasciitis showed a substantial increase, 
accompanied by an increased risk of respiratory failure and mediastinitis.

DOI: 10.1089/sur.2023.163
PMCID: PMC11075171
PMID: 37944093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
report.