---
reference_id: "PMID:38021761"
title: "The Role of BRAF Inhibitors in the Management of Ameloblastoma: A Literature Review."
authors:
- Malakar A
- Kumar VR
- Yadav P
- Bhardwaj V
- Barua CG
- Bhardwaj G
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.47682
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of BRAF Inhibitors in the Management of Ameloblastoma: A Literature Review.
**Authors:** Malakar A, Kumar VR, Yadav P, Bhardwaj V, Barua CG, Bhardwaj G
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.47682](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.47682)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Oct 25;15(10):e47682. doi: 10.7759/cureus.47682. eCollection 2023
 Oct.

The Role of BRAF Inhibitors in the Management of Ameloblastoma: A Literature 
Review.

Malakar A(1), Kumar VR(1), Yadav P(2), Bhardwaj V(1), Barua CG(3), Bhardwaj 
G(4).

Author information:
(1)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Prabhu Dayal Memorial (PDM) Dental College 
and Research Institute, PDM University, Bahadurgarh, IND.
(2)Periodontics, Employees' State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) Dental College 
and Hospital, Delhi, IND.
(3)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Career Postgraduate Institute of Dental 
Sciences and Hospital, Lucknow, IND.
(4)Dentistry, Prabhu Dayal Memorial (PDM) Dental College and Research Institute, 
PDM University, Bahadurgarh, IND.

Ameloblastoma is one of the most prevalent but enigmatic benign odontogenic 
tumors of the jaw, accounting for approximately 10% of all maxillary and 
mandibular tumors. This neoplasia is distinguished by exhibiting several 
clinical and histological variants along with several mutations that affect its 
behavior. The ameloblastoma treatment plan is determined by the tumor's size, 
anatomical location, histologic variant, and anatomical involvement. On 
chromosome 7, there is a proto-oncogene called BRAF. When BRAF is mutated, it 
becomes an oncogene and continuously produces proteins like MEK and ERK, members 
of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). In the signaling pathway, these 
proteins activate transcription factor inside the nucleus that helps in cell 
division and growth. Numerous neoplasms have been linked to more than 40 BRAF 
mutations. The most common one is BRAF proto-oncogene serine/threonine kinase 
(BRAF) V600E, whose treatment has been linked to a positive outcome. BRAF 
inhibitors like vemurafenib, dabrafenib, and sorafenib have shown excellent 
results, especially in metastatic ameloblastoma. BRAF, particularly in the case 
of metastatic ameloblastoma, inhibitors such as vemurafenib, dabrafenib, and 
sorafenib, has demonstrated outstanding results. Targeted therapies have been 
employed as adjuvant therapies to enhance cosmetic outcomes, even though no 
reports of serial cases demonstrate their effectiveness in ameloblastomas. In 
the treatment of ameloblastomas, the identification of BRAF V600E and additional 
mutations as the prime targeted therapies has proven to be a significant 
breakthrough where surgical treatment was contraindicated. In this article, we 
review the presence of BRAF V600E mutations, their inhibitors, and targeted 
therapies in ameloblastoma.

Copyright © 2023, Malakar et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.47682
PMCID: PMC10673693
PMID: 38021761

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.