---
reference_id: "PMID:25151931"
title: "[Physiopathology of rosacea]."
authors:
- Cribier B
journal: Ann Dermatol Venereol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/S0151-9638(14)70153-X
keywords:
- Humans
- "Rosacea/etiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Physiopathology of rosacea].
**Authors:** Cribier B
**Journal:** Ann Dermatol Venereol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0151-9638(14)70153-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0151-9638(14)70153-X)

## Content

1. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2014 Sep;141 Suppl 2:S158-64. doi: 
10.1016/S0151-9638(14)70153-X.

[Physiopathology of rosacea].

[Article in French]

Cribier B(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de dermatologie, hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, BP 426, 67091 
Strasbourg Cedex, France. Electronic address: 
bernard.cribier@chru-strasbourg.fr.

For a long time rosacea was thought to be mainly a vascular disorder. In the 
past ten years many other concepts have emerged, such as the neurovascular 
aspects and involvement of innate immunity. There is obviously a genetic part in 
rosacea, as it is much more common in people with fair skin, blue eyes and 
Celtic ascendance. The same persons are submitted to continental weather, with 
major temperature seasonal variations. Erythema and telangiectasia result from 
dilated superficial capillaries that have bizarre shapes, and induce constant 
edema of the dermis. This might be a favouring factor for Demodex colonization, 
which plays a major role in rosacea. Inflammation is always present, even in 
erythematotelangiectatic subtypes. It involves innate immunity, in response to 
environmental factors, like Demodex and its own biotope, resulting in 
overproduction of LL37, a pro-inflammatory peptide able to induce skin 
inflammation in an animal model, trough activation of inflammatory cells. Tool 
like receptors are involved in the activation of innate immunity. Demodex is the 
cause of ganulomas seen in papulopustular rosacea, but it is also always present 
in the erythematotelangiectatic subtypoe. Colonization by Demodex is 
nevertheless not decreased with conventional treatments of rosacea, like 
tetracyclins and metronizaole. This might be due to induction of inflamation by 
bacteria hosted by Demodex, like Bacillus oleronius, and dozens of bacteria that 
are being investigated. Finaly, rhinophyma is linked to both vascular changes 
and activation of fibrosis, involving TGF beta.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0151-9638(14)70153-X
PMID: 25151931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]