---
reference_id: "PMID:35000660"
title: "Prevalence of chronic maxillary atelectasis: a radiological study."
authors:
- Sivrice ME
- Yasan H
- Okur N
- Okur E
- Buyukcelik B
- Kumbul YC
journal: J Laryngol Otol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1017/S0022215122000056
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Maxillary Sinus/diagnostic imaging
- Retrospective Studies
- Prevalence
- Syndrome
- "Paranasal Sinus Diseases/complications, diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- Pulmonary Atelectasis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of chronic maxillary atelectasis: a radiological study.
**Authors:** Sivrice ME, Yasan H, Okur N, Okur E, Buyukcelik B, Kumbul YC
**Journal:** J Laryngol Otol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0022215122000056](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022215122000056)

## Content

1. J Laryngol Otol. 2022 Dec;136(12):1240-1244. doi: 10.1017/S0022215122000056. 
Epub 2022 Jan 10.

Prevalence of chronic maxillary atelectasis: a radiological study.

Sivrice ME(1), Yasan H(1), Okur N(2), Okur E(1), Buyukcelik B(1), Kumbul YC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of 
Medicine, Süleyman Demirel University, Isparta, Turkey.
(2)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Süleyman Demirel University, 
Isparta, Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: Chronic maxillary atelectasis is an infrequent entity and data on 
its prevalence are lacking. This study investigated the prevalence of chronic 
maxillary atelectasis and aimed to determine the bilaterality of this entity.
METHODS: The data for 5835 patients who underwent paranasal sinus computed 
tomography from 2016 to 2020 were retrospectively analysed.
RESULTS: Fifty-four patients were diagnosed with chronic maxillary atelectasis; 
its prevalence was 0.92 per cent. The mean age of these 54 patients was 42.98 ± 
18.89 years (range, 18-85 years); 17 of the patients were female and 37 were 
male. Chronic maxillary atelectasis was unilateral in 42 patients and bilateral 
in 12 patients (22.2 per cent). Eight patients were found to have enophthalmos 
with apparent facial asymmetry.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of bilateral chronic maxillary atelectasis may be 
higher than previously reported and bilaterality may increase as the number of 
diagnosed cases increases. A unified classification is also proposed, which 
describes the silent sinus syndrome as chronic maxillary atelectasis IIIS.

DOI: 10.1017/S0022215122000056
PMID: 35000660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]