---
reference_id: "PMID:23808910"
title: Fibroscan can avoid liver biopsy in Indian patients with chronic hepatitis B.
authors:
- Goyal R
- Mallick SR
- Mahanta M
- Kedia S
- Shalimar
- Dhingra R
- Sharma H
- Das P
- Datta Gupta S
- Panda S
- Acharya SK
journal: J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/jgh.12318
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibroscan can avoid liver biopsy in Indian patients with chronic hepatitis B.
**Authors:** Goyal R, Mallick SR, Mahanta M, Kedia S, Shalimar, Dhingra R, Sharma H, Das P, Datta Gupta S, Panda S, Acharya SK
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jgh.12318](https://doi.org/10.1111/jgh.12318)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013 Nov;28(11):1738-45. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12318.

Fibroscan can avoid liver biopsy in Indian patients with chronic hepatitis B.

Goyal R(1), Mallick SR, Mahanta M, Kedia S, Shalimar, Dhingra R, Sharma H, Das 
P, Datta Gupta S, Panda S, Acharya SK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Liver fibrosis is an established determinant of prognosis 
and therapy in chronic hepatitis B (CHB). The role of fibroscan in assessing 
fibrosis in CHB remains unclear. Present study was designed to correlate 
fibroscan with liver biopsy and determine whether fibroscan can avoid liver 
biopsy in patients with CHB.
METHODS: Fibroscan and liver biopsy were performed in 382 consecutive patients 
with CHB. Biopsies were reviewed by pathologist blinded to the fibroscan value. 
Discriminant values of liver stiffness measurement (LSM) to reasonably exclude 
and predict significant fibrosis were calculated from receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) curves. The factors affecting LSM independent of fibrosis 
were assessed.
RESULTS: Three hundred fifty-seven patients were included (mean age 30.1 ± 9.7 
years, male : female 17 : 3). There was significant correlation between LSM and 
histological fibrosis (r = 0.58, P < 0.001). The area under ROC curve of LSM for 
significant fibrosis (F0-1 vs. F2-4), bridging fibrosis (F0-2 vs. F3-4), and 
cirrhosis (F0-3 vs. F4) was 0.84 (95% CI: 0.78-0.89), 0.94 (95% CI: 0.89-0.99), 
and 0.93 (95% CI: 0.85-1.00), respectively. LSM < 6.0 KPa could exclude 
significant (F ≥ 2) and bridging fibrosis (F ≥ 3) with a negative predictive 
value (NPV) of 92.4% and 99.5%, respectively. Cut-off of 9 KPa could detect 
significant (F ≥ 2) and bridging fibrosis (F ≥ 3) with specificity of 95% and 
97%, respectively, and had a positive predictive value (PPV) of 84.3% in 
predicting significant fibrosis. LSM < 6 KPa and > 9 KPa matched with 
histological fibrosis in 227/250 (91%) patients. Therefore, fibroscan could 
avoid liver biopsy in 70% (250/357) patients with an accuracy > 90%. 
Histological fibrosis, ALT > 5 times, and age > 40 years were independent 
determinants of increased liver stiffness.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibroscan accurately assessed fibrosis and could avoid liver biopsy 
in more than two-thirds of patients with CHB.

© 2013 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley 
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jgh.12318
PMID: 23808910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]