---
reference_id: "PMID:37995995"
title: Predictive Factors for Seizures after Revascularization in Patients with Moyamoya Disease.
authors:
- Huang C
- Huang C
- Zhan X
journal: World Neurosurg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2023.11.075
keywords:
- Humans
- "Moyamoya Disease/complications, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Postoperative Complications/epidemiology, etiology, diagnosis"
- Cerebral Revascularization/methods
- "Seizures/epidemiology, etiology"
- Epilepsy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictive Factors for Seizures after Revascularization in Patients with Moyamoya Disease.
**Authors:** Huang C, Huang C, Zhan X
**Journal:** World Neurosurg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.wneu.2023.11.075](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2023.11.075)

## Content

1. World Neurosurg. 2024 Feb;182:e205-e209. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2023.11.075. Epub
 2023 Nov 21.

Predictive Factors for Seizures after Revascularization in Patients with 
Moyamoya Disease.

Huang C(1), Huang C(1), Zhan X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(2)Spine and Osteopathy Ward, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi, China. Electronic address: gxqyyxcx@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Moyamoya disease (MMD) is a rare and complex cerebrovascular 
disorder that is diagnosed through imaging studies, such as computed tomography 
or magnetic resonance imagin, which show progressive narrowing of the terminal 
portion of the internal carotid arteries and the development of compensatory 
capillary collaterals. The objective of our study was to identify and clarify 
the predictive factors for seizures in patients with MMD.
METHODS: From January 2019 to March 2023, a total of 102 patients with MMD were 
enrolled in this study. Ten patients with seizures after surgery as the main 
presentation were included. Patients with epilepsy were compared to those 
without epilepsy in terms of their clinical characteristics. Multivariable 
analysis was applied to determine factors linked with postoperative seizures.
RESULTS: Ten patients developed seizures after revascularization for MMD. 
Logistic regression analysis revealed that early seizure (odds ratio [OR], 
0.068; 95% CI, 0.014-0.342; P = 0.001), cortical involvement (OR, 9.593; 95% CI, 
2.256-40.783; P = 0.002), and postoperative hyperperfusion (OR, 7.417; 95% CI, 
1.077-51.093; P = 0.042) were significantly associated with seizures. In a 
multivariate analysis, it was found that early seizures were significantly 
associated with a higher likelihood of experiencing seizures (OR, 5.88; 95% CI, 
1.01-33.96; P = 0.048), while patients who had seizures were more likely to have 
cortical involvement (OR, 8.90; 95% CI, 1.55-50.96; P = 0.014) or postoperative 
hyperperfusion (OR, 12.44; 95% CI, 1.21-127.74; P = 0.034).
CONCLUSIONS: Epilepsy in patients with MMD link with several clinical factors. 
In patients with MMD who undergo bypass surgery, early seizures, cortical 
involvement, and postoperative hyperperfusion are significant independent 
predictive factors for the development of epilepsy.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2023.11.075
PMID: 37995995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]