---
reference_id: "PMID:25474614"
title: Social justice, climate change, and dengue.
authors:
- Chang AY
- Fuller DO
- Carrasquillo O
- Beier JC
journal: Health Hum Rights
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Social justice, climate change, and dengue.
**Authors:** Chang AY, Fuller DO, Carrasquillo O, Beier JC
**Journal:** Health Hum Rights (2014)

## Content

1. Health Hum Rights. 2014 Jun 14;16(1):93-104.

Social justice, climate change, and dengue.

Chang AY(1), Fuller DO(2), Carrasquillo O(3), Beier JC(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Instructor of Medicine at the in the Department of General Internal 
Medicine at the University of Miami.
(2)Professor of Geography in the College of Arts and Sciences at the University 
of Miami.
(3)Professor of Medicine and Public Health Sciences in the Department of General 
Internal Medicine at the University of Miami.
(4)Professor of Epidemiology and Public Health Sciences at the University of 
Miami.

Climate change should be viewed fundamentally as an issue of global justice. 
Understanding the complex interplay of climatic and socioeconomic trends is 
imperative to protect human health and lessen the burden of diseases such as 
dengue fever. Dengue fever is rapidly expanding globally. Temperature, rainfall, 
and frequency of natural disasters, as well as non-climatic trends involving 
population growth and migration, urbanization, and international trade and 
travel, are expected to increase the prevalence of mosquito breeding sites, 
mosquito survival, the speed of mosquito reproduction, the speed of viral 
incubation, the distribution of dengue virus and its vectors, human migration 
patterns towards urban areas, and displacement after natural disasters. The 
burden of dengue disproportionately affects the poor due to increased 
environmental risk and decreased health care. Mobilization of social 
institutions is needed to improve the structural inequalities of poverty that 
predispose the poor to increased dengue fever infection and worse outcomes. This 
paper reviews the link between dengue and climatic factors as a starting point 
to developing a comprehensive understanding of how climate change affects dengue 
risk and how institutions can address the issues of social justice and dengue 
outbreaks that increasingly affect vulnerable urban populations.

Copyright © 2014 Chang, Fuller, Carrasquillo, Beier. This is an open access 
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 
Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which 
permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

PMID: 25474614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]