---
reference_id: "PMID:32307694"
title: "Treatment of hereditary palmoplantar keratoderma: a review by analysis of the literature."
authors:
- Bodemer C
- Steijlen P
- Mazereeuw-Hautier J
- "O'Toole EA"
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.19144
keywords:
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/drug therapy, genetics"
- Keratolytic Agents
- Quality of Life
- Retinoids
- Skin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of hereditary palmoplantar keratoderma: a review by analysis of the literature.
**Authors:** Bodemer C, Steijlen P, Mazereeuw-Hautier J, O'Toole EA
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.19144](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.19144)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2021 Mar;184(3):393-400. doi: 10.1111/bjd.19144. Epub 2020 Jun
17.

Treatment of hereditary palmoplantar keratoderma: a review by analysis of the
literature.

Bodemer C(1), Steijlen P(2), Mazereeuw-Hautier J(3), O'Toole EA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Reference Centre for Genodermatoses, MAGEC Necker
Enfants Malades, Paris-centre University, APHP5, ERN-Skin, France.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Maastricht University Medical Centre and the GROW
School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht, ERN-Skin, the
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Centre de référence des maladies rares de la peau,
Larrey Hospital, Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse, ERN-Skin, France.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Royal London Hospital, Barts Health NHS Trust,
London, ERN-Skin, UK.

BACKGROUND: No specific or curative therapy exists for hereditary palmoplantar
keratoderma (hPPK), which can profoundly alter patient quality of life, leading
sometimes to severe functional impairment and pain. The rarity and the
aetiological diversity of this group of disorders can explain the difficulty in
comparing the efficacy of available treatments.
OBJECTIVES: To review the different treatments tried in patients with hPPK since
2008, their efficacy and safety, with an evaluation of the various therapeutic
modalities that can be used to treat hPPK.
METHODS: We undertook a comprehensive review of the literature data published
since 2008.
RESULTS: Only a few case series and individual case reports were identified.
Topical (emollients, keratolytics, retinoids, steroids) and systemic treatments
(mostly different retinoids), often combined, are used to relieve symptoms. Oral
retinoids appear to be the most efficient treatment, but not in all PPK forms,
and with variable tolerance. New targeted treatments, according to the specific
mechanisms of hPPK, appear promising for the future.
CONCLUSIONS: More studies using robust methodology and involving larger cohorts
of well-characterized patients (phenotype-genotype) are necessary and should be
prioritized by structured networks, such as the European Network for Rare Skin
Diseases (ERN-Skin), with the aim of better management of patients with rare
skin diseases.

© 2020 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.19144
PMID: 32307694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
