---
reference_id: "PMID:33843540"
title: Comparability of different Z-score equations for aortic root dimensions in children with Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Rutten DWE
- Aarts-Janssen IJH
- Kempers MJE
- Reimer AG
- Udink Ten Cate FEA
- Loeys BL
- Slieker MG
journal: Cardiol Young
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1017/S1047951121001311
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparability of different Z-score equations for aortic root dimensions in children with Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Rutten DWE, Aarts-Janssen IJH, Kempers MJE, Reimer AG, Udink Ten Cate FEA, Loeys BL, Slieker MG
**Journal:** Cardiol Young (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S1047951121001311](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1047951121001311)

## Content

1. Cardiol Young. 2021 Dec;31(12):1962-1968. doi: 10.1017/S1047951121001311. Epub
 2021 Apr 12.

Comparability of different Z-score equations for aortic root dimensions in 
children with Marfan syndrome.

Rutten DWE(1), Aarts-Janssen IJH(1), Kempers MJE(2), Reimer AG(1), Udink Ten 
Cate FEA(1), Loeys BL(2)(3), Slieker MG(#)(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Center for Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital & University of 
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Aortic root dilation is a major complication of Marfan syndrome and 
is one of the most important criteria in establishing the diagnosis. Currently, 
different echocardiographic nomograms are used to calculate aortic root 
Z-scores. The aim of the present study was to assess the potential differences 
in aortic root measurements when aortic root Z-scores were obtained in a cohort 
of paediatric Marfan patients using several published nomograms.
METHODS: In a cohort of 100 children with Marfan syndrome, Z-scores for aortic 
root dimensions were calculated according to the nomograms of Pettersen et al, 
Gautier et al, Colan et al, and Lopez et al. Bland-Altman plots were used to 
estimate mean differences in Z-scores and to establish limits of agreement.
RESULTS: The mean Z-score of the sinus of Valsalva for Lopez et al was 
significantly higher compared to Gautier et al (p < 0.01) and Pettersen et al (p 
= 0.03). The nomogram of Lopez et al resulted in substantially higher Z-scores 
in patients with a large sinus of Valsalva diameter. Thirty-five percentage of 
the studied patients would have a Z-score ≥ 2 using Lopez et al compared to 20% 
for Pettersen et al, 21% for Gautier et al, and 33% for Colan et al.
CONCLUSION: The currently available nomograms for calculating Z-scores of aortic 
dilation in children with Marfan syndrome lead to clinically relevant 
differences in Z-scores, especially in children with a relative large aortic 
root diameter. This could have impact on both the diagnosis and treatment of 
patients with Marfan syndrome.

DOI: 10.1017/S1047951121001311
PMID: 33843540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]