---
reference_id: "PMID:35417191"
title: Inhibition of METTL3 attenuates renal injury and inflammation by alleviating TAB3 m6A modifications via IGF2BP2-dependent mechanisms.
authors:
- Wang JN
- Wang F
- Ke J
- Li Z
- Xu CH
- Yang Q
- Chen X
- He XY
- He Y
- Suo XG
- Li C
- Yu JT
- Jiang L
- Ni WJ
- Jin J
- Liu MM
- Shao W
- Yang C
- Gong Q
- Chen HY
- Li J
- Wu YG
- Meng XM
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.abk2709
keywords:
- Acute Kidney Injury
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/metabolism"
- Animals
- Cisplatin/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Inflammation/metabolism
- Kidney/metabolism
- Lipopolysaccharides/metabolism
- Male
- "Methyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- RNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Reperfusion Injury/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of METTL3 attenuates renal injury and inflammation by alleviating TAB3 m6A modifications via IGF2BP2-dependent mechanisms.
**Authors:** Wang JN, Wang F, Ke J, Li Z, Xu CH, Yang Q, Chen X, He XY, He Y, Suo XG, Li C, Yu JT, Jiang L, Ni WJ, Jin J, Liu MM, Shao W, Yang C, Gong Q, Chen HY, Li J, Wu YG, Meng XM
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.abk2709](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.abk2709)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2022 Apr 13;14(640):eabk2709. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.abk2709.  Epub 2022 Apr 13.

Inhibition of METTL3 attenuates renal injury and inflammation by alleviating 
TAB3 m6A modifications via IGF2BP2-dependent mechanisms.

Wang JN(1), Wang F(1)(2), Ke J(3), Li Z(1), Xu CH(1), Yang Q(1), Chen X(1), He 
XY(1), He Y(1), Suo XG(1), Li C(1), Yu JT(1), Jiang L(4), Ni WJ(1), Jin J(5), 
Liu MM(1), Shao W(5), Yang C(6), Gong Q(7), Chen HY(8), Li J(1), Wu YG(4), Meng 
XM(1).

Author information:
(1)Inflammation and Immune Mediated Diseases Laboratory of Anhui Province, the 
Key Laboratory of Anti-inflammatory of Immune Medicines, Ministry of Education, 
Anhui Institute of Innovative Drugs, School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei 230032, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Lu'an Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Lu'an 
People's Hospital of Anhui Province, Lu'an 237006, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei 230032, China.
(4)Department of Nephropathy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei 230032, China.
(5)School of Basic Medicine, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 23003, China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Prevention and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease of 
Zhanjiang City, Institute of Nephrology, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong 
Medical University, Zhanjiang, Guangdong 524001, China.
(7)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui 
Medical University, Hefei 230032, China.
(8)School of Chinese Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 999077, 
China.

The role of N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modifications in renal diseases is largely 
unknown. Here, we characterized the role of N6-adenosine-methyltransferase-like 
3 (METTL3), whose expression is elevated in renal tubules in different acute 
kidney injury (AKI) models as well as in human biopsies and cultured tubular 
epithelial cells (TECs). METTL3 silencing alleviated renal inflammation and 
programmed cell death in TECs in response to stimulation by tumor necrosis 
factor-α (TNF-α), cisplatin, and lipopolysaccharide (LPS), whereas METTL3 
overexpression had the opposite effects. Conditional knockout of METTL3 from 
mouse kidneys attenuated cisplatin- and ischemic/reperfusion (I/R)-induced renal 
dysfunction, injury, and inflammation. Moreover, TAB3 [TGF-β-activated kinase 1 
(MAP3K7) binding protein 3] was identified as a target of METTL3 by m6A 
methylated RNA immunoprecipitation sequencing and RNA sequencing. The stability 
of TAB3 was increased through binding of IGF2BP2 (insulin-like growth factor 2 
binding protein 2) to its m6A-modified stop codon regions. The proinflammatory 
effects of TAB3 were then explored both in vitro and in vivo. Adeno-associated 
virus 9 (AAV9)-mediated METTL3 silencing attenuated renal injury and 
inflammation in cisplatin- and LPS-induced AKI mouse models. We further 
identified Cpd-564 as a METTL3 inhibitor that had better protective effects 
against cisplatin- and ischemia/reperfusion-induced renal injury and 
inflammation than S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine, a previously identified METTL3 
inhibitor. Collectively, METTL3 promoted m6A modifications of TAB3 and enhanced 
its stability via IGF2BP2-dependent mechanisms. Both genetic and pharmacological 
inhibition of METTL3 attenuated renal injury and inflammation, suggesting that 
the METTL3/TAB3 axis is a potential target for treatment of AKI.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.abk2709
PMID: 35417191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]