---
reference_id: "PMID:17003133"
title: Transaldolase is essential for maintenance of the mitochondrial transmembrane potential and fertility of spermatozoa.
authors:
- Perl A
- Qian Y
- Chohan KR
- Shirley CR
- Amidon W
- Banerjee S
- Middleton FA
- Conkrite KL
- Barcza M
- Gonchoroff N
- Suarez SS
- Banki K
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0602678103
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium Signaling/physiology
- "Epididymis/enzymology, ultrastructure"
- Fertility/physiology
- Gene Expression
- Gene Silencing
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- "Infertility, Male"
- Male
- Membrane Potentials/physiology
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mitochondria/pathology, ultrastructure"
- Mitochondrial Membranes/enzymology
- Molecular Sequence Data
- NAD/metabolism
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- "Recombination, Genetic"
- Sperm Motility/physiology
- "Spermatozoa/cytology, enzymology, physiology, ultrastructure"
- Sugar Phosphates/metabolism
- "Transaldolase/deficiency, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transaldolase is essential for maintenance of the mitochondrial transmembrane potential and fertility of spermatozoa.
**Authors:** Perl A, Qian Y, Chohan KR, Shirley CR, Amidon W, Banerjee S, Middleton FA, Conkrite KL, Barcza M, Gonchoroff N, Suarez SS, Banki K
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0602678103](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0602678103)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Oct 3;103(40):14813-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0602678103. Epub 2006 Sep 26.

Transaldolase is essential for maintenance of the mitochondrial transmembrane
potential and fertility of spermatozoa.

Perl A(1), Qian Y, Chohan KR, Shirley CR, Amidon W, Banerjee S, Middleton FA,
Conkrite KL, Barcza M, Gonchoroff N, Suarez SS, Banki K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, State University of New York,
750 East Adams Street, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA. perla@upstate.edu

Fertility of spermatozoa depends on maintenance of the mitochondrial
transmembrane potential (Deltapsi(m)), which is generated by the
electron-transport chain and regulated by an oxidation-reduction equilibrium of
reactive oxygen intermediates, pyridine nucleotides, and glutathione (GSH).
Here, we report that male mice lacking transaldolase (TAL)(-/-) are sterile
because of defective forward motility. TAL(-/-) spermatozoa show loss of
Deltapsi(m) and mitochondrial membrane integrity because of diminished NADPH,
NADH, and GSH. Mitochondria constitute major Ca(2+) stores; thus, diminished
mitochondrial mass accounts for reduced Ca(2+) fluxing, defective forward
motility, and infertility. Reduced forward progression of TAL-deficient
spermatozoa is associated with diminished mitochondrial reactive oxygen
intermediate production and Ca(2+) levels, intracellular acidosis, and
compensatory down-regulation of carbonic anhydrase IV and overexpression of CD38
and gamma-glutamyl transferase. Microarray analyses of gene expression in the
testis, caput, and cauda epididymidis of TAL(+/+), TAL(+/-), and TAL(-/-)
littermates confirmed a dominant impact of TAL deficiency on late stages of
sperm-cell development, affecting the electron-transport chain and GSH
metabolism. Stimulation of de novo GSH synthesis by oral N-acetyl-cysteine
normalized the low fertility rate of TAL(+/-) males without affecting the
sterility of TAL(-/-) males. Whereas TAL(-/-) sperm failed to fertilize TAL(+/+)
oocytes in vitro, sterility of TAL(-/-) sperm was circumvented by
intracytoplasmic sperm injection, indicating that TAL deficiency influenced the
structure and function of mitochondria without compromising the nucleus and DNA
integrity. Collectively, these data reveal an essential role of TAL in
sperm-cell mitochondrial function and, thus, male fertility.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0602678103
PMCID: PMC1595434
PMID: 17003133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
