---
reference_id: "PMID:38026786"
title: "Neurobiology and the Treatment of Alcohol Use Disorder: A Review of the Evidence Base."
authors:
- Donato S
- Ray LA
journal: Subst Abuse Rehabil
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2147/SAR.S409943
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurobiology and the Treatment of Alcohol Use Disorder: A Review of the Evidence Base.
**Authors:** Donato S, Ray LA
**Journal:** Subst Abuse Rehabil (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2147/SAR.S409943](https://doi.org/10.2147/SAR.S409943)

## Content

1. Subst Abuse Rehabil. 2023 Nov 15;14:157-166. doi: 10.2147/SAR.S409943. 
eCollection 2023.

Neurobiology and the Treatment of Alcohol Use Disorder: A Review of the Evidence 
Base.

Donato S(1), Ray LA(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(2)Brain Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a significant public health concern, accounting 
for a majority of substance use disorder cases in the United States. Treatment 
for AUD is complex, with multiple intervention points that may be further 
complicated by genotype and phenotype, resulting in diverse outcomes. In order 
to better understand the current landscape of AUD treatment, the present review 
considers different etiological models of AUD and assesses the evidence base of 
current treatment options. The first section of this review summarizes various 
etiological models of AUD and presents different approaches to classifying the 
disorder. Various theories, including neurobiological models, are discussed. The 
second section presents a comprehensive analysis of available treatment options 
for AUD, encompassing behavioral and pharmacological interventions and their 
current evidence base. Finally, this review discusses the ongoing treatment gap 
and significant factors contributing to low treatment utilization. Together, 
this review provides an overview of different etiological processes and 
mechanisms of AUD, as well as summarizes the literature on key treatment 
approaches. By integrating historical, theoretical, and empirical data, this 
review aims to inform both researchers and providers with valuable insights to 
advance AUD treatment approaches and narrow the treatment gap.

© 2023 Donato and Ray.

DOI: 10.2147/SAR.S409943
PMCID: PMC10657770
PMID: 38026786

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.