---
reference_id: "PMID:35646586"
title: "Developing lung cancer in COPD: Possible role of carrying Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency variants."
authors:
- Onur ST
- Boyracı N
- Akyıl FT
- Sökücü SN
- Kara K
journal: Respir Med Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2022.101667
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developing lung cancer in COPD: Possible role of carrying Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency variants.
**Authors:** Onur ST, Boyracı N, Akyıl FT, Sökücü SN, Kara K
**Journal:** Respir Med Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmcr.2022.101667](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmcr.2022.101667)

## Content

1. Respir Med Case Rep. 2022 May 21;38:101667. doi: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2022.101667. 
eCollection 2022.

Developing lung cancer in COPD: Possible role of carrying Alpha-1 antitrypsin 
deficiency variants.

Onur ST(1), Boyracı N(1), Akyıl FT(1), Sökücü SN(1), Kara K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, Health Sciences University, Yedikule Chest 
Diseases and Thoracic Surgery Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by 
persistent airflow limitation and airway inflammation, with a prevalence of 
10.1%. Among the many causes of COPD, Smoking is the leading and another big 
cause is (AATD α1-antitrypsin deficiency)' an inherited disorder. Prevalence of 
COPD patients is 1.9%. World Health Organization (WHO) advice all COPD patients' 
AATD rate to be screened at least once during their life.The prevalence of AATD 
in the general population ranges from 1:2,000-5,000 in parts of Europe and from 
1 to 5,000-10,000 in the United States and Canada.
CASE 1: An 81-year-old male patient with COPD. In computed tomography (CT) of 
the thorax, mass in the right lower lobe and a nodule in the right upper lobe 
were detected. The biopsy from right bronchial entrance via fiberoptic 
bronchoscopy (FB) yielded squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). AAT level was 169 mg/dL 
(ref. range: 90-200 mg/dL). M/P lowell allele was detected in genetic analysis.
CASE 2: A 45-year-old male patient with COPD. Conglomerated lymhadenomegaly in 
the paratracheal area was detected in CT. The biopsy from mucosal infiltrates 
initiating from the entrance of the right upper lobe to the anterior segment 
revealed SCC. His AAT level was 190 mg/dL (ref. range: 90-200 mg/dL) and the 
genetic analysis demonstrated M/I mutation.
CASE 3: A 64-year-old male COPD patient. In thorax CT, a 24 mm diameter 
parenchymal nodule in the left lower lobe was detected. Transthoracic fine 
needle aspiration biopsy from the left lung nodule showed SCC. His AAT level was 
196 mg/dL (ref. range: 90-200 mg/dL) and M/P lowell allele was detected in the 
genetic analysis.
DISCUSSION: AAT deficiency can cause early-onset of COPD, manifested with 
emphysema and chronic bronchitis. It has been suggested that AATD is associated 
with an increased risk of many types of cancer. Although the relationship 
between AATD or variant carriage and LC histopathology is not clear in the 
literature, it was detected as squamous cell carcinoma in our cases. We infer 
that unmeasurable lung damage is more prevalent in heterozygous patients and we 
believe that sharing our results may draw more attention in this regard.

© 2022 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2022.101667
PMCID: PMC9136117
PMID: 35646586

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest in connection 
with this paper.