---
reference_id: "PMID:35205305"
title: "The Role of TRPM4 Gene Mutations in Causing Familial Progressive Cardiac Conduction Disease: A Further Contribution."
authors:
- Palladino A
- Papa AA
- Petillo R
- Scutifero M
- Morra S
- Passamano L
- Nigro V
- Politano L
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13020258
keywords:
- Aged
- "Atrioventricular Block/genetics, metabolism"
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac"
- Heart
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "TRPM Cation Channels/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of TRPM4 Gene Mutations in Causing Familial Progressive Cardiac Conduction Disease: A Further Contribution.
**Authors:** Palladino A, Papa AA, Petillo R, Scutifero M, Morra S, Passamano L, Nigro V, Politano L
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13020258](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13020258)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Jan 28;13(2):258. doi: 10.3390/genes13020258.

The Role of TRPM4 Gene Mutations in Causing Familial Progressive Cardiac 
Conduction Disease: A Further Contribution.

Palladino A(1), Papa AA(2), Petillo R(1), Scutifero M(1), Morra S(1), Passamano 
L(1), Nigro V(3), Politano L(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiomiology and Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Campania Luigi 
Vanvitelli, 80138 Naples, Italy.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Translational Medical Sciences, 
University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Monaldi Hospital, 80131 Naples, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, 
80138 Naples, Italy.

Progressive cardiac conduction disease (PCCD) is a relatively common condition 
in young and elderly populations, related to rare mutations in several genes, 
including SCN5A, SCN1B, LMNA and GJA5, TRPM4. Familial cases have also been 
reported. We describe a family with a large number of individuals necessitating 
pacemaker implantation, likely due to varying degrees of PCCD. The proband is a 
47-year-old-patient, whose younger brother died at 25 years of unexplained 
sudden cardiac death. Three paternal uncles needed a pacemaker (PM) implantation 
between 40 and 65 years for unspecified causes. At the age of 42, he was 
implanted with a PM for two episodes of syncope and the presence of complete 
atrioventricular block (AVB). NGS analysis revealed the missense variation c. 
2351G>A, p.Gly844Asp in the exon 17 of the TRPM4 gene. This gene encodes the 
TRPM4 channel, a calcium-activated nonselective cation channel of the transient 
receptor potential melastatin (TRPM) ion channel family. Variations in TRPM4 
have been shown to cause an increase in cell surface current density, which 
results in a gain of gene function. Our report broadens and supports the 
causative role of TRPM4 gene mutations in PCCD. Genetic screening and 
identification of the causal mutation are critical for risk stratification and 
family counselling.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13020258
PMCID: PMC8871839
PMID: 35205305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.