---
reference_id: "PMID:19502434"
title: Worldwide prevalence of class 2 integrases outside the clinical setting is associated with human impact.
authors:
- Rodríguez-Minguela CM
- Apajalahti JH
- Chai B
- Cole JR
- Tiedje JM
journal: Appl Environ Microbiol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1128/AEM.00133-09
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Worldwide prevalence of class 2 integrases outside the clinical setting is associated with human impact.
**Authors:** Rodríguez-Minguela CM, Apajalahti JH, Chai B, Cole JR, Tiedje JM
**Journal:** Appl Environ Microbiol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1128/AEM.00133-09](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00133-09)

## Content

1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2009 Aug;75(15):5100-10. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00133-09.
Epub  2009 Jun 5.

Worldwide prevalence of class 2 integrases outside the clinical setting is 
associated with human impact.

Rodríguez-Minguela CM(1), Apajalahti JH, Chai B, Cole JR, Tiedje JM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Microbial Ecology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
48824-1325, USA.

An intI-targeted PCR assay was optimized to evaluate the frequency of partial 
class 2-like integrases relative to putative, environmental IntI elements in 
clone libraries generated from 17 samples that included various terrestrial, 
marine, and deep-sea habitats with different exposures to human influence. We 
identified 169 unique IntI phylotypes (< or =98% amino acid identity) relative 
to themselves and with respect to those previously described. Among these, six 
variants showed an undescribed, extended, IntI-specific additional domain. A 
connection between human influence and the dominance of IntI-2-like variants was 
also observed. IntI phylotypes 80 to 99% identical to class 2 integrases 
comprised approximately 70 to 100% (n = 65 to 87) of the IntI elements detected 
in samples with a high input of fecal waste, whereas IntI2-like sequences were 
undetected in undisturbed settings and poorly represented (1 to 10%; n = 40 to 
79) in environments with moderate or no recent fecal or anthropogenic impact. 
Eleven partial IntI2-like sequences lacking the signature ochre 179 codon were 
found among samples of biosolids and agricultural soil supplemented with swine 
manure, indicating a wider distribution of potentially functional IntI2 variants 
than previously reported. To evaluate IntI2 distribution patterns beyond the 
usual hosts, namely, the Enterobacteriaceae, we coupled PCR assays targeted at 
intI and 16S rRNA loci to G+C fractionation of total DNA extracted from manured 
cropland. IntI2-like sequences and 16S rRNA phylotypes related to Firmicutes 
(Clostridium and Bacillus) and Bacteroidetes (Chitinophaga and Sphingobacterium) 
dominated a low-G+C fraction ( approximately 40 to 45%), suggesting that these 
groups could be important IntI2 hosts in manured soil. Moreover, G+G 
fractionation uncovered an additional set of 36 novel IntI phylotypes (< or =98% 
amino acid identity) undetected in bulk DNA and revealed the prevalence of 
potentially functional IntI2 variants in the low-G+C fraction.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00133-09
PMCID: PMC2725508
PMID: 19502434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]