---
reference_id: "PMID:22876374"
title: Chronic Granulomatous Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Leiding JW
- Holland SM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Granulomatous Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Leiding JW, Holland SM

## Content

1. Chronic Granulomatous Disease.

Leiding JW(1), Holland SM(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2012 Aug 9 [updated 2026 Jan 22].

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy and Immunology, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, Maryland
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is a primary 
immunodeficiency disorder of phagocytes (neutrophils, monocytes, macrophages, 
and eosinophils) resulting from impaired killing of bacteria and fungi. CGD is 
characterized by severe recurrent bacterial and fungal infections and 
dysregulated inflammatory responses resulting in granuloma formation and other 
inflammatory disorders such as colitis. Infections typically involve the lung 
(pneumonia), lymph nodes (lymphadenitis), liver (abscess), bone (osteomyelitis), 
and skin (abscesses or cellulitis). Granulomas typically involve the 
genitourinary system (bladder) and gastrointestinal tract (often the pylorus 
initially, and later the esophagus, jejunum, ileum, cecum, rectum, and 
perirectal area). Some males with X-linked CGD have McLeod neuroacanthocytosis 
syndrome as the result of a contiguous gene deletion. While CGD may present 
anytime from infancy to late adulthood, the vast majority of affected 
individuals are diagnosed before age five years. Use of antimicrobial 
prophylaxis and therapy has greatly improved overall survival.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CGD is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings by identification of pathogenic variant(s) in one of six 
genes that encode or permit assembly of the subunits of phagocyte NADPH oxidase: 
biallelic pathogenic variants in CYBA, CYBC1, NCF1, NCF2, and NCF4 cause 
autosomal recessive CGD; pathogenic variants in CYBB cause X-linked CGD.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: A definitive microbiologic diagnosis is 
essential to proper treatment of infections. Newer azole drugs (voriconazole, 
posaconazole, isovuconazole) have expanded therapeutic options for fungal 
infections. Long courses of antimicrobials are often needed for adequate 
treatment. Abscesses may require percutaneous drainage or excisional surgery. 
Simultaneous administration of antimicrobials and corticosteroids can help 
resolve the associated heightened inflammatory response, including colitis. 
Prevention of primary manifestations: Lifelong daily antibacterial and 
antifungal prophylaxis is recommended; immunomodulatory therapy with interferon 
gamma (IFN-gamma) is part of the prophylactic regimen in many centers. 
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the only known cure 
for CGD and is associated with excellent overall and event-free survival, 
especially when performed with matched donors at a younger age. Surveillance: 
Screening labs every 3-4 months in a healthy individual with CGD can aid in 
early detection and treatment of asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic 
infections and noninfectious complications such as colitis, pulmonary 
granulomas, and pulmonary fibrosis. Agents/circumstances to avoid: (1) Decayed 
organic matter (e.g., mulching, gardening, leaf raking, house demolition) as 
inhalation of fungal spores can result in fulminant pneumonitis; (2) live 
bacterial vaccines including bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccination and 
Salmonella typhi vaccination; (3) persons with CGD and McLeod 
neuroacanthocytosis syndrome: blood transfusions that are Kell antigen positive. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: Early diagnosis of relatives at risk allows for 
prompt initiation of antimicrobial prophylaxis and other treatment. Pregnancy 
management: The major concern during the pregnancy of a woman known to have CGD 
is use of prophylactic antimicrobials: trimethoprim, a folic acid antagonist, is 
discontinued during pregnancy because of the high risk for birth defects. 
Although sulfamethoxazole is not known to increase the risk of birth defects in 
humans, it is typically administered in conjunction with trimethoprim. Data 
regarding teratogenicity of itraconazole are limited.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CGD associated with a pathogenic variant in CYBB is 
inherited in an X-linked manner. CGD associated with biallelic pathogenic 
variants in CYBA, CYBC1, NCF1, NCF2, or NCF4 is inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner. X-linked CGD. If the mother of an affected male is 
heterozygous for a CYBB pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting it in 
each pregnancy is 50%. Males who inherit the pathogenic variant will be 
affected. Females who inherit the pathogenic variant will be heterozygous. 
Heterozygous females are typically not affected with CGD but are at substantial 
risk for inflammatory conditions. Once the CYBB pathogenic variant has been 
identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic heterozygote 
detection for at-risk female relatives is possible. Autosomal recessive CGD. If 
both parents are known to be heterozygous for an autosomal recessive CGD-causing 
pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% 
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being a carrier, and a 25% chance of 
inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Once the CGD-causing 
pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, molecular 
genetic carrier testing for at-risk relatives is possible. Once the CGD-causing 
pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member, 
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible. (Other prenatal 
testing options may be available if the pathogenic variant[s] in the family are 
not known.)

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 22876374