---
reference_id: "PMID:39194735"
title: "Is Oxytocin a Contributor to Behavioral and Metabolic Features in Prader-Willi Syndrome?"
authors:
- Petersson M
- Höybye C
journal: Curr Issues Mol Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cimb46080518
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is Oxytocin a Contributor to Behavioral and Metabolic Features in Prader-Willi Syndrome?
**Authors:** Petersson M, Höybye C
**Journal:** Curr Issues Mol Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cimb46080518](https://doi.org/10.3390/cimb46080518)

## Content

1. Curr Issues Mol Biol. 2024 Aug 13;46(8):8767-8779. doi: 10.3390/cimb46080518.

Is Oxytocin a Contributor to Behavioral and Metabolic Features in Prader-Willi 
Syndrome?

Petersson M(1)(2), Höybye C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 171 76 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a rare genetic disorder typically characterized 
by decreased social interaction, hyperphagia, poor behavioral control and temper 
tantrums, together with a high risk of morbid obesity unless food intake is 
controlled. The genetic defects that cause PWS include paternal 15q deletion 
(estimated in 60% of cases), chromosome 15 maternal uniparental disomy (UPD) 
(estimated in 35% of cases) and imprinting defects and translocations. Several 
studies indicate an oxytocin deficiency in PWS. Oxytocin is a hypothalamic 
nonapeptide with receptors located in the brain and in various other tissues in 
the body. It acts as a neuropeptide in several brain areas of great importance 
for behavioral and metabolic effects, as well as a neurohypophyseal hormone 
released into the circulation. Oxytocin in both rats and humans has strong and 
long-lasting behavioral and metabolic effects. Thus, an oxytocin deficiency 
might be involved in several of the behavioral and metabolic symptoms 
characterizing PWS. Treatment with oxytocin has, in some studies, shown 
improvement in psycho-social behavior and hyperphagia in individuals with PWS. 
This review focus on the behavioral and metabolic effects of oxytocin, the 
symptoms of a potential oxytocin deficiency in PWS and the effects of oxytocin 
treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/cimb46080518
PMCID: PMC11353121
PMID: 39194735

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.