---
reference_id: "PMID:32723872"
title: "CHOP and c-JUN up-regulate the mutant Z α(1)-antitrypsin, exacerbating its aggregation and liver proteotoxicity."
authors:
- Attanasio S
- Ferriero R
- Gernoux G
- De Cegli R
- Carissimo A
- Nusco E
- Campione S
- Teckman J
- Mueller C
- Piccolo P
- Brunetti-Pierri N
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.014307
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress/genetics
- Humans
- "Liver/metabolism, pathology"
- "Liver Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Protein Aggregation, Pathological/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Protein Folding
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-jun/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription Factor CHOP/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Up-Regulation
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/biosynthesis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHOP and c-JUN up-regulate the mutant Z α(1)-antitrypsin, exacerbating its aggregation and liver proteotoxicity.
**Authors:** Attanasio S, Ferriero R, Gernoux G, De Cegli R, Carissimo A, Nusco E, Campione S, Teckman J, Mueller C, Piccolo P, Brunetti-Pierri N
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA120.014307](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA120.014307)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Sep 18;295(38):13213-13223. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.014307.
Epub 2020 Jul 28.

CHOP and c-JUN up-regulate the mutant Z α(1)-antitrypsin, exacerbating its
aggregation and liver proteotoxicity.

Attanasio S(1), Ferriero R(1), Gernoux G(2), De Cegli R(1), Carissimo A(3),
Nusco E(1), Campione S(4), Teckman J(5), Mueller C(6), Piccolo P(7),
Brunetti-Pierri N(8).

Author information:
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Cancer Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Institute for Applied Mathematics "Mauro Picone" National Research Council,
Naples, Italy.
(4)Pathology Unit, Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy.
(5)St. Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Cancer Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA; Horae Gene Therapy
Center, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts,
USA.
(7)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy; Department of
Translational Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy. Electronic
address: piccolo@tigem.it.
(8)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy; Department of
Translational Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy. Electronic
address: brunetti@tigem.it.

α1-Antitrypsin (AAT) encoded by the SERPINA1 gene is an acute-phase protein
synthesized in the liver and secreted into the circulation. Its primary role is
to protect lung tissue by inhibiting neutrophil elastase. The Z allele of
SERPINA1 encodes a mutant AAT, named ATZ, that changes the protein structure and
leads to its misfolding and polymerization, which cause endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress and liver disease through a gain-of-function toxic mechanism.
Hepatic retention of ATZ results in deficiency of one of the most important
circulating proteinase inhibitors and predisposes to early-onset emphysema
through a loss-of-function mechanism. The pathogenetic mechanisms underlying the
liver disease are not completely understood. C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP), a
transcription factor induced by ER stress, was found among the most up-regulated
genes in livers of PiZ mice that express ATZ and in human livers of patients
homozygous for the Z allele. Compared with controls, juvenile PiZ/Chop-/- mice
showed reduced hepatic ATZ and a transcriptional response indicative of
decreased ER stress by RNA-Seq analysis. Livers of PiZ/Chop-/- mice also showed
reduced SERPINA1 mRNA levels. By chromatin immunoprecipitations and luciferase
reporter-based transfection assays, CHOP was found to up-regulate SERPINA1
cooperating with c-JUN, which was previously shown to up-regulate SERPINA1, thus
aggravating hepatic accumulation of ATZ. Increased CHOP levels were detected in
diseased livers of children homozygous for the Z allele. In summary, CHOP and
c-JUN up-regulate SERPINA1 transcription and play an important role in hepatic
disease by increasing the burden of proteotoxic ATZ, particularly in the
pediatric population.

© 2020 Attanasio et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.014307
PMCID: PMC7504927
PMID: 32723872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest—The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.
