---
reference_id: "PMID:27503945"
title: "Adipose tissue inflammation: a cause or consequence of obesity-related insulin resistance?"
authors:
- Blüher M
journal: Clin Sci (Lond)
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1042/CS20160005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adipose tissue inflammation: a cause or consequence of obesity-related insulin resistance?
**Authors:** Blüher M
**Journal:** Clin Sci (Lond) (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1042/CS20160005](https://doi.org/10.1042/CS20160005)

## Content

1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2016 Sep 1;130(18):1603-14. doi: 10.1042/CS20160005.

Adipose tissue inflammation: a cause or consequence of obesity-related insulin 
resistance?

Blüher M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Leipzig, Leipzig 04103, Germany 
bluma@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.

The worldwide obesity epidemic has become a major health concern, because it 
contributes to higher mortality due to an increased risk for noncommunicable 
diseases including cardiovascular diseases, type 2 diabetes, musculoskeletal 
disorders and some cancers. Insulin resistance may link accumulation of adipose 
tissue in obesity to metabolic diseases, although the underlying mechanisms are 
not completely understood. In the past decades, data from human studies and 
transgenic animal models strongly suggested correlative, but also causative 
associations between activation of proinflammatory pathways and insulin 
resistance. Particularly chronic inflammation in adipose tissue seems to play an 
important role in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance. On the 
other hand, adipose tissue inflammation has been shown to be essential for 
healthy adipose tissue expansion and remodelling. However, whether adipose 
tissue inflammation represents a consequence or a cause of impaired insulin 
sensitivity remains an open question. A better understanding of the molecular 
pathways linking excess adipose tissue storage to chronic inflammation and 
insulin resistance may provide the basis for the future development of 
anti-inflammatory treatment strategies to improve adverse metabolic consequences 
of obesity. In this review, potential mechanisms of adipose tissue inflammation 
and how adipose tissue inflammation may cause insulin resistance are discussed.

© 2016 The Author(s). published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the 
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/CS20160005
PMID: 27503945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]