---
reference_id: "PMID:26125104"
title: Update on the pathogenesis and treatment of the antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Chighizola CB
- Raschi E
- Borghi MO
- Meroni PL
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on the pathogenesis and treatment of the antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Chighizola CB, Raschi E, Borghi MO, Meroni PL
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000200](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000200)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2015 Sep;27(5):476-82. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000200.

Update on the pathogenesis and treatment of the antiphospholipid syndrome.

Chighizola CB(1), Raschi E, Borghi MO, Meroni PL.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan 
bExperiment Laboratory of ImmunoRheumatologic Researches, IRCCS Istituto 
Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Many advancements in our understanding of the pathogenic 
mechanisms of the antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) have been accomplished over 
the recent months. Such progresses are paralleled by the development of 
innovative pharmacological tools that could provide novel therapeutic windows in 
APS management. The most recent and innovative findings about the biologic 
effects of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPLs) and the treatment APS will be 
hereby critically appraised.
RECENT FINDINGS: Antibodies against the domain I of β2 glycoprotein I (β2GPI) 
are increasingly recognized as the main pathogenic subset; pioneer therapeutic 
options exploiting the pathogenicity of anti-domain I antibodies have been 
developed. AnnexinA2 and toll-like receptor (TLR)4 have been identified as the 
main receptors for β2GPI/anti-β2GPI antibodies on target cells; additional 
co-receptors might include TLR1, TLR2 and TLR6. Upon binding, aPLs engage 
intracellular mediators as nuclear factor kappa B and mammalian target of 
rapamycin, which provide potential therapeutic targets. Current innovative 
treatment options include novel oral anticoagulants and the complement inhibitor 
eculizumab. The addition to standard treatment of pleiotropic agents such as 
hydroxychloroquine, statins and vitamin D could allow better disease control.
SUMMARY: The lively and intense research in the APS field opens new frontiers in 
aPL pathogenic mechanisms, as well as diagnosis and treatment of the syndrome.
VIDEO ABSTRACT: http://links.lww.com/COR/A26.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000200
PMID: 26125104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]