---
reference_id: "PMID:7201843"
title: Cardiac arrhythmias in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Bjarnason I
- Hardarson T
- Jonsson S
journal: Br Heart J
year: '1982'
doi: 10.1136/hrt.48.3.198
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac arrhythmias in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Bjarnason I, Hardarson T, Jonsson S
**Journal:** Br Heart J (1982)
**DOI:** [10.1136/hrt.48.3.198](https://doi.org/10.1136/hrt.48.3.198)

## Content

1. Br Heart J. 1982 Sep;48(3):198-203. doi: 10.1136/hrt.48.3.198.

Cardiac arrhythmias in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Bjarnason I, Hardarson T, Jonsson S.

This study was designed to assess the prevalence of cardiac arrhythmias in a 
group of relatives of patients who had come to necropsy with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Another aim of the study was to assess the validity of an 
interventricular septal thickness of 1.3 cm or more, measured by 
echocardiography, as a diagnostic criterion of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy among 
relatives of cases proven at necropsy. Fifty close relatives of eight deceased 
patients were examined. By the above definition 22 relatives had hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy and 28 did not. A comparison of the prevalence and types of 
cardiac arrhythmias, as shown by 24 hour ambulatory electrocardiographic 
monitoring, was made between the two groups and a third apparently healthy group 
of 40 people. The patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy showed a significant 
increase in supraventricular extrasystoles/24 hours, supraventricular 
arrhythmias, high grade ventricular arrhythmia, and the number of patients with 
more than 10 ventricular extrasystoles every 24 hours when compared with the 
other groups. There was no significant difference between normal relatives and 
controls. The prevalence and types of arrhythmia in these patients were similar 
to those found by other investigators using different diagnostic criteria. These 
results support the contention that these patients do indeed have hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy and suggest that all close relatives of necropsy proven cases 
should be examined by echocardiography and subsequently by ambulatory 
electrocardiographic monitoring if the interventricular septal thickness is 1.3 
more.

DOI: 10.1136/hrt.48.3.198
PMCID: PMC481229
PMID: 7201843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]