---
reference_id: "PMID:21531865"
title: Exome sequencing identifies an MYH3 mutation in a family with distal arthrogryposis type 1.
authors:
- Alvarado DM
- Buchan JG
- Gurnett CA
- Dobbs MB
journal: J Bone Joint Surg Am
year: '2011'
doi: 10.2106/JBJS.J.02004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome sequencing identifies an MYH3 mutation in a family with distal arthrogryposis type 1.
**Authors:** Alvarado DM, Buchan JG, Gurnett CA, Dobbs MB
**Journal:** J Bone Joint Surg Am (2011)
**DOI:** [10.2106/JBJS.J.02004](https://doi.org/10.2106/JBJS.J.02004)

## Content

1. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2011 Jun 1;93(11):1045-50. doi: 10.2106/JBJS.J.02004.

Exome sequencing identifies an MYH3 mutation in a family with distal 
arthrogryposis type 1.

Alvarado DM(1), Buchan JG, Gurnett CA, Dobbs MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, 
1 Children's Place, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

BACKGROUND: Few genes responsible for distal arthrogryposis type 1 are known, 
although genes coding for the proteins in the sarcomere have been implicated in 
other types of distal arthrogryposis. Cost-effective sequencing methods are now 
available to examine all genes in the human genome for the purpose of 
establishing the genetic basis of musculoskeletal disorders.
METHODS: A multigenerational family with distal arthrogryposis type 1 
characterized by clubfoot and mild hand contractures was identified, and exome 
sequencing was performed on DNA from one of the affected family members. Linkage 
analysis was used to confirm whether a genetic variant segregated with distal 
arthrogryposis.
RESULTS: Exome sequencing identified 573 novel variants that were not present in 
control databases. A missense mutation in MYH3 (a gene coding for the heavy 
chain of myosin), causing an F437I amino acid substitution, was identified that 
segregated with distal arthrogryposis in this family. Linkage analysis confirmed 
that this MYH3 mutation was the only exome variant common to all six affected 
individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Identification of an MYH3 mutation in this family with distal 
arthrogryposis type 1 broadens the phenotype associated with MYH3 mutations to 
include distal arthrogryposis types 1, 2A (Freeman-Sheldon syndrome), and 2B 
(Sheldon-Hall syndrome). Exome sequencing is a useful and cost-effective method 
to discover causative genetic mutations, although data from extended families 
may be needed to confirm the importance of the hundreds of identified variants.

DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.J.02004
PMCID: PMC3102311
PMID: 21531865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]