---
reference_id: "PMID:34606655"
title: The analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation in familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Ozturk K
- Cakan M
journal: Pediatr Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/ped.15017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation in familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Ozturk K, Cakan M
**Journal:** Pediatr Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ped.15017](https://doi.org/10.1111/ped.15017)

## Content

1. Pediatr Int. 2022 Jan;64(1):e15017. doi: 10.1111/ped.15017.

The analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation in familial Mediterranean fever.

Ozturk K(1), Cakan M(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Pediatric Rheumatology, Gaziantep Cengiz Gökçek Children Hospital, 
Gaziantep, Turkey.
(2)Clinic of Pediatric Rheumatology, Şanlıurfa Research and Training Hospital, 
Şanlıurfa, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most common monogenic 
autoinflammatory disease manifesting with phenotypic heterogeneity. It is a 
clinically diagnosed disease supported by Mediterranean fever gene mutation 
analysis. This medical record review study aimed to make a new interpretation of 
clinical features in FMF patients by grouping genetic results based on the 
classification proposed by the Eurofever/ Paediatric Rheumatology International 
Trials Organisation.
METHODS: The medical charts of pediatric FMF patients who were diagnosed and 
followed up regularly at the two pediatric rheumatology units were reviewed. 
Genetic analysis results were classified as confirmatory and nonconfirmatory as 
defined in the new Eurofever/ Paediatric Rheumatology International Trials 
Organisation classification criteria, and they were compared with clinical 
findings.
RESULTS: A total of 216 FMF patients were involved in the study. Group 1 was 
composed of 133 (61.6%) patients with a confirmatory mutation and group 2 
included 83 (38.4%) patients with a nonconfirmatory mutation. All clinical 
findings were compared, and in terms of fever (P = 0.027), abdominal pain (P = 
0.016), arthritis (P = 0.008) and erysipelas-like erythema (ELE; P = 0.003) 
incidence, there was a significant difference between the two groups. The most 
common Mediterranean fever gene mutation patterns were homozygous (33.8%) and 
heterozygous (17.1%) mutations of M694V. The frequency of arthritis and ELE in 
patients with M694V homozygous mutations was significantly higher than in the 
other patients (P = 0.002 and P <0.001, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The most frequently observed clinical features of FMF (i.e., fever 
and abdominal pain) are both observed in patients with confirmatory and 
nonconfirmatory mutations, ELE and arthritis are more commonly observed in 
patients with confirmatory mutations.

© 2021 Japan Pediatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ped.15017
PMID: 34606655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]