---
reference_id: "PMID:29370033"
title: "AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT VITREORETINOCHOROIDOPATHY: When Molecular Genetic Testing Helps Clinical Diagnosis."
authors:
- Boulanger-Scemama E
- Sahel JA
- Mohand-Said S
- Antonio A
- Condroyer C
- Zeitz C
- Audo I
journal: Retina
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000002041
keywords:
- Aged
- "Choroid Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Electroretinography
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Follow-Up Studies
- Fundus Oculi
- Genetic Testing/methods
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Ophthalmoscopy
- Pedigree
- "Retinal Degeneration/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Fields
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT VITREORETINOCHOROIDOPATHY: When Molecular Genetic Testing Helps Clinical Diagnosis.
**Authors:** Boulanger-Scemama E, Sahel JA, Mohand-Said S, Antonio A, Condroyer C, Zeitz C, Audo I
**Journal:** Retina (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IAE.0000000000002041](https://doi.org/10.1097/IAE.0000000000002041)

## Content

1. Retina. 2019 May;39(5):867-878. doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000002041.

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT VITREORETINOCHOROIDOPATHY: When Molecular Genetic Testing
Helps Clinical Diagnosis.

Boulanger-Scemama E(1), Sahel JA(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Mohand-Said S(2)(4), Antonio
A(4), Condroyer C(4), Zeitz C(4), Audo I(2)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Fondation Ophtalmologique Adolphe de Rothschild, Paris, France.
(2)Centre Hospitalier National d'Ophtalmologie des Quinze-Vingts, DHUSight
Restore, INSERM-DGOS CIC 1423, Paris, France.
(3)Académie des Sciences-Institut de France, Paris, France.
(4)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, INSERM U968, CNRS UMR_7210,
Institut de la Vision, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(6)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College of London, London, United
Kingdom.

PURPOSE: Autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy is an extremely rare
disease, which belongs to the BEST1-related disease spectrum.
METHODS: Report of five patients with an initial diagnosis of atypical rod-cone
dystrophy, for whom autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy was
retrospectively diagnosed on genetic results using targeted next-generation
sequencing. Each patient had a comprehensive ophthalmic examination including
multimodal retinal imaging and functional evaluation.
RESULTS: Visual acuity ranged from <20/800 to 20/25. Two patients had narrowed
angle with history of acute angle-closure glaucoma for one patient. Full-field
electroretinogram showed severe reduction of both scotopic and photopic
responses for 3/5 patients. Electrooculogram could be performed for one of the
two patients with moderate alterations of full-field electroretinogram. It
revealed severe light rise abnormalities with decreased Arden ratio (125% right
eye, 145% left eye) in keeping with generalized severe dysfunction of the
retinal pigment epithelium. On fundoscopy, the pathognomonic circumferential
hyperpigmented band of the peripheral retina was totally absent in two patients.
CONCLUSION: This report highlights the high phenotypic variability of autosomal
dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy, which may be misdiagnosed, especially in
advanced forms with severe generalized photoreceptor dysfunction mimicking
retinitis pigmentosa. Targeted next-generation sequencing can contribute to the
proper clinical diagnosis, especially in case of atypical phenotypic features of
autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy.

DOI: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000002041
PMID: 29370033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
