---
reference_id: "PMID:24507838"
title: Cellular and molecular mechanisms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Barnes PJ
journal: Clin Chest Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2013.10.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular and molecular mechanisms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Barnes PJ
**Journal:** Clin Chest Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccm.2013.10.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccm.2013.10.004)

## Content

1. Clin Chest Med. 2014 Mar;35(1):71-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2013.10.004. Epub
2013  Dec 12.

Cellular and molecular mechanisms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, Dovehouse Street, London 
SW3 6LY, UK. Electronic address: p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is associated with chronic inflammation 
affecting predominantly lung parenchyma and peripheral airways and results in 
largely irreversible and progressive airflow limitation. This inflammation is 
characterized by increased numbers of alveolar macrophages, neutrophils, and T 
lymphocytes, which are recruited from the circulation. Oxidative stress plays a 
key role in driving this inflammation. The pulmonary inflammation may enhance 
the development and growth of lung cancer. The peripheral inflammation extends 
into the circulation, resulting in systemic inflammation with the same 
inflammatory proteins. Systemic inflammation may worsen comorbidities. Treatment 
of pulmonary inflammation may therefore have beneficial effects.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccm.2013.10.004
PMID: 24507838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]