---
reference_id: "PMID:11271896"
title: "Crohn's disease of aphthous type: serial changes in intestinal lesions."
authors:
- Matsumoto T
- Iida M
- Nakamura S
- Hizawa K
- Yao T
- Fujishima M
journal: Br J Radiol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1259/bjr.73.874.11271896
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crohn's disease of aphthous type: serial changes in intestinal lesions.
**Authors:** Matsumoto T, Iida M, Nakamura S, Hizawa K, Yao T, Fujishima M
**Journal:** Br J Radiol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1259/bjr.73.874.11271896](https://doi.org/10.1259/bjr.73.874.11271896)

## Content

1. Br J Radiol. 2000 Oct;73(874):1046-51. doi: 10.1259/bjr.73.874.11271896.

Crohn's disease of aphthous type: serial changes in intestinal lesions.

Matsumoto T(1), Iida M, Nakamura S, Hizawa K, Yao T, Fujishima M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endoscopic Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Kyushu University 
Hospital, Maidashi 3-1-1, Higashiku, Fukuoka, Japan.

In Crohn's disease (CD), aphthous lesions are regarded as possible precursors of 
typical intestinal involvement. To determine the natural course of intestinal 
lesions in CD of aphthous type, the clinical course of 10 patients was 
retrospectively investigated during a period ranging from 6 to 16 years after 
diagnosis. The criterion for inclusion was confirmed aphthous lesions within the 
gastrointestinal tract with histologically verified epithelioid granuloma. The 
degrees of aphthous lesions in the small intestine and the colon were graded by 
small bowel radiography, barium enema examination and colonoscopy. Five patients 
developed typical CD during a period ranging from 0.8-3.3 years. The site of 
involvement was the ileum in three patients, the colon in one patient and both 
the ileum and the colon in one patient. Typical small intestinal CD occurred in 
four of seven patients with marked aphthous lesions of the small intestine, 
whereas colonic CD occurred in two of eight patients with such aphthous lesions 
of the colon. These findings suggest that CD of aphthous type is not necessarily 
a precursor of clinically overt disease. This may especially be the case for 
colonic aphthous lesions.

DOI: 10.1259/bjr.73.874.11271896
PMID: 11271896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]