---
reference_id: "PMID:21502559"
title: Phase II study of carboplatin and paclitaxel in advanced thymoma and thymic carcinoma.
authors:
- Lemma GL
- Lee JW
- Aisner SC
- Langer CJ
- Tester WJ
- Johnson DH
- Loehrer PJ Sr
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.32.9607
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Carboplatin/administration & dosage"
- Carcinoma/drug therapy
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Paclitaxel/administration & dosage"
- Thymoma/drug therapy
- Thymus Neoplasms/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase II study of carboplatin and paclitaxel in advanced thymoma and thymic carcinoma.
**Authors:** Lemma GL, Lee JW, Aisner SC, Langer CJ, Tester WJ, Johnson DH, Loehrer PJ Sr
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2010.32.9607](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2010.32.9607)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2011 May 20;29(15):2060-5. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.32.9607. Epub 
2011 Apr 18.

Phase II study of carboplatin and paclitaxel in advanced thymoma and thymic 
carcinoma.

Lemma GL(1), Lee JW, Aisner SC, Langer CJ, Tester WJ, Johnson DH, Loehrer PJ Sr.

Author information:
(1)Indiana University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis 46202, 
USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the impact of carboplatin and 
paclitaxel in patients with advanced previously untreated thymoma and thymic 
carcinoma.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a prospective multicenter study in patients 
with unresectable thymoma (n = 21) or thymic carcinoma (n = 23). Patients were 
treated with carboplatin (area under the curve, 6) plus paclitaxel (225 mg/m(2)) 
every 3 weeks for a maximum of six cycles. The primary end point of this trial 
was to evaluate the objective response rate.
RESULTS: From February 2001 through January 2008, 46 patients were enrolled. 
Thirteen patients had grade 4 or greater toxicity, mostly neutropenia. Using 
RECIST (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors) 1.0 criteria, three 
complete responses (CRs) and six partial responses (PRs; objective response rate 
[ORR], 42.9%; 90% CI, 24.5% to 62.8%) were observed in the thymoma cohort; 10 
patients had stable disease. For patients with thymic carcinoma, no CRs and five 
PRs (ORR, 21.7%; 90% CI, 9.0% to 40.4%) were observed; 12 patients had stable 
disease. Progression-free survival (PFS) was 16.7 (95% CI, 7.2 to 19.8) and 5.0 
(95% CI, 3.0 to 8.3) months for thymoma and thymic carcinoma cohorts, 
respectively. To date, only seven patients (33.3%) with thymoma have died, 
compared with 16 patients (69.6%) with thymic carcinoma. Median survival time 
was 20.0 months (95% CI, 5.0 to 43.6 months) for patients with thymic carcinoma, 
but it has not been reached for patients with thymoma.
CONCLUSION: Carboplatin plus paclitaxel has moderate clinical activity for 
patients with thymic malignancies, but this seems less than expected with 
anthracycline-based therapy. Patients with thymic carcinoma have poorer PFS and 
overall survival than patients with thymoma.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2010.32.9607
PMCID: PMC3107762
PMID: 21502559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' disclosures of potential conflicts of 
interest and author contributions are found at the end of this article.