---
reference_id: "PMID:25766368"
title: Hirayama disease.
authors:
- Foster E
- Tsang BK
- Kam A
- Storey E
- Day B
- Hill A
journal: J Clin Neurosci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2014.11.025
keywords:
- Adult
- Cervical Vertebrae/pathology
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- "Spinal Muscular Atrophies of Childhood/diagnosis, therapy"
- Thoracic Vertebrae/pathology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirayama disease.
**Authors:** Foster E, Tsang BK, Kam A, Storey E, Day B, Hill A
**Journal:** J Clin Neurosci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jocn.2014.11.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2014.11.025)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurosci. 2015 Jun;22(6):951-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2014.11.025. Epub 
2015 Mar 9.

Hirayama disease.

Foster E(1), Tsang BK(2), Kam A(3), Storey E(2), Day B(4), Hill A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, The Alfred Hospital, 55 Commercial Road, 
Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia. Electronic address: dr.ecfoster@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, The Alfred Hospital, 55 Commercial Road, 
Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia.
(3)Department of Radiology, The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(4)Department of Neurosciences, The Alfred Hospital, 55 Commercial Road, 
Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia; Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

This article discusses three patients with likely Hirayama disease. They have no 
other significant past medical history and no personal or family history of 
other neurological disorders. Hirayama disease is a form of cervical myelopathy 
attributed to forward displacement of the posterior cervical dural sac on neck 
flexion with resultant cord compression and/or venous congestion. It is 
characterized by a pure motor focal amyotrophy in the distribution of C7, C8 and 
T1 spinal segmental-innervated muscles and differs from other motor neuron 
diseases by virtue of its ultimately non-progressive course.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2014.11.025
PMID: 25766368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]