---
reference_id: "PMID:33768451"
title: A case of dengue fever that should be considered as imported infectious disease with digestive symptoms.
authors:
- Kinoshita K
- Fukuchi S
- Fukuda K
- Okamoto K
- Ogawa R
- Matsunari O
- Mizukami K
- Okimoto T
- Kodama M
- Murakami K
journal: Clin J Gastroenterol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12328-021-01391-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of dengue fever that should be considered as imported infectious disease with digestive symptoms.
**Authors:** Kinoshita K, Fukuchi S, Fukuda K, Okamoto K, Ogawa R, Matsunari O, Mizukami K, Okimoto T, Kodama M, Murakami K
**Journal:** Clin J Gastroenterol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12328-021-01391-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12328-021-01391-w)

## Content

1. Clin J Gastroenterol. 2021 Aug;14(4):1115-1120. doi:
10.1007/s12328-021-01391-w.  Epub 2021 Mar 25.

A case of dengue fever that should be considered as imported infectious disease 
with digestive symptoms.

Kinoshita K(1), Fukuchi S(2)(3), Fukuda K(2), Okamoto K(2), Ogawa R(2), 
Matsunari O(2), Mizukami K(2), Okimoto T(2), Kodama M(2), Murakami K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Oita University Faculty of Medicine Graduate 
School of Medicine, 1-1 Idaigaoka, Hasama, Yufu, Oita, 879-5593, Japan. 
kkinoshita@oita-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Oita University Faculty of Medicine Graduate 
School of Medicine, 1-1 Idaigaoka, Hasama, Yufu, Oita, 879-5593, Japan.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Almeida Memorial Hospital, Oita, Japan.

Patients with dengue fever usually present with fever and rash, but non-specific 
symptoms such as headache, myalgia, arthralgia, and digestive symptoms are 
sometimes seen. We report a case of dengue fever with digestive symptoms in a 
patient who traveled to Indonesia. A 35-year-old man presented with fever, 
diarrhea, headache, and arthralgia. He later developed generalized rash. Dengue 
fever was clinically suspected from the travel history and confirmed by 
laboratory tests. He tested positive for anti-dengue virus antibodies, so dengue 
fever was diagnosed. Dengue fever should be included in the differential 
diagnosis of patients with digestive symptoms after returning to Japan.

© 2021. Japanese Society of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.1007/s12328-021-01391-w
PMID: 33768451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]