---
reference_id: "PMID:28593303"
title: Factors in Early Adolescence Associated With a Mole-Prone Phenotype in Late Adolescence.
authors:
- Xu H
- Marchetti MA
- Dusza SW
- Chung E
- Fonseca M
- Scope A
- Geller AC
- Bishop M
- Marghoob AA
- Halpern AC
journal: JAMA Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2017.1547
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Cohort Studies
- Dermoscopy/methods
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Massachusetts
- Melanoma/etiology
- Multivariate Analysis
- "Nevus/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Phenotype
- Prospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Students
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factors in Early Adolescence Associated With a Mole-Prone Phenotype in Late Adolescence.
**Authors:** Xu H, Marchetti MA, Dusza SW, Chung E, Fonseca M, Scope A, Geller AC, Bishop M, Marghoob AA, Halpern AC
**Journal:** JAMA Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamadermatol.2017.1547](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamadermatol.2017.1547)

## Content

1. JAMA Dermatol. 2017 Oct 1;153(10):990-998. doi:
10.1001/jamadermatol.2017.1547.

Factors in Early Adolescence Associated With a Mole-Prone Phenotype in Late
Adolescence.

Xu H(1), Marchetti MA(1), Dusza SW(1), Chung E(1), Fonseca M(1), Scope A(1)(2),
Geller AC(3), Bishop M(4), Marghoob AA(1), Halpern AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Sheba Medical Center, Sackler School of Medicine,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Harvard T.H. Chan School of
Public Health, Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)School Health Services, Framingham Public Schools, Framingham, Massachusetts.

IMPORTANCE: Nevi are important phenotypic risk factors for melanoma in adults.
Few studies have examined the constitutional and behavioral factors associated
with a mole-prone phenotype in adolescents.
OBJECTIVE: To identify host, behavioral, and dermoscopic factors in early
adolescence (age, 14 years) that are associated with a mole-prone phenotype in
late adolescence (age, 17 years).
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A prospective observational cohort study from
the Study of Nevi in Children was conducted from January 1, 2009, to December
31, 2014, with a 2- to 3-year follow-up. A total of 569 students from the school
system in Framingham, Massachusetts, were enrolled in the 8th or 9th grade
(baseline; mean [SD] age, 14.4 [0.7] years). The overall retention rate was
73.3%, and 417 students were reassessed in the 11th grade.
MAIN OUTCOME AND MEASURES: Mole-prone phenotype in the 11th grade, defined as
total nevus count of the back and 1 randomly selected leg in the top decile of
the cohort or having any nevi greater than 5 mm in diameter.
RESULTS: Of the 417 students assessed at follow-up in the 11th grade (166
females and 251 males; mean [SD] age, 17.0 [0.4] years), 111 participants
(26.6%) demonstrated a mole-prone phenotype: 69 students (62.2%) with 1 nevus
greater than 5 mm in diameter, 23 students (20.7%) with total nevus count in the
top decile, and 19 students (17.1%) with both characteristics. On multivariate
analysis, baseline total nevus count (adjusted odds ratio, 9.08; 95% CI,
4.0-23.7; P < .001) and increased variability of nevus dermoscopic pattern
(adjusted odds ratio, 4.24; 95% CI, 1.36-13.25; P = .01) were associated with a
mole-prone phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study found clinically recognizable factors
associated with a mole-prone phenotype that may facilitate the identification of
individuals at risk for melanoma. These findings could have implications for
primary prevention strategies and help target at-risk adolescents for
higher-intensity counseling about sun protection and skin self-examination.

DOI: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2017.1547
PMCID: PMC5638685
PMID: 28593303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
