---
reference_id: "PMID:24372704"
title: Stress-induced upregulation of SLC19A3 is impaired in biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease.
authors:
- Schänzer A
- Döring B
- Ondrouschek M
- Goos S
- Garvalov BK
- Geyer J
- Acker T
- Neubauer B
- Hahn A
journal: Brain Pathol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/bpa.12117
keywords:
- Acidosis/pathology
- "Basal Ganglia Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Brain/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Fibroblasts/pathology
- Humans
- Hypoxia/pathology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Phosphopyruvate Hydratase/metabolism
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "Stress, Psychological/physiopathology"
- Up-Regulation/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stress-induced upregulation of SLC19A3 is impaired in biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease.
**Authors:** Schänzer A, Döring B, Ondrouschek M, Goos S, Garvalov BK, Geyer J, Acker T, Neubauer B, Hahn A
**Journal:** Brain Pathol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bpa.12117](https://doi.org/10.1111/bpa.12117)

## Content

1. Brain Pathol. 2014 Apr;24(3):270-9. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12117. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Stress-induced upregulation of SLC19A3 is impaired in biotin-thiamine-responsive
basal ganglia disease.

Schänzer A(1), Döring B, Ondrouschek M, Goos S, Garvalov BK, Geyer J, Acker T,
Neubauer B, Hahn A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, Germany.

Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease (BTBGD) is a potentially
treatable disorder caused by mutations in the SLC19A3 gene, encoding the human
thiamine transporter 2. Manifestation of BTBGD as acute encephalopathy triggered
by a febrile infection has been frequently reported, but the underlying
mechanisms are not clear. We investigated a family with two brothers being
compound heterozygous for the SLC19A3 mutations p.W94R and p.Q393*fs.
Post-mortem analysis of the brain of one brother showed a mixture of acute,
subacute and chronic changes with cystic and necrotic lesions and hemorrhage in
the putamen, and hemorrhagic lesions in the caudate nucleus and cortical layers.
SLC19A3 expression was substantially reduced in the cortex, basal ganglia and
cerebellum compared with an age-matched control. Importantly, exposure of
fibroblasts to stress factors such as acidosis or hypoxia markedly upregulated
SLC19A3 in control cells, but failed to elevate SLC19A3 expression in the
patient's fibroblasts. These results demonstrate ubiquitously reduced thiamine
transporter function in the cerebral gray matter, and neuropathological
alterations similar to Wernicke's disease in BTBGD. They also suggest that
episodes of encephalopathy are caused by a substantially reduced capacity of
mutant neuronal cells to increase SLC19A3 expression, necessary to adapt to
stress conditions.

© 2013 International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.12117
PMCID: PMC8029177
PMID: 24372704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
