---
reference_id: "PMID:20683999"
title: "Temple-Baraitser syndrome: a rare and possibly unrecognized condition."
authors:
- Jacquinet A
- Gérard M
- Gabbett MT
- Rausin L
- Misson JP
- Menten B
- Mortier G
- Van Maldergem L
- Verloes A
- Debray FG
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33574
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Temple-Baraitser syndrome: a rare and possibly unrecognized condition.
**Authors:** Jacquinet A, Gérard M, Gabbett MT, Rausin L, Misson JP, Menten B, Mortier G, Van Maldergem L, Verloes A, Debray FG
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.33574](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.33574)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Sep;152A(9):2322-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33574.

Temple-Baraitser syndrome: a rare and possibly unrecognized condition.

Jacquinet A(1), Gérard M, Gabbett MT, Rausin L, Misson JP, Menten B, Mortier G, 
Van Maldergem L, Verloes A, Debray FG.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics, CHU & University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.

Temple-Baraitser syndrome, previously described in two unrelated patients, is 
the association of severe mental retardation and abnormal thumbs and great toes. 
We report two additional unrelated patients with Temple-Baraitser syndrome, 
review clinical and radiological features of previously reported cases and 
discuss mode of inheritance. Patients share a consistent pattern of anomalies: 
hypo or aplasia of the thumb and great toe nails and broadening and/or 
elongation of the thumbs and halluces, which have a tubular aspect. All patients 
were born to unrelated parents and occurred as a single occurrence in multiple 
sibships, suggesting sporadic inheritance from a de novo mutation mechanism. 
Comparative genomic hybridization in Patients 1, 2 and 3 did not reveal any copy 
number variations. We confirm that Temple-Baraitser syndrome represents a 
distinct syndrome, probably unrecognized, possibly caused by a de novo mutation 
in a not yet identified gene.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33574
PMID: 20683999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]