---
reference_id: "PMID:36671453"
title: Metabolic Maturation Exaggerates Abnormal Calcium Handling in a Lamp2 Knockout Human Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiomyocyte Model of Danon Disease.
authors:
- Barndt RJ
- Liu Q
- Tang Y
- Haugh MP
- Cui J
- Chan SY
- Wu H
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/biom13010069
keywords:
- Humans
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type IIb/genetics, metabolism"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
- Calcium/metabolism
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 2/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metabolic Maturation Exaggerates Abnormal Calcium Handling in a Lamp2 Knockout Human Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiomyocyte Model of Danon Disease.
**Authors:** Barndt RJ, Liu Q, Tang Y, Haugh MP, Cui J, Chan SY, Wu H
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom13010069](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom13010069)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2022 Dec 29;13(1):69. doi: 10.3390/biom13010069.

Metabolic Maturation Exaggerates Abnormal Calcium Handling in a Lamp2 Knockout
Human Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiomyocyte Model of Danon Disease.

Barndt RJ(1), Liu Q(2)(3), Tang Y(1), Haugh MP(4), Cui J(5), Chan SY(1)(6), Wu
H(1)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Pittsburgh Heart, Lung, and Blood Vascular Medicine Institute, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634,
USA.
(3)Center for Human Genetics, Clemson University, Greenwood, SC 29646, USA.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh Swanson School of
Engineering, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15260, USA.
(6)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Danon disease (DD) is caused by mutations of the gene encoding
lysosomal-associated membrane protein type 2 (LAMP2), which lead to impaired
autophagy, glycogen accumulation, and cardiac hypertrophy. However, it is not
well understood why a large portion of DD patients develop arrhythmia and sudden
cardiac death. In the current study, we generated LAMP2 knockout (KO) human
iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (CM), which mimic the LAMP2 dysfunction in DD heart.
Morphologic analysis demonstrated the sarcomere disarrangement in LAMP2 KO CMs.
In functional studies, LAMP2 KO CMs showed near-normal calcium handling at base
level. However, treatment of pro-maturation medium (MM) exaggerated the disease
phenotype in the KO cells as they exhibited impaired calcium recycling and
increased irregular beating events, which recapitulates the pro-arrhythmia
phenotypes of DD patients. Further mechanistic study confirmed that MM treatment
significantly enhanced the autophagic stress in the LAMP2 KO CMs, which was
accompanied by an increase of both cellular and mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species (ROS) levels. Excess ROS accumulation in LAMP2 KO CMs resulted in the
over-activation of calcium/calmodulin dependent protein kinase IIδ (CaMKIIδ) and
arrhythmogenesis, which was partially rescued by the treatment of ROS scavenger.
In summary, our study has revealed ROS induced CaMKIIδ overactivation as a key
mechanism that promotes cardiac arrhythmia in DD patients.

DOI: 10.3390/biom13010069
PMCID: PMC9855424
PMID: 36671453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.Y.C. has served as a consultant for Acceleron
Pharma and United Therapeutics; S.Y.C. has held research grants from Actelion,
Bayer, and Pfizer. S.Y.C. is a director, officer, and shareholder of Synhale
Therapeutics. has filed patents regarding metabolic dysregulation in pulmonary
hypertension. The other authors declare that they have no known competing
financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
