---
reference_id: "PMID:39979764"
title: "Spinal cord involvement in primary central nervous system vasculitis. A systematic review of clinical, neuroradiological and pathological findings."
authors:
- Zedde M
- Pascarella R
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-025-08007-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/pathology, diagnostic imaging"
- "Spinal Cord/pathology, diagnostic imaging"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal cord involvement in primary central nervous system vasculitis. A systematic review of clinical, neuroradiological and pathological findings.
**Authors:** Zedde M, Pascarella R
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-025-08007-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-025-08007-y)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2025 Jun;46(6):2523-2538. doi: 10.1007/s10072-025-08007-y. Epub
2025  Feb 20.

Spinal cord involvement in primary central nervous system vasculitis. A 
systematic review of clinical, neuroradiological and pathological findings.

Zedde M(1), Pascarella R(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Unit, Stroke Unit, Azienda Unità Sanitaria Locale-IRCCS di Reggio 
Emilia, Via Amendola 2, Reggio Emilia, 42122, Italy. 
zedde.marialuisa@ausl.re.it.
(2)Neuroradiology Unit, Azienda Unità Sanitaria Locale-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, 
Via Amendola 2, Reggio Emilia, 42122, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Primary Angiitis of Central Nervous System (PACNS) is a rare 
disease featured by transmural inflammation in vessels pertaining to brain, 
leptomeninges and spinal cord. It is a rare disease and the involvement of the 
spinal cord represents a rarer and not yet completely investigated subtype.
METHODS: We performed a systematic search of the available literature on Pubmed 
and Embase, adding backward and forward citations, in order to retrieve the 
reported cases of PACNS i9nvolvimeng the spinal cord without time limitations. 
The main aim is to retrieve information about clinical and demographic features, 
pathological and neuroradiological findings on brain and spinal cord, and, 
finally, treatment and outcome.  RESULTS: The search provided 33 papers (mainly 
individual case reports) and 38 patients, with a large age frame (from 12 to 70 
years of age), mainly adults. Among these ones 36/38 received a pathological 
diagnosis and granulomatous pattern was the main reported one. The description 
of spinal cord involvement in MRI is variable form extensive tumefactive lesions 
to spinal roots prominent involvement. The mortality is high (29% at the end of 
the individual follow-up).   DISCUSSION: As in non-spinal involvement, the main 
limitation of the retrieved cases is the inhomogeneity of the diagnostic and 
therapeutic pathway with underusing and underreporting of neuroradiolgoical 
techniques relevant for the diagnosis according with the available diagnostic 
criteria. Spinal cord involvement confirms its rarity, but it has been 
associated to a high disability and mortality and the diagnosis of PACNS has 
therapeutic consequences.  CONCLUSIONS: Spinal cord involvement is present in a 
minority of PACNS cases with a variety of neuroradiological and pathological 
findings. The standardization of the diagnostic pathway could help to improve 
the quality of information in prospective studies.

© 2025. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-025-08007-y
PMID: 39979764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interest: The authors 
have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of 
this article. Ethical approval: Not applicable.