---
reference_id: "PMID:8189757"
title: Radiation therapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsil.
authors:
- Foote RL
- Hilgenfeld RU
- Kunselman SJ
- Schaid DJ
- Buskirk SJ
- Grado GL
- Earle JD
journal: Mayo Clin Proc
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1016/s0025-6196(12)62242-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radiation therapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsil.
**Authors:** Foote RL, Hilgenfeld RU, Kunselman SJ, Schaid DJ, Buskirk SJ, Grado GL, Earle JD
**Journal:** Mayo Clin Proc (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0025-6196(12)62242-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0025-6196(12)62242-3)

## Content

1. Mayo Clin Proc. 1994 Jun;69(6):525-31. doi: 10.1016/s0025-6196(12)62242-3.

Radiation therapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsil.

Foote RL(1), Hilgenfeld RU, Kunselman SJ, Schaid DJ, Buskirk SJ, Grado GL, Earle 
JD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Radiation Oncology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Minnesota.

Comment in
    Mayo Clin Proc. 1994 Jun;69(6):603-4. doi: 10.1016/s0025-6196(12)62257-5.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the patient population referred for radiation therapy 
for tonsillar cancer and to assess the effectiveness of use of only radiation 
therapy in this population.
DESIGN: We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 21 patients referred 
to the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, from 1970 through 1988 for radiation 
therapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsillar region.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The median age of the 21 study patients was 65 years 
(range, 45 to 92), and the male:female ratio was 12:9. In all patients, 
follow-up continued until death or for 2.25 to 16.25 years. Of the 21 patients, 
17 had tumors that were either surgically unresectable or medically inoperable, 
and 20 had clinical stage III or IV disease. The median total dose of 
irradiation was 55 Gy.
RESULTS: Local control of the tonsillar cancer was as follows: T2, four of five 
patients; T3, seven of seven; and T4, five of nine. Thus, the local control rate 
was 76%. No associations were discovered among local control, total dose of 
radiation therapy, dose per fraction, overall duration of treatment, age, sex, 
or reason for referral for radiation therapy. Control of metastatic cervical 
adenopathy was as follows: clinical stage N1, seven of seven patients; N2, six 
of seven; and N3, one of one. (Six study patients had no nodal involvement.) The 
estimated 5-year cause-specific survival and overall survival rates were 77% and 
31%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: This study substantiates the effectiveness of radiation therapy in 
patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsil.

DOI: 10.1016/s0025-6196(12)62242-3
PMID: 8189757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]