---
reference_id: "PMID:12394612"
title: Serum amyloid P component scintigraphy for diagnosis and monitoring amyloidosis.
authors:
- Hawkins PN
journal: Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1097/00041552-200211000-00013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum amyloid P component scintigraphy for diagnosis and monitoring amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Hawkins PN
**Journal:** Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00041552-200211000-00013](https://doi.org/10.1097/00041552-200211000-00013)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2002 Nov;11(6):649-55. doi: 
10.1097/00041552-200211000-00013.

Serum amyloid P component scintigraphy for diagnosis and monitoring amyloidosis.

Hawkins PN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Royal Free and University College Medical School 
London, UK. p.n.hawkins@rfc.ucl.ac.uk

Serum amyloid P component is a normal plasma protein and a universal 
non-fibrillar constituent of amyloid deposits. Radiolabelled serum amyloid P 
component scintigraphy is a non-invasive and quantitative method for imaging 
amyloid deposits, which produces diagnostic images in most patients with 
systemic amyloidosis, and can be used repeatedly to monitor the course of the 
disease. The scintigraphy technique and biopsy histology are complementary, 
providing a detailed microscopic analysis and a quantitative whole body survey 
respectively. Clinically useful observations provided by the imaging method 
include different organ distributions of amyloid in different types of the 
disease, demonstration of amyloid in anatomic sites not available for biopsy, 
and evidence for rapid progression and sometimes regression of amyloid deposits 
with different rates in different organs. Labelled serum amyloid P component 
studies thus make a unique contribution to the diagnosis and management of 
individual patients with systemic amyloidosis, and to systematic studies of 
existing and novel therapies. The technique is available routinely for all known 
or suspected cases of amyloidosis in the NHS National Amyloidosis Centre at the 
Royal Free Hospital, but it has not been developed commercially.

DOI: 10.1097/00041552-200211000-00013
PMID: 12394612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]