---
reference_id: "PMID:23453665"
title: Mutations in c12orf57 cause a syndromic form of colobomatous microphthalmia.
authors:
- Zahrani F
- Aldahmesh MA
- Alshammari MJ
- Al-Hazzaa SA
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.01.008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- "Brain Diseases, Metabolic, Inborn/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Coloboma/genetics
- Corneal Opacity/genetics
- Exome
- Eye/metabolism
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Mice
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Microphthalmos/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in c12orf57 cause a syndromic form of colobomatous microphthalmia.
**Authors:** Zahrani F, Aldahmesh MA, Alshammari MJ, Al-Hazzaa SA, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.01.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.01.008)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Mar 7;92(3):387-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.01.008. Epub
 2013 Feb 28.

Mutations in c12orf57 cause a syndromic form of colobomatous microphthalmia.

Zahrani F(1), Aldahmesh MA, Alshammari MJ, Al-Hazzaa SA, Alkuraya FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Microphthalmia is an important developmental eye disorder. Although mutations in 
several genes have been linked to this condition, they only account for a 
minority of cases. We performed autozygome analysis and exome sequencing on a 
multiplex consanguineous family in which colobomatous microphthalmia is 
associated with profound global developmental delay, intractable seizures, and 
corpus callosum abnormalities, and we identified a homozygous truncating 
mutation in C12orf57 [c.1A>G; p.Met1?]. In a simplex case with a similar 
phenotype, we identified compound heterozygosity for the same mutation and 
another missense mutation [c.152T>A; p.Leu51Gln]. Little is known about C12orf57 
but we show that it is expressed in several mouse tissues, including the eye and 
brain. Our data strongly implicate mutations in C12orf57 in the pathogenesis of 
a clinically distinct autosomal-recessive syndromic form of colobomatous 
microphthalmia.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.01.008
PMCID: PMC3591839
PMID: 23453665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]