---
reference_id: "PMID:33541111"
title: "Risk Factors of Coronary Artery Abnormalities and Resistance to Intravenous Immunoglobulin Plus Corticosteroid Therapy in Severe Kawasaki Disease: An Analysis of Post RAISE."
authors:
- Miyata K
- Miura M
- Kaneko T
- Morikawa Y
- Sakakibara H
- Matsushima T
- Misawa M
- Takahashi T
- Nakazawa M
- Tsuchihashi T
- Yamashita Y
- Obonai T
- Chiga M
- Hori N
- Komiyama O
- Yamagishi H
journal: Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.120.007191
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk Factors of Coronary Artery Abnormalities and Resistance to Intravenous Immunoglobulin Plus Corticosteroid Therapy in Severe Kawasaki Disease: An Analysis of Post RAISE.
**Authors:** Miyata K, Miura M, Kaneko T, Morikawa Y, Sakakibara H, Matsushima T, Misawa M, Takahashi T, Nakazawa M, Tsuchihashi T, Yamashita Y, Obonai T, Chiga M, Hori N, Komiyama O, Yamagishi H
**Journal:** Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.120.007191](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.120.007191)

## Content

1. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2021 Feb;14(2):e007191. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.120.007191. Epub 2021 Feb 5.

Risk Factors of Coronary Artery Abnormalities and Resistance to Intravenous 
Immunoglobulin Plus Corticosteroid Therapy in Severe Kawasaki Disease: An 
Analysis of Post RAISE.

Miyata K(1), Miura M(1), Kaneko T(2)(3), Morikawa Y(2), Sakakibara H(4), 
Matsushima T(4), Misawa M(5), Takahashi T(6), Nakazawa M(7), Tsuchihashi T(8), 
Yamashita Y(9), Obonai T(10), Chiga M(11), Hori N(12), Komiyama O(13), Yamagishi 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology (K.M., M. Miura), Tokyo Metropolitan Children's 
Medical Center, Japan.
(2)Clinical Research Support Center (T.K., Y.M.), Tokyo Metropolitan Children's 
Medical Center, Japan.
(3)Teikyo Academic Research Center, Teikyo University, Tokyo, Japan (T.K.).
(4)Department of General Pediatrics (H.S., T.M.), Tokyo Metropolitan Children's 
Medical Center, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Metropolitan Bokutoh Hospital, Japan (M. 
Misawa).
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Saiseikai Utsunomiya Hospital, Tochigi, Japan (T. 
Takahashi).
(7)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Saitama National 
Hospital, Saitama, Japan (M.N.).
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Kawasaki Municipal Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan (T. 
Tsuchihashi).
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Yokohama Municipal Citizen's Hospital, Kanagawa, 
Japan (Y.Y.).
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Tama-Hokubu Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan (T.O.).
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Metropolitan Ohtsuka Hospital, Japan (M.C.).
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Ota Memorial Hospital, Gunma, Japan (N.H.).
(13)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical 
Center, Japan (O.K.).

BACKGROUND: Coronary artery abnormalities (CAAs) still occur in patients with 
Kawasaki disease receiving intensified treatment with corticosteroids. We aimed 
to determine the risk factors of CAA development and resistance to intensified 
treatment in Post RAISE (Prospective Observational Study on Stratified Treatment 
With Immunoglobulin Plus Steroid Efficacy for Kawasaki Disease)-the largest 
prospective cohort of Kawasaki disease patients to date.
METHODS: In Post RAISE, 2648 consecutive patients with Kawasaki disease were 
enrolled. The present study analyzed 724 patients predicted to be intravenous 
immunoglobulin (IVIG) nonresponders (Kobayashi score ≥5) who received 
intensified treatment consisting of IVIG plus prednisolone. The association 
between the baseline characteristics and CAA at 1 month after disease onset was 
examined. The association between the baseline characteristics and treatment 
resistance was also investigated.
RESULTS: Maximum Z score at baseline ≥2.5 (odds ratio, 3.4 [95% CI, 1.5-7.8]), 
age at fever onset <1 year (odds ratio, 3.4 [95% CI, 1.6-7.4]), and 
nonresponsiveness to IVIG plus prednisolone treatment (odds ratio, 6.8 [95% CI, 
3.3-14.0]) were independent predictors of CAA development. Nonresponsiveness to 
IVIG plus prednisolone was significantly associated with 8 baseline variables. 
Baseline total bilirubin (odds ratio, 1.4 [95% CI, 1.2-1.7]) was the only 
significant independent predictor other than the variables included in the 
Kobayashi score, enabling treatment resistance to be identified at diagnosis. 
The area under the ROC curve was 0.74 (95% CI, 0.69-0.79). At a cutoff point of 
1.0, the sensitivity and specificity for predicting treatment resistance were 
71% and 65%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In Post RAISE, younger age at fever onset, a larger maximum Z score 
at baseline, and nonresponsiveness to IVIG plus prednisolone were risk factors 
significantly associated with CAA development. Nonresponders were able to be 
identified at diagnosis based on the total bilirubin value. To prevent CAA, more 
intensified or adjunctive therapies using other agents, such as pulsed 
methylprednisolone, ciclosporin, infliximab, and Anakinra, should be considered 
for patients with these risk factors. Registration: URL: 
https://www.umin.ac.jp/ctr/; Unique identifier: UMIN000007133.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.120.007191
PMID: 33541111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]