---
reference_id: "PMID:36331148"
title: "Identification of nine novel variants across PAX3, SOX10, EDNRB, and MITF genes in Waardenburg syndrome with next-generation sequencing."
authors:
- Lee CY
- Lo MY
- Chen YM
- Lin PH
- Hsu CJ
- Chen PL
- Wu CC
- Hsu JS
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2082
keywords:
- Humans
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
- Mutation
- SOXE Transcription Factors/genetics
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Exons
- Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor/genetics
- PAX3 Transcription Factor/genetics
- "Receptor, Endothelin B/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of nine novel variants across PAX3, SOX10, EDNRB, and MITF genes in Waardenburg syndrome with next-generation sequencing.
**Authors:** Lee CY, Lo MY, Chen YM, Lin PH, Hsu CJ, Chen PL, Wu CC, Hsu JS
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.2082](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.2082)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2022 Dec;10(12):e2082. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2082. Epub
2022  Nov 4.

Identification of nine novel variants across PAX3, SOX10, EDNRB, and MITF genes
in Waardenburg syndrome with next-generation sequencing.

Lee CY(1), Lo MY(2)(3), Chen YM(4), Lin PH(2)(5), Hsu CJ(2)(6), Chen PL(3)(4),
Wu CC(2)(7), Hsu JS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Hsinchu
Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Medical Genomics and Proteomics, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Yunlin
Branch, Yunlin, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, Buddhist Tzuchi General Hospital, Taichung
Branch, Taichung, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan University Hospital, Hsinchu
Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a hereditary, genetically heterogeneous
disorder characterized by variable presentations of sensorineural hearing
impairment and pigmentation anomalies. This study aimed to investigate the
clinical features of WS in detail and determine the genetic causes of patients
with clinically suspected WS.
METHODS: A total of 24 patients from 21 Han-Taiwanese families were enrolled and
underwent comprehensive physical and audiological examinations. We applied
targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) to investigate the potential causative
variants in these patients and further validated the candidate variants through
Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: We identified 19 causative variants of WS in our cohort. Of these
variants, nine were novel and discovered in PAX3, SOX10, EDNRB, and MITF genes,
including missense, nonsense, deletion, and splice site variants. Several
patients presented with skeletal deformities, hypotonia, megacolon, and
neurological disorders that were rarely seen in WS.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed highly phenotypic variability in Taiwanese WS
patients and demonstrated that targeted NGS allowed us to clarify the genetic
diagnosis and extend the genetic variant spectrum of WS.

© 2022 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.2082
PMCID: PMC9747560
PMID: 36331148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or
non‐financial interests to disclose.
