---
reference_id: "PMID:26669660"
title: High incidence and variable clinical outcome of cardiac hypertrophy due to ACAD9 mutations in childhood.
authors:
- Collet M
- Assouline Z
- Bonnet D
- Rio M
- Iserin F
- Sidi D
- Goldenberg A
- Lardennois C
- Metodiev MD
- Haberberger B
- Haack T
- Munnich A
- Prokisch H
- Rötig A
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.264
keywords:
- "Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cardiomegaly/genetics, pathology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Electron Transport Complex I/deficiency, genetics"
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation Rate
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# High incidence and variable clinical outcome of cardiac hypertrophy due to ACAD9 mutations in childhood.
**Authors:** Collet M, Assouline Z, Bonnet D, Rio M, Iserin F, Sidi D, Goldenberg A, Lardennois C, Metodiev MD, Haberberger B, Haack T, Munnich A, Prokisch H, Rötig A
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2015.264](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2015.264)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2016 Aug;24(8):1112-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.264. Epub 2015 
Dec 16.

High incidence and variable clinical outcome of cardiac hypertrophy due to ACAD9 
mutations in childhood.

Collet M(1), Assouline Z(1), Bonnet D(1), Rio M(1), Iserin F(1), Sidi D(1), 
Goldenberg A(2), Lardennois C(2), Metodiev MD(1), Haberberger B(3), Haack T(3), 
Munnich A(1), Prokisch H(3), Rötig A(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatric, Cardiology and Genetics and INSERM U1163, 
Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Hôpital 
Necker-Enfants-Malades, Paris, France.
(2)Unité de Génétique Clinique, Department of Neonatal Medicine - 
Neuropediatrics and Functional Education, CHU de Rouen, Hôpital Charles Nicolle, 
Rouen, France.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum, Munchen, Germany.

Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase family, member 9 (ACAD9) mutation is a frequent, usually 
fatal cause of early-onset cardiac hypertrophy and mitochondrial respiratory 
chain complex I deficiency in early childhood. We retrospectively studied a 
series of 20 unrelated children with cardiac hypertrophy and isolated complex I 
deficiency and identified compound heterozygosity for missense, splice site or 
frame shift ACAD9 variants in 8/20 patients (40%). Age at onset ranged from 
neonatal period to 9 years and 5/8 died in infancy. Heart transplantation was 
possible in 3/8. Two of them survived and one additional patient improved 
spontaneously. Importantly, the surviving patients later developed delayed-onset 
neurologic or muscular symptoms, namely cognitive impairment, seizures, muscle 
weakness and exercise intolerance. Other organ involvement included proximal 
tubulopathy, renal failure, secondary ovarian failure and optic atrophy. We 
conclude that ACAD9 mutation is the most frequent cause of cardiac hypertrophy 
and isolated complex I deficiency. Heart transplantation in children surviving 
neonatal period should be considered with caution, as delayed-onset muscle and 
brain involvement of various severity may occur, even if absent prior to 
transplantation.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.264
PMCID: PMC4970679
PMID: 26669660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]