---
reference_id: "PMID:32882766"
title: Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Modeling of Best Disease and Autosomal Recessive Bestrophinopathy.
authors:
- Lee JH
- Oh JO
- Lee CS
journal: Yonsei Med J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3349/ymj.2020.61.9.816
keywords:
- Bestrophins/genetics
- Cell Differentiation
- "Chloride Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Retinal Pigment Epithelium/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Vision Disorders
- Visual Acuity
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Modeling of Best Disease and Autosomal Recessive Bestrophinopathy.
**Authors:** Lee JH, Oh JO, Lee CS
**Journal:** Yonsei Med J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3349/ymj.2020.61.9.816](https://doi.org/10.3349/ymj.2020.61.9.816)

## Content

1. Yonsei Med J. 2020 Sep;61(9):816-825. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2020.61.9.816.

Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Modeling of Best Disease and Autosomal Recessive
Bestrophinopathy.

Lee JH(1), Oh JO(1), Lee CS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The Institute of Vision Research, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, The Institute of Vision Research, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. sklee219@yuhs.ac.

Erratum in
    Yonsei Med J. 2020 Nov;61(11):989. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2020.61.11.989.

PURPOSE: To understand the pathophysiology of Best disease (BD) and autosomal
recessive bestrophinopathy (ARB) by establishing an in vitro model using human
induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human iPSC lines were generated from mononuclear cells in
peripheral blood of one ARB patient, one autosomal dominant BD patient, and two
normal controls. Immunocytochemistry and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction in iPSC lines were conducted to demonstrate the pluripotent markers.
After the differentiation of iPSC into functional retinal pigment epithelium
(RPE), morphological characteristics of the RPE were evaluated using confocal
microscopy and immunocytochemistry. The rates of fluid flow across iPSC-RPE
monolayer were measured to compare apical to basal fluid transports by RPE. RNA
sequencing was performed on iPSC-RPE to identify the differences in gene
expression profiles, and specific gene sets were tested using Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis.
RESULTS: Morphological characteristics, gene expression, and epithelial
integrity of ARB iPSC were comparable to those of BD patient or normal control.
Fluid transport from apical to basal was significantly decreased in ARB iPSC-RPE
compared with BD iPSC-RPE or control iPSC-RPE. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
confirmed that ARB iPSC-RPE exhibited significant enrichments of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition gene set and TNF-α signaling via NF-κB gene
set compared to control iPSC-RPE or BD iPSC-RPE.
CONCLUSION: A human iPSC model of ARB showed a functional deficiency rather than
anatomical defects. ARB may be caused by RPE dysfunction following BEST1
mutation.

© Copyright: Yonsei University College of Medicine 2020.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2020.61.9.816
PMCID: PMC7471084
PMID: 32882766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of
interest to disclose.
