---
reference_id: "PMID:35838839"
title: Selective RET inhibitors shift the treatment pattern of RET fusion-positive NSCLC and improve survival outcomes.
authors:
- Lu C
- Wei XW
- Zhang YC
- Chen ZH
- Xu CR
- Zheng MY
- Yang JJ
- Zhang XC
- Zhou Q
journal: J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00432-022-04188-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, chemically induced"
- Retrospective Studies
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selective RET inhibitors shift the treatment pattern of RET fusion-positive NSCLC and improve survival outcomes.
**Authors:** Lu C, Wei XW, Zhang YC, Chen ZH, Xu CR, Zheng MY, Yang JJ, Zhang XC, Zhou Q
**Journal:** J Cancer Res Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00432-022-04188-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00432-022-04188-7)

## Content

1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2023 Jul;149(7):2987-2995. doi:
10.1007/s00432-022-04188-7. Epub 2022 Jul 15.

Selective RET inhibitors shift the treatment pattern of RET fusion-positive
NSCLC and improve survival outcomes.

Lu C(1)(2), Wei XW(2), Zhang YC(2), Chen ZH(2), Xu CR(2), Zheng MY(2), Yang
JJ(2), Zhang XC(2), Zhou Q(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)The Second School of Clinical Medicine, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, 510515, China.
(2)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital,
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
(3)The Second School of Clinical Medicine, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, 510515, China. gzzhouqing@126.com.
(4)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital,
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
gzzhouqing@126.com.

PURPOSE: Rearranged during transfection (RET) fusions are important genetic
drivers in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Selective RET inhibitors are
setting a new paradigm in RET-driven NSCLC. However, the real-world treatment
patterns, outcomes and toxicity remain largely unknown.
METHODS: Data from RET fusion-positive NSCLC patients treated in our centre were
retrospectively analysed. Of them, patients diagnosed before and after August
2018 were included in analysis of treatment patterns; and patients received
selective RET inhibitors were eligible for analysis of adverse events (AEs).
RESULTS: Patients diagnosed before August 2018 (n = 30) predominantly received
chemotherapy and immunotherapy (83%) as initial therapy, while patients
diagnosed after August 2018 (n = 39) mainly received selective RET inhibitors
(38.5% at first-line; 50.0% at second-line). In the total 69 patients, overall
survival (OS) was prolonged in patients treated with selective RET inhibitors
versus untreated patients (median 34.3 versus 17.5 months; p = 0.002) during a
median follow-up of 28.7 months. But there was no difference between patients
treated with immunotherapy versus untreated patients. In the 38 patients
received selective RET inhibition, median progression-free survival (PFS) was
11.9 months. AEs ≥ grade 3 occurred in 42.1% patients and were not associated
with PFS (p = 0.63) or OS (p = 0.60). Haematological toxicity ≥ grade 3 occurred
in 31.6% patients and was the leading cause of drug discontinuation.
CONCLUSION: Selective RET inhibitors are increasingly being adopted into
clinical practice and are associated with improved OS. However,
treatment-related ≥ grade 3 AEs, especially haematologic AEs, occur frequently
in real-world setting.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-022-04188-7
PMCID: PMC10314840
PMID: 35838839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. Qing
Zhou reports honoraria from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, Eli Lilly,
MSD, Pfizer, Roche, and Sanofi, outside the submitted work. Other authors
declare no competing interests that could have appeared to influence the work
reported in this paper.
