---
reference_id: "PMID:36521378"
title: "Primary central nervous system germ cell tumors in children and young adults: A review of controversies in diagnostic and treatment approach."
authors:
- Yeo KK
- Nagabushan S
- Dhall G
- Abdelbaki MS
journal: Neoplasia
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2022.100860
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Young Adult
- Prospective Studies
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Central Nervous System Neoplasms/diagnosis, therapy"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Central Nervous System/pathology
- Brain Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary central nervous system germ cell tumors in children and young adults: A review of controversies in diagnostic and treatment approach.
**Authors:** Yeo KK, Nagabushan S, Dhall G, Abdelbaki MS
**Journal:** Neoplasia (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neo.2022.100860](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neo.2022.100860)

## Content

1. Neoplasia. 2023 Feb;36:100860. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2022.100860. Epub 2022 Dec
13.

Primary central nervous system germ cell tumors in children and young adults: A 
review of controversies in diagnostic and treatment approach.

Yeo KK(1), Nagabushan S(2), Dhall G(3), Abdelbaki MS(4).

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber / Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorder Center, USA; 
Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.
(2)Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, New South Wales, 
Australia; University of New South Wales, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)The Alabama Center for Childhood Cancer and Blood Disorders at Children's of 
Alabama, Birmingham, USA; University of Alabama, Birmingham, USA. Electronic 
address: Gdhall@uabmc.edu.
(4)The Division of Hematology and Oncology, St. Louis Children's Hospital, 
Washington University, School of Medicine in St. Louis, Washington University, 
St. Louis, Missouri, USA. Electronic address: MohamedA@wustl.edu.

Primary central nervous system (CNS) germ cell tumors (GCT) are a rare 
heterogenous group of cancers, arising most commonly in the second decade of 
life. Through several clinical trials conducted around the world by various 
groups, the treatment approach for CNS GCT has advanced substantially with 
generally improved overall outcomes. In recent years, the goal of clinical 
trials has been focused on reduction of the radiotherapy burden and minimization 
of long-term toxicity. This review summarizes the current diagnostic and 
treatment regimens for CNS GCT, examines the controversies associated with these 
approaches, gaps in contemporary knowledge, and underscores the challenges we 
face. We also explore future directions in the management of CNS GCT with the 
ultimate overall aim of preserving curative outcomes, identifying novel 
biomarkers, and mitigating neurocognitive, endocrine, and psychological toxicity 
through prospective clinical studies.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neo.2022.100860
PMCID: PMC9772847
PMID: 36521378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interests The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.