---
reference_id: "PMID:38212857"
title: "Do risk factors differentiate DSM-5 and drive for thinness severity groups for anorexia nervosa?"
authors:
- Dang AB
- Kiropoulos L
- Anderluh M
- Collier D
- Fernandez-Aranda F
- Karwautz A
- Treasure J
- Wagner G
- Krug I
journal: J Eat Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40337-024-00966-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Do risk factors differentiate DSM-5 and drive for thinness severity groups for anorexia nervosa?
**Authors:** Dang AB, Kiropoulos L, Anderluh M, Collier D, Fernandez-Aranda F, Karwautz A, Treasure J, Wagner G, Krug I
**Journal:** J Eat Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40337-024-00966-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40337-024-00966-5)

## Content

1. J Eat Disord. 2024 Jan 11;12(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s40337-024-00966-5.

Do risk factors differentiate DSM-5 and drive for thinness severity groups for
anorexia nervosa?

Dang AB(1), Kiropoulos L(2), Anderluh M(3), Collier D(4), Fernandez-Aranda F(5),
Karwautz A(6), Treasure J(7), Wagner G(6), Krug I(2).

Author information:
(1)Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Melbourne,
Redmond Barry Building, Level 7, Room 707, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
dangb1@student.unimelb.edu.au.
(2)Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Melbourne,
Redmond Barry Building, Level 7, Room 707, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(3)University Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Ljubljana SI,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(4)Eating Disorders Unit and SGDP Research Centre, Institute of Psychiatry,
King's College, London, UK.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital of Bellvitge- IDIBELL,
Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.
(7)Section of Eating Disorders, Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute
of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: The current study examined whether risk factors for anorexia nervosa
(AN) were related to different levels of severity based on (a) the DSM-5/body
mass index (BMI) and (b) drive for thinness (DT) severity ratings.
METHODS: The sample comprised 153 pairs of individuals with a lifetime diagnosis
AN per DSM-IV criteria and their non-ED sisters (N = 306, mean age = 26.53; mean
current BMI = 20.42 kg/m2). The Oxford risk factor interview was used to
establish AN-related risk factors. Individuals were categorised into the DSM-5
severity groups based on their lowest BMI, while the DT subscale from the eating
disorder inventory-2 was used to classify individuals with AN into low and high
DT groups.
RESULTS: Multinominal regression models showed similar risk factors (e.g.,
perfectionism, having a history of being teased about weight and shape)
contributed to the development of AN using the DSM-5 and DT severity ratings.
Follow-up analyses across the severity groups for both indices revealed that
only childhood perfectionism was found to be more common in the extreme severe
DSM-5 BMI severity group compared to the severe DSM-5 group.
CONCLUSION: Overall, this study found little evidence for AN risk factors being
related to the DSM-5 and DT severity ratings. However, given the novelty of this
study, replication of the current results is warranted.

Plain Language Summary: Several risk factors, such as childhood obesity, have
been found to contribute to the development of Anorexia Nervosa (AN). Yet, we
are unsure if there is a set of risk factors that influence different levels of
AN severity. While the DSM-5 suggests using BMI to measure severity, recent
support favour the usage of drive for thinness (DT) as an alternative severity
measure. Therefore, this study aimed to explore risk factors specifically
associated with the development of different AN severity levels using both the
DSM-5 BMI and DT severity classification systems. We recruited 153 pairs of
individuals with a lifetime diagnosis AN per DSM-IV criteria and their non-ED
sisters. The Oxford risk factor interview was used to establish AN-related risk
factors. We found childhood perfectionism, weight/shape teasing, childhood
obesity, and breast-related embarrassment to be significant risk factors for AN.
Additionally, childhood perfectionism was more common in the extreme severe
DSM-5 group compared to the severe DSM-5 group. This suggests that adding
perfectionism-related aspects to prevention and early intervention programs for
AN may be beneficial. Considering the novelty of this study, replication of the
current results is needed.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40337-024-00966-5
PMCID: PMC10785425
PMID: 38212857

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
