---
reference_id: "PMID:24698003"
title: Prophylactic CNS directed therapy in systemic diffuse large B cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Ghose A
- Kundu R
- Latif T
journal: Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2014.02.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prophylactic CNS directed therapy in systemic diffuse large B cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Ghose A, Kundu R, Latif T
**Journal:** Crit Rev Oncol Hematol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.critrevonc.2014.02.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2014.02.006)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2014 Sep;91(3):292-303. doi: 
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2014.02.006. Epub 2014 Mar 12.

Prophylactic CNS directed therapy in systemic diffuse large B cell lymphoma.

Ghose A(1), Kundu R(2), Latif T(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Cincinnati, United States. 
Electronic address: ghoseau@ucmail.uc.edu.
(2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Cincinnati, United States. 
Electronic address: ria_kundu@trihealth.com.
(3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Cincinnati, United States. 
Electronic address: latiftr@ucmail.uc.edu.

Overall survival in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) has significantly 
improved in the last decade, especially after the incorporation of rituximab. 
Involvement of the central nervous system (CNS) at presentation or at recurrence 
is an uncommon event, but carries a dismal prognosis with median survival of 
less than 6 months. Although prophylactic CNS directed therapy is a widely used 
approach to prevent this complication, randomized clinical trials have been very 
limited. CNS prophylaxis has inherent toxicities; therefore, identifying the 
population of patients who would receive most benefit is of utmost importance. 
From an extensive review of current literature, we report the incidence of CNS 
relapse in DLBCL and describe the role of CNS prophylaxis in the post-rituximab 
compared to the pre-rituximab era. We also review the current modalities of CNS 
prophylaxis and attempt to identify the high-risk patients who would benefit. 
Lastly, we present a treatment algorithm that defines the role of CNS 
prophylaxis in the management of patients with DLBCL.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2014.02.006
PMID: 24698003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]