---
reference_id: "PMID:29395863"
title: "Pembrolizumab in patients with thymic carcinoma: a single-arm, single-centre, phase 2 study."
authors:
- Giaccone G
- Kim C
- Thompson J
- McGuire C
- Kallakury B
- Chahine JJ
- Manning M
- Mogg R
- Blumenschein WM
- Tan MT
- Subramaniam DS
- Liu SV
- Kaplan IM
- McCutcheon JN
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30062-7
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Immunological/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- District of Columbia
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Thymoma/drug therapy, immunology, mortality, pathology"
- "Thymus Neoplasms/drug therapy, immunology, mortality, pathology"
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pembrolizumab in patients with thymic carcinoma: a single-arm, single-centre, phase 2 study.
**Authors:** Giaccone G, Kim C, Thompson J, McGuire C, Kallakury B, Chahine JJ, Manning M, Mogg R, Blumenschein WM, Tan MT, Subramaniam DS, Liu SV, Kaplan IM, McCutcheon JN
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30062-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30062-7)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2018 Mar;19(3):347-355. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30062-7. Epub
 2018 Jan 26.

Pembrolizumab in patients with thymic carcinoma: a single-arm, single-centre, 
phase 2 study.

Giaccone G(1), Kim C(2), Thompson J(2), McGuire C(2), Kallakury B(2), Chahine 
JJ(2), Manning M(2), Mogg R(3), Blumenschein WM(3), Tan MT(2), Subramaniam 
DS(2), Liu SV(2), Kaplan IM(4), McCutcheon JN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown 
University, Washington, DC, USA. Electronic address: gg496@georgetown.edu.
(2)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown 
University, Washington, DC, USA.
(3)Merck and Co, Kenilworth, NJ, USA.
(4)Adaptive Biotechnologies, Seattle, WA, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2018 Mar;19(3):274-275. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30064-0.

BACKGROUND: Treatment options are limited for patients with thymic carcinoma. 
These aggressive tumours are not typically associated with paraneoplastic 
autoimmune disorders, and strong PD-L1 expression has been reported in thymic 
epithelial tumours. We aimed to assess the activity of pembrolizumab, a 
monoclonal antibody that targets PD-1, in patients with advanced thymic 
carcinoma.
METHODS: We completed a single-arm phase 2 study of pembrolizumab in patients 
with recurrent thymic carcinoma who had progressed after at least one line of 
chemotherapy. This was a single-centre study performed at Lombardi Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA. Key inclusion 
criteria were an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0-2, 
no history of autoimmune disease or other malignancy requiring treatment or 
laboratory abnormality, and adequate organ function. Patients received 200 mg of 
pembrolizumab every 3 weeks for up to 2 years. The primary objective of the 
study was the proportion of patients who had achieved a response assessed with 
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1. Analysis was per 
protocol, in all eligible patients. The study is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02364076, and is closed to accrual; we report the 
final analysis.
FINDINGS: 41 patients were enrolled from March 12, 2015, to Dec 16, 2016, of 
whom 40 were eligible and evaluable and one was excluded because of elevated 
liver enzymes at screening. The median follow-up was 20 months (IQR 14-26). The 
proportion of patients who achieved a response was 22·5% (95% CI 10·8-38·5); one 
(3%) patient achieved a complete response, eight (20%) patients achieved partial 
responses, and 21 (53%) patients achieved stable disease. The most common grade 
3 or 4 adverse events were increased aspartate aminotransferase and alanine 
aminotransferase (five [13%] patients each). Six (15%) patients developed severe 
autoimmune toxicity, including two (5%) patients with myocarditis. There were 17 
deaths at the time of analysis, but no deaths due to toxicity.
INTERPRETATION: Pembrolizumab is a promising treatment option in patients with 
thymic carcinoma. Because severe autoimmune disorders are more frequent in 
thymic carcinoma than in other tumour types, careful monitoring is essential.
FUNDING: Merck & Co.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30062-7
PMCID: PMC10683856
PMID: 29395863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests GG reports research 
support to his institution from Karyopharm Therapeutics and Eli Lilly, and 
served as an advisory board member for Bristol-Myers Squibb and G1 Therapeutics. 
RM and WMB are employees of Merck and Co. DSS served as an advisory board member 
for Bristol-Myers Squibb and Takeda Pharmaceuticals. SVL served as an advisory 
board member for Genentech (Roche), Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Celgene, Ignyta, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, and 
Taiho Pharmaceutical. All other authors declare no competing interests.