---
reference_id: "PMID:31423530"
title: A hypomorphic allele of SLC35D1 results in Schneckenbecken-like dysplasia.
authors:
- Rautengarten C
- Quarrell OW
- Stals K
- Caswell RC
- De Franco E
- Baple E
- Burgess N
- Jokhi R
- Heazlewood JL
- Offiah AC
- Ebert B
- Ellard S
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz200
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Fetal Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Loss of Function Mutation
- Male
- Mice
- "Monosaccharide Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/embryology, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A hypomorphic allele of SLC35D1 results in Schneckenbecken-like dysplasia.
**Authors:** Rautengarten C, Quarrell OW, Stals K, Caswell RC, De Franco E, Baple E, Burgess N, Jokhi R, Heazlewood JL, Offiah AC, Ebert B, Ellard S
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddz200](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddz200)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2019 Nov 1;28(21):3543-3551. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz200.

A hypomorphic allele of SLC35D1 results in Schneckenbecken-like dysplasia.

Rautengarten C(1), Quarrell OW(2), Stals K(3), Caswell RC(4), De Franco E(3), 
Baple E(3)(4), Burgess N(5), Jokhi R(6), Heazlewood JL(1), Offiah AC(7), Ebert 
B(1), Ellard S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Sheffield Children's Hospital, Western Bank, 
Sheffield S10 2TH, UK.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, 
Barrack Road, Exeter, EX2 5DW, UK.
(4)University of Exeter School of Medicine, Barrack Road, Exeter EX2 5DW, UK.
(5)Department of Histology, Sheffield Children's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, 
Western Bank, Sheffield UK. S10 2TH, UK.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, 
Jessop Wing Tree Root Walk, Sheffield S10 2SF, UK.
(7)University of Sheffield, Academic Unit of Child Health, Sheffield Children's 
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TH, UK.

We report the case of a consanguineous couple who lost four pregnancies 
associated with skeletal dysplasia. Radiological examination of one fetus was 
inconclusive. Parental exome sequencing showed that both parents were 
heterozygous for a novel missense variant, p.(Pro133Leu), in the SLC35D1 gene 
encoding a nucleotide sugar transporter. The affected fetus was homozygous for 
the variant. The radiological features were reviewed, and being similar, but 
atypical, the phenotype was classified as a 'Schneckenbecken-like dysplasia.' 
The effect of the missense change was assessed using protein modelling 
techniques and indicated alterations in the mouth of the solute channel. A 
detailed biochemical investigation of SLC35D1 transport function and that of the 
missense variant p.(Pro133Leu) revealed that SLC35D1 acts as a general UDP-sugar 
transporter and that the p.(Pro133Leu) mutation resulted in a significant 
decrease in transport activity. The reduced transport activity observed for 
p.(Pro133Leu) was contrasted with in vitro activity for SLC35D1 p.(Thr65Pro), 
the loss-of-function mutation was associated with Schneckenbecken dysplasia. The 
functional classification of SLC35D1 as a general nucleotide sugar transporter 
of the endoplasmic reticulum suggests an expanded role for this transporter 
beyond chondroitin sulfate biosynthesis to a variety of important glycosylation 
reactions occurring in the endoplasmic reticulum.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddz200
PMCID: PMC6927460
PMID: 31423530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]