---
reference_id: "PMID:38737913"
title: "Biomarkers in inflammatory bowel disease: a practical guide."
authors:
- Clough J
- Colwill M
- Poullis A
- Pollok R
- Patel K
- Honap S
journal: Therap Adv Gastroenterol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/17562848241251600
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarkers in inflammatory bowel disease: a practical guide.
**Authors:** Clough J, Colwill M, Poullis A, Pollok R, Patel K, Honap S
**Journal:** Therap Adv Gastroenterol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/17562848241251600](https://doi.org/10.1177/17562848241251600)

## Content

1. Therap Adv Gastroenterol. 2024 May 9;17:17562848241251600. doi: 
10.1177/17562848241251600. eCollection 2024.

Biomarkers in inflammatory bowel disease: a practical guide.

Clough J(1)(2), Colwill M(1), Poullis A(1), Pollok R(3)(4), Patel K(1), Honap 
S(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)St George's University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(2)School of Immunology and Microbial Sciences, King's College London, London, 
UK.
(3)St George's University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust.
(4)Institute of Infection and Immunity, St George's University, London, UK.
(5)INFINY Institute, Nancy University Hospital, Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy, France.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), comprising ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's 
disease (CD), is a costly condition in terms of morbidity and healthcare 
utilization, with an increasing prevalence now approaching 1% in the Western 
world. Endoscopic assessment of IBD remains the gold standard for diagnosis, 
evaluation of treatment response and determination of post-operative recurrence, 
but is expensive and invasive. Biomarkers can facilitate non-invasive disease 
assessment, with C-reactive protein and faecal calprotectin as the most widely 
available biomarkers in current clinical practice. This narrative review 
summarizes the evidence for their use in both UC and CD and offers practical 
guidance for healthcare providers taking into account the limitations of 
biomarker interpretation. We present evidence for the future use of novel 
biomarkers in IBD and discuss how biomarker discovery could deliver the goal of 
precision medicine in IBD.

Plain Language Summary: Biomarkers in inflammatory bowel disease: a practical 
guide Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a term used to describe two 
conditions, ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD). These two diseases 
cause inflammation of the bowel, which can lead to diarrhoea, abdominal pain and 
bleeding from the back passage. The best way of assessing how active a patient’s 
IBD is, is by performing a camera test called a colonoscopy. However, having a 
colonoscopy is inconvenient, comes with some risks to the patient, and uses a 
lot of healthcare resources. ‘Biomarkers’ are proteins detectable in body fluids 
(such as blood, poo and urine) which can give information to medical staff about 
how active a patient’s disease is, without the need for colonoscopy. In this 
article, we give guidance about how best to use these tests, and when they might 
not be so useful. We also discuss new biomarkers and ways in which they could be 
used in the future to predict which treatments patients might respond to best.

© The Author(s), 2024.

DOI: 10.1177/17562848241251600
PMCID: PMC11085009
PMID: 38737913

Conflict of interest statement: JC has received a travel grant from Galapagos 
and has contributed to an advisory board for AbbVie. MC has received a travel 
grant from Celltrion. AP has no competing interests. RP has contributed to an 
advisory board for Galapagos. KVP reports payment or honoraria for lectures, 
presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational events from 
AbbVie, DrFalk, Janssen, PreddictImmune and Takeda; support for attending 
meetings or travel from AbbVie, Ferring, Janssen and Tillotts; and participation 
on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board for AbbVie, Galapagos and 
Janssen. SH has received speaker, consultant, advisory board member fees and/or 
has received travel grants from Pfizer, Janssen, AbbVie, Takeda, Ferring, 
Galapagos, Lilly and Pharmacosmos.