---
reference_id: "PMID:38822207"
title: Reduced functional connectivity induced by longitudinal alterations of structure and perfusion may be associated with cognitive impairment in patients on maintenance hemodialysis.
authors:
- Yang W
- Li M
- Song L
- Xu B
- Chen Q
- Yang Z
- Liu W
- Zhang A
- Wang H
- Wang ZC
journal: Brain Imaging Behav
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11682-024-00897-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced functional connectivity induced by longitudinal alterations of structure and perfusion may be associated with cognitive impairment in patients on maintenance hemodialysis.
**Authors:** Yang W, Li M, Song L, Xu B, Chen Q, Yang Z, Liu W, Zhang A, Wang H, Wang ZC
**Journal:** Brain Imaging Behav (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11682-024-00897-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11682-024-00897-4)

## Content

1. Brain Imaging Behav. 2024 Oct;18(5):1052-1063. doi:
10.1007/s11682-024-00897-4.  Epub 2024 Jun 1.

Reduced functional connectivity induced by longitudinal alterations of structure 
and perfusion may be associated with cognitive impairment in patients on 
maintenance hemodialysis.

Yang W(#)(1), Li M(#)(1), Song L(1), Xu B(2), Chen Q(1), Yang Z(1), Liu W(3), 
Zhang A(4), Wang H(5), Wang ZC(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, No. 95 Yong An Road, Xicheng District, 100050, Beijing, China.
(2)MR Research, GE Healthcare, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, No. 95 Yong An Road, Xicheng District, 100050, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, No. 95 Yong An Road, Xicheng District, 100050, Beijing, China. 
z15210076255@163.com.
(5)Department of Radiology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, No. 95 Yong An Road, Xicheng District, 100050, Beijing, China. 
wanghao4756@163.com.
(6)Department of Radiology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, No. 95 Yong An Road, Xicheng District, 100050, Beijing, China. 
cjr.wzhch@vip.163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Hemodialysis (HD) leads to cognitive impairment; however, the pathophysiology of 
maintenance HD remains unclear. This study aimed to investigate the longitudinal 
alterations in gray matter volume (GMV) and cerebral blood flow (CBF) in 
patients on HD at follow-up compared with baseline, examine the alterations in 
functional connectivity (FC) by defining co-changed brain regions as seed 
points, and investigate the correlation between the co-changed brain regions and 
neuropsychological test scores. Twenty-seven patients with HD and 30 healthy 
controls were enrolled in this study. All participants underwent high-resolution 
T1-weighted imaging, arterial spin labeling, and functional MR imaging to 
measure GMV, CBF, and FC. The patients on HD were assessed at baseline and 
3 years subsequently. The right and left medial superior frontal gyrus 
(SFGmed.L) exhibited significantly lower GMV and CBF in patients on HD at 
follow-up compared with baseline and lower FC between the SFGmed.L and left 
middle temporal gyrus (MTG.L). FC between the SFGmed.L and MTG.L was positively 
correlated with neuropsychological test scores in the HD group at follow-up. 
Reduced GMV and CBF may result in decreased FC between the SFGmed.L and MTG.L, 
which may be associated with cognitive impairment in patients on maintenance HD. 
Our findings provide unique insights into the pathological mechanisms of 
patients on maintenance HD with cognitive impairment.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11682-024-00897-4
PMID: 38822207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval: The study has 
been approved by the Ethics Committee of Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital 
Medical University. The study was conducted following the Declaration of 
Helsinki. Consent to participate: Informed consent was obtained from all study 
participants. Legally Authorized Representatives of illiterate participants 
provided informed consent for the study. Consent to publication: All the authors 
agreed to publish this article. Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.