---
reference_id: "PMID:11418353"
title: "Baculovirus expression of parvovirus B19 (B19V) NS1: utility in confirming recent infection."
authors:
- Ennis O
- Corcoran A
- Kavanagh K
- Mahon BP
- Doyle S
journal: J Clin Virol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1016/s1386-6532(01)00168-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Baculovirus expression of parvovirus B19 (B19V) NS1: utility in confirming recent infection.
**Authors:** Ennis O, Corcoran A, Kavanagh K, Mahon BP, Doyle S
**Journal:** J Clin Virol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1386-6532(01)00168-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1386-6532(01)00168-8)

## Content

1. J Clin Virol. 2001 Aug;22(1):55-60. doi: 10.1016/s1386-6532(01)00168-8.

Baculovirus expression of parvovirus B19 (B19V) NS1: utility in confirming 
recent infection.

Ennis O(1), Corcoran A, Kavanagh K, Mahon BP, Doyle S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, National University of Ireland, Co. Kildare, Maynooth, 
Ireland.

BACKGROUND: The presence of anti-parvovirus B19 (B19V) IgM against viral capsid 
proteins (VP1 and VP2) has long been used to detect recent infection. The 
utility of antibodies directed against B19V NS1 protein has received less 
attention as a serological indicator of recent infection, although anti-B19V NS1 
IgG has been associated with persistent infection.
OBJECTIVES: To elucidate the role of anti-B19V NS1 antibody detection in recent 
infection, full-length B19V NS1 was expressed and purified. The resultant 
antigen was used to develop both Western blot assays and microplate ELISA for 
the detection of NS1 antibodies.
STUDY DESIGN: Serum specimens were obtained from individuals recently infected 
with B19V (children (n=16), adults (n=40)) and from 17 individuals with no 
evidence of recent B19V infection. All specimens were screened for anti-B19V NS1 
IgG and IgM.
RESULTS: It was observed that 68.8% (11/16) of children recently infected with 
B19V were anti-B19V NS1 IgG seropositive. Furthermore, 27.5% (11/40) anti-B19V 
VP2 IgM positive specimens also contained anti-B19V NS1 IgM when tested by 
ELISA, while no reactivity was observed following Western blot analysis, 
possibly due to the absence of conformational epitopes.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-B19V NS1 IgM detection may have utility in the confirmation of 
recent infection with B19V.

DOI: 10.1016/s1386-6532(01)00168-8
PMID: 11418353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]