---
reference_id: "PMID:30572135"
title: Th17 cells in renal inflammation and autoimmunity.
authors:
- Dolff S
- Witzke O
- Wilde B
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2018.08.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Th17 cells in renal inflammation and autoimmunity.
**Authors:** Dolff S, Witzke O, Wilde B
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2018.08.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2018.08.006)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2019 Feb;18(2):129-136. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2018.08.006. Epub
 2018 Dec 17.

Th17 cells in renal inflammation and autoimmunity.

Dolff S(1), Witzke O(1), Wilde B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, University Hospital Essen, University of 
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(2)Department of Nephrology, University Hospital Essen, University of 
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. Electronic address: benjamin.wilde@uk-essen.de.

Th17 cells are a distinct lineage of T-cells. These T-cells express IL-17A and 
the lineage-defining transcription factor RORγt. Th17 cells have a pivotal, 
physiological role in host defense against pathogens. These pro-inflammatory 
T-cells are also key players in autoimmunity and a pathogenic role has been 
demonstrated in several diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis or psoriasis. 
Recently, there is evidence that Th17 cells may drive renal inflammation and 
renal autoimmunity in anti-neutrophil-cytoplasmic-antibody-(ANCA)-vasculitis and 
systemic lupus erythematosus. The aim of this review is to discuss the possible 
involvement of Th17 cells in renal autoimmunity and its value for future 
therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2018.08.006
PMID: 30572135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]