---
reference_id: "PMID:24289836"
title: Environmental factors in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Ascherio A
journal: Expert Rev Neurother
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1586/14737175.2013.865866
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental factors in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Ascherio A
**Journal:** Expert Rev Neurother (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1586/14737175.2013.865866](https://doi.org/10.1586/14737175.2013.865866)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Neurother. 2013 Dec;13(12 Suppl):3-9. doi: 
10.1586/14737175.2013.865866.

Environmental factors in multiple sclerosis.

Ascherio A(1).

Author information:
(1)Harvard School of Public Health, Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck St, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Although genetic susceptibility explains the clustering of multiple sclerosis 
(MS) cases within families, the changes in MS risk that occur with migration can 
be explained only by changes in the environment. The strongest known risk factor 
for MS is infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Compared with uninfected 
individuals, the hazard of developing MS is approximately 15-fold higher among 
individuals infected with EBV in childhood and about 30-fold higher among those 
infected with EBV in adolescence or later in life. Although the mechanisms 
underlying this association remain unclear, the data provide strong evidence of 
a causal relation between EBV infection and MS risk. Relevant aspects of MS 
epidemiology beyond genetics are not explained by EBV involvement, however, 
implying the involvement of other factors. Modifiable factors for MS risk 
include smoking and childhood obesity. Increased risk of MS in individuals with 
vitamin D insufficiency has been proposed to explain the strong latitude 
gradient in MS prevalence. Results of case-control studies that relied on 
prevalent MS cases have been mixed, however, and potentially influenced by 
selection and recall biases. In a recent case-control study of individuals 
presenting with a first demyelinating episode, higher levels of vitamin D, sun 
exposure or actinic damage were found to be associated with reduced MS risk. Two 
longitudinal studies have thus far been completed. In the first, based on 
assessment of vitamin D intake from diet and supplements, the risk of MS was 
found to be 30% lower among women in the highest quintile compared with those in 
the lowest quintile. In the second study, conducted among young adults in the US 
military, vitamin D status was assessed by averaging multiple season-adjusted 
measures of 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]D). During an average of 5 years' 
follow-up, MS risk among healthy young adults with serum levels of 25(OH) 
vitamin D >100 nmol/l was about 60% lower than in individuals of the same age 
and sex with serum 25(OH) vitamin D levels <100 nmol/l. If confirmed, these 
findings suggest that a high proportion of MS cases could be effectively 
prevented by vitamin D supplementation. Furthermore, there is growing evidence 
that vitamin D insufficiency is a risk factor for conversion from clinically 
isolated syndrome to MS and for MS progression. Both prevention and treatment 
trials with vitamin D are needed to confirm these findings and to determine 
optimal levels of vitamin D.

DOI: 10.1586/14737175.2013.865866
PMID: 24289836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]