---
reference_id: "PMID:35366047"
title: Glycated hemoglobin at diagnosis of type 1 diabetes and at follow-up in children and adolescents during the COVID-19 pandemic in Germany.
authors:
- Kamrath C
- Rosenbauer J
- Eckert AJ
- Ohlenschläger U
- Sydlik C
- Nellen-Hellmuth N
- Holl RW
journal: Pediatr Diabetes
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/pedi.13338
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycated hemoglobin at diagnosis of type 1 diabetes and at follow-up in children and adolescents during the COVID-19 pandemic in Germany.
**Authors:** Kamrath C, Rosenbauer J, Eckert AJ, Ohlenschläger U, Sydlik C, Nellen-Hellmuth N, Holl RW
**Journal:** Pediatr Diabetes (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pedi.13338](https://doi.org/10.1111/pedi.13338)

## Content

1. Pediatr Diabetes. 2022 Sep;23(6):749-753. doi: 10.1111/pedi.13338. Epub 2022
Apr  10.

Glycated hemoglobin at diagnosis of type 1 diabetes and at follow-up in children 
and adolescents during the COVID-19 pandemic in Germany.

Kamrath C(1), Rosenbauer J(2)(3), Eckert AJ(3)(4), Ohlenschläger U(5), Sydlik 
C(6), Nellen-Hellmuth N(7), Holl RW(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center of Child and Adolescent Medicine, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, 
Germany.
(2)Institute for Biometrics and Epidemiology, German Diabetes Center, Leibniz 
Center for Diabetes Research at Heinrich Heine University Dusseldorf, 
Dusseldorf, Germany.
(3)German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Munich-Neuherberg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Epidemiology and Medical Biometry, ZIBMT, Ulm University, Ulm, 
Germany.
(5)Child and Adolescent Diabetology, Altonaer Kinderkrankenhaus, Hamburg, 
Germany.
(6)Center of Child and Adolescent Medicine, Innklinikum Altötting, Altötting, 
Germany.
(7)Center of Child and Adolescent Medicine, Leopoldina Clinic Schweinfurt, 
Schweinfurt, Germany.

BACKGROUND: This study investigated the diagnostic delay and the subsequent 
quality of care during the Covid-19 pandemic among children with new-onset type 
1 diabetes.
METHODS: We compared the HbA1c levels of 3111 children at diagnosis of type 1 
diabetes and of 2825 children at a median follow-up of 4.7 months (interquartile 
range, 4.1-5.4) together with their daily insulin requirement during the 
Covid-19 pandemic with the two previous years via multivariable linear 
regression, using data from the German Diabetes Registry DPV.
RESULTS: During the Covid-19 pandemic, HbA1c levels were higher at diagnosis of 
type 1 diabetes (mean estimated difference, 0.33% [95% confidence interval, 
0.23-0.43], p < 0.001), but not at follow-up (mean estimated difference, 0.02% 
[-0.02-0.07]). Children with diabetes onset during the Covid-19 pandemic had a 
significantly higher daily insulin requirement after initiation of therapy (mean 
estimated difference, 0.08 U/kg [0.06-0.10], p < 0.001). Both the increase in 
HbA1c and daily insulin requirement were evident only after the first wave of 
the pandemic.
CONCLUSIONS: This increase in HbA1c at diagnosis of type 1 diabetes during the 
Covid-19 pandemic may indicate a delay in seeking medical care due to the 
pandemic. However, this did not affect short-term glycemic control. The 
increased insulin requirement at follow-up could suggest a more rapid autoimmune 
progression during the pandemic.

© 2022 The Authors. Pediatric Diabetes published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pedi.13338
PMCID: PMC9115394
PMID: 35366047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflict of 
interest.