---
reference_id: "PMID:30949686"
title: Coupling of the Na+/K+-ATPase to Ankyrin B controls Na+/Ca2+ exchanger activity in cardiomyocytes.
authors:
- Skogestad J
- Aronsen JM
- Tovsrud N
- Wanichawan P
- Hougen K
- Stokke MK
- Carlson CR
- Sjaastad I
- Sejersted OM
- Swift F
journal: Cardiovasc Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvz087
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ankyrins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Calcium Signaling
- Excitation Contraction Coupling
- Male
- Membrane Potentials
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Myocardial Contraction
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/enzymology"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs
- "Rats, Wistar"
- Sodium-Calcium Exchanger/metabolism
- Sodium-Potassium-Exchanging ATPase/metabolism
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coupling of the Na+/K+-ATPase to Ankyrin B controls Na+/Ca2+ exchanger activity in cardiomyocytes.
**Authors:** Skogestad J, Aronsen JM, Tovsrud N, Wanichawan P, Hougen K, Stokke MK, Carlson CR, Sjaastad I, Sejersted OM, Swift F
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cvr/cvz087](https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvz087)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Res. 2020 Jan 1;116(1):78-90. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvz087.

Coupling of the Na+/K+-ATPase to Ankyrin B controls Na+/Ca2+ exchanger activity
in cardiomyocytes.

Skogestad J(1)(2), Aronsen JM(1)(3), Tovsrud N(1)(2), Wanichawan P(1)(2), Hougen
K(1)(2), Stokke MK(1)(2)(4), Carlson CR(1)(2), Sjaastad I(1)(2), Sejersted
OM(1)(2), Swift F(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Experimental Medical Research, Oslo University Hospital and
University of Oslo, Ullevål, N-0407 Oslo, Norway.
(2)KG Jebsen Cardiac Research Centre and Center for Heart Failure Research,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Bjørknes College, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo,
Norway.
(5)Centre for Fertility and Health, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo,
Norway.

AIMS: Ankyrin B (AnkB) is an adaptor protein that assembles Na+/K+-ATPase (NKA)
and Na+/Ca2+ exchanger (NCX) in the AnkB macromolecular complex.
Loss-of-function mutations in AnkB cause the AnkB syndrome in humans,
characterized by ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. It is unclear
to what extent NKA binding to AnkB allows regulation of local Na+ and Ca2+
domains and hence NCX activity.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To investigate the role of NKA binding to AnkB in
cardiomyocytes, we synthesized a disruptor peptide (MAB peptide) and its AnkB
binding ability was verified by pulldown experiments. As opposed to control, the
correlation between NKA and NCX currents was abolished in adult rat ventricular
myocytes dialyzed with MAB peptide, as well as in cardiomyocytes from AnkB+/-
mice. Disruption of NKA from AnkB (with MAB peptide) increased NCX-sensed
cytosolic Na+ concentration, reduced Ca2+ extrusion through NCX, and increased
frequency of Ca2+ sparks and Ca2+ waves without concomitant increase in Ca2+
transient amplitude or SR Ca2+ load, suggesting an effect in local Ca2+ domains.
Selective inhibition of the NKAα2 isoform abolished both the correlation between
NKA and NCX currents and the increased rate of Ca2+ sparks and waves following
NKA/AnkB disruption, suggesting that an AnkB/NKAα2/NCX domain controls Ca2+
fluxes in cardiomyocytes.
CONCLUSION: NKA binding to AnkB allows ion regulation in a local domain, and
acute disruption of the NKA/AnkB interaction using disruptor peptides lead to
increased rate of Ca2+ sparks and waves. The functional effects were mediated
through the NKAα2 isoform. Disruption of the AnkB/NKA/NCX domain could be an
important pathophysiological mechanism in the AnkB syndrome.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved.
© The Author(s) 2019. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cvr/cvz087
PMID: 30949686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
