---
reference_id: "PMID:18996916"
title: Disruption of neural progenitors along the ventricular and subventricular zones in periventricular heterotopia.
authors:
- Ferland RJ
- Batiz LF
- Neal J
- Lian G
- Bundock E
- Lu J
- Hsiao YC
- Diamond R
- Mei D
- Banham AH
- Brown PJ
- Vanderburg CR
- Joseph J
- Hecht JL
- Folkerth R
- Guerrini R
- Walsh CA
- Rodriguez EM
- Sheen VL
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn377
keywords:
- Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Animals
- Cell Adhesion
- Cell Movement
- "Cerebral Ventricles/cytology, physiopathology"
- "Contractile Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Filamins
- "Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Microfilament Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurons/physiology
- "Periventricular Nodular Heterotopia/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Soluble N-Ethylmaleimide-Sensitive Factor Attachment Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Stem Cells/cytology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of neural progenitors along the ventricular and subventricular zones in periventricular heterotopia.
**Authors:** Ferland RJ, Batiz LF, Neal J, Lian G, Bundock E, Lu J, Hsiao YC, Diamond R, Mei D, Banham AH, Brown PJ, Vanderburg CR, Joseph J, Hecht JL, Folkerth R, Guerrini R, Walsh CA, Rodriguez EM, Sheen VL
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddn377](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddn377)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Feb 1;18(3):497-516. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn377. Epub 2008
Nov  7.

Disruption of neural progenitors along the ventricular and subventricular zones
in periventricular heterotopia.

Ferland RJ(1), Batiz LF, Neal J, Lian G, Bundock E, Lu J, Hsiao YC, Diamond R,
Mei D, Banham AH, Brown PJ, Vanderburg CR, Joseph J, Hecht JL, Folkerth R,
Guerrini R, Walsh CA, Rodriguez EM, Sheen VL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary
Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA.

Periventricular heterotopia (PH) is a disorder characterized by neuronal
nodules, ectopically positioned along the lateral ventricles of the cerebral
cortex. Mutations in either of two human genes, Filamin A (FLNA) or
ADP-ribosylation factor guanine exchange factor 2 (ARFGEF2), cause PH (Fox et
al. in 'Mutations in filamin 1 prevent migration of cerebral cortical neurons in
human periventricular heterotopia'. Neuron, 21, 1315-1325, 1998; Sheen et al. in
'Mutations in ARFGEF2 implicate vesicle trafficking in neural progenitor
proliferation and migration in the human cerebral cortex'. Nat. Genet., 36,
69-76, 2004). Recent studies have shown that mutations in mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase kinase-4 (Mekk4), an indirect interactor with FlnA, also
lead to periventricular nodule formation in mice (Sarkisian et al. in 'MEKK4
signaling regulates filamin expression and neuronal migration'. Neuron, 52,
789-801, 2006). Here we show that neurons in post-mortem human PH brains
migrated appropriately into the cortex, that periventricular nodules were
primarily composed of later-born neurons, and that the neuroependyma was
disrupted in all PH cases. As studied in the mouse, loss of FlnA or Big2
function in neural precursors impaired neuronal migration from the germinal
zone, disrupted cell adhesion and compromised neuroepithelial integrity.
Finally, the hydrocephalus with hop gait (hyh) mouse, which harbors a mutation
in Napa [encoding N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein alpha
(alpha-SNAP)], also develops a progressive denudation of the neuroepithelium,
leading to periventricular nodule formation. Previous studies have shown that
Arfgef2 and Napa direct vesicle trafficking and fusion, whereas FlnA associates
dynamically with the Golgi membranes during budding and trafficking of transport
vesicles. Our current findings suggest that PH formation arises from a final
common pathway involving disruption of vesicle trafficking, leading to impaired
cell adhesion and loss of neuroependymal integrity.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn377
PMCID: PMC2722192
PMID: 18996916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
