---
reference_id: "PMID:20659440"
title: A novel mutation of GATA4 in a familial atrial septal defect.
authors:
- Chen Y
- Mao J
- Sun Y
- Zhang Q
- Cheng HB
- Yan WH
- Choy KW
- Li H
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.07.021
keywords:
- Adult
- Asian People
- Case-Control Studies
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Family
- GATA4 Transcription Factor/genetics
- "Heart Septal Defects, Atrial/genetics"
- "Heart Septal Defects, Ventricular/genetics"
- Homeobox Protein Nkx-2.5
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation of GATA4 in a familial atrial septal defect.
**Authors:** Chen Y, Mao J, Sun Y, Zhang Q, Cheng HB, Yan WH, Choy KW, Li H
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2010.07.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2010.07.021)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2010 Nov 11;411(21-22):1741-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.07.021.
 Epub 2010 Jul 24.

A novel mutation of GATA4 in a familial atrial septal defect.

Chen Y(1), Mao J, Sun Y, Zhang Q, Cheng HB, Yan WH, Choy KW, Li H.

Author information:
(1)Center for Reproduction and Genetics, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated 
Suzhou Hospital, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province 215002, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have identified that mutations in a few genes, 
including T-BOX5, NKX2-5, EVC and GATA4, are associated with atrial septal 
defect (ASD).
METHODS: A family of three generations with 4 members who were affected with ASD 
was investigated. To exclude the presence of any sub-microscopic chromosomal 
imbalance, high-resolution 1M array-based comparative genomic hybridization 
(aCGH) was performed. SNaPShot was used to certify the specificity of the 
finding mutation in the other family members. The coding region of GATA4 and 
NKX2-5 genes was screened by sequencing in another 30 cases including 10 cases 
of ventricular septal defect (VSD), 10 cases of atrial septal defect (ASD), 8 
cases of VSD combined with ASD and 2 cases of atrioventricular septal defects 
(AVSD).
RESULTS: No pathogenic copy number variant was detected by aCGH in the four 
affected family members with ASD. A novel non-synonymous variant, c.839C>T 
(T280M) in GATA4, was identified and segregated with all the ASD patients within 
this Chinese family. Such mutation was absent in other family members or present 
among sporadic CHD patients. In addition, we identified a non-synonymous variant 
in the NKX2-5 gene (P257A) associated with one congenital heart disease patient 
with VSD. Both mutations were not identified among healthy controls.
CONCLUSION: T280M mutation of GATA4 is suggested to be associated with ASD in 
this Chinese family.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.07.021
PMID: 20659440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]