---
reference_id: "PMID:22116938"
title: GLUT10 is required for the development of the cardiovascular system and the notochord and connects mitochondrial function to TGFβ signaling.
authors:
- Willaert A
- Khatri S
- Callewaert BL
- Coucke PJ
- Crosby SD
- Lee JG
- Davis EC
- Shiva S
- Tsang M
- De Paepe A
- Urban Z
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr555
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Cardiovascular Abnormalities/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Glucose Transport Proteins, Facilitative/physiology"
- Luciferases/metabolism
- "Mitochondria/metabolism, pathology"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Morpholinos/pharmacology
- Mutation/genetics
- "Notochord/metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Signal Transduction
- Transcriptome
- "Transforming Growth Factor beta/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Zebrafish/embryology, genetics, growth & development"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GLUT10 is required for the development of the cardiovascular system and the notochord and connects mitochondrial function to TGFβ signaling.
**Authors:** Willaert A, Khatri S, Callewaert BL, Coucke PJ, Crosby SD, Lee JG, Davis EC, Shiva S, Tsang M, De Paepe A, Urban Z
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddr555](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddr555)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Mar 15;21(6):1248-59. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr555. Epub 2011
Nov  24.

GLUT10 is required for the development of the cardiovascular system and the
notochord and connects mitochondrial function to TGFβ signaling.

Willaert A(1), Khatri S, Callewaert BL, Coucke PJ, Crosby SD, Lee JG, Davis EC,
Shiva S, Tsang M, De Paepe A, Urban Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2012 Jul;82(1):30-2. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01870.x.

Growth factor signaling results in dramatic phenotypic changes in cells, which
require commensurate alterations in cellular metabolism. Mutations in
SLC2A10/GLUT10, a member of the facilitative glucose transporter family, are
associated with altered transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) signaling in
patients with arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS). The objective of this work was
to test whether SLC2A10/GLUT10 can serve as a link between TGFβ-related
transcriptional regulation and metabolism during development. In zebrafish
embryos, knockdown of slc2a10 using antisense morpholino oligonucleotide
injection caused a wavy notochord and cardiovascular abnormalities with a
reduced heart rate and blood flow, which was coupled with an incomplete and
irregular vascular patterning. This was phenocopied by treatment with a
small-molecule inhibitor of TGFβ receptor (tgfbr1/alk5). Array hybridization
showed that the changes at the transcriptome level caused by the two treatments
were highly correlated, revealing that a reduced tgfbr1 signaling is a key
feature of ATS in early zebrafish development. Interestingly, a large proportion
of the genes, which were specifically dysregulated after glut10 depletion gene
and not by tgfbr1 inhibition, play a major role in mitochondrial function.
Consistent with these results, slc2a10 morphants showed decreased respiration
and reduced TGFβ reporter gene activity. Finally, co-injection of antisense
morpholinos targeting slc2a10 and smad7 (a TGFβ inhibitor) resulted in a partial
rescue of smad7 morphant phenotypes, suggesting scl2a10/glut10 functions
downstream of smads. Taken together, glut10 is essential for cardiovascular
development by facilitating both mitochondrial respiration and TGFβ signaling.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddr555
PMCID: PMC3284116
PMID: 22116938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
