---
reference_id: "PMID:33402059"
title: Analysis of gamma-glutamyltransferase in acute promyelocytic leukemia patients undergoing arsenic trioxide treatment.
authors:
- Sui M
- Wei H
- Zhang Q
- Xiu R
- Shen X
- Zhang Z
- Zhou J
journal: Hematology
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/16078454.2020.1868782
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of gamma-glutamyltransferase in acute promyelocytic leukemia patients undergoing arsenic trioxide treatment.
**Authors:** Sui M, Wei H, Zhang Q, Xiu R, Shen X, Zhang Z, Zhou J
**Journal:** Hematology (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/16078454.2020.1868782](https://doi.org/10.1080/16078454.2020.1868782)

## Content

1. Hematology. 2021 Dec;26(1):58-64. doi: 10.1080/16078454.2020.1868782.

Analysis of gamma-glutamyltransferase in acute promyelocytic leukemia patients 
undergoing arsenic trioxide treatment.

Sui M(1)(2), Wei H(1), Zhang Q(1), Xiu R(1), Shen X(1), Zhang Z(1)(2), Zhou 
J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin, People's Republic of China.
(2)Central Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical University, 
Harbin, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVES: The remarkable effect of arsenic trioxide (ATO) was verified, but 
elevated gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT), aminotransferases (ALT and AST) are 
generally observed in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients undergoing ATO 
treatment. However, utilization of hepatoprotective agents or discontinuation of 
ATO may inhibit ATO efficacy. In order to maintain ATO effect from 
hepatoprotective agents' influence so we investigate relationships between 
single elevation in GGT and hepatocellular injury in this study.
METHODS: Correlation of GGT variation and leukocyte counts were analyzed in all 
81 APL patients, correlations among liver enzymes (ALT, AST and GGT) were also 
analyzed in patients without prophylactic hepatoprotective agents. In following 
study, we take the clinical observation of changes in aminotransferases in 
patients with single elevation in GGT without hepatoprotective agents.
RESULTS: The average elevated GGT in the WBC abnormal group was more than the 
normal group (53.86U/L vs. 31.03U/L, P = 0.008), a positive Pearson's 
correlation of GGT variation and changed leukocyte counts in patients without 
prophylactic hepatoprotective agents. There are no significant correlation 
between aminotransferases (ALT and AST) and GGT but correlation between ALT and 
AST was statistically significant (R = 0.649, P = 0.000). For APL patients with 
single elevation in GGT, ALT and AST levels were normal throughout the ATO 
treatment without hepatoprotective agents.
CONCLUSION: Single elevation in GGT without elevated aminotransferases can't be 
identified as hepatotoxicity, and the elevated levels of GGT are associated with 
increasing leukocyte counts. Continue single-agent ATO without prophylactic 
hepatoprotective agents is recommended in APL patients with single elevation in 
GGT, in order to maintain ATO effect.

DOI: 10.1080/16078454.2020.1868782
PMID: 33402059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]