---
reference_id: "PMID:19035443"
title: Pathological activation of KIT in metastatic tumors of acral and mucosal melanomas.
authors:
- Ashida A
- Takata M
- Murata H
- Kido K
- Saida T
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/ijc.24048
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- Female
- Humans
- Indoles/pharmacology
- Male
- "Melanoma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Mucous Membrane/pathology
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Phosphorylation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/metabolism
- Pyrroles/pharmacology
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Stem Cell Factor/metabolism
- Sunitinib
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathological activation of KIT in metastatic tumors of acral and mucosal melanomas.
**Authors:** Ashida A, Takata M, Murata H, Kido K, Saida T
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.24048](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.24048)

## Content

1. Int J Cancer. 2009 Feb 15;124(4):862-8. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24048.

Pathological activation of KIT in metastatic tumors of acral and mucosal
melanomas.

Ashida A(1), Takata M, Murata H, Kido K, Saida T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 3-1-1
Asahi, Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan.

Recent studies showed KIT gene aberrations in a substantial number of melanomas
on acral skin and mucosa, suggesting the therapeutic benefit of tyrosine kinase
inhibitors, such as imatinib. We therefore examined the expression and mutations
of KIT in 4 primary and 24 metastatic acral and mucosal melanomas.
Immunohistochemistry revealed moderate or strong KIT protein expression in 13
(48%) tumors. Sequence analysis revealed K642E and D820Y mutations in two
metastases. Amplification of KIT was identified by real-time PCR in 4 tumors,
including one that had K642E. Western blot analysis showed phosphorylation of
the KIT receptor in 8 (62%) of 13 cryopreserved samples, indicating the frequent
pathological activation of the receptor in vivo. Phosphorylation of KIT protein
was detected in 2 tumors harboring KIT mutations, as well as in one tumor with
KIT gene amplification. Furthermore, 5 tumors without detectable KIT gene
aberrations showed phosphorylation of the KIT receptor. Expression of stem cell
factor (SCF) in melanoma cells as well as stromal cells suggests SCF/KIT
autocrine and paracrine activation in these tumors. Finally, we found
significant growth suppressive effects of sunitinib in two acral melanoma cell
lines; one harboring the D820Y mutation and one showing SCF-dependent KIT
activation. These results show pathological activation of KIT in a substantial
number of metastatic tumors of acral and mucosal melanomas, and suggest a
potential therapeutic benefit of sunitinib for these melanomas.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24048
PMID: 19035443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
