---
reference_id: "PMID:33045774"
title: First Case of Peroxisomal D-bifunctional Protein Deficiency with Novel HSD17B4 Mutations and Progressive Neuropathy in Korea.
authors:
- Bae EY
- Yi Y
- Lim HH
- Lee JM
- Lee B
- Kim SY
- Kim YM
journal: J Korean Med Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e357
keywords:
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Peroxisomal Multifunctional Protein-2/deficiency, genetics"
- Republic of Korea
- "Seizures/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Zellweger Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First Case of Peroxisomal D-bifunctional Protein Deficiency with Novel HSD17B4 Mutations and Progressive Neuropathy in Korea.
**Authors:** Bae EY, Yi Y, Lim HH, Lee JM, Lee B, Kim SY, Kim YM
**Journal:** J Korean Med Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e357](https://doi.org/10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e357)

## Content

1. J Korean Med Sci. 2020 Oct 12;35(39):e357. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e357.

First Case of Peroxisomal D-bifunctional Protein Deficiency with Novel HSD17B4 
Mutations and Progressive Neuropathy in Korea.

Bae EY(1), Yi Y(1)(2), Lim HH(1), Lee JM(1), Lee B(1)(3), Kim SY(4), Kim 
YM(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chungnam National University College of Medicine, 
Chungnam National University Hospital, Daejeon, Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Hallym University, Kangdong 
Sacred Heart Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, 
Korea.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Daejeon Eulji Medical Center, Eulji University, 
Daejeon, Korea.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Chungnam National University College of Medicine, 
Chungnam National University Sejong Hospital, Sejong, Korea. ym4805@gmail.com.

Peroxisomal D-bifunctional protein (DBP), encoded by the HSD17B4 gene, catalyzes 
β-oxidation of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs). The deficiency of this 
peroxisomal enzyme leads to the accumulation of VLCFAs, causing multisystemic 
manifestations including the brain, retina, adrenal gland, hearing, and skeletal 
system. Herein, we report the first Korean neonatal case of peroxisomal DBP 
deficiency and the clinical prognosis over 2 years. This patient showed 
craniofacial dysmorphism, club foot, and seizures with cyanosis one day after 
birth. Elevated VLCFAs levels were indicative of a peroxisomal disorder. 
Targeted exome sequencing was performed and two missense mutations p.Asp117Val 
and p.Phe279Ser in the HSD17B4 gene were identified. The patient had type III 
DBP deficiency; therefore, docosahexaenoic acid and non-soluble vitamins were 
administered. However, progressive nystagmus, optic nerve atrophy, and bilateral 
hearing defects were observed and follow-up brain imaging revealed 
leukodystrophy and brain atrophy. Multiple anti-epileptic drugs were required to 
control the seizures. Over two years, the patient achieved normal growth with 
home ventilation and tube feeding. Hereby, the subject's parents had support 
during the second pregnancy from the proven molecular information. Moreover, 
targeted exome sequencing is an effective diagnostic approach, considering 
genetic heterogeneity of Zellweger spectrum disorders.

© 2020 The Korean Academy of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e357
PMCID: PMC7550233
PMID: 33045774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.