---
reference_id: "PMID:15945070"
title: "CDG-IL: an infant with a novel mutation in the ALG9 gene and additional phenotypic features."
authors:
- Weinstein M
- Schollen E
- Matthijs G
- Neupert C
- Hennet T
- Grubenmann CE
- Frank CG
- Aebi M
- Clarke JT
- Griffiths A
- Seargeant L
- Poplawski N
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30851
keywords:
- Cathepsin A/metabolism
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Genetic Complementation Test
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Infant
- "Mannosyltransferases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Muscle Hypotonia/pathology
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Psychomotor Disorders/pathology
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics, growth & development"
- Seizures/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CDG-IL: an infant with a novel mutation in the ALG9 gene and additional phenotypic features.
**Authors:** Weinstein M, Schollen E, Matthijs G, Neupert C, Hennet T, Grubenmann CE, Frank CG, Aebi M, Clarke JT, Griffiths A, Seargeant L, Poplawski N
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30851](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30851)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Jul 15;136(2):194-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30851.

CDG-IL: an infant with a novel mutation in the ALG9 gene and additional 
phenotypic features.

Weinstein M(1), Schollen E, Matthijs G, Neupert C, Hennet T, Grubenmann CE, 
Frank CG, Aebi M, Clarke JT, Griffiths A, Seargeant L, Poplawski N.

Author information:
(1)Hospital for Sick Children, Pediatrics, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
michael.weinstein@sickkids.ca

We describe the second case of congenital disorder of glycosylation type IL 
(CDG-IL) caused by deficiency of the ALG9 a1,2 mannosyltransferase enzyme. The 
female infant's features included psychomotor retardation, seizures, hypotonia, 
diffuse brain atrophy with delayed myelination, failure to thrive, pericardial 
effusion, cystic renal disease, hepatosplenomegaly, esotropia, and inverted 
nipples. Lipodystrophy and dysmorphic facial features were absent. Magnetic 
resonance imaging of the brain showed volume loss in the cerebral hemispheres 
and cerebellum and delayed myelination. Laboratory investigations revealed low 
levels of multiple serum proteins including antithrombin III, factor XI, and 
cholesterol. Hypoglycosylation was confirmed by the typical CDG type 1 pattern 
of serum transferrin analyzed by isoelectric focusing. A defect in the ALG9 
enzyme was suggested by the accumulation of the DolPP-GlcNAc2Man6 and 
DolPP-GlcNAc2Man8 in the patient's fibroblasts and confirmed by mutation 
analysis: the patient is homozygous for the ALG9 mutation p.Y286C. The causal 
effect of the mutation was shown by complementation assays in alg9 deficient 
yeast cells. The child described here further delineates the clinical spectrum 
of CDG-IL and confirms the significant clinical overlap amongst CDG subtypes.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30851
PMID: 15945070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]