---
reference_id: "PMID:22795107"
title: "Osteogenesis imperfecta type IV: prenatal molecular diagnosis and genetic counseling in a pregnancy carried to full term with favorable outcome."
authors:
- Chen CP
- Lin SP
- Su YN
- Chern SR
- Lin MH
- Su JW
- Wang W
journal: Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.tjog.2012.04.019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta type IV: prenatal molecular diagnosis and genetic counseling in a pregnancy carried to full term with favorable outcome.
**Authors:** Chen CP, Lin SP, Su YN, Chern SR, Lin MH, Su JW, Wang W
**Journal:** Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tjog.2012.04.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tjog.2012.04.019)

## Content

1. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2012 Jun;51(2):271-5. doi:
10.1016/j.tjog.2012.04.019.

Osteogenesis imperfecta type IV: prenatal molecular diagnosis and genetic 
counseling in a pregnancy carried to full term with favorable outcome.

Chen CP(1), Lin SP, Su YN, Chern SR, Lin MH, Su JW, Wang W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei City, Taiwan. 
cpc_mmh@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To present molecular diagnosis and genetic counseling for 
osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type IV in a pregnancy carried to term with 
favorable outcome.
CASE REPORT: A 34-year-old, primigravid woman was referred for genetic 
counseling in the second trimester because of advanced maternal age and a 
positive family history of OI type IV. Her husband had a weight of 40 kg and a 
height of 145 cm. Her husband had normal sclerae, moderate short stature and 
osteopenia, and had sustained multiple fractures with minimal trauma since 
childhood. The husband and his relatives including his mother, aunt, uncle, 
sister and nephew had suffered from OI type IV. Molecular analysis of the 
affected individuals in the family revealed a G to T change at position c.2197 
(c.2197G>T, GGT>TGT) of the exon 37 in the COL1A2 gene leading to a change of 
glycine at codon 733 to cysteine (G733C). Cytogenetic analysis of cultured 
amniocytes revealed a karyotype of 46,XY. Molecular analysis of uncultured 
amniocytes revealed a missense mutation of G733C in COL1A2. Level II ultrasound 
at 23 weeks of gestation revealed significant shortness of the limbs. Small 
stature for gestation age was obvious in the third trimester. At 37 weeks of 
gestation, a fetal ultrasound showed curvature of the femurs. A cesarean section 
was performed at 38 weeks of gestation, and a male baby was delivered 
uneventfully. The baby had normal sclerae, a body weight of 2190 g (< 5(th) 
centile) and a body length of 46 cm (< 5(th) centile). X-rays showed thin 
clavicles and short curved femurs but no bony fractures. No fractures were noted 
at the age of 1 month.
CONCLUSION: The present case adds to previous examples of favorable outcome in 
pregnancies with non-lethal forms of OI.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tjog.2012.04.019
PMID: 22795107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]