---
reference_id: "PMID:8988165"
title: "Mutations in human TBX5 [corrected] cause limb and cardiac malformation in Holt-Oram syndrome."
authors:
- Basson CT
- Bachinsky DR
- Lin RC
- Levi T
- Elkins JA
- Soults J
- Grayzel D
- Kroumpouzou E
- Traill TA
- Leblanc-Straceski J
- Renault B
- Kucherlapati R
- Seidman JG
- Seidman CE
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1038/ng0197-30
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in human TBX5 [corrected] cause limb and cardiac malformation in Holt-Oram syndrome.
**Authors:** Basson CT, Bachinsky DR, Lin RC, Levi T, Elkins JA, Soults J, Grayzel D, Kroumpouzou E, Traill TA, Leblanc-Straceski J, Renault B, Kucherlapati R, Seidman JG, Seidman CE
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0197-30](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0197-30)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1997 Jan;15(1):30-5. doi: 10.1038/ng0197-30.

Mutations in human TBX5 [corrected] cause limb and cardiac malformation in 
Holt-Oram syndrome.

Basson CT(1), Bachinsky DR, Lin RC, Levi T, Elkins JA, Soults J, Grayzel D, 
Kroumpouzou E, Traill TA, Leblanc-Straceski J, Renault B, Kucherlapati R, 
Seidman JG, Seidman CE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1997 Apr;15(4):411.

Holt-Oram syndrome is characterized by upper limb malformations and cardiac 
septation defects. Here, we demonstrate that mutations in the human TBX5 gene 
underlie this disorder. TBX5 was cloned from the disease locus on human 
chromosome 12q24.1 and identified as a member of the T-box transcription factor 
family. A nonsense mutation in TBX5 causes Holt-Oram syndrome in affected 
members of one family; a TBX5 missense mutation was identified in affected 
members of another. We conclude that TBX5 is critical for limb and heart 
development and suggest that haploinsufficiency of TBX5 causes Holt-Oram 
syndrome.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0197-30
PMID: 8988165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]