---
reference_id: "PMID:11211309"
title: "Clear cell sarcoma shows immunoreactivity for microphthalmia transcription factor: further evidence for melanocytic differentiation."
authors:
- Granter SR
- Weilbaecher KN
- Quigley C
- Fletcher CD
- Fisher DE
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/modpathol.3880249
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clear cell sarcoma shows immunoreactivity for microphthalmia transcription factor: further evidence for melanocytic differentiation.
**Authors:** Granter SR, Weilbaecher KN, Quigley C, Fletcher CD, Fisher DE
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/modpathol.3880249](https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.3880249)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2001 Jan;14(1):6-9. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.3880249.

Clear cell sarcoma shows immunoreactivity for microphthalmia transcription 
factor: further evidence for melanocytic differentiation.

Granter SR(1), Weilbaecher KN, Quigley C, Fletcher CD, Fisher DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Microphthalmia transcription factor, a melanocytic nuclear protein critical for 
the embryonic development and postnatal viability of melanocytes, is a master 
regulator in modulating extracellular signals. Recently, microphthalmia 
transcription factor expression was shown to be both a sensitive and specific 
marker of epithelioid melanoma. We investigated the sensitivity of D5, an 
anti-microphthalmia transcription factor antibody, for diagnosis of clear cell 
sarcoma (also known as malignant melanoma of soft parts). Immunoreactivity in a 
nuclear pattern for D5 was present in 8 of 12 (75%) tumors. D5 staining was 
strong in three tumors, moderate in two, and weak in three. S-100 protein 
expression was seen in all 12 cases that had clear cell sarcoma examined. HMB-45 
staining was seen in 11 of 12 (92%) tumors. Focal Melan-A positivity was seen in 
3 of 7 (43%) tumors. Although D5 was shown in a previous study to be a highly 
sensitive and specific marker for epithelioid melanomas, the results of this 
study expand the spectrum of tumors showing immunoreactivity for D5. D5 
immunoreactivity in clear cell sarcoma provides further evidence for melanocytic 
differentiation in this unusual tumor.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.3880249
PMID: 11211309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]