---
reference_id: "PMID:9005853"
title: Identification of a gene that causes primary open angle glaucoma.
authors:
- Stone EM
- Fingert JH
- Alward WL
- Nguyen TD
- Polansky JR
- Sunden SL
- Nishimura D
- Clark AF
- Nystuen A
- Nichols BE
- Mackey DA
- Ritch R
- Kalenak JW
- Craven ER
- Sheffield VC
journal: Science
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1126/science.275.5300.668
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Artificial, Yeast"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- "Glaucoma, Open-Angle/genetics"
- Glycoproteins
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- Sequence Tagged Sites
- Trabecular Meshwork/metabolism
- Myocilin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a gene that causes primary open angle glaucoma.
**Authors:** Stone EM, Fingert JH, Alward WL, Nguyen TD, Polansky JR, Sunden SL, Nishimura D, Clark AF, Nystuen A, Nichols BE, Mackey DA, Ritch R, Kalenak JW, Craven ER, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** Science (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.275.5300.668](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.275.5300.668)

## Content

1. Science. 1997 Jan 31;275(5300):668-70. doi: 10.1126/science.275.5300.668.

Identification of a gene that causes primary open angle glaucoma.

Stone EM(1), Fingert JH, Alward WL, Nguyen TD, Polansky JR, Sunden SL, Nishimura 
D, Clark AF, Nystuen A, Nichols BE, Mackey DA, Ritch R, Kalenak JW, Craven ER, 
Sheffield VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, IA 52242, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1997 Jan 31;275(5300):621. doi: 10.1126/science.275.5300.621.

Glaucoma is a major cause of blindness and is characterized by progressive 
degeneration of the optic nerve and is usually associated with elevated 
intraocular pressure. Analyses of sequence tagged site (STS) content and 
haplotype sharing between families affected with chromosome 1q-linked open angle 
glaucoma (GLC1A) were used to prioritize candidate genes for mutation screening. 
A gene encoding a trabecular meshwork protein (TIGR) mapped to the narrowest 
disease interval by STS content and radiation hybrid mapping. Thirteen glaucoma 
patients were found to have one of three mutations in this gene (3.9 percent of 
the population studied). One of these mutations was also found in a control 
individual (0.2 percent). Identification of these mutations will aid in early 
diagnosis, which is essential for optimal application of existing therapies.

DOI: 10.1126/science.275.5300.668
PMID: 9005853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]