---
reference_id: "PMID:39086438"
title: A Novel Mutation of ORNT1 Detected in a Hyperornithinemia-Hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria Syndrome Child by Clinical Whole-Exome Sequencing.
authors:
- Laochareonsuk W
- Osatakul S
- Intusoma U
- Maneechay W
- Sangkhathat S
journal: J Pediatr Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1742247
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel Mutation of ORNT1 Detected in a Hyperornithinemia-Hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria Syndrome Child by Clinical Whole-Exome Sequencing.
**Authors:** Laochareonsuk W, Osatakul S, Intusoma U, Maneechay W, Sangkhathat S
**Journal:** J Pediatr Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0041-1742247](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0041-1742247)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Genet. 2022 Feb 10;13(3):205-210. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1742247.
eCollection 2024 Sep.

A Novel Mutation of ORNT1 Detected in a
Hyperornithinemia-Hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria Syndrome Child by Clinical
Whole-Exome Sequencing.

Laochareonsuk W(1), Osatakul S(2), Intusoma U(3), Maneechay W(4), Sangkhathat
S(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Science and Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of
Medicine, Prince of Songkla University, Songkhla, Thailand.
(2)Pediatric Gastroenterology Unit, Division of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine,
Prince of Songkla University, Songkhla, Thailand.
(3)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Division of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Prince
of Songkla University, Songkhla, Thailand.
(4)Translational Medicine Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Prince of
Songkla University, Songkhla, Thailand.
(5)Division of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Songkla University,
Songkhla, Thailand.

Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome, an inborn
error of metabolism, is an inherited syndrome caused by loss-of-function
mutations in the SLC25A15, resulting in ornithine translocase1 (ORNT1)
deficiency. Disrupted ornithine transportation in an affected individual usually
manifests with the accumulation of intermediate metabolites, leading to
neurological impairment, hepatitis, and/or protein intolerance at various ages
of onset. In this paper, we report a compound heterozygous mutation in SLC25A15
from a 2-year-old girl who presented with neurological alterations and hepatic
failure. Before developing neurological sequelae, she had signs of globally
delayed development. The accumulation of toxic metabolites may explain these
neurological consequences. After biochemical confirmation of HHH, whole-exome
sequencing (WES) was performed, which identified mutations at codons 21 and 179
of SLC25A15 that are predicted to result in the loss of function of ORNT1. Each
of the mutations was found to be inherited from one of her parents. After
therapy, her toxic metabolites decreased significantly. In conclusion, HHH
syndrome frequently manifests with nonspecific symptoms and unapparent
biochemical profiles, which may lead to delayed diagnosis. Correction of the
accumulating metabolites is necessary to prevent irreversible neurological
impairment. Furthermore, performing a WES provides a shortcut for accurate
diagnosis.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonDerivative-NonCommercial License,
permitting copying and reproduction so long as the original work is given
appropriate credit. Contents may not be used for commercial purposes, or
adapted, remixed, transformed or built upon. (
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1742247
PMCID: PMC11288712
PMID: 39086438

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.
