---
reference_id: "PMID:37493935"
title: "Walking status and spinopelvic parameters in young children with achondroplasia: 10-year follow-up."
authors:
- da Silva LCA
- Asma A
- Ulusaloglu AC
- Margetts M
- Ditro CP
- Rogers KJ
- Bowen JR
- Mackenzie WG
- Mackenzie WGS
journal: Spine Deform
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s43390-023-00733-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Achondroplasia/physiopathology, complications, diagnostic imaging"
- Male
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Walking/physiology
- "Kyphosis/etiology, physiopathology, diagnostic imaging"
- Lumbar Vertebrae/diagnostic imaging
- Thoracic Vertebrae/diagnostic imaging
- Pelvis
- Disease Progression
- Pelvic Bones/diagnostic imaging
- Lordosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Walking status and spinopelvic parameters in young children with achondroplasia: 10-year follow-up.
**Authors:** da Silva LCA, Asma A, Ulusaloglu AC, Margetts M, Ditro CP, Rogers KJ, Bowen JR, Mackenzie WG, Mackenzie WGS
**Journal:** Spine Deform (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s43390-023-00733-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s43390-023-00733-7)

## Content

1. Spine Deform. 2023 Nov;11(6):1477-1483. doi: 10.1007/s43390-023-00733-7. Epub 
2023 Jul 26.

Walking status and spinopelvic parameters in young children with achondroplasia: 
10-year follow-up.

da Silva LCA(1), Asma A(1), Ulusaloglu AC(1), Margetts M(2), Ditro CP(1), Rogers 
KJ(1), Bowen JR(1), Mackenzie WG(1), Mackenzie WGS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nemours Children's Health, 1600 Rockland 
Road, Wilmington, DE, 19803, USA.
(2)Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nemours Children's Health, 1600 Rockland 
Road, Wilmington, DE, 19803, USA. stuart.mackenzie@nemours.org.

PURPOSE: Thoracolumbar kyphosis (TLK) is common in children with achondroplasia 
and resolves in 90% by 10 years of age. Our purpose was to describe the natural 
progression of TLK in a cohort of pre-walking children with achondroplasia.
METHODS: A single-center, retrospective review identified 62 children (32 male, 
30 female) with achondroplasia. Clinical information and sagittal spinopelvic 
parameters were collected. The children were divided into positive pelvic tilt 
(PT) and negative PT. All parents were routinely counseled about unsupported 
sitting.
RESULTS: Spontaneous resolution rate was 64.5% at 1-year post-walking, 74.2% at 
5 years of age, and 88.7% at 10 years of age. None of the children required 
posterior spinal decompression and fusion for progressive deformity or 
symptomatic spinal stenosis. At 1-year post-walking, the negative PT group had a 
higher sacral slope (p = 0.006), higher lumbar lordosis (p < 0.001), and lower 
pelvic incidence (p < 0.001). This relationship remained constant up to 10 years 
of age, and there was no association with TLK.
CONCLUSION: In this largest series to date, spontaneous resolution of TLK in 
children with achondroplasia was 64.5% at 1-year post-walking, 74.2% at 5 years 
of age, and 88.7% in children followed to 10 years of age. With early 
identification and regular follow-up with patient education, no patient in this 
series required treatment or developed symptomatic spinal stenosis. While not 
predictive of resolution of TLK, the dichotomous presentation of PT in young 
children with achondroplasia persists at 5 and 10 years of age and reliably 
predicts the spinopelvic parameters.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: III-retrospective comparative study.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Scoliosis Research Society.

DOI: 10.1007/s43390-023-00733-7
PMID: 37493935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]