---
reference_id: "PMID:33661571"
title: β-endorphin differentially contributes to food anticipatory activity in male and female mice undergoing activity-based anorexia.
authors:
- Daimon CM
- Hentges ST
journal: Physiol Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.14814/phy2.14788
keywords:
- Animals
- "Anorexia/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Female
- "Hypothalamus/drug effects, metabolism"
- Male
- Mice
- "Physical Conditioning, Animal/physiology"
- Pro-Opiomelanocortin/metabolism
- "Receptors, Opioid, mu/genetics, metabolism"
- beta-Endorphin/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# β-endorphin differentially contributes to food anticipatory activity in male and female mice undergoing activity-based anorexia.
**Authors:** Daimon CM, Hentges ST
**Journal:** Physiol Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.14814/phy2.14788](https://doi.org/10.14814/phy2.14788)

## Content

1. Physiol Rep. 2021 Mar;9(5):e14788. doi: 10.14814/phy2.14788.

β-endorphin differentially contributes to food anticipatory activity in male and
female mice undergoing activity-based anorexia.

Daimon CM(1), Hentges ST(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
CO, USA.

Anorexia nervosa (AN) has a lifetime prevalence of up to 4% and a high mortality
rate (~5-10%), yet little is known regarding the etiology of this disease. In an
attempt to fill the gaps in knowledge, activity-based anorexia (ABA) in rodents
has been a widely used model as it mimics several key features of AN including
severely restricted food intake and excessive exercise. Using this model, a role
for the hypothalamic proopiomelanocortin (POMC) system has been implicated in
the development of ABA as Pomc mRNA is elevated in female rats undergoing the
ABA paradigm. Since the Pomc gene product α-MSH potently inhibits food intake,
it could be that elevated α-MSH might promote ABA. However, the α-MSH receptor
antagonist SHU9119 does not protect against the development of ABA.
Interestingly, it has also been shown that female mice lacking the mu opioid
receptor (MOR), the primary receptor activated by the Pomc-gene-derived opioid
β-endorphin, display blunted food anticipatory behavior (FAA), a key feature of
ABA. Thus, we hypothesized that the elevation in Pomc mRNA observed during ABA
may lead to increased β-endorphin concentrations and MOR activation to promote
ABA. Further, given the known sex differences in AN and ABA, we hypothesized
that MORs may contribute differentially in male and female mice. Using wild-type
and MOR knockout mice of both sexes, a MOR antagonist and careful analysis of
food anticipatory behavior and β-endorphin levels, we found 1) increased Pomc
mRNA levels in both female and male mice that underwent ABA, 2) increased
β-endorphin in female mice that underwent ABA, and 3) blunted FAA in both sexes
in response to MOR genetic deletion yet blunted FAA only in males in response to
MOR antagonism. The results presented provide support for both hypotheses and
suggest that it may be the β-endorphin resulting from
increased Pomc transcription that supports the development of some features of
ABA.

© 2021 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on
behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.14788
PMCID: PMC7931805
PMID: 33661571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interests.
