---
reference_id: "PMID:15571466"
title: Chemotherapeutic options in the management of anal cancer.
authors:
- Gervaz P
- Allal AS
- Roth A
- Morel P
journal: Expert Opin Pharmacother
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1517/14656566.5.12.2479
keywords:
- Anus Neoplasms/therapy
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/complications, therapy"
- Cisplatin/therapeutic use
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Fluorouracil/therapeutic use
- HIV Seropositivity/complications
- Humans
- Mitomycin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chemotherapeutic options in the management of anal cancer.
**Authors:** Gervaz P, Allal AS, Roth A, Morel P
**Journal:** Expert Opin Pharmacother (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1517/14656566.5.12.2479](https://doi.org/10.1517/14656566.5.12.2479)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2004 Dec;5(12):2479-84. doi: 
10.1517/14656566.5.12.2479.

Chemotherapeutic options in the management of anal cancer.

Gervaz P(1), Allal AS, Roth A, Morel P.

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Cantonal Universitaire de Genève, Clinique de Chirurgie Viscérale, 
Switzerland. pascal.gervaz@hcuge.ch

During the past two decades, anal cancer has served as a paradigm for the 
successful application of chemoradiation to solid tumours; so far, it remains 
one of the few carcinomas of the gastrointestinal tract which are curable 
without the need for definitive surgery. Since the original contribution by 
Nigro in 1974, surprisingly few changes have been made to the standard of care 
in chemotherapy, which still consists of a combination of 5-fluorouracil and 
mitomycin C. However, many issues have yet to be clarified, such as the 
potential role of cisplatin as a substitute to mitomycin, as well as 
treatment-induced toxicity in HIV-positive patients. In this paper, the 
management of patients with anal cancer is presented, and new chemotherapeutic 
options are critically reviewed. Finally, the authors' opinion regarding 
currently unresolved issues in the treatment of these rare neoplasms is 
expressed.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.5.12.2479
PMID: 15571466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]