---
reference_id: "PMID:36686446"
title: Categorization of differences of sex development among Egyptian children and the role of antimullerian hormone and inhibin B.
authors:
- Abdelghaffar S
- AbdelMoneam EN
- Hassanein SA
- Radwan NA
- Mira MF
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2022.1072399
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Categorization of differences of sex development among Egyptian children and the role of antimullerian hormone and inhibin B.
**Authors:** Abdelghaffar S, AbdelMoneam EN, Hassanein SA, Radwan NA, Mira MF
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2022.1072399](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2022.1072399)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Jan 6;13:1072399. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.1072399. eCollection 2022.

Categorization of differences of sex development among Egyptian children and the 
role of antimullerian hormone and inhibin B.

Abdelghaffar S(1), AbdelMoneam EN(1), Hassanein SA(1), Radwan NA(2), Mira MF(1).

Author information:
(1)The Diabetes, Endocrine and Metabolism Pediatric Unit, Pediatric Department 
(DEMPU), Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Department of Clinical and Chemical Pathology, Cairo University, Cairo, 
Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Differences of sex development (DSD) are congenital conditions 
linked to atypical development of chromosomal, gonadal, or anatomical sex.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to demonstrate our experiences at the 
Diabetes Endocrine and Metabolism Pediatric Unit (DEMPU), Faculty of Medicine, 
Cairo University in the field of DSD by focusing on the clinical presentation, 
laboratory profile, classification, and etiological diagnosis of these 
conditions. In addition, the present study intended to delineate the importance 
of serum anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) and inhibin B in detecting the presence of 
functioning testicular tissue.
METHODS: This cohort study included 451 infants and children with various 
clinical presentations of DSD. The study performed a retrospective analysis on 
medical records of established DSD cases to evaluate the clinical importance of 
AMH and inhibin B. In addition, newly diagnosed patients were prospectively 
analyzed.
RESULTS: Three hundred thirty-six (74.5%) patients were 46,XY DSD, 98 (21.7%) 
were 46,XX DSD, 14 patients had other karyotypes and 3 had missing karyotypes. 
Among the 46XY DSD patients, the most common cause was partial androgen 
insensitivity. In contrast, congenital adrenal hyperplasia constituted the most 
common diagnosis in 46,XX DSD cases. The cut off value of serum AMH was 14.5 
ng/ml with 100% sensitivity and 55.1% specificity.
CONCLUSION: Partial androgen insensitivity was the most important cause of 46,XY 
DSD in Egyptian children, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia was the most common 
cause of 46,XX DSD. AMH was valuable in detecting functioning testicular tissue.

Copyright © 2023 Abdelghaffar, AbdelMoneam, Hassanein, Radwan and Mira.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.1072399
PMCID: PMC9858568
PMID: 36686446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.