---
reference_id: "PMID:14681042"
title: The effects of a mutant connexin 26 on epidermal differentiation.
authors:
- Bakirtzis G
- Jamieson S
- Aasen T
- Bryson S
- Forrow S
- Tetley L
- Finbow M
- Greenhalgh D
- Hodgins M
journal: Cell Commun Adhes
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1080/cac.10.4-6.359.364
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effects of a mutant connexin 26 on epidermal differentiation.
**Authors:** Bakirtzis G, Jamieson S, Aasen T, Bryson S, Forrow S, Tetley L, Finbow M, Greenhalgh D, Hodgins M
**Journal:** Cell Commun Adhes (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1080/cac.10.4-6.359.364](https://doi.org/10.1080/cac.10.4-6.359.364)

## Content

1. Cell Commun Adhes. 2003 Jul-Dec;10(4-6):359-64. doi:
10.1080/cac.10.4-6.359.364.

The effects of a mutant connexin 26 on epidermal differentiation.

Bakirtzis G(1), Jamieson S, Aasen T, Bryson S, Forrow S, Tetley L, Finbow M, 
Greenhalgh D, Hodgins M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Sciences and Molecular Pathology, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom. gb99k@clinmed.gla.ac.uk

To elucidate the mode of action of dominant mutant connexins in causing 
inherited skin diseases, transgenic mice were produced that express the true 
Vohwinkel syndrome-associated mutant Cx26 (D66H), from a keratin 10 promoter, 
specifically in the suprabasal epidermal keratinocytes. Following birth, the 
transgenic mice developed keratoderma similar to that of human carriers of Cx26 
(D66H). Expression of the transgene resulted in a loss of Cx26 and Cx30 at 
intercellular junctions of epidermal keratinocytes and accumulation of these 
connexins in the cytoplasm. Injection of primary mouse keratinocytes with 
Lucifer Yellow showed no difference in terms of dye spreading between transgenic 
and non transgenic keratinocytes in vitro. Expression of the mutant Cx26 (D66H) 
did not interfere with the formation of the epidermal water barrier during late 
embryonic development. Attempts to produce transgenic mice expressing the wild 
type form of Cx26 from the K10 promoter failed to produce viable animals 
although transgenic embryos were recovered at days 9 and 12 of gestation, 
suggesting that the transgene might be embryonic lethal.

DOI: 10.1080/cac.10.4-6.359.364
PMID: 14681042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]