---
reference_id: "PMID:23056495"
title: Anion-sensitive fluorophore identifies the Drosophila swell-activated chloride channel in a genome-wide RNA interference screen.
authors:
- Stotz SC
- Clapham DE
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046865
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Bestrophins
- "Chloride Channels/chemistry, deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Drosophila Proteins/chemistry, deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Drosophila melanogaster/cytology, genetics, metabolism"
- Genomics
- Humans
- Luminescent Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- RNA Interference
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anion-sensitive fluorophore identifies the Drosophila swell-activated chloride channel in a genome-wide RNA interference screen.
**Authors:** Stotz SC, Clapham DE
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0046865](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0046865)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46865. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046865. Epub 2012 Oct
4.

Anion-sensitive fluorophore identifies the Drosophila swell-activated chloride
channel in a genome-wide RNA interference screen.

Stotz SC(1), Clapham DE.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

When cells swell in hypo-osmotic solutions, chloride-selective ion channels
(Cl(swell)) activate to reduce intracellular osmolality and prevent catastrophic
cell rupture. Despite intensive efforts to assign a molecular identity to the
mammalian Cl(swell) channel, it remains unknown. In an unbiased genome-wide RNA
interference (RNAi) screen of Drosophila cells stably expressing an
anion-sensitive fluorescent indicator, we identify Bestrophin 1 (dBest1) as the
Drosophila Cl(swell) channel. Of the 23 screen hits with mammalian homologs and
predicted transmembrane domains, only RNAi specifically targeting dBest1
eliminated the Cl(swell) current (I(Clswell)). We further demonstrate the
essential contribution of dBest1 to Drosophila I(Clswell) with the introduction
of a human Bestrophin disease-associated mutation (W94C). Overexpression of the
W94C construct in Drosophila cells significantly reduced the endogenous
I(Clswell). We confirm that exogenous expression of dBest1 alone in human
embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells creates a clearly identifiable Drosophila-like
I(Clswell). In contrast, activation of mouse Bestrophin 2 (mBest2), the closest
mammalian ortholog of dBest1, is swell-insensitive. The first 64 residues of
dBest1 conferred swell activation to mBest2. The chimera, however, maintains
mBest2-like pore properties, strongly indicating that the Bestrophin protein
forms the Cl(swell) channel itself rather than functioning as an essential
auxiliary subunit. dBest1 is an anion channel clearly responsive to swell; this
activation depends upon its N-terminus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046865
PMCID: PMC3464265
PMID: 23056495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
