---
reference_id: "PMID:27484695"
title: "Targeted tissue perfusion versus macrocirculation-guided standard care in patients with septic shock (TARTARE-2S): study protocol and statistical analysis plan for a randomized controlled trial."
authors:
- Pettilä V
- Merz T
- Wilkman E
- Perner A
- Karlsson S
- Lange T
- Hästbacka J
- Hjortrup PB
- Kuitunen A
- Jakob SM
- Takala J
journal: Trials
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13063-016-1515-x
keywords:
- Arterial Pressure/drug effects
- Biomarkers/blood
- Cardiotonic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Cardiovascular Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Clinical Protocols
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Data Interpretation, Statistical"
- Europe
- Feasibility Studies
- "Fluid Therapy/adverse effects, mortality"
- Hemodynamics/drug effects
- Humans
- Lactic Acid/blood
- Microcirculation/drug effects
- "Models, Statistical"
- Prospective Studies
- Regional Blood Flow
- "Renal Replacement Therapy/adverse effects, mortality"
- Research Design
- "Respiration, Artificial/adverse effects, mortality"
- Sample Size
- "Shock, Septic/diagnosis, mortality, physiopathology, therapy"
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- Vasoconstrictor Agents/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted tissue perfusion versus macrocirculation-guided standard care in patients with septic shock (TARTARE-2S): study protocol and statistical analysis plan for a randomized controlled trial.
**Authors:** Pettilä V, Merz T, Wilkman E, Perner A, Karlsson S, Lange T, Hästbacka J, Hjortrup PB, Kuitunen A, Jakob SM, Takala J
**Journal:** Trials (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13063-016-1515-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13063-016-1515-x)

## Content

1. Trials. 2016 Aug 2;17:384. doi: 10.1186/s13063-016-1515-x.

Targeted tissue perfusion versus macrocirculation-guided standard care in
patients with septic shock (TARTARE-2S): study protocol and statistical analysis
plan for a randomized controlled trial.

Pettilä V(1)(2), Merz T(3), Wilkman E(4), Perner A(5)(6), Karlsson S(7), Lange
T(6)(8), Hästbacka J(4), Hjortrup PB(5), Kuitunen A(7), Jakob SM(3), Takala
J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Bern University Hospital
(Inselspital), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. ville.pettilae@insel.ch.
(2)Division of Intensive Care Medicine, Department of Perioperative, Intensive
Care and Pain Medicine, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland. ville.pettilae@insel.ch.
(3)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Bern University Hospital
(Inselspital), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Division of Intensive Care Medicine, Department of Perioperative, Intensive
Care and Pain Medicine, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Department of Intensive Care, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)CRIC, Center of Research for Intensive Care, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Department of Intensive Care, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(8)Section of Biostatistics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Septic shock has a 90-day mortality risk of up to 50 %. The
hemodynamic targets, including mean arterial pressure (MAP) are not based on
robust clinical data. Both severe hypotension and high doses of vasopressors may
be harmful. Hence, re-evaluation of hemodynamic targets in septic shock is
relevant.
METHODS/DESIGN: The targeted tissue perfusion versus macrocirculation-guided
standard care in patients with septic shock (TARTARE-2S) trial is a prospective,
two-parallel-group, randomized, open-label, multicenter trial with
assessor-blinded outcome evaluation. We will randomize at least 200 patients
with septic shock in four European intensive care units (ICUs) to test whether a
tissue perfusion-guided treatment strategy based on capillary refill time,
peripheral temperature, arterial lactate concentrations, and accepting lower MAP
levels, leads to a faster resolution of shock than macrocirculation
target-guided standard care. The primary outcome measure is days alive in
30 days with normal arterial blood lactate (first value of <2 mmol/L) and
without any inotropic or vasopressor agent. Secondary outcomes include
individual components of the primary outcome, days alive without renal
replacement, days alive without mechanical ventilation in 30 days, and new acute
kidney injury. The sample size enables detection of a 13.5-h difference in the
primary outcome with a type 1 error of 5 % and power of 80 %, assuming 25 %
mortality and a mean of 650 h (SD 30) among the 30-day survivors. After 150
included patients the statistician masked for allocation group will recalculate
the sample size potentially increasing the sample up to 300. The Data Safety and
Monitoring Board (DSMB) will review the safety data after 100 patients.
DISCUSSION: The TARTARE-2S trial will provide important clinical data on
treatment targets in septic shock, evaluating the impact of clinical tissue
perfusion-guided hemodynamic treatment on a surrogate outcome combining
resolution of shock (hyperlactatemia and vasopressors/inotropes), and 30-day
mortality.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02579525 . Registered on 19 October
2015.

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-016-1515-x
PMCID: PMC4971711
PMID: 27484695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
