---
reference_id: "PMID:28379967"
title: Isolation of dengue virus from the upper respiratory tract of four patients with dengue fever.
authors:
- Cheng NM
- Sy CL
- Chen BC
- Huang TS
- Lee SS
- Chen YS
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005520
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolation of dengue virus from the upper respiratory tract of four patients with dengue fever.
**Authors:** Cheng NM, Sy CL, Chen BC, Huang TS, Lee SS, Chen YS
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0005520](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0005520)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Apr 5;11(4):e0005520. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005520. eCollection 2017 Apr.

Isolation of dengue virus from the upper respiratory tract of four patients with 
dengue fever.

Cheng NM(1), Sy CL(1), Chen BC(2), Huang TS(2), Lee SS(1)(2)(3), Chen YS(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung 
Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Microbiology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Dengue fever is an important arboviral disease. The clinical 
manifestations vary from a mild non-specific febrile syndrome to severe 
life-threatening illness. The virus can usually be detected in the blood during 
the early stages of the disease. Dengue virus has also been found in isolated 
cases in the cerebrospinal fluid, urine, nasopharyngeal sections and saliva. In 
this report, we describe the isolation of dengue virus from the upper 
respiratory tract of four confirmed cases of dengue.
METHODS: We reviewed all laboratory reports of the isolation of dengue virus 
from respiratory specimens at the clinical microbiology laboratory of the 
Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital during 2007 to 2015. We then examined the 
medical records of the cases from whom the virus was isolated to determine their 
demographic characteristics, family contacts, clinical signs and symptoms, 
course of illness and laboratory findings.
RESULTS: Dengue virus was identified in four patients from a nasopharyngeal or 
throat culture. Two were classified as group A dengue (dengue without warning 
signs), one as group B (dengue with warning signs) and one as group C (severe 
dengue). All had respiratory symptoms. Half had family members with similar 
respiratory symptoms during the period of their illnesses. All of the patients 
recovered uneventfully.
CONCLUSIONS: The isolation of dengue virus from respiratory specimens of 
patients with cough, rhinorrhea and nasal congestion, although rare, raises the 
possibility that the virus is capable of transmission by the aerosol route among 
close contacts. This concept is supported by studies that show that the virus 
can replicate in cultures of respiratory epithelium and can be transmitted 
through mucocutaneous exposure to blood from infected patients. However, current 
evidence is insufficient to prove the hypothesis of transmission through the 
respiratory route. Further studies will be needed to determine the frequency of 
respiratory colonization, viable virus titers in respiratory secretions and 
molecular genetic evidence of transmission among close contacts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005520
PMCID: PMC5403165
PMID: 28379967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.