---
reference_id: "PMID:35128833"
title: Prevalence and determinants of iron deficiency in cardiac amyloidosis.
authors:
- Jobbé-Duval A
- Bézard M
- Moutereau S
- Kharoubi M
- Oghina S
- Zaroui A
- Galat A
- Chalard C
- Hugon-Vallet E
- Lemonnier F
- Eyharts D
- Poulot E
- Fanen P
- Funalot B
- Molinier-Frenkel V
- Audard V
- Hittinger L
- Delbarre MA
- Teiger E
- Damy T
journal: ESC Heart Fail
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ehf2.13818
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and determinants of iron deficiency in cardiac amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Jobbé-Duval A, Bézard M, Moutereau S, Kharoubi M, Oghina S, Zaroui A, Galat A, Chalard C, Hugon-Vallet E, Lemonnier F, Eyharts D, Poulot E, Fanen P, Funalot B, Molinier-Frenkel V, Audard V, Hittinger L, Delbarre MA, Teiger E, Damy T
**Journal:** ESC Heart Fail (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ehf2.13818](https://doi.org/10.1002/ehf2.13818)

## Content

1. ESC Heart Fail. 2022 Apr;9(2):1314-1327. doi: 10.1002/ehf2.13818. Epub 2022
Feb  6.

Prevalence and determinants of iron deficiency in cardiac amyloidosis.

Jobbé-Duval A(1), Bézard M(2), Moutereau S(3), Kharoubi M(2), Oghina S(2), 
Zaroui A(2), Galat A(2), Chalard C(2), Hugon-Vallet E(1), Lemonnier F(4), 
Eyharts D(2), Poulot E(5), Fanen P(6), Funalot B(6), Molinier-Frenkel V(7), 
Audard V(8), Hittinger L(2), Delbarre MA(2), Teiger E(2), Damy T(2).

Author information:
(1)Heart Failure and Transplant Department, 'Louis Pradel' Cardiologic Hospital, 
Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(2)Department of Cardiology, French Referral Centre for Cardiac Amyloidosis, 
Cardiogen Network, GRC Amyloid Research Institute, DHU A-TVB, InsermU955, Henri 
Mondor Teaching Hospital, APHP, 51 Avenue Marechal de Lattre de Tassigny, 
Creteil, 94000, France.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Henri Mondor Teaching Hospital, APHP, Creteil, 
France.
(4)Department of Haematology, Henri Mondor Teaching Hospital, APHP, Creteil, 
France.
(5)Department of Pathology, Henri Mondor Teaching Hospital, APHP, Creteil, 
France.
(6)Department of Genetics, Henri Mondor Teaching Hospital, APHP, Creteil, 
France.
(7)Department of Immunobiology, Henri Mondor Teaching Hospital, APHP, Creteil, 
France.
(8)Department of Nephrology, Henri Mondor Teaching Hospital, APHP, Creteil, 
France.

AIMS: Iron deficiency (ID) is common in patient with chronic heart failure (HF) 
and has been widely studied. In contrast, data concerning ID in cardiac 
amyloidosis (CA) are limited. Amyloidosis is a severe and fatal systemic 
disease, characterized by an accumulation of amyloid fibrils in various 
tissues/organs, including nerves, kidneys, gastrointestinal tract, and heart. 
Amyloid deposits in the heart eventually cause HF. The main subtypes of CA are 
light chain (AL), hereditary transthyretin (ATTRv), and wild-type transthyretin 
(ATTRwt). We performed this study to determine the prevalence, clinical outcome 
(all-cause mortality), and determinants of ID among the three main subtypes of 
CA.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Iron deficiency status were analysed in 816 CA patients 
enrolled at the French Referral Centre for Cardiac Amyloidosis: 271 (33%) had 
AL, 164 (20%) ATTRv, and 381 (47%) ATTRwt. ID affected 49% of CA patients, 45% 
with AL, 58% with ATTRv, and 48% with ATTRwt. We identified ATTR status (ATTRv 
P = 0.003, ATTRwt P = 0.037), diabetes (P = 0.003), aspirin treatment 
(P = 0.009), haemoglobin levels (P = 0.006), and altered global longitudinal 
strain (P = 0.02) as independent ID determinants. There is no difference in 
all-cause mortality considering ID status.
CONCLUSIONS: Iron deficiency is common in patients with CA, irrespective of the 
subtype. Patients seem more likely to have ID if diagnosed with ATTR, if 
diabetic, and/or treated with aspirin. In CA, the benefit of intravenous iron 
therapy, for ID, on morbidity and mortality needs further study.

© 2022 The Authors. ESC Heart Failure published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1002/ehf2.13818
PMCID: PMC8934992
PMID: 35128833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T.D. has received grant and/or consultant fees 
from Pfizer, Alnylam, Vifor, Akcea, Novartis, Resmed, Bayer, Astra‐Zeneca, 
Sanofi‐Aventis. A.J.D. has received grant and/or consultant fees from Novartis, 
Amicus, Sanofi‐Genzyme, Boehringer Ingelheim.