---
reference_id: "PMID:29773863"
title: Low prevalence of argininosuccinate lyase deficiency among inherited urea cycle disorders in Korea.
authors:
- Kim D
- Ko JM
- Kim YM
- Seo GH
- Kim GH
- Lee BH
- Yoo HW
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-018-0467-2
keywords:
- "Argininosuccinic Aciduria/epidemiology, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Prevalence
- Republic of Korea/epidemiology
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low prevalence of argininosuccinate lyase deficiency among inherited urea cycle disorders in Korea.
**Authors:** Kim D, Ko JM, Kim YM, Seo GH, Kim GH, Lee BH, Yoo HW
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-018-0467-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-018-0467-2)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2018 Jul;63(8):911-917. doi: 10.1038/s10038-018-0467-2. Epub 2018
 May 17.

Low prevalence of argininosuccinate lyase deficiency among inherited urea cycle
disorders in Korea.

Kim D(1), Ko JM(2), Kim YM(1), Seo GH(1), Kim GH(3), Lee BH(4)(5), Yoo HW(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.
(3)Medical Genetics Center, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. bhlee@amc.seoul.kr.
(5)Medical Genetics Center, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. bhlee@amc.seoul.kr.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. hwyoo@amc.seoul.kr.
(7)Medical Genetics Center, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. hwyoo@amc.seoul.kr.

Argininosuccinic aciduria (ASA), which is considered to be the second most
common urea cycle disorder (UCD), is caused by an argininosuccinate lyase
deficiency and is biochemically characterized by elevation of argininosuccinic
acid and arginine deficiency. In addition to hyperammonemia, other
characteristic features of ASA include hepatic fibrosis, hypertension,
neurocognitive deficiencies, and trichorrhexis nodosa. Herein, we
retrospectively reviewed the clinical findings, biochemical profiles, and
genotypic characteristics of five Korean patients with ASA, who showed typical
phenotypes and biochemical findings of the disease. Molecular analysis of these
patients revealed six novel ASL mutations. Next, we investigated the prevalence
of all types of UCDs in Korea. Of note, over a two decade periods, ASA was only
detected in 6.3% of patients with a UCD, which made it the fourth most common
UCD in Korea. In comparison with Caucasians, in whom ASA is the second most
common UCD, ASA is comparatively rare in East Asian populations, including
Japanese and Koreans. These findings suggest the possibility of geographic
variation in UCDs among ethnic groups.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-018-0467-2
PMID: 29773863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
