---
reference_id: "PMID:14523047"
title: A hypermorphic IkappaBalpha mutation is associated with autosomal dominant anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia and T cell immunodeficiency.
authors:
- Courtois G
- Smahi A
- Reichenbach J
- Döffinger R
- Cancrini C
- Bonnet M
- Puel A
- Chable-Bessia C
- Yamaoka S
- Feinberg J
- Dupuis-Girod S
- Bodemer C
- Livadiotti S
- Novelli F
- Rossi P
- Fischer A
- Israël A
- Munnich A
- Le Deist F
- Casanova JL
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1172/JCI18714
keywords:
- Child
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Humans
- I-kappa B Kinase
- I-kappa B Proteins/genetics
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- NF-kappa B/physiology
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- "Receptor-CD3 Complex, Antigen, T-Cell/physiology"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A hypermorphic IkappaBalpha mutation is associated with autosomal dominant anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia and T cell immunodeficiency.
**Authors:** Courtois G, Smahi A, Reichenbach J, Döffinger R, Cancrini C, Bonnet M, Puel A, Chable-Bessia C, Yamaoka S, Feinberg J, Dupuis-Girod S, Bodemer C, Livadiotti S, Novelli F, Rossi P, Fischer A, Israël A, Munnich A, Le Deist F, Casanova JL
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI18714](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI18714)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2003 Oct;112(7):1108-15. doi: 10.1172/JCI18714.

A hypermorphic IkappaBalpha mutation is associated with autosomal dominant 
anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia and T cell immunodeficiency.

Courtois G(1), Smahi A, Reichenbach J, Döffinger R, Cancrini C, Bonnet M, Puel 
A, Chable-Bessia C, Yamaoka S, Feinberg J, Dupuis-Girod S, Bodemer C, Livadiotti 
S, Novelli F, Rossi P, Fischer A, Israël A, Munnich A, Le Deist F, Casanova JL.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Biologie Moléculaire de l'Expression Génique, Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique URA 2582, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2003 Oct;112(7):983-5. doi: 10.1172/JCI19960.

X-linked anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (XL-EDA-ID) is 
caused by hypomorphic mutations in the gene encoding NEMO/IKKgamma, the 
regulatory subunit of the IkappaB kinase (IKK) complex. IKK normally 
phosphorylates the IkappaB-inhibitors of NF-kappaB at specific serine residues, 
thereby promoting their ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome. This 
allows NF-kappaB complexes to translocate into the nucleus where they activate 
their target genes. Here, we describe an autosomal-dominant (AD) form of EDA-ID 
associated with a heterozygous missense mutation at serine 32 of IkappaBalpha. 
This mutation is gain-of-function, as it enhances the inhibitory capacity of 
IkappaBalpha by preventing its phosphorylation and degradation, and results in 
impaired NF-kappaB activation. The developmental, immunologic, and infectious 
phenotypes associated with hypomorphic NEMO and hypermorphic IKBA mutations 
largely overlap and include EDA, impaired cellular responses to ligands of TIR 
(TLR-ligands, IL-1beta, and IL-18), and TNFR (TNF-alpha, LTalpha1/beta2, and 
CD154) superfamily members and severe bacterial diseases. However, AD-EDA-ID but 
not XL-EDA-ID is associated with a severe and unique T cell immunodeficiency. 
Despite a marked blood lymphocytosis, there are no detectable memory T cells in 
vivo, and naive T cells do not respond to CD3-TCR activation in vitro. Our 
report highlights both the diversity of genotypes associated with EDA-ID and the 
diversity of immunologic phenotypes associated with mutations in different 
components of the NF-kappaB signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI18714
PMCID: PMC198529
PMID: 14523047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]