---
reference_id: "PMID:37215603"
title: Advances in symptomatic therapy for left ventricular non-compaction in children.
authors:
- Li D
- Wang C
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1147362
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in symptomatic therapy for left ventricular non-compaction in children.
**Authors:** Li D, Wang C
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2023.1147362](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2023.1147362)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2023 May 4;11:1147362. doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1147362. 
eCollection 2023.

Advances in symptomatic therapy for left ventricular non-compaction in children.

Li D(1), Wang C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shenyang, China.

Left ventricular non-compaction is a complex cardiomyopathy and the third 
largest childhood cardiomyopathy, for which limited knowledge is available. Both 
pathogenesis and prognosis are still under investigation. Currently, no 
effective treatment strategy exists to reduce its incidence or severity, and 
symptomatic treatment is the only clinical treatment strategy. Treatment 
strategies are constantly explored in clinical practice, and some progress has 
been made in coping with the corresponding symptoms because the prognosis of 
children with left ventricular non-compaction is usually poor if there are 
complications. In this review, we summarized and discussed the coping methods 
for different left ventricular non-compaction symptoms.

© 2023 Li and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2023.1147362
PMCID: PMC10192632
PMID: 37215603

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.