---
reference_id: "PMID:12354394"
title: BMP signaling is required locally to pattern the dorsal telencephalic midline.
authors:
- Hébert JM
- Mishina Y
- McConnell SK
journal: Neuron
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00900-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BMP signaling is required locally to pattern the dorsal telencephalic midline.
**Authors:** Hébert JM, Mishina Y, McConnell SK
**Journal:** Neuron (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00900-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00900-5)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2002 Sep 12;35(6):1029-41. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00900-5.

BMP signaling is required locally to pattern the dorsal telencephalic midline.

Hébert JM(1), Mishina Y, McConnell SK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, 385 Serra Mall, CA 
94305, USA.

BMPs have been proposed to pattern the medial-lateral axis of the telencephalon 
in a concentration-dependent manner, thus helping to subdivide the embryonic 
telencephalon into distinct forebrain regions. Using a CRE/loxP genetic 
approach, we tested this hypothesis by disrupting the Bmpr1a gene in the 
telencephalon. In mutants, BMP signaling was compromised throughout the dorsal 
telencephalon, but only the most dorsalmedial derivative, the choroid plexus, 
failed to be specified or differentiate. Choroid plexus precursors remained 
proliferative and did not adopt the fate of their lateral telencephalic 
neighbors. These results demonstrate that BMP signaling is required for the 
formation of the most dorsal telencephalic derivative, the choroid plexus, and 
that BMP signaling plays an essential role in locally patterning the dorsal 
midline. Our data fail to support a more global, concentration-dependent role in 
specifying telencephalic cell fates.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00900-5
PMID: 12354394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]