---
reference_id: "PMID:27473171"
title: Altered gut microbiota in Rett syndrome.
authors:
- Strati F
- Cavalieri D
- Albanese D
- De Felice C
- Donati C
- Hayek J
- Jousson O
- Leoncini S
- Pindo M
- Renzi D
- Rizzetto L
- Stefanini I
- Calabrò A
- De Filippo C
journal: Microbiome
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s40168-016-0185-y
keywords:
- "Bacteria/classification, genetics"
- Biodiversity
- Constipation/pathology
- Dysbiosis/microbiology
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
- "Fungi/classification, genetics"
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome/physiology
- Humans
- Inflammation/pathology
- Intestines/microbiology
- Metabolomics/methods
- Metagenomics/methods
- Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2/genetics
- "Rett Syndrome/genetics, microbiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered gut microbiota in Rett syndrome.
**Authors:** Strati F, Cavalieri D, Albanese D, De Felice C, Donati C, Hayek J, Jousson O, Leoncini S, Pindo M, Renzi D, Rizzetto L, Stefanini I, Calabrò A, De Filippo C
**Journal:** Microbiome (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40168-016-0185-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-016-0185-y)

## Content

1. Microbiome. 2016 Jul 30;4(1):41. doi: 10.1186/s40168-016-0185-y.

Altered gut microbiota in Rett syndrome.

Strati F(1)(2), Cavalieri D(1)(3), Albanese D(1), De Felice C(4), Donati C(1),
Hayek J(5), Jousson O(2), Leoncini S(5), Pindo M(6), Renzi D(7), Rizzetto L(1),
Stefanini I(1), Calabrò A(7), De Filippo C(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Biology, Research and Innovation Centre,
Fondazione Edmund Mach, Via E. Mach 1, 38010, San Michele all' Adige, Italy.
(2)Centre for Integrative Biology, University of Trento, Via Sommarive 9, 38123,
Trento, Italy.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Florence, Via Madonna del Piano 6,
50019, Sesto Fiorentino, Florence, Italy.
(4)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital AOUS, Viale Bracci 16,
53100, Siena, Italy.
(5)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, University Hospital AOUS, Viale Bracci 16, 53100,
Siena, Italy.
(6)Department of Genomics and Biology of Fruit Crop, Research and Innovation
Centre, Fondazione Edmund Mach, Via E. Mach 1, 38010, San Michele all' Adige,
Italy.
(7)Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, Gastroenterology
Unit, University of Florence, Viale Morgagni 40, 50139, Florence, Italy.
(8)Institute of Biometeorology (IBIMET), National Research Council (CNR), Via
Giovanni Caproni 8, I-50145, Florence, Italy. c.de.filippo@ibimet.cnr.it.

BACKGROUND: The human gut microbiota directly affects human health, and its
alteration can lead to gastrointestinal abnormalities and inflammation. Rett
syndrome (RTT), a progressive neurological disorder mainly caused by mutations
in MeCP2 gene, is commonly associated with gastrointestinal dysfunctions and
constipation, suggesting a link between RTT's gastrointestinal abnormalities and
the gut microbiota. The aim of this study was to evaluate the bacterial and
fungal gut microbiota in a cohort of RTT subjects integrating clinical,
metabolomics and metagenomics data to understand if changes in the gut
microbiota of RTT subjects could be associated with gastrointestinal
abnormalities and inflammatory status.
RESULTS: Our findings revealed the occurrence of an intestinal sub-inflammatory
status in RTT subjects as measured by the elevated values of faecal calprotectin
and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. We showed that, overall, RTT subjects
harbour bacterial and fungal microbiota altered in terms of relative abundances
from those of healthy controls, with a reduced microbial richness and dominated
by microbial taxa belonging to Bifidobacterium, several Clostridia (among which
Anaerostipes, Clostridium XIVa, Clostridium XIVb) as well as
Erysipelotrichaceae, Actinomyces, Lactobacillus, Enterococcus, Eggerthella,
Escherichia/Shigella and the fungal genus Candida. We further observed that
alterations of the gut microbiota do not depend on the constipation status of
RTT subjects and that this dysbiotic microbiota produced altered short chain
fatty acids profiles.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated for the first time that RTT is associated with a
dysbiosis of both the bacterial and fungal component of the gut microbiota,
suggesting that impairments of MeCP2 functioning favour the establishment of a
microbial community adapted to the costive gastrointestinal niche of RTT
subjects. The altered production of short chain fatty acids associated with this
microbiota might reinforce the constipation status of RTT subjects and
contribute to RTT gastrointestinal physiopathology.

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-016-0185-y
PMCID: PMC4967335
PMID: 27473171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
