---
reference_id: "PMID:39007044"
title: Anterior STEMI in a 25-year-old with Cogan syndrome.
authors:
- Takla A
- Eid F
- Eid MM
- Joshi A
- Abtahian F
- Cheng A
- Feitell S
journal: J Cardiol Cases
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jccase.2024.02.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anterior STEMI in a 25-year-old with Cogan syndrome.
**Authors:** Takla A, Eid F, Eid MM, Joshi A, Abtahian F, Cheng A, Feitell S
**Journal:** J Cardiol Cases (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jccase.2024.02.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jccase.2024.02.014)

## Content

1. J Cardiol Cases. 2024 Mar 5;30(1):9-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jccase.2024.02.014. 
eCollection 2024 Jul.

Anterior STEMI in a 25-year-old with Cogan syndrome.

Takla A(1), Eid F(2), Eid MM(3), Joshi A(3), Abtahian F(3), Cheng A(4), Feitell 
S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Rochester General Hospital, Rochester, NY, 
USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Unity Hospital, Rochester, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Rochester General Hospital, Rochester, 
NY, USA.
(4)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Rochester General Hospital, Rochester, 
NY, USA.

Cogan syndrome (CS) is a chronic inflammatory disorder primarily affecting young 
adults. It is characterized by interstitial keratitis, vestibuloauditory 
dysfunction, and, rarely, systemic vasculitis and aortitis. In this case report, 
we present a rare instance of a young male with anterior ST-elevation myocardial 
infarction in the context of aneurysmal coronary vessels and proximal occlusion 
of the left anterior descending artery. This case underscores the importance of 
recognizing cardiac risk factors in the setting of CS, as they can be 
life-threatening. Regular follow up is necessary, especially for patients 
showing signs of vasculitis or experiencing cardiac symptoms. A 
multidisciplinary approach to management can help optimize the prognosis for 
these complex patients.
LEARNING OBJECTIVE: Comprehend Cogan syndrome (CS): Grasp the clinical 
manifestations and potential cardiovascular complications of CS. Diagnostic 
approach in CS: Differentiate cardiac symptoms in CS from typical coronary 
diseases, emphasizing the role of heart catheterization. Multidisciplinary 
management: Recognize the importance of integrating rheumatologists, 
cardiologists, and surgeons for optimal CS patient outcomes.

© 2024 Japanese College of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights are 
reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar 
technologies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jccase.2024.02.014
PMCID: PMC11245749
PMID: 39007044