---
reference_id: "PMID:34477998"
title: Simple Measurement of IgA Predicts Immunity and Mortality in Ataxia-Telangiectasia.
authors:
- Zielen S
- Duecker RP
- Woelke S
- Donath H
- Bakhtiar S
- Buecker A
- Kreyenberg H
- Huenecke S
- Bader P
- Mahlaoui N
- Ehl S
- El-Helou SM
- Pietrucha B
- Plebani A
- van der Flier M
- van Aerde K
- Kilic SS
- Reda SM
- Kostyuchenko L
- McDermott E
- Galal N
- Pignata C
- Pérez JLS
- Laws HJ
- Niehues T
- Kutukculer N
- Seidel MG
- Marques L
- Ciznar P
- Edgar JDM
- Soler-Palacín P
- von Bernuth H
- Krueger R
- Meyts I
- Baumann U
- Kanariou M
- Grimbacher B
- Hauck F
- Graf D
- Granado LIG
- Prader S
- Reisli I
- Slatter M
- Rodríguez-Gallego C
- Arkwright PD
- Bethune C
- Deripapa E
- Sharapova SO
- Lehmberg K
- Davies EG
- Schuetz C
- Kindle G
- Schubert R
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-021-01090-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/immunology, mortality"
- B-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- "IgA Deficiency/immunology, mortality"
- "IgG Deficiency/immunology, mortality"
- Immunoglobulin A/blood
- Immunoglobulin G/blood
- Immunoglobulin M/blood
- Infant
- Lymphocyte Count
- Male
- Middle Aged
- T-Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Simple Measurement of IgA Predicts Immunity and Mortality in Ataxia-Telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Zielen S, Duecker RP, Woelke S, Donath H, Bakhtiar S, Buecker A, Kreyenberg H, Huenecke S, Bader P, Mahlaoui N, Ehl S, El-Helou SM, Pietrucha B, Plebani A, van der Flier M, van Aerde K, Kilic SS, Reda SM, Kostyuchenko L, McDermott E, Galal N, Pignata C, Pérez JLS, Laws HJ, Niehues T, Kutukculer N, Seidel MG, Marques L, Ciznar P, Edgar JDM, Soler-Palacín P, von Bernuth H, Krueger R, Meyts I, Baumann U, Kanariou M, Grimbacher B, Hauck F, Graf D, Granado LIG, Prader S, Reisli I, Slatter M, Rodríguez-Gallego C, Arkwright PD, Bethune C, Deripapa E, Sharapova SO, Lehmberg K, Davies EG, Schuetz C, Kindle G, Schubert R
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-021-01090-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-021-01090-8)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2021 Nov;41(8):1878-1892. doi: 10.1007/s10875-021-01090-8.
Epub  2021 Sep 3.

Simple Measurement of IgA Predicts Immunity and Mortality in 
Ataxia-Telangiectasia.

Zielen S(1), Duecker RP(2), Woelke S(1), Donath H(1), Bakhtiar S(3), Buecker 
A(1), Kreyenberg H(3), Huenecke S(3), Bader P(3), Mahlaoui N(4), Ehl S(5), 
El-Helou SM(5)(6)(7), Pietrucha B(8), Plebani A(9), van der Flier M(10), van 
Aerde K(11), Kilic SS(12), Reda SM(13), Kostyuchenko L(14), McDermott E(15), 
Galal N(16), Pignata C(17), Pérez JLS(18), Laws HJ(19), Niehues T(20), 
Kutukculer N(21), Seidel MG(22), Marques L(23), Ciznar P(24), Edgar JDM(25), 
Soler-Palacín P(26), von Bernuth H(27)(28)(29), Krueger R(27), Meyts I(30), 
Baumann U(31), Kanariou M(32), Grimbacher B(5)(6)(33), Hauck F(34), Graf D(35), 
Granado LIG(36), Prader S(37), Reisli I(38), Slatter M(39), Rodríguez-Gallego 
C(40), Arkwright PD(41), Bethune C(42), Deripapa E(43), Sharapova SO(44), 
Lehmberg K(45), Davies EG(46), Schuetz C(47), Kindle G(5)(48), Schubert R(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergology, Pulmonology and Cystic Fibrosis, Department for 
Children and Adolescents, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Division of Allergology, Pulmonology and Cystic Fibrosis, Department for 
Children and Adolescents, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany. 
RuthPia.Duecker@kgu.de.
(3)Division for Stem Cell Transplantation, Immunology and Intensive Care Unit, 
Department for Children and Adolescents, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany.
(4)Pediatric Immunology-Hematology and Rheumatology Unit, French National 
Reference Center for Primary Immune Deficiencies (CEREDIH), Necker Children's 
University Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, 
France.
(5)Institute for Immunodeficiency, Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency (CCI), 
Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(6)RESIST - Cluster of Excellence 2155 To Hanover Medical School, Satellite 
Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.
(8)Department of Immunology, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Av. 
Dzieci Polskich 20, 04-730, Warsaw, Poland.
(9)Pediatrics Clinic and Institute for Molecular Medicine A. Nocivelli, 
Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia and 
ASST-Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(10)Section Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Laboratory of Medical Immunology, 
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Amalia's Children Hospital, Radboud University 
Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(12)Department of Pediatric Immunology and Rheumatology, the School of Medicine, 
Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Ain 
Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.
(14)Center of Pediatric Immunology, Western Ukrainian Specialized Children's 
Medical Centre, Lviv, Ukraine.
(15)Clinical Immunology and Allergy Unit, Nottingham University Hospitals, 
Nottingham, UK.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Cairo University Specialized Pediatric Hospital, 
Cairo, Egypt.
(17)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Section of Pediatrics, 
Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
(18)Infectious Diseases and Immunodeficiencies Unit, Service of Pediatrics, 
Hospital Universitario Virgen de Las Nieves, Granada, Spain.
(19)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, 
Medical Faculty, Center of Child and Adolescent Health, Heinrich-Heine 
University, Duesseldorf, Germany.
(20)Centre for Child and Adolescent Health, Helios Klinikum Krefeld, Krefeld, 
Germany.
(21)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Immunology, Ege University, 
Izmir, Turkey.
(22)Research Unit for Pediatric Hematology and Immunology, Division of Pediatric 
Hemato-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical 
University Graz, Graz, Austria.
(23)Pediatric Department, Infectious Diseases and Immunodeficiencies Unit, Porto 
Hospital Center, Porto, Portugal.
(24)Pediatric Department, Faculty of Medicine, Children University Hospital in 
Bratislava, Comenius University in Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(25)The Royal Hospitals & Queen's University, Belfast, UK.
(26)Pediatric Infectious Diseases and Immunodeficiencies Unit, Vall D'Hebron 
Research Institute, Hospital Universitari Vall D'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(27)Department of Pediatric Pneumology, Immunology and Intensive Care, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(28)Department of Immunology, Labor Berlin Charité - Vivantes GmbH, Berlin, 
Germany.
(29)Berlin Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(30)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, and the Laboratory 
for Inborn Errors of Immunity, Department of Microbiology, Immunology and 
Transplantation, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(31)Department of Paediatric Pulmonology, Allergy and Neonatology, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(32)Department of Immunology and Histocompatibility, Centre for Primary 
Immunodeficiencies, "Aghia Sophia" Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(33)DZIF-German Center for Infection Research, Satellite Center Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany; Centre for Integrative Biological Signalling Studies, 
Albert-Ludwigs University, Freiburg, Germany.
(34)Department of Pediatrics, Dr. Von Hauner Children's Hospital, University 
Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany.
(35)MVZ Dr. Reising-Ackermann Und Kollegen, Leipzig, Germany.
(36)Primary Immunodeficiencies Unit, Pediatrics, Hospital 12 Octubre, 
Complutense University School of Medicine, Madrid, Spain.
(37)Division of Immunology and Children's Research Center, University Children's 
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(38)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Immunology and Allergy, 
Meram Medical Faculty, Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey.
(39)Primary Immunodeficiency Group, Paediatric Immunology and Haematopoietic 
Stem Cell Transplantation, Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Great 
North Childrens' Hospital, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(40)Department of Immunology, Dr. Negrin University Hospital of Gran Canaria, 
University Fernando Pessoa Canarias, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.
(41)Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, University of 
Manchester and Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(42)University Hospital Plymouth NHS Trust, Plymouth, UK.
(43)National Medical Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and 
Immunology, Moscow, Russia.
(44)Research Department, Belarusian Research Center for Pediatric Oncology, 
Hematology and Immunology, Minsk region, Minsk, Belarus.
(45)Division for Pediatric Stem Cell Transplantation and Immunology, Clinic for 
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(46)Great Ormond Street Hospital and UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child 
Health, London, UK.
(47)Department of Pediatrics, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, 
Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(48)FREEZE Biobank, Center for Biobanking, Medical Center and Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Breisacher Str. 115, 79106, Freiburg, Germany.

Patients with ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) suffer from progressive cerebellar 
ataxia, immunodeficiency, respiratory failure, and cancer susceptibility. From a 
clinical point of view, A-T patients with IgA deficiency show more symptoms and 
may have a poorer prognosis. In this study, we analyzed mortality and immunity 
data of 659 A-T patients with regard to IgA deficiency collected from the 
European Society for Immunodeficiencies (ESID) registry and from 66 patients 
with classical A-T who attended at the Frankfurt Goethe-University between 2012 
and 2018. We studied peripheral B- and T-cell subsets and T-cell repertoire of 
the Frankfurt cohort and survival rates of all A-T patients in the ESID 
registry. Patients with A-T have significant alterations in their lymphocyte 
phenotypes. All subsets (CD3, CD4, CD8, CD19, CD4/CD45RA, and CD8/CD45RA) were 
significantly diminished compared to standard values. Patients with IgA 
deficiency (n = 35) had significantly lower lymphocyte counts compared to A-T 
patients without IgA deficiency (n = 31) due to a further decrease of naïve CD4 
T-cells, central memory CD4 cells, and regulatory T-cells. Although both patient 
groups showed affected TCR-ß repertoires compared to controls, no differences 
could be detected between patients with and without IgA deficiency. Overall 
survival of patients with IgA deficiency was significantly diminished. For the 
first time, our data show that patients with IgA deficiency have significantly 
lower lymphocyte counts and subsets, which are accompanied with reduced 
survival, compared to A-T patients without IgA deficiency. IgA, a simple 
surrogate marker, is indicating the poorest prognosis for classical A-T 
patients. Both non-interventional clinical trials were registered at 
clinicaltrials.gov 2012 (Susceptibility to infections in ataxia-telangiectasia; 
NCT02345135) and 2017 (Susceptibility to Infections, tumor risk and liver 
disease in patients with ataxia-telangiectasia; NCT03357978).

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-021-01090-8
PMCID: PMC8604875
PMID: 34477998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have the following conflicts to 
declare: Dr. Zielen reports honoraria from CSL-Behring, AstraZeneca; 
Sanofi-Aventis GmbH; Boehringer Ingelheim; Stallergenes Greer; Allergy 
Therapeutics, bene-Arzneimittel GmbH; Vifor Pharma GmbH; Novartis AG; 
GlaxoSmithKline GmbH; ALK-Abelló Arzneimittel GmbH; Lofarma GmbH, IMS Health 
GmbH & Co; and Biotest Pharma GmbH, outside the submitted work. Dr. Ehl reports 
grants from UCB, during the conduct of the study. Dr. Sabine M. El-Helou was 
funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), by the European 
Society for Immunodeficiencies (ESID), by the Care-for-Rare Foundation, by 
PROimmun e.V., and by a restricted grant from LFB, CSL Behring, and Grifols. For 
GAIN and RESIST, she was funded by the BMBF. Dr. Kindle reports grants from ESID 
(European Society for Immunodeficiencies) and grants from BMBF (German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research), during the conduct of the study. Dr. van 
Aerde reports grants from Baxter, during the conduct of the study. Dr. Laws 
reports personal fees from Shire; Roche; Novonordisk; Pfizer; Csl Behring, 
outside the submitted work. Dr. Niehues reports honoraria from uptodate.com; 
travelling costs from PENTA and JIR cohorts (Padua, Italy; Lausanne 
Switzerland), up to 2017 from PPTA (plasma protein therapeutics association). 
Dr. Seidel reports personal fees from Shire [Hypogammaglobulinemia (Subcutaneous 
IgG, hyaluronic acid, immune globulin (human))], outside the submitted work. Dr. 
Meyts reports grants from CSL Behring, outside the submitted work. IM is a 
senior clinical investigator at FWO Vlaanderen (supported by CSL Behring Chair 
of Primary Immunodeficiencies, by a KU Leuven C1 Grant C16/18/007, by a VIB GC 
PID Grant, by a FWO Grants G0C8517N; and G0E8420N and by the Jeffrey Modell 
Foundation. IM is a recipient of a ERC-StG MORE2ADA2. This work is supported by 
ERN-RITA. Dr. Grimbacher reports grants from DZIF, DFG, BMBF, Fritz Thyssen 
Stiftung, Shire/Baxalta, Merck, BMS, Novartis, CSL Behring, personal fees from 
Janssen Cilag, Novartis, during the conduct of the study, outside the submitted 
work. Dr. Schubert reports grants from A-T Children’s Project, DFG, 
SPARKS–Action for A-T, Starke Lunge Foundation, personal fees from Biotest 
Pharma GmbH and Vifor Pharma Deutschland GmbH, outside the submitted work. The 
other authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.