---
reference_id: "PMID:37142601"
title: Genomic mutation landscape of skin cancers from DNA repair-deficient xeroderma pigmentosum patients.
authors:
- Yurchenko AA
- Rajabi F
- Braz-Petta T
- Fassihi H
- Lehmann A
- Nishigori C
- Wang J
- Padioleau I
- Gunbin K
- Panunzi L
- Morice-Picard F
- Laplante P
- Robert C
- Kannouche PL
- Menck CFM
- Sarasin A
- Nikolaev SI
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-38311-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum/pathology
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
- DNA Repair/genetics
- Mutation
- Skin Neoplasms/genetics
- Genomics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic mutation landscape of skin cancers from DNA repair-deficient xeroderma pigmentosum patients.
**Authors:** Yurchenko AA, Rajabi F, Braz-Petta T, Fassihi H, Lehmann A, Nishigori C, Wang J, Padioleau I, Gunbin K, Panunzi L, Morice-Picard F, Laplante P, Robert C, Kannouche PL, Menck CFM, Sarasin A, Nikolaev SI
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-38311-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-38311-0)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 May 4;14(1):2561. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-38311-0.

Genomic mutation landscape of skin cancers from DNA repair-deficient xeroderma 
pigmentosum patients.

Yurchenko AA(#)(1), Rajabi F(#)(1), Braz-Petta T(2), Fassihi H(3), Lehmann 
A(3)(4), Nishigori C(5), Wang J(1), Padioleau I(1), Gunbin K(1), Panunzi L(1), 
Morice-Picard F(6), Laplante P(1), Robert C(1)(7), Kannouche PL(8), Menck 
CFM(9), Sarasin A(8), Nikolaev SI(10).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U981, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Université Paris Saclay, 
Villejuif, France.
(2)Departamento de Biologia Celular e Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio 
Grande do Norte, Av. Senador Salgado Filho, s/n, Natal, 59078-970, Brazil.
(3)National Xeroderma Pigmentosum Service, Department of Photodermatology, St 
John's Institute of Dermatology, Guy's and St Thomas' Foundation Trust, London, 
SE1 7EH, UK.
(4)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, 
BN1 9RQ, UK.
(5)Division of Dermatology, Department of Internal Related, Kobe University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
(6)Service de Dermatologie, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy and Paris-Saclay University, 
Villejuif, France.
(8)CNRS UMR9019 Genome Integrity and Cancers, Institut Gustave Roussy, 
Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(9)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of 
Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(10)INSERM U981, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Université Paris Saclay, 
Villejuif, France. sergey.nikolaev@gustaveroussy.fr.
(#)Contributed equally

Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is a genetic disorder caused by mutations in genes of 
the Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER) pathway (groups A-G) or in Translesion 
Synthesis DNA polymerase η (V). XP is associated with an increased skin cancer 
risk, reaching, for some groups, several thousand-fold compared to the general 
population. Here, we analyze 38 skin cancer genomes from five XP groups. We find 
that the activity of NER determines heterogeneity of the mutation rates across 
skin cancer genomes and that transcription-coupled NER extends beyond the gene 
boundaries reducing the intergenic mutation rate. Mutational profile in XP-V 
tumors and experiments with POLH knockout cell line reveal the role of 
polymerase η in the error-free bypass of (i) rare TpG and TpA DNA lesions, (ii) 
3' nucleotides in pyrimidine dimers, and (iii) TpT photodimers. Our study 
unravels the genetic basis of skin cancer risk in XP and provides insights into 
the mechanisms reducing UV-induced mutagenesis in the general population.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-38311-0
PMCID: PMC10160032
PMID: 37142601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.