---
reference_id: "PMID:31160660"
title: "Characterization of mouse ocular response to a 35-day spaceflight mission: Evidence of blood-retinal barrier disruption and ocular adaptations."
authors:
- Mao XW
- Nishiyama NC
- Byrum SD
- Stanbouly S
- Jones T
- Drew A
- Sridharan V
- Boerma M
- Tackett AJ
- Zawieja D
- Willey JS
- Delp M
- Pecaut MJ
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-44696-0
keywords:
- "Adaptation, Ocular"
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Aquaporin 4/metabolism
- "Blood-Retinal Barrier/physiology, physiopathology"
- Cluster Analysis
- Crystallins/metabolism
- Endothelial Cells/metabolism
- Eye Proteins/metabolism
- Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein/metabolism
- Intraocular Pressure
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Platelet Endothelial Cell Adhesion Molecule-1/metabolism
- Proteomics
- Space Flight
- Zonula Occludens-1 Protein/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of mouse ocular response to a 35-day spaceflight mission: Evidence of blood-retinal barrier disruption and ocular adaptations.
**Authors:** Mao XW, Nishiyama NC, Byrum SD, Stanbouly S, Jones T, Drew A, Sridharan V, Boerma M, Tackett AJ, Zawieja D, Willey JS, Delp M, Pecaut MJ
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-019-44696-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-44696-0)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2019 Jun 3;9(1):8215. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-44696-0.

Characterization of mouse ocular response to a 35-day spaceflight mission: 
Evidence of blood-retinal barrier disruption and ocular adaptations.

Mao XW(1), Nishiyama NC(2), Byrum SD(3)(4), Stanbouly S(2), Jones T(2), Drew 
A(2), Sridharan V(5), Boerma M(5), Tackett AJ(3)(4), Zawieja D(6), Willey JS(7), 
Delp M(8), Pecaut MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, Division of Biomedical Engineering Sciences 
(BMES), Loma Linda University School of Medicine and Medical Center, Loma Linda, 
CA, 92350, USA. xmao@llu.edu.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences, Division of Biomedical Engineering Sciences 
(BMES), Loma Linda University School of Medicine and Medical Center, Loma Linda, 
CA, 92350, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, 72202, USA.
(4)Arkansas Children's Research Institute, Little Rock, AR, USA.
(5)Division of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, 72202, USA.
(6)Department of Medical Physiology, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
Texas, USA.
(7)Department of Radiation Oncology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Bowman Gray 
Center, Winston-Salem, NC, 27101, USA.
(8)Department of Nutrition, Food and Exercise Sciences, Florida State 
University, Tallahassee, FL, 32306, USA.

The health risks associated with spaceflight-induced ocular structural and 
functional damage has become a recent concern for NASA. The goal of the present 
study was to characterize the effects of spaceflight and reentry to 1 g on the 
structure and integrity of the retina and blood-retinal barrier (BRB) in the 
eye. To investigate possible mechanisms, changes in protein expression profiles 
were examined in mouse ocular tissue after spaceflight. Ten week old male 
C57BL/6 mice were launched to the International Space Station (ISS) on Space-X 
12 at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) on August, 2017. After a 35-day mission, 
mice were returned to Earth alive. Within 38 +/- 4 hours of splashdown, mice 
were euthanized and ocular tissues were collected for analysis. Ground control 
(GC) and vivarium control mice were maintained on Earth in flight hardware or 
normal vivarium cages respectively. Repeated intraocular pressure (IOP) 
measurements were performed before the flight launch and re-measured before the 
mice were euthanized after splashdown. IOP was significantly lower in 
post-flight measurements compared to that of pre-flight (14.4-19.3 mmHg vs 
16.3-20.3 mmHg) (p < 0.05) for the left eye. Flight group had significant 
apoptosis in the retina and retinal vascular endothelial cells compared to 
control groups (p < 0.05). Immunohistochemical analysis of the retina revealed 
that an increased expression of aquaporin-4 (AQP-4) in the flight mice compared 
to controls gave strong indication of disturbance of BRB integrity. There were 
also a significant increase in the expression of platelet endothelial cell 
adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) and a decrease in the expression of the 
BRB-related tight junction protein, Zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1). Proteomic 
analysis showed that many key proteins and pathways responsible for cell death, 
cell cycle, immune response, mitochondrial function and metabolic stress were 
significantly altered in the flight mice compared to ground control animals. 
These data indicate a complex cellular response that may alter retina structure 
and BRB integrity following long-term spaceflight.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-44696-0
PMCID: PMC6547757
PMID: 31160660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.