---
reference_id: "PMID:22152680"
title: "Lipoic acid synthetase deficiency causes neonatal-onset epilepsy, defective mitochondrial energy metabolism, and glycine elevation."
authors:
- Mayr JA
- Zimmermann FA
- Fauth C
- Bergheim C
- Meierhofer D
- Radmayr D
- Zschocke J
- Koch J
- Sperl W
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lipoic acid synthetase deficiency causes neonatal-onset epilepsy, defective mitochondrial energy metabolism, and glycine elevation.
**Authors:** Mayr JA, Zimmermann FA, Fauth C, Bergheim C, Meierhofer D, Radmayr D, Zschocke J, Koch J, Sperl W
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.011)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Dec 9;89(6):792-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.011.

Lipoic acid synthetase deficiency causes neonatal-onset epilepsy, defective 
mitochondrial energy metabolism, and glycine elevation.

Mayr JA(1), Zimmermann FA, Fauth C, Bergheim C, Meierhofer D, Radmayr D, 
Zschocke J, Koch J, Sperl W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg 
5020, Austria. h.mayr@salk.at

Lipoic acid is an essential prosthetic group of four mitochondrial enzymes 
involved in the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate, α-ketoglutarate, and 
branched chain amino acids and in the glycine cleavage. Lipoic acid is 
synthesized stepwise within mitochondria through a process that includes lipoic 
acid synthetase. We identified the homozygous mutation c.746G>A (p.Arg249His) in 
LIAS in an individual with neonatal-onset epilepsy, muscular hypotonia, lactic 
acidosis, and elevated glycine concentration in plasma and urine. Investigation 
of the mitochondrial energy metabolism showed reduced oxidation of pyruvate and 
decreased pyruvate dehydrogenase complex activity. A pronounced reduction of the 
prosthetic group lipoamide was found in lipoylated proteins.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.011
PMCID: PMC3234378
PMID: 22152680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]