---
reference_id: "PMID:36700853"
title: Gene expression changes in Tay-Sachs disease begin early in fetal brain development.
authors:
- Han ST
- Hirt A
- Nicoli ER
- Kono M
- Toro C
- Proia RL
- Tifft CJ
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12596
keywords:
- Humans
- "Tay-Sachs Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Gangliosidoses, GM2/genetics, metabolism"
- Brain/pathology
- Gene Expression
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene expression changes in Tay-Sachs disease begin early in fetal brain development.
**Authors:** Han ST, Hirt A, Nicoli ER, Kono M, Toro C, Proia RL, Tifft CJ
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12596](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12596)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2023 Jul;46(4):687-694. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12596. Epub
2023  Feb 5.

Gene expression changes in Tay-Sachs disease begin early in fetal brain
development.

Han ST(1), Hirt A(1), Nicoli ER(1), Kono M(2), Toro C(3), Proia RL(2), Tifft
CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Genetics and Biochemistry Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.
(3)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Office of the Director,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Treatment of monogenic disorders has historically relied on symptomatic
management with limited ability to target primary molecular deficits. However,
recent advances in gene therapy and related technologies aim to correct these
underlying deficiencies, raising the possibility of disease management or even
prevention for diseases that can be treated pre-symptomatically. Tay-Sachs
disease (TSD) would be one such candidate, however very little is known about
the presymptomatic stage of TSD. To better understand the effects of TSD on
brain development, we evaluated the transcriptomes of human fetal brain samples
with biallelic pathogenic variants in HEXA. We identified dramatic changes in
the transcriptome, suggesting a perturbation of normal development. We also
observed a shift in the expression of the sphingolipid metabolic pathway away
from production of the HEXA substrate, GM2 ganglioside, presumptively to
compensate for dysfunction of the enzyme. However, we do not observe
transcriptomic signatures of end-stage disease, suggesting that developmental
perturbations precede neurodegeneration. To our knowledge, this is the first
report of the relationship between fetal disease pathology in juvenile onset TSD
and the analysis of gene expression in fetal TSD tissues. This study highlights
the need to better understand the "pre-symptomatic" stage of disease to set
realistic expectations for patients receiving early therapeutic intervention.

Published 2023. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12596
PMCID: PMC10329985
PMID: 36700853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
