---
reference_id: "PMID:26506407"
title: "Leigh syndrome: One disorder, more than 75 monogenic causes."
authors:
- Lake NJ
- Compton AG
- Rahman S
- Thorburn DR
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ana.24551
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Leigh Disease/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leigh syndrome: One disorder, more than 75 monogenic causes.
**Authors:** Lake NJ, Compton AG, Rahman S, Thorburn DR
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.24551](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.24551)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2016 Feb;79(2):190-203. doi: 10.1002/ana.24551. Epub 2015 Dec 15.

Leigh syndrome: One disorder, more than 75 monogenic causes.

Lake NJ(1)(2), Compton AG(1)(2), Rahman S(3), Thorburn DR(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(3)Mitochondrial Research Group, Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Institute of 
Child Health, University College London and Metabolic Unit, Great Ormond Street 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Victorian Clinical Genetic Services, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.

Leigh syndrome is the most common pediatric presentation of mitochondrial 
disease. This neurodegenerative disorder is genetically heterogeneous, and to 
date pathogenic mutations in >75 genes have been identified, encoded by 2 
genomes (mitochondrial and nuclear). More than one-third of these disease genes 
have been characterized in the past 5 years alone, reflecting the significant 
advances made in understanding its etiological basis. We review the diverse 
biochemical and genetic etiology of Leigh syndrome and associated clinical, 
neuroradiological, and metabolic features that can provide clues for diagnosis. 
We discuss the emergence of genotype-phenotype correlations, insights gleaned 
into the molecular basis of disease, and available therapeutic options.

© 2015 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.24551
PMID: 26506407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]