---
reference_id: "PMID:35309606"
title: "Type 1 diabetes mellitus in pediatric age group: A rising endemic."
authors:
- Pasi R
- Ravi KS
journal: J Family Med Prim Care
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_975_21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 1 diabetes mellitus in pediatric age group: A rising endemic.
**Authors:** Pasi R, Ravi KS
**Journal:** J Family Med Prim Care (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_975_21](https://doi.org/10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_975_21)

## Content

1. J Family Med Prim Care. 2022 Jan;11(1):27-31. doi: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_975_21.
 Epub 2022 Jan 31.

Type 1 diabetes mellitus in pediatric age group: A rising endemic.

Pasi R(1), Ravi KS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
Mangalagiri, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences Rishikesh, 
Uttarakhand, India.

Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus is the most common endocrinological abnormality found 
in children. The incidence of T1DM has steadily increased in nearly all parts of 
the world. Both genetic susceptibility and environmental factors contribute to 
the pathogenesis. It is caused due to either decreased or absent insulin 
production in the body due to multiple etiologies. We have done a literature 
review of type 1 DM in children and a clinical audit of point prevalence of type 
1 DM cases & its clinical correlates of patients presenting at the tertiary 
level hospital, AIIMS Rishikesh, over two years six months period (April 2015 to 
September 2017). We found the prevalence of diabetes mellitus (Type 1) is 2.88%. 
Among clinical features at presentation, 56.5% presented with polyuria, 34.8% 
with polydipsia, 21.7% with polyphagia, 39.1% with weight loss. 26.1% of 
patients had diabetic ketoacidosis at presentation. The majority of children 
have deranged HbA1C levels (94.4%). It is concluded that children presented with 
higher HbA1c levels at onset and higher duration of symptoms are at greater risk 
for the development of complications.

Copyright: © 2022 Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care.

DOI: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_975_21
PMCID: PMC8930152
PMID: 35309606

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.