---
reference_id: "PMID:28433112"
title: Wilson disease - liver pathology.
authors:
- Pronicki M
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00007-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilson disease - liver pathology.
**Authors:** Pronicki M
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00007-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00007-0)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2017;142:71-75. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00007-0.

Wilson disease - liver pathology.

Pronicki M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, 
Poland. Electronic address: m.pronicki@ipczd.pl.

The liver in Wilson disease may demonstrate a wide range of damage patterns. 
Some patients may present almost no detectable microscopic pathology, while 
others display lesions consistent with fulminant hepatitis or acute liver 
failure. Most liver biopsy specimens show moderate to severe steatosis, variable 
degree of portal and/or lobular inflammation, and fibrosis eventually 
progressing to cirrhosis. Additional findings include liver cell degeneration 
and ballooning, Mallory hyaline bodies, liver cell necrosis, and glycogenation 
of periportal hepatocytic nuclei. None of the above lesions are specific for 
Wilson disease and should be interpreted in a wider medical context and 
particular clinical setting. The main message concerning liver pathology is that 
Wilson disease may be microscopically misinterpreted as many other liver 
diseases, including viral or autoimmune hepatitis, alcoholic/nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis, toxic liver injury, cryptogenic cirrhosis, metabolic liver 
disease, and many others. The possibility of Wilson disease should be considered 
in all patients, especially young ones presenting unexplained liver diseases 
with many variable patterns of microscopic liver involvement.

© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00007-0
PMID: 28433112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]