---
reference_id: "PMID:6802865"
title: "Hypoplasia of the nose and eyes, hyposmia, hypogeusia, and hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism in two males."
authors:
- Bosma JF
- Henkin RI
- Christiansen RL
- Herdt JR
journal: J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol
year: '1981'
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Eye Abnormalities
- Facial Bones/abnormalities
- Gonadotropins/pharmacology
- Humans
- Hypogonadism/complications
- Male
- Nose/abnormalities
- Olfaction Disorders/congenital
- Skull/abnormalities
- Stereognosis
- Taste Disorders/congenital
- "Tomography, X-Ray"
- Vision Disorders/congenital
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypoplasia of the nose and eyes, hyposmia, hypogeusia, and hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism in two males.
**Authors:** Bosma JF, Henkin RI, Christiansen RL, Herdt JR
**Journal:** J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol (1981)

## Content

1. J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol. 1981;1(2):153-84.

Hypoplasia of the nose and eyes, hyposmia, hypogeusia, and hypogonadotrophic
hypogonadism in two males.

Bosma JF, Henkin RI, Christiansen RL, Herdt JR.

Two males, 9-11 and 29-31 years of age, with severe hypoplasia of the nose,
hypoplasia of the eyes, sensory abnormalities of taste and smell, and
hypogonadism were studied. The nasal septum, cribriform plates and foramina of
the vomeronasal (vn) nerves were demonstrated in both; the capsule of the vn
organ was shown in one. Their nasal skeleton, demonstrated by tomoradiography,
had grown in early embryological form. The nose was not patent in either
patient. In both, the cranial vaults, orbits, epipharynges, and oral cavities
were indented toward the hypoplastic nasal composite and the peripheral
dimensions of their faces were normal for their respective ages. Each patient
had impaired visual function with cataracts and colobomata. Each was unable to
recognize the smell of any vapor (Type I hyposmia), and had severe impairment of
recognition of any tastant (recognition hypogeusia); detection of vapors and of
tastants were in appropriate anatomical areas. Each was unable orally to
recognize standard plastic forms (astereognosis) though each could recognize the
forms manually. Each patient had bilateral inguinal hernias, one or two
undescended testes, and hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism. These patients do not
fall within the spectrum of arrhinencephaly because of the presence of medial
structure of attachment of the falx cerebri and because of their normal
intelligence. Distinction of patients with this pattern of abnormalities from
arrhinencephaly is important by reason of their potentiality of normal mental
development. We hypothesize that their abnormalities resulted from an
embryological disruption that occurred in the first trimester of pregnancy. The
embryogenesis of the nasal composite is presumed to have been adequate for
reciprocal induction of the anlagen of the forebrain. Development of their faces
to normal peripheral dimensions indicates that the nasal composite is not
essential for gross facial enlargement.

PMID: 6802865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
