---
reference_id: "PMID:30488088"
title: "[Impairments of language and communication in schizophrenia]."
authors:
- Heim S
- Dehmer M
- Berger-Tunkel M
journal: Nervenarzt
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00115-018-0647-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Impairments of language and communication in schizophrenia].
**Authors:** Heim S, Dehmer M, Berger-Tunkel M
**Journal:** Nervenarzt (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00115-018-0647-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00115-018-0647-5)

## Content

1. Nervenarzt. 2019 May;90(5):485-489. doi: 10.1007/s00115-018-0647-5.

[Impairments of language and communication in schizophrenia].

[Article in German]

Heim S(1)(2)(3), Dehmer M(4), Berger-Tunkel M(4).

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Psychiatrie, Psychotherapie und Psychosomatik, Medizinische 
Fakultät, RWTH Aachen, Pauwelsstraße 30, 52074, Aachen, Deutschland. 
sheim@ukaachen.de.
(2)JARA - Translational Brain Medicine, Aachen, Deutschland. sheim@ukaachen.de.
(3)Institut für Neurowissenschaften und Medizin (INM-1), Forschungszentrum 
Jülich, Jülich, Deutschland. sheim@ukaachen.de.
(4)Klinik für Psychiatrie, Psychotherapie und Psychosomatik, Medizinische 
Fakultät, RWTH Aachen, Pauwelsstraße 30, 52074, Aachen, Deutschland.

Disorganized speech is one of the key symptoms of schizophrenia. This article 
provides an overview of those areas of speech and communication impaired in 
patients with schizophrenia. Moreover, the state of the art of behavioral 
interventions is summarized. In conclusion, more well-controlled speech-language 
therapy studies are required in order to improve participation and 
communication-related quality of life in schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-018-0647-5
PMID: 30488088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]