---
reference_id: "PMID:16763903"
title: "Mini-symposium: newborn screening for inborn errors of metabolism--clinical effectiveness."
authors:
- Wilcken B
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-005-0254-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mini-symposium: newborn screening for inborn errors of metabolism--clinical effectiveness.
**Authors:** Wilcken B
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-005-0254-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-005-0254-z)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2006 Apr-Jun;29(2-3):366-9. doi:
10.1007/s10545-005-0254-z.

Mini-symposium: newborn screening for inborn errors of metabolism--clinical 
effectiveness.

Wilcken B(1).

Author information:
(1)The Children's Hospital at Westmead, and the Discipline of Paediatrics, 
University of Sydney, Locked Bag 4001, Westmead NSW, 2145, Sydney, Australia.

With the application of tandem mass spectrometry, newborn screening has become 
an important topic in inborn metabolic disease. The aim of newborn screening is 
to produce an improved clinical outcome by early detection of disease, but it 
has been difficult to measure clinical effectiveness. Good evidence of clinical 
effectiveness has been hard to obtain because of the rarity of individual 
disorders, often precluding randomized controlled trials, the increase in 
diagnosis of individual disorders by screening, compared with clinical 
diagnosis, variable definitions of what constitutes a case, uncertainty about 
completeness of ascertainment, and differences in treatment in different 
geographical areas or at different times. Multiplex testing has introduced some 
new problems. There have been recent attempts to standardize screening in 
several countries, which have taken different approaches. Public pressure has 
driven the introduction of screening for inborn errors in some areas. Since it 
seems inevitable that screening may often be implemented ahead of hard evidence 
of benefit, ongoing evaluation of clinical effectiveness is a necessary part of 
any screening programme.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-005-0254-z
PMID: 16763903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]