---
reference_id: "PMID:33925341"
title: "ABCC6, Pyrophosphate and Ectopic Calcification: Therapeutic Solutions."
authors:
- Shimada BK
- Pomozi V
- Zoll J
- Kuo S
- Martin L
- Le Saux O
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms22094555
keywords:
- "5'-Nucleotidase/genetics"
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Calcification, Physiologic/genetics, physiology"
- Calcinosis
- Diphosphates/metabolism
- GPI-Linked Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Joint Diseases
- Mice
- "ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family C Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Pyrophosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- Rats
- Vascular Calcification
- Vascular Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ABCC6, Pyrophosphate and Ectopic Calcification: Therapeutic Solutions.
**Authors:** Shimada BK, Pomozi V, Zoll J, Kuo S, Martin L, Le Saux O
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22094555](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22094555)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Apr 27;22(9):4555. doi: 10.3390/ijms22094555.

ABCC6, Pyrophosphate and Ectopic Calcification: Therapeutic Solutions.

Shimada BK(1), Pomozi V(2), Zoll J(1), Kuo S(3), Martin L(4)(5), Le Saux O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, John A. Burns School of Medicine,
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96817, USA.
(2)Institute of Enzymology, RCNS, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 1117 Budapest,
Hungary.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Kapi'olani Medical Center for Women and Children,
University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96826, USA.
(4)PXE Consultation Center, MAGEC Reference Center for Rare Skin Diseases,
Angers University Hospital, 49100 Angers, France.
(5)BNMI, CNRS 6214/INSERM 1083, University Bretagne-Loire, 49100 Angers, France.

Pathological (ectopic) mineralization of soft tissues occurs during aging, in
several common conditions such as diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, and renal
failure and in certain genetic disorders. Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), a
multi-organ disease affecting dermal, ocular, and cardiovascular tissues, is a
model for ectopic mineralization disorders. ABCC6 dysfunction is the primary
cause of PXE, but also some cases of generalized arterial calcification of
infancy (GACI). ABCC6 deficiency in mice underlies an inducible dystrophic
cardiac calcification phenotype (DCC). These calcification diseases are part of
a spectrum of mineralization disorders that also includes Calcification of
Joints and Arteries (CALJA). Since the identification of ABCC6 as the "PXE gene"
and the development of several animal models (mice, rat, and zebrafish), there
has been significant progress in our understanding of the molecular genetics,
the clinical phenotypes, and pathogenesis of these diseases, which share
similarities with more common conditions with abnormal calcification. ABCC6
facilitates the cellular efflux of ATP, which is rapidly converted into
inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi) and adenosine by the ectonucleotidases NPP1 and
CD73 (NT5E). PPi is a potent endogenous inhibitor of calcification, whereas
adenosine indirectly contributes to calcification inhibition by suppressing the
synthesis of tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP). At present,
therapies only exist to alleviate symptoms for both PXE and GACI; however,
extensive studies have resulted in several novel approaches to treating PXE and
GACI. This review seeks to summarize the role of ABCC6 in ectopic calcification
in PXE and other calcification disorders, and discuss therapeutic strategies
targeting various proteins in the pathway (ABCC6, NPP1, and TNAP) and direct
inhibition of calcification via supplementation by various compounds.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22094555
PMCID: PMC8123679
PMID: 33925341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to
report.
