---
reference_id: "PMID:39412385"
title: A Rare Case of Meckel-Gruber Syndrome with Congenital Intestinal Atresia and Abdominal Pseudocyst Clinic.
authors:
- Ulusoy Tangul S
- Gencan G
journal: Fetal Pediatr Pathol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/15513815.2024.2414178
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Rare Case of Meckel-Gruber Syndrome with Congenital Intestinal Atresia and Abdominal Pseudocyst Clinic.
**Authors:** Ulusoy Tangul S, Gencan G
**Journal:** Fetal Pediatr Pathol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15513815.2024.2414178](https://doi.org/10.1080/15513815.2024.2414178)

## Content

1. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2025 Jan-Feb;44(1):63-68. doi: 
10.1080/15513815.2024.2414178. Epub 2024 Oct 16.

A Rare Case of Meckel-Gruber Syndrome with Congenital Intestinal Atresia and 
Abdominal Pseudocyst Clinic.

Ulusoy Tangul S(1), Gencan G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Yozgat Bozok 
University, Yozgat, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Lokman Hekim University, 
Ankara, Turkey.

Background: Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MGS) is a rare disease with a fatal, 
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. This article mentions the neonatal MGS 
case followed by intestinal atresia and meconium pseudocyst clinic. Case 
presentation: Bile-containing-fluid was aspirated from the fetus, which was 
found to have polyhydramnios, gastric dilatation, lung hypoplasia, and cystic 
formation with a diameter of 68*62mm in the abdomen at 32 weeks of gestation in 
the intrauterine period. The cyst recurred after 2 weeks. We operated the 
patient with the preliminary diagnosis of meconium pseudocyst due to 
intrauterine perforation. The general condition was moderate in the 
postoperative period, and intermittent bilious vomiting continued. We performed 
an ileostomy on the patient due to his inability to tolerate oral intake, lack 
of passage, and abdominal distension. In addition, as a result of liver biopsy, 
cholestasis, cholestatic changes, bile-duct loss, and ductular reaction were 
detected. According to the current clinical findings and genetic analysis 
results, the patient was diagnosed with MGS. Conclusion: Autosomal recessive, 
fatal diseases such as MGS are pathologies with a high probability of recurrence 
with each pregnancy. Therefore, awareness needs to be increased to prevent these 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1080/15513815.2024.2414178
PMID: 39412385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]