---
reference_id: "PMID:30789692"
title: SYNGAP1-Related Intellectual Disability.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Holder JL Jr
- Hamdan FF
- Michaud JL
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SYNGAP1-Related Intellectual Disability.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Holder JL Jr, Hamdan FF, Michaud JL

## Content

1. SYNGAP1-Related Intellectual Disability.

Holder JL Jr(1), Hamdan FF(2), Michaud JL(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2019 Feb 21 [updated 2025 Aug 14].

Author information:
(1)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas
(2)CHU Ste-Justine Research Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SYNGAP1-related intellectual disability (SYNGAP1-ID) 
is characterized by developmental delay (DD) or intellectual disability (ID) 
(100% of affected individuals), generalized epilepsy (~84%), and autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD) and other behavioral abnormalities (≤50%). To date more than 50 
individuals with SYNGAP1-ID have been reported. In the majority DD/ID was 
moderate to severe; in some it was mild. The epilepsy is generalized; a subset 
of individuals with epilepsy have myoclonic astatic epilepsy (Doose syndrome) or 
epilepsy with myoclonic absences. Behavioral abnormalities can include 
stereotypic behaviors (e.g., hand flapping, obsessions with certain objects) as 
well as poor social development. Feeding difficulties can be significant in 
some.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SYNGAP1-ID is established in a proband with 
developmental delay or intellectual disability in whom molecular genetic testing 
identifies either a heterozygous pathogenic variant in SYNGAP1 (~89%) or a 
deletion of 6p21.3 (~11%).
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: DD/ID are managed as per standard 
practice. No guidelines are available regarding choice of specific anti-seizure 
medications (ASMs). In about 50% of affected individuals, the epilepsy responds 
to a single ASM; in the remainder it is pharmacoresistant. Children may qualify 
for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of ASD. Consultation with a 
developmental pediatrician may guide parents through appropriate behavioral 
management strategies and/or provide prescription medications when necessary. 
Nasogastric/gastrostomy feeding may be required for individuals with persistent 
feeding issues. Surveillance: Monitor seizure manifestations and control; 
behavioral issues; developmental progress and educational needs.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SYNGAP1-ID is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. To 
date almost all probands with SYNGAP1-ID whose parents have undergone molecular 
genetic testing have had a de novo germline pathogenic variant; however, 
vertical transmission (from a mildly affected, mosaic parent to the proband) has 
been reported in one family. Thus, while the risk to sibs appears to be low, it 
is presumed to be greater than in the general population because of the 
possibility of germline mosaicism in a parent. Once the SYNGAP1 pathogenic 
variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal testing for a 
pregnancy at increased risk and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 30789692