---
reference_id: "PMID:32388798"
title: "MEN2-related pheochromocytoma: current state of knowledge, specific characteristics in MEN2B, and perspectives."
authors:
- Amodru V
- Taieb D
- Guerin C
- Romanet P
- Paladino N
- Brue T
- Cuny T
- Barlier A
- Sebag F
- Castinetti F
journal: Endocrine
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s12020-020-02332-2
keywords:
- "Adrenal Gland Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Humans
- Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2a/genetics
- Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2b
- "Pheochromocytoma/epidemiology, genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Thyroid Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MEN2-related pheochromocytoma: current state of knowledge, specific characteristics in MEN2B, and perspectives.
**Authors:** Amodru V, Taieb D, Guerin C, Romanet P, Paladino N, Brue T, Cuny T, Barlier A, Sebag F, Castinetti F
**Journal:** Endocrine (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12020-020-02332-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-020-02332-2)

## Content

1. Endocrine. 2020 Sep;69(3):496-503. doi: 10.1007/s12020-020-02332-2. Epub 2020 
May 10.

MEN2-related pheochromocytoma: current state of knowledge, specific 
characteristics in MEN2B, and perspectives.

Amodru V(1), Taieb D(2), Guerin C(3), Romanet P(4), Paladino N(3), Brue T(1), 
Cuny T(1), Barlier A(4), Sebag F(3), Castinetti F(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Aix-Marseille University, INSERM U1251, Endo-ERN 
Reference Center for Rare Genetic Tumor Syndromes, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux 
de Marseille, Marseille, France.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Aix-Marseille University, Endo-ERN Reference 
Center for Rare Genetic Tumor Syndromes, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de 
Marseille, Marseille, France.
(3)Department of Endocrine Surgery, Aix-Marseille University, Endo-ERN Reference 
Center for Rare Genetic Tumor Syndromes, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de 
Marseille, Marseille, France.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Aix-Marseille University, INSERM U1251, 
Endo-ERN Reference Center for Rare Genetic Tumor Syndromes, Assistance 
Publique-Hopitaux de Marseille, Marseille, France.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Aix-Marseille University, INSERM U1251, Endo-ERN 
Reference Center for Rare Genetic Tumor Syndromes, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux 
de Marseille, Marseille, France. Frederic.castinetti@ap-hm.fr.

Erratum in
    Endocrine. 2020 Sep;69(3):695. doi: 10.1007/s12020-020-02365-7.
    Endocrine. 2020 Jul 14. doi: 10.1007/s12020-020-02408-z.

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) is a rare hereditary syndrome due to 
mutations of the proto-oncogene REarranged during Transfection (RET), defined by 
the association of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) in almost 100% cases, and 
pheochromocytoma in roughly 50% (primary hyperparathyroidism can be seen in 
10-20% of patients with MEN2A). Early thyroidectomy and the efficacy of novel 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors modified the natural history of MTC, with 
possibilities of cure or long-term control. The second main compound, 
pheochromocytoma, is reported with a variable penetrance, from 10 to 80% cases, 
depending on the mutation of RET. Pheochromocytoma constitutes the main disease 
to screen in patients with RET mutations. Pheochromocytoma clinical and 
biochemical diagnosis, as well as the way to treat it are thus crucial. This 
review will thus focus on the epidemiological specificities of MEN2-related 
pheochromocytoma, the genotype/phenotype relationship, the modern imaging 
modalities necessary to confirm the diagnosis in this hereditary context, as 
well as the optimal management and the possibilities of adrenal sparing surgery. 
Additional information will include the natural history of 
MEN2B-pheochromocytoma, the rare cases of malignant pheochromocytoma, and the 
factors that could modify the penetrance between individuals carrying the same 
mutation, especially in the same family.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-020-02332-2
PMID: 32388798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]