---
reference_id: "PMID:31724072"
title: PD-L1 expression in gastroesophageal dysplastic lesions.
authors:
- Fassan M
- Brignola S
- Pennelli G
- Alberti G
- Angerilli V
- Bressan A
- Pellino A
- Lanza C
- Salmaso R
- Lonardi S
- Pucciarelli S
- Spolverato G
- Scarpa M
- Realdon S
- Farinati F
- Luchini C
- Rugge M
- Loupakis F
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-019-02693-8
keywords:
- Aged
- B7-H1 Antigen/metabolism
- Barrett Esophagus/pathology
- Biomarkers/analysis
- Esophagus/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Precancerous Conditions/pathology
- Stomach Neoplasms/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PD-L1 expression in gastroesophageal dysplastic lesions.
**Authors:** Fassan M, Brignola S, Pennelli G, Alberti G, Angerilli V, Bressan A, Pellino A, Lanza C, Salmaso R, Lonardi S, Pucciarelli S, Spolverato G, Scarpa M, Realdon S, Farinati F, Luchini C, Rugge M, Loupakis F
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-019-02693-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-019-02693-8)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2020 Jul;477(1):151-156. doi: 10.1007/s00428-019-02693-8. Epub 
2019 Nov 14.

PD-L1 expression in gastroesophageal dysplastic lesions.

Fassan M(1), Brignola S(2), Pennelli G(2), Alberti G(3)(4), Angerilli V(2), 
Bressan A(2), Pellino A(3), Lanza C(2), Salmaso R(2), Lonardi S(3), Pucciarelli 
S(5), Spolverato G(5), Scarpa M(6), Realdon S(7), Farinati F(8), Luchini C(9), 
Rugge M(2)(10), Loupakis F(3).

Author information:
(1)Surgical Pathology Unit, Department of Medicine (DIMED), University of Padua, 
via Gabelli 61, 35121, Padua, PD, Italy. matteo.fassan@unipd.it.
(2)Surgical Pathology Unit, Department of Medicine (DIMED), University of Padua, 
via Gabelli 61, 35121, Padua, PD, Italy.
(3)Unit of Medical Oncology 1, Department of Oncology, Istituto Oncologico 
Veneto, IOV-IRCCS, Padua, PD, Italy.
(4)Department of Oncology, Surgery and Gastroenterology (DISCOG), University of 
Padua, Padua, PD, Italy.
(5)1st Surgery Unit, Department of Surgical Oncology and Gastroenterology 
(DiSCOG), University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(6)Surgery Unit, Istituto Oncologico Veneto, IOV-IRCCS, Padua, PD, Italy.
(7)Gastroenterology Unit, Istituto Oncologico Veneto, IOV-IRCCS, Padua, PD, 
Italy.
(8)Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Surgical Oncology and Gastroenterology 
(DiSCOG), University of Padua, Padua, PD, Italy.
(9)Section of Pathology, Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, University 
and Hospital Trust of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(10)Veneto Cancer Registry, Padua, Italy.

Immunotherapy has been recently approved for gastric (GC) and 
gastroesophageal-junction adenocarcinomas (GEC), and PD-L1 immunohistochemical 
evaluation represents a promising predictive biomarker in this oncological 
setting. A series of 125 gastroesophageal dysplastic lesions (52 low-grade, 73 
high-grade) was investigated for PD-L1 and DNA mismatch repair proteins status. 
PD-L1 was positive (combined positive score (CPS) ≥ 1) in 48 (31.0%) dysplastic 
lesions. A higher prevalence of PD-L1-positive cases was observed among 
esophageal specimens compared with gastric ones (p = 0.0003), in high-grade and 
adenocarcinoma samples in comparison with low-grade dysplasia (p < 0.0001), and 
in lesions with mismatch repair deficiency (p = 0.028). For 30 dysplastic 
samples, a synchronous matched invasive lesion (GC = 15, GEC = 15) was available 
and tested for PD-L1 expression; a discordant PD-L1 status was observed in 12/30 
(40%) cases. A relatively high prevalence in PD-L1 positivity was observed among 
gastroesophageal dysplastic lesions and this should be taken into consideration 
for future therapeutic strategies based on this biomarker.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-019-02693-8
PMID: 31724072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]