---
reference_id: "PMID:19131814"
title: "Variation in the TLR4 gene influences the risk of organ failure and shock posttrauma: a cohort study."
authors:
- Shalhub S
- Junker CE
- Imahara SD
- Mindrinos MN
- Dissanaike S
- "O'Keefe GE"
journal: J Trauma
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1097/TA.0b013e3181938d50
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variation in the TLR4 gene influences the risk of organ failure and shock posttrauma: a cohort study.
**Authors:** Shalhub S, Junker CE, Imahara SD, Mindrinos MN, Dissanaike S, O'Keefe GE
**Journal:** J Trauma (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1097/TA.0b013e3181938d50](https://doi.org/10.1097/TA.0b013e3181938d50)

## Content

1. J Trauma. 2009 Jan;66(1):115-22; discussion 122-3. doi: 
10.1097/TA.0b013e3181938d50.

Variation in the TLR4 gene influences the risk of organ failure and shock 
posttrauma: a cohort study.

Shalhub S(1), Junker CE, Imahara SD, Mindrinos MN, Dissanaike S, O'Keefe GE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Washington, Harborview Medical Center, 
Seattle, Washington 98104, USA. shalhub@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: Genetic variation contributes to risk and outcomes of sepsis. We 
sought to determine whether variation in inflammation related genes is 
associated with severity of sepsis in trauma patients.
METHODS: A cohort of severely injured Caucasian patients was studied and 
genotyped for candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). These were 
toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) A896G, tumor necrosis factor-alpha G-308A, 
interleukin-6 G-174C, interleukin-1beta C-31T, and cluster of differentiation 
marker 14C-159T. SNP genotypes among patients with sepsis and complicated sepsis 
were analyzed by chi2 and logistic regression. Six haplotype-tagging SNPs in the 
TLR4 gene were subsequently examined to analyze their influence on TLR4 A896G 
SNPs relationship to sepsis severity.
RESULTS: We enrolled 598 patients. Complicated sepsis developed in 147 (25%). 
Adjusting for independent risk factors, carriage of the variant TLR4 896 G 
allele was associated with decreased risk of complicated sepsis (odds ratio = 
0.3, 95% confidence interval, 0.1-0.7, p = 0.008). Furthermore, two haplotypes 
seemed to better characterize this risk than the variant TLR4 896G allele. The 
variant TLR4 896G allele is linked to one common haplotype, which seems to 
confer a considerably reduced risk of complicated sepsis. (aOR = 0.2 95% 
confidence interval, 0.05-0.7, p = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Variation within TLR4 gene is associated with severity of 
posttraumatic sepsis. This risk may not be solely related to TLR4 A896G SNP. It 
is likely that other, uncharacterized variations in the TLR4 gene contribute to 
sepsis severity. A thorough evaluation of variability within the TLR4 gene is 
needed to characterize sepsis risk.

DOI: 10.1097/TA.0b013e3181938d50
PMCID: PMC2740632
PMID: 19131814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]