---
reference_id: "PMID:15895552"
title: The wide spectrum of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs).
authors:
- Manto MU
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1080/14734220510007914
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Alcohol Oxidoreductases/genetics
- Animals
- Humans
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/classification, etiology, genetics"
- "Spinocerebellar Degenerations/genetics, physiopathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The wide spectrum of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs).
**Authors:** Manto MU
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14734220510007914](https://doi.org/10.1080/14734220510007914)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2005;4(1):2-6. doi: 10.1080/14734220510007914.

The wide spectrum of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs).

Manto MU(1).

Author information:
(1)FNRS-Neurologie, Hôpital Erasme-ULB, Bruxelles, Belgium. mmanto@ulb.ac.be

Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a clinically heterogeneous group of 
disorders. Current molecular classification corresponds to the order of gene 
description (SCA1-SCA 25). The prevalence of SCAs is estimated to be 
1-4/100,000. Patients exhibit usually a slowly progressive cerebellar syndrome 
with various combinations of oculomotor disorders, dysarthria, dysmetria/kinetic 
tremor, and/or ataxic gait. They can present also with pigmentary retinopathy, 
extrapyramidal movement disorders (parkinsonism, dyskinesias, dystonia, chorea), 
pyramidal signs, cortical symptoms (seizures, cognitive impairment/behavioral 
symptoms), peripheral neuropathy. SCAs are also genetically heterogeneous and 
the clinical diagnosis of subtypes of SCAs is complicated by the salient overlap 
of the phenotypes between genetic subtypes. The following clinical features have 
some specific values for predicting a gene defect: slowing of saccades in SCA2, 
ophthalmoplegia in SCA1, SCA2 and SCA3, pigmentary retinopathy in SCA7, 
spasticity in SCA3, dyskinesias associated with a mutation in the fibroblast 
growth factor 14 (FGF 14) gene, cognitive impairment/behavioral symptoms in 
SCA17 and DRPLA, seizures in SCA10, SCA17 and DRPLA, peripheral neuropathy in 
SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, SCA4, SCA8, SCA18 and SCA25. Neurophysiological findings are 
compatible with a dying-back axonopathy and/or a neuronopathy. Three patterns of 
atrophy can be identified on brain MRI: a pure cerebellar atrophy, a pattern of 
olivopontocerebellar atrophy, and a pattern of global brain atrophy. A 
remarkable observation is the presence of dentate nuclei calcifications in 
SCA20, resulting in a low signal on brain MRI sequences. Several identified 
mutations correspond to expansions of repeated trinucleotides (CAG repeats in 
SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, SCA6, SCA7, SCA17 and DRPLA, CTG repeats in SCA8). A 
pentanucleotide repeat expansion (ATTCT) is associated with SCA10. Missense 
mutations have also been found recently. Anticipation is a main feature of SCAs, 
due to instability of expanded alleles. Anticipation may be particularly 
prominent in SCA7. It is estimated that extensive genetic testing leads to the 
identification of the causative gene in about 60-75 % of cases. Our knowledge of 
the molecular mechanisms of SCAs is rapidly growing, and the development of 
relevant animal models of SCAs is bringing hope for effective therapies in 
human.

DOI: 10.1080/14734220510007914
PMID: 15895552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]