---
reference_id: "PMID:29851873"
title: Bedside Approach to the Mental Status Assessment.
authors:
- Tang-Wai DF
- Freedman M
journal: Continuum (Minneap Minn)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1212/CON.0000000000000617
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bedside Approach to the Mental Status Assessment.
**Authors:** Tang-Wai DF, Freedman M
**Journal:** Continuum (Minneap Minn) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1212/CON.0000000000000617](https://doi.org/10.1212/CON.0000000000000617)

## Content

1. Continuum (Minneap Minn). 2018 Jun;24(3, BEHAVIORAL NEUROLOGY AND 
PSYCHIATRY):672-703. doi: 10.1212/CON.0000000000000617.

Bedside Approach to the Mental Status Assessment.

Tang-Wai DF, Freedman M.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article presents a clinically useful approach to 
obtaining the history and performing the mental status examination of patients 
with cognitive, language, or behavioral problems.
RECENT FINDINGS: Laboratory and imaging biomarkers are being developed for 
accurate diagnosis of neurobehavioral disorders, yet few are currently available 
for clinical use. Moreover, not all centers have access to these potential 
tools. Practicing clinicians are therefore left primarily with their skills of 
history taking and examination. Although geared for research, diagnostic 
criteria have been refined over the past several years and can nevertheless aid 
the clinician with the diagnosis of disorders such as mild cognitive impairment, 
Alzheimer disease, frontotemporal dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, the 
primary progressive aphasias, corticobasal syndrome, vascular cognitive 
impairment, and posterior cortical atrophy. Regularly revised criteria reflect 
ongoing knowledge gained from in-depth studies of these disorders.
SUMMARY: The focused history and mental status examination remain essential 
tools for the evaluation and diagnosis of neurologic disorders affecting 
cognition, language, and behavior.

DOI: 10.1212/CON.0000000000000617
PMID: 29851873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]