---
reference_id: "PMID:39052387"
title: "The genomic landscape of lung cancer in never-smokers from the Women's Health Initiative."
authors:
- Moorthi S
- Paguirigan A
- Itagi P
- Ko M
- Pettinger M
- Hoge AC
- Nag A
- Patel NA
- Wu F
- Sather C
- Levine KM
- Fitzgibbon MP
- Thorner AR
- Anderson GL
- Ha G
- Berger AH
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.174643
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, epidemiology"
- Aged
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Smoking/genetics, epidemiology, adverse effects"
- "Women's Health"
- "Adenocarcinoma of Lung/genetics, epidemiology"
- "Non-Smokers/statistics & numerical data"
- Genomics/methods
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- United States/epidemiology
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- "Smokers/statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genomic landscape of lung cancer in never-smokers from the Women's Health Initiative.
**Authors:** Moorthi S, Paguirigan A, Itagi P, Ko M, Pettinger M, Hoge AC, Nag A, Patel NA, Wu F, Sather C, Levine KM, Fitzgibbon MP, Thorner AR, Anderson GL, Ha G, Berger AH
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.174643](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.174643)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2024 Jul 25;9(17):e174643. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.174643.

The genomic landscape of lung cancer in never-smokers from the Women's Health
Initiative.

Moorthi S(1), Paguirigan A(2), Itagi P(1)(3), Ko M(3), Pettinger M(3), Hoge
AC(3), Nag A(4), Patel NA(4), Wu F(5), Sather C(5), Levine KM(1)(6), Fitzgibbon
MP(5), Thorner AR(4), Anderson GL(3), Ha G(1)(3)(7), Berger AH(1)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Human Biology Division.
(2)Clinical Research Division, and.
(3)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
(4)Center for Cancer Genomics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Genomics and Bioinformatics Shared Resource, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center,
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(6)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine and.
(7)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.

Over 200,000 individuals are diagnosed with lung cancer in the United States
every year, with a growing proportion of cases, especially lung adenocarcinoma,
occurring in individuals who have never smoked. Women over the age of 50
comprise the largest affected demographic. To understand the genomic drivers of
lung adenocarcinoma and therapeutic response in this population, we performed
whole genome and/or whole exome sequencing on 73 matched lung tumor/normal pairs
from postmenopausal women who participated in the Women's Health Initiative.
Somatic copy number alterations showed little variation by smoking status,
suggesting that aneuploidy may be a general characteristic of lung cancer
regardless of smoke exposure. Similarly, clock-like and APOBEC mutation
signatures were prevalent but did not differ in tumors from smokers and
never-smokers. However, mutations in both EGFR and KRAS showed unique allelic
differences determined by smoking status that are known to alter tumor response
to targeted therapy. Mutations in the MYC-network member MGA were more prevalent
in tumors from smokers. Fusion events in ALK, RET, and ROS1 were absent, likely
due to age-related differences in fusion prevalence. Our work underscores the
profound effect of smoking status, age, and sex on the tumor mutational
landscape and identifies areas of unmet medical need.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.174643
PMCID: PMC11385083
PMID: 39052387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared
that no conflict of interest exists.
