---
reference_id: "PMID:27744657"
title: Pathogenesis of Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis.
authors:
- Lim BJ
- Yang JW
- Do WS
- Fogo AB
journal: J Pathol Transl Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.4132/jptm.2016.09.21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis.
**Authors:** Lim BJ, Yang JW, Do WS, Fogo AB
**Journal:** J Pathol Transl Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.4132/jptm.2016.09.21](https://doi.org/10.4132/jptm.2016.09.21)

## Content

1. J Pathol Transl Med. 2016 Nov;50(6):405-410. doi: 10.4132/jptm.2016.09.21.
Epub  2016 Oct 16.

Pathogenesis of Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis.

Lim BJ(1), Yang JW(2), Do WS(1), Fogo AB(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Yonsei University Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju, 
Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is characterized by focal and 
segmental obliteration of glomerular capillary tufts with increased matrix. FSGS 
is classified as collapsing, tip, cellular, perihilar and not otherwise 
specified variants according to the location and character of the sclerotic 
lesion. Primary or idiopathic FSGS is considered to be related to podocyte 
injury, and the pathogenesis of podocyte injury has been actively investigated. 
Several circulating factors affecting podocyte permeability barrier have been 
proposed, but not proven to cause FSGS. FSGS may also be caused by genetic 
alterations. These genes are mainly those regulating slit diaphragm structure, 
actin cytoskeleton of podocytes, and foot process structure. The mode of 
inheritance and age of onset are different according to the gene involved. 
Recently, the role of parietal epithelial cells (PECs) has been highlighted. 
Podocytes and PECs have common mesenchymal progenitors, therefore, PECs could be 
a source of podocyte repopulation after podocyte injury. Activated PECs migrate 
along adhesion to the glomerular tuft and may also contribute to the progression 
of sclerosis. Markers of activated PECs, including CD44, could be used to 
distinguish FSGS from minimal change disease. The pathogenesis of FSGS is very 
complex; however, understanding basic mechanisms of podocyte injury is important 
not only for basic research, but also for daily diagnostic pathology practice.

DOI: 10.4132/jptm.2016.09.21
PMCID: PMC5122732
PMID: 27744657

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.