---
reference_id: "PMID:28655174"
title: "Diagnosis and Management of Osteopetrosis: Consensus Guidelines From the Osteopetrosis Working Group."
authors:
- Wu CC
- Econs MJ
- DiMeglio LA
- Insogna KL
- Levine MA
- Orchard PJ
- Miller WP
- Petryk A
- Rush ET
- Shoback DM
- Ward LM
- Polgreen LE
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2017-01127
keywords:
- Calcitriol/therapeutic use
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Consensus
- Evidence-Based Medicine
- Female
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/methods
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- "Osteopetrosis/epidemiology, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- Prognosis
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Management of Osteopetrosis: Consensus Guidelines From the Osteopetrosis Working Group.
**Authors:** Wu CC, Econs MJ, DiMeglio LA, Insogna KL, Levine MA, Orchard PJ, Miller WP, Petryk A, Rush ET, Shoback DM, Ward LM, Polgreen LE
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2017-01127](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2017-01127)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017 Sep 1;102(9):3111-3123. doi: 
10.1210/jc.2017-01127.

Diagnosis and Management of Osteopetrosis: Consensus Guidelines From the 
Osteopetrosis Working Group.

Wu CC(1), Econs MJ(2), DiMeglio LA(3), Insogna KL(4), Levine MA(5), Orchard 
PJ(6), Miller WP(6), Petryk A(6)(7), Rush ET(8), Shoback DM(9), Ward LM(10), 
Polgreen LE(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute at 
Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California 90502.
(2)Departments of Medicine and Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202.
(4)Department of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06519.
(5)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
and Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 
55455.
(7)Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., New Haven, Connecticut 06510.
(8)Departments of Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska 
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198.
(9)Endocrine Research Unit, Department of Medicine, San Francisco Department of 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of California, San Francisco, 
California 94143.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1N 6N5, 
Canada.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute at 
Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California 90502.

BACKGROUND: Osteopetrosis encompasses a group of rare metabolic bone diseases 
characterized by impaired osteoclast activity or development, resulting in high 
bone mineral density. Existing guidelines focus on treatment of the severe 
infantile forms with hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) but do not address 
the management of patients with less severe forms for whom HCT is not the 
standard of care. Therefore, our objective was to develop expert consensus 
guidelines for the management of these patients.
METHODS: A modified Delphi method was used to build consensus among participants 
of the Osteopetrosis Working Group, with responses to an anonymous online survey 
used to identify areas of agreement and conflict and develop a follow-up survey. 
The strength of recommendations and quality of evidence was graded using the 
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation system.
RESULTS: Consensus was found in the areas of diagnosis, monitoring, and 
treatment. We recommend relying on characteristic radiographic findings to make 
the diagnosis and found that genetic testing adds important information by 
identifying mutations associated with unique disease complications. We recommend 
ongoing monitoring for changes in mineral metabolism and other complications, 
including cranial nerve impingement, anemia, leukopenia, and dental disease. We 
suggest that calcitriol should not be used in high doses and instead recommend 
symptom-based supportive therapy for disease complications because noninfantile 
osteopetrosis has no effective treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Scarcity of published studies on osteopetrosis reduce the ability 
to develop evidence-based guidelines for the management of these patients. 
Expert opinion-based guidelines for this rare condition are nevertheless 
important to enable improved care.

Copyright © 2017 Endocrine Society

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2017-01127
PMID: 28655174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]