---
reference_id: "PMID:34418586"
title: Chronic Inflammation in Ulcerative Colitis Causes Long-Term Changes in Goblet Cell Function.
authors:
- Singh V
- Johnson K
- Yin J
- Lee S
- Lin R
- Yu H
- In J
- Foulke-Abel J
- Zachos NC
- Donowitz M
- Rong Y
journal: Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.08.010
keywords:
- "Colitis, Ulcerative/pathology"
- Goblet Cells/pathology
- Humans
- Inflammation/pathology
- Intestinal Mucosa/metabolism
- Mucins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Inflammation in Ulcerative Colitis Causes Long-Term Changes in Goblet Cell Function.
**Authors:** Singh V, Johnson K, Yin J, Lee S, Lin R, Yu H, In J, Foulke-Abel J, Zachos NC, Donowitz M, Rong Y
**Journal:** Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.08.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.08.010)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2022;13(1):219-232. doi:
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.08.010. Epub 2021 Aug 18.

Chronic Inflammation in Ulcerative Colitis Causes Long-Term Changes in Goblet
Cell Function.

Singh V(1), Johnson K(2), Yin J(3), Lee S(3), Lin R(3), Yu H(3), In J(3),
Foulke-Abel J(3), Zachos NC(3), Donowitz M(2), Rong Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland. Electronic address: vsingh11@jhmi.edu.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland; Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: One of the features of ulcerative colitis (UC) is a defect in
the protective mucus layer. This has been attributed to a reduced number of
goblet cells (GCs). However, it is not known whether abnormal GC mucus secretion
also contributes to the reduced mucus layer. Our aims were to investigate
whether GC secretion was abnormal in UC and exists as a long-term effect of
chronic inflammation.
METHODS: Colonoids were established from intestinal stem cells of healthy
subjects (HS) and patients with UC. Colonoids were maintained as
undifferentiated (UD) or induced to differentiate (DF) and studied as
three-dimensional or monolayers on Transwell filters. Total RNA was extracted
for quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis. Carbachol and
prostaglandin E2 mediated mucin stimulation was examined by MUC2 IF/confocal
microscopy and transmission electron microscopy.
RESULTS: Colonoids from UC patients can be propagated over many passages;
however, they exhibit a reduced rate of growth and transepithelial electrical
resistance compared with HS. Differentiated UC colonoid monolayers form a thin
and non-continuous mucus layer. UC colonoids have increased expression of
secretory lineage markers ATOH1 and SPDEF, along with MUC2 positive GCs, but
failed to secrete mucin in response to the cholinergic agonist carbachol and
prostaglandin E2, which caused increased secretion in HS. Exposure to tumor
necrosis factor α (5 days) reduced the number of GCs, with a greater percentage
decrease in UC colonoids compared with HS.
CONCLUSIONS: Chronic inflammation in UC causes long-term changes in GCs, leading
to abnormal mucus secretion. This continued defect in GC mucus secretion may
contribute to the recurrence in UC.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.08.010
PMCID: PMC8593611
PMID: 34418586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
