---
reference_id: "PMID:20425814"
title: The MECP2 duplication syndrome.
authors:
- Ramocki MB
- Tavyev YJ
- Peters SU
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33184
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Autistic Disorder/genetics
- Gene Duplication
- Humans
- Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The MECP2 duplication syndrome.
**Authors:** Ramocki MB, Tavyev YJ, Peters SU
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.33184](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.33184)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 May;152A(5):1079-88. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33184.

The MECP2 duplication syndrome.

Ramocki MB(1), Tavyev YJ, Peters SU.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA. mramocki@bcm.edu

In this review, we detail the history, molecular diagnosis, epidemiology, and 
clinical features of the MECP2 duplication syndrome, including considerations 
for the care of patients with this X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder. MECP2 
duplication syndrome is 100% penetrant in affected males and is associated with 
infantile hypotonia, severe to profound mental retardation, autism or autistic 
features, poor speech development, recurrent infections, epilepsy, progressive 
spasticity, and, in some cases, developmental regression. Most of the reported 
cases are inherited, however, de novo cases have been documented. While carrier 
females have been reported to be unaffected, more recent research demonstrates 
that despite normal intelligence, female carriers display a range of 
neuropsychiatric phenotypes that pre-date the birth of an affected son. Given 
what we know of the syndrome to date, we propose that genetic testing is 
warranted in cases of males with infantile hypotonia and in cases of boys with 
mental retardation and autistic features with or without recurrent infections, 
progressive spasticity, epilepsy, or developmental regression. We discuss 
recommendations for clinical management and surveillance as well as the need for 
further clinical, genotype-phenotype, and molecular studies to assist the 
patients and their families who are affected by this syndrome.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33184
PMCID: PMC2861792
PMID: 20425814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]