---
reference_id: "PMID:30353170"
title: "Epigenetics in eating disorders: a systematic review."
authors:
- Hübel C
- Marzi SJ
- Breen G
- Bulik CM
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-018-0254-7
keywords:
- Anorexia Nervosa/genetics
- Bulimia Nervosa/genetics
- DNA Methylation/genetics
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/genetics"
- Epigenomics/methods
- Feeding and Eating Disorders/genetics
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetics in eating disorders: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Hübel C, Marzi SJ, Breen G, Bulik CM
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-018-0254-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-018-0254-7)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2019 Jun;24(6):901-915. doi: 10.1038/s41380-018-0254-7. Epub
2018 Oct 23.

Epigenetics in eating disorders: a systematic review.

Hübel C(1)(2)(3), Marzi SJ(1)(4), Breen G(1)(2), Bulik CM(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Social, Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(2)UK National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Maudsley Biomedical Research
Centre, South London and Maudsley Hospital and King's College London, London,
UK.
(3)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)The Blizard Institute, Barts and the London Medical School, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. cbulik@med.unc.edu.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA. cbulik@med.unc.edu.
(7)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA. cbulik@med.unc.edu.

Eating disorders are complex heritable conditions influenced by both genetic and
environmental factors. Given the progress of genomic discovery in anorexia
nervosa, with the identification of the first genome-wide significant locus, as
well as animated discussion of epigenetic mechanisms in linking environmental
factors with disease onset, our goal was to conduct a systematic review of the
current body of evidence on epigenetic factors in eating disorders to inform
future directions in this area. Following PRISMA guidelines, two independent
authors conducted a search within PubMed and Web of Science and identified 18
journal articles and conference abstracts addressing anorexia nervosa (n = 13),
bulimia nervosa (n = 6), and binge-eating disorder (n = 1), published between
January 2003 and October 2017. We reviewed all articles and included a critical
discussion of field-specific methodological considerations. The majority of
epigenetic analyses of eating disorders investigated methylation at candidate
genes (n = 13), focusing on anorexia and bulimia nervosa in very small samples
with considerable sample overlap across published studies. Three studies used
microarray-based technologies to examine DNA methylation across the genome of
anorexia nervosa and binge-eating disorder patients. Overall, results were
inconclusive and were primarily exploratory in nature. The field of epigenetics
in eating disorders remains in its infancy. We encourage the scientific
community to apply methodologically sound approaches using genome-wide designs
including epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS), to increase sample sizes,
and to broaden the focus to include all eating disorder types.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-018-0254-7
PMCID: PMC6544542
PMID: 30353170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Dr. Bulik reports: Shire
(grant recipient, Scientific Advisory Board member) and Pearson and Walker
(author, royalty recipient) (unrelated to the content of this manuscript). Dr.
Breen has received grant funding from and served as a consultant to Eli Lilly
and has received honoraria from Illumina (all unrelated to the content of this
manuscript). Dr. Marzi and Dr. Hübel have nothing to disclose.
