---
reference_id: "PMID:37597303"
title: "Comparative safety of anaplastic lymphoma kinase tyrosine kinase inhibitors in advanced anaplastic lymphoma kinase-mutated non-small cell lung cancer: Systematic review and network meta-analysis."
authors:
- Luo Y
- Zhang Z
- Guo X
- Tang X
- Li S
- Gong G
- Gao S
- Zhang Y
- Lin S
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2023.107319
keywords:
- Humans
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors
- Crizotinib
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Pyrimidines
- Sulfones
- Organophosphorus Compounds
- Aminopyridines
- Lactams
- Pyrazoles
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative safety of anaplastic lymphoma kinase tyrosine kinase inhibitors in advanced anaplastic lymphoma kinase-mutated non-small cell lung cancer: Systematic review and network meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Luo Y, Zhang Z, Guo X, Tang X, Li S, Gong G, Gao S, Zhang Y, Lin S
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2023.107319](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2023.107319)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2023 Oct;184:107319. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2023.107319. Epub
2023  Aug 7.

Comparative safety of anaplastic lymphoma kinase tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
advanced anaplastic lymphoma kinase-mutated non-small cell lung cancer:
Systematic review and network meta-analysis.

Luo Y(1), Zhang Z(1), Guo X(1), Tang X(1), Li S(1), Gong G(2), Gao S(2), Zhang
Y(3), Lin S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical
University, Luzhou, China.
(2)Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Luzhou Municipal People's Hospital, Luzhou, China.
Electronic address: zyx140721@163.com.
(4)Department of Oncology, The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical
University, Luzhou, China. Electronic address: lslinsheng@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (ALK-TKIs) are
new treatment for advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Here, we quantified the
toxicity profiles of different ALK-TKIs to guide clinical decision making.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We searched PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Central
Register of Controlled Trials. Data were analyzed using random effects and
consistency models under the frequency framework.
RESULTS: Of 865 relevant studies, 13 RCTs (encompassing 3,353 patients) were
finally included. A network meta-analysis of all-grade AEs, fatal AEs, and
treatment discontinuation due to AEs revealed no significant differences among
the six ALK-TKIs. The rates of grade 3-4 AEs were: alectinib (16.2%), crizotinib
(46.4%), brigatinib (63.7%), ensartinib (75.6%), ceritinib (78.3%), and
lorlatinib (91.6%). The toxicity spectra of ALK-TKIs were different. The most
frequent AEs associated with crizotinib were gastrointestinal reactions, visual
disorders, neutropenia, edema, fatigue, and elevated alanine aminotransferase
(ALT) or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels, while those in the alectinib
group were anemia and constipation. Diarrhea, hepatotoxicity, and increased
serum creatinine were most common with ceritinib. The most frequent AEs in the
brigatinib group were gastrointestinal reactions, hypertension, cough, headache,
and elevated ALT or AST levels. The most significant toxicities of ensartinib
were skin disorders, including pruritus and rash. Changes in lipid levels were
the most frequent AEs associated with lorlatinib; weight gain, cognitive
effects, and mood effects were lorlatinib-specific AEs.
CONCLUSIONS: The toxicity spectra of ALK-TKIs differed. Alectinib might be the
safest ALK-TKI drug according to the combined evidence of grades 3-4 AEs and the
combined incidence.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2023.107319
PMID: 37597303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
