---
reference_id: "PMID:35061769"
title: Relationship between hypertension and non-obstructive coronary artery disease in chronic coronary syndrome (the NORIC registry).
authors:
- Berge CA
- Eskerud I
- Almeland EB
- Larsen TH
- Pedersen ER
- Rotevatn S
- Lønnebakken MT
journal: PLoS One
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0262290
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship between hypertension and non-obstructive coronary artery disease in chronic coronary syndrome (the NORIC registry).
**Authors:** Berge CA, Eskerud I, Almeland EB, Larsen TH, Pedersen ER, Rotevatn S, Lønnebakken MT
**Journal:** PLoS One (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0262290](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0262290)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2022 Jan 21;17(1):e0262290. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0262290. 
eCollection 2022.

Relationship between hypertension and non-obstructive coronary artery disease in 
chronic coronary syndrome (the NORIC registry).

Berge CA(1), Eskerud I(2), Almeland EB(2), Larsen TH(1)(3), Pedersen ER(1), 
Rotevatn S(1), Lønnebakken MT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Heart Disease, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: The burden of non-obstructive coronary artery disease (CAD) in the 
society is high, and there is currently limited evidence-based recommendation 
for risk stratification and treatment. Previous studies have demonstrated an 
association between increasing extent of non-obstructive CAD and cardiovascular 
events. Whether hypertension, a modifiable cardiovascular risk factor, is 
associated with extensive non-obstructive CAD in patients with symptomatic 
chronic coronary syndrome (CCS) remains unclear.
METHODS: We included 1138 patients (mean age 62±11 years, 48% women) with 
symptomatic CCS and non-obstructive CAD (1-49% lumen diameter reduction) by 
coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) from the Norwegian Registry for 
Invasive Cardiology (NORIC). The extent of non-obstructive CAD was assessed as 
coronary artery segment involvement score (SIS), and extensive non-obstructive 
CAD was adjudicated when SIS >4. Hypertension was defined as known hypertension 
or use of antihypertensive medication.
RESULTS: Hypertension was found in 45% of patients. Hypertensive patients were 
older, with a higher SIS, calcium score, and prevalence of comorbidities and 
statin therapy compared to the normotensive (all p<0.05). There was no 
difference in the prevalence of hypertension between sexes. Univariable analysis 
revealed a significant association between hypertension and non-obstructive CAD. 
In multivariable analysis, hypertension remained associated with extensive 
non-obstructive CAD, independent of sex, age, smoking, diabetes, statin 
treatment, obesity and calcium score (OR 1.85, 95% CI [1.22-2.80], p = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: In symptomatic CCS, hypertension was associated with extensive 
non-obstructive CAD by CCTA. Whether hypertension may be a new treatment target 
in symptomatic non-obstructive CAD needs to be explored in future studies.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: Identifier NCT04009421.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0262290
PMCID: PMC8782369
PMID: 35061769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.