---
reference_id: "PMID:15108122"
title: Missense mutation in pseudouridine synthase 1 (PUS1) causes mitochondrial myopathy and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA).
authors:
- Bykhovskaya Y
- Casas K
- Mengesha E
- Inbal A
- Fischel-Ghodsian N
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1086/421530
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Anemia, Sideroblastic/genetics"
- Biological Evolution
- Bone Marrow/enzymology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Hydro-Lyases/genetics
- Male
- Mitochondrial Myopathies/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscle, Skeletal/enzymology"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Pseudouridine/metabolism
- "RNA, Transfer/genetics"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Missense mutation in pseudouridine synthase 1 (PUS1) causes mitochondrial myopathy and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA).
**Authors:** Bykhovskaya Y, Casas K, Mengesha E, Inbal A, Fischel-Ghodsian N
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1086/421530](https://doi.org/10.1086/421530)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Jun;74(6):1303-8. doi: 10.1086/421530. Epub 2004 Apr 22.

Missense mutation in pseudouridine synthase 1 (PUS1) causes mitochondrial
myopathy and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA).

Bykhovskaya Y(1), Casas K, Mengesha E, Inbal A, Fischel-Ghodsian N.

Author information:
(1)Ahmanson Department of Pediatrics, Steven Spielberg Pediatric Research
Center, and Medical Genetics Birth Defects Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,
Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

Mitochondrial myopathy and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA) is a rare, autosomal
recessive oxidative phosphorylation disorder specific to skeletal muscle and
bone marrow. Linkage analysis and homozygosity testing of two families with
MLASA localized the candidate region to 1.2 Mb on 12q24.33. Sequence analysis of
each of the six known genes in this region, as well as four putative genes with
expression in bone marrow or muscle, identified a homozygous missense mutation
in the pseudouridine synthase 1 gene (PUS1) in all patients with MLASA from
these families. The mutation is the only amino acid coding change in these 10
genes that is not a known polymorphism, and it is not found in 934 controls. The
amino acid change affects a highly conserved amino acid, and appears to be in
the catalytic center of the protein, PUS1p. PUS1 is widely expressed, and
quantitative expression analysis of RNAs from liver, brain, heart, bone marrow,
and skeletal muscle showed elevated levels of expression in skeletal muscle and
brain. We propose deficient pseudouridylation of mitochondrial tRNAs as an
etiology of MLASA. Identification of the pathophysiologic pathways of the
mutation in these families may shed light on the tissue specificity of oxidative
phosphorylation disorders.

DOI: 10.1086/421530
PMCID: PMC1182096
PMID: 15108122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
