---
reference_id: "PMID:19333779"
title: "Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: the effects of accidental fat loading in a patient detected through newborn screening."
authors:
- Ficicioglu C
- Hussa C
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-009-1143-7
keywords:
- "Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase, Long-Chain/deficiency, genetics"
- Age of Onset
- Congenital Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes
- "Diet, Fat-Restricted"
- "Dietary Fats/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant Formula/administration & dosage"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, diet therapy, genetics"
- Male
- Medical Errors
- "Milk Proteins/administration & dosage"
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/diagnosis, diet therapy, genetics"
- "Muscular Diseases/diagnosis, diet therapy, genetics"
- Neonatal Screening
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: the effects of accidental fat loading in a patient detected through newborn screening.
**Authors:** Ficicioglu C, Hussa C
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-009-1143-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-009-1143-7)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2009 Dec;32 Suppl 1:S187-90. doi:
10.1007/s10545-009-1143-7. Epub 2009 Apr 4.

Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: the effects of accidental fat
loading in a patient detected through newborn screening.

Ficicioglu C(1), Hussa C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Biochemical Genetics, The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. Ficicioglu@email.chop.edu

Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (VLCADD) is an autosomal
recessive disorder of fatty acid oxidation. The majority of patients with VLCADD
can be detected through newborn screening (NBS) with elevated levels of the
tetradecanoyl carnitine species. An 11-month-old infant, diagnosed with
late-onset VLCADD (genotype: T848C/G1322A) through newborn screening at birth,
was admitted with emesis, severe lethargy, limpness in extremities, loss of
muscle tone and an elevated CK level. He was mistakenly given Ketocal formula
(about 8 g/kg per day long-chain fat-over six times his usual intake) instead of
his usual Monogen formula for 2.5 days before being admitted. Once admitted, he
was started on Monogen and IV (10% dextrose) fluids. He was discharged home
after four days in the hospital without any sequelae of this accidental fat
loading event. The report highlights several important points about this
particular case and more generally about patients with VLCADD detected through
NBS: (1) the amount of time in which patients might become severely symptomatic
and the nature of these symptoms after fat loading; (2) the time frame for
complete recovery after beginning of treatment; (3) the importance of alerting
home-care companies and families about formula delivery errors and their
repercussions.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-009-1143-7
PMID: 19333779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
