---
reference_id: "PMID:37166701"
title: "Nonstimulant Medications for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in Adults: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Radonjić NV
- Bellato A
- Khoury NM
- Cortese S
- Faraone SV
journal: CNS Drugs
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40263-023-01005-8
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/drug therapy
- Atomoxetine Hydrochloride/adverse effects
- Guanfacine/adverse effects
- Viloxazine
- Central Nervous System Stimulants/adverse effects
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonstimulant Medications for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in Adults: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Radonjić NV, Bellato A, Khoury NM, Cortese S, Faraone SV
**Journal:** CNS Drugs (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40263-023-01005-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-023-01005-8)

## Content

1. CNS Drugs. 2023 May;37(5):381-397. doi: 10.1007/s40263-023-01005-8. Epub 2023
May 11.

Nonstimulant Medications for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in
Adults: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Radonjić NV(#)(1), Bellato A(#)(2), Khoury NM(1), Cortese S(#)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7),
Faraone SV(#)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, NY, USA.
(2)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham Malaysia, Jalan Broga,
Semeniyih, Malaysia.
(3)Centre for Innovation in Mental Health, School of Psychology, Faculty of
Environmental and Life Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(4)Solent NHS Trust, Southampton, UK.
(5)Clinical and Experimental Sciences (CNS and Psychiatry), Faculty of Medicine,
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(6)Hassenfeld Children's Hospital at NYU Langone, New York University Child
Study Center, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Division of Psychiatry and Applied Psychology, School of Medicine, University
of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(8)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science and Neuroscience and
Physiology, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA.
sfaraone@childpsychresearch.org.
(9)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science and Neuroscience and
Physiology, Institute for Human Performance, SUNY Upstate Medical University,
Room 3707, 505 Irving Ave., Syracuse, NY, 13210, USA.
sfaraone@childpsychresearch.org.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: For some adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD), nonstimulants need to be considered either as a monotherapy or as an
adjunct to stimulants.
OBJECTIVES: The objectives of this systematic review and meta-analysis were to
assess the efficacy, acceptability, and tolerability of nonstimulants in adults
with ADHD.
METHODS: Data sources, searches, and study selection were based on a previously
published network meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials (RCTs) by Cortese
at al. (Lancet Psychiatry 5(9):727-738, 2018), which we updated in March 2022.
Specifically, we searched PubMed, BIOSIS Previews, CINAHL, the Cochrane Central
Register of Controlled Trials, EMBASE, ERIC, MEDLINE, PsycINFO, OpenGrey, Web of
Science Core Collection, ProQuest Dissertations and Theses (UK and Ireland),
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses (abstracts and international), and the WHO
International Trials Registry Platform, including ClinicalTrials.gov for
double-blind RCTs with a placebo arm, lasting at least one week, including
adults with a diagnosis of ADHD based on DSM-III, DSM-III-R, DSM-IV(TR), DSM-5
or ICD-9- or 10, and reporting data on efficacy, tolerability (drop-out due to
side effects) and acceptability (drop-out due to any cause) of guanfacine,
clonidine, or atomoxetine. Additionally, we searched for RCTs of viloxazine
extended release (ER), approved for ADHD in 2021. Random-effects meta-analyses
were conducted, and the risk of bias for individual RCTs was assessed using the
Cochrane Risk of Bias tool.
RESULTS: We included 18 studies in the meta-analyses (4308 participants) plus
one additional study in the narrative synthesis (374 participants). The
meta-analysis showed that atomoxetine (15 RCTs) (Hedge's g = - 0.48, 95% CI
[- 0.64; - 0.33]), guanfacine (two RCTs) (Hedge's g = - 0.66, 95% CI [- 0.94;
- 0.38]) and viloxazine ER (one RCT) were significantly more efficacious than
placebo. Atomoxetine was less well tolerated than placebo, while tolerability of
guanfacine and viloxazine ER could not be meta-analysed, since only one study,
for each medication, reported on it.
CONCLUSIONS: All investigated nonstimulants were more efficacious in the
treatment of ADHD in adults, than placebo, while the placebo had better
acceptability and tolerability.
PROTOCOL: https://osf.io/5vnmt/?view_only=2bf87ed12ba94645babedceeee4c0120 .

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40263-023-01005-8
PMID: 37166701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
