---
reference_id: "PMID:26095438"
title: Analysis of Histologic Features Suspecting Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK)-Expressing Pulmonary Adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Choi IH
- Kim DW
- Ha SY
- Choi YL
- Lee HJ
- Han J
journal: J Pathol Transl Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.4132/jptm.2015.05.13
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of Histologic Features Suspecting Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK)-Expressing Pulmonary Adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Choi IH, Kim DW, Ha SY, Choi YL, Lee HJ, Han J
**Journal:** J Pathol Transl Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.4132/jptm.2015.05.13](https://doi.org/10.4132/jptm.2015.05.13)

## Content

1. J Pathol Transl Med. 2015 Jul;49(4):310-7. doi: 10.4132/jptm.2015.05.13. Epub
2015 Jul 15.

Analysis of Histologic Features Suspecting Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
(ALK)-Expressing Pulmonary Adenocarcinoma.

Choi IH(1), Kim DW(1), Ha SY(2), Choi YL(2), Lee HJ(3), Han J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Soonchunhyang University Seoul Hospital,
Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Gwangmyeong Sungae Hospital, Gwangmyeong, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Since 2007 when anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangements were
discovered in non-small cell lung cancer, the ALK gene has received attention
due to ALK-targeted therapy, and a notable treatment advantage has been observed
in patients harboring the EML4/ALK translocation. However, using
ALK-fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) as the standard method has
demerits such as high cost, a time-consuming process, dependency on
interpretation skill, and tissue preparation. We analyzed the histologic
findings which could complement the limitation of ALK-FISH test for pulmonary
adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: Two hundred five cases of ALK-positive and 101 of ALK-negative
pulmonary adenocarcinoma from January 2007 to May 2013 were enrolled in this
study. The histologic findings and ALK immunohistochemistry results were
reviewed and compared with the results of ALK-FISH and EGFR/KRAS mutation
status.
RESULTS: Acinar, cribriform, and solid growth patterns, extracellular and
intracellular mucin production, and presence of signet-ring-cell element, and
psammoma body were significantly more often present in ALK-positive cancer. In
addition, the presence of goblet cell-like cells and presence of nuclear
inclusion and groove resembling papillary thyroid carcinoma were common in the
ALK-positive group.
CONCLUSIONS: The above histologic parameters can be helpful in predicting ALK
rearranged pulmonary adenocarcinoma, leading to rapid FISH analysis and timely
treatment.

DOI: 10.4132/jptm.2015.05.13
PMCID: PMC4508568
PMID: 26095438

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest No potential conflict of
interest relevant to this article was reported.
