---
reference_id: "PMID:26206888"
title: N-acetylcysteine treatment ameliorates the skeletal phenotype of a mouse model of diastrophic dysplasia.
authors:
- Monti L
- Paganini C
- Lecci S
- De Leonardis F
- Hay E
- Cohen-Solal M
- Villani S
- Superti-Furga A
- Tenni R
- Forlino A
- Rossi A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv289
keywords:
- "Acetylcysteine/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Antioxidants/administration & dosage"
- "Bone and Bones/drug effects, pathology"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Chondrocytes/cytology, drug effects"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Dwarfism/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Embryo, Mammalian/drug effects"
- Female
- Growth and Development/drug effects
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Pregnancy
- Proteoglycans/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# N-acetylcysteine treatment ameliorates the skeletal phenotype of a mouse model of diastrophic dysplasia.
**Authors:** Monti L, Paganini C, Lecci S, De Leonardis F, Hay E, Cohen-Solal M, Villani S, Superti-Furga A, Tenni R, Forlino A, Rossi A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv289](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv289)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Oct 1;24(19):5570-80. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv289. Epub 2015
Jul  23.

N-acetylcysteine treatment ameliorates the skeletal phenotype of a mouse model 
of diastrophic dysplasia.

Monti L(1), Paganini C(1), Lecci S(1), De Leonardis F(1), Hay E(2), Cohen-Solal 
M(2), Villani S(3), Superti-Furga A(4), Tenni R(1), Forlino A(1), Rossi A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Unit of Biochemistry and.
(2)Inserm U1132 and University Paris 7, Hopital Lariboisiere, 75010 Paris, 
France and.
(3)Department of Public Health, Experimental and Forensic Medicine, Unit of 
Biostatistics and Clinical Epidemiology, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Lausanne University Hospital, University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne 1011, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, Unit of Biochemistry and antrossi@unipv.it.

Diastrophic dysplasia (DTD) is a recessive chondrodysplasia caused by mutations 
in SLC26A2, a cell membrane sulfate-chloride antiporter. Sulfate uptake 
impairment results in low cytosolic sulfate, leading to cartilage proteoglycan 
(PG) undersulfation. In this work, we used the dtd mouse model to study the role 
of N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC), a well-known drug with antioxidant properties, as 
an intracellular sulfate source for macromolecular sulfation. Because of the 
important pre-natal phase of skeletal development and growth, we administered 30 
g/l NAC in the drinking water to pregnant mice to explore a possible 
transplacental effect on the fetuses. When cartilage PG sulfation was evaluated 
by high-performance liquid chromatography disaccharide analysis in dtd newborn 
mice, a marked increase in PG sulfation was observed in newborns from 
NAC-treated pregnancies when compared with the placebo group. Morphometric 
studies of the femur, tibia and ilium after skeletal staining with alcian blue 
and alizarin red indicated a partial rescue of abnormal bone morphology in dtd 
newborns from treated females, compared with pups from untreated females. The 
beneficial effect of increased macromolecular sulfation was confirmed by 
chondrocyte proliferation studies in cryosections of the tibial epiphysis by 
proliferating cell nuclear antigen immunohistochemistry: the percentage of 
proliferating cells, significantly reduced in the placebo group, reached normal 
values in dtd newborns from NAC-treated females. In conclusion, NAC is a useful 
source of sulfate for macromolecular sulfation in vivo when extracellular 
sulfate supply is reduced, confirming the potential of therapeutic approaches 
with thiol compounds to improve skeletal deformity and short stature in human 
DTD and related disorders.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv289
PMID: 26206888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]