---
reference_id: "PMID:27234404"
title: Genetic testing of the FBN1 gene in Chinese patients with Marfan/Marfan-like syndrome.
authors:
- Yang H
- Luo M
- Chen Q
- Fu Y
- Zhang J
- Qian X
- Sun X
- Fan Y
- Zhou Z
- Chang Q
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2016.05.021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic testing of the FBN1 gene in Chinese patients with Marfan/Marfan-like syndrome.
**Authors:** Yang H, Luo M, Chen Q, Fu Y, Zhang J, Qian X, Sun X, Fan Y, Zhou Z, Chang Q
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2016.05.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2016.05.021)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2016 Aug 1;459:30-35. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2016.05.021. Epub
2016  May 24.

Genetic testing of the FBN1 gene in Chinese patients with Marfan/Marfan-like 
syndrome.

Yang H(1), Luo M(2), Chen Q(1), Fu Y(1), Zhang J(2), Qian X(2), Sun X(2), Fan 
Y(3), Zhou Z(4), Chang Q(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Beijing Key Laboratory for 
Molecular Diagnostics of Cardiovascular Diseases, Diagnostic Laboratory Service, 
Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100037, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Center of Vascular Surgery, 
Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100037, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)John Welsh Cardiovascular Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of Pediatrics, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Beijing Key Laboratory for 
Molecular Diagnostics of Cardiovascular Diseases, Diagnostic Laboratory Service, 
Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100037, People's 
Republic of China. Electronic address: zhouzhou@fuwaihospital.org.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Center of Vascular Surgery, 
Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100037, People's 
Republic of China. Electronic address: chqfw@yahoo.com.

Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder 
typically involving the ocular, skeletal and cardiovascular systems, and aortic 
aneurysms/dissection mainly contributes to its mortality. Here, we performed 
genetic testing of the FBN1 gene in 39 Chinese probands with Marfan/Marfan-like 
syndrome and their related family members by Sanger sequencing. In total, 29 
pathogenic/likely pathogenic FBN1 mutations, including 17 novel ones, were 
identified. In addition, most MFS patients with aortic disease (62%) had a 
truncating or splicing mutation. These results expand the FBN1 mutation spectrum 
and enrich our knowledge of genotype-phenotype correlations. Genetic testing for 
MFS and its related aortic diseases is increasingly important for early 
intervention and treatment.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2016.05.021
PMID: 27234404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]