---
reference_id: "PMID:34392972"
title: "Heterogeneous impact of hypotension on organ perfusion and outcomes: a narrative review."
authors:
- Meng L
journal: Br J Anaesth
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.bja.2021.06.048
keywords:
- Blood Circulation/physiology
- Humans
- "Hypotension/complications, physiopathology"
- "Intraoperative Complications/etiology, physiopathology"
- "Postoperative Complications/etiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterogeneous impact of hypotension on organ perfusion and outcomes: a narrative review.
**Authors:** Meng L
**Journal:** Br J Anaesth (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bja.2021.06.048](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bja.2021.06.048)

## Content

1. Br J Anaesth. 2021 Dec;127(6):845-861. doi: 10.1016/j.bja.2021.06.048. Epub
2021  Aug 12.

Heterogeneous impact of hypotension on organ perfusion and outcomes: a narrative
review.

Meng L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT, USA. Electronic address: lingzhong.meng@yale.edu.

Arterial blood pressure is the driving force for organ perfusion. Although
hypotension is common in acute care, there is a lack of accepted criteria for
its definition. Most practitioners regard hypotension as undesirable even in
situations that pose no immediate threat to life, but hypotension does not
always lead to unfavourable outcomes based on experience and evidence. Thus
efforts are needed to better understand the causes, consequences, and treatments
of hypotension. This narrative review focuses on the heterogeneous underlying
pathophysiological bases of hypotension and their impact on organ perfusion and
patient outcomes. We propose the iso-pressure curve with hypotension and
hypertension zones as a way to visualize changes in blood pressure. We also
propose a haemodynamic pyramid and a pressure-output-resistance triangle to
facilitate understanding of why hypotension can have different
pathophysiological mechanisms and end-organ effects. We emphasise that
hypotension does not always lead to organ hypoperfusion; to the contrary,
hypotension may preserve or even increase organ perfusion depending on the
relative changes in perfusion pressure and regional vascular resistance and the
status of blood pressure autoregulation. Evidence from RCTs does not support the
notion that a higher arterial blood pressure target always leads to improved
outcomes. Management of blood pressure is not about maintaining a prespecified
value, but rather involves ensuring organ perfusion without undue stress on the
cardiovascular system.

Copyright © 2021 British Journal of Anaesthesia. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bja.2021.06.048
PMCID: PMC8978210
PMID: 34392972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
