---
reference_id: "PMID:35426371"
title: "Mitochondria and the future of RASopathies: the emergence of bioenergetics."
authors:
- Kontaridis MI
- Chennappan S
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1172/JCI157560
keywords:
- Animals
- Costello Syndrome/metabolism
- Energy Metabolism
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mitochondria/genetics, metabolism"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Zebrafish/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondria and the future of RASopathies: the emergence of bioenergetics.
**Authors:** Kontaridis MI, Chennappan S
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI157560](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI157560)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2022 Apr 15;132(8):1-5. doi: 10.1172/JCI157560.

Mitochondria and the future of RASopathies: the emergence of bioenergetics.

Kontaridis MI(1)(2)(3), Chennappan S(1).

Author information:
(1)Masonic Medical Research Institute, Department of Biological Sciences and 
Translational Medicine, Utica, New York, USA.
(2)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Department of Medicine, Division of 
Cardiology, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2022 Apr 15;132(8):e131053. doi: 10.1172/JCI131053.

RASopathies are a family of rare autosomal dominant disorders that affect the 
canonical Ras/MAPK signaling pathway and manifest as neurodevelopmental systemic 
syndromes, including Costello syndrome (CS). In this issue of the JCI, Dard et 
al. describe the molecular determinants of CS using a myriad of genetically 
modified models, including mice expressing HRAS p.G12S, patient-derived skin 
fibroblasts, hiPSC-derived human cardiomyocytes, an HRAS p.G12V zebrafish model, 
and human lentivirally induced fibroblasts overexpressing HRAS p.G12S or HRAS 
p.G12A. Mitochondrial proteostasis and oxidative phosphorylation were altered in 
CS, and inhibition of the AMPK signaling pathway mediated bioenergetic changes. 
Importantly, the pharmacological induction of this pathway restored cardiac 
function and reduced the developmental defects associated with CS. These 
findings identify a role for altered bioenergetics and provide insights into 
more effective treatment strategies for patients with RASopathies.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI157560
PMCID: PMC9017150
PMID: 35426371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: MIK receives grant funding 
from Onconova Therapeutics. MIK also holds patent no. 9844535 (“SHP2 inhibitors 
and Methods of Treating Glomerulonephritis-Associated Diseases using SHP2 
Inhibitors”) and patent application no. 20180071252 (“Methods of Treating 
Autoimmune and/or Glomerulonephritis-Associated Diseases using SHP-2 
Inhibitors”).