---
reference_id: "PMID:39045727"
title: "Long-Term Hearing Outcome For Vestibular Schwannomas After Microsurgery And Radiotherapy: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Daloiso A
- Cazzador D
- Concheri S
- Tealdo G
- Zanoletti E
journal: Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ohn.910
keywords:
- Humans
- "Neuroma, Acoustic/surgery, radiotherapy"
- Microsurgery
- Hearing Loss/etiology
- "Radiosurgery/adverse effects, methods"
- Hearing/radiation effects
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Hearing Outcome For Vestibular Schwannomas After Microsurgery And Radiotherapy: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Daloiso A, Cazzador D, Concheri S, Tealdo G, Zanoletti E
**Journal:** Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ohn.910](https://doi.org/10.1002/ohn.910)

## Content

1. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2024 Dec;171(6):1670-1681. doi: 10.1002/ohn.910. 
Epub 2024 Jul 24.

Long-Term Hearing Outcome For Vestibular Schwannomas After Microsurgery And 
Radiotherapy: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Daloiso A(1), Cazzador D(1), Concheri S(1), Tealdo G(1), Zanoletti E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience DNS, Otolaryngology Section, University of Padova, 
Padova, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Hearing loss is a common symptom associated with vestibular 
schwannoma (VS), either because of the tumor's effects on the cochlear nerve or 
due to active treatments such as surgery or stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS). 
Treatment decisions for VS are based on factors including tumor size, hearing 
status, patient symptoms, and institutional preference. The study aimed to 
investigate long-term auditory outcomes in VS patients undergoing active 
treatments with a hearing preservation intent.
DATA SOURCES: A systematic literature review was conducted following Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines, searching 
Scopus, Pubmed, and Web of Science databases from inception to January 2024.
REVIEW METHODS: Studies meeting inclusion criteria, including a minimum 5-year 
follow-up and assessment of pre- and posttreatment hearing outcomes, were 
included. Pooled prevalence estimates for serviceable hearing after SRS and 
microsurgery were calculated using MetaXL software. Risk of bias assessment was 
performed with the Risk of Bias in Non-randomized Studies of Interventions tool.
RESULTS: Nine studies met the inclusion criteria, with 356 patients included for 
analysis. The pooled prevalence of maintaining serviceable hearing after SRS at 
10 years was 18.1% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.7%-43.3%), with wide 
prediction intervals indicating variability in outcomes. Microsurgery 
demonstrated a higher prevalence of maintaining long-term serviceable hearing, 
with a pooled estimate of 74.5% (95% CI: 63.5%-84.1%).
CONCLUSION: This systematic review underscores the importance of long-term 
follow-up in evaluating auditory outcomes in VS treatment. Despite the biases 
inherent to pretreatment patients selection, hearing preservation microsurgery 
for sporadic VS removal demonstrated favorable and stable long-term serviceable 
hearing.

© 2024 The Author(s). Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck 
Surgery Foundation.

DOI: 10.1002/ohn.910
PMCID: PMC11605020
PMID: 39045727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.