---
reference_id: "PMID:38637590"
title: Polycystic ovary syndrome.
authors:
- Stener-Victorin E
- Teede H
- Norman RJ
- Legro R
- Goodarzi MO
- Dokras A
- Laven J
- Hoeger K
- Piltonen TT
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-024-00511-3
keywords:
- Pregnancy
- Adult
- Adolescent
- Female
- Humans
- "Polycystic Ovary Syndrome/complications, diagnosis"
- Hyperandrogenism
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/complications"
- Quality of Life
- Anti-Mullerian Hormone
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polycystic ovary syndrome.
**Authors:** Stener-Victorin E, Teede H, Norman RJ, Legro R, Goodarzi MO, Dokras A, Laven J, Hoeger K, Piltonen TT
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-024-00511-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-024-00511-3)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2024 Apr 18;10(1):27. doi: 10.1038/s41572-024-00511-3.

Polycystic ovary syndrome.

Stener-Victorin E(1), Teede H(2), Norman RJ(3), Legro R(4)(5), Goodarzi MO(6),
Dokras A(7), Laven J(8), Hoeger K(9), Piltonen TT(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden. elisabet.stener-victorin@ki.se.
(2)Monash Centre for Health Research and Implementation, Monash Health and
Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Robinson Research Institute, Adelaide Medical School, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Penn State College of Medicine,
Hershey, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Public Health Science, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey,
PA, USA.
(6)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology & Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA.
(10)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Research Unit of Clinical Medicine,
Medical Research Center, Oulu University Hospital, University of Oulu, Oulu,
Finland.

Despite affecting ~11-13% of women globally, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is
a substantially understudied condition. PCOS, possibly extending to men's
health, imposes a considerable health and economic burden worldwide. Diagnosis
in adults follows the International Evidence-based Guideline for the Assessment
and Management of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome, requiring two out of three criteria
- clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism, ovulatory dysfunction, and/or
specific ovarian morphological characteristics or elevated anti-Müllerian
hormone. However, diagnosing adolescents omits ovarian morphology and
anti-Müllerian hormone considerations. PCOS, marked by insulin resistance and
hyperandrogenism, strongly contributes to early-onset type 2 diabetes, with
increased odds for cardiovascular diseases. Reproduction-related implications
include irregular menstrual cycles, anovulatory infertility, heightened risks of
pregnancy complications and endometrial cancer. Beyond physiological
manifestations, PCOS is associated with anxiety, depression, eating disorders,
psychosexual dysfunction and negative body image, collectively contributing to
diminished health-related quality of life in patients. Despite its high
prevalence persisting into menopause, diagnosing PCOS often involves extended
timelines and multiple health-care visits. Treatment remains ad hoc owing to
limited understanding of underlying mechanisms, highlighting the need for
research delineating the aetiology and pathophysiology of the syndrome.
Identifying factors contributing to PCOS will pave the way for personalized
medicine approaches. Additionally, exploring novel biomarkers, refining
diagnostic criteria and advancing treatment modalities will be crucial in
enhancing the precision and efficacy of interventions that will positively
impact the lives of patients.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-024-00511-3
PMID: 38637590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
