---
reference_id: "PMID:31675495"
title: "Cellular Senescence: Defining a Path Forward."
authors:
- Gorgoulis V
- Adams PD
- Alimonti A
- Bennett DC
- Bischof O
- Bishop C
- Campisi J
- Collado M
- Evangelou K
- Ferbeyre G
- Gil J
- Hara E
- Krizhanovsky V
- Jurk D
- Maier AB
- Narita M
- Niedernhofer L
- Passos JF
- Robbins PD
- Schmitt CA
- Sedivy J
- Vougas K
- von Zglinicki T
- Zhou D
- Serrano M
- Demaria M
journal: Cell
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.005
keywords:
- Aging/genetics
- Biomarkers
- Cell Cycle Checkpoints/genetics
- Cellular Senescence/genetics
- Chromatin/genetics
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/genetics, therapy"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular Senescence: Defining a Path Forward.
**Authors:** Gorgoulis V, Adams PD, Alimonti A, Bennett DC, Bischof O, Bishop C, Campisi J, Collado M, Evangelou K, Ferbeyre G, Gil J, Hara E, Krizhanovsky V, Jurk D, Maier AB, Narita M, Niedernhofer L, Passos JF, Robbins PD, Schmitt CA, Sedivy J, Vougas K, von Zglinicki T, Zhou D, Serrano M, Demaria M
**Journal:** Cell (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.005)

## Content

1. Cell. 2019 Oct 31;179(4):813-827. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.005.

Cellular Senescence: Defining a Path Forward.

Gorgoulis V(1), Adams PD(2), Alimonti A(3), Bennett DC(4), Bischof O(5), Bishop 
C(6), Campisi J(7), Collado M(8), Evangelou K(9), Ferbeyre G(10), Gil J(11), 
Hara E(12), Krizhanovsky V(13), Jurk D(14), Maier AB(15), Narita M(16), 
Niedernhofer L(17), Passos JF(14), Robbins PD(17), Schmitt CA(18), Sedivy J(19), 
Vougas K(20), von Zglinicki T(21), Zhou D(22), Serrano M(23), Demaria M(24).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Group, Department of Histology and Embryology, 
Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece; 
Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece; Faculty 
Institute for Cancer Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; Center for New Biotechnologies and 
Precision Medicine, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, Athens, Greece. Electronic address: vgorg@med.uoa.gr.
(2)Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK; 
CRUK Beatson Institute, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK; Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical 
Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(3)Institute of Oncology Research (IOR), Oncology Institute of Southern 
Switzerland, Bellinzona, Switzerland; Università della Svizzera Italiana, 
Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Lugano, Switzerland; Department of Medicine, 
University of Padova, Padova, Italy; Veneto Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
Padova, Italy.
(4)Molecular and Clinical Sciences Research Institute, St. George's, University 
of London, London SW17 0RE, UK.
(5)Laboratory of Nuclear Organization and Oncogenesis, Department of Cell 
Biology and Infection, Inserm U993, Institute Pasteur, Paris, France.
(6)Centre for Cell Biology and Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute, Barts & 
The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 4 
Newark St, London E1 2AT, UK.
(7)Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA, USA.
(8)Health Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela (IDIS), Clinical 
University Hospital (CHUS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(9)Molecular Carcinogenesis Group, Department of Histology and Embryology, 
Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(10)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, Université de Montréal and 
CRCHUM, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(11)MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences (LMS), Du Cane Road, London, UK; 
Institute of Clinical Sciences (ICS), Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College 
London, Du Cane Road, London, UK.
(12)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Research Institute for Microbial 
Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(13)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot, Israel.
(14)Robert and Arlene Kogod Center on Aging, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(15)Department of Human Movement Sciences, Faculty of Behavioural and Movement 
Sciences, Amsterdam Movement Sciences, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands; Department of Medicine and Aged Care, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, 
The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(16)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0RE, United Kingdom.
(17)Institute on the Biology of Aging and Metabolism, University of Minnesota, 
MN, USA.
(18)Charité - University Medical Center, Department of Hematology, Oncology and 
Tumor Immunology, Virchow Campus, and Molekulares Krebsforschungszentrum, 
Berlin, Germany; Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz 
Association, Berlin, Germany; Kepler University Hospital, Department of 
Hematology and Oncology, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria.
(19)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, and Center 
for the Biology of Aging, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(20)Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(21)Newcastle University Institute for Ageing, Institute for Cell and Molecular 
Biology, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon 
Tyne NE4 5PL, UK.
(22)Department of Pharmacodynamics, College of Pharmacy, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(23)Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, 
Spain; Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona 
Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain. Electronic 
address: manuel.serrano@irbbarcelona.org.
(24)University of Groningen (RUG), European Research Institute for the Biology 
of Aging (ERIBA), University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), Groningen, the 
Netherlands. Electronic address: m.demaria@umcg.nl.

Cellular senescence is a cell state implicated in various physiological 
processes and a wide spectrum of age-related diseases. Recently, interest in 
therapeutically targeting senescence to improve healthy aging and age-related 
disease, otherwise known as senotherapy, has been growing rapidly. Thus, the 
accurate detection of senescent cells, especially in vivo, is essential. Here, 
we present a consensus from the International Cell Senescence Association 
(ICSA), defining and discussing key cellular and molecular features of 
senescence and offering recommendations on how to use them as biomarkers. We 
also present a resource tool to facilitate the identification of genes linked 
with senescence, SeneQuest (available at http://Senequest.net). Lastly, we 
propose an algorithm to accurately assess and quantify senescence, both in 
cultured cells and in vivo.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.005
PMID: 31675495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]