---
reference_id: "PMID:36749015"
title: "Is Satoyoshi syndrome an autoimmune disease? A systematic review."
authors:
- Viana Abreu Montanaro V
- Solís-García Del Pozo J
- Falcão Hora T
- León BH
- de Cabo C
- Solera J
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kead067
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is Satoyoshi syndrome an autoimmune disease? A systematic review.
**Authors:** Viana Abreu Montanaro V, Solís-García Del Pozo J, Falcão Hora T, León BH, de Cabo C, Solera J
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kead067](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kead067)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2023 Jul 5;62(7):2343-2351. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/kead067.

Is Satoyoshi syndrome an autoimmune disease? A systematic review.

Viana Abreu Montanaro V(1)(2)(3), Solís-García Del Pozo J(4), Falcão Hora T(1), 
León BH(5), de Cabo C(6), Solera J(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasilia, Brasil.
(2)Programa de PósGraduação em Neurologia, Universidade Federal Fluminense, 
Niterói, Brazil.
(3)Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Unit of Infectious Diseases, Complejo 
Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Rheumatology, Universidad San Francisco de 
Quito, Quito, Ecuador.
(6)Research Department, Neuropsychopharmacology Unit, Complejo Hospitalario 
Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de 
Albacete, Albacete, Spain.
(8)Department of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de 
Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: Satoyoshi syndrome is a rare multisystem disease of presumed 
autoimmune aetiology. We carried out a systematic review to evaluate the 
available evidence to support that autoimmune hypothesis.
METHODS: We searched for Satoyoshi syndrome cases in PubMed, the Web of Science 
and Scopus up to January 2022, using keywords 'Satoyoshi syndrome' or 
'Komuragaeri disease'. Data on symptoms, associated autoimmune diseases, 
presence of autoantibodies and response to treatment were collected.
RESULTS: A total of 77 patients from 57 articles published between 1967 and 2021 
were included; 59 patients were women. The mean age at diagnosis was 21.2 years. 
All cases had painful muscular spasms and alopecia. Frequent manifestations 
included: diarrhoea, malabsorption, growth retardation, amenorrhoea and bone 
deformity. Satoyoshi syndrome was associated with other autoimmune diseases: 
myasthenia gravis, autoimmune thyroiditis, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, 
atopic dermatitis, bronchial and lupus erythematosus. Autoantibody 
determinations were performed in 39 patients, of which 27 had positive results. 
The most frequently detected autoantibodies were ANAs. Other less frequently 
found autoantibodies were: anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies, anti-DNA 
antibodies, antithyroid antibodies, anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (anti-GAD) 
and anti-gliadin antibodies. Pharmacological treatment was reported in 50 
patients. Most of them improved with CS, immunosuppressants and immunoglobulins, 
or a combination of these medications.
CONCLUSION: Satoyoshi syndrome is associated with other autoimmune diseases and 
a variety of autoantibodies. Improvement after CS or other immunosuppressant 
treatment was observed in 90% of cases. These data support an autoimmune 
aetiology for Satoyoshi syndrome. More studies including systematic 
determination of autoantibodies in all patients with Satoyoshi syndrome will 
help us advance in our understanding of this disease.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kead067
PMID: 36749015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]