---
reference_id: "PMID:31176627"
title: Mid-Term Outcome for Anomalous Origin of the Left Coronary Artery From the Pulmonary Artery.
authors:
- Zhang C
- Zhang H
- Yan J
- Hua Z
- Song Y
- Sun H
- Li S
journal: Heart Lung Circ
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2019.04.018
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Bland White Garland Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology, surgery"
- Cardiac Surgical Procedures/methods
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Coronary Vessels/surgery
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Pulmonary Artery/abnormalities, surgery"
- Retrospective Studies
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- "Ventricular Function, Left/physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mid-Term Outcome for Anomalous Origin of the Left Coronary Artery From the Pulmonary Artery.
**Authors:** Zhang C, Zhang H, Yan J, Hua Z, Song Y, Sun H, Li S
**Journal:** Heart Lung Circ (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hlc.2019.04.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hlc.2019.04.018)

## Content

1. Heart Lung Circ. 2020 May;29(5):766-771. doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2019.04.018. Epub 
2019 May 24.

Mid-Term Outcome for Anomalous Origin of the Left Coronary Artery From the 
Pulmonary Artery.

Zhang C(1), Zhang H(1), Yan J(1), Hua Z(1), Song Y(1), Sun H(1), Li S(2).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Cardiovascular Disease and Fuwai Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)National Center for Cardiovascular Disease and Fuwai Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. 
Electronic address: drlishoujun@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: This study is a single-centre experience with surgical intervention 
of anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery 
(ALCAPA).
METHODS: A retrospective review was performed of patients who underwent ALCAPA 
repair between November 1991 and October 2017.
RESULTS: A total of 138 patients with a median age of 36 months underwent ALCAPA 
repair. The median follow-up period was 3.5 years. Overall, 114 (82.6%) patients 
received coronary reimplantation, 21 (15.2%) underwent Takeuchi repair, and 
three (2.1%) were treated by closure of the ALCAPA plus coronary artery bypass 
graft. Concomitant mitral repair was performed in 50 patients with 
moderate-to-severe mitral regurgitation (MR). Three (2.1%) patients died in 
hospital. Three (2.1%) patients needed extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
(ECMO) support. Seven (5.0%) patients needed delayed sternal closure. In 
patients with decreased preoperative left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 
(<50%), the LVEF significantly improved from 25% to 33% at discharge 
(p = 0.001). The percentage of more than moderately significant MR decreased 
from 36.2% to 5.2% (p = 0.02). There was no late mortality. Two patients needed 
reoperation because of baffle leaks after Takeuchi repair. Three patients had 
severe MR. All patients had normal LVEF at last follow-up. The median 
normalisation time of left ventricular function was 6 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Short-term and mid-term outcomes of surgical treatment for ALCAPA 
patients were excellent. The concomitant mitral valve repair did not increase 
the perioperative risk but had satisfactory mid-term outcomes. Normalisation of 
left ventricular function is expected within the first 6 months.

Copyright © 2019 Australian and New Zealand Society of Cardiac and Thoracic 
Surgeons (ANZSCTS) and the Cardiac Society of Australia and New Zealand (CSANZ). 
Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hlc.2019.04.018
PMID: 31176627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]