---
reference_id: "PMID:19451830"
title: "A model for integrating a mind/body approach to cardiac rehabilitation: outcomes and correlators."
authors:
- Casey A
- Chang BH
- Huddleston J
- Virani N
- Benson H
- Dusek JA
journal: J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1097/HCR.0b013e3181a33352
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A model for integrating a mind/body approach to cardiac rehabilitation: outcomes and correlators.
**Authors:** Casey A, Chang BH, Huddleston J, Virani N, Benson H, Dusek JA
**Journal:** J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1097/HCR.0b013e3181a33352](https://doi.org/10.1097/HCR.0b013e3181a33352)

## Content

1. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2009 Jul-Aug;29(4):230-8; quiz 239-40. doi: 
10.1097/HCR.0b013e3181a33352.

A model for integrating a mind/body approach to cardiac rehabilitation: outcomes 
and correlators.

Casey A(1), Chang BH, Huddleston J, Virani N, Benson H, Dusek JA.

Author information:
(1)Benson-Henry Institute for Mind Body Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467, USA. acasey3@partners.org

PURPOSE: Although cardiac rehabilitation programs have been shown to decrease 
cardiovascular risk, morbidity, and mortality, few programs have integrated a 
balanced mind/body approach in which patients are taught the relaxation response 
and utilize cognitive behavior skills for stress management, along with diet and 
exercise. We examined the medical and psychological outcomes of patients treated 
in such a cardiac rehabilitation program in a general hospital setting.
METHODS: From 1997 to 2005, outcomes were measured in 637 patients with coronary 
artery disease at baseline and after a 3-month program. Components of the 
intervention included smoking cessation, moderate aerobic exercise, nutrition 
counseling, relaxation response training, and cognitive/behavioral skills.
RESULTS: Men and women improved significantly with respect to medical outcomes 
(blood pressure, lipids, weight, exercise conditioning, frequency of symptoms of 
chest pain and shortness of breath) and psychological outcomes (general severity 
index, depression, anxiety, and hostility) (P < .0001). Patients considered "at 
higher risk" for cardiac events due to high baseline measures improved their 
measures to a less than "at higher risk" level. Data indicate that specific 
components of the intervention, that is, increased relaxation response practice 
and exercise, significantly contributed to these improvements (P < .05). 
Furthermore, age and gender differences, particularly for psychological 
measures, were found; younger patients and female patients had greater 
improvements than older patients and male patients.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides preliminary data for a subsequent randomized 
control trial to test mind/body-based interventions to determine the most 
effective outcomes at an affordable cost.

DOI: 10.1097/HCR.0b013e3181a33352
PMID: 19451830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]