---
reference_id: "PMID:40398847"
title: "Whipple Disease Initial Presentation as Supraclavicular Lymphadenopathy in a Patient With Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Diagnostic Challenge."
authors:
- Amin SE
- Gite S
- Wanger A
- Chavez V
- Armstrong J
- Thakral B
- Navarro P
- Makhoul J
- Wahed A
- Narula N
- Saluja K
journal: Int J Surg Pathol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/10668969251342475
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple Disease Initial Presentation as Supraclavicular Lymphadenopathy in a Patient With Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Diagnostic Challenge.
**Authors:** Amin SE, Gite S, Wanger A, Chavez V, Armstrong J, Thakral B, Navarro P, Makhoul J, Wahed A, Narula N, Saluja K
**Journal:** Int J Surg Pathol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/10668969251342475](https://doi.org/10.1177/10668969251342475)

## Content

1. Int J Surg Pathol. 2025 Dec;33(8):1816-1823. doi: 10.1177/10668969251342475. 
Epub 2025 May 21.

Whipple Disease Initial Presentation as Supraclavicular Lymphadenopathy in a 
Patient With Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Diagnostic Challenge.

Amin SE(1), Gite S(1), Wanger A(1), Chavez V(1), Armstrong J(1), Thakral B(2), 
Navarro P(1), Makhoul J(3), Wahed A(1), Narula N(1), Saluja K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Disease, The University of Texas Health Science Center 
at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.

Whipple disease is a rare systemic disease caused by Tropheryma whipplei. It can 
present with a wide range of nonspecific symptoms that might overlap with 
underlying medical conditions, posing a diagnostic challenge. We present a 
61-year-old man with a past medical history of rheumatoid arthritis and chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, who presented with persistent 
leukocytosis and supraclavicular lymphadenopathy. A positron emission tomography 
scan revealed hypermetabolic activity in the supraclavicular, abdominal, and 
pelvic lymph nodes along with a myocardial hypermetabolic lesion, concerning a 
lymphoproliferative disorder versus sarcoidosis. A supraclavicular lymph node 
excisional biopsy revealed complete architectural effacement by a diffuse foamy 
histiocytic infiltrate without granuloma formation or necrosis. The differential 
diagnosis included underlying infection, histiocytic neoplasm, 
lymphoproliferative disorder, storage disorder, and others. Immunostains show 
the histiocytic cells were positive for CD68 and CD163, while negative for S100, 
CD1a, kappa, lambda, and BRAF V600E. Grocott-Gömöri's methenamine silver and 
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stains demonstrated diffuse intracytoplasmic granular 
staining that was resistant to diastase treatment. Gram, acid fast bacilli, and 
Fite stains were negative. Electron microscopy revealed rod-shaped organisms 
with a trilaminar plasma membrane, morphologically consistent with T whipplei. 
Polymerase chain reaction was positive for T whipplei, confirming the diagnosis. 
Although rare, Whipple disease should be considered in immunocompromised 
patients presenting with nonspecific nongastrointestinal symptoms and 
lymphadenopathy clinically simulating lymphoma. Periodic acid-Schiff D-positive 
inclusions, along with confirmatory molecular results, are crucial for 
diagnosis. Whipple disease is a curable disease that can be lethal if 
unrecognized, emphasizing the importance of heightened awareness for early 
diagnosis and timely treatment.

DOI: 10.1177/10668969251342475
PMCID: PMC12446694
PMID: 40398847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.