---
reference_id: "PMID:28280135"
title: Homozygous mutation in NUP107 leads to microcephaly with steroid-resistant nephrotic condition similar to Galloway-Mowat syndrome.
authors:
- Rosti RO
- Sotak BN
- Bielas SL
- Bhat G
- Silhavy JL
- Aslanger AD
- Altunoglu U
- Bilge I
- Tasdemir M
- Yzaguirrem AD
- Musaev D
- Infante S
- Thuong W
- Marin-Valencia I
- Nelson SF
- Kayserili H
- Gleeson JG
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104237
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Female
- "Hernia, Hiatal/genetics"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Kidney/metabolism
- Male
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Nephrosis/genetics
- Nephrotic Syndrome/genetics
- Nuclear Pore Complex Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Proteins/genetics
- Steroids/metabolism
- Turkey
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous mutation in NUP107 leads to microcephaly with steroid-resistant nephrotic condition similar to Galloway-Mowat syndrome.
**Authors:** Rosti RO, Sotak BN, Bielas SL, Bhat G, Silhavy JL, Aslanger AD, Altunoglu U, Bilge I, Tasdemir M, Yzaguirrem AD, Musaev D, Infante S, Thuong W, Marin-Valencia I, Nelson SF, Kayserili H, Gleeson JG
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104237](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104237)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2017 Jun;54(6):399-403. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104237. Epub
2017 Mar 9.

Homozygous mutation in NUP107 leads to microcephaly with steroid-resistant
nephrotic condition similar to Galloway-Mowat syndrome.

Rosti RO(1), Sotak BN(1), Bielas SL(2), Bhat G(3)(4), Silhavy JL(1), Aslanger
AD(5), Altunoglu U(6), Bilge I(7), Tasdemir M(7), Yzaguirrem AD(1), Musaev D(1),
Infante S(1), Thuong W(1), Marin-Valencia I(3), Nelson SF(8), Kayserili H(5)(9),
Gleeson JG(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Pediatric Brain Disease, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan.
(3)Laboratory for Pediatric Brain Disease, The Rockefeller University, New York,
New York, USA.
(4)Division of Pediatric Genetics , The Children's Hospital at Montefiore,
Bronx, Bronx, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Koç University Hospital, Istanbul 34010,
Turkey.
(6)Department Medical Genetics, Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty,
Istanbul, Turkey.
(7)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Koç University Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey.
(8)Program in Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, Koç University, School of Medicine (KUSoM),
Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Microcephaly with nephrotic syndrome is a rare co-occurrence,
constituting the Galloway-Mowat syndrome (GAMOS), caused by mutations in WDR73
(OMIM: 616144). However, not all patients harbour demonstrable WDR73 deleterious
variants, suggesting that there are other yet unidentified factors contributing
to GAMOS aetiology.
METHODS: Autozygosity mapping and candidate analysis was used to identify
deleterious variants in consanguineous families. Analysis of patient fibroblasts
was used to study splicing and alterations in cellular function.
RESULTS: In two consanguineous families with five affected individuals from
Turkey with a GAMOS-like presentation, we identified a shared homozygous variant
leading to partial exon 4 skipping in nucleoporin, 107-KD (NUP107). The founder
mutation was associated with concomitant reduction in NUP107 protein and in the
obligate binding partner NUP133 protein, as well as density of nuclear pores in
patient cells.
CONCLUSION: Recently, NUP107 was suggested as a candidate in a family with
nephrotic syndrome and developmental delay. Other NUP107-reported cases had
isolated renal phenotypes. With the addition of these individuals, we implicate
an allele-specific critical role for NUP107 in the regulation of brain growth
and a GAMOS-like presentation.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of
the article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104237
PMID: 28280135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
