---
reference_id: "PMID:18678321"
title: Germline mutations and variants in the succinate dehydrogenase genes in Cowden and Cowden-like syndromes.
authors:
- Ni Y
- Zbuk KM
- Sadler T
- Patocs A
- Lobo G
- Edelman E
- Platzer P
- Orloff MS
- Waite KA
- Eng C
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.07.011
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genetic Variation
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- "Microscopy, Confocal"
- Middle Aged
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Succinate Dehydrogenase/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germline mutations and variants in the succinate dehydrogenase genes in Cowden and Cowden-like syndromes.
**Authors:** Ni Y, Zbuk KM, Sadler T, Patocs A, Lobo G, Edelman E, Platzer P, Orloff MS, Waite KA, Eng C
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.07.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.07.011)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Aug;83(2):261-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.07.011.

Germline mutations and variants in the succinate dehydrogenase genes in Cowden 
and Cowden-like syndromes.

Ni Y(1), Zbuk KM, Sadler T, Patocs A, Lobo G, Edelman E, Platzer P, Orloff MS, 
Waite KA, Eng C.

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, 
USA.

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2011 May 13;88(5):674-5; author reply 676. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.12.016.

Individuals with PTEN mutations have Cowden syndrome (CS), associated with 
breast, thyroid, and endometrial neoplasias. Many more patients with features of 
CS, not meeting diagnostic criteria (termed CS-like), are evaluated by 
clinicians for CS-related cancer risk. Germline mutations in succinate 
dehydrogenase subunits SDHB-D cause pheochromocytoma-paraganglioma syndrome. One 
to five percent of SDHB/SDHD mutation carriers have renal cell or papillary 
thyroid carcinomas, which are also CS-related features. SDHB-D may be candidate 
susceptibility genes for some PTEN mutation-negative individuals with CS-like 
cancers. To address this hypothesis, germline SDHB-D mutation analysis in 375 
PTEN mutation-negative CS/CS-like individuals was performed, followed by 
functional analysis of identified SDH mutations/variants. Of 375 PTEN 
mutation-negative CS/CS-like individuals, 74 (20%) had increased manganese 
superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) expression, a manifestation of mitochondrial 
dysfunction. Among these, 10 (13.5%) had germline mutations/variants in SDHB (n 
= 3) or SDHD (7), not found in 700 controls (p < 0.001). Compared to PTEN 
mutation-positive CS/CS-like individuals, those with SDH mutations/variants were 
enriched for carcinomas of the female breast (6/9 SDH versus 30/107 PTEN, p < 
0.001), thyroid (5/10 versus 15/106, p < 0.001), and kidney (2/10 versus 4/230, 
p = 0.026). In the absence of PTEN alteration, CS/CS-like-related SDH 
mutations/variants show increased phosphorylation of AKT and/or MAPK, downstream 
manifestations of PTEN dysfunction. Germline SDH mutations/variants occur in a 
subset of PTEN mutation-negative CS/CS-like individuals and are associated with 
increased frequencies of breast, thyroid, and renal cancers beyond those 
conferred by germline PTEN mutations. SDH testing should be considered for 
germline PTEN mutation-negative CS/CS-like individuals, especially in the 
setting of breast, thyroid, and/or renal cancers.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.07.011
PMCID: PMC2495063
PMID: 18678321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]