---
reference_id: "PMID:10603100"
title: Liver transplantation in urea cycle disorders.
authors:
- Saudubray JM
- Touati G
- Delonlay P
- Jouvet P
- Narcy C
- Laurent J
- Rabier D
- Kamoun P
- Jan D
- Revillon Y
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1007/pl00014323
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/mortality, surgery"
- Carbamoyl-Phosphate Synthase I Deficiency Disease/surgery
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Citrullinemia/surgery
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Liver Transplantation/mortality
- Male
- Ornithine Carbamoyltransferase Deficiency Disease/surgery
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Urea/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver transplantation in urea cycle disorders.
**Authors:** Saudubray JM, Touati G, Delonlay P, Jouvet P, Narcy C, Laurent J, Rabier D, Kamoun P, Jan D, Revillon Y
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1007/pl00014323](https://doi.org/10.1007/pl00014323)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 1999 Dec;158 Suppl 2:S55-9. doi: 10.1007/pl00014323.

Liver transplantation in urea cycle disorders.

Saudubray JM(1), Touati G, Delonlay P, Jouvet P, Narcy C, Laurent J, Rabier D,
Kamoun P, Jan D, Revillon Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Hopital Necker Enfants-Malades, 149 rue de Sevres,
75743 Paris, France.

We report here our experience in the long-term management of 28 patients with
citrullinaemia, 13 patients with carbamoyl phosphate synthase deficiency and 15
patients with argininosuccinic aciduria. In addition, we report a national
French survey of 119 patients with ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency
enzymatically characterized in our laboratory. We also include in this report
four personal patients (two with OTC and two with citrullinaemia) who were liver
transplanted, and one OTC patient from the National French survey. Although this
retrospective series is not really representative of the modern treatment
combining low protein diet and arginine, sodium benzoate and sodium
phenylbutyrate, it is obvious that the long-term outcome of all urea cycle
disorders remains very guarded. We highlight the severity of the neonatal forms
of such disorders, and mostly for OTC-deficient males. According to this
evidence, our policy is not to treat such severely affected patients in the
neonatal period who die anyway spontaneously within 2 to 3 days. At the present
time, we only have three patients with neonatal citrullinaemia, aged 1, 6 and 10
years respectively, who are still doing well. One of them has been successfully
liver transplanted at 5 years. Another transplanted patient died in the
post-surgical phase. We emphasize the unexpected severity of argininosuccinic
aciduria in which there is no one patient doing well. This is a rather
surprising finding as this disorder is easy to manage and rarely presents with
recurrent attacks of hyperammonaemia when it is treated by arginine
supplementation. This consideration would suggest to extend the indication of
orthotopic liver transplantation in this disorder. Finally, the most difficult
indication is in the late onset symptomatic female OTC group. In this last
group, despite a significant residual activity due to heterozygote status, even
with a variable lyonisation, only seven girls are still mentally and
neurologically normal. Interestingly, three of these seven were
liver-transplanted before the constitution of irreversible neurological damage.
These three girls and their family declare their well-being, their feeling to be
cured and enjoy their normal life.

DOI: 10.1007/pl00014323
PMID: 10603100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
