---
reference_id: "PMID:34418402"
title: Myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease.
authors:
- Marignier R
- Hacohen Y
- Cobo-Calvo A
- Pröbstel AK
- Aktas O
- Alexopoulos H
- Amato MP
- Asgari N
- Banwell B
- Bennett J
- Brilot F
- Capobianco M
- Chitnis T
- Ciccarelli O
- Deiva K
- De Sèze J
- Fujihara K
- Jacob A
- Kim HJ
- Kleiter I
- Lassmann H
- Leite MI
- Linington C
- Meinl E
- Palace J
- Paul F
- Petzold A
- Pittock S
- Reindl M
- Sato DK
- Selmaj K
- Siva A
- Stankoff B
- Tintore M
- Traboulsee A
- Waters P
- Waubant E
- Weinshenker B
- Derfuss T
- Vukusic S
- Hemmer B
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00218-0
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Biomarkers
- Child
- "Demyelinating Autoimmune Diseases, CNS/diagnosis, immunology, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Immunologic Factors/pharmacology
- Middle Aged
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein/immunology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease.
**Authors:** Marignier R, Hacohen Y, Cobo-Calvo A, Pröbstel AK, Aktas O, Alexopoulos H, Amato MP, Asgari N, Banwell B, Bennett J, Brilot F, Capobianco M, Chitnis T, Ciccarelli O, Deiva K, De Sèze J, Fujihara K, Jacob A, Kim HJ, Kleiter I, Lassmann H, Leite MI, Linington C, Meinl E, Palace J, Paul F, Petzold A, Pittock S, Reindl M, Sato DK, Selmaj K, Siva A, Stankoff B, Tintore M, Traboulsee A, Waters P, Waubant E, Weinshenker B, Derfuss T, Vukusic S, Hemmer B
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00218-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00218-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2021 Sep;20(9):762-772. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00218-0.

Myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease.

Marignier R(1), Hacohen Y(2), Cobo-Calvo A(3), Pröbstel AK(4), Aktas O(5),
Alexopoulos H(6), Amato MP(7), Asgari N(8), Banwell B(9), Bennett J(10), Brilot
F(11), Capobianco M(12), Chitnis T(13), Ciccarelli O(2), Deiva K(14), De Sèze
J(15), Fujihara K(16), Jacob A(17), Kim HJ(18), Kleiter I(19), Lassmann H(20),
Leite MI(21), Linington C(22), Meinl E(23), Palace J(21), Paul F(24), Petzold
A(25), Pittock S(26), Reindl M(27), Sato DK(28), Selmaj K(29), Siva A(30),
Stankoff B(31), Tintore M(3), Traboulsee A(32), Waters P(21), Waubant E(33),
Weinshenker B(34), Derfuss T(4), Vukusic S(35), Hemmer B(36).

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie, Sclérose en Plaques, Pathologies de la Myéline et
Neuro-Inflammation, and Centre de Référence des Maladies Inflammatoires Rares du
Cerveau et de la Moelle, Hôpital Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Bron, France;
Centre des Neurosciences de Lyon, INSERM 1028 et CNRS UMR5292, Lyon, France;
Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France. Electronic address:
romain.marginier@chu-lyon.fr.
(2)Queen Square Multiple Sclerosis Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, Faculty
of Brain Sciences, University College London, London, UK.
(3)Centre d'Esclerosi Múltiple de Catalunya, Department of
Neurology/Neuroimmunology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Neurologic Clinic and Policlinic and Research Center for Clinical
Neuroimmunology and Neuroscience, Departments of Medicine, Biomedicine, and
Clinical Research, University Hospital Basel, University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland.
(5)Medical Faculty, Department of Neurology, Heinrich Heine University
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(6)Neuroimmunology Unit, Department of Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine,
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(7)IRCCS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(8)Institute of Regional Health Research and Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(9)Division of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Neurology and Department of Pediatrics,
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
USA.
(10)Department of Neurology and Department of Ophthalmology, Programs in
Neuroscience and Immunology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO, USA.
(11)Brain Autoimmunity Group, Kids Neuroscience Centre, Kids Research at the
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Brain and Mind Centre and School of Medical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW,
Australia.
(12)Regional Multiple Sclerosis Centre, Department of Neurology, University
Hospital San Luigi, Orbassano, Italy.
(13)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris-Sud,
Hôpital Bicêtre, Pediatric Neurology Department, National Referral Center for
Rare Inflammatory Brain and Spinal Diseases, Université Paris-Sud, and UMR
1184-CEA-IDMIT, Center for Immunology of Viral Infections and Autoimmune
Diseases, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(15)Department of Neurology, Strasbourg University Hospital and Clinical
Investigation Center, INSERM 1434, Strasbourg, France.
(16)Department of Multiple Sclerosis Therapeutics, Fukushima Medical University
School of Medicine Koriyama, Japan; Multiple Sclerosis and Neuromyelitis Optica
Center, Southern TOHOKU Research Institute for Neuroscience, Koriyama, Japan.
(17)Division of Multiple Sclerosis and Autoimmune Neurology, Neurological
Institute, Cleveland Clinic Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates; Walton
Centre National Health Service Trust, Liverpool, UK.
(18)Department of Neurology, Research Institute and Hospital of National Cancer
Center, Goyang, Korea.
(19)Marianne-Strauß-Klinik, Behandlungszentrum Kempfenhausen für Multiple
Sklerose Kranke, Berg, Germany; Department of Neurology, Ruhr-University Bochum,
Bochum, Germany.
(20)Department of Neuroimmunology, Center for Brain Research, Medical University
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(21)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(22)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK.
(23)Institute of Clinical Neuroimmunology, Biomedical Center and University
Hospitals, Ludwig Maximilian University Munich, Germany.
(24)NeuroCure Clinical Research Center, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin,
and Berlin Institute of Health, and Experimental and Clinical Research Center,
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine and Charité-Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(25)Moorfields Eye Hospital and National Hospital for Neurology and
Neurosurgery, London, UK; University College London Queen Square Institute of
Neurology, London, UK; National Institute for Health Research Biomedical
Research Centre at Moorfields Eye Hospital and University College London
Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK.
(26)Department of Neurology and Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, and Center
for Multiple Sclerosis and Autoimmune Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA.
(27)Clinical Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria.
(28)Brain Institute of Rio Grande do Sul and School of Medicine, Pontifical
Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(29)University of Warmia and Mazury, Olsztyn, Poland; Center of Neurology, Łódź,
Poland.
(30)Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Cerrahpasa School of Medicine, Department of
Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey.
(31)Sorbonne Université, Paris Brain Institute, ICM, CNRS, Inserm, and Saint
Antoine Hospital, APHP, Paris, France.
(32)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(33)Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(34)Department of Neurology and Center for Multiple Sclerosis and Autoimmune
Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(35)Service de Neurologie, Sclérose en Plaques, Pathologies de la Myéline et
Neuro-Inflammation, and Centre de Référence des Maladies Inflammatoires Rares du
Cerveau et de la Moelle, Hôpital Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Bron, France;
Centre des Neurosciences de Lyon, INSERM 1028 et CNRS UMR5292, Lyon, France;
Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France.
(36)Department of Neurology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany; Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology, Munich, Germany.

Erratum in
    Lancet Neurol. 2021 Oct;20(10):e6. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00290-8.
    Lancet Neurol. 2022 Jan;21(1):e1. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00433-6.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2021 Sep;20(9):695-697. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00247-7.

Myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease (MOGAD) is a
recently identified autoimmune disorder that presents in both adults and
children as CNS demyelination. Although there are clinical phenotypic overlaps
between MOGAD, multiple sclerosis, and aquaporin-4 antibody-associated
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) cumulative biological, clinical,
and pathological evidence discriminates between these conditions. Patients
should not be diagnosed with multiple sclerosis or NMOSD if they have anti-MOG
antibodies in their serum. However, many questions related to the clinical
characterisation of MOGAD and pathogenetic role of MOG antibodies are still
unanswered. Furthermore, therapy is mainly based on standard protocols for
aquaporin-4 antibody-associated NMOSD and multiple sclerosis, and more evidence
is needed regarding how and when to treat patients with MOGAD.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00218-0
PMID: 34418402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests RM reports personal
fees from Viela Bio, Roche, and UCB; and non-financial support from Viela Bio,
Merck, Biogen, and Roche, outside the submitted work. AC-C reports funding from
the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (Spain) JR19/00007. A-KP reports grants from
the Swiss National Science Foundation, the European Research Council, the
National Multiple Sclerosis Society, the ProPatient Foundation, the
Goldschmidt-Jacobson-Foundation, and intramural Funding from the University of
Basel and personal fees (used for research) from Biogen. OA reports grants from
German Research Foundation, German Ministry of Education and Research, Roche,
Novartis, and Biogen; and personal fees from Alexion, Almirall, Biogen, Merck,
Novartis, Roche, Sanofi, Teva, and Viela Bio, outside the submitted work. M-PA
reports grants Merck, Biogen, Sanofi Genzyme, from Teva, Roche, and Novartis;
and person fees from Merck, Biogen, Sanofi Genzyme, from Teva, Roche, and
Novartis outside the submitted work. BB reports personal fees from Novartis,
outside the submitted work. JB reports personal fees from Roche, Genentech,
Viela Bio, Chugai Pharm, Alexion, Novartis, Genzyme, Teva Neuroscience, EMD
Serono, Frequency Therapeutics, Equillium, Clene Nanoscience, Mitsubishi-Tanabe,
and Reistone Bio; grants from Novartis, EMD Serono, National Institutes of
Health, Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation, and National Multiple Sclerosis
Foundation, outside the submitted work; and has a patent Aquaporumab, issued. FB
reports grants from the Australian National Health Research Medical Council and
the University of Sydney Research Excellence Initiative; personal fees from
Biogen and Merck, outside the submitted work. TC reports consulting fees from
Biogen Idec, Novartis, Sanofi, Bayer, Celgene, and Genentech; grants from
Novartis, Octave Bioscience, EMD Serono, and Verily Life Sciences; all outside
the submitted work. OC reports grants from Spinal Cord Research Foundation,
Rosetrees Trust, Progressive Multiple Sclerosis Alliance, Bioclinica and
GeNeuro, EU-H2020, UK Multiple Sclerosis Society, National Multiple Sclerosis
Society, National Institute for Health Research University College London
Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre, and National Institute for Health Research
Research Professorship; and serves as a consultant for Merck, Novartis, and
Roche; and receives an honorarium from the American Academy of Neurology as
Associate Editor of Neurology. KD reports personal fees from Novartis, Biogen,
Roche, and Merck; and non-financial support from Novartis, outside the submitted
work. KF reports grants from Ministry of Education, Science and Technology of
Japan, and Ministry of Health, Wellfare and Labor of Japan, during the conduct
of the study; personal fees from Chugai/Roche, Alexion, Viela Bio, AsahiKasei
Medical, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Biogen/Eisai, Novartis, Teijin, Bayer, Ono, Nihon
Pharmaceutical, and Takeda, outside the submitted work; and personal fees from
UCB during the conduct of the study. HJK reports grants from National Research
Foundation of Korea, Aprilbio; personal fees from Alexion, Aprilbio, Celltrion,
Eisai, HanAll BioPharma, Merck Serono, Novartis, Sanofi Genzyme, Teva-Handok,
and Viela Bio. M-IL is funded by the UK National Health Service National
Specialised Commissioning Group for Neuromyelitis optica and the UK NIHR Oxford
Biomedical Research Centre; has been awarded research grants from The Myaware
and University of Oxford; received speaker honoraria or travel grants from
Biogen Idec, Novartis, and the Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation; and serves
on scientific or educational advisory boards for UCB, Argenx, and Viela Bio. MC
reports personal fees from Biogen, Merck, Sanofi, Novartis, and Roche; and
non-financial support from Merck, Sanofi, and Roche, outside the submitted work.
IK reports personal fees from Biogen, Novartis, Merck, Sanofi Genzyme, Roche,
Mylan, Alexion, Celgene, Chugai, and IQVIA; and grants from Chugai, outside the
submitted work. HL reports personal fees from Biogen, Merck, Roche, Novartis,
Sanofi Aventis, and MedDay, outside the submitted work. EM reports personal fees
from Roche, Novartis, Sanofi, Bioeq, Merck, and Biogen; and grants from Sanofi,
Merck, and Novartis, outside the submitted work. JP reports grants from Merck
Serono, Chugai, Medlmmum, Alexion, and ABIDE; personal fees from Merck Serono,
Teva, Chugai, MedImmun, Alexion, Novartis, Roche, ABIDE, MedDay, ARGENX,
Mitsubushi, UCB, and Viela Bio, outside the submitted work; and has a patent
Isis: Diagnosing Multiple Sclerosis, issued, and a patent Know-how from the
Numares Collaboration, pending. FP receives honoraria for lecturing, and travel
expenses for attending meetings from Guthy-Jackson Foundation, Bayer, Biogen,
Merck Serono, Sanofi Genzyme, Novartis, Alexion, Viela Bio, Roche, UCB,
Mitsubishi Tanabe, and Celgene; and research funding from the German Ministry
for Education and Research, Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Einstein
Foundation, Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation, EU FP7 Framework Program,
Biogen, Genzyme, Merck Serono, Novartis, Bayer, Alexion, Roche, Parexel and
Almirall. AP reports personal fees from Novartis, Heidelberg Engineering, and
Zeiss; and grants from Novartis, outside the submitted work; and is part of the
steering committee of the OCTiMS study which is sponsored by Novartis and the
ANGI network which is sponsored by ZEISS (he has not received honoraria for
these activities). AP is supported by the National Institute for Health
Research, Biomedical Research Centre based at Moorfields Eye Hospital National
Health Service Foundation Trust, and University College London Institute of
Ophthalmology. The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the NHS, the NIHR, or the UK Department of Health. SP reports grants
from Grifols, NIH, Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation, Autoimmune Encephalitis
Alliance, MedImmune, UCB, and Alexion Pharmaceuticals, outside the submitted
work; and has a patent (Patent# 8,889,102, Application#12–678350) Neuromyelitis
Optica Autoantibodies as a Marker for Neoplasia, issued, a patent (Patent# 9 891
219B2, Application#12–573942) Methods for Treating Neuromyelitis Optica by
Administration of Eculizumab to an individual that is Aquaporin-4 (AQP4)-IgG
Autoantibody positive, issued, a patent GFAP-IgG, pending, a patent
Septin-5-IgG, pending, a patent MAP1B-IgG, pending, a patent Kelch-like protein
11, pending, and a patent PDE10A, pending. MR reports grants from Euroimmun and
Roche, during the conduct of the study; and The University Hospital and Medical
University of Innsbruck (Austria; employer of MR) receives payments for antibody
assays (MOG, AQP4, and other autoantibodies). DKS reports grants from Conselho
Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico, Fundação de Amparo à
Pesquisa do Estado do Rio Grande do Sul, TEVA, and Merck; and personal fees from
TEVA, Merck, Biogen, Roche, and Viela Bio, outside the submitted work. KS
reports personal fees from Biogen, Novartis, Merck, Roche, Celgene, and TG
Therapeutics; and grants from Merck and Roche, outside the submitted work. AS
reports personal fees from F Hoffmann-La Roche, Sanofi-Genzyme, Novartis,
Merck-Serono, Teva, and Biogen Idec/Gen Pharma of Turkey; and non-financial
support from F Hoffmann-La Roche and Sanofi-Genzyme, outside the submitted work.
BS has received research grants from Sanofi-Genzyme, Roche, and Merck-Serono,
and personal fees for lectures from Sanofi-Genzyme, Merck-Serono, Teva, Biogen
and Novartis. MT reports personal fees from Almirall, Bayer Schering Pharma,
Biogen-Idec, Genzyme, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi-Aventis, Viela Bio,
and Teva Pharmaceuticals; and grants from Biogen-Idec and Genzyme, outside the
submitted work. AT reports grants from Roche and personal fees from Roche,
Sanofi Genzyme, Novartis, EMD Serono, Teva, and Biogen, outside the submitted
work. PW reports personal fees from Alexion, F Hoffmann La-Roche, and BC
Neuroimmunology, outside the submitted work; and has a patent Antibodies in
Autoimmune Neurology, with royalties paid. EW reports personal fees from DBV,
Jazz Pharma, and Emerald, outside the submitted work. BW reports personal fees
from RSR, Oxford University, Hospices Civil de Lyon, and MVZ Labor PD Dr
Volkmann und Kollegen; personal fees from Viela Bio, Alexion, Roche Group
(includes Genentech and Chugai), Mitsubishi Tanabe, and Roivant, outside the
submitted work; and has a patent NMO-IgG (AQP4-IgG) for diagnosis of NMOSD, with
royalties paid. TD reports grants from Novartis, Biogen, and Roche; and
financial compensation to his institution for activities on advisory boards,
steering committees, or data safety monitoring boards from Alexion, Actelion,
Novartis, Merck, Biogen, Genzyme, GeNeuro, Mitsubishi Pharma, Roche, Celgene,
and MedDay. TD's wife is an employee of Novartis and holds stock options of
Novartis. SV reports grants from Biogen, MedDay, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche,
and Sanofi-Genzyme; personal fees from Biogen, Celgene, MedDay, Merck-Serono,
Novartis, Roche, Sanofi-Genzyme, and Teva; and non-financial support from
Biogen, MedDay, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, and Sanofi-Genzyme, outside the
submitted work. BH reports personal fees from Desitin, Novartis, Allergy Care,
and TG Therapeutics, outside the submitted work. The other authors declare no
competing interests.
