---
reference_id: "PMID:37675676"
title: "Managing cholesteatomas with labyrinthine fistula."
journal: Singapore Med J
year: "2025"
doi: 10.4103/singaporemedj.SMJ-2021-377
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Managing cholesteatomas with labyrinthine fistula.

## Content

INTRODUCTION: A retrospective study (2011 to 2018) was conducted to evaluate the
management of cholesteatomas with labyrinthine fistulae (LFs), clinical
characteristics and postoperative hearing outcomes in a hospital. METHODS:
Demographic data of patients with primary middle ear mastoidectomies for
cholesteatoma were extracted. Preoperative high-resolution computed tomography
(HRCT) temporal bone and intraoperative findings, and hearing levels
preoperatively and postoperatively were evaluated. RESULTS: Of the middle ear
cholesteatomas, 15.6% ( n = 14) of ears were complicated by LF. HRCT scans
showed 92.9% sensitivity and 94.7% specificity in the identification of LFs.
Intraoperative findings of LFs include stapes erosion (78.6%), malleus erosion
(78.6%), incus erosion (92.9%), dehiscence of tegmen tympani (28.6%) and
tympanic facial canal (64.3%). Compared to the non-LF group, the LF group
showed significantly higher incidence of stapes erosion ( P < 0.001), tegmen
tympani dehiscence ( P = 0.016) and semicircular canal dehiscence ( P < 0.001).
Matrix was removed completely in 85.7% ( n = 12) and was left behind in 14.3% (
n = 2) of ears. Also, 21.5% ( n = 3) had preoperative dead ears. Postoperative
hearing results had a mean follow-up time of 2.1 (standard deviation 1.5, range
0.14-4.84) years. In the matrix removal group ( n = 9), 77.9% had unchanged
hearing levels, 11.1% showed improvement and 11.1% showed decrease in hearing
levels. The matrix preservation group ( n = 2) had deteriorated hearing levels.
CONCLUSION: Preservation of hearing in LFs is possible with cautious matrix
removal. Despite matrix preservation to preserve hearing in large LFs, our
patients' hearing deteriorated postoperatively. Longer follow-up of hearing with
matrix preservation may show poorer hearing outcomes.
