---
reference_id: "PMID:36161616"
title: "The effectiveness of anti-interleukin-1 therapy on subclinical inflammation parameters during the attack-free period in familial Mediterranean fever patients: A case-control study."
authors:
- Atalar E
- Doğan İ
- Gök K
- Güven SC
- Maraş Y
- Ceylan GG
- Erten S
journal: Turk J Med Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.55730/1300-0144.5338
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effectiveness of anti-interleukin-1 therapy on subclinical inflammation parameters during the attack-free period in familial Mediterranean fever patients: A case-control study.
**Authors:** Atalar E, Doğan İ, Gök K, Güven SC, Maraş Y, Ceylan GG, Erten S
**Journal:** Turk J Med Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.55730/1300-0144.5338](https://doi.org/10.55730/1300-0144.5338)

## Content

1. Turk J Med Sci. 2022 Apr;52(2):522-523. doi: 10.55730/1300-0144.5338. Epub
2022  Apr 14.

The effectiveness of anti-interleukin-1 therapy on subclinical inflammation 
parameters during the attack-free period in familial Mediterranean fever 
patients: A case-control study.

Atalar E(1), Doğan İ(1), Gök K(1), Güven SC(1), Maraş Y(1), Ceylan GG(2), Erten 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Ankara City 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: : Anti IL-1 therapy is useful in suppressing attacks in FMF patients 
with colchicine resistance, however, it is not certain whether subclinical 
inflammation can sufficiently be inhibited with anti-IL-1 therapy in FMF 
patients with amyloidosis.
METHODS: Forty-six FMF patients receiving anti-interleukin-1 therapy and 36 
healthy control patients were compared in terms of laboratory parameters. Also, 
FMF patients were further divided into two groups; those with amyloidosis and 
those without it, and these subgroups were compared to each other in terms of 
clinical and laboratory findings.
RESULTS: In comparison between the FMF and healthy control groups, erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP) level, and red cell 
distribution width (RDW) level were detected to be higher and hemoglobin level 
lower in the patient group. Within the FMF patient group, the ESR, CRP, 
fibrinogen, RDW, and NLR values were significantly higher in the subgroup with 
amyloidosis in comparison to the subgroup without amyloidosis.
DISCUSSION: Anti-interleukin-1 therapy could not fully suppress the subclinical 
inflammatory parameters when compared to healthy individuals.

DOI: 10.55730/1300-0144.5338
PMID: 36161616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]