---
reference_id: "PMID:18095307"
title: "Familiality and heritability of binge eating disorder: results of a case-control family study and a twin study."
authors:
- Javaras KN
- Laird NM
- Reichborn-Kjennerud T
- Bulik CM
- Pope HG Jr
- Hudson JI
journal: Int J Eat Disord
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/eat.20484
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Bulimia/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
- "Education, Continuing"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Twin Studies as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familiality and heritability of binge eating disorder: results of a case-control family study and a twin study.
**Authors:** Javaras KN, Laird NM, Reichborn-Kjennerud T, Bulik CM, Pope HG Jr, Hudson JI
**Journal:** Int J Eat Disord (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eat.20484](https://doi.org/10.1002/eat.20484)

## Content

1. Int J Eat Disord. 2008 Mar;41(2):174-9. doi: 10.1002/eat.20484.

Familiality and heritability of binge eating disorder: results of a case-control 
family study and a twin study.

Javaras KN(1), Laird NM, Reichborn-Kjennerud T, Bulik CM, Pope HG Jr, Hudson JI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA. javaras@wisc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the familiality and heritability of binge eating disorder 
(BED).
METHOD: We used a new ACE structural equation model to estimate heritability 
from a case-control family study of BED conducted in the Boston area. The sample 
consisted of 150 overweight/obese probands with lifetime BED by DSM-IV criteria, 
150 overweight/obese probands without lifetime BED, and 888 of their 
first-degree relatives. We compared our findings with those from a study of 
binge eating (in the absence of compensatory behaviors) among 7,831 Norwegian 
twins.
RESULTS: The prevalence of BED differed by sex and by age. In the case-control 
family study, BED was found to aggregate in families, and heritability was 
estimated as 57% (CI: 30-77%). Including shared environment did not 
substantially improve the model's fit, nor did allowing sex-specific 
heritability. Findings from the twin study were similar.
CONCLUSION: BED appears to aggregate in families and have a significant genetic 
component.

DOI: 10.1002/eat.20484
PMID: 18095307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]