---
reference_id: "PMID:38133944"
title: "Colombian Ocular Inflammatory Diseases Epidemiology Study (COIDES): Optic Neuritis Incidence Between 2015-2020."
authors:
- Rodríguez-Rodríguez CA
- Cifuentes-González C
- Mejía-Salgado G
- Garzón-Dangond JM
- Verbel-Yaneth AV
- Machado-Galindo S
- Cruz-Reyes DL
- de-la-Torre A
journal: Ocul Immunol Inflamm
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/09273948.2023.2295538
keywords:
- Humans
- Colombia/epidemiology
- Incidence
- "Optic Neuritis/epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Male
- Female
- COVID-19/epidemiology
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Adolescent
- Aged
- Child
- Young Adult
- Registries
- "Child, Preschool"
- SARS-CoV-2
- Sex Distribution
- Age Distribution
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Colombian Ocular Inflammatory Diseases Epidemiology Study (COIDES): Optic Neuritis Incidence Between 2015-2020.
**Authors:** Rodríguez-Rodríguez CA, Cifuentes-González C, Mejía-Salgado G, Garzón-Dangond JM, Verbel-Yaneth AV, Machado-Galindo S, Cruz-Reyes DL, de-la-Torre A
**Journal:** Ocul Immunol Inflamm (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09273948.2023.2295538](https://doi.org/10.1080/09273948.2023.2295538)

## Content

1. Ocul Immunol Inflamm. 2024 Oct;32(8):1749-1754. doi: 
10.1080/09273948.2023.2295538. Epub 2023 Dec 22.

Colombian Ocular Inflammatory Diseases Epidemiology Study (COIDES): Optic 
Neuritis Incidence Between 2015-2020.

Rodríguez-Rodríguez CA(1), Cifuentes-González C(2), Mejía-Salgado G(1)(2), 
Garzón-Dangond JM(2), Verbel-Yaneth AV(1), Machado-Galindo S(1), Cruz-Reyes 
DL(3), de-la-Torre A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Interest Group, Neuroscience (NEUROS) Research Group, 
Neurovitae Research Center, Institute of Translational Medicine (IMT), Escuela 
de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia.
(2)Neuroscience Research Group (NEUROS), Neurovitae Center for Neuroscience, 
Institute of Translational Medicine (IMT), Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la 
Salud, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)Clinical Research Group, Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, 
Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia.

PURPOSE: To estimate the incidence of Optic Neuritis (ON) in Colombia using data 
from the national health registry between January 1, 2015, and December 31, 
2020.
METHODS: A population-based study was conducted using the Integrated Social 
Protection Information System from the Colombian Ministry of Health and the 
International Classification of Diseases-10 code for ON to estimate the 
incidence of ON from 2015 to 2020. We also evaluated the impact of the COVID-19 
lockdown on the epidemiology of the disease in 2020. Finally, a standardized 
morbidity rate map was created to assess a country's ON geographic distribution.
RESULTS: From 2015 to 2019, 2,463 new cases of ON were reported. The overall 
5-year incidence rate was 1.56 cases per 100,000 inhabitants per year, 66% of 
the patients were females. The peak of presentation in males was the 
quinquennium of 50-54 years, and in females, it was 45-49 years. In 2020, 
coinciding with the COVID-19 pandemic, there was a reduction in the incidence of 
ON by approximately 0.15 cases per 100,000 inhabitants. The regions with a high 
number of cases and an increasing risk of new cases were Bogotá, Antioquia, and 
Valle del Cauca.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of ON in Colombia is lower compared to countries in 
the northern hemisphere, with women under 50 years being predominantly affected. 
The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic corresponded with a reduction in identifying 
new ON cases. This underscores governments' need to implement effective 
diagnostic strategies in the future.

DOI: 10.1080/09273948.2023.2295538
PMID: 38133944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]