---
reference_id: "PMID:38502233"
title: "Giant cell arteritis: insights from a monocentric retrospective cohort study."
authors:
- Alnaimat F
- Alduradi H
- Al-Qasem S
- Ghazzal H
- Alsarhan M
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-024-05540-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/drug therapy, epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Female
- Aged
- Middle Aged
- Temporal Arteries/pathology
- Jordan/epidemiology
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Methotrexate/therapeutic use
- Biopsy
- Azathioprine/therapeutic use
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Giant cell arteritis: insights from a monocentric retrospective cohort study.
**Authors:** Alnaimat F, Alduradi H, Al-Qasem S, Ghazzal H, Alsarhan M
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-024-05540-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-024-05540-5)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2024 Jun;44(6):1013-1023. doi: 10.1007/s00296-024-05540-5. Epub
 2024 Mar 19.

Giant cell arteritis: insights from a monocentric retrospective cohort study.

Alnaimat F(1), Alduradi H(2), Al-Qasem S(3), Ghazzal H(4), Alsarhan M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of 
Jordan, Amman, Jordan. f.naimat@ju.edu.jo.
(2)School of Nursing, The University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan.
(3)Jordan University Hospital, Amman, Jordan.
(4)Istishari Hospital, Amman, Jordan.
(5)King Hussein Medical Center, Amman, Jordan.

Giant cell arteritis (GCA), more common in Northern European populations, has 
limited data in Arabcountries. Our study reports GCA's clinical manifestations 
in Jordan and reviews published research on GCA across Arab nations. In this 
retrospective analysis, GCA patients diagnosed from January 2007 to March 2019 
at a Jordanian academic medical center were included through referrals for 
temporal artery biopsy (TAB). A comprehensive search in PubMed, Scopus, and the 
DOAJ (Directory of Open Access Journals) databases was conducted to identify all 
relevant English-language manuscripts from Arab countries on GCA without time 
limitations. Among 59 diagnosed GCA patients, 41 (69.5%) were clinically 
diagnosed with a negative TAB, and 19 (30.5%) had a positive result. Females 
comprised 74.6% (n = 44) with 1:3 male-female ratio. The mean age at diagnosis 
was 67.3 (± 9.5) years, with most presenting within two weeks (n = 40, 67.8%). 
Headache was reported by 54 patients (91.5%). Elevated ESR occurred in 51 
patients (78%), with a mean of 81 ± 32.2 mm/hr. All received glucocorticoids for 
13.1 ± 10 months. Azathioprine, Methotrexate, and Tocilizumab usage was 15.3% 
(n = 9), 8.5% (n = 5), and 3.4% (n = 2), respectively. Remission was observed in 
57.6% (n=34), and 40.7% (n = 24) had a chronic clinical course on treatment. 
Males had higher biopsy-based diagnoses (p = .008), and biopsy-diagnosed 
patients were older (p = .043). The literature search yielded only 20 
manuscripts originating in the Arab world. The predominant study types included 
case reports and retrospective analyses, with only one case series and 
onecase-control study.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-024-05540-5
PMID: 38502233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]