---
reference_id: "PMID:38116750"
title: A severe neurocognitive phenotype caused by biallelic CHD3 variants in two siblings.
authors:
- Goldfarb Yaacobi R
- Sukenik Halevy R
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63503
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Siblings
- Iran
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- Mi-2 Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase Complex/genetics
- Developmental Disabilities
- Hypertelorism
- Facies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A severe neurocognitive phenotype caused by biallelic CHD3 variants in two siblings.
**Authors:** Goldfarb Yaacobi R, Sukenik Halevy R
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63503](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63503)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2024 Apr;194(4):e63503. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63503. Epub 2023
 Dec 20.

A severe neurocognitive phenotype caused by biallelic CHD3 variants in two
siblings.

Goldfarb Yaacobi R(1), Sukenik Halevy R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Institute, Meir Medical Center, Kfar Saba, Israel.
(2)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

CHD3 heterozygous variants are associated with Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome
(SBCS) which consists of intellectual disability (ID), macrocephaly, and
dysmorphic facies. Most reported variants are missense or loss of function
clustered within the ATPase/helicase domain of the protein. We report a severe
neurocognitive phenotype caused by biallelic CHD3 variants in two siblings, each
inherited from a mildly affected parent. Male and female siblings were referred
to the Genetics Clinic due to severe ID and profound dysmorphism. The parents
are first cousins of Iranian descent with borderline intellectual abilities.
Exome sequencing was performed for the affected female and her parents. A single
homozygous candidate variant in the CHD3 gene was detected in the proband:
c.5384_5389dup. p.Arg1796_Phe1797insTrpArg, resulting in an in-frame insertion
of 2 amino acids located outside the ATPase/helicase domain at the C-terminal
region of CHD3-encoding residues. This variant is classified as likely
pathogenic according to ACMG guidelines. The variant was detected in a
heterozygous state in each parent. Both affected siblings were homozygous, while
their unaffected brother did not carry the variant. Biallelic CHD3 variants
cause a severe neurodevelopmental syndrome that is distinguishable from SBCS. We
assume that the variant type (in-frame insertion) and location may enable CHD3
biallelic variants.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63503
PMID: 38116750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
