---
reference_id: "PMID:37132057"
title: "Monkeypox: Virology, laboratory diagnosis and therapeutic approach."
authors:
- Siami H
- Asghari A
- Parsamanesh N
journal: J Gene Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jgm.3521
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox: Virology, laboratory diagnosis and therapeutic approach.
**Authors:** Siami H, Asghari A, Parsamanesh N
**Journal:** J Gene Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jgm.3521](https://doi.org/10.1002/jgm.3521)

## Content

1. J Gene Med. 2023 Sep;25(9):e3521. doi: 10.1002/jgm.3521. Epub 2023 May 2.

Monkeypox: Virology, laboratory diagnosis and therapeutic approach.

Siami H(1), Asghari A(2)(3), Parsamanesh N(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Islamic Azad University of Medical Science, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Student Research Committee, Birjand University of Medical Sciences, Birjand, 
Iran.
(3)Infectious Diseases Research Center, Birjand University of Medical Sciences, 
Birjand, Iran.
(4)Zanjan Metabolic Diseases Research Center, Zanjan University of Medical 
Science, Zanjan, Iran.
(5)Department of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, Zanjan 
University of Medical Sciences, Zanjan, Iran.

Monkeypox infection outbreaks have been observed sporadically in Africa, usually 
as a result of interaction with wildlife reservoirs. The genomes of the new 
strain range in size from 184.7 to 198.0 kb and are identified with 143-214 open 
reading frames. Viral cores are rapidly carried on microtubules away from the 
cell's perimeter and deeper into the cytoplasm once the virus and cell membranes 
fuse. Depending on the kind of exposure, patients with monkeypox may experience 
a febrile prodrome 5-13 days after exposure, which frequently includes 
lymphadenopathy, malaise, headaches, and muscle aches. A different diagnostic 
approach is available for monkeypox, including histopathological analysis, 
electron microscopy, immunoassays, polymerase chain reaction, genome sequencing, 
microarrays, loop-mediated isothermal amplification technology and CRISPR (i.e., 
"clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats"). There are 
currently no particular, clinically effective treatments available for the 
monkeypox virus. An initial treatment is cidofovir. As a monophosphate 
nucleotide analog, cidofovir is transformed into an inhibitor of viral DNA 
polymerase by cellular kinases, which is analogous to cidofovir's function in 
inhibiting viral DNA synthesis. The European Medicine Agency and the Food and 
Drug Administration have both granted permission for IMVAMUNE, a 
replication-deficient, attenuated third-generation modified vaccinia Ankara 
vaccine, to be used for the prevention of smallpox and monkeypox in adults.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jgm.3521
PMID: 37132057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]