---
reference_id: "PMID:29490364"
title: "A Cross-Sectional Study on the Hearing Threshold Levels Among People in Qinling, Qinghai, and Nanjing, China."
authors:
- Wang J
- Qian X
- Chen J
- Yang Y
- Gao X
journal: Am J Audiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1044/2017_AJA-16-0053
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Cross-Sectional Study on the Hearing Threshold Levels Among People in Qinling, Qinghai, and Nanjing, China.
**Authors:** Wang J, Qian X, Chen J, Yang Y, Gao X
**Journal:** Am J Audiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1044/2017_AJA-16-0053](https://doi.org/10.1044/2017_AJA-16-0053)

## Content

1. Am J Audiol. 2018 Mar 8;27(1):147-155. doi: 10.1044/2017_AJA-16-0053.

A Cross-Sectional Study on the Hearing Threshold Levels Among People in Qinling, 
Qinghai, and Nanjing, China.

Wang J(1)(2), Qian X(1)(2), Chen J(1)(2), Yang Y(1)(2), Gao X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Affiliated Drum Tower 
Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, Jiangsu Provincial Key Medical 
Discipline (Laboratory), Nanjing Jiangsu, P.R. China.
(2)Research Institute of Otolaryngology, Nanjing, P.R. China.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to investigate the hearing threshold among different 
age groups, genders, and geographic areas in China to provide some insight into 
the appropriate clinical interventions for hearing loss.
METHOD: Using a systematic random sampling technique, 562 participants from 
Qinling, Qinghai, and Nanjing were included. Participants in the same area were 
divided into 3 groups according to their age. Pure-tone audiometric thresholds 
were measured at octave and interoctave frequencies of 0.125-16 kHz for each 
subject.
RESULTS: There were significant differences in auditory thresholds at nearly all 
frequencies among young, middle-aged, and elderly people, and hearing thresholds 
increased with increasing age. People generally had the best hearing ability in 
Nanjing, better hearing ability in Qinghai, and the worst hearing ability in 
Qinling. Significant differences in hearing thresholds were found between males 
and females at several frequencies in Qinling.
CONCLUSION: People living in the rural area of Qinling in China had higher 
hearing threshold levels, particularly males, and hearing thresholds increased 
with age.

DOI: 10.1044/2017_AJA-16-0053
PMID: 29490364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]