---
reference_id: "PMID:11890876"
title: Scleroderma-like cutaneous syndromes.
authors:
- Mori Y
- Kahari VM
- Varga J
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rep
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1007/s11926-002-0006-0
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Eosinophilia-Myalgia Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Fasciitis/diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- "Scleroderma, Localized/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Scleroderma, Systemic/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Skin Diseases/diagnosis, therapy"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scleroderma-like cutaneous syndromes.
**Authors:** Mori Y, Kahari VM, Varga J
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rep (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11926-002-0006-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-002-0006-0)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2002 Apr;4(2):113-22. doi: 10.1007/s11926-002-0006-0.

Scleroderma-like cutaneous syndromes.

Mori Y(1), Kahari VM, Varga J.

Author information:
(1)Section of Rheumatology, University of Illinois at Chicago College of 
Medicine, 1158 MBRB, 900 S. Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607-7171, USA. 
jvarga@uic.edu

Several distinct entities associated with dermal fibrosis can mimic 
scleroderma/systemic sclerosis. The list of scleroderma-like conditions or 
scleroderma variants includes eosinophilic fasciitis, localized forms of 
scleroderma, scleredema and scleromyxedema, keloids, and environmental 
exposure-associated conditions including eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome and 
pseudosclerodermas induced by various drugs. Although these conditions are 
relatively uncommon, their accurate recognition is essential to avoid 
misdiagnosis and inappropriate therapy. The pathogenesis of these scleroderma 
variants appears to share similarities with each other and with that of 
scleroderma. Better understanding of scleroderma-like disorders is emerging 
through epidemiologic investigations, and in vivo and in vitro experimental 
research. Activation of eosinophils and disordered regulation of fibroblast 
collagen synthesis, apoptosis, and proliferation are recurrent findings in these 
disorders. The etiologic role of infection with Borrelia species or other 
microorganisms remains controversial. Cytokines such as transforming growth 
factor-beta, interleukin-4, interleukin-13, and connective tissue growth factor 
contribute to fibrosis in these disorders by inducing an accentuated and 
persistent fibrogenic response to tissue injury. The role of genetic factors in 
susceptibility and clinical expression of scleroderma-like conditions remains to 
be systematically addressed. Because of the relative rarity of these conditions, 
few well-controlled clinical treatment trials have been performed. In addition, 
there is no consensus on optimal management. Much anecdotal information and 
small clinical series indicate that phototherapy may have a role in the 
treatment of scleroderma-like conditions.

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-002-0006-0
PMID: 11890876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]