---
reference_id: "PMID:32114444"
title: "Structural and strategic landscape of PIKK protein family and their inhibitors: an overview."
authors:
- Angira D
- Shaik A
- Thiruvenkatam V
journal: Front Biosci (Landmark Ed)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2741/4867
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "DNA-Activated Protein Kinase/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, enzymology, pathology"
- "Nuclear Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/chemistry, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural and strategic landscape of PIKK protein family and their inhibitors: an overview.
**Authors:** Angira D, Shaik A, Thiruvenkatam V
**Journal:** Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2741/4867](https://doi.org/10.2741/4867)

## Content

1. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2020 Mar 1;25(8):1538-1567. doi: 10.2741/4867.

Structural and strategic landscape of PIKK protein family and their inhibitors:
an overview.

Angira D(1), Shaik A(2), Thiruvenkatam V(3).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gujarat,
India-382355.
(2)Discipline of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gujarat,
India, 382355, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
382355.
(3)Discipline of Biological Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India, vijay@iitgn.ac.in.

Phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase-related kinases (PIKKs) is a class of six unique
serine/threonine kinases that are characterized as high molecular mass colossal
proteins present in multicellular organisms. They predominantly regulate the
innumerable eukaryotic cellular processes, for instance, cell-signaling cascades
related to DNA damage and repair, cell growth and proliferation, cell cycle
arrest, genome surveillance, gene expression and many other important yet
diverse functions. A characteristic PIKK member comprises of an N-terminal HEAT
domain, followed by FAT domain, a highly conserved kinase catalytic domain, and
a C-terminal FATC domain. In this comprehensive review, we reassess and discuss
various established functions of all the six PIKK members with each function
corroborated by their structural topology. In addition to the domain
architecture of these atypical kinases, their specific inhibitors have been
briefly deliberated. This review gives us the impression of the emergent
importance of PIKKs, which, despite of their complexity, are the hub of research
with respect to the inhibitor development.

DOI: 10.2741/4867
PMID: 32114444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
