---
reference_id: "PMID:28915070"
title: "Value of transmission electron microscopy for primary ciliary dyskinesia diagnosis in the era of molecular medicine: Genetic defects with normal and non-diagnostic ciliary ultrastructure."
authors:
- Shapiro AJ
- Leigh MW
journal: Ultrastruct Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/01913123.2017.1362088
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Value of transmission electron microscopy for primary ciliary dyskinesia diagnosis in the era of molecular medicine: Genetic defects with normal and non-diagnostic ciliary ultrastructure.
**Authors:** Shapiro AJ, Leigh MW
**Journal:** Ultrastruct Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/01913123.2017.1362088](https://doi.org/10.1080/01913123.2017.1362088)

## Content

1. Ultrastruct Pathol. 2017 Nov-Dec;41(6):373-385. doi: 
10.1080/01913123.2017.1362088. Epub 2017 Sep 15.

Value of transmission electron microscopy for primary ciliary dyskinesia 
diagnosis in the era of molecular medicine: Genetic defects with normal and 
non-diagnostic ciliary ultrastructure.

Shapiro AJ(1), Leigh MW(2).

Author information:
(1)a Division of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine, Montreal Children's Hospital , 
McGill University Health Centre Research Institute , Montréal , Québec , Canada.
(2)b Department of Pediatrics and Marsico Lung Institute , University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine , Chapel Hill , North Carolina , USA.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a genetic disorder causing chronic 
oto-sino-pulmonary disease. No single diagnostic test will detect all PCD cases. 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of respiratory cilia was previously 
considered the gold standard diagnostic test for PCD, but 30% of all PCD cases 
have either normal ciliary ultrastructure or subtle changes which are 
non-diagnostic. These cases are identified through alternate diagnostic tests, 
including nasal nitric oxide measurement, high-speed videomicroscopy analysis, 
immunofluorescent staining of axonemal proteins, and/or mutation analysis of 
various PCD causing genes. Autosomal recessive mutations in DNAH11 and HYDIN 
produce normal TEM ciliary ultrastructure, while mutations in genes encoding for 
radial spoke head proteins result in some cross-sections with non-diagnostic 
alterations in the central apparatus interspersed with normal ciliary 
cross-sections. Mutations in nexin link and dynein regulatory complex genes lead 
to a collection of different ciliary ultrastructures; mutations in CCDC65, 
CCDC164, and GAS8 produce normal ciliary ultrastructure, while mutations in 
CCDC39 and CCDC40 cause absent inner dynein arms and microtubule disorganization 
in some ciliary cross-sections. Mutations in CCNO and MCIDAS cause near complete 
absence of respiratory cilia due to defects in generation of multiple cellular 
basal bodies; however, the scant cilia generated may have normal ultrastructure. 
Lastly, a syndromic form of PCD with retinal degeneration results in normal 
ciliary ultrastructure through mutations in the RPGR gene. Clinicians must be 
aware of these genetic causes of PCD resulting in non-diagnostic TEM ciliary 
ultrastructure and refrain from using TEM of respiratory cilia as a test to rule 
out PCD.

DOI: 10.1080/01913123.2017.1362088
PMCID: PMC6047068
PMID: 28915070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration: The authors report no conflicts of 
interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of this 
paper.