---
reference_id: "PMID:26791099"
title: Novel frameshift variant in gene SALL4 causing Okihiro syndrome.
authors:
- Alves LU
- Perez AB
- Alonso LG
- Otto PA
- Mingroni-Netto RC
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.12.015
keywords:
- Brazil
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Duane Retraction Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Humans
- Male
- Pedigree
- Penetrance
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel frameshift variant in gene SALL4 causing Okihiro syndrome.
**Authors:** Alves LU, Perez AB, Alonso LG, Otto PA, Mingroni-Netto RC
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.12.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.12.015)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2016 Feb;59(2):80-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.12.015. Epub
2016  Jan 11.

Novel frameshift variant in gene SALL4 causing Okihiro syndrome.

Alves LU(1), Perez AB(2), Alonso LG(2), Otto PA(1), Mingroni-Netto RC(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociências,
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São
Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociências,
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
renetto@ib.usp.br.

Okihiro syndrome, Duane-radial ray syndrome or acro-reno-ocular syndrome (OMIM
#607323) are alternative denominations describing an extremely variable
condition, characterized by several radial defects of the upper limbs associated
with Duane anomaly. It is a rare autosomal dominant disorder determined by
variants in the SALL4 gene which encodes a transcription factor with eight zinc
finger motifs. Here we report a novel heterozygous frameshift variant,
c.410dupG, present in a Brazilian family. The five affected individuals exhibit
a broad spectrum of phenotypes, ranging from the severe one presented by the
index case (grossly shortened and deformed forearm, markedly hypoplastic and
appendicular thumb, malformed right foot and ear malformation), to the less
conspicuous condition presented by his near relatives (usually only
triphalangeal or hypoplastic thumbs, sometimes associated with ulnar deviation);
Duane's anomaly, however, was not observed in any of the affected family
members. The c.410dupG variant is predicted to result in the translation of a
truncated protein with 180 amino acid residues, lacking seven of the eight zinc
finger motifs, with the same size of the predicted products of the already
reported c.496dupC variant, described in two unrelated cases. However, the
phenotypes observed in the three families (the one here reported and other two
with c.496dupC variant) are very different. The analysis of cases so far
published does not permit to establish a clear or direct genotype-phenotype
correlation, but the three more severe foot malformation cases are due to
variants predicted to encode truncated proteins lacking seven ZFMs. This might
indicate a possible correlation between foot malformation and reduced size of
the protein, suggesting that the nonsense-mediated-decay mechanism might not be
so effective as to eliminate all SALL4 variants harboring premature termination
codons.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.12.015
PMID: 26791099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
