---
reference_id: PMID:12116252
title: A 52-kb deletion in the SOST-MEOX1 intergenic region on 17q12-q21 is associated with van Buchem disease in the Dutch population.
authors:
- Staehling-Hampton K
- Proll S
- Paeper BW
- Zhao L
- Charmley P
- Brown A
- Gardner JC
- Galas D
- Schatzman RC
- Beighton P
- Papapoulos S
- Hamersma H
- Brunkow ME
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10401
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Africa
- Base Sequence
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17/genetics"
- "DNA, Intergenic/genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Markers
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Netherlands
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, pathology"
- Osteosclerosis/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A 52-kb deletion in the SOST-MEOX1 intergenic region on 17q12-q21 is associated with van Buchem disease in the Dutch population.
**Authors:** Staehling-Hampton K, Proll S, Paeper BW, Zhao L, Charmley P, Brown A, Gardner JC, Galas D, Schatzman RC, Beighton P, Papapoulos S, Hamersma H, Brunkow ME
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.10401](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.10401)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jun 15;110(2):144-52. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10401.

A 52-kb deletion in the SOST-MEOX1 intergenic region on 17q12-q21 is associated 
with van Buchem disease in the Dutch population.

Staehling-Hampton K(1), Proll S, Paeper BW, Zhao L, Charmley P, Brown A, Gardner 
JC, Galas D, Schatzman RC, Beighton P, Papapoulos S, Hamersma H, Brunkow ME.

Author information:
(1)Celltech R&D Inc., Bothell, Washington 98021, USA.

Van Buchem disease is an autosomal recessive sclerosing bone dysplasia 
characterized by skeletal hyperostosis, overgrowth of the mandible, and a 
liability to entrapment of the seventh and eighth cranial nerves. The genetic 
determinant maps to chromosome 17q12-q21. We refined the critical interval to 
the < 1-Mb region between D17S2250 and D17S2253 in 15 affected individuals, all 
of whom shared a common disease haplotype. Furthermore, we report here the 
identification of a 52-kb deletion located within the interval and encompassing 
D17S1789 that is 100% concordant with the disorder. Although the deletion itself 
does not appear to disrupt the coding region of any known or novel gene(s), the 
closest flanking genes are MEOX1 on the proximal side, and SOST on the distal 
side of the deletion. MEOX1 is known to be important for the development of the 
axial skeleton, whereas the SOST gene is the determinant of sclerosteosis, a 
disorder that shares many features with van Buchem disease, thus raising the 
possibility that van Buchem disease results from dysregulation of the expression 
of one or both of these genes.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.10401
PMID: 12116252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]