---
reference_id: "PMID:31478832"
title: Adaptation of hepatitis C virus to interferon lambda polymorphism across multiple viral genotypes.
authors:
- Chaturvedi N
- Svarovskaia ES
- Mo H
- Osinusi AO
- Brainard DM
- Subramanian GM
- McHutchison JG
- Zeuzem S
- Fellay J
journal: Elife
year: '2019'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.42542
keywords:
- "Adaptation, Biological"
- Africa
- Asia
- Europe
- Genotype
- Hepacivirus/genetics
- "Hepatitis C/immunology, virology"
- Humans
- Immunologic Factors/genetics
- Interferons/genetics
- Viral Load
- Viral Nonstructural Proteins/genetics
- Interleukins
- Interferon Lambda
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adaptation of hepatitis C virus to interferon lambda polymorphism across multiple viral genotypes.
**Authors:** Chaturvedi N, Svarovskaia ES, Mo H, Osinusi AO, Brainard DM, Subramanian GM, McHutchison JG, Zeuzem S, Fellay J
**Journal:** Elife (2019)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.42542](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.42542)

## Content

1. Elife. 2019 Sep 3;8:e42542. doi: 10.7554/eLife.42542.

Adaptation of hepatitis C virus to interferon lambda polymorphism across
multiple viral genotypes.

Chaturvedi N(1)(2), Svarovskaia ES(3), Mo H(3), Osinusi AO(3), Brainard DM(3),
Subramanian GM(3), McHutchison JG(3), Zeuzem S(4), Fellay J(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Gilead Sciences Inc, Foster City, United States.
(4)Goethe University Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany.
(5)Precision Medicine Unit, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Elife. 2019 Sep 03;8:e50148. doi: 10.7554/eLife.50148.

Genetic polymorphism in the interferon lambda (IFN-λ) region is associated with
spontaneous clearance of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and response to
interferon-based treatment. Here, we evaluate associations between IFN-λ
polymorphism and HCV variation in 8729 patients (Europeans 77%, Asians 13%,
Africans 8%) infected with various viral genotypes, predominantly 1a (41%), 1b
(22%) and 3a (21%). We searched for associations between rs12979860 genotype and
variants in the NS3, NS4A, NS5A and NS5B HCV proteins. We report multiple
associations in all tested proteins, including in the interferon-sensitivity
determining region of NS5A. We also assessed the combined impact of human and
HCV variation on pretreatment viral load and report amino acids associated with
both IFN-λ polymorphism and HCV load across multiple viral genotypes. By
demonstrating that IFN-λ variation leaves a large footprint on the viral
proteome, we provide evidence of pervasive viral adaptation to innate immune
pressure during chronic HCV infection.

© 2019, Chaturvedi et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.42542
PMCID: PMC6721370
PMID: 31478832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NC, JF No competing interests declared, ES, HM,
AO, DB, GS, JM This study was partially funded by Gilead Sciences and the author
is an employee of Gilead Sciences, SZ has been a consultant for Abbvie, Gilead,
Janssen, Merck/MSD
