---
reference_id: "PMID:32315770"
title: The pivotal role of ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1 (UBA1) in neuronal health and neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Lambert-Smith IA
- Saunders DN
- Yerbury JJ
journal: Int J Biochem Cell Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2020.105746
keywords:
- Animals
- Autophagy/genetics
- Humans
- Motor Neurons/metabolism
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/enzymology, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Neurons/enzymology, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- Ubiquitin/metabolism
- "Ubiquitin-Activating Enzymes/chemistry, genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Ubiquitination/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pivotal role of ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1 (UBA1) in neuronal health and neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Lambert-Smith IA, Saunders DN, Yerbury JJ
**Journal:** Int J Biochem Cell Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biocel.2020.105746](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2020.105746)

## Content

1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2020 Jun;123:105746. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2020.105746.  Epub 2020 Apr 18.

The pivotal role of ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1 (UBA1) in neuronal health and 
neurodegeneration.

Lambert-Smith IA(1), Saunders DN(2), Yerbury JJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute, Northfields Avenue, 
Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia; School of Chemistry and Molecular Bioscience, 
University of Wollongong, Northfields Avenue, Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia.
(2)School of Medical Sciences, UNSW, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: 
d.saunders@unsw.edu.au.
(3)Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute, Northfields Avenue, 
Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia; School of Chemistry and Molecular Bioscience, 
University of Wollongong, Northfields Avenue, Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia. 
Electronic address: jyerbury@uow.edu.au.

Ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1, UBA1, functions at the apex of the enzymatic 
ubiquitylation cascade, catalysing ubiquitin activation. UBA1 is thus of 
fundamental importance to the modulation of ubiquitin homeostasis and to all 
downstream ubiquitylation-dependent cellular processes, including proteolysis 
through the ubiquitin-proteasome system and selective autophagy. The 
proteasome-dependent and -independent functions of UBA1 contribute significantly 
to a range of processes crucial to neuronal health. The significance of UBA1 
activity to neuronal health is clear in light of accumulating evidence 
implicating impaired UBA1 activity in a range of neurodegenerative conditions, 
including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's disease and 
spinal muscular atrophy. Moreover, ubiquitylation-independent functions of UBA1 
of importance to neuronal functioning have been proposed. Here, we summarise 
findings supporting the significant role of UBA1 in regulating neuronal 
functioning, and discuss the detrimental consequences of UBA1 impairment that 
contribute to neuronal dysfunction and degeneration.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2020.105746
PMID: 32315770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]