---
reference_id: "PMID:36833282"
title: "Whole Exome Sequencing Reveals a Novel Homozygous Variant in the Ganglioside Biosynthetic Enzyme, ST3GAL5 Gene in a Saudi Family Causing Salt and Pepper Syndrome."
authors:
- Abdulkareem AA
- Shirah BH
- Naseer MI
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14020354
keywords:
- Microcephaly
- Retinal Degeneration
- Obesity
- Developmental Disabilities
- Myopia
- Sialyltransferases/deficiency
- Exome Sequencing
- Saudi Arabia
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Fingers/abnormalities
- Humans
- Muscle Hypotonia
- Gangliosides
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole Exome Sequencing Reveals a Novel Homozygous Variant in the Ganglioside Biosynthetic Enzyme, ST3GAL5 Gene in a Saudi Family Causing Salt and Pepper Syndrome.
**Authors:** Abdulkareem AA, Shirah BH, Naseer MI
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14020354](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14020354)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Jan 30;14(2):354. doi: 10.3390/genes14020354.

Whole Exome Sequencing Reveals a Novel Homozygous Variant in the Ganglioside
Biosynthetic Enzyme, ST3GAL5 Gene in a Saudi Family Causing Salt and Pepper
Syndrome.

Abdulkareem AA(1)(2), Shirah BH(3), Naseer MI(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research, King Abdulaziz University,
Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Faculty of Science, Department of Biochemistry, King Abdulaziz University,
Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research
Centre, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Medical Laboratory Technology, Faculty of Applied Medical
Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.

Salt and pepper developmental regression syndrome (SPDRS) is an autosomal
recessive disorder characterized by epilepsy, profound intellectual disability,
choreoathetosis, scoliosis, and dermal pigmentation along with dysmorphic facial
features. GM3 synthase deficiency is due to any pathogenic mutation in the ST3
Beta-Galactoside Alpha-2,3-Sialyltransferase 5 (ST3GAL5) gene, which encodes the
sialyltransferase enzyme that synthesizes ganglioside GM3. In this study, the
Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) results presented a novel homozygous pathogenic
variant, NM_003896.3:c.221T>A (p.Val74Glu), in the exon 3 of the ST3GAL5 gene.
causing SPDRS with epilepsy, short stature, speech delay, and developmental
delay in all three affected members of the same Saudi family. The results of the
WES sequencing were further validated using Sanger sequencing analysis. For the
first time, we are reporting SPDRS in a Saudi family showing phenotypic features
similar to other reported cases. This study further adds to the literature and
explains the role of the ST3GAL5 gene, which plays an important role, and any
pathogenic variants that may cause the GM3 synthase deficiency that leads to the
disease. This study would finally enable the creation of a database of the
disease that provides a base for understanding the important and critical
genomic regions that will help control intellectual disability and epilepsy in
Saudi patients.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14020354
PMCID: PMC9957204
PMID: 36833282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflict of interest by any author.
