---
reference_id: "PMID:39009701"
title: Genetic neurodevelopmental clustering and dyslexia.
authors:
- Ciulkinyte A
- Mountford HS
- Fontanillas P
- 23andMe Research Team
- Bates TC
- Martin NG
- Fisher SE
- Luciano M
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-024-02649-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Dyslexia/genetics
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/genetics
- Genome-Wide Association Study/methods
- Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Female
- Tourette Syndrome/genetics
- Male
- Major Depressive Disorder/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Schizophrenia/genetics
- Bipolar Disorder/genetics
- Phenotype
- Autistic Disorder/genetics
- Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic neurodevelopmental clustering and dyslexia.
**Authors:** Ciulkinyte A, Mountford HS, Fontanillas P, 23andMe Research Team, Bates TC, Martin NG, Fisher SE, Luciano M
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-024-02649-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-024-02649-8)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2025 Jan;30(1):140-150. doi: 10.1038/s41380-024-02649-8. Epub
2024 Jul 15.

Genetic neurodevelopmental clustering and dyslexia.

Ciulkinyte A(1), Mountford HS(2), Fontanillas P(3); 23andMe Research Team; Bates
TC(2), Martin NG(4), Fisher SE(5)(6), Luciano M(7).

Collaborators: Aslibekyan S, Auton A, Babalola E, Bell RK, Bielenberg J, Bowes
J, Bryc K, Chaudhary NS, Coker D, Das S, DelloRusso E, Elson SL, Eriksson N,
Filshtein T, Freyman W, Fuller Z, German C, Granka JM, Heilbron K, Hernandez A,
Hicks B, Hinds DA, Jewett EM, Jiang Y, Kukar K, Kwong A, Liang Y, Lin KH, Llamas
BA, McIntyre MH, Micheletti SJ, Moreno ME, Nandakumar P, Nguyen DT, O'Connell J,
Petrakovitz AA, Poznik GD, Reynoso A, Saini S, Schumacher M, Selcer L, Shastri
AJ, Shelton JF, Shi J, Shringarpure S, Su QJ, Tat SA, Tran V, Tung JY, Wang X,
Wang W, Weldon CH, Wilton P, Wong CD.

Author information:
(1)Translational Neuroscience PhD Programme, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
UK.
(2)School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(3)23andMe, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA.
(4)Genetic Epidemiology, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston,
QLD, Australia.
(5)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(6)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University,
Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(7)School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. michelle.luciano@ed.ac.uk.

Dyslexia is a learning difficulty with neurodevelopmental origins, manifesting
as reduced accuracy and speed in reading and spelling. It is substantially
heritable and frequently co-occurs with other neurodevelopmental conditions,
particularly attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Here, we
investigate the genetic structure underlying dyslexia and a range of psychiatric
traits using results from genome-wide association studies of dyslexia, ADHD,
autism, anorexia nervosa, anxiety, bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder,
obsessive compulsive disorder, schizophrenia, and Tourette syndrome. Genomic
Structural Equation Modelling (GenomicSEM) showed heightened support for a model
consisting of five correlated latent genomic factors described as: F1)
compulsive disorders (including obsessive-compulsive disorder, anorexia nervosa,
Tourette syndrome), F2) psychotic disorders (including bipolar disorder,
schizophrenia), F3) internalising disorders (including anxiety disorder, major
depressive disorder), F4) neurodevelopmental traits (including autism, ADHD),
and F5) attention and learning difficulties (including ADHD, dyslexia). ADHD
loaded more strongly on the attention and learning difficulties latent factor
(F5) than on the neurodevelopmental traits latent factor (F4). The attention and
learning difficulties latent factor (F5) was positively correlated with
internalising disorders (.40), neurodevelopmental traits (.25) and psychotic
disorders (.17) latent factors, and negatively correlated with the compulsive
disorders (-.16) latent factor. These factor correlations are mirrored in
genetic correlations observed between the attention and learning difficulties
latent factor and other cognitive, psychological and wellbeing traits. We
further investigated genetic variants underlying both dyslexia and ADHD, which
implicated 49 loci (40 not previously found in GWAS of the individual traits)
mapping to 174 genes (121 not found in GWAS of individual traits) as potential
pleiotropic variants. Our study confirms the increased genetic relation between
dyslexia and ADHD versus other psychiatric traits and uncovers novel pleiotropic
variants affecting both traits. In future, analyses including additional
co-occurring traits such as dyscalculia and dyspraxia will allow a clearer
definition of the attention and learning difficulties latent factor, yielding
further insights into factor structure and pleiotropic effects.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-024-02649-8
PMCID: PMC11649571
PMID: 39009701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: PF and the 23andMe Research
Team members are employed by and hold stock or stock options in 23andMe, Inc.
All other authors declare no competing interests. Ethical approval: The study
used secondary data, with all original studies stating relevant ethical
approval. The secondary data analyses were approved under the Edinburgh Medical
School Research Ethics Committee.
