---
reference_id: "PMID:21922466"
title: "The thymus in myasthenia gravis: Site of \"innate autoimmunity\"?"
authors:
- Cavalcante P
- Le Panse R
- Berrih-Aknin S
- Maggi L
- Antozzi C
- Baggi F
- Bernasconi P
- Mantegazza R
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/mus.22103
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The thymus in myasthenia gravis: Site of "innate autoimmunity"?
**Authors:** Cavalcante P, Le Panse R, Berrih-Aknin S, Maggi L, Antozzi C, Baggi F, Bernasconi P, Mantegazza R
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.22103](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.22103)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2011 Oct;44(4):467-84. doi: 10.1002/mus.22103.

The thymus in myasthenia gravis: Site of "innate autoimmunity"?

Cavalcante P(1), Le Panse R, Berrih-Aknin S, Maggi L, Antozzi C, Baggi F, 
Bernasconi P, Mantegazza R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Neuromuscular Diseases and Neuroimmunology, 
Fondazione Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.

Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune disorder caused, in most cases, by 
autoantibodies against components of the neuromuscular junction, frequently the 
acetylcholine receptor (AChR), and less often the muscle-specific kinase 
receptor. The thymus plays a major role in the pathogenesis of MG with anti-AChR 
antibodies: it shows marked pathologic alterations (hyperplastic or tumoral) in 
most AChR-positive patients and contains the elements required to initiate and 
sustain an autoimmune reaction (AChR autoantigen, AChR-specific T cells, and 
autoantibody-secreting plasma cells). In this study we review early and more 
recent findings implicating the thymus as site of AChR autosensitization in MG 
and briefly discuss the therapeutic role of thymectomy. We also summarize data 
showing that the MG thymus is in a state of chronic inflammation, and we review 
emerging evidence of a viral contribution to the onset and maintenance of the 
thymic autoimmune response.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.22103
PMID: 21922466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]