---
reference_id: "PMID:36414803"
title: Plasma cell neoplasms and related entities-evolution in diagnosis and classification.
authors:
- Fend F
- Dogan A
- Cook JR
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-022-03431-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Multiple Myeloma/genetics
- "Plasmacytoma/diagnosis, genetics"
- Paraproteinemias/diagnosis
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Autoimmune/genetics"
- "Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance/diagnosis, genetics"
- Amyloidosis/genetics
- "Lymphoma, B-Cell/genetics"
- "Translocation, Genetic"
- Immunoglobulin M
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plasma cell neoplasms and related entities-evolution in diagnosis and classification.
**Authors:** Fend F, Dogan A, Cook JR
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-022-03431-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-022-03431-3)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2023 Jan;482(1):163-177. doi: 10.1007/s00428-022-03431-3. Epub 
2022 Nov 21.

Plasma cell neoplasms and related entities-evolution in diagnosis and 
classification.

Fend F(1), Dogan A(2), Cook JR(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Tübingen University Hospital, Tübingen, Germany. 
falko.fend@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(2)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
(3)Department of Clinical Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 44195, 
USA. COOKJ2@ccf.org.

Plasma cell neoplasms including multiple myeloma (MM) and related terminally 
differentiated B-cell neoplasms are characterized by secretion of monoclonal 
immunoglobulin and stepwise development from a preneoplastic clonal B and/or 
plasma cell proliferation called monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined 
significance (MGUS). Diagnosis of these disorders requires integration of 
clinical, laboratory, and morphological features. While their classification 
mostly remains unchanged compared to the revised 2016 WHO classification and the 
2014 International Myeloma Working Group consensus, some changes in criteria and 
terminology were proposed in the 2022 International Consensus Classification 
(ICC) of mature lymphoid neoplasms. MGUS of IgM type is now divided into IgM 
MGUS of plasma cell type, precursor to the rare IgM MM and characterized by 
MM-type cytogenetics, lack of clonal B-cells and absence of MYD88 mutation, and 
IgM MGUS, NOS including the remaining cases. Primary cold agglutinin disease is 
recognized as a new entity. MM is now formally subdivided into cytogenetic 
groups, recognizing the importance of genetics for clinical features and 
prognosis. MM with recurrent genetic abnormalities includes MM with CCND family 
translocations, MM with MAF family translocations, MM with NSD2 translocation, 
and MM with hyperdiploidy, with the remaining cases classified as MM, NOS. For 
diagnosis of localized plasma cell tumors, solitary plasmacytoma of bone, and 
primary extraosseous plasmacytoma, the importance of excluding minimal bone 
marrow infiltration by flow cytometry is emphasized. Primary systemic 
amyloidosis is renamed immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis (AL), and a 
localized AL amyloidosis is recognized as a distinct entity. This review 
summarizes the updates on plasma cell neoplasms and related entities proposed in 
the 2022 ICC. KEY POINTS: • Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma can be diagnosed with 
lymphoplasmacytic aggregates in trephine biopsies < 10% of cellularity and 
evidence of clonal B-cells and plasma cells. • IgM MGUS is subdivided into a 
plasma cell type and a not otherwise specified (NOS) type. • Primary cold 
agglutinin disease is recognized as a new entity. • The term "multiple myeloma" 
replaces the term "plasma cell myeloma" used in the 2016 WHO classification. • 
Multiple myeloma is subdivided into 4 mutually exclusive cytogenetic groups and 
MM NOS. • Minimal bone marrow infiltration detected by flow cytometry is of 
major prognostic importance for solitary plasmacytoma of bone and to a lesser 
extent for primary extraosseous plasmacytoma. • Localized IG light chain 
amyloidosis is recognized as a separate entity, distinct from systemic 
immunoglobulin light chain (AL) amyloidosis.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-022-03431-3
PMCID: PMC9852202
PMID: 36414803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.