---
reference_id: "PMID:21451421"
title: "A double-blind, randomized study comparing the antihypertensive effect of eplerenone and spironolactone in patients with hypertension and evidence of primary aldosteronism."
authors:
- Parthasarathy HK
- Ménard J
- White WB
- Young WF Jr
- Williams GH
- Williams B
- Ruilope LM
- McInnes GT
- Connell JM
- MacDonald TM
journal: J Hypertens
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283455ca5
keywords:
- Adult
- Antihypertensive Agents/therapeutic use
- Double-Blind Method
- Eplerenone
- Female
- Humans
- Hyperaldosteronism/drug therapy
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Placebos
- Quality of Life
- "Spironolactone/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A double-blind, randomized study comparing the antihypertensive effect of eplerenone and spironolactone in patients with hypertension and evidence of primary aldosteronism.
**Authors:** Parthasarathy HK, Ménard J, White WB, Young WF Jr, Williams GH, Williams B, Ruilope LM, McInnes GT, Connell JM, MacDonald TM
**Journal:** J Hypertens (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283455ca5](https://doi.org/10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283455ca5)

## Content

1. J Hypertens. 2011 May;29(5):980-90. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283455ca5.

A double-blind, randomized study comparing the antihypertensive effect of
eplerenone and spironolactone in patients with hypertension and evidence of
primary aldosteronism.

Parthasarathy HK(1), Ménard J, White WB, Young WF Jr, Williams GH, Williams B,
Ruilope LM, McInnes GT, Connell JM, MacDonald TM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Papworth Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2011 Aug;13(8):629-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-7176.2011.00495.x.

BACKGROUND: Eplerenone is claimed to be a more selective blocker of the
mineralocorticoid receptor than spironolactone being associated with fewer
antiandrogenic side-effects. We compared the efficacy, safety and tolerability
of eplerenone versus spironolactone in patients with hypertension associated
with primary aldosteronism.
METHODS: The study was multicentre, randomized, double-blind, active-controlled,
and parallel group design. Following a single-blind, placebo run-in period,
patients were randomized 1: 1 to a 16-week double-blind, treatment period of
spironolactone (75-225 mg once daily) or eplerenone (100-300 mg once daily)
using a titration-to-effect design. To be randomized, patients had to meet
biochemical criteria for primary aldosteronism and have a seated DBP at least 90
mmHg and less than 120 mmHg and SBP less than 200 mmHg. The primary efficacy
endpoint was the antihypertensive effect of eplerenone versus spironolactone to
establish noninferiority of eplerenone in the mean change from baseline in
seated DBP.
RESULTS: Changes from baseline in DBP were less on eplerenone (-5.6 ± 1.3 SE
mmHg) than spironolactone (-12.5 ± 1.3 SE mmHg) [difference, -6.9 mmHg (-10.6,
-3.3); P<0.001]. Although there were no significant differences between
eplerenone and spironolactone in the overall incidence of adverse events, more
patients randomized to spironolactone developed male gynaecomastia (21.2 versus
4.5%; P=0.033) and female mastodynia (21.1 versus 0.0%; P=0.026).
CONCLUSION: The antihypertensive effect of spironolactone was significantly
greater than that of eplerenone in hypertension associated with primary
aldosteronism.

© 2011 Wolters Kluwer Health | Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

DOI: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283455ca5
PMID: 21451421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
