---
reference_id: "PMID:23606748"
title: Autosomal recessive GJA1 (Cx43) gene mutations cause oculodentodigital dysplasia by distinct mechanisms.
authors:
- Huang T
- Shao Q
- MacDonald A
- Xin L
- Lorentz R
- Bai D
- Laird DW
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1242/jcs.123315
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Connexin 26
- "Connexin 43/genetics, metabolism"
- Connexins
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Cytosol/metabolism
- "Eye Abnormalities/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Fluorescent Dyes/metabolism
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Gap Junctions/metabolism, pathology"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- "Protein Isoforms/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Transport
- "Syndactyly/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Tooth Abnormalities/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal recessive GJA1 (Cx43) gene mutations cause oculodentodigital dysplasia by distinct mechanisms.
**Authors:** Huang T, Shao Q, MacDonald A, Xin L, Lorentz R, Bai D, Laird DW
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.123315](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.123315)

## Content

1. J Cell Sci. 2013 Jul 1;126(Pt 13):2857-66. doi: 10.1242/jcs.123315. Epub 2013
Apr 19.

Autosomal recessive GJA1 (Cx43) gene mutations cause oculodentodigital dysplasia
by distinct mechanisms.

Huang T(1), Shao Q, MacDonald A, Xin L, Lorentz R, Bai D, Laird DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Western Ontario, London
ON N6A-5C1, Canada.

Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD) is mainly an autosomal dominant human disease
caused by mutations in the GJA1 gene, which encodes the gap junction protein
connexin43 (Cx43). Surprisingly, there have been two autosomal recessive
mutations reported that cause ODDD: a single amino acid substitution (R76H) and
a premature truncation mutation (R33X). When expressed in either gap junctional
intercellular communication (GJIC)-deficient HeLa cells or Cx43-expressing NRK
cells, the R76H mutant trafficked to the plasma membrane to form gap
junction-like plaques, whereas the R33X mutant remained diffusely localized
throughout the cell, including the nucleus. As expected, the R33X mutant failed
to form functional channels. In the case of the R76H mutant, dye transfer
studies in HeLa cells and electrical conductance analysis in GJIC-deficient N2a
cells revealed that this mutant could form functional gap junction channels,
albeit with reduced macroscopic and single channel conductance. Alexa 350 dye
transfer studies further revealed that the R76H mutant had no detectable
negative effect on the function of co-expressed Cx26, Cx32, Cx37 or Cx40,
whereas the R33X mutant exhibited significant dominant or trans-dominant effects
on Cx43 and Cx40 as manifested by a reduction in wild-type connexin gap junction
plaques. Taken together, our results suggest that the trans-dominant effect of
R33X together with its complete inability to form a functional channel may
explain why patients harboring this autosomal recessive R33X mutant exhibit
greater disease burden than patients harboring the R76H mutant.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.123315
PMID: 23606748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
