---
reference_id: "PMID:32125362"
title: Epidemiologic Features and Clinical Course of Patients Infected With SARS-CoV-2 in Singapore.
authors:
- Young BE
- Ong SWX
- Kalimuddin S
- Low JG
- Tan SY
- Loh J
- Ng OT
- Marimuthu K
- Ang LW
- Mak TM
- Lau SK
- Anderson DE
- Chan KS
- Tan TY
- Ng TY
- Cui L
- Said Z
- Kurupatham L
- Chen MI
- Chan M
- Vasoo S
- Wang LF
- Tan BH
- Lin RTP
- Lee VJM
- Leo YS
- Lye DC
- Singapore 2019 Novel Coronavirus Outbreak Research Team
journal: JAMA
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2020.3204
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- "Betacoronavirus/isolation & purification"
- COVID-19
- "Coronavirus Infections/epidemiology, therapy, virology"
- Disease Progression
- Drug Combinations
- Female
- Humans
- "Lopinavir/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Oxygen Inhalation Therapy
- Pandemics
- "Pneumonia, Viral/epidemiology, therapy, virology"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Respiratory Tract Infections/virology
- "Ritonavir/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- SARS-CoV-2
- Singapore/epidemiology
- Virus Shedding
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiologic Features and Clinical Course of Patients Infected With SARS-CoV-2 in Singapore.
**Authors:** Young BE, Ong SWX, Kalimuddin S, Low JG, Tan SY, Loh J, Ng OT, Marimuthu K, Ang LW, Mak TM, Lau SK, Anderson DE, Chan KS, Tan TY, Ng TY, Cui L, Said Z, Kurupatham L, Chen MI, Chan M, Vasoo S, Wang LF, Tan BH, Lin RTP, Lee VJM, Leo YS, Lye DC, Singapore 2019 Novel Coronavirus Outbreak Research Team
**Journal:** JAMA (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2020.3204](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.3204)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2020 Apr 21;323(15):1488-1494. doi: 10.1001/jama.2020.3204.

Epidemiologic Features and Clinical Course of Patients Infected With SARS-CoV-2
in Singapore.

Young BE(1)(2)(3), Ong SWX(1)(2), Kalimuddin S(4)(5), Low JG(4)(5), Tan SY(6),
Loh J(7), Ng OT(1)(2)(3), Marimuthu K(1)(2)(8), Ang LW(1), Mak TM(1), Lau SK(9),
Anderson DE(5), Chan KS(4), Tan TY(5)(6), Ng TY(7), Cui L(1), Said Z(10),
Kurupatham L(10), Chen MI(1)(11), Chan M(1)(2), Vasoo S(1)(2), Wang LF(5), Tan
BH(3)(9), Lin RTP(1), Lee VJM(10)(11), Leo YS(1)(2)(3)(8)(11), Lye
DC(1)(2)(3)(8); Singapore 2019 Novel Coronavirus Outbreak Research Team.

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Infectious Diseases, Singapore.
(2)Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore.
(3)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Singapore.
(4)Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
(5)Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore.
(6)Changi General Hospital, Singapore.
(7)Sengkang General Hospital, Singapore.
(8)Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, Singapore.
(9)DSO National Laboratories, Singapore.
(10)Ministry of Health, Singapore.
(11)Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, Singapore.

Erratum in
    JAMA. 2020 Apr 21;323(15):1510. doi: 10.1001/jama.2020.4372.

Comment in
    Ulster Med J. 2020 Sep;89(2):128.

IMPORTANCE: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) emerged
in Wuhan, China, in December 2019 and has spread globally with sustained
human-to-human transmission outside China.
OBJECTIVE: To report the initial experience in Singapore with the epidemiologic
investigation of this outbreak, clinical features, and management.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Descriptive case series of the first 18
patients diagnosed with polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-confirmed SARS-CoV-2
infection at 4 hospitals in Singapore from January 23 to February 3, 2020; final
follow-up date was February 25, 2020.
EXPOSURES: Confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Clinical, laboratory, and radiologic data were
collected, including PCR cycle threshold values from nasopharyngeal swabs and
viral shedding in blood, urine, and stool. Clinical course was summarized,
including requirement for supplemental oxygen and intensive care and use of
empirical treatment with lopinavir-ritonavir.
RESULTS: Among the 18 hospitalized patients with PCR-confirmed SARS-CoV-2
infection (median age, 47 years; 9 [50%] women), clinical presentation was an
upper respiratory tract infection in 12 (67%), and viral shedding from the
nasopharynx was prolonged for 7 days or longer among 15 (83%). Six individuals
(33%) required supplemental oxygen; of these, 2 required intensive care. There
were no deaths. Virus was detectable in the stool (4/8 [50%]) and blood (1/12
[8%]) by PCR but not in urine. Five individuals requiring supplemental oxygen
were treated with lopinavir-ritonavir. For 3 of the 5 patients, fever resolved
and supplemental oxygen requirement was reduced within 3 days, whereas 2
deteriorated with progressive respiratory failure. Four of the 5 patients
treated with lopinavir-ritonavir developed nausea, vomiting, and/or diarrhea,
and 3 developed abnormal liver function test results.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among the first 18 patients diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2
infection in Singapore, clinical presentation was frequently a mild respiratory
tract infection. Some patients required supplemental oxygen and had variable
clinical outcomes following treatment with an antiretroviral agent.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.3204
PMCID: PMC7054855
PMID: 32125362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Young
reported receiving personal fees from Sanofi and Roche. Dr Wang reported
receiving grants from the Ministry of Health, Singapore. No other disclosures
were reported.
