---
reference_id: "PMID:23746550"
title: De novo mutations in the genome organizer CTCF cause intellectual disability.
authors:
- Gregor A
- Oti M
- Kouwenhoven EN
- Hoyer J
- Sticht H
- Ekici AB
- Kjaergaard S
- Rauch A
- Stunnenberg HG
- Uebe S
- Vasileiou G
- Reis A
- Zhou H
- Zweier C
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De novo mutations in the genome organizer CTCF cause intellectual disability.
**Authors:** Gregor A, Oti M, Kouwenhoven EN, Hoyer J, Sticht H, Ekici AB, Kjaergaard S, Rauch A, Stunnenberg HG, Uebe S, Vasileiou G, Reis A, Zhou H, Zweier C
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.007)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Jul 11;93(1):124-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.007.
Epub  2013 Jun 6.

De novo mutations in the genome organizer CTCF cause intellectual disability.

Gregor A(1), Oti M, Kouwenhoven EN, Hoyer J, Sticht H, Ekici AB, Kjaergaard S, 
Rauch A, Stunnenberg HG, Uebe S, Vasileiou G, Reis A, Zhou H, Zweier C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

An increasing number of genes involved in chromatin structure and epigenetic 
regulation has been implicated in a variety of developmental disorders, often 
including intellectual disability. By trio exome sequencing and subsequent 
mutational screening we now identified two de novo frameshift mutations and one 
de novo missense mutation in CTCF in individuals with intellectual disability, 
microcephaly, and growth retardation. Furthermore, an individual with a larger 
deletion including CTCF was identified. CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) is one of 
the most important chromatin organizers in vertebrates and is involved in 
various chromatin regulation processes such as higher order of chromatin 
organization, enhancer function, and maintenance of three-dimensional chromatin 
structure. Transcriptome analyses in all three individuals with point mutations 
revealed deregulation of genes involved in signal transduction and emphasized 
the role of CTCF in enhancer-driven expression of genes. Our findings indicate 
that haploinsufficiency of CTCF affects genomic interaction of enhancers and 
their regulated gene promoters that drive developmental processes and cognition.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.007
PMCID: PMC3710752
PMID: 23746550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]