---
reference_id: "PMID:29489177"
title: Lafora Disease.
authors:
- Ibrahim F
- Murr NI
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lafora Disease.
**Authors:** Ibrahim F, Murr NI

## Content

1. Lafora Disease.

Ibrahim F(1), Murr NI(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026
Jan–.
2024 Feb 29.

Author information:
(1)SIU Neuroscience Institute
(2)South IL Sch of Med, Memorial Med Center

Progressive myoclonic epilepsies are rare genetic disorders that most frequently
present in late childhood or adolescence but can be seen in all age groups from
infancy to adulthood. Conversely, epileptic encephalopathies start with
polymorphic seizures in early infancy. These epilepsies are associated with
progressive myoclonus, epileptic seizures, dementia ataxia, and, in the worst
cases, death. Progressive myoclonic epilepsies include Unverricht-Lundborg
disease, Lafora disease, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses, sialidosis type I,
myoclonus epilepsy, ragged red fibers (MERRF), Gaucher disease type 3,
dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy, and other rare progressive myoclonic
epilepsies.  Lafora disease is a severe, autosomal recessive, progressive
myoclonus epilepsy commonly observed in previously healthy adolescents, with
death occurring within 10 years of symptom onset. Genetic research has
identified many hereditary etiologies, and others are expected to be found.
In Lafora disease, the main cause is the loss-of-function mutations
in EPM2A and NHLRC1 that encode laforin and malin, respectively. Lack of either
protein results in poorly branched, hyperphosphorylated glycogen that
precipitates, aggregates, and accumulates into Lafora bodies. The presence of
the pathognomic Lafora bodies in a tissue biopsy is diagnostic of Lafora
disease. Characteristic features of Lafora disease include intractable myoclonic
and photosensitive seizures, drop attacks, ataxia, apraxia, cortical blindness,
rapidly progressive dementia, and neuropsychiatric symptoms. Pathologically,
Lafora disease is associated with polyglucosan deposits, also known as Lafora
bodies, in the brain, liver, muscles, and sweat glands. This disease is
diagnosed through clinical, electrophysiological, histological, and genetic
findings. No curative treatments or preventative interventions are available at
present for Lafora disease. Management Lafora disease focuses on symptomatic
relief of seizures and myoclonus, together with palliative, supportive, and
rehabilitative measures. Antiepileptic drugs can be used for the management of
myoclonus and seizures. However, patients can become drug-resistant over time,
resulting in disease progression, increased seizure frequency, and a decline in
neurologic function.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 29489177

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Faisal Ibrahim declares no relevant
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Najib Murr
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
