---
reference_id: "PMID:37626650"
title: "Exploring the Pathogenesis and Mechanism-Targeted Treatments of Rosacea: Previous Understanding and Updates."
authors:
- Chen C
- Wang P
- Zhang L
- Liu X
- Zhang H
- Cao Y
- Wang X
- Zeng Q
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11082153
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploring the Pathogenesis and Mechanism-Targeted Treatments of Rosacea: Previous Understanding and Updates.
**Authors:** Chen C, Wang P, Zhang L, Liu X, Zhang H, Cao Y, Wang X, Zeng Q
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines11082153](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines11082153)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2023 Jul 31;11(8):2153. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11082153.

Exploring the Pathogenesis and Mechanism-Targeted Treatments of Rosacea: 
Previous Understanding and Updates.

Chen C(1), Wang P(1), Zhang L(1), Liu X(1), Zhang H(1), Cao Y(1), Wang X(1), 
Zeng Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Photomedicine, Shanghai Skin Disease Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai 200040, China.

Rosacea is a chronic inflammatory skin disease characterized by recurrent 
erythema, flushing, telangiectasia, papules, pustules, and phymatous changes in 
the central area of the face. Patients with this condition often experience a 
significant negative impact on their quality of life, self-esteem, and overall 
well-being. Despite its prevalence, the pathogenesis of rosacea is not yet fully 
understood. Recent research advances are reshaping our understanding of the 
underlying mechanisms of rosacea, and treatment options based on the 
pathophysiological perspective hold promise to improve patient outcomes and 
reduce incidence. In this comprehensive review, we investigate the pathogenesis 
of rosacea in depth, with a focus on emerging and novel mechanisms, and provide 
an up-to-date overview of therapeutic strategies that target the diverse 
pathogenic mechanisms of rosacea. Lastly, we discuss potential future research 
directions aimed at enhancing our understanding of the condition and developing 
effective treatments.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11082153
PMCID: PMC10452301
PMID: 37626650

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.