---
reference_id: "PMID:25441437"
title: "GFR decline as an end point for clinical trials in CKD: a scientific workshop sponsored by the National Kidney Foundation and the US Food and Drug Administration."
authors:
- Levey AS
- Inker LA
- Matsushita K
- Greene T
- Willis K
- Lewis E
- de Zeeuw D
- Cheung AK
- Coresh J
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.07.030
keywords:
- "Clinical Trials as Topic/standards, trends"
- "Education/standards, trends"
- "Endpoint Determination/standards, trends"
- "Foundations/standards, trends"
- Glomerular Filtration Rate/physiology
- Humans
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- United States/epidemiology
- "United States Food and Drug Administration/standards, trends"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GFR decline as an end point for clinical trials in CKD: a scientific workshop sponsored by the National Kidney Foundation and the US Food and Drug Administration.
**Authors:** Levey AS, Inker LA, Matsushita K, Greene T, Willis K, Lewis E, de Zeeuw D, Cheung AK, Coresh J
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.07.030](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.07.030)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014 Dec;64(6):821-35. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.07.030. Epub 
2014 Oct 16.

GFR decline as an end point for clinical trials in CKD: a scientific workshop 
sponsored by the National Kidney Foundation and the US Food and Drug 
Administration.

Levey AS(1), Inker LA(2), Matsushita K(3), Greene T(4), Willis K(5), Lewis E(6), 
de Zeeuw D(7), Cheung AK(8), Coresh J(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA. Electronic address: 
alevey@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA.
(3)Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD.
(4)Division of Epidemiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(5)National Kidney Foundation, New York, NY.
(6)Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL.
(7)Department of Clinical Pharmacy & Pharmacology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(8)Division of Nephrology & Hypertension, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, 
UT.

Comment in
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2014 Dec;64(6):836-7. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.09.006.

The US Food and Drug Administration currently accepts halving of glomerular 
filtration rate (GFR), assessed as doubling of serum creatinine level, as a 
surrogate end point for the development of kidney failure in clinical trials of 
kidney disease progression. A doubling of serum creatinine level generally is a 
late event in chronic kidney disease (CKD); thus, there is great interest in 
considering alternative end points for clinical trials to shorten their 
duration, reduce sample size, and extend their conduct to patients with earlier 
stages of CKD. However, the relationship between lesser declines in GFR and the 
subsequent development of kidney failure has not been well characterized. The 
National Kidney Foundation and Food and Drug Administration sponsored a 
scientific workshop to critically examine available data to determine whether 
alternative GFR-based end points have sufficiently strong relationships with 
important clinical outcomes of CKD to be used in clinical trials. Based on a 
series of meta-analyses of cohorts and clinical trials and simulations of trial 
designs and analytic methods, the workshop concluded that a confirmed decline in 
estimated GFR of 30% over 2 to 3 years may be an acceptable surrogate end point 
in some circumstances, but the pattern of treatment effects on GFR must be 
examined, specifically acute effects on estimated GFR. An estimated GFR decline 
of 40% may be more broadly acceptable than a 30% decline across a wider range of 
baseline GFRs and patterns of treatment effects on GFR. However, there are other 
circumstances in which these end points could lead to a reduction in statistical 
power or erroneous conclusions regarding benefits or harms of interventions. We 
encourage careful consideration of these alternative end points in the design of 
future clinical trials.

Copyright © 2014 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.07.030
PMID: 25441437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]