---
reference_id: "PMID:24860871"
title: Erythropoiesis-driven regulation of hepcidin in human red cell disorders is better reflected through concentrations of soluble transferrin receptor rather than growth differentiation factor 15.
authors:
- Fertrin KY
- Lanaro C
- Franco-Penteado CF
- de Albuquerque DM
- de Mello MR
- Pallis FR
- Bezerra MA
- Hatzlhofer BL
- Olbina G
- Saad ST
- da Silva Araújo A
- Westerman M
- Costa FF
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.23649
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erythropoiesis-driven regulation of hepcidin in human red cell disorders is better reflected through concentrations of soluble transferrin receptor rather than growth differentiation factor 15.
**Authors:** Fertrin KY, Lanaro C, Franco-Penteado CF, de Albuquerque DM, de Mello MR, Pallis FR, Bezerra MA, Hatzlhofer BL, Olbina G, Saad ST, da Silva Araújo A, Westerman M, Costa FF
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.23649](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.23649)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 2014 Apr;89(4):385-90. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23649.

Erythropoiesis-driven regulation of hepcidin in human red cell disorders is 
better reflected through concentrations of soluble transferrin receptor rather 
than growth differentiation factor 15.

Fertrin KY(1), Lanaro C, Franco-Penteado CF, de Albuquerque DM, de Mello MR, 
Pallis FR, Bezerra MA, Hatzlhofer BL, Olbina G, Saad ST, da Silva Araújo A, 
Westerman M, Costa FF.

Author information:
(1)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia do Sangue (INCTS), Hematology and 
Hemotherapy Center, University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil.

Growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF-15) is a bone marrow-derived cytokine 
whose ability to suppress iron regulator hepcidin in vitro and increased 
concentrations found in patients with ineffective erythropoiesis (IE)suggest 
that hepcidin deficiency mediated by GDF-15 may be the pathophysiological 
explanation for nontransfusional iron overload. We aimed to compare GDF-15 
production in anemic states with different types of erythropoietic dysfunction. 
Complete blood counts, biochemical markers of iron status, plasma hepcidin, 
GDF-15, and known hepcidin regulators [interleukin-6 and erythropoietin (EPO)] 
were measured in 87 patients with red cell disorders comprising IE and hemolytic 
states: thalassemia, sickle cell anemia, and cobalamin deficiency. Healthy 
volunteers were also evaluated for comparison. Neither overall increased EPO,nor 
variable GDF-15 concentrations correlated with circulating hepcidin 
concentrations (P = 0.265 and P = 0.872). Relative hepcidin deficiency was found 
in disorders presenting with concurrent elevation of GDF-15 and soluble 
transferrin receptor (sTfR), a biomarker of erythropoiesis, and sTfR had the 
strongest correlation with hepcidin (r(s) = 0.584, P < 0.0001). Our data show 
that high concentrations of GDF-15 in vivo are not necessarily associated with 
pathological hepcidin reduction, and hepcidin deficiency was only found when 
associated with sTfR overproduction. sTfR elevation may be a necessary common 
denominator of erythropoiesis-driven mechanisms to favor iron absorption in 
anemic states and appears a suitable target for investigative approaches to iron 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.23649
PMID: 24860871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]