---
reference_id: "PMID:9023448"
title: Pathology of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in children.
authors:
- Joshi VV
journal: Keio J Med
year: '1996'
doi: 10.2302/kjm.45.306
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathology of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in children.
**Authors:** Joshi VV
**Journal:** Keio J Med (1996)
**DOI:** [10.2302/kjm.45.306](https://doi.org/10.2302/kjm.45.306)

## Content

1. Keio J Med. 1996 Dec;45(4):306-12. doi: 10.2302/kjm.45.306.

Pathology of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in children.

Joshi VV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Hartford Hospital, CT 06102, USA.

OVERVIEW: Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) was first described to occur 
in children in 1983. With experience of increasing number of cases of AIDS, 
pathologic lesions in various organs and tissues such as lungs, brain, G.I. 
tract, heart, blood vessels, lymph nodes, spleen, bone marrow, etc. became 
evident in autopsy and biopsy specimens. These pathologic lesions were 
classified into four groups based on known or suspected pathogenesis: 1) Primary 
lesions due to Human Immunodeficiency (HIV) infection itself (lymph nodes, 
brain, etc) 2) associated lesions related to direct or indirect sequelae of HIV 
infection (Opportunistic infections, PLH/LIP complex, etc) 3) lesions of 
undetermined pathogenesis, (cardiomyopathy, arteriopathy, thrombocytopenia, 
nephropathy, etc) 4) lesions of multifactorial pathogenesis (villous atrophy of 
intestine, thymic lesions, etc).
UPDATE: In recent years the emphasis of pathologic study is on the reactive and 
neoplastic proliferative disorders. These disorders include nodal and extranodal 
lymphoproliferative lesions (such as myoepithelial sialadenitis, malignant 
lymphomas, etc), smooth muscle tumors (SMTs), Kaposi's sarcoma, Human Papilloma 
virus associated genital lesions and miscellaneous tumors. In a recent study, it 
has been shown that Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) may be related to the pathogenesis 
of SMTs. The most recently recognized lymphoproliferative lesions include those 
of mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) of salivary glands, lungs and 
tonsils. The MALT lymphomas in children with AIDS are responsive to therapy and 
tend to take an indolent clinical course. Therefore recognition of MALT 
lymphomas as a distinctive lesion in pediatric AIDS is of practical importance. 
In this view of increasing incidence of HIV and HPV infections in adolescent 
females seen in certain countries attention should also be focused on early 
detection of HPV related genital lesions so that their possible progression to 
intraepithelial and invasive cervical carcinoma can be prevented.

DOI: 10.2302/kjm.45.306
PMID: 9023448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]