---
reference_id: "PMID:38467733"
title: Origin and evolution of pentanucleotide repeat expansions at the familial cortical myoclonic tremor with epilepsy type1 - SAMD12 locus.
authors:
- Chen X
- Zhang F
- Shi Y
- Wang H
- Chen M
- Yang D
- Wang L
- Liu P
- Xie F
- Chen J
- Fu A
- Hu B
- Wang B
- Ouyang Z
- Wu S
- Lin Z
- Cen Z
- Luo W
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-024-01586-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics"
- DNA Repeat Expansion
- "Evolution, Molecular"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Phylogeny
- Male
- Female
- Multifunctional Enzymes
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Origin and evolution of pentanucleotide repeat expansions at the familial cortical myoclonic tremor with epilepsy type1 - SAMD12 locus.
**Authors:** Chen X, Zhang F, Shi Y, Wang H, Chen M, Yang D, Wang L, Liu P, Xie F, Chen J, Fu A, Hu B, Wang B, Ouyang Z, Wu S, Lin Z, Cen Z, Luo W
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-024-01586-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-024-01586-y)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2025 Mar;33(2):252-257. doi: 10.1038/s41431-024-01586-y. Epub
 2024 Mar 12.

Origin and evolution of pentanucleotide repeat expansions at the familial 
cortical myoclonic tremor with epilepsy type1 - SAMD12 locus.

Chen X(#)(1), Zhang F(#)(1), Shi Y(#)(1), Wang H(1), Chen M(2), Yang D(1), Wang 
L(1), Liu P(3), Xie F(4), Chen J(1), Fu A(5), Hu B(6), Wang B(1), Ouyang Z(1), 
Wu S(1), Lin Z(1), Cen Z(7), Luo W(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 310009, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Zhuji Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Zhuji, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Taizhou Central Hospital (Taizhou University 
Hospital), Taizhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 310020, Zhejiang, China.
(5)Wuhan Dgensee Clinical Laboratory Co., Ltd. Wuhan, Wuhan, 430075, China.
(6)Center for Tumor Precision Diagnosis, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, 430062, China.
(7)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 310009, Zhejiang, China. cenzd@zju.edu.cn.
(8)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 310009, Zhejiang, China. luoweirock@zju.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Familial cortical myoclonic tremor with epilepsy type 1 (FCMTE1) is caused by 
(TTTTA)exp(TTTCA)exp repeat expansions in SAMD12, while pure (TTTTA)exp is 
polymorphic. Our investigation focused on the origin and evolution of pure 
(TTTTA)exp and (TTTTA)exp(TTTCA)exp at this locus. We observed a founder effect 
between them. The phylogenetic analysis suggested that the (TTTTA)exp(TTTCA)exp 
might be generated from pure (TTTTA)exp through infrequent transformation 
events. Long-read sequencing revealed somatic generation of (TTTTA)exp(TTTCA)exp 
from pure (TTTTA)exp, likely via long segment (TTTCA) repeats insertion. Our 
findings indicate close relationships between the non-pathogenic (TTTTA)exp and 
the pathogenic (TTTTA)exp(TTTCA)exp, with dynamic interconversions. This sheds 
light on the genesis of pathogenic repeat expansions from ancestral premutation 
alleles. Our results may guide future studies in detecting novel repeat 
expansion disorders and elucidating repeat expansion mutational processes, 
thereby enhancing our understanding of human genomic variation.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to European Society of Human 
Genetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-024-01586-y
PMCID: PMC11840102
PMID: 38467733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests. Ethical approval: The ethics was approved in the Second 
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine (I2019001151). 
Written informed consent was obtained from all participants following the 
Declaration of Helsinki.