---
reference_id: "PMID:22328087"
title: "Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts protein 1 functionally cooperates with the TRPV4 cation channel to activate the response of astrocytes to osmotic stress: dysregulation by pathological mutations."
authors:
- Lanciotti A
- Brignone MS
- Molinari P
- Visentin S
- De Nuccio C
- Macchia G
- Aiello C
- Bertini E
- Aloisi F
- Petrucci TC
- Ambrosini E
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds032
keywords:
- Astrocytes/metabolism
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Cations, Divalent"
- "Cysts/genetics, metabolism"
- "Hereditary Central Nervous System Demyelinating Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Osmosis
- TRPV Cation Channels/metabolism
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts protein 1 functionally cooperates with the TRPV4 cation channel to activate the response of astrocytes to osmotic stress: dysregulation by pathological mutations.
**Authors:** Lanciotti A, Brignone MS, Molinari P, Visentin S, De Nuccio C, Macchia G, Aiello C, Bertini E, Aloisi F, Petrucci TC, Ambrosini E
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/dds032](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds032)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 May 15;21(10):2166-80. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds032. Epub 2012 
Feb 9.

Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts protein 1 
functionally cooperates with the TRPV4 cation channel to activate the response 
of astrocytes to osmotic stress: dysregulation by pathological mutations.

Lanciotti A(1), Brignone MS, Molinari P, Visentin S, De Nuccio C, Macchia G, 
Aiello C, Bertini E, Aloisi F, Petrucci TC, Ambrosini E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanità,Viale Regina Elena 299, Rome 00161, Italy.

Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC), a rare 
leukodystrophy characterized by macrocephaly, subcortical fluid cysts and myelin 
vacuolation, has been linked to mutations in the MLC1 gene. This gene encodes a 
membrane protein that is highly expressed in astrocytes. Based on MLC 
pathological features, it was proposed that astrocyte-mediated defects in ion 
and fluid homeostasis could account for the alterations observed in MLC-affected 
brains. However, the role of MLC1 and the effects of pathological mutations on 
astrocyte osmoregulatory functions have still to be demonstrated. Using human 
astrocytoma cells stably overexpressing wild-type MLC1 or three known 
MLC-associated pathological mutations, we investigated MLC1 involvement in 
astrocyte reaction to osmotic changes using biochemical, dynamic video imaging 
and immunofluorescence techniques. We have found that MLC1 overexpressed in 
astrocytoma cells is mainly localized in the plasma membrane, is part of the 
Na,K-ATPase-associated molecular complex that includes the potassium channel 
Kir4.1, syntrophin and aquaporin-4 and functionally interacts with the calcium 
permeable channel TRPV4 (transient receptor potential vanilloid-4 cation 
channel) which mediates swelling-induced cytosolic calcium increase and volume 
recovery in response to hyposmosis. Pathological MLC mutations cause changes in 
MLC1 expression and intracellular localization as well as in the astrocyte 
response to osmotic changes by altering MLC1 molecular interactions with the 
Na,K-ATPase molecular complex and abolishing the increase in calcium influx 
induced by hyposmosis and treatment with the TRPV4 agonist 4αPDD. These data 
demonstrate, for the first time, that MLC1 plays a role in astrocyte 
osmo-homeostasis and that defects in intracellular calcium dynamics may 
contribute to MLC pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds032
PMID: 22328087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]