---
reference_id: "PMID:37993833"
title: A novel mutation of the RPGRIP1L gene in a Chinese boy with Joubert syndrome with oculorenal involvement.
authors:
- Li Q
- Liu Q
- Liu S
- Yu L
- Yang Z
- Wang C
- Wang J
- Sun S
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-023-04415-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation of the RPGRIP1L gene in a Chinese boy with Joubert syndrome with oculorenal involvement.
**Authors:** Li Q, Liu Q, Liu S, Yu L, Yang Z, Wang C, Wang J, Sun S
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-023-04415-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-023-04415-1)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2023 Nov 23;23(1):590. doi: 10.1186/s12887-023-04415-1.

A novel mutation of the RPGRIP1L gene in a Chinese boy with Joubert syndrome 
with oculorenal involvement.

Li Q(1)(2), Liu Q(2), Liu S(1)(2), Yu L(1)(2), Yang Z(1)(2), Wang C(1)(2), Wang 
J(1)(2), Sun S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatism and Immunology, Shandong 
Provincial Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, No. 324 
Jingwu Road, Huaiyin District, Jinan, 250021, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatism and Immunology, Shandong 
Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University, No. 324 
Jingwu Road, Huaiyin District, Jinan, 250021, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatism and Immunology, Shandong 
Provincial Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, No. 324 
Jingwu Road, Huaiyin District, Jinan, 250021, People's Republic of China. 
shuzhens01@126.com.
(4)Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatism and Immunology, Shandong 
Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University, No. 324 
Jingwu Road, Huaiyin District, Jinan, 250021, People's Republic of China. 
shuzhens01@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Joubert syndrome (JS) is a rare genetically heterogeneous primary 
ciliopathy characterized by a pathognomonic cerebellar and brainstem 
malformation, the "molar tooth sign", and variable organ involvement (such as 
eye, kidney, liver, and skeleton). Here, we present a case of JS in a Chinese 
boy.
CASE PRESENTATION: An 11-year-old Chinese boy presented with neonatal 
asphyxiation and hypoxia, strabismus, subsequent developmental delay, ataxia and 
end-stage kidney disease (ESKD). Routine blood tests showed severe anemia, 
increasing blood urea nitrogen and creatinine, elevated parathyroid hormone, 
hypocalcemia, hypokalemia and metabolic acidosis. Urine tests showed mild 
proteinuria. Ultrasound showed two small kidneys. Brain magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) showed dysplasia of the cerebellar vermis and extension of the 
upper cerebellar feet with the "molar tooth sign". Genetic analysis showed novel 
compound heterozygous mutations in the RPGRIP1L gene [p.L447fs*7(p.Leu447fsTer7) 
and p.G908V (p.Gly908Val)].
CONCLUSION: In the present study, we identified novel compound heterozygous 
mutations in the RPGRIP1L gene in a Chinese boy. The clinical and genetic 
findings of this study will expand the understanding of JS.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-023-04415-1
PMCID: PMC10666333
PMID: 37993833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.