---
reference_id: "PMID:37350195"
title: Distinct genomic landscapes in radiation-associated angiosarcoma compared with other radiation-associated sarcoma histologies.
authors:
- Dermawan JK
- Chi P
- Tap WD
- Rosenbaum E
- "D'Angelo S"
- Alektiar KM
- Antonescu CR
journal: J Pathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/path.6137
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Bone Neoplasms
- Genomics
- Hemangiosarcoma/genetics
- Neurofibrosarcoma
- "Sarcoma/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct genomic landscapes in radiation-associated angiosarcoma compared with other radiation-associated sarcoma histologies.
**Authors:** Dermawan JK, Chi P, Tap WD, Rosenbaum E, D'Angelo S, Alektiar KM, Antonescu CR
**Journal:** J Pathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/path.6137](https://doi.org/10.1002/path.6137)

## Content

1. J Pathol. 2023 Aug;260(4):465-477. doi: 10.1002/path.6137. Epub 2023 Jun 23.

Distinct genomic landscapes in radiation-associated angiosarcoma compared with 
other radiation-associated sarcoma histologies.

Dermawan JK(1), Chi P(2)(3), Tap WD(2)(3), Rosenbaum E(2)(3), D'Angelo S(2)(3), 
Alektiar KM(4), Antonescu CR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA.

MYC amplifications have been frequently detected in radiation (RT)-associated 
angiosarcomas (ASs) by low-resolution molecular methods. However, large-scale 
next-generation sequencing (NGS) studies to investigate the genomic landscape of 
RT-AS are scarce, particularly compared with other RT-associated sarcomas. We 
performed a detailed comparative genomic investigation of RT-AS versus other 
RT-associated histotypes, as well as sporadic sarcomas with similar histologies. 
Our institutional targeted DNA-NGS assay database was searched for RT-associated 
sarcomas. Clinical outcome data, pathologic diagnosis, and the types and 
frequencies of genomic alterations, including single nucleotide variants (SNVs) 
and copy number alterations (CNAs), were analyzed. The cohort consisted of 82 
patients, 68 (83%) females and 14 (17%) males, aged 37-88 (mean 64) years. 
Forty-four RT-ASs (38 from breast) and 38 RT sarcomas of other histologies, 
including 12 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (RT-MPNSTs), 14 
undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcomas (RT-UPSs), and 12 osteosarcomas (RT-OSs), 
were included. Median time intervals from radiation to initial diagnosis in 
RT-AS (8.0 years) were significantly lower than those in RT-MPNST and RT-UPS 
(12.5 and 18.5 years), respectively. Each RT-sarcoma histotype harbored distinct 
mutations and CNAs. RT-associated AS had more frequent MYC, FLT4, CRKL, HRAS, 
and KMT2D alterations than sporadic AS (enriched in TP53, KDR, ATM, ATRX), 
whereas the mutational landscapes of MPNST, UPS, and OS were similar in both RT 
and non-RT settings. CDKN2A/B deletions and TP53 alterations were infrequent in 
RT-AS compared with other RT sarcomas. Among RT sarcomas, RT-AS harbored the 
lowest fraction of genome altered (FGA), while RT-MPNST showed the highest FGA. 
RT-AS had the lowest insertion:SNV and deletion:SNV ratios, while RT-UPS had the 
highest. The predominant mutational signatures were associated with errors in 
DNA repair and replication. In conclusion, RT-AS has a distinct genomic 
landscape compared with other RT sarcomas and sporadic AS. Potential molecular 
targets for precision medicine may be histotype-dependent. © 2023 The 
Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

© 2023 The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1002/path.6137
PMCID: PMC10756077
PMID: 37350195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest were declared