---
reference_id: "PMID:21129727"
title: "Loss of CHSY1, a secreted FRINGE enzyme, causes syndromic brachydactyly in humans via increased NOTCH signaling."
authors:
- Tian J
- Ling L
- Shboul M
- Lee H
- "O'Connor B"
- Merriman B
- Nelson SF
- Cool S
- Ababneh OH
- Al-Hadidy A
- Masri A
- Hamamy H
- Reversade B
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.005
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Female
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Frameshift Mutation
- Genotype
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "N-Acetylgalactosaminyltransferases/chemistry, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- RNA Interference
- "Receptors, Notch/metabolism"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Signal Transduction
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of CHSY1, a secreted FRINGE enzyme, causes syndromic brachydactyly in humans via increased NOTCH signaling.
**Authors:** Tian J, Ling L, Shboul M, Lee H, O'Connor B, Merriman B, Nelson SF, Cool S, Ababneh OH, Al-Hadidy A, Masri A, Hamamy H, Reversade B
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.005)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Dec 10;87(6):768-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.005.

Loss of CHSY1, a secreted FRINGE enzyme, causes syndromic brachydactyly in 
humans via increased NOTCH signaling.

Tian J(1), Ling L, Shboul M, Lee H, O'Connor B, Merriman B, Nelson SF, Cool S, 
Ababneh OH, Al-Hadidy A, Masri A, Hamamy H, Reversade B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, A(∗)STAR, Singapore.

We delineated a syndromic recessive preaxial brachydactyly with partial 
duplication of proximal phalanges to 16.8 Mb over 4 chromosomes. High-throughput 
sequencing of all 177 candidate genes detected a truncating frameshift mutation 
in the gene CHSY1 encoding a chondroitin synthase with a Fringe domain. CHSY1 
was secreted from patients' fibroblasts and was required for synthesis of 
chondroitin sulfate moieties. Noticeably, its absence triggered massive 
production of JAG1 and subsequent NOTCH activation, which could only be reversed 
with a wild-type but not a Fringe catalytically dead CHSY1 construct. In vitro, 
depletion of CHSY1 by RNAi knockdown resulted in enhanced osteogenesis in fetal 
osteoblasts and remarkable upregulation of JAG2 in glioblastoma cells. In vivo, 
chsy1 knockdown in zebrafish embryos partially phenocopied the human disorder; 
it increased NOTCH output and impaired skeletal, pectoral-fin, and retinal 
development. We conclude that CHSY1 is a secreted FRINGE enzyme required for 
adjustment of NOTCH signaling throughout human and fish embryogenesis and 
particularly during limb patterning.

Copyright © 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.005
PMCID: PMC2997365
PMID: 21129727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]