---
reference_id: "PMID:25856337"
title: Pediatric Acute Dacryocystitis.
authors:
- Ali MJ
journal: Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000000472
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Acute Dacryocystitis.
**Authors:** Ali MJ
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IOP.0000000000000472](https://doi.org/10.1097/IOP.0000000000000472)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2015 Sep-Oct;31(5):341-7. doi: 
10.1097/IOP.0000000000000472.

Pediatric Acute Dacryocystitis.

Ali MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Dacryology Service, L.V.Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, India.

Comment in
    Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2016 Mar-Apr;32(2):155. doi: 
10.1097/IOP.0000000000000638.
    Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2016 Mar-Apr;32(2):155-6. doi: 
10.1097/IOP.0000000000000639.

PURPOSE: To review and summarize the symptomatology, microbiology, special 
clinical entities, management, complications, and outcomes of pediatric acute 
dacryocystitis.
METHODS: The author performed a PubMed search of all articles published in 
English on acute dacryocystitis. Pediatric subpopulations of these articles were 
reviewed along with the scant literature of direct references to neonatal and 
pediatric acute dacryocystitis. Data reviewed included demographics, 
presentations, microbiological work up, management, complications, and outcomes.
RESULTS: Acute dacryocystitis is not very common in the pediatric age groups and 
occurs mostly as a complication of congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction. The 
age of onset is usually in the neonatal period with a female preponderance. The 
clinical spectrum ranges from classic pediatric acute dacryocystitis to 
meningitis. Staphylococcus aureus is the commonest isolate. Occasionally 
acquired etiologies and rare organisms like Pantoea sp., Epstein-Barr Virus, and 
Sporothrix are implicated in the etiopathogenesis. The diagnosis is usually 
clinical aided by laboratory investigations. Better antibiotics, 
well-established laboratory techniques and surgical modalities, and improved 
patient care logistics have contributed to good outcomes; however, complications 
are still being noted although infrequently.
CONCLUSIONS: Pediatric acute dacryocystitis is a distinct entity with unique 
features of its own. It is a serious infection that warrants careful evaluation 
and immediate management. In the era of antibiotic resistance, microbiological 
work up of Pediatric acute dacryocystitis is very useful for subsequent 
treatment. Surgical challenges in the pediatric age group are distinct and the 
outcomes are good if standard protocols are followed.

DOI: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000000472
PMID: 25856337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]