---
reference_id: "PMID:31141632"
title: Daratumumab plus Lenalidomide and Dexamethasone for Untreated Myeloma.
authors:
- Facon T
- Kumar S
- Plesner T
- Orlowski RZ
- Moreau P
- Bahlis N
- Basu S
- Nahi H
- Hulin C
- Quach H
- Goldschmidt H
- "O'Dwyer M"
- Perrot A
- Venner CP
- Weisel K
- Mace JR
- Raje N
- Attal M
- Tiab M
- Macro M
- Frenzel L
- Leleu X
- Ahmadi T
- Chiu C
- Wang J
- Van Rampelbergh R
- Uhlar CM
- Kobos R
- Qi M
- Usmani SZ
- MAIA Trial Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1817249
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Daratumumab plus Lenalidomide and Dexamethasone for Untreated Myeloma.
**Authors:** Facon T, Kumar S, Plesner T, Orlowski RZ, Moreau P, Bahlis N, Basu S, Nahi H, Hulin C, Quach H, Goldschmidt H, O'Dwyer M, Perrot A, Venner CP, Weisel K, Mace JR, Raje N, Attal M, Tiab M, Macro M, Frenzel L, Leleu X, Ahmadi T, Chiu C, Wang J, Van Rampelbergh R, Uhlar CM, Kobos R, Qi M, Usmani SZ, MAIA Trial Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1817249](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1817249)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2019 May 30;380(22):2104-2115. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1817249.

Daratumumab plus Lenalidomide and Dexamethasone for Untreated Myeloma.

Facon T(1), Kumar S(1), Plesner T(1), Orlowski RZ(1), Moreau P(1), Bahlis N(1), 
Basu S(1), Nahi H(1), Hulin C(1), Quach H(1), Goldschmidt H(1), O'Dwyer M(1), 
Perrot A(1), Venner CP(1), Weisel K(1), Mace JR(1), Raje N(1), Attal M(1), Tiab 
M(1), Macro M(1), Frenzel L(1), Leleu X(1), Ahmadi T(1), Chiu C(1), Wang J(1), 
Van Rampelbergh R(1), Uhlar CM(1), Kobos R(1), Qi M(1), Usmani SZ(1); MAIA Trial 
Investigators.

Collaborators: Baker R, Hocking J, Huey-Shin CL, Janowski W, Mollee P, Quach H, 
Ramanathan S, Renwick W, Wickham N, Fillitz M, Greil R, Gunsilius E, Krauth MT, 
Lechner D, Caers J, Delforge M, Kentos A, Bahlis N, Fox S, Gallagher G, Lemieux 
Blanchard E, Sebag M, Trudel S, Venner C, White D, Abildgaard N, Andersen NF, 
Plesner T, Allangba O, Araujo C, Arnulf B, Attal M, Belhadj-Merzoug K, 
Benboubker L, Benramdane R, Bouketouche M, Bourgeois E, Bouscary D, Caillot D, 
Chaleteix C, Choquet S, Decaux O, Demarquette H, Dib M, Eisenmann JC, Facon T, 
Fohrer-Sonntag C, Frenzel L, Garderet L, Godmer P, Guyotat D, Hulin C, Jaccard 
A, Karlin L, Kolb B, Leleu X, Lenain P, Macro M, Moreau P, Morel P, 
Orsini-Piocelle F, Pegourie B, Perrot A, Richez V, Rigaudeau S, Rodon P, Sanhes 
L, Stoppa AM, Thannberger A, Tiab M, Vincent L, Voog E, Zarnitsky C, Aulitzky W, 
Dürig J, Goldschmidt H, Hensel M, Junghanss C, Klausmann M, Krauter J, Mayr HC, 
Munder M, Röllig C, Rueckert A, Schub N, Thomalla J, von Metzler I, Wattad M, 
Weisel K, Coyne M, O'Dwyer M, Avivi I, Ben-Yehuda D, Preis M, Sofer O, Suriu C, 
Vaxman I, Bosi A, Caravita Di Toritto T, Giuliani N, Petrini M, Beeker A, Brada 
S, Broijl A, Blimark C, Flogegard M, Hansson M, Karlsson C, Lauri B, Nahi H, 
Basu S, Blundell J, Cavenagh J, Cavet J, Cook G, Hunter H, Jenner M, Lindsay J, 
Marron G, Rabin N, Ramasamy K, Rocci A, Tighe J, Williams C, Agajanian R, 
Alkaied H, Amjad M, Anz B 3rd, Armas A, Babu S, Berdeja J, Bhutani D, Brenner W, 
Chanan-Khan A, Chari A, Chaualgain C, Chaudhry A, Chen F, Cruz W, Drew D, 
Erikson B, Gabayan AE, Gabrail N, Galindo E, Goldstein M, Hansen V, 
Ifthikharuddin J, Janakiraman N, Karnat A, Kirkel D, Knapp M, Kocoglu M, Kumar 
S, Kuzma C, Lewis D, Libby E, Lunin S, Lunning M, Mace J, Malad S, McCaul K, 
Miller C, Moore M, Nooka A, Orlowski R, Parker T, Paroly W, Pati A, Peguero J, 
Raje N, Rosko A, Sadashiv S, Saez R, Saleh A, Schuster S, Singh J, Staszewski H, 
Stevens D, Stockerl-Goldstein K, Sumrall B, Usmani S, Valent J, Weng D, Yen C.

Author information:
(1)From University of Lille, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) Lille, 
Service des Maladies du Sang, Lille (T.F.), Hematology Department, University 
Hospital Hôtel-Dieu, Nantes (P.M.), Department of Hematology, Hospital Haut 
Leveque, University Hospital, Pessac (C.H.), Hematology Department, University 
Hospital, Vandoeuvre lès Nancy (A.P.), Service d'Hématologie, CHU de 
Toulouse-Institut Universitaire du Cancer de Toulouse Oncopole, Toulouse (M.A.), 
Department of Hematology, Vendée Hospital, La Roche sur Yon (M.T.), CHU de Caen, 
Caen (M.M.), Department of Clinical Hematology, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Necker Hospital, Paris (L.F.), and Department of Hematology, CHU la 
Miletrie and INSERM CIC 1402, Poitiers (X.L.) - all in France; the Department of 
Hematology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN (S.K.); Vejle Hospital and 
University of Southern Denmark, Vejle (T.P.); Department of Lymphoma-Myeloma, 
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (R.Z.O.); University of 
Calgary, Arnie Charbonneau Cancer Research Institute, Calgary, AB (N.B.), and 
the Division of Medical Oncology, University of Alberta, Edmonton (C.P.V.) - 
both in Canada; Royal Wolverhampton Hospitals NHS Trust, Wolverhampton, United 
Kingdom (S.B.); Karolinska Institute, Department of Medicine, Division of 
Hematology, Karolinska University Hospital at Huddinge, Stockholm (H.N.); 
University of Melbourne, St. Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
(H.Q.); University Hospital Heidelberg and National Center of Tumor Diseases 
(NCT), Heidelberg (H.G.), and the Department of Oncology, Hematology and Bone 
Marrow Transplantation, Section of Pneumology, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg (K.W.) - both in Germany; Department of 
Medicine-Haematology, National University of Ireland, Galway (M.O.); Florida 
Cancer Specialists and Research Institute, St. Petersburg (J.R.M.); the 
Department of Hematology-Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 
(N.R.); Genmab US, Princeton (T.A.), and Janssen Research and Development, 
Raritan (J.W., R.K.) - both in New Jersey; Janssen Research and Development, 
Spring House, PA (C.C., C.M.U., M.Q.); Janssen Research and Development, Beerse, 
Belgium (R.V.R.); and Levine Cancer Institute-Atrium Health, Charlotte, NC 
(S.Z.U.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2019 May 30;380(22):2172-2173. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1904372.

BACKGROUND: Lenalidomide plus dexamethasone is a standard treatment for patients 
with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma who are ineligible for autologous 
stem-cell transplantation. We sought to determine whether the addition of 
daratumumab would significantly reduce the risk of disease progression or death 
in this population.
METHODS: We randomly assigned 737 patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma 
who were ineligible for autologous stem-cell transplantation to receive 
daratumumab plus lenalidomide and dexamethasone (daratumumab group) or 
lenalidomide and dexamethasone alone (control group). Treatment was to continue 
until the occurrence of disease progression or unacceptable side effects. The 
primary end point was progression-free survival.
RESULTS: At a median follow-up of 28.0 months, disease progression or death had 
occurred in 240 patients (97 of 368 patients [26.4%] in the daratumumab group 
and 143 of 369 patients [38.8%] in the control group). The estimated percentage 
of patients who were alive without disease progression at 30 months was 70.6% 
(95% confidence interval [CI], 65.0 to 75.4) in the daratumumab group and 55.6% 
(95% CI, 49.5 to 61.3) in the control group (hazard ratio for disease 
progression or death, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.43 to 0.73; P<0.001). The percentage of 
patients with a complete response or better was 47.6% in the daratumumab group 
and 24.9% in the control group (P<0.001). A total of 24.2% of the patients in 
the daratumumab group, as compared with 7.3% of the patients in the control 
group, had results below the threshold for minimal residual disease (1 tumor 
cell per 105 white cells) (P<0.001). The most common adverse events of grade 3 
or 4 were neutropenia (50.0% in the daratumumab group vs. 35.3% in the control 
group), anemia (11.8% vs. 19.7%), lymphopenia (15.1% vs. 10.7%), and pneumonia 
(13.7% vs. 7.9%).
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma who were 
ineligible for autologous stem-cell transplantation, the risk of disease 
progression or death was significantly lower among those who received 
daratumumab plus lenalidomide and dexamethasone than among those who received 
lenalidomide and dexamethasone alone. A higher incidence of neutropenia and 
pneumonia was observed in the daratumumab group. (Funded by Janssen Research and 
Development; MAIA ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02252172.).

Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1817249
PMCID: PMC10045721
PMID: 31141632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]