---
reference_id: "PMID:9207801"
title: "Mutations in human TBX3 alter limb, apocrine and genital development in ulnar-mammary syndrome."
authors:
- Bamshad M
- Lin RC
- Law DJ
- Watkins WC
- Krakowiak PA
- Moore ME
- Franceschini P
- Lala R
- Holmes LB
- Gebuhr TC
- Bruneau BG
- Schinzel A
- Seidman JG
- Seidman CE
- Jorde LB
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1038/ng0797-311
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in human TBX3 alter limb, apocrine and genital development in ulnar-mammary syndrome.
**Authors:** Bamshad M, Lin RC, Law DJ, Watkins WC, Krakowiak PA, Moore ME, Franceschini P, Lala R, Holmes LB, Gebuhr TC, Bruneau BG, Schinzel A, Seidman JG, Seidman CE, Jorde LB
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0797-311](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0797-311)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1997 Jul;16(3):311-5. doi: 10.1038/ng0797-311.

Mutations in human TBX3 alter limb, apocrine and genital development in 
ulnar-mammary syndrome.

Bamshad M(1), Lin RC, Law DJ, Watkins WC, Krakowiak PA, Moore ME, Franceschini 
P, Lala R, Holmes LB, Gebuhr TC, Bruneau BG, Schinzel A, Seidman JG, Seidman CE, 
Jorde LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt 
Lake City 84112, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1998 May;19(1):102.

Ulnar-mammary syndrome is a rare pleiotropic disorder affecting limb, apocrine 
gland, tooth and genital development. We demonstrate that mutations in human 
TBX3, a member of the T-box gene family, cause ulnar-mammary syndrome in two 
families. Each mutation (a single nucleotide deletion and a splice-site 
mutation) is predicted to cause haploinsufficiency of TBX3, implying that 
critical levels of this transcription factor are required for morphogenesis of 
several organs. Limb abnormalities of ulnar-mammary syndrome involve posterior 
elements. Mutations in TBX5, a related and linked gene, cause anterior limb 
abnormalities in Holt-Oram syndrome. We suggest that during the evolution of 
TBX3 and TBX5 from a common ancestral gene, each has acquired specific yet 
complementary roles in patterning the mammalian upper limb.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0797-311
PMID: 9207801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]