---
reference_id: "PMID:40877933"
title: UBE3A reinstatement restores behaviorand proteome in an Angelman syndrome mouse model of imprinting defects.
authors:
- Milazzo C
- Narayanan R
- Badillo S
- Wang S
- Almand R
- Monshouwer R
- Tzouros M
- Golling S
- Mientjes E
- Chamberlain S
- Kremer T
- Elgersma Y
journal: Mol Autism
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13229-025-00675-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# UBE3A reinstatement restores behaviorand proteome in an Angelman syndrome mouse model of imprinting defects.
**Authors:** Milazzo C, Narayanan R, Badillo S, Wang S, Almand R, Monshouwer R, Tzouros M, Golling S, Mientjes E, Chamberlain S, Kremer T, Elgersma Y
**Journal:** Mol Autism (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13229-025-00675-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-025-00675-z)

## Content

1. Mol Autism. 2025 Aug 28;16(1):45. doi: 10.1186/s13229-025-00675-z.

UBE3A reinstatement restores behaviorand proteome in an Angelman syndrome mouse 
model of imprinting defects.

Milazzo C(#)(1), Narayanan R(#)(2), Badillo S(3), Wang S(1), Almand R(1), 
Monshouwer R(1), Tzouros M(4), Golling S(4), Mientjes E(1), Chamberlain S(5), 
Kremer T(6), Elgersma Y(7).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC Center of Expertise for 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders (ENCORE), Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Neuroscience and Rare Diseases (NRD), Pharmaceutical Research & Early 
Development, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Predictive Modelling and Data Analytics (PMDA), Pharmaceutical Sciences, F. 
Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Proteomics 360 Labs, Pharmaceutical Research & Early Development, F. 
Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Neuroscience and Rare Diseases (NRD), Pharmaceutical Research & Early 
Development, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland. 
stormy.chamberlain@roche.com.
(6)Neuroscience and Rare Diseases (NRD), Pharmaceutical Research & Early 
Development, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland. 
kremer.thomas@gmail.com.
(7)Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC Center of Expertise for 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders (ENCORE), Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
y.elgersma@erasmusmc.nl.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Angelman Syndrome (AS) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder with 
only symptomatic treatment currently available. The primary cause of AS is loss 
of functional UBE3A protein. This can be caused by deletions in the maternal 
15q11-q13 region, maternal AS-imprinting center defects (mICD), paternal 
uniparental disomy of chromosome 15 (UPD) or mutations within the UBE3A gene. 
Current mouse models are Ube3a-centric and do not address expression changes of 
other genes in the 15q11-q13 locus on the pathophysiology of AS. This limits the 
ability to discern differences in therapeutic responses to current 
UBE3A-targeting strategies and hampers the identification of novel 
therapeutics/co-therapeutics.
METHODS: Using a mouse line that harbors a maternally inherited mutation 
affecting the AS-PWS imprinting center ('mICD mice'), we studied the impact of 
the mICD or UPD AS subtype on behavior, seizure susceptibility and proteome. 
Additionally, by using mice overexpressing two copies of Ube3a or antisense 
oligonucleotide (ASO) targeting Ube3a-ATS, we analyzed the impact of bi-allelic 
Ube3a activation on behavior and proteome.
RESULTS: mICD mice showed 80% reduction in UBE3A protein, bi-allelic expression 
of Ube3a-ATS and Mkrn3-Snord115 gene cluster, leading to robust AS behavioral 
deficits and proteome alterations similar to Ube3am-/p+ mice. Genetic UBE3A 
overexpression in mICD mice, mimicking therapeutic strategies that effectively 
activate the biallelic silenced Ube3a gene, resulted in a complete rescue of all 
behavioral phenotypes, seizure susceptibility and proteome alterations. 
Subsequently, treatment with an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) to directly 
activate the biallelic silenced Ube3a gene in mICD mice also resulted in 
efficient reinstatement of UBE3A, 30% higher relative to WT, alongside a partial 
rescue of behavioral phenotypes.
LIMITATIONS: Despite using a highly robust AS-specific behavioral battery, we 
did not investigate readouts such as neuronal activity and sleep, for which 
impairments in Ube3am-/p+ mice were described.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these findings demonstrate that the loss of UBE3A 
protein is the primary factor underlying AS phenotypes in this mICD/UPD mouse 
model of AS, while the biallelic expressed genes in this locus play either a 
marginal or yet unidentified role. These findings also corroborate UBE3A 
reinstatement as an attractive therapeutic strategy for AS individuals carrying 
an mICD or UPD mutation.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13229-025-00675-z
PMCID: PMC12395761
PMID: 40877933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with the 
European Commission Council Directive 2010/63/EU (CCD license AVD101002016791 
and AVD10100202216352). Consent for publication: All authors have approved the 
final manuscript and consent for publication. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.