---
reference_id: "PMID:32033229"
title: "Arsenic Toxicity: Molecular Targets and Therapeutic Agents."
authors:
- Nurchi VM
- Djordjevic AB
- Crisponi G
- Alexander J
- Bjørklund G
- Aaseth J
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/biom10020235
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic Toxicity: Molecular Targets and Therapeutic Agents.
**Authors:** Nurchi VM, Djordjevic AB, Crisponi G, Alexander J, Bjørklund G, Aaseth J
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom10020235](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom10020235)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2020 Feb 4;10(2):235. doi: 10.3390/biom10020235.

Arsenic Toxicity: Molecular Targets and Therapeutic Agents.

Nurchi VM(1), Djordjevic AB(2), Crisponi G(1), Alexander J(3), Bjørklund G(4), 
Aaseth J(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Cagliari, 
Cittadella Universitaria, 09124 Monserrato-Cagliari, Italy.
(2)Department of Toxicology "Akademik Danilo Soldatović", Faculty of Pharmacy, 
University of Belgrade, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(3)Norwegian Institute of Public Health, 0213 Oslo, Norway.
(4)Council for Nutritional and Environmental Medicine, 8610 Mo i Rana, Norway.
(5)Research Department, Innlandet Hospital Trust, 2380 Brumunddal, Norway.
(6)IM Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University (Sechenov University), 
Bolshaya Pirogovskaya St., 19-1, 119146 Moscow, Russia.

: High arsenic (As) levels in food and drinking water, or under some 
occupational conditions, can precipitate chronic toxicity and in some cases 
cancer. Millions of people are exposed to unacceptable amounts of As through 
drinking water and food. Highly exposed individuals may develop acute, subacute, 
or chronic signs of poisoning, characterized by skin lesions, cardiovascular 
symptoms, and in some cases, multi-organ failure. Inorganic arsenite(III) and 
organic arsenicals with the general formula R-As2+ are bound tightly to thiol 
groups, particularly to vicinal dithiols such as dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA), 
which together with some seleno-enzymes constitute vulnerable targets for the 
toxic action of As. In addition, R-As2+-compounds have even higher affinity to 
selenol groups, e.g., in thioredoxin reductase that also possesses a thiol group 
vicinal to the selenol. Inhibition of this and other ROS scavenging 
seleno-enzymes explain the oxidative stress associated with arsenic poisoning. 
The development of chelating agents, such as the dithiols BAL 
(dimercaptopropanol), DMPS (dimercapto-propanesulfonate) and DMSA 
(dimercaptosuccinic acid), took advantage of the fact that As had high affinity 
towards vicinal dithiols. Primary prevention by reducing exposure of the 
millions of people exposed to unacceptable As levels should be the prioritized 
strategy. However, in acute and subacute and even some cases with chronic As 
poisonings chelation treatment with therapeutic dithiols, in particular DMPS 
appears promising as regards alleviation of symptoms. In acute cases, initial 
treatment with BAL combined with DMPS should be considered.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10020235
PMCID: PMC7072575
PMID: 32033229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.