---
reference_id: "PMID:27410456"
title: "Biallelic mutations in CYP26B1: A differential diagnosis for Pfeiffer and Antley-Bixler syndromes."
authors:
- Morton JE
- Frentz S
- Morgan T
- Sutherland-Smith AJ
- Robertson SP
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37804
keywords:
- "Acrocephalosyndactylia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Antley-Bixler Syndrome Phenotype/diagnosis, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Facies
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Protein Conformation
- "Retinoic Acid 4-Hydroxylase/chemistry, genetics"
- Skull/abnormalities
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic mutations in CYP26B1: A differential diagnosis for Pfeiffer and Antley-Bixler syndromes.
**Authors:** Morton JE, Frentz S, Morgan T, Sutherland-Smith AJ, Robertson SP
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37804](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37804)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Oct;170(10):2706-10. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37804. Epub
2016  Jul 13.

Biallelic mutations in CYP26B1: A differential diagnosis for Pfeiffer and 
Antley-Bixler syndromes.

Morton JE(1), Frentz S(2), Morgan T(2), Sutherland-Smith AJ(3), Robertson SP(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women's Hospital, Edgbaston, Birmingham, 
UK.
(2)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, Otago 
University, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(3)Institute of Molecular BioSciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New 
Zealand.
(4)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, Otago 
University, Dunedin, New Zealand. stephen.robertson@otago.ac.nz.

Recently, a newly identified autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia was 
described characterized by calvarial abnormalities (including cranium bifidum, 
coronal, and lambdoid synostosis), oligodactyly, femoral bowing, narrow thorax, 
small pelvic bones, and radiohumeral synostosis. In the two families described, 
a more severe phenotype led to in utero lethality in three siblings while in a 
single patient in a second family the phenotype was sufficiently mild to allow 
survival to 5 months of age. The disorder is caused by biallelic missense 
mutations in CYP26B1, which encodes for a cytochrome P450 enzyme responsible for 
the catabolism of retinoic acid in a temporally and spatially restricted fashion 
during embryonic development. Here, we provide the third family affected by the 
disorder and the first affected individual to survive beyond infancy. This woman 
homozygous for c.1303G>A; p.(Gly435Ser) in CYP26B1, which was associated with 
multisutural synostosis, radiohumeral synostosis, normal bone mineral density, 
and apparent intellectual disability, a phenotype with significant similarities 
to Antley-Bixler and Pfeiffer syndromes. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37804
PMID: 27410456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]