---
reference_id: "PMID:16321689"
title: Determinants of rapid progression of aortic root dilatation and complications in Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Lazarevic AM
- Nakatani S
- Okita Y
- Marinkovic J
- Takeda Y
- Hirooka K
- Matsuo H
- Kitamura S
- Yamagishi M
- Miyatake K
journal: Int J Cardiol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2005.01.040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Determinants of rapid progression of aortic root dilatation and complications in Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Lazarevic AM, Nakatani S, Okita Y, Marinkovic J, Takeda Y, Hirooka K, Matsuo H, Kitamura S, Yamagishi M, Miyatake K
**Journal:** Int J Cardiol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijcard.2005.01.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2005.01.040)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiol. 2006 Jan 13;106(2):177-82. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2005.01.040.

Determinants of rapid progression of aortic root dilatation and complications in 
Marfan syndrome.

Lazarevic AM(1), Nakatani S, Okita Y, Marinkovic J, Takeda Y, Hirooka K, Matsuo 
H, Kitamura S, Yamagishi M, Miyatake K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, National Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Osaka, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Progressive aortic dilatation has prognostic significance in the 
Marfan syndrome.
METHODS: To identify which patients were at high risk of rapid progression, we 
echocardiographically studied 43 patients (age 22 +/- 14 years) with the mean 
follow-up period of 5.2 +/- 3.2 years. Aortic diameters, left ventricular (LV) 
size, fractional shortening, and the severity of aortic and mitral regurgitation 
were assessed. Transmitral peak early and atrial flow velocities, their ratio 
and the deceleration time of peak early velocity were also obtained.
RESULTS: Mean annual increases of aortic diameters were 0.4 +/- 0.3 mm at the 
annulus, 1.5 +/- 1.3 mm at the sinuses of Valsalva, 0.7 +/- 0.6 mm at the 
supraaortic ridge and 0.4 +/- 0.4 mm at the proximal ascending aorta. Patients 
were divided into 2 groups according to the aortic growth rate at the sinuses of 
Valsalva level: rapid (R, >3% per year, 15 patients) or slow (S, < or =3% per 
year, 28 patients) progression groups. Measured variables did not show 
significant differences between the 2 groups except older age, higher blood 
pressure and more severe aortic regurgitation in group R. Multiple regression 
analysis identified prolonged deceleration time as the most important variable 
predicting aortic complications. Aortic dissection occurred more frequently in 
group R (7 patients, 47%) than in group S (0%, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Marfan patients at older age, with higher blood pressure, and with 
significant aortic regurgitation were at high risk of progression of aortic 
dilatation, with the most remarkable increase at the sinuses of Valsalva. 
Prolonged deceleration time may relate to an increased risk for aortic 
complications.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2005.01.040
PMID: 16321689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]