---
reference_id: PMID:26608821
title: "Manganese neurotoxicity: behavioral disorders associated with dysfunctions in the basal ganglia and neurochemical transmission."
authors:
- Bouabid S
- Tinakoua A
- Lakhdar-Ghazal N
- Benazzouz A
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/jnc.13442
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Manganese neurotoxicity: behavioral disorders associated with dysfunctions in the basal ganglia and neurochemical transmission.
**Authors:** Bouabid S, Tinakoua A, Lakhdar-Ghazal N, Benazzouz A
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jnc.13442](https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.13442)

## Content

1. J Neurochem. 2016 Feb;136(4):677-691. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13442. Epub 2015 Dec
28.

Manganese neurotoxicity: behavioral disorders associated with dysfunctions in 
the basal ganglia and neurochemical transmission.

Bouabid S(1)(2)(3), Tinakoua A(1)(2)(3), Lakhdar-Ghazal N(3), Benazzouz A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, 
Bordeaux, France.
(2)CNRS, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, Bordeaux, France.
(3)Université Mohammed V, Faculté des Sciences, Equipe Rythmes Biologiques, 
Neurosciences et Environnement, Rabat, Morocco.

Manganese (Mn) is an essential element required for many physiological 
functions. While it is essential at physiological levels, excessive accumulation 
of Mn in the brain causes severe dysfunctions in the central nervous system 
known as manganism. Manganism is an extrapyramidal disorder characterized by 
motor disturbances associated with neuropsychiatric and cognitive disabilities 
similar to Parkinsonism. As the primary brain regions targeted by Mn are the 
basal ganglia, known to be involved in the pathophysiology of extrapyramidal 
disorders, this review will examine the impact of Mn exposure on the basal 
ganglia circuitry and neurotransmitters in relation to motor and non-motor 
disorders. The collected data from recent available studies in humans and 
experimental animal models provide new information about the mechanisms by which 
Mn affects behavior, neurotransmitters, and basal ganglia function observed in 
manganism. The effects of the alterations of metals on basal ganglia and 
neurochemical functioning are critical to develop effective modalities not only 
for the treatment of vulnerable populations (e.g., Mn-exposed workers) but also 
for understanding the etiology of neurodegenerative diseases where brain metal 
imbalances are involved, such as Parkinson's disease. We examine the impact of 
manganese (Mn) exposure on the basal ganglia circuitry and neurotransmitters in 
relation with motor and non-motor disorders. The collected data from available 
studies show that when accumulated in the globus pallidus, Mn influences the 
subthalamic (STN) and substantia nigra (SN) neurons, which are at the origin of 
changes in the thalamus and the cortex.

© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.13442
PMID: 26608821