---
reference_id: "PMID:23590662"
title: "Acute myeloid leukemia: advances in diagnosis and classification."
authors:
- Hasserjian RP
journal: Int J Lab Hematol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12081
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute myeloid leukemia: advances in diagnosis and classification.
**Authors:** Hasserjian RP
**Journal:** Int J Lab Hematol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijlh.12081](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijlh.12081)

## Content

1. Int J Lab Hematol. 2013 Jun;35(3):358-66. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12081.

Acute myeloid leukemia: advances in diagnosis and classification.

Hasserjian RP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street, 
Boston, MA 02114, USA. rhasserjian@partners.org

Acute myeloid leukemia is an aggressive myeloid neoplasm characterized by ≥20% 
myeloblasts in the blood or bone marrow. Current treatment strategies for acute 
myeloid leukemia are based on both patient-related parameters such as age and 
performance status as well as the intrinsic characteristics of particular 
disease subtypes. Subtyping of acute myeloid leukemia requires an integration of 
information from the patient's clinical history (such as any prior preleukemic 
myeloid neoplasm or cytotoxic potentially leukemogenic therapy), the leukemia 
morphology, cytogenetic findings, and the mutation status of particular genes 
(NPM1, FLT3, and CEBPA). In recent years, a barrage of information has become 
available regarding gene mutations that occur in acute myeloid leukemia and 
their influence on prognosis. Future therapies for acute myeloid leukemia will 
increasingly rely on the genetic signatures of individual leukemias and will 
adjust therapy to the predicted disease aggressiveness as well as employ 
therapies targeted against particular deregulated genetic pathways. This article 
reviews current standards for diagnosing and classifying acute myeloid leukemia 
according to the 2008 WHO Classification. Data that have subsequently 
accumulated regarding newly characterized gene mutations are also presented. It 
is anticipated that future leukemia classifications will employ a combination of 
karyotypic features and the gene mutation pattern to stratify patients to 
increasingly tailored treatment plans.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ijlh.12081
PMID: 23590662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]