---
reference_id: "PMID:29148036"
title: Function and mechanism of the pyrin inflammasome.
authors:
- Heilig R
- Broz P
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/eji.201746947
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Function and mechanism of the pyrin inflammasome.
**Authors:** Heilig R, Broz P
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eji.201746947](https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.201746947)

## Content

1. Eur J Immunol. 2018 Feb;48(2):230-238. doi: 10.1002/eji.201746947. Epub 2017
Dec  6.

Function and mechanism of the pyrin inflammasome.

Heilig R(1), Broz P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland.

Pyrin, encoded by the MEFV gene, is an intracellular pattern recognition 
receptor that assembles inflammasome complexes in response to pathogen 
infections. Mutations in the MEFV gene have been linked to autoinflammatory 
diseases such as familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) or pyrin-associated 
autoinflammation with neutrophilic dermatosis (PAAND). Recent insights have now 
revealed how pyrin is activated during infection, providing a molecular basis 
for the understanding of such disease-causing mutations in pyrin. Interestingly, 
pyrin does not directly recognize molecular patterns (pathogen- or host-derived 
danger molecules), but rather responds to disturbances in cytoplasmic 
homeostasis caused by the infection. In the case of pyrin, these perturbations, 
recently defined as 'homeostasis-altering molecular processes' (HAMPs), are 
processes leading to the inactivation of the RhoA GTPase. This review attempts 
to combine early observation and findings with the most recent discoveries on 
how pyrin detects inactivation of RhoA to shed light on the function and 
mechanism of pyrin activation.

© 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201746947
PMID: 29148036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]