---
reference_id: "PMID:32868688"
title: "Voices: Are They Dissociative or Psychotic?"
authors:
- Ross CA
journal: J Nerv Ment Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001206
keywords:
- "Borderline Personality Disorder/psychology, therapy"
- "Dissociative Disorders/psychology, therapy"
- "Dissociative Identity Disorder/psychology, therapy"
- "Hallucinations/psychology, therapy"
- Humans
- Psychotherapy
- Psychotic Disorders/psychology
- Schizophrenia
- Schizophrenic Psychology
- "Stress Disorders, Post-Traumatic/psychology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Voices: Are They Dissociative or Psychotic?
**Authors:** Ross CA
**Journal:** J Nerv Ment Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/NMD.0000000000001206](https://doi.org/10.1097/NMD.0000000000001206)

## Content

1. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2020 Sep;208(9):658-662. doi: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001206.

Voices: Are They Dissociative or Psychotic?

Ross CA(1).

Author information:
(1)The Colin A. Ross Institute for Psychological Trauma, Richardson, Texas.

Auditory hallucinations are widely regarded as symptoms of brain disease treated 
with medications. In an alternative paradigm, voices are understood as 
trauma-driven dissociated, disowned, or disavowed aspects of self; the goal is 
not to suppress them but to integrate them during psychotherapy. Auditory 
hallucinations are common in dissociative identity disorder, borderline 
personality disorder, and complex posttraumatic stress disorder and are not 
specific to psychosis. The features that differentiate psychotic from 
dissociative voices include the qualities of the voices themselves, as well as 
other symptoms: for example, compared with dissociative voices, psychotic voices 
are accompanied by less sociability, more formal thought disorder, more negative 
symptoms including blunted affect, and more delusions. The author proposes that 
the psychotherapy of dissociative voices can be indicated trans-diagnostically, 
including in a subgroup of individuals with diagnoses of schizophrenia. 
Psychotherapeutic strategies are illustrated with a case example.

DOI: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001206
PMID: 32868688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]