---
reference_id: "PMID:36925460"
title: "Hamartomatous polyps: Diagnosis, surveillance, and management."
authors:
- Gorji L
- Albrecht P
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i8.1304
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hamartomatous polyps: Diagnosis, surveillance, and management.
**Authors:** Gorji L, Albrecht P
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v29.i8.1304](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v29.i8.1304)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2023 Feb 28;29(8):1304-1314. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v29.i8.1304.

Hamartomatous polyps: Diagnosis, surveillance, and management.

Gorji L(1), Albrecht P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Kettering Health Dayton, Dayton, OH 45405, United 
States. leva.gorji@ketteringhealth.org.
(2)Department of Surgery, Kettering Health Dayton, Dayton, OH 45405, United 
States.

Hereditary polyposis syndrome can be divided into three categories: 
Ade-nomatous, serrated, and hamartomatous polyps. Hamartomatous polyps, 
malformations of normal tissue presenting in a disorganized manner, are 
characterized by an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. These syndromes 
exhibit hamartomatous gastrointestinal polyps in conjunction to extra-intestinal 
manifestations, which require conscientious and diligent monitoring. 
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Cowden syndrome, and juvenile polyposis syndrome are the 
most common displays of hamartomatous polyposis syndrome (HPS). Diagnosis can be 
pursued with molecular testing and endoscopic sampling. Early identification of 
these autosomal dominant pathologies allows to optimize malignancy 
sur-veillance, which helps reduce morbidity and mortality in both the affected 
patient population as well as at-risk family members. Endoscopic surveillance is 
an important pillar of prognosis and monitoring, with many patients eventually 
requiring surgical intervention. In this review, we discuss the diagnosis, 
surveillance, and management of HPS.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i8.1304
PMCID: PMC10011967
PMID: 36925460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.