---
reference_id: PMID:12226664
title: Loss of the Lkb1 tumour suppressor provokes intestinal polyposis but resistance to transformation.
authors:
- Bardeesy N
- Sinha M
- Hezel AF
- Signoretti S
- Hathaway NA
- Sharpless NE
- Loda M
- Carrasco DR
- DePinho RA
journal: Nature
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/nature01045
keywords:
- AMP-Activated Protein Kinases
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Animals
- Carrier Proteins
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, pathology"
- Cellular Senescence/genetics
- "Culture Media, Conditioned"
- Fibroblasts
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Targeting
- "Genes, Tumor Suppressor"
- "Genes, ras/genetics"
- "Intestinal Polyps/genetics, pathology"
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/deficiency, genetics"
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of the Lkb1 tumour suppressor provokes intestinal polyposis but resistance to transformation.
**Authors:** Bardeesy N, Sinha M, Hezel AF, Signoretti S, Hathaway NA, Sharpless NE, Loda M, Carrasco DR, DePinho RA
**Journal:** Nature (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature01045](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01045)

## Content

1. Nature. 2002 Sep 12;419(6903):162-7. doi: 10.1038/nature01045.

Loss of the Lkb1 tumour suppressor provokes intestinal polyposis but resistance 
to transformation.

Bardeesy N(1), Sinha M, Hezel AF, Signoretti S, Hathaway NA, Sharpless NE, Loda 
M, Carrasco DR, DePinho RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Sep 12;419(6903):127-8. doi: 10.1038/419127a.

Germline mutations in LKB1 (also known as STK11) are associated with 
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS), a disorder with predisposition to gastrointestinal 
polyposis and cancer. PJS polyps are unusual neoplasms characterized by marked 
epithelial and stromal overgrowth but have limited malignant potential. Here we 
show that Lkb1(+/-) mice develop intestinal polyps identical to those seen in 
individuals affected with PJS. Consistent with this in vivo tumour suppressor 
function, Lkb1 deficiency prevents culture-induced senescence without loss of 
Ink4a/Arf or p53. Despite compromised mortality, Lkb1(-/-) mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts show resistance to transformation by activated Ha-Ras either alone 
or with immortalizing oncogenes. This phenotype is in agreement with the paucity 
of mutations in Ras seen in PJS polyps and suggests that loss of Lkb1 function 
as an early neoplastic event renders cells resistant to subsequent 
oncogene-induced transformation. In addition, the Lkb1 transcriptome shows 
modulation of factors linked to angiogenesis, extracellular matrix remodelling, 
cell adhesion and inhibition of Ras transformation. Together, our data 
rationalize several features of PJS polyposis--notably its peculiar 
histopathological presentation and limited malignant potential--and place Lkb1 
in a distinct class of tumour suppressors.

DOI: 10.1038/nature01045
PMID: 12226664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]