---
reference_id: "PMID:39103498"
title: Effects of pharmacological and environmental manipulations on choice between fentanyl and shock avoidance/escape in male and female rats under mutually exclusive and non-exclusive choice conditions.
authors:
- Marcus MM
- Marsh SA
- Arriaga M
- Negus SS
- Banks ML
journal: Neuropsychopharmacology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41386-024-01939-7
keywords:
- Animals
- "Fentanyl/pharmacology, administration & dosage"
- Male
- Female
- "Choice Behavior/drug effects, physiology"
- Rats
- "Avoidance Learning/drug effects, physiology"
- Self Administration
- "Conditioning, Operant/drug effects"
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- "Analgesics, Opioid/pharmacology, administration & dosage"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- "Escape Reaction/drug effects, physiology"
- Electroshock
- Reinforcement Schedule
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of pharmacological and environmental manipulations on choice between fentanyl and shock avoidance/escape in male and female rats under mutually exclusive and non-exclusive choice conditions.
**Authors:** Marcus MM, Marsh SA, Arriaga M, Negus SS, Banks ML
**Journal:** Neuropsychopharmacology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41386-024-01939-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41386-024-01939-7)

## Content

1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2024 Dec;49(13):2011-2021. doi: 
10.1038/s41386-024-01939-7. Epub 2024 Aug 5.

Effects of pharmacological and environmental manipulations on choice between 
fentanyl and shock avoidance/escape in male and female rats under mutually 
exclusive and non-exclusive choice conditions.

Marcus MM(1), Marsh SA(1), Arriaga M(1), Negus SS(1), Banks ML(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University 
School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University 
School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA. mbanks7@vcu.edu.

Substance use disorders are defined by persistent drug consumption despite 
adverse consequences. Accordingly, we developed two fentanyl-vs-shock 
avoidance/escape choice procedures in which male and female rats responded under 
a fixed-ratio (FR)1:FR1 concurrent schedule of shock avoidance/escape and IV 
fentanyl under either mutually exclusive or non-exclusive choice conditions. 
Initial experiments using a discrete-trial procedure determined behavioral 
allocation between mutually exclusive shock avoidance/escape and different 
fentanyl doses (0.32-18 μg/kg/infusion; Experiment 1). Shock intensity 
(0.1-0.7 mA) and shock avoidance/escape response requirement (FR1-16) were also 
manipulated (Experiment 2). Next, we used a free-operant procedure in which 
shock avoidance/escape and fentanyl were continuously available under 
non-exclusive conditions, and response-shock (R-S) interval (30-1000 s) was 
manipulated (Experiment 3). Finally, we tested the hypothesis that 
extended-access fentanyl self-administration would produce fentanyl dependence, 
establish fentanyl withdrawal as an endogenous negative reinforcer, and increase 
fentanyl choice in both procedures (Experiments 4 and 5). The shock 
avoidance/escape contingency decreased fentanyl self-administration, and rats 
consistently chose shock avoidance/escape over fentanyl in both choice 
conditions. Decreasing shock intensity or increasing shock avoidance/escape 
response requirement failed to increase fentanyl choice, suggesting that 
fentanyl and shock avoidance/escape are independent economic commodities. 
Increasing the R-S interval increased fentanyl choice but failed to increase 
shock delivery. Extended fentanyl access engendered high fentanyl intake and 
opioid withdrawal signs but failed to increase fentanyl choice under either 
choice condition. These results suggest that neither positive fentanyl 
reinforcement nor negative reinforcement by fentanyl withdrawal is sufficient to 
reduce shock avoidance/escape-maintained responding and increase foot shock as 
an adverse consequence.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41386-024-01939-7
PMCID: PMC11480371
PMID: 39103498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.