---
reference_id: "PMID:12174774"
title: "The use of reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for the rapid detection and identification of dengue virus in an endemic region: a validation study."
authors:
- De Paula SO
- Pires Neto RJ
- Corrêa JA
- Assumpção SR
- Costa ML
- Lima DM
- Fonseca BA
journal: Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0035-9203(02)90094-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The use of reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for the rapid detection and identification of dengue virus in an endemic region: a validation study.
**Authors:** De Paula SO, Pires Neto RJ, Corrêa JA, Assumpção SR, Costa ML, Lima DM, Fonseca BA
**Journal:** Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0035-9203(02)90094-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0035-9203(02)90094-5)

## Content

1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2002 May-Jun;96(3):266-9. doi: 
10.1016/s0035-9203(02)90094-5.

The use of reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for the 
rapid detection and identification of dengue virus in an endemic region: a 
validation study.

De Paula SO(1), Pires Neto RJ, Corrêa JA, Assumpção SR, Costa ML, Lima DM, 
Fonseca BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Programme of Graduate Studies on Applied 
Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of 
São Paulo, 14049-900, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

Dengue is the most important arboviral disease worldwide. Dengue diagnosis is 
usually made by serology, but serological techniques do not identify the 
infecting strain, and are only useful late in the course of infection. Several 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) protocols have been 
described for dengue diagnosis but none of them has been used on a regular 
basis. We conducted a validation study of PCR-based diagnosis in an area (in 
Brazil) where dengue-1 virus has been circulating at a low incidence rate. Viral 
detection by RT-PCR was evaluated using the sera of 253 patients with clinical 
diagnosis of dengue, and the results were compared to those obtained by IgM 
capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (MAC-ELISA) and virus isolation. Out 
of 75 IgM-positive samples, 17 were RT-PCR positive, and only 2 were positive 
for virus isolation. Through enzymatic digestion of PCR amplicons, we were able 
to differentiate the 2 dengue serotypes circulating in Brazil (dengue-1 and 
dengue-2), and to determine that dengue-1 was the virus responsible for the 
infections. We show with this study that RT-PCR is more sensitive than virus 
isolation on clinical samples and allows for a rapid detection of dengue 
infections and for a straightforward identification of the circulating serotype.

DOI: 10.1016/s0035-9203(02)90094-5
PMID: 12174774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]