---
reference_id: "PMID:35672279"
title: "Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma of the head and neck with HEY1::NCOA2 fusion: A clinicopathologic and molecular study of 13 cases with emphasis on diagnostic pitfalls."
authors:
- Xu B
- Rooper LM
- Dermawan JK
- Zhang Y
- Suurmeijer AJH
- Dickson BC
- Demicco EG
- Antonescu CR
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.23075
keywords:
- Adult
- Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins/genetics
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- Child
- "Chondrosarcoma, Mesenchymal/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Gene Fusion
- "Head and Neck Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Male
- Nuclear Receptor Coactivator 2/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma of the head and neck with HEY1::NCOA2 fusion: A clinicopathologic and molecular study of 13 cases with emphasis on diagnostic pitfalls.
**Authors:** Xu B, Rooper LM, Dermawan JK, Zhang Y, Suurmeijer AJH, Dickson BC, Demicco EG, Antonescu CR
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.23075](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.23075)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2022 Nov;61(11):670-677. doi: 10.1002/gcc.23075.
Epub  2022 Jun 23.

Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma of the head and neck with HEY1::NCOA2 fusion: A
clinicopathologic and molecular study of 13 cases with emphasis on diagnostic
pitfalls.

Xu B(1), Rooper LM(2), Dermawan JK(1), Zhang Y(1), Suurmeijer AJH(3), Dickson
BC(4), Demicco EG(4), Antonescu CR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York City, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital &
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma (MCS) is a rare translocation-associated
sarcoma, driven by a canonical HEY1::NCOA2 fusion. The tumors typically have a
biphasic phenotype of primitive small blue round cells intermixed with hyaline
cartilage. The head and neck (HN) region is a common site for MCS, accounting
for 12-45% of all cases reported.
AIMS: We assembled a relatively large cohort of 13 molecularly confirmed HN MCS
for a detailed clinicopathologic analysis. The underlying fusion events were
determined using fluorescence in situ hybridization and/or targeted RNA
sequencing.
RESULTS: The median age of presentation was 19 years. Five MCSs (39%) had an
intraosseous presentation (skull, maxilla, palate, and mandible), while the
remaining eight cases occurred in the brain/meninges, orbit, and nasal cavity.
Microscopically, HN MCSs were characterized by primitive round cells arranged in
a distinctive nested architecture and a rich staghorn vasculature. A
cartilaginous component of hyaline cartilage islands and/or single chondrocytes
were present in 69% cases. A combined immunoprofile of
CD99(+)/SATB2(+)/CD34(-)/STAT6(-) was typically noted. As this immunoprofile is
non-specific, the referral diagnoses in cases lacking a cartilaginous component
included Ewing sarcoma family and osteosarcoma. Among the seven patients with
follow-up data, three developed distant metastasis and one died of disease.
CONCLUSION: HN MCS may arise at intra- or extra-osseous sites. The HN MCS
appears to have a more prolonged survival compared other MCS sites. Testing for
HEY1::NCOA2 fusion is recommended in HN tumors with nested round cell morphology
and staghorn vasculature that lack a distinctive cartilaginous component.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.23075
PMCID: PMC9813803
PMID: 35672279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
