---
reference_id: "PMID:40607310"
title: "Successful management of Netherton syndrome using IVIG and dupilumab: A case report."
authors:
- Johar R
- Khojah A
- Goronfolah L
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Glob
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacig.2025.100508
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful management of Netherton syndrome using IVIG and dupilumab: A case report.
**Authors:** Johar R, Khojah A, Goronfolah L
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Glob (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacig.2025.100508](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacig.2025.100508)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Glob. 2025 Jun 2;4(3):100508. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacig.2025.100508. eCollection 2025 Aug.

Successful management of Netherton syndrome using IVIG and dupilumab: A case 
report.

Johar R(1), Khojah A(2), Goronfolah L(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Pediatrics Department, College of Medicine, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, 
Saudi Arabia.
(3)King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz 
University for Health Sciences, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

Netherton syndrome (NS) is a rare autosomal recessive genodermatosis caused by 
pathogenic mutations in the serine protease inhibitor Kazal-type 5 (SPINK5) 
gene, leading to impaired skin barrier function and immune dysregulation. It is 
characterized by congenital ichthyosis, trichorrhexis invaginata, and severe 
atopy. Herein, we present the case of a young boy with NS, confirmed by genetic 
analysis revealing a homozygous splice site mutation in SPINK5 (c.1302+5G>C). 
The patient was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin due to frequent 
infections that required multiple hospital admissions. When he was 6 years old, 
dupilumab was added to reduce skin inflammation and improve skin barrier 
function before food reintroduction. He demonstrated substantial clinical 
benefits, with marked relief from pruritus resulting in better quality of life. 
Additionally, he exhibited notable hair growth. Serologically, total his serum 
IgE levels decreased from 1078 IU/mL to 55.8 IU/mL following dupilumab therapy. 
This case highlights the potential benefits of an integrated therapeutic 
approach in management of this challenging condition.

© 2025 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacig.2025.100508
PMCID: PMC12221484
PMID: 40607310

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: 
The authors declare that they have no relevant conflicts of interest.