---
reference_id: "PMID:26397266"
title: "Elevated Hemoglobin A1C Levels Correlate with Blood Glucose Elevation in Diabetic Patients following Local Corticosteroid Injection in the Hand: A Prospective Study."
authors:
- Kim N
- Schroeder J
- Hoffler CE
- Matzon JL
- Lutsky KF
- Beredjiklian PK
journal: Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000001624
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated Hemoglobin A1C Levels Correlate with Blood Glucose Elevation in Diabetic Patients following Local Corticosteroid Injection in the Hand: A Prospective Study.
**Authors:** Kim N, Schroeder J, Hoffler CE, Matzon JL, Lutsky KF, Beredjiklian PK
**Journal:** Plast Reconstr Surg (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PRS.0000000000001624](https://doi.org/10.1097/PRS.0000000000001624)

## Content

1. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2015 Oct;136(4):474e-479e. doi: 
10.1097/PRS.0000000000001624.

Elevated Hemoglobin A1C Levels Correlate with Blood Glucose Elevation in 
Diabetic Patients following Local Corticosteroid Injection in the Hand: A 
Prospective Study.

Kim N(1), Schroeder J, Hoffler CE, Matzon JL, Lutsky KF, Beredjiklian PK.

Author information:
(1)Philadelphia, Pa. From the Rothman Institute of Orthopedics at Thomas 
Jefferson University Hospital.

BACKGROUND: Diabetic patients develop hand conditions that are managed with 
local corticosteroid injections. Injections can result in a transient elevation 
in serum glucose in diabetic patients. Hemoglobin A1c is the accepted measure of 
long-term plasma glucose control in diabetics (levels ≥7 percent reflect poor 
blood glucose control). The purpose of this study was to assess the relationship 
between hemoglobin A1c levels and increased blood glucose levels after 
corticosteroid injections.
METHODS: Twenty-five diabetic patients were evaluated prospectively. One 
milliliter containing 10 mg of triamcinolone acetonide was used. The most recent 
hemoglobin A1c level and normal average blood glucose levels were obtained. 
Glucose levels were obtained from patient recall of their daily blood glucose 
self- monitoring on the day of the injection. Postinjection blood glucose levels 
were recorded until levels returned to preinjection baseline.
RESULTS: Twenty patients (80 percent) had elevation of their blood glucose level 
from baseline. No patient had elevated blood glucose levels after 5 days. 
Patients with hemoglobin A1c levels greater than or equal to 7 percent had a 
higher blood glucose elevation and maintained this for longer than those who had 
a lower hemoglobin A1c level. Patients in the higher hemoglobin A1c group also 
had a higher number of hyperglycemic events. There was a strong or moderate 
correlation between hemoglobin A1c and elevated blood glucose levels during days 
1 to 4.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with hemoglobin A1c levels greater than or equal to 7 
percent have elevations in blood glucose that are higher and last longer than 
patients with lower levels. Hemoglobin A1c levels can be used to roughly predict 
the degree of blood glucose elevation after corticosteroid injections into the 
hands of diabetic patients.

DOI: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000001624
PMID: 26397266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]