---
reference_id: "PMID:20021811"
title: "[Four new cases with WT1 gene mutations in Chinese patients with Wilms' tumor]."
authors:
- Jiang YP
- Shen Y
- Sun N
- Wang H
journal: Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Four new cases with WT1 gene mutations in Chinese patients with Wilms' tumor].
**Authors:** Jiang YP, Shen Y, Sun N, Wang H
**Journal:** Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi (2009)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Oct;47(10):762-6.

[Four new cases with WT1 gene mutations in Chinese patients with Wilms' tumor].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang YP(1), Shen Y, Sun N, Wang H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Internal Medicine, Beijing Children's Hospital 
Affiliated to Capital Medical University, Beijing 100045, China.

OBJECTIVE: Wilms' tumor (WT) is the most common malignant renal tumor in 
childhood. The WT1 gene located at 11p13 was identified in 1990 as a tumor 
suppressor gene important in the development in WT. The WT1 gene consists of 10 
exons, with exons 1 to 6 encoding an N-terminal proline- and glutamine-rich 
transactivational domain, and exons 7 to 10 encoding a C-terminal zinc-finger 
domain involved in DNA binding. In China we know little about the frequency and 
genotype of WT1 mutations in Chinese WT patients. This study aimed to determine 
the frequency and genotype of WT1 mutations in children with nonsyndromic WT in 
China.
METHODS: We collected peripheral blood of WT patients treated in Beijing 
Children's Hospital. Genomic DNA of 54 WT patients was isolated from blood 
samples. All coding WT1 exons and their flanking intronic sequences were 
amplified by PCR method. The amplified PCR products from all individuals were 
then subjected to automatic DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Four different constitutional WT1 mutations were identified in four 
children. Three mutations are predicted to produce truncated protein. One 
mutation is missense. Of the four mutations, three had not been reported before. 
Patient 1 had a 1006 A > T transition in exon 7, which caused (336)Lys to become 
a stop codon (K336X). DNA sequence analyses in patient 2 indicated the point 
mutations in exon 9 which was a 1168 C > T substitution and caused (390)Arg to 
become a stop codon (R390X). It indicated a point mutations in exon 6 in patient 
3 which was a 814 G > T substitution and resulted in (272)Glu to become a stop 
codon (E272X). In patient 4 there was a homozygous mutation in exon 10. The 
mutation was a 1228 A > G substitution and resulted in (410)Ser to become a Gly 
codon (S410G).
CONCLUSION: Constitutional WT1 mutations occur at a low frequency (7.4%) in 
Chinese patients with Wilms' Tumor. It is similar to the results of overseas 
study. Four WT1 gene mutations were confirmed, three were nonsense, one was 
missense.

PMID: 20021811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]