---
reference_id: "PMID:24037726"
title: Variant ALDH2 is associated with accelerated progression of bone marrow failure in Japanese Fanconi anemia patients.
authors:
- Hira A
- Yabe H
- Yoshida K
- Okuno Y
- Shiraishi Y
- Chiba K
- Tanaka H
- Miyano S
- Nakamura J
- Kojima S
- Ogawa S
- Matsuo K
- Takata M
- Yabe M
journal: Blood
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-06-507962
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variant ALDH2 is associated with accelerated progression of bone marrow failure in Japanese Fanconi anemia patients.
**Authors:** Hira A, Yabe H, Yoshida K, Okuno Y, Shiraishi Y, Chiba K, Tanaka H, Miyano S, Nakamura J, Kojima S, Ogawa S, Matsuo K, Takata M, Yabe M
**Journal:** Blood (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2013-06-507962](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2013-06-507962)

## Content

1. Blood. 2013 Oct 31;122(18):3206-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-06-507962. Epub
2013  Sep 13.

Variant ALDH2 is associated with accelerated progression of bone marrow failure 
in Japanese Fanconi anemia patients.

Hira A(1), Yabe H, Yoshida K, Okuno Y, Shiraishi Y, Chiba K, Tanaka H, Miyano S, 
Nakamura J, Kojima S, Ogawa S, Matsuo K, Takata M, Yabe M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of DNA Damage Signaling, Department of Late Effects Studies, 
Radiation Biology Center, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan;

Comment in
    Int J Hematol. 2016 Jan;103(1):112-4. doi: 10.1007/s12185-015-1891-0.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a severe hereditary disorder with defective DNA damage 
response and repair. It is characterized by phenotypes including progressive 
bone marrow failure (BMF), developmental abnormalities, and increased occurrence 
of leukemia and cancer. Recent studies in mice have suggested that the FA 
proteins might counteract aldehyde-induced genotoxicity in hematopoietic stem 
cells. Nearly half of the Japanese population carries a dominant-negative allele 
(rs671) of the aldehyde-catalyzing enzyme ALDH2 (acetaldehyde dehydrogenase 2), 
providing an opportunity to test this hypothesis in humans. We examined 64 
Japanese FA patients, and found that the ALDH2 variant is associated with 
accelerated progression of BMF, while birth weight or the number of physical 
abnormalities was not affected. Moreover, malformations at some specific 
anatomic locations were observed more frequently in ALDH2-deficient patients. 
Our current data indicate that the level of ALDH2 activity impacts pathogenesis 
in FA, suggesting the possibility of a novel therapeutic approach.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-06-507962
PMCID: PMC3953058
PMID: 24037726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]