---
reference_id: "PMID:35382378"
title: "Association of <em>TNFAIP3</em> gene polymorphism (<em>rs5029939</em>) with susceptibility and clinical phenotype of systemic lupus erythematosus."
authors:
- Gaballah H
- Abd-Elkhalek R
- Hussein O
- El-Wahab SA
journal: Arch Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.46497/ArchRheumatol.2022.8769
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of <em>TNFAIP3</em> gene polymorphism (<em>rs5029939</em>) with susceptibility and clinical phenotype of systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Gaballah H, Abd-Elkhalek R, Hussein O, El-Wahab SA
**Journal:** Arch Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.46497/ArchRheumatol.2022.8769](https://doi.org/10.46497/ArchRheumatol.2022.8769)

## Content

1. Arch Rheumatol. 2021 Oct 16;36(4):570-576. doi:
10.46497/ArchRheumatol.2022.8769. eCollection 2021 Dec.

Association of <em>TNFAIP3</em> gene polymorphism (<em>rs5029939</em>) with
susceptibility and clinical phenotype of systemic lupus erythematosus.

Gaballah H(1), Abd-Elkhalek R(1), Hussein O(2), El-Wahab SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Rehabilitation, Faculty of Medicine, Zagazig
University, Zagazig, Egypt.
(2)Department of Clinical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Zagazig University,
Zagazig , Egypt.

OBJECTIVES: This study aims to investigate the association of the tumor necrosis
factor-alpha inducible protein 3 (TNFAIP3) (rs5029939) gene single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) with the risk of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and its
clinical manifestations in a cohort of SLE patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This study included a total of 180 participants (18 males,
72 females; mean age: 30.9±10.1 years; range 17 to 59 years) including 90 SLE
patients and 90 healthy controls between March 2017 and February 2020. The
TNFAIP3 rs5029939 gene polymorphism was identified by polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) in all
participants.
RESULTS: There was a significant difference in genotype distribution of the
TNFAIP3 rs5029939 SNP between SLE patients and healthy controls, where CG
genotype was more common in SLE patients (53.3%) than controls (11.1%)
(p=0.001). We found a significant difference in G allele frequency of TNFAIP3
(rs5029939) (37.8% with SLE vs. 5.6% with controls, p=0.001). Genotype CG was
significantly associated with lupus nephritis and neuropsychiatric
manifestations (p<0.05). Although the response to treatment was numerically
higher with the genotype CC, it did not reach statistical significance (p=0.4).
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that TNFAIP3 rs5029939 gene polymorphism is
associated with SLE susceptibility and may have an impact on its clinical
phenotype. As such association differs among populations of diverse ethnic
backgrounds, larger genome-wide association studies are warranted to further
elucidate genetic associations.

Copyright © 2021, Turkish League Against Rheumatism.

DOI: 10.46497/ArchRheumatol.2022.8769
PMCID: PMC8957768
PMID: 35382378

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declared no
conflicts of interest with respect to the authorship and/or publication of this
article.
