---
reference_id: "PMID:36546480"
title: Human JAK1 gain of function causes dysregulated myelopoeisis and severe allergic inflammation.
authors:
- Biggs CM
- Cordeiro-Santanach A
- Prykhozhij SV
- Deveau AP
- Lin Y
- Del Bel KL
- Orben F
- Ragotte RJ
- Saferali A
- Mostafavi S
- Dinh L
- Dai D
- Weinacht KG
- Dobbs K
- Ott de Bruin L
- Sharma M
- Tsai K
- Priatel JJ
- Schreiber RA
- Rozmus J
- Hosking MC
- Shopsowitz KE
- McKinnon ML
- Vercauteren S
- Seear M
- Notarangelo LD
- Lynn FC
- Berman JN
- Turvey SE
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.150849
keywords:
- Child
- Animals
- Humans
- Gain of Function Mutation
- Zebrafish
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- Hypersensitivity/genetics
- Inflammation/genetics
- "Hypersensitivity, Immediate"
- Eosinophilia/genetics
- Janus Kinase 1/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human JAK1 gain of function causes dysregulated myelopoeisis and severe allergic inflammation.
**Authors:** Biggs CM, Cordeiro-Santanach A, Prykhozhij SV, Deveau AP, Lin Y, Del Bel KL, Orben F, Ragotte RJ, Saferali A, Mostafavi S, Dinh L, Dai D, Weinacht KG, Dobbs K, Ott de Bruin L, Sharma M, Tsai K, Priatel JJ, Schreiber RA, Rozmus J, Hosking MC, Shopsowitz KE, McKinnon ML, Vercauteren S, Seear M, Notarangelo LD, Lynn FC, Berman JN, Turvey SE
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.150849](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.150849)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2022 Dec 22;7(24):e150849. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.150849.

Human JAK1 gain of function causes dysregulated myelopoeisis and severe allergic 
inflammation.

Biggs CM(1)(2), Cordeiro-Santanach A(3), Prykhozhij SV(4), Deveau AP(5), Lin 
Y(2), Del Bel KL(1)(2), Orben F(1)(2), Ragotte RJ(1)(2), Saferali A(1)(2)(6), 
Mostafavi S(7)(8), Dinh L(7)(8), Dai D(2), Weinacht KG(9), Dobbs K(10), Ott de 
Bruin L(11), Sharma M(1)(2), Tsai K(2)(12), Priatel JJ(2)(12), Schreiber 
RA(1)(2), Rozmus J(1)(2), Hosking MC(1)(2), Shopsowitz KE(2)(12), McKinnon 
ML(7), Vercauteren S(12), Seear M(1)(2), Notarangelo LD(10), Lynn FC(2)(13), 
Berman JN(4)(14), Turvey SE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(2)BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)AGADA Biosciences Inc., Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(4)CHEO Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.
(6)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics and.
(8)Department of Statistics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(9)Division of Stem Cell Transplantation and Regenerative Medicine, Department 
of Pediatrics, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
(10)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(11)Division of Immunology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(12)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and.
(13)Department of Surgery, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(14)Departments of Pediatrics and Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Primary atopic disorders are a group of inborn errors of immunity that skew the 
immune system toward severe allergic disease. Defining the biology underlying 
these extreme monogenic phenotypes reveals shared mechanisms underlying common 
polygenic allergic disease and identifies potential drug targets. Germline 
gain-of-function (GOF) variants in JAK1 are a cause of severe atopy and 
eosinophilia. Modeling the JAK1GOF (p.A634D) variant in both zebrafish and human 
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) revealed enhanced myelopoiesis. RNA-Seq 
of JAK1GOF human whole blood, iPSCs, and transgenic zebrafish revealed a shared 
core set of dysregulated genes involved in IL-4, IL-13, and IFN signaling. 
Immunophenotypic and transcriptomic analysis of patients carrying a JAK1GOF 
variant revealed marked Th cell skewing. Moreover, long-term ruxolitinib 
treatment of 2 children carrying the JAK1GOF (p.A634D) variant remarkably 
improved their growth, eosinophilia, and clinical features of allergic 
inflammation. This work highlights the role of JAK1 signaling in atopic immune 
dysregulation and the clinical impact of JAK1/2 inhibition in treating 
eosinophilic and allergic disease.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.150849
PMCID: PMC9869972
PMID: 36546480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]