---
reference_id: "PMID:36028842"
title: SHFLD3 phenotypes caused by 17p13.3 triplication/ duplication encompassing Fingerin (BHLHA9) invariably.
authors:
- Bukowska-Olech E
- Sowińska-Seidler A
- Wierzba J
- Jamsheer A
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02480-w
keywords:
- Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins/genetics
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Female
- Gene Duplication
- Humans
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Male
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SHFLD3 phenotypes caused by 17p13.3 triplication/ duplication encompassing Fingerin (BHLHA9) invariably.
**Authors:** Bukowska-Olech E, Sowińska-Seidler A, Wierzba J, Jamsheer A
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02480-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02480-w)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Aug 26;17(1):325. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02480-w.

SHFLD3 phenotypes caused by 17p13.3 triplication/ duplication encompassing 
Fingerin (BHLHA9) invariably.

Bukowska-Olech E(#)(1), Sowińska-Seidler A(#)(2), Wierzba J(3), Jamsheer 
A(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Poznan, Poland. ewe.olech@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Poznan, Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Internal Medicine Nursing, Department of Rare 
Disorders, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Poznan, Poland. jamsheer@wp.pl.
(5)Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland. jamsheer@wp.pl.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Split-hand/ foot malformation with long bone deficiency 3 (SHFLD3) 
is an extremely rare condition associated with duplications located on 17p13.3, 
which invariably encompasses the BHLHA9 gene. The disease inherits with variable 
expressivity and significant incomplete penetrance as high as 50%.
RESULTS: We have detected 17p13.3 locus one-allele triplication in a male 
proband from family 1 (F1.1), and duplication in a male proband from family 2 
(F2.1) applying array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH). The 
rearrangements mapped to the following chromosomal regions-arr[GRCh38] 
17p13.3(960254-1291856)×4 in F1.1 and arr[GRCh38] 17p13.3(1227482-1302716)×3 in 
F2.1. The targeted quantitative PCR revealed that the 17p13.3 locus was also 
duplicated in the second affected member from family 2 (F2.2; brother of F2.1). 
In the next step, we performed segregation studies using quantitative PCR and 
revealed that F1.1 inherited the triplication from his healthy father-F1.2, 
whereas the locus was unremarkable in the mother of F2.1 & F2.2 and the healthy 
son of F2.1. However, the duplication was present in a healthy daughter of F2.2, 
an asymptomatic carrier. The breakpoint analysis allowed to define the exact 
size and span of the duplicated region in Family 2, i.e., 78,948 bp 
chr17:1225063-1304010 (HG38). Interestingly, all symptomatic carriers from both 
families presented with variable SHFLD3 phenotype. The involvement of secondary 
modifying locus could not be excluded, however, the Sanger sequencing screening 
of BHLHA9 entire coding sequence was unremarkable for both families.
CONCLUSIONS: We have shed light on the one-allele CNV triplication occurrence 
that should be considered when a higher probe (over duplication range) signal is 
noted. Second, all SHFLD3 patients were accurately described regarding 
infrequent limb phenotypes, which were highly variable even when familial. Of 
note, all symptomatic individuals were males. SHFLD3 still remains a mysterious 
ultra-rare disease and our findings do not answer crucial questions regarding 
the disease low penetrance, variable expression and heterogeneity. However, we 
have presented some clinical and molecular aspects that may be helpful in daily 
diagnostic routine, both dysmorphological and molecular assessment, of patients 
affected with SHFLD3.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02480-w
PMCID: PMC9419377
PMID: 36028842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.