---
reference_id: "PMID:22358239"
title: Visual acuity and retinal function in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Berezovsky A
- Rocha DM
- Sacai PY
- Watanabe SS
- Cavascan NN
- Salomão SR
journal: Clinics (Sao Paulo)
year: '2012'
doi: 10.6061/clinics/2012(02)09
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/physiopathology
- Child
- Dark Adaptation/physiology
- Electroretinography/methods
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Retinal Degeneration/physiopathology
- Retinal Rod Photoreceptor Cells/physiology
- Retrospective Studies
- Sensory Thresholds/physiology
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visual acuity and retinal function in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Berezovsky A, Rocha DM, Sacai PY, Watanabe SS, Cavascan NN, Salomão SR
**Journal:** Clinics (Sao Paulo) (2012)
**DOI:** [10.6061/clinics/2012(02)09](https://doi.org/10.6061/clinics/2012(02)09)

## Content

1. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2012;67(2):145-9. doi: 10.6061/clinics/2012(02)09.

Visual acuity and retinal function in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Berezovsky A(1), Rocha DM, Sacai PY, Watanabe SS, Cavascan NN, Salomão SR.

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal de São Paulo/Escola Paulista de Medicina, Departamento
de Oftalmologia, Brazil. aberezovsky@oftalmo.epm.br

OBJECTIVE: Bardet-Biedl syndrome is a genetic, multisystem disorder that causes
severe visual impairment. This condition is characterized by retinal dystrophy,
obesity, digit anomalies, renal disease, and hypogonadism. The purpose of this
study was to analyze visual acuity and full-field electroretinogram findings in
patients with the Bardet-Biedl syndrome phenotype.
METHODS: The visual acuity of a group of 23 patients (15 males) with ages
ranging from 6-36 years (mean = 15.8 ± 6.4; median = 14.7) was assessed. Retinal
function was evaluated by full-field electroretinography, and dark-adapted
thresholds were assessed.
RESULTS: Visual acuity in the better-seeing eye was 20/40 or better in 5
patients (21.7%), 20/50-20/150 in 13 (56.5%) patients, 20/200-20/400 in 2 (8.7%)
patients and worse than 20/400 in one (4.3%) patient. The mean acuity in the
better-seeing eye was 0.7 ± 0.6 logMAR (20/100, Snellen equivalent). Scotopic
rod and maximal responses were nondetectable in 21 (91.3%) patients, and cone
responses were non-detectable in 15 (65.2%) patients. Elevated dark-adapted
visual thresholds were observed in all 19 patients who were able to be assessed,
with 10 (52.6%) patients having thresholds greater than 30 dB.
CONCLUSIONS: In a relatively young cohort of patients with Bardet-Biedl
syndrome, only 21% had 20/40 or better vision. ERG scotopic responses were
absent in the majority of cases, with cone responses being observed in less than
half of cases. These findings showed the early deleterious effects in retinal
function and visual acuity caused by this condition.

DOI: 10.6061/clinics/2012(02)09
PMCID: PMC3275121
PMID: 22358239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported.
