---
reference_id: "PMID:35561684"
title: Topical therapy for regression and melanoma prevention of congenital giant nevi.
authors:
- Choi YS
- Erlich TH
- von Franque M
- Rachmin I
- Flesher JL
- Schiferle EB
- Zhang Y
- Pereira da Silva M
- Jiang A
- Dobry AS
- Su M
- Germana S
- Lacher S
- Freund O
- Feder E
- Cortez JL
- Ryu S
- Babila Propp T
- Samuels YL
- Zakka LR
- Azin M
- Burd CE
- Sharpless NE
- Liu XS
- Meyer C
- Austen WG Jr
- Bojovic B
- Cetrulo CL Jr
- Mihm MC
- Hoon DS
- Demehri S
- Hawryluk EB
- Fisher DE
journal: Cell
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topical therapy for regression and melanoma prevention of congenital giant nevi.
**Authors:** Choi YS, Erlich TH, von Franque M, Rachmin I, Flesher JL, Schiferle EB, Zhang Y, Pereira da Silva M, Jiang A, Dobry AS, Su M, Germana S, Lacher S, Freund O, Feder E, Cortez JL, Ryu S, Babila Propp T, Samuels YL, Zakka LR, Azin M, Burd CE, Sharpless NE, Liu XS, Meyer C, Austen WG Jr, Bojovic B, Cetrulo CL Jr, Mihm MC, Hoon DS, Demehri S, Hawryluk EB, Fisher DE
**Journal:** Cell (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.025)

## Content

1. Cell. 2022 Jun 9;185(12):2071-2085.e12. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.025. Epub 
2022 May 12.

Topical therapy for regression and melanoma prevention of congenital giant nevi.

Choi YS(1), Erlich TH(1), von Franque M(2), Rachmin I(1), Flesher JL(1), 
Schiferle EB(1), Zhang Y(3), Pereira da Silva M(1), Jiang A(3), Dobry AS(4), Su 
M(1), Germana S(1), Lacher S(1), Freund O(1), Feder E(5), Cortez JL(6), Ryu 
S(7), Babila Propp T(1), Samuels YL(1), Zakka LR(8), Azin M(1), Burd CE(9), 
Sharpless NE(10), Liu XS(3), Meyer C(3), Austen WG Jr(11), Bojovic B(12), 
Cetrulo CL Jr(11), Mihm MC(8), Hoon DS(7), Demehri S(1), Hawryluk EB(4), Fisher 
DE(13).

Author information:
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA; Department 
of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA.
(2)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA; Department 
of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA; Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave, 
Cambridge, MA 02139.
(3)Department of Data Science, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard T.H. Chan 
School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02215.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(5)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.
(6)Department of Dermatology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87106, 
USA.
(7)Department of Translational Molecular Medicine, Saint John's Cancer Institute 
Providence Health and System, Santa Monica, CA 90404.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(9)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH, USA.
(10)National Cancer Institute, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.
(11)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Division of Plastic 
Surgery, Shriners Hospital for Children, Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA.
(12)National Cancer Institute, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; 
Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(13)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA; Department 
of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA. Electronic address: dfisher3@mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Trends Cancer. 2022 Aug;8(8):626-628. doi: 10.1016/j.trecan.2022.06.004.
    Cell Res. 2022 Sep;32(9):799-800. doi: 10.1038/s41422-022-00691-1.

Giant congenital melanocytic nevi are NRAS-driven proliferations that may cover 
up to 80% of the body surface. Their most dangerous consequence is progression 
to melanoma. This risk often triggers preemptive extensive surgical excisions in 
childhood, producing severe lifelong challenges. We have presented preclinical 
models, including multiple genetically engineered mice and xenografted human 
lesions, which enabled testing locally applied pharmacologic agents to avoid 
surgery. The murine models permitted the identification of proliferative versus 
senescent nevus phases and treatments targeting both. These nevi recapitulated 
the histologic and molecular features of human giant congenital nevi, including 
the risk of melanoma transformation. Cutaneously delivered MEK, PI3K, and c-KIT 
inhibitors or proinflammatory squaric acid dibutylester (SADBE) achieved major 
regressions. SADBE triggered innate immunity that ablated detectable nevocytes, 
fully prevented melanoma, and regressed human giant nevus xenografts. These 
findings reveal nevus mechanistic vulnerabilities and suggest opportunities for 
topical interventions that may alter the therapeutic options for children with 
congenital giant nevi.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.025
PMCID: PMC9237838
PMID: 35561684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests D.E.F. has a financial 
interest in Soltego, a company developing salt inducible kinase inhibitors for 
topical skin-darkening treatments that might be used for a broad set of human 
applications. The interests of D.E.F. were reviewed and are managed by 
Massachusetts General Hospital and Partners HealthCare in accordance with their 
conflict-of-interest policies. C.L.C. has a financial interest in 4Immune, a 
company developing cell therapy treatments that can be used for a broad set of 
human applications. The interests of C.L.C were reviewed and are managed by Mass 
General Brigham in accordance with their conflict-of-interest policies. X.S.L. 
is a cofounder, board member, SAB member, and consultant of GV20 Oncotherapy and 
its subsidiaries; stockholder of BMY, TMO, WBA, ABT, ABBV, and JNJ; and received 
research funding from Takeda, Sanofi, Bristol Myers Squibb, and Novartis. M.C.M. 
discloses consulting relationship with Novartis, Advisory Board with BioCoz and 
Caliber ID, and author royalties with Wiley & Sons.