---
reference_id: "PMID:27465791"
title: α1-Antitrypsin deficiency.
authors:
- Greene CM
- Marciniak SJ
- Teckman J
- Ferrarotti I
- Brantly ML
- Lomas DA
- Stoller JK
- McElvaney NG
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.51
keywords:
- "Delayed Diagnosis/adverse effects, mortality"
- Dyspnea/etiology
- Emphysema/etiology
- Epithelial Cells/metabolism
- Humans
- Liver Diseases/etiology
- Monocytes/metabolism
- "Mutation/immunology, physiology"
- Neutrophils/metabolism
- Smoking/adverse effects
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/complications, epidemiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# α1-Antitrypsin deficiency.
**Authors:** Greene CM, Marciniak SJ, Teckman J, Ferrarotti I, Brantly ML, Lomas DA, Stoller JK, McElvaney NG
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2016.51](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2016.51)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016 Jul 28;2:16051. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.51.

α1-Antitrypsin deficiency.

Greene CM(1), Marciniak SJ(2), Teckman J(3), Ferrarotti I(4), Brantly ML(5),
Lomas DA(6), Stoller JK(7), McElvaney NG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland Education and
Research Centre, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin 9, Ireland.
(2)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Saint Louis University, St Louis, Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics Pneumology Unit, University
of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(6)UCL Respiratory, Division of Medicine, University College London, London, UK.
(7)Education Institute and Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
Ohio, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2018 Oct 29;4(1):40. doi: 10.1038/s41572-018-0043-2.

α1-Antitrypsin deficiency (A1ATD) is an inherited disorder caused by mutations
in SERPINA1, leading to liver and lung disease. It is not a rare disorder but
frequently goes underdiagnosed or misdiagnosed as asthma, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) or cryptogenic liver disease. The most frequent
disease-associated mutations include the S allele and the Z allele of SERPINA1,
which lead to the accumulation of misfolded α1-antitrypsin in hepatocytes,
endoplasmic reticulum stress, low circulating levels of α1-antitrypsin and liver
disease. Currently, there is no cure for severe liver disease and the only
management option is liver transplantation when liver failure is
life-threatening. A1ATD-associated lung disease predominately occurs in adults
and is caused principally by inadequate protease inhibition. Treatment of
A1ATD-associated lung disease includes standard therapies that are also used for
the treatment of COPD, in addition to the use of augmentation therapy (that is,
infusions of human plasma-derived, purified α1-antitrypsin). New therapies that
target the misfolded α1-antitrypsin or attempt to correct the underlying genetic
mutation are currently under development.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.51
PMID: 27465791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
