---
reference_id: "PMID:37695405"
title: A case report of anal fistula-associated mucinous adenocarcinoma developing 3 years after treatment of perianal abscess.
authors:
- Koizumi M
- Matsuda A
- Yamada T
- Morimoto K
- Kubota I
- Kubota Y
- Tamura S
- Tominaga K
- Sakatani T
- Yoshida H
journal: Surg Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s40792-023-01743-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case report of anal fistula-associated mucinous adenocarcinoma developing 3 years after treatment of perianal abscess.
**Authors:** Koizumi M, Matsuda A, Yamada T, Morimoto K, Kubota I, Kubota Y, Tamura S, Tominaga K, Sakatani T, Yoshida H
**Journal:** Surg Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40792-023-01743-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40792-023-01743-3)

## Content

1. Surg Case Rep. 2023 Sep 11;9(1):159. doi: 10.1186/s40792-023-01743-3.

A case report of anal fistula-associated mucinous adenocarcinoma developing 
3 years after treatment of perianal abscess.

Koizumi M(1)(2), Matsuda A(3), Yamada T(3), Morimoto K(4), Kubota I(4), Kubota 
Y(4), Tamura S(4), Tominaga K(5), Sakatani T(5), Yoshida H(3).

Author information:
(1)Nishiarai Coloproctology Clinic, 3-7-13 Shimane, Adachi-ku, Tokyo, Japan. 
k-michi@nms.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Gastrointestinal and Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery, Nippon 
Medical School, Sendagi 1-1-5, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8603, Japan. 
k-michi@nms.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Gastrointestinal and Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery, Nippon 
Medical School, Sendagi 1-1-5, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8603, Japan.
(4)Nishiarai Coloproctology Clinic, 3-7-13 Shimane, Adachi-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Nippon Medical School, Sendagi 1-1-5, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8603, Japan.

BACKGROUND: A long-standing (over 10 years) anal fistula is considered a 
fundamental cause of fistula-associated mucinous adenocarcinoma (FAMC). Perianal 
abscesses and anal fistulas are two sequential phases of the same anorectal 
infectious process. We experienced a case of FAMC which developed 3 years after 
the treatment of a perianal abscess.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 68-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of 
progressive anal pain and a palpable tumor. She had a history of undergoing a 
drainage operation for a perianal abscess 3 years previously. A 15 × 15-mm tumor 
at the former drainage site was identified; transanal ultrasonography showed an 
intersphincteric fistula connecting to the tumor. A biopsy taken from the tumor 
demonstrated mucinous adenocarcinoma; the tumor was diagnosed as FAMC. 
Laparoscopic abdominoperineal resection was performed. Histopathology showed 
highly dysplastic cells lining the lumen of the anal fistula and poorly 
differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma proliferating in the dermis and epidermis 
in the distal aspect of the fistula.
CONCLUSIONS: FAMC can develop within fewer than 3 years after the development of 
a perianal abscess and anal fistula.

© 2023. Japan Surgical Society.

DOI: 10.1186/s40792-023-01743-3
PMCID: PMC10495293
PMID: 37695405

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.