---
reference_id: "PMID:8578172"
title: Prognosis and life expectancy on alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency and chronic liver disease.
authors:
- Propst A
- Propst T
- Ofner D
- Feichtinger H
- Judmaier G
- Vogel W
journal: Scand J Gastroenterol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.3109/00365529509101615
keywords:
- Chronic Disease
- Female
- Humans
- Life Expectancy
- Liver Diseases/complications
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognosis and life expectancy on alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency and chronic liver disease.
**Authors:** Propst A, Propst T, Ofner D, Feichtinger H, Judmaier G, Vogel W
**Journal:** Scand J Gastroenterol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.3109/00365529509101615](https://doi.org/10.3109/00365529509101615)

## Content

1. Scand J Gastroenterol. 1995 Nov;30(11):1108-12. doi:
10.3109/00365529509101615.

Prognosis and life expectancy on alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency and chronic
liver disease.

Propst A(1), Propst T, Ofner D, Feichtinger H, Judmaier G, Vogel W.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Internal Medicine, Innsbruck University, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency is a common autosomal recessive
disorder associated with early development of emphysema, liver cirrhosis, and
hepatocellular carcinoma. The aim of the present study was to define prognosis
and life expectancy in patients with alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency with and
without chronic liver disease.
METHODS: After a follow-up of 15 years the estimated life table analysis of
mortality of 160 patients with alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency was
retrospectively calculated. The survival time was estimated using the
Kaplan-Meier survival curves and was compared with the life expectancy of the
age- and sex-matched population of west Austria.
RESULTS: Fifty-four patients with alpha 1-antitrypsin patients had evidence of
chronic liver disease; of these, 78% showed positive viral markers. Of the 106
patients with alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency without chronic liver disease none
had evidence of additional viral infection. Life expectancy in patients with
alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency and chronic liver disease was significantly lower
than in patients with alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency without chronic liver
disease (p = 0.001). No difference in life expectancy in alpha 1-antitrypsin
deficiency without chronic liver disease was found in comparison with that of
the normal population.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that in alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency-associated
chronic liver disease it is the high coinfection rather than the inborn error of
metabolism itself that is responsible for a deterioration of life expectancy or
for the poor prognosis of the disease.

DOI: 10.3109/00365529509101615
PMID: 8578172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
