---
reference_id: "PMID:38471765"
title: "Diagnosis and management in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: first international consensus statement."
authors:
- Lacombe D
- Bloch-Zupan A
- Bredrup C
- Cooper EB
- Houge SD
- García-Miñaúr S
- Kayserili H
- Larizza L
- Lopez Gonzalez V
- Menke LA
- Milani D
- Saettini F
- Stevens CA
- Tooke L
- Van der Zee JA
- Van Genderen MM
- Van-Gils J
- Waite J
- Adrien JL
- Bartsch O
- Bitoun P
- Bouts AHM
- Cueto-González AM
- Dominguez-Garrido E
- Duijkers FA
- Fergelot P
- Halstead E
- Huisman SA
- Meossi C
- Mullins J
- Nikkel SM
- Oliver C
- Prada E
- Rei A
- Riddle I
- Rodriguez-Fonseca C
- Rodríguez Pena R
- Russell J
- Saba A
- Santos-Simarro F
- Simpson BN
- Smith DF
- Stevens MF
- Szakszon K
- Taupiac E
- Totaro N
- Valenzuena Palafoll I
- Van Der Kaay DCM
- Van Wijk MP
- Vyshka K
- Wiley S
- Hennekam RC
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/jmg-2023-109438
keywords:
- "Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- CREB-Binding Protein/genetics
- E1A-Associated p300 Protein/genetics
- Disease Management
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: first international consensus statement.
**Authors:** Lacombe D, Bloch-Zupan A, Bredrup C, Cooper EB, Houge SD, García-Miñaúr S, Kayserili H, Larizza L, Lopez Gonzalez V, Menke LA, Milani D, Saettini F, Stevens CA, Tooke L, Van der Zee JA, Van Genderen MM, Van-Gils J, Waite J, Adrien JL, Bartsch O, Bitoun P, Bouts AHM, Cueto-González AM, Dominguez-Garrido E, Duijkers FA, Fergelot P, Halstead E, Huisman SA, Meossi C, Mullins J, Nikkel SM, Oliver C, Prada E, Rei A, Riddle I, Rodriguez-Fonseca C, Rodríguez Pena R, Russell J, Saba A, Santos-Simarro F, Simpson BN, Smith DF, Stevens MF, Szakszon K, Taupiac E, Totaro N, Valenzuena Palafoll I, Van Der Kaay DCM, Van Wijk MP, Vyshka K, Wiley S, Hennekam RC
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg-2023-109438](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg-2023-109438)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2024 May 21;61(6):503-519. doi: 10.1136/jmg-2023-109438.

Diagnosis and management in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: first international 
consensus statement.

Lacombe D(1), Bloch-Zupan A(2), Bredrup C(3), Cooper EB(4), Houge SD(5), 
García-Miñaúr S(6), Kayserili H(7), Larizza L(8), Lopez Gonzalez V(9), Menke 
LA(10), Milani D(11), Saettini F(12), Stevens CA(13), Tooke L(14), Van der Zee 
JA(15), Van Genderen MM(16), Van-Gils J(17), Waite J(18), Adrien JL(19), Bartsch 
O(20), Bitoun P(21), Bouts AHM(22), Cueto-González AM(23), Dominguez-Garrido 
E(24), Duijkers FA(25), Fergelot P(17), Halstead E(26), Huisman SA(10)(27), 
Meossi C(11), Mullins J(28), Nikkel SM(29), Oliver C(30), Prada E(11), Rei 
A(31), Riddle I(32), Rodriguez-Fonseca C(33), Rodríguez Pena R(34), Russell 
J(31), Saba A(35), Santos-Simarro F(36), Simpson BN(37), Smith DF(38), Stevens 
MF(39), Szakszon K(40), Taupiac E(17), Totaro N(31), Valenzuena Palafoll I(23), 
Van Der Kaay DCM(41), Van Wijk MP(42), Vyshka K(43), Wiley S(32), Hennekam 
RC(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Bordeaux, and INSERM 
U1211, University of Bordeaux, 33076 Bordeaux, France 
didier.lacombe@chu-bordeaux.fr.
(2)Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, Université de Strasbourg, and Centre de 
référence des maladies rares orales et dentaires, Hôpitaux Universitaires de 
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, and Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et 
Cellulaire, INSERM U1258, Illkirch, France.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, 5020 Bergen, Norway.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway 
and Division of Evolution, Infection and Genomics, School of Biological 
Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.
(6)Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La 
Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, Koc University School of Medicine (KUSOM), 
34010 Istanbul, Turkey.
(8)Laboratorio di Ricerca in Citogenetica medica e Genetica Molecolare, Centro 
di Ricerche e Tecnologie Biomediche IRCCS-Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, 
Italy.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Medical Genetics Section, Virgen de la Arrixaca 
University Hospital, IMIB, CIBERER, Murcia, Spain.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(11)Fondazione IRCCS, Ca'Granda Ospedale Maggiore, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(12)Fondazione Matilde Tettamanti Menotti De Marchi Onlus, Fondazione Monza e 
Brianza per il Bambino e la sua Mamma, Monza, Italy.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tennessee College of Medicine, 
Chattanooga, Tennessee, USA.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Groote Schuur Hospital, University of Cape Town, 
Cape Town, South Africa.
(15)Department of Pediatric Urology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(16)Bartiméus Diagnostic Center for complex visual disorders, Zeist and 
Department of Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands.
(17)Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Bordeaux, and INSERM 
U1211, University of Bordeaux, 33076 Bordeaux, France.
(18)School of Psychology, College of Health and Life Sciences, Aston University, 
Birmingham, UK.
(19)Université de Paris, Laboratoire de Psychopathologie et Processus de Santé, 
Boulogne Billancourt, France.
(20)MVZ - Humangenetik, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University 
Mainz, 55131 Mainz, Germany.
(21)Département de Genetique, SIDVA 91, Juvisy-sur-Orge, France.
(22)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(23)Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, University Vall d'Hebron 
Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(24)Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, Fundacion Rioja Salud, La Rioja, Spain.
(25)Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(26)Psychology and Human Development Department, University College London, 
London, UK.
(27)Zodiak, Prinsenstichting, Purmerend, Netherlands.
(28)Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome Support Group, Registered Charity, Rickmansworth, 
UK.
(29)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada.
(30)School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, UK.
(31)Associazione Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome-Una Vita Speciale, Organizzazione di 
Volontariato (ODV), Gornate Olona, Varese, Italy.
(32)Division of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, and Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(33)Asociación Española para el Sindrome de Rubinstein-Taybi (AESRT), Madrid, 
Spain.
(34)Immunology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain.
(35)French RTS Support Group, Paris, France.
(36)Unit of Molecular Diagnostics and Clinical Genetics, Hospital Universitari 
Son Espases, Health Research Institute of the Balearic Islands (IdISBa), Palma, 
Spain.
(37)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
and Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati School of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, 
USA.
(38)Department of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital 
Medical Center, and Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(39)Department of Anesthesiology, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(40)Institution of Pediatrics, University of Debrecen Clinical Centre, Debrecen, 
Hungary.
(41)Division of Paediatric Endocrinology, Department of Paediatrics, Erasmus 
University Medical Centre, Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(42)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Emma Children's Hospital, 
Amsterdam UMC, University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(43)European Reference Network on Rare Congenital Malformations and Rare 
Intellectual Disability (ERN-ITHACA), Robert Debré University Hospital, Paris, 
France.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is an archetypical genetic syndrome that is 
characterised by intellectual disability, well-defined facial features, distal 
limb anomalies and atypical growth, among numerous other signs and symptoms. It 
is caused by variants in either of two genes (CREBBP, EP300) which encode for 
the proteins CBP and p300, which both have a function in transcription 
regulation and histone acetylation. As a group of international experts and 
national support groups dedicated to the syndrome, we realised that marked 
heterogeneity currently exists in clinical and molecular diagnostic approaches 
and care practices in various parts of the world. Here, we outline a series of 
recommendations that document the consensus of a group of international experts 
on clinical diagnostic criteria for types of RTS (RTS1: CREBBP; RTS2: EP300), 
molecular investigations, long-term management of various particular physical 
and behavioural issues and care planning. The recommendations as presented here 
will need to be evaluated for improvements to allow for continued optimisation 
of diagnostics and care.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg-2023-109438
PMCID: PMC11137475
PMID: 38471765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.