---
reference_id: "PMID:17906597"
title: Metabolic acidosis as an underlying mechanism of respiratory distress in children with severe acute asthma.
authors:
- Meert KL
- Clark J
- Sarnaik AP
journal: Pediatr Crit Care Med
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1097/01.PCC.0000288673.82916.9D
keywords:
- "Acidosis/diagnosis, etiology"
- Acute Disease
- Adolescent
- "Asthma/complications, metabolism"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Hospitals, Pediatric"
- Humans
- "Hyperventilation/etiology, metabolism"
- Infant
- "Intensive Care Units, Pediatric"
- Male
- Medical Audit
- Michigan
- "Respiratory Insufficiency/etiology, metabolism"
- Respiratory Sounds
- Retrospective Studies
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metabolic acidosis as an underlying mechanism of respiratory distress in children with severe acute asthma.
**Authors:** Meert KL, Clark J, Sarnaik AP
**Journal:** Pediatr Crit Care Med (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.PCC.0000288673.82916.9D](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.PCC.0000288673.82916.9D)

## Content

1. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2007 Nov;8(6):519-23. doi:
10.1097/01.PCC.0000288673.82916.9D.

Metabolic acidosis as an underlying mechanism of respiratory distress in
children with severe acute asthma.

Meert KL(1), Clark J, Sarnaik AP.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Michigan, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, MI, USA. kmeert@med.wayne.edu

Comment in
    Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2007 Nov;8(6):582-3. doi:
10.1097/01.PCC.0000288676.68618.92.
    Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2009 Jan;10(1):142-3; author reply 143. doi:
10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181937cc9.

OBJECTIVE: 1) To alert the clinician that increasing rate and depth of breathing
during treatment of acute asthma may be a manifestation of metabolic acidosis
with hyperventilation rather than worsening airway obstruction; and 2) to
describe the frequency of metabolic acidosis with hyperventilation in children
with severe acute asthma admitted to our pediatric intensive care unit.
DESIGN: Retrospective medical record review.
SETTING: University-affiliated children's hospital.
PATIENTS: All patients admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit with a
diagnosis of asthma between January 1, 2005, and December 31, 2005.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Fifty-three patients with asthma (median age 7.8
yrs, range 0.7-17.9 yrs; 35 [66%] male; 46 [87%] black and 7 [13%] white) were
admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit during the study period. Fifteen
(28%) patients developed metabolic acidosis with hyperventilation (pH <7.35,
Pco2 <35 torr [4.6 kPa], and base excess < or = -7 mmol/L) during their hospital
course. Of these, lactic acid was assessed in four patients and was elevated in
each; all had hyperglycemia (blood glucose >120 mg/dL [6.7 mmol/L]). Patients
who developed metabolic acidosis with hyperventilation received asthma therapy
similar to that received by patients who did not develop the disorder. Metabolic
acidosis resolved contemporaneously with tapering of beta2-adrenergic agonists
and administration of supportive care. All patients survived.
CONCLUSIONS: Metabolic acidosis with hyperventilation manifesting as respiratory
distress can occur in children with severe acute asthma. A pathophysiologic
rationale exists for the contribution of beta2-adrenergic agents to the
development of this acid-base disorder. Failure to recognize metabolic acidosis
as the underlying mechanism of respiratory distress may lead to inappropriate
intensification of bronchodilator therapy. Supportive care and tapering of
beta2-adrenergic agents are recommended to resolve this condition.

DOI: 10.1097/01.PCC.0000288673.82916.9D
PMID: 17906597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
