---
reference_id: "PMID:27308687"
title: Maternal 15q Duplication Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Lusk L
- Vogel-Farley V
- DiStefano C
- Jeste S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maternal 15q Duplication Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Lusk L, Vogel-Farley V, DiStefano C, Jeste S

## Content

1. Maternal 15q Duplication Syndrome.

Lusk L(1), Vogel-Farley V(2), DiStefano C(3), Jeste S(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2016 Jun 16 [updated 2021 Jul 15].

Author information:
(1)Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(2)Dup15q Alliance, Highland Park, Illinois
(3)University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California
(4)Chief of Neurology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Maternal 15q duplication syndrome (maternal dup15q) is 
characterized by hypotonia and motor delays, intellectual disability, autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD), and epilepsy including infantile spasms. Rarely, 
maternal dup15q may also be associated with psychosis or sudden unexplained 
death. Those with a maternal isodicentric 15q11.2-q13.1 supernumerary chromosome 
are typically more severely affected than those with an interstitial 
duplication.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of maternal dup15q is established by detection 
of at least one extra maternally derived copy of the Prader-Willi/Angelman 
critical region, a region approximately 5 Mb long within chromosome region 
15q11.2-q13.1. The extra copy or copies most commonly arise by one of two 
mechanisms: A maternal isodicentric 15q11.2-q13.1 supernumerary chromosome – 
idic(15) – typically comprising two extra copies of 15q11.2-q13.1 and resulting 
in tetrasomy for 15q11.2-q13.1 (~60-80%); A maternal interstitial 15q11.2-q13.1 
duplication that typically includes one extra copy of 15q11.2-q13.1 within 
chromosome 15, resulting in trisomy for 15q11.2-q13.1 (~20-40%).
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Multidisciplinary team evaluation of 
motor and speech development and to assist in referrals for appropriate 
educational programs. Supportive care may include: feeding therapy, occupational 
and physical therapy, alternative and augmentative communication, behavioral 
therapy (e.g., applied behavioral analysis therapy), psychotropic medications 
for behavioral manifestations, and standard management for seizures. 
Surveillance: Growth and nutritional assessment at each visit. Periodic: 
neurodevelopmental and/or developmental/behavioral assessments, and monitoring 
for evidence of seizures and/or change in seizure type. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: Seizure triggers (e.g., sleep deprivation, stress). Evaluation of 
relatives at risk: Consider genetic testing of sibs of a proband (known to be at 
increased risk for an inherited maternal interstitial 15q11.2-q13.1 duplication) 
in order to refer those with the interstitial duplication promptly for 
multidisciplinary team evaluation and developmental support.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Maternal dup15q caused by: Maternal idic(15). De novo in all 
affected individuals reported to date; thus, risk to sibs is low, but presumed 
to be marginally greater than in the general population because of the 
possibility of maternal germline mosaicism; Maternal interstitial 15q11.2-q13.1 
duplication. De novo in approximately 85% of probands and inherited from the 
mother in approximately 15%. If the mother has the 15q interstitial duplication, 
the risk to each child of inheriting the duplication is 50%. Prenatal testing or 
preimplantation genetic testing using chromosomal microarray (CMA) will detect 
the 15q interstitial duplication; however, prenatal test results cannot reliably 
predict the severity of the phenotype even in a pregnancy known to be at 
increased risk for maternal dup15q.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 27308687