---
reference_id: "PMID:20306439"
title: Multifocal electroretinogram and central visual field testing in central areolar choroidal dystrophy.
authors:
- Gundogan FC
- Dinç UA
- Erdem U
- Ozge G
- Sobaci G
journal: Eur J Ophthalmol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1177/112067211002000517
keywords:
- Choroid Diseases/physiopathology
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Humans
- Macular Degeneration/physiopathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retina/physiopathology
- Scotoma/physiopathology
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Visual Field Tests
- Visual Fields/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multifocal electroretinogram and central visual field testing in central areolar choroidal dystrophy.
**Authors:** Gundogan FC, Dinç UA, Erdem U, Ozge G, Sobaci G
**Journal:** Eur J Ophthalmol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1177/112067211002000517](https://doi.org/10.1177/112067211002000517)

## Content

1. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2010 Sep-Oct;20(5):919-24. doi: 10.1177/112067211002000517.

Multifocal electroretinogram and central visual field testing in central areolar 
choroidal dystrophy.

Gundogan FC(1), Dinç UA, Erdem U, Ozge G, Sobaci G.

Author information:
(1)Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Department of Ophthalmology, Ankara, 
Turkey. fgundogan@yahoo.com

PURPOSE: To study multifocal electroretinogram (mfERG) and its relation to 
retinal sensitivity assessed by Humphrey visual field (HVF) analysis in central 
areolar choroidal dystrophy (CACD).
METHODS: Seven eyes of 4 patients with CACD and 15 normal control subjects were 
examined. mfERG and central 30/2 HVF were tested for each participant. Ring 
analysis in mfERG was evaluated. HVF results were evaluated in 5 concentric 
rings in order to compare the results to concentric ring analysis in mfERG. The 
differences between control subjects and patients were evaluated by Mann-Whitney 
U test and the correlations were assessed by Spearman test.
RESULTS: Mean Snellen acuity was 0.49+/-0.10 in patients. HVF revealed central 
scotoma in 6 of 7 eyes (85.7%), whereas a paracentral scotoma extending to 
fixation point was detected in 1 eye. The retinal sensitivities in 5 concentric 
rings in HVF were significantly lower (p<0.001 for ring 1 to ring 4, and p=0.017 
in ring 5) in CACD patients. Similarly, CACD patients had lower P1/N1 amplitudes 
(p<0.05) and delayed P1/N1 implicit times (p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In CACD, in the areas of scotoma detected by HVF, mfERG values were 
depressed. However, both mfERG and HVF abnormalities were found outside the 
areas of ophthalmoscopically normal retinal areas.

DOI: 10.1177/112067211002000517
PMID: 20306439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]