---
reference_id: "PMID:28409474"
title: Generation of Peroxisome-Deficient Somatic Animal Cell Mutants.
authors:
- Okumoto K
- Fujiki Y
journal: Methods Mol Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6937-1_29
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generation of Peroxisome-Deficient Somatic Animal Cell Mutants.
**Authors:** Okumoto K, Fujiki Y
**Journal:** Methods Mol Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4939-6937-1_29](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-6937-1_29)

## Content

1. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1595:319-327. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6937-1_29.

Generation of Peroxisome-Deficient Somatic Animal Cell Mutants.

Okumoto K(1), Fujiki Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, 
Nishi-ku, Fukuoka, 819-0395, Japan.
(2)Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, 
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. yfujiki@kyudai.jp.

Cell mutants with a genetic defect affecting various cellular phenotypes are 
widely utilized as a powerful tool in genetic, biochemical, and cell biological 
research. More than a dozen complementation groups of animal somatic mutant 
cells defective in peroxisome biogenesis have been successfully isolated in 
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells and used as a model system reflecting fatal 
human severe genetic disorders named peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBD). 
Isolation and characterization of peroxisome-deficient CHO cell mutants has 
allowed the identification of PEX genes and the gene products peroxins, which 
directly leads to the accomplishment of isolation of pathogenic genes 
responsible for human PBDs, as well as elucidation of their functional roles in 
peroxisome biogenesis. Here, we describe the procedure to isolate 
peroxisome-deficient mammalian cell mutants from CHO cells, by making use of an 
effective, photo-sensitized selection method.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6937-1_29
PMID: 28409474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]