---
reference_id: "PMID:37801591"
title: HLA-DR genotypes in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus in Taiwan.
authors:
- Yen CY
- Wang PY
- Chen KY
- Tseng CC
- Wu CC
- Ou TT
- Yen JH
journal: J Chin Med Assoc
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/JCMA.0000000000001009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA-DR genotypes in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus in Taiwan.
**Authors:** Yen CY, Wang PY, Chen KY, Tseng CC, Wu CC, Ou TT, Yen JH
**Journal:** J Chin Med Assoc (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/JCMA.0000000000001009](https://doi.org/10.1097/JCMA.0000000000001009)

## Content

1. J Chin Med Assoc. 2023 Dec 1;86(12):1060-1065. doi: 
10.1097/JCMA.0000000000001009. Epub 2023 Oct 6.

HLA-DR genotypes in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus in Taiwan.

Yen CY(1)(2), Wang PY(1)(3), Chen KY(1)(3), Tseng CC(1)(4), Wu CC(1), Ou TT(1), 
Yen JH(1)(3)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Institute of Medical Informatics, College of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC.
(3)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.
(4)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.
(5)Institute of Biomedical Science, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan, ROC.
(6)Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, National Yang Ming Chiao 
Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, ROC.

BACKGROUND: Different human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR genotypes have been known 
to be associated with the risk of development of systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE) in different populations, although Lu et al. have reported previously that 
no correlation exists between the HLA-DR genotype and disease manifestation in 
SLE patients in Taiwan. We investigated the effects different HLA-DR genotypes 
had on SLE incidence in Taiwanese patients as to whether risk alleles were 
associated with different clinical manifestations, and the effects risk alleles 
had on the age of disease onset.
METHODS: Two hundred thirty-four SLE patients and 346 healthy controls were 
enrolled. HLA-DR genotyping was performed with the HLA FluoGene DRDQ kit for 
each subject. Chi-square tests and t tests were performed for statistical 
analysis.
RESULTS: HLA-DR2 was significantly more frequently found in SLE patients than in 
controls (odds ratio [OR] = 2.05, 95% CI, 1.44-2.92, p < 0.001). Notably, 
HLA-DR6 appeared to trend toward negative correlation with SLE, whereas HLA-DR8 
appeared to trend toward positive correlation. HLA-DR2 patients had an earlier 
onset of disease as well as a higher prevalence of oral ulcer, avascular 
necrosis of bone, and renal involvement (lupus nephritis).
CONCLUSION: HLA-DR2 was associated with SLE susceptibility in this Taiwanese 
population as well as lower age of disease onset and more severe clinical 
manifestations.

Copyright © 2023, the Chinese Medical Association.

DOI: 10.1097/JCMA.0000000000001009
PMID: 37801591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest related to the subject matter or materials 
discussed in this article.