---
reference_id: "PMID:40013426"
title: Real-life effectiveness of narrowband UVB phototherapy for pityriasis lichenoides.
authors:
- Bardelli R
- Bellinato F
- Carugno A
- Zerbinati N
- Gisondi P
- Girolomoni G
journal: Dermatol Reports
year: '2025'
doi: 10.4081/dr.2025.10272
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Real-life effectiveness of narrowband UVB phototherapy for pityriasis lichenoides.
**Authors:** Bardelli R, Bellinato F, Carugno A, Zerbinati N, Gisondi P, Girolomoni G
**Journal:** Dermatol Reports (2025)
**DOI:** [10.4081/dr.2025.10272](https://doi.org/10.4081/dr.2025.10272)

## Content

1. Dermatol Reports. 2025 Aug 22;17(3):10272. doi: 10.4081/dr.2025.10272. Epub
2025  Feb 27.

Real-life effectiveness of narrowband UVB phototherapy for pityriasis
lichenoides.

Bardelli R(1), Bellinato F(2), Carugno A(3), Zerbinati N(4), Gisondi P(2),
Girolomoni G(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Dermatology and Venereology, Department of Medicine, University of
Verona; Dermatology Unit, Ospedale di Circolo e Fondazione Macchi, ASST Sette
Laghi, Varese.
(2)Section of Dermatology and Venereology, Department of Medicine, University of
Verona.
(3)Dermatology Unit, Ospedale di Circolo e Fondazione Macchi, ASST Sette Laghi,
Varese; Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria, Varese.
(4)Dermatology Unit, Ospedale di Circolo e Fondazione Macchi, ASST Sette Laghi,
Varese; Department of Medicine and Innovation Technology, University of
Insubria, Varese.

Dear Editor, Pityriasis lichenoides (PL) is an inflammatory skin disease of
unknown etiology. The clinical spectrum of pityriasis lichenoides encompasses
febrile ulcer-necrotic Mucha-Habermann disease (FUMHD), pityriasis lichenoides
et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA), and pityriasis lichenoides chronica (PLC).
Phototherapy is an effective and well-tolerated modality that is often
successful for persistent PL or resistant to topical treatments. [...].

DOI: 10.4081/dr.2025.10272
PMCID: PMC12505215
PMID: 40013426

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to
declare.
