---
reference_id: "PMID:26219480"
title: "Subdural hematomas: glutaric aciduria type 1 or abusive head trauma? A systematic review."
authors:
- Vester ME
- Bilo RA
- Karst WA
- Daams JG
- Duijst WL
- van Rijn RR
journal: Forensic Sci Med Pathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s12024-015-9698-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subdural hematomas: glutaric aciduria type 1 or abusive head trauma? A systematic review.
**Authors:** Vester ME, Bilo RA, Karst WA, Daams JG, Duijst WL, van Rijn RR
**Journal:** Forensic Sci Med Pathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12024-015-9698-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12024-015-9698-0)

## Content

1. Forensic Sci Med Pathol. 2015 Sep;11(3):405-15. doi:
10.1007/s12024-015-9698-0.  Epub 2015 Jul 29.

Subdural hematomas: glutaric aciduria type 1 or abusive head trauma? A 
systematic review.

Vester ME(1), Bilo RA, Karst WA, Daams JG, Duijst WL, van Rijn RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Academic Medical Center, Room G1-213, Meibergdreef 
9, 1105 AZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, marloes.vester@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: Glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1) is a rare metabolic disorder of 
glutaryl-CoA-dehydrogenase enzyme deficiency. Children with GA1 are reported to 
be predisposed to subdural hematoma (SDH) development due to stretching of 
cortical veins secondary to cerebral atrophy and expansion of CSF spaces. 
Therefore, GA1 testing is part of the routine work-up in abusive head trauma 
(AHT). This systematic review addresses the coexistence of GA1 and SDH and the 
validity of GA1 in the differential diagnosis of AHT.
METHODS: A systematic literature review, with language restriction, of papers 
published before 1 Jan 2015, was performed using Pubmed, PsychINFO, and Embase. 
Inclusion criteria were reported SDHs, hygromas or effusions in GA1 patients up 
to 18 years of age. Of 1599 publications, 20 publications were included for 
analysis.
RESULTS: In total 20 cases, 14 boys and 6 girls, were included. In eight cases 
(40%) a child abuse work-up was performed, which was negative in all cases. 
Clinical history revealed the presence of trauma in eight cases (40%). In only 
one case neuroradiology revealed no abnormalities related to GA1 according to 
the authors, although on evaluation we could not exclude AHT.
CONCLUSION: From this systematic review we conclude that SDHs in 19/20 children 
with GA1 are accompanied by other brain abnormalities specific for GA1. One case 
with doubtful circumstances was the exception to this rule.

DOI: 10.1007/s12024-015-9698-0
PMCID: PMC4529472
PMID: 26219480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]