---
reference_id: "PMID:26146942"
title: Carbon Dioxide Capture by a Metal-Organic Framework with Nitrogen-Rich Channels Based on Rationally Designed Triazole-Functionalized Tetraacid Organic Linker.
authors:
- Seth S
- Savitha G
- Moorthy JN
journal: Inorg Chem
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.5b00722
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carbon Dioxide Capture by a Metal-Organic Framework with Nitrogen-Rich Channels Based on Rationally Designed Triazole-Functionalized Tetraacid Organic Linker.
**Authors:** Seth S, Savitha G, Moorthy JN
**Journal:** Inorg Chem (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.inorgchem.5b00722](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.inorgchem.5b00722)

## Content

1. Inorg Chem. 2015 Jul 20;54(14):6829-35. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.5b00722.
Epub  2015 Jul 6.

Carbon Dioxide Capture by a Metal-Organic Framework with Nitrogen-Rich Channels 
Based on Rationally Designed Triazole-Functionalized Tetraacid Organic Linker.

Seth S(1), Savitha G(1), Moorthy JN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
208016, India.

A semirigid tetraacid linker H4L functionalized with 1,2,3-triazole was 
rationally designed and synthesized to access nitrogen-rich MOFs for selective 
adsorption of CO2. The cadmium MOF, that is, Cd-L, obtained by the reaction of 
H4L with Cd(NO3)2, is found to be a 3D porous framework structure that is robust 
to desolvation. Crystal structure analysis reveals channels that are decorated 
by the triazole moieties of L. Gas adsorption studies show that Cd-L MOF permits 
remarkable CO2 uptake to the extent of 99 and 1000 cc/g at 1 and 30 bar, 
respectively, at 0 °C. While literature survey reveals that MIL-112, constructed 
from a 1,2,3-triazole functionalized linker, exhibits no porosity to gas 
adsorption due to structural flexibility, the results with Cd-L MOF described 
herein emphasize how rigidification of the organic linker improves gas uptake 
properties of the resultant MOF.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.5b00722
PMID: 26146942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]