---
reference_id: "PMID:33099653"
title: "Dengue and post-infection fatigue: findings from a prospective cohort-the Colombo Dengue Study."
authors:
- Sigera PC
- Rajapakse S
- Weeratunga P
- De Silva NL
- Gomes L
- Malavige GN
- Rodrigo C
- Fernando SD
journal: Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/trstmh/traa110
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue and post-infection fatigue: findings from a prospective cohort-the Colombo Dengue Study.
**Authors:** Sigera PC, Rajapakse S, Weeratunga P, De Silva NL, Gomes L, Malavige GN, Rodrigo C, Fernando SD
**Journal:** Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/trstmh/traa110](https://doi.org/10.1093/trstmh/traa110)

## Content

1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Jun 2;115(6):669-676. doi: 
10.1093/trstmh/traa110.

Dengue and post-infection fatigue: findings from a prospective cohort-the 
Colombo Dengue Study.

Sigera PC(1), Rajapakse S(2), Weeratunga P(2), De Silva NL(3), Gomes L(4), 
Malavige GN(4), Rodrigo C(5), Fernando SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, 
00800, Colombo 08, Sri Lanka.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, 
00800, Colombo 08, Sri Lanka.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, General Sir John 
Kotelawala Defence University, 10390, Ratmalana, Sri Lanka.
(4)Centre for Dengue Research, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Sri 
Jayewardenepura, 10250, Nugegoda, Sri Lanka.
(5)Department of Pathology, School of Medical Sciences, University of New South 
Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies on post-infection fatigue in dengue are few but 
suggest that up to 25% of dengue patients may suffer from fatigue. This study 
aimed to evaluate the prevalence and associations of post-infection fatigue in 
dengue patients compared with non-dengue fever patients.
METHODS: Post-infection fatigue and its demographic and clinical associations 
were assessed in adult dengue and non-dengue fever patients 2 months after the 
acute infection in a prospective cohort study in Sri Lanka. Fatigue at 2 months 
(primary endpoint) was assessed with the fatigue questionnaire as a dichotomous 
outcome based on a pre-recommended cut-off (score ≥4) and as the total score 
from the questionnaire (higher score indicates more fatigue).
RESULTS: Of 260 patients, 158 had dengue and, of these, 51 (32%) had fatigue at 
2 months. Risk was higher in dengue patients (vs non-dengue; relative risk [RR] 
4.93 [95% confidence interval {CI} 2.3 to 10.4]) and more so in female dengue 
patients (vs male dengue patients; RR 2.45 [95% CI 1.24 to 4.86]). Severe dengue 
patients had a higher mean fatigue score (p=0.024).
CONCLUSIONS: Post-infection fatigue is an underappreciated burden of this widely 
prevalent infection. Our findings are useful to triage patients at risk of 
fatigue for follow-up.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Royal 
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.1093/trstmh/traa110
PMCID: PMC9115379
PMID: 33099653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]