---
reference_id: "PMID:30762282"
title: "Rhabdomyosarcoma diagnosed in the first year of life: Localized, metastatic, and relapsed disease. Outcome data from five trials and one registry of the Cooperative Weichteilsarkom Studiengruppe (CWS)."
authors:
- Sparber-Sauer M
- Stegmaier S
- Vokuhl C
- Seitz G
- von Kalle T
- Scheer M
- Münter M
- Bielack SS
- Weclawek-Tompol J
- Ladenstein R
- Niggli F
- Ljungman G
- Fuchs J
- Hettmer S
- Koscielniak E
- Klingebiel T
- CWS Study Group
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.27652
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/diagnosis, mortality, therapy"
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- "Registries/statistics & numerical data"
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/diagnosis, mortality, therapy"
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rhabdomyosarcoma diagnosed in the first year of life: Localized, metastatic, and relapsed disease. Outcome data from five trials and one registry of the Cooperative Weichteilsarkom Studiengruppe (CWS).
**Authors:** Sparber-Sauer M, Stegmaier S, Vokuhl C, Seitz G, von Kalle T, Scheer M, Münter M, Bielack SS, Weclawek-Tompol J, Ladenstein R, Niggli F, Ljungman G, Fuchs J, Hettmer S, Koscielniak E, Klingebiel T, CWS Study Group
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.27652](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.27652)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2019 Jun;66(6):e27652. doi: 10.1002/pbc.27652. Epub 2019
 Feb 14.

Rhabdomyosarcoma diagnosed in the first year of life: Localized, metastatic, and
relapsed disease. Outcome data from five trials and one registry of the
Cooperative Weichteilsarkom Studiengruppe (CWS).

Sparber-Sauer M(1), Stegmaier S(1), Vokuhl C(2), Seitz G(3), von Kalle T(4),
Scheer M(1), Münter M(5), Bielack SS(1)(6), Weclawek-Tompol J(7), Ladenstein
R(8), Niggli F(9), Ljungman G(10), Fuchs J(11), Hettmer S(12), Koscielniak
E(1)(13), Klingebiel T(14); CWS Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Klinikum Stuttgart - Olgahospital, Stuttgart Cancer Center, Zentrum für
Kinder-, Jugend- und Frauenmedizin, Pediatrics 5 (Oncology, Hematology,
Immunology), Stuttgart, Germany.
(2)Section of Pediatric Pathology, Department of Pathology, Kiel Pediatric Tumor
Registry, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Children's Hospital Marburg,
Marburg, Germany.
(4)Klinikum Stuttgart - Olgahospital, Stuttgart Cancer Center, Zentrum für
Kinder-, Jugend- und Frauenmedizin, Olgahospital, Institute of Radiology,
Stuttgart, Germany.
(5)Klinikum Stuttgart, Institute of Radiotherapy, Stuttgart, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of Muenster,
Muenster, Germany.
(7)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology and BMT, University of Wroclaw,
Wroclaw, Poland.
(8)Pediatric Oncology, St. Anna Kinderspital, Wien, Austria.
(9)Department of Pediatric Oncology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Children's University Hospital,
University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.
(11)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, University Children's Hospital,
Tuebingen, Germany.
(12)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Division of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.
(13)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital,
Tuebingen, Germany.
(14)Department for Children and Adolescents, University Hospital of Frankfurt,
Frankfurt/M., Germany.

BACKGROUND: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) diagnosed during the first year of life is
reported to have poor outcome. Little is known about treatment and outcome data
of relapsed disease (RD).
METHODS: Characteristics, treatment, and outcome of 155 patients ≤ 12 months
registered within the Cooperative Weichteilsarkom Studiengruppe (CWS) between
1981 and 2016 were evaluated.
RESULTS: Localized disease (LD) was diagnosed in 144 patients and metastatic
disease (MD) in 11. The histological diagnosis was alveolar (RMA) (n = 38, 23/25
examined patients PAX7/3:FOXO1-positive), embryonal (RME) (n = 100), botryoid
(n = 10), anaplastic (n = 1), and spindle-cell RMS (n = 6). Multimodal treatment
including conventional (age-adjusted) chemotherapy (CHT) (n = 150), resection
(n = 137), and radiotherapy (RT) (n = 37) was administered. Complete remission
was achieved in 129 of 144 patients with LD. RD occurred in 51 infants at a
median age of 1.7 years (range, 0.3-8.8). Sixty-three percent of patients with
RMA suffered RD, in contrast to 28% of patients with RME. Relapse treatment
consisted of conventional CHT (n = 48), resection (n = 28), and RT (n = 21). The
pattern of relapse and best resection were significant prognostic factors for
patients with RD (P = 0.000 and P = 0.002). Late effects occurred as secondary
malignancies in 6%, long-term toxicity in 21%, and resection-related impairment
in 33% of the 105 surviving patients. The 5-year event-free survival and overall
survival for infants with initial LD were 51% and 69%, 14% and 14% for patients
with initial MD and 39% and 41% for relapsed patients, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Multimodal treatment including microscopically complete resection is
strongly recommended to achieve a good prognosis in LD and RD of infants with
RMS.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.27652
PMID: 30762282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
