---
reference_id: "PMID:19680750"
title: "Polymorphisms in arsenic metabolism genes, urinary arsenic methylation profile and cancer."
authors:
- Chung CJ
- Hsueh YM
- Bai CH
- Huang YK
- Huang YL
- Yang MH
- Chen CJ
journal: Cancer Causes Control
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s10552-009-9413-0
keywords:
- "Arsenic/adverse effects, metabolism"
- Arsenic Poisoning/genetics
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Methylation
- "Neoplasms/chemically induced, genetics"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Taiwan
- "Water Pollutants, Chemical/adverse effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polymorphisms in arsenic metabolism genes, urinary arsenic methylation profile and cancer.
**Authors:** Chung CJ, Hsueh YM, Bai CH, Huang YK, Huang YL, Yang MH, Chen CJ
**Journal:** Cancer Causes Control (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10552-009-9413-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10552-009-9413-0)

## Content

1. Cancer Causes Control. 2009 Nov;20(9):1653-61. doi: 10.1007/s10552-009-9413-0.
 Epub 2009 Aug 13.

Polymorphisms in arsenic metabolism genes, urinary arsenic methylation profile
and cancer.

Chung CJ(1), Hsueh YM, Bai CH, Huang YK, Huang YL, Yang MH, Chen CJ.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Public Health, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan.

Arsenic-metabolism-related genes can regulate the arsenic methylation process
and may influence susceptibility to cancer. We evaluated the roles of arsenic
metabolism genes on urinary arsenic profiles of repeated measurement with
15-year follow-up (1988-2004) through general linear model (GLM) and assessed
the effect of the changed extent of urinary arsenic profiles on cancer risk.
Questionnaire information and blood samples and two urines (1988 and 2004) were
collected from 208 subjects in an arseniasis hyperendemic area in Taiwan.
Profiles for concentrations of urinary arsenic were determined using
HPLC-HG-AAS. The relative proportion of each arsenic species was calculated by
dividing the concentration of each arsenic species by the total arsenic
concentration. Genotyping was done using the 5' nuclease allelic discrimination
(Taqman) assay. The incidence of cancer was identified through linking to the
National Cancer Registry Systems. The Cox proportional hazards model and
survival curves were used in the analyses. After a 15-year follow-up, baseline
monomethylarsonic acid percentage (MMA%) and change in MMA% exhibited a
significant dose-response relationship with cancer risk. Individuals with a
higher baseline MMA% and a lower change in MMA% had the earliest cancer
incidence (statistically significant). Through GLM, significant gene effects of
arsenic (+3 oxidation state)-methyltransferase (AS3MT) on MMA%, dimethylarsinic
acid percentage (DMA%) and DMA/MMA, purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) on
DMA% and glutathione S-transferase omega 2 (GSTO2) on inorganic arsenics (InAs%)
were found. Our results show that MMA% might be a potential predictor of cancer
risk. The change in MMA% was linked to individual cancer susceptibility related
to AS3MT rs3740393.

DOI: 10.1007/s10552-009-9413-0
PMID: 19680750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
