---
reference_id: "PMID:19665020"
title: Crystal structures of bacterial FabH suggest a molecular basis for the substrate specificity of the enzyme.
authors:
- Gajiwala KS
- Margosiak S
- Lu J
- Cortez J
- Su Y
- Nie Z
- Appelt K
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.08.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crystal structures of bacterial FabH suggest a molecular basis for the substrate specificity of the enzyme.
**Authors:** Gajiwala KS, Margosiak S, Lu J, Cortez J, Su Y, Nie Z, Appelt K
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2009.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2009.08.001)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 2009 Sep 3;583(17):2939-46. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.08.001.
Epub  2009 Aug 6.

Crystal structures of bacterial FabH suggest a molecular basis for the substrate 
specificity of the enzyme.

Gajiwala KS(1), Margosiak S, Lu J, Cortez J, Su Y, Nie Z, Appelt K.

Author information:
(1)Quorex Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA 92008, USA. ketan.gajiwala@pfizer.com

FabH (beta-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein synthase III) is unique in that it 
initiates fatty acid biosynthesis, is inhibited by long-chain fatty acids 
providing means for feedback control of the process, and dictates the fatty acid 
profile of the organism by virtue of its substrate specificity. We report the 
crystal structures of bacterial FabH enzymes from four different pathogenic 
species: Enterococcus faecalis, Haemophilus influenzae, Staphylococcus aureus 
and Escherichia coli. Structural data on the enzyme from different species show 
important differences in the architecture of the substrate-binding sites that 
parallel the inter-species diversity in the substrate specificities of these 
enzymes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.08.001
PMID: 19665020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]