---
reference_id: PMID:23340492
title: Effect of dietary intervention to reduce the n-6/n-3 fatty acid ratio on maternal and fetal fatty acid profile and its relation to offspring growth and body composition at 1 year of age.
authors:
- Much D
- Brunner S
- Vollhardt C
- Schmid D
- Sedlmeier EM
- Brüderl M
- Heimberg E
- Bartke N
- Boehm G
- Bader BL
- Amann-Gassner U
- Hauner H
journal: Eur J Clin Nutr
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2013.2
keywords:
- Birth Weight/drug effects
- Body Composition
- Breast Feeding
- Dietary Supplements
- "Erythrocytes/chemistry, drug effects"
- "Fatty Acids, Omega-3/administration & dosage, blood"
- "Fatty Acids, Omega-6/administration & dosage, blood"
- Feeding Behavior
- Female
- "Fetal Blood/chemistry, drug effects"
- "Fetus/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Fish Oils/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Lactation
- Maternal Nutritional Physiological Phenomena
- Phospholipids/blood
- Pregnancy
- Skinfold Thickness
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of dietary intervention to reduce the n-6/n-3 fatty acid ratio on maternal and fetal fatty acid profile and its relation to offspring growth and body composition at 1 year of age.
**Authors:** Much D, Brunner S, Vollhardt C, Schmid D, Sedlmeier EM, Brüderl M, Heimberg E, Bartke N, Boehm G, Bader BL, Amann-Gassner U, Hauner H
**Journal:** Eur J Clin Nutr (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejcn.2013.2](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejcn.2013.2)

## Content

1. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2013 Mar;67(3):282-8. doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2013.2. Epub 2013 Jan
 23.

Effect of dietary intervention to reduce the n-6/n-3 fatty acid ratio on 
maternal and fetal fatty acid profile and its relation to offspring growth and 
body composition at 1 year of age.

Much D(1), Brunner S, Vollhardt C, Schmid D, Sedlmeier EM, Brüderl M, Heimberg 
E, Bartke N, Boehm G, Bader BL, Amann-Gassner U, Hauner H.

Author information:
(1)Else Kröner-Fresenius-Center for Nutritional Medicine, Klinikum rechts der 
Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: Evidence is accumulating that the long-chain PUFA (LCPUFA) 
are associated with offspring growth and body composition. We investigated the 
relationship between LCPUFAs in red blood cells (RBCs) of pregnant 
women/breastfeeding mothers and umbilical cord RBCs of their neonates with 
infant growth and body composition ≤ 1 year of age.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: In an open-label randomized, controlled trial, 208 healthy 
pregnant women received a dietary intervention (daily supplementation with 1200 
mg n-3 LCPUFAs and dietary counseling to reduce arachidonic acid (AA) intake) 
from the 15th week of gestation until 4 months of lactation or followed their 
habitual diet. Fatty acids of plasma phospholipids (PLs) and RBCs from maternal 
and cord blood were determined and associated with infant body weight, body mass 
index (BMI), lean body mass and fat mass assessed by skinfold thickness 
measurements and ultrasonography.
RESULTS: Dietary intervention significantly reduced the n-6/n-3 LCPUFA ratio in 
maternal and cord-blood plasma PLs and RBCs. Maternal RBCs docosahexaenoic acid 
(DHA), n-3 LCPUFAs and n-6 LCPUFAs at the 32nd week of gestation were positively 
related to birth weight. Maternal n-3 LCPUFAs, n-6 LCPUFAs and AA were 
positively associated with birth length. Maternal RBCs AA and n-6 LCPUFAs were 
significantly negatively related to BMI and Ponderal Index at 1 year postpartum, 
but not to fat mass.
CONCLUSION: Maternal DHA, AA, total n-3 LCPUFAs and n-6 LCPUFAs might serve as 
prenatal growth factors, while n-6 LCPUFAs also seems to regulate postnatal 
growth. The maternal n-6/n-3 LCPUFA ratio does not appear to have a role in 
adipose tissue development during early postnatal life.

DOI: 10.1038/ejcn.2013.2
PMID: 23340492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]