---
reference_id: "PMID:25908211"
title: Outcome of gastric emptying and gastrointestinal symptoms after liver transplantation for hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis.
authors:
- Wixner J
- Sundström T
- Karling P
- Anan I
- Suhr OB
journal: BMC Gastroenterol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s12876-015-0284-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcome of gastric emptying and gastrointestinal symptoms after liver transplantation for hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Wixner J, Sundström T, Karling P, Anan I, Suhr OB
**Journal:** BMC Gastroenterol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12876-015-0284-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12876-015-0284-4)

## Content

1. BMC Gastroenterol. 2015 Apr 25;15:51. doi: 10.1186/s12876-015-0284-4.

Outcome of gastric emptying and gastrointestinal symptoms after liver 
transplantation for hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis.

Wixner J(1), Sundström T(2), Karling P(3), Anan I(4), Suhr OB(5).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, S-90187, 
Umeå, Sweden. jonas.wixner@medicin.umu.se.
(2)Radiation Sciences, Umeå University, S-90187, Umeå, Sweden. 
torbjorn.sundstrom@diagrad.umu.se.
(3)Departments of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, S-90187, 
Umeå, Sweden. pontus.karling@vll.se.
(4)Departments of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, S-90187, 
Umeå, Sweden. intissar.anan@medicin.umu.se.
(5)Departments of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, S-90187, 
Umeå, Sweden. ole.suhr@medicin.umu.se.

BACKGROUND: Hereditary transthyretin amyloid (ATTR) amyloidosis is a rare but 
fatal autosomal dominant condition that is present all over the world. A liver 
transplantation has been shown to halt the progress of the disease in selected 
patients and is currently considered to be the standard treatment. 
Gastrointestinal manifestations are common in hereditary ATTR amyloidosis and 
are important for the patients' morbidity and mortality. The aim of this study 
was to evaluate the long-term outcome of gastric emptying, gastrointestinal 
symptoms and nutritional status after liver transplantation for the disease.
METHODS: Swedish patients with hereditary ATTR amyloidosis transplanted between 
1990 and 2012 were included. A standardized method for measuring gastric 
emptying with a Tc(99m)-labelled meal followed by scintigraphy was utilized. 
Validated questionnaires were used to assess gastrointestinal symptoms and the 
modified body mass index (mBMI), in which BMI is multiplied by s-albumin, was 
used to evaluate nutritional status. Non-parametrical statistical tests were 
used.
RESULTS: Gastric emptying rates and nutritional statuses were evaluated 
approximately eight months before and two and five years after liver 
transplantation, whereas gastrointestinal symptoms were assessed in median nine 
months before and two and nine years after transplantation. No significant 
change was found in gastric emptying (median half-time 137 vs. 132 vs. 125 min, 
p = 0.52) or nutritional status (median mBMI 975 vs. 991 vs. 973, p = 0.75) 
after transplantation. Gastrointestinal symptom scores, however, had increased 
significantly over time (median score 7 vs. 10 vs. 13, p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Gastric emptying and nutritional status were maintained after liver 
transplantation for hereditary ATTR amyloidosis, although gastrointestinal 
symptom scores had increased over time.

DOI: 10.1186/s12876-015-0284-4
PMCID: PMC4415350
PMID: 25908211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]