---
reference_id: "PMID:16750612"
title: Genetic alterations in melanocytic tumors.
authors:
- Takata M
- Saida T
journal: J Dermatol Sci
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2006.05.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic alterations in melanocytic tumors.
**Authors:** Takata M, Saida T
**Journal:** J Dermatol Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jdermsci.2006.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdermsci.2006.05.002)

## Content

1. J Dermatol Sci. 2006 Jul;43(1):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2006.05.002.

Genetic alterations in melanocytic tumors.

Takata M(1), Saida T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 3-1-1 
Asahi, Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan. mtakata@hsp.md.shinshu-u.ac.jp

In the last decade, significant progress has been made in our understanding of 
the genetic alterations in melanocytic tumors. The most exciting finding is the 
discovery of oncogenic BRAF mutations in both malignant melanoma and melanocytic 
nevi. This finding indicates that activation of the mitogen-activated protein 
kinase pathway may be a critical initiating step of melanocytic neoplasia, and 
that the fundamental difference between melanoma and nevi may lie in the 
inhibitory machinery for this oncogenic signaling. In addition, different 
genetic alterations identified in melanomas at different sites and with 
different levels of sun exposure have been shown, indicating that there are 
several distinct genetic pathways in the development of melanoma. Different 
patterns of genetic alterations have also been identified among different kinds 
of melanocytic nevi. While acquired nevi and small congenital nevi show a high 
frequency of BRAF mutations regardless of their anatomic localization, the 
mutations were rare in medium-sized congenital nevi and giant congenital nevi. 
Spitz nevi show no BRAF mutations, while a subset of cases show HRAS mutations, 
often associated with a copy number increase of chromosome 11p. The clear 
differences in genetic aberration patterns have significant clinical 
implications in the diagnosis and treatment of melanocytic tumors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2006.05.002
PMID: 16750612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]