---
reference_id: "PMID:16881414"
title: Epidemiology and clinical features of Mediterranean spotted fever in Italy.
authors:
- Cascio A
- Iaria C
journal: Parassitologia
year: '2006'
keywords:
- Adult
- Alanine Transaminase/blood
- Animals
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Arachnid Vectors/parasitology
- Aspartate Aminotransferases/blood
- Bites and Stings/parasitology
- "Boutonneuse Fever/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Child
- Comorbidity
- Humans
- Italy/epidemiology
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/etiology"
- Rhipicephalus sanguineus/parasitology
- "Rickettsia conorii/isolation & purification"
- Seasons
- Thrombocytopenia/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology and clinical features of Mediterranean spotted fever in Italy.
**Authors:** Cascio A, Iaria C
**Journal:** Parassitologia (2006)

## Content

1. Parassitologia. 2006 Jun;48(1-2):131-3.

Epidemiology and clinical features of Mediterranean spotted fever in Italy.

Cascio A(1), Iaria C.

Author information:
(1)Clinica delle Malattie Infettive, Dipartimento di Patologia Umana, Università
di Messina, Italy.

Mediterranean Spotted Fever is caused by Rickettsia conorii and is transmitted
to humans by Rhipicephalus sanguineus, the common dog tick. It is characterized
by the symptomatologic triad: fever, exanthema and "tache noire", the typical
eschar at the site of the tick bite. In Italy the most affected region is
Sicily. The seasonal peak of the disease (from June through September) occurs
during maximal activity of immature stage ticks. Severe forms of the disease
have been reported in 6% of patients, especially adults with one of the
following conditions: diabetes, cardiac disease, chronic alcoholism,
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, end stage kidney disease. The
mortality rate may reach 2.5%. Oral or parenteral administration of
tetracyclines or chloramphenicol represent the standard treatment. Recent
studies indicate that oral clarithromycin and azithromycin could constitute an
acceptable alternative for the treatment of the disease in children;
furthermore, they could be recommended during pregnancy.

PMID: 16881414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
