---
reference_id: "PMID:38300829"
title: "Surveillance for Acute Flaccid Myelitis - United States, 2018-2022."
authors:
- Whitehouse ER
- Lopez A
- English R
- Getachew H
- Ng TFF
- Emery B
- Rogers S
- Kidd S
journal: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7304a1
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- United States/epidemiology
- Neuromuscular Diseases/epidemiology
- Paralysis
- Myelitis/epidemiology
- Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/epidemiology
- Enterovirus Infections/epidemiology
- "Enterovirus D, Human"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surveillance for Acute Flaccid Myelitis - United States, 2018-2022.
**Authors:** Whitehouse ER, Lopez A, English R, Getachew H, Ng TFF, Emery B, Rogers S, Kidd S
**Journal:** MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.15585/mmwr.mm7304a1](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7304a1)

## Content

1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2024 Feb 1;73(4):70-76. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm7304a1.

Surveillance for Acute Flaccid Myelitis - United States, 2018-2022.

Whitehouse ER, Lopez A, English R, Getachew H, Ng TFF, Emery B, Rogers S, Kidd
S.

Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a serious neurologic condition primarily
affecting children; AFM can cause acute respiratory failure and permanent
paralysis. AFM is a rare but known complication of various viral infections,
particularly those of enteroviruses (EVs). Increases in AFM cases during 2014,
2016, and 2018 were associated with EV-D68 infection. This report examines
trends in confirmed AFM cases during 2018-2022 and patients' clinical and
laboratory characteristics. The number of AFM cases was low during 2019-2022
(28-47 cases per year); the number of cases remained low in 2022 despite
evidence of increased EV-D68 circulation in the United States. Compared with
cases during the most recent peak year (2018), fewer cases during 2019-2021 had
upper limb involvement, prodromal respiratory or febrile illness, or
cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis, and more were associated with lower limb
involvement. It is unclear why EV-D68 circulation in 2022 was not associated
with an increase in AFM cases or when the next increase in AFM cases will occur.
Nonetheless, clinicians should continue to suspect AFM in any child with acute
flaccid limb weakness, especially those with a recent respiratory or febrile
illness.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7304a1
PMCID: PMC10843070
PMID: 38300829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts of interest were
disclosed.
