---
reference_id: "PMID:35841250"
title: Elecsys Cerebrospinal Fluid Assays Accurately Distinguish Alzheimer's Disease from Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration.
authors:
- Ortner M
- Goldhardt O
- Diehl-Schmid J
- Yakushev I
- Lanz K
- Hedderich DM
- Manuilova E
- Simon M
- Weinberger JP
- Grimmer T
journal: J Prev Alzheimers Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.14283/jpad.2022.27
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elecsys Cerebrospinal Fluid Assays Accurately Distinguish Alzheimer's Disease from Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration.
**Authors:** Ortner M, Goldhardt O, Diehl-Schmid J, Yakushev I, Lanz K, Hedderich DM, Manuilova E, Simon M, Weinberger JP, Grimmer T
**Journal:** J Prev Alzheimers Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.14283/jpad.2022.27](https://doi.org/10.14283/jpad.2022.27)

## Content

1. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2022;9(3):491-498. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2022.27.

Elecsys Cerebrospinal Fluid Assays Accurately Distinguish Alzheimer's Disease 
from Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration.

Ortner M(1), Goldhardt O, Diehl-Schmid J, Yakushev I, Lanz K, Hedderich DM, 
Manuilova E, Simon M, Weinberger JP, Grimmer T.

Author information:
(1)Dr Marion Ortner, MD, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Klinikum 
rechts der Isar, Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Ismaninger 
Str. 22, 81675 Munich, Germany; Telephone: +49 89 41404275; Fax: +49 89 
41404923; Email: marion.ortner@tum.de.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
(FTLD) are heterogeneous in their clinical presentation and underlying 
pathology, but they often have overlapping features. Diagnostic accuracy is 
critical for guiding patient management. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) diagnostic 
assays for the differentiation of AD and FTLD may increase diagnostic accuracy.
OBJECTIVES: In this study, we aimed to understand the potential role of CSF 
biomarkers and biomarker ratios, measured using Elecsys® CSF immunoassays (Roche 
Diagnostics International Ltd, Rotkreuz, Switzerland), in the differential 
diagnosis of AD and FTLD.
DESIGN: This study was conducted at a single center in Munich, Germany between 
July 2019 and July 2020. Patient CSF samples were retrospectively collected from 
the study center biobank.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 130 patients with cognitive impairment were included in 
the study; 86 patients were diagnosed with AD and 44 with FTLD (behavioral 
variant frontotemporal dementia, semantic variant of primary progressive 
aphasia, and non-fluent variant of primary progressive aphasia), based on core 
clinical criteria and a non-CSF biomarker, a typical pattern of regional 
hypometabolism on [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography.
MEASUREMENTS: Patient CSF biomarker concentrations were measured using Elecsys 
CSF immunoassays. Receiver operating characteristic analyses were conducted to 
determine areas under the curve (AUCs) for CSF biomarker performance. 
Sensitivity and specificity analyses were conducted to evaluate the performance 
of established cut-offs (Aβ42 ≤1000 pg/mL, pTau181/Aβ42 ratio >0.024, and 
tTau/Aβ42 ratio >0.28) and optimized cut-offs based on Youden's index.
RESULTS: AUC-based performance was similarly good for the pTau181/Aβ42 ratio 
(AUC=0.841; 95% CI: 0.759-0.923), pTau181/Aβ40 ratio (AUC=0.837; 95% CI: 
0.754-0.919), Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio (AUC=0.829; 95% CI: 0.746-0.912), tTau/Aβ42 ratio 
(AUC=0.822; 95% CI: 0.736-0.908), pTau181/Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio (AUC=0.817; 95% CI: 
0.734-0.901), and Aβ42 (AUC=0.812; 95% CI: 0.722-0.902). Performance was 
slightly lower for the tTau/Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio (AUC=0.799; 95% CI: 0.713-0.885), 
pTau181 alone (AUC=0.793; 95% CI: 0.707-0.880), tTau/Aβ40 ratio (AUC=0.751; 95% 
CI: 0.657-0.844), and tTau alone (AUC=0.706; 95% CI: 0.613-0.799). The highest 
qualitative performance was observed with the pTau181/Aβ42 ratio with an 
established cut-off value of >0.024 and optimized cut-off value of >0.022: 
sensitivity and specificity values were 0.892 and 0.773, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Elecsys CSF immunoassays demonstrate good diagnostic accuracy in 
differentiating patients with AD from those with FTLD. These immunoassays have 
the potential to support clinical decision making, i.e. in diagnosing patients 
with FTLD by excluding patients with amyloid positivity, which is indicative of 
underlying AD.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2022.27
PMID: 35841250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: OG reports receiving grants from Actelion and 
payment from Julius Clinical/Toyama for prescreening activities. IY reports 
receiving grants or contracts from the Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research Germany (BMBF); consulting fees from Blue Earth Diagnostics and 
ABX-CRO; payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, 
manuscript writing or educational events from Piramal; support for attending 
meetings and/or travel from the Society for Nuclear Medicine and Molecular 
Imaging; and leadership or fiduciary role in the Society for Nuclear Medicine 
and Molecular Imaging (Board of Directors, Brain Imaging Council). JPW is an 
employee of Roche Diagnostics GmbH and holds shares in F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. 
EM is an employee of Roche Diagnostics GmbH. MS is an employee of Roche 
Diagnostics International Ltd. TG reports receiving consulting fees from Abbvie, 
Anavex, Biogen, Bracket, Eli Lilly, Functional Neuromodulation, Grifols, 
IQVIA/Quintiles, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Noselab, NuiCare, Roche Pharma, Toyama, 
and Vivoryon; payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers 
bureaus, manuscript writing or educational events from Actelion, B. Braun, 
Biogen, Eli Lilly, Life Molecular Imaging, Novartis, Parexel, and Roche Pharma; 
and support for attending meetings and/or travel from Biogen. The remaining 
authors declare no known competing financial interests or personal relationships 
that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this manuscript.