---
reference_id: "PMID:22467936"
title: "Challenging the diagnosis of primary angiitis of the central nervous system: a single-center retrospective study."
authors:
- Néel A
- Auffray-Calvier E
- Guillon B
- Fontenoy AM
- Loussouarn D
- Pagnoux C
- Hamidou MA
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.3899/jrheum.110707
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Cerebral Angiography/methods
- Cohort Studies
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Vasospasm, Intracranial/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Challenging the diagnosis of primary angiitis of the central nervous system: a single-center retrospective study.
**Authors:** Néel A, Auffray-Calvier E, Guillon B, Fontenoy AM, Loussouarn D, Pagnoux C, Hamidou MA
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.3899/jrheum.110707](https://doi.org/10.3899/jrheum.110707)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2012 May;39(5):1026-34. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.110707. Epub 2012 Apr
 1.

Challenging the diagnosis of primary angiitis of the central nervous system: a 
single-center retrospective study.

Néel A(1), Auffray-Calvier E, Guillon B, Fontenoy AM, Loussouarn D, Pagnoux C, 
Hamidou MA.

Author information:
(1)Service de Médecine Interne, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes, 
Nantes, France. antoine.neel@univ-nantes.fr

OBJECTIVE: (1) To describe a series of adults assessed for suspected primary 
angiitis of the central nervous system (PACNS) and their final diagnosis; (2) to 
describe and compare presenting features of PACNS and reversible cerebral 
vasoconstriction syndrome (RCVS); and (3) to evaluate the specificity of the 
presenting features of RCVS.
METHODS: Patients evaluated at our institution between 2000 and 2008 for a 
possible CNS vasculitis and investigated by conventional angiography and/or 
brain biopsy were retrospectively analyzed. The inclusion criteria were a 
clinicoradiological presentation and cerebral angiography and/or brain biopsy 
raising the hypothesis of isolated cerebral vasculitis; and absence of 
identifiable etiology at the time of conventional angiogram and/or brain biopsy.
RESULTS: Among 58 cases evaluated, 37 met the inclusion criteria and 33 were 
included in the study. Thirteen patients had RCVS. Thunderclap headaches, the 
absence of a focal neurological deficit, a convexal subarachnoid hemorrhage 
and/or normal brain parenchyma on magnetic resonance imaging, and "string of 
beads" appearance on conventional angiography had high diagnostic value. Six 
patients had other noninflammatory vascular disorders (intracranial 
atherosclerosis, cryptogenic embolism, and genetic vasculopathy). Six patients 
had infection or malignancy. Eight patients were diagnosed with PACNS; their 
clinical presentation and disease course were heterogeneous. Brain biopsy was 
performed in 3 cases (positive in 1).
CONCLUSION: RCVS is an important differential diagnosis of CNS vasculitis. Its 
particular presentation should allow rapid identification in order to avoid 
pointless investigations and treatment. The frequent lack of histological proof 
and heterogeneous presentation of PACNS illustrated the nosological 
uncertainties of this label.

DOI: 10.3899/jrheum.110707
PMID: 22467936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]