---
reference_id: "PMID:31958497"
title: Skeletal deterioration in COL2A1-related spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia occurs prior to osteoarthritis.
authors:
- Rolvien T
- Yorgan TA
- Kornak U
- Hermans-Borgmeyer I
- Mundlos S
- Schmidt T
- Niemeier A
- Schinke T
- Amling M
- Oheim R
journal: Osteoarthritis Cartilage
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2019.12.011
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Remodeling
- "Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Cartilage/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Child
- Collagen Type II/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Middle Aged
- "Osteoarthritis/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/congenital, diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- X-Ray Microtomography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skeletal deterioration in COL2A1-related spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia occurs prior to osteoarthritis.
**Authors:** Rolvien T, Yorgan TA, Kornak U, Hermans-Borgmeyer I, Mundlos S, Schmidt T, Niemeier A, Schinke T, Amling M, Oheim R
**Journal:** Osteoarthritis Cartilage (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.joca.2019.12.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2019.12.011)

## Content

1. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2020 Mar;28(3):334-343. doi: 
10.1016/j.joca.2019.12.011. Epub 2020 Jan 17.

Skeletal deterioration in COL2A1-related spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia occurs 
prior to osteoarthritis.

Rolvien T(1), Yorgan TA(2), Kornak U(3), Hermans-Borgmeyer I(4), Mundlos S(3), 
Schmidt T(2), Niemeier A(5), Schinke T(2), Amling M(2), Oheim R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Lottestr. 59, 22529, Hamburg, Germany; Department of 
Orthopedics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. 
Electronic address: t.rolvien@uke.de.
(2)Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Lottestr. 59, 22529, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Berlin-Brandenburg School for Regenerative Therapies, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Max Planck Institute for 
Molecular Genetics, FG Development and Disease, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Center for Molecular Neurobiology, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Orthopedics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, 
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, a combination of progressive 
arthropathy with variable signs of skeletal dysplasia, can be a result of 
mutations in the collagen, type II, alpha 1 (COL2A1) gene. However, the bone 
involvement (e.g., density, microstructure) in this disorder has hitherto not 
been studied.
DESIGN: A 50-year-old female patient and her 8-year-old son with flattening of 
vertebral bodies and early-onset osteoarthritis were genetically tested using a 
custom designed gene bone panel including 386 genes. Bone microstructure and 
turnover were assessed using high-resolution peripheral quantitative computed 
tomography (HR-pQCT) and serum bone turnover markers, respectively. Furthermore, 
the bone and cartilage phenotype of male mice heterozygous for the 
loss-of-function mutation of Col2a1 (Col2a1+/d) was analyzed compared to 
wildtype littermates using μ-CT and histomorphometry.
RESULTS: We identified a dominant COL2A1 mutation (c.620G > A p.(Gly207Glu)) 
indicating spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia in the female patient and her son, both 
being severely affected by skeletal deterioration. Although there was no 
osteoarthritis detectable at first visit, the son was affected by trabecular 
osteopenia, which progressed over time. In an iliac crest biopsy obtained from 
the mother, osteoclast indices were remarkably increased. Col2a1+/d mice 
developed a moderate skeletal phenotype expressed by reduced cortical and 
trabecular parameters at 4 weeks. Importantly, no articular defects could be 
observed in the knee joints at 4 weeks, while osteoarthritis was only detectable 
in 12-week-old mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that collagen type II deficiency in 
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia leads to skeletal deterioration with early-onset in 
humans and mice that occurs prior to the development of osteoarthritis.

Copyright © 2020 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joca.2019.12.011
PMID: 31958497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]