---
reference_id: "PMID:32378251"
title: "Baseline characteristics of patients with atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome (aHUS): The Australian cohort in a global aHUS registry."
authors:
- Soraru J
- Isbel N
- Wong G
- Coates PT
- Mantha M
- Abraham A
- Juneja R
- Hsu D
- Brown F
- Bose B
- Mudge D
- Carroll R
- Kausman J
- Hughes P
- Barbour T
- Durkan A
- Mount P
- Lee D
- Larkins N
- Ranganathan D
- Lim WH
journal: Nephrology (Carlton)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/nep.13722
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Australia/epidemiology
- Child
- Complement Factor H/genetics
- Complement Inactivating Agents/therapeutic use
- Demography
- Female
- Gastrointestinal Tract/pathology
- Humans
- Kidney/pathology
- "Kidney Transplantation/statistics & numerical data"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Registries/statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Baseline characteristics of patients with atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome (aHUS): The Australian cohort in a global aHUS registry.
**Authors:** Soraru J, Isbel N, Wong G, Coates PT, Mantha M, Abraham A, Juneja R, Hsu D, Brown F, Bose B, Mudge D, Carroll R, Kausman J, Hughes P, Barbour T, Durkan A, Mount P, Lee D, Larkins N, Ranganathan D, Lim WH
**Journal:** Nephrology (Carlton) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nep.13722](https://doi.org/10.1111/nep.13722)

## Content

1. Nephrology (Carlton). 2020 Sep;25(9):683-690. doi: 10.1111/nep.13722. Epub
2020  May 31.

Baseline characteristics of patients with atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome
(aHUS): The Australian cohort in a global aHUS registry.

Soraru J(1), Isbel N(2), Wong G(3)(4)(5), Coates PT(6)(7), Mantha M(8), Abraham
A(9), Juneja R(10), Hsu D(11), Brown F(12), Bose B(13), Mudge D(2), Carroll
R(6), Kausman J(14), Hughes P(15), Barbour T(15), Durkan A(16), Mount P(17), Lee
D(18), Larkins N(19)(20), Ranganathan D(21), Lim WH(1)(20).

Author information:
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Perth, Western
Australia, Australia.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia.
(3)Centre for Transplant and Renal Research, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia.
(4)Centre for Kidney Research, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia.
(5)School of Public Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia.
(6)Central and Northern Renal and Transplantation Service, Royal Adelaide
Hospital, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(7)Adelaide Health and Medical Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia.
(8)Department of Nephrology, Cairns Base Hospital, Cairns, Queensland,
Australia.
(9)Department of Nephrology and Renal Transplant, Fiona Stanley Hospital, Perth,
Western Australia, Australia.
(10)Flinders Medical Centre, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(11)Department of Haematology, Liverpool Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia.
(12)Department of Nephrology, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.
(13)Department of Nephrology, Nepean Hospital, Blue Mountains, New South Wales,
Australia.
(14)Department of Nephrology and Renal Transplantation, The Royal Children's
Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(15)Department of Nephrology and Transplantation, The Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(16)Department of Nephrology, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia.
(17)Department of Nephrology, Austin Health, Melbourne, Australia.
(18)Department of Renal Medicine, Eastern Health Clinical School, Monash
University Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(19)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Perth Children's Hospital, Perth,
Western Australia, Australia.
(20)School of Medicine, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western
Australia, Australia.
(21)Kidney Health Service, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane, School
of Medicine, Griffith University, Mount Gravatt, Queensland, Australia.

AIMS: To describe the baseline characteristics and treatment of Australian
patients diagnosed with atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome (aHUS) reported to
the Global aHUS Registry.
METHODS: Descriptive analysis of the Australian cohort with aHUS (n = 106) was
undertaken for demographics, disease characteristics and prior treatment with
eculizumab; comparing with the global cohort (n = 1688) for certain
pre-specified disease characteristics.
RESULTS: In Australia, almost two-thirds of patients diagnosed with aHUS were
female and over 80% of patients were Caucasians, with similar proportions
reported in the global cohort. Less than 6% of patients in the Australia and
global cohorts were reported to have a history of autoimmune disease (4% vs 2%,
respectively; P = .21) or cancer (5% vs 5%, respectively; P = .93), conditions
that have been associated with secondary HUS. In the Australian cohort, 26% had
received a kidney transplant and 68% of patients had received eculizumab.
Kidneys were the most common organ involvement, followed by gastrointestinal
tract (26%) and cardiovascular system (19%), with 35% of patients reported to
have had at least two organs involved within 6 months prior to baseline visit or
entry into the registry. Complement factor H was the most common pathogenic
complement gene variant in the Australian patients.
CONCLUSION: Data from the aHUS registry confirms and defines region-specific
disease characteristics among a selected group of Australian children and adults
with aHUS reported to the registry. Ongoing and more inclusive data will provide
further information about temporal trends and treatment outcomes, representing a
unique opportunity for clinicians and researchers to further develop knowledge
surrounding this rare disease.

© 2020 Asian Pacific Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1111/nep.13722
PMID: 32378251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
