---
reference_id: "PMID:16155008"
title: A positive feedback loop between glycogen synthase kinase 3beta and protein phosphatase 1 after stimulation of NR2B NMDA receptors in forebrain neurons.
authors:
- Szatmari E
- Habas A
- Yang P
- Zheng JJ
- Hagg T
- Hetman M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M502699200
keywords:
- Animals
- "CREB-Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- "Feedback, Physiological"
- Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3/metabolism
- Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 beta
- Hippocampus/cytology
- Male
- Mice
- N-Methylaspartate/pharmacology
- "Neurons/enzymology, metabolism"
- Phosphoprotein Phosphatases/metabolism
- Prosencephalon/cytology
- Protein Phosphatase 1
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/agonists, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A positive feedback loop between glycogen synthase kinase 3beta and protein phosphatase 1 after stimulation of NR2B NMDA receptors in forebrain neurons.
**Authors:** Szatmari E, Habas A, Yang P, Zheng JJ, Hagg T, Hetman M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M502699200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M502699200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 11;280(45):37526-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M502699200. Epub 
2005 Sep 9.

A positive feedback loop between glycogen synthase kinase 3beta and protein 
phosphatase 1 after stimulation of NR2B NMDA receptors in forebrain neurons.

Szatmari E(1), Habas A, Yang P, Zheng JJ, Hagg T, Hetman M.

Author information:
(1)Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center, University of Louisville, KY 
40292, USA.

N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) are critical for neuronal plasticity and 
survival, whereas their excessive activation produces excitotoxicity and may 
accelerate neurodegeneration. Here, we report that stimulation of NMDARs in 
cultured rat hippocampal or cortical neurons and in the adult mouse brain in 
vivo disinhibited glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) by protein 
phosphatase 1(PP1)-mediated dephosphorylation of GSK3beta at the serine 9 
residue. NMDA-triggered GSK3beta activation was mediated by NMDAR that contained 
the NR2B subunit. Interestingly, GSK3beta inhibition reduced inhibitory 
phosphorylation of the PP1 inhibitor 2 (I2) and attenuated serine 9 
dephosphorylation by PP1. These data suggest existence of a feedback loop 
between GSK3beta and PP1 that results in amplification of PP1 activation by 
GSK3beta. In addition, GSK3beta inhibition decreased PP1-mediated 
dephosphorylation of the cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) at the 
serine 133 residue in NMDA-stimulated neurons. Conversely, overexpression of 
GSK3beta abolished non-NR2B-mediated activation of CRE-driven transcription. 
These data suggest that cross-talk between GSK3beta and PP1 contributes to NR2B 
NMDAR-induced inhibition of CREB signaling by non-NR2B NMDAR. The excessive 
activation of NR2B-PP1-GSK3beta-PP1 circuitry may contribute to the deficits of 
CREB-dependent neuronal plasticity in neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M502699200
PMID: 16155008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]