---
reference_id: "PMID:35457678"
title: Surgical Treatment of Vitiligo.
authors:
- Frączek A
- Kasprowicz-Furmańczyk M
- Placek W
- Owczarczyk-Saczonek A
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph19084812
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical Treatment of Vitiligo.
**Authors:** Frączek A, Kasprowicz-Furmańczyk M, Placek W, Owczarczyk-Saczonek A
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph19084812](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19084812)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Apr 15;19(8):4812. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph19084812.

Surgical Treatment of Vitiligo.

Frączek A(1), Kasprowicz-Furmańczyk M(2), Placek W(2), Owczarczyk-Saczonek A(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Collegium Medicum, The University of Warmia and Mazury, 
10-082 Olsztyn, Poland.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Sexually Transmitted Diseases and Clinical 
Immunology, The University of Warmia and Mazury, Al. Wojska Polskiego 30, 10-229 
Olsztyn, Poland.

Vitiligo is described as a dermatological condition characterized by 
pigmentation disorders in both the skin and mucous membranes. Clinically, this 
disease is characterized by the presence of well-defined white areas of various 
shapes and sizes, which are a manifestation of a reduced number of melanocytes. 
Due to the fact that vitiligo can be a significant cosmetic problem for 
patients, a number of methods are currently available to help fight for a better 
skin appearance. If all the available non-invasive procedures turn out to be 
ineffective, surgery can help, which is a very good alternative in the case of 
difficult-to-treat but stable changes. Both the development of new techniques 
and modifications to the already available treatment of cell and tissue 
transplantation give hope to numerous patients around the world. The 
effectiveness of a particular method is determined by its appropriate selection 
depending on the lesions undergoing therapy. Each form of surgical intervention 
has its advantages and disadvantages, which, along with the location or size of 
the treated hypopigmentation area, should be analyzed by a doctor and discussed 
with their patient. This article is an overview of the currently available 
methods of surgical treatment of vitiligo and a comparison of their pros and 
cons.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph19084812
PMCID: PMC9031570
PMID: 35457678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.