---
reference_id: "PMID:23915561"
title: "Galactosialidosis: review and analysis of CTSA gene mutations."
authors:
- Caciotti A
- Catarzi S
- Tonin R
- Lugli L
- Perez CR
- Michelakakis H
- Mavridou I
- Donati MA
- Guerrini R
- "d'Azzo A"
- Morrone A
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-114
keywords:
- "Cathepsin A/chemistry, genetics"
- Computational Biology/methods
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Galactosialidosis: review and analysis of CTSA gene mutations.
**Authors:** Caciotti A, Catarzi S, Tonin R, Lugli L, Perez CR, Michelakakis H, Mavridou I, Donati MA, Guerrini R, d'Azzo A, Morrone A
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-8-114](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-8-114)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Aug 2;8:114. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-114.

Galactosialidosis: review and analysis of CTSA gene mutations.

Caciotti A(1), Catarzi S, Tonin R, Lugli L, Perez CR, Michelakakis H, Mavridou 
I, Donati MA, Guerrini R, d'Azzo A, Morrone A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Molecular and Cell Biology, Paediatric Neurology Unit and 
Laboratories, Meyer Children's Hospital, Viale Pieraccini n, 24, Florence 50139, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the CTSA gene, that encodes the protective 
protein/cathepsin A or PPCA, lead to the secondary deficiency of β-galactosidase 
(GLB1) and neuraminidase 1 (NEU1), causing the lysosomal storage disorder 
galactosialidosis (GS). Few clinical cases of GS have been reported in the 
literature, the majority of them belonging to the juvenile/adult group of 
patients.
METHODS: The correct nomenclature of mutations for this gene is discussed 
through the analysis of the three PPCA/CTSA isoforms available in the GenBank 
database. Phenotype-genotype correlation has been assessed by computational 
analysis and review of previously reported single amino acid substitutions.
RESULTS: We report the clinical and mutational analyses of four cases with the 
rare infantile form of GS. We identified three novel nucleotide changes, two of 
them resulting in the missense mutations, c.347A>G (p.His116Arg), c.775T>C 
(p.Cys259Arg), and the third, c.1216C>T, resulting in the p.Gln406* stop codon, 
a type of mutation identified for the first time in GS. An Italian founder 
effect of the c.114delG mutation can be suggested according to the origin of the 
only three patients carrying this mutation reported here and in the literature.
CONCLUSIONS: In early reports mutations nomenclature was selected according to 
all CTSA isoforms (three different isoforms), thus generating a lot of 
confusion. In order to assist physicians in the interpretation of detected 
mutations, we mark the correct nomenclature for CTSA mutations. The complexity 
of pathology caused by the multifunctions of CTSA, and the very low numbers of 
mutations (only 23 overall) in relation to the length of the CTSA gene are 
discussed.In addition, the in silico functional predictions of all reported 
missense mutations allowed us to closely predict the early infantile, late 
infantile and juvenile phenotypes, also disclosing different degrees of severity 
in the juvenile phenotype.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-114
PMCID: PMC3737020
PMID: 23915561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]