---
reference_id: "PMID:39503780"
title: Homozygosity for a hypomorphic mutation in frizzled class receptor 5 causes syndromic ocular coloboma with microcornea in humans.
authors:
- Cortés-González V
- Rodriguez-Morales M
- Ataliotis P
- Mayer C
- Plaisancié J
- Chassaing N
- Lee H
- Rozet JM
- Cavodeassi F
- Fares Taie L
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-024-02712-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Frizzled Receptors/genetics
- Coloboma/genetics
- Animals
- Homozygote
- Zebrafish/genetics
- Male
- Female
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygosity for a hypomorphic mutation in frizzled class receptor 5 causes syndromic ocular coloboma with microcornea in humans.
**Authors:** Cortés-González V, Rodriguez-Morales M, Ataliotis P, Mayer C, Plaisancié J, Chassaing N, Lee H, Rozet JM, Cavodeassi F, Fares Taie L
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-024-02712-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-024-02712-y)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2024 Dec;143(12):1509-1521. doi: 10.1007/s00439-024-02712-y. Epub 
2024 Nov 6.

Homozygosity for a hypomorphic mutation in frizzled class receptor 5 causes 
syndromic ocular coloboma with microcornea in humans.

Cortés-González V(#)(1)(2), Rodriguez-Morales M(#)(1)(2), Ataliotis P(#)(3), 
Mayer C(4)(5), Plaisancié J(6)(7), Chassaing N(6)(7), Lee H(8), Rozet JM(9), 
Cavodeassi F(#)(10), Fares Taie L(#)(11).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Asociación Para Evitar la Ceguera en México, 
Vicente García Torres No. 46 Barrio San Lucas, Coyoacán, Mexico City, C.P. 
04030, Mexico.
(2)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, 
Mexico.
(3)School of Health and Medical Sciences, City St. George's University of 
London, London, SW17 0RE, UK.
(4)Complex Systems and Translational Bioinformatics (CSTB), ICube Laboratory, 
UMR7357, University of Strasbourg, 1 rue Eugène Boeckel, Strasbourg, 67000, 
France.
(5)Faculté des Sciences, Université Paris Cité, UFR Sciences du Vivant, Paris, 
75013, France.
(6)Laboratoire de Référence (LBMR) des Anomalies Malformatives de l'oeil, 
Institut Fédératif de Biologie (IFB), CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(7)Centre de Référence des Affections Rares en Génétique Ophtalmologique, CARGO, 
site constitutif, CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(8)3billion Inc., Seoul, South Korea.
(9)Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology (LGO), INSERM UMR1163, Institute of 
Genetic Diseases, Imagine and Paris Descartes University, Paris, 75015, France.
(10)School of Health and Medical Sciences, City St. George's University of 
London, London, SW17 0RE, UK. fcavodea@sgul.ac.uk.
(11)Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology (LGO), INSERM UMR1163, Institute of 
Genetic Diseases, Imagine and Paris Descartes University, Paris, 75015, France. 
lucas.fares-taie@inserm.fr.
(#)Contributed equally

Ocular coloboma (OC) is a congenital disorder caused by the incomplete closure 
of the embryonic ocular fissure. OC can present as a simple anomaly or, in more 
complex forms, be associated with additional ocular abnormalities. It can occur 
in isolation or as part of a broader syndrome, exhibiting considerable genetic 
heterogeneity. Diagnostic yield for OC remains below 30%, indicating the need 
for further genetic exploration. Mutations in the Wnt receptor FZD5, which is 
expressed throughout eye development, have been linked to both isolated and 
complex forms of coloboma. These mutations often result in a dominant-negative 
effect, where the mutated FZD5 protein disrupts WNT signaling by sequestering 
WNT ligands. Here, we describe a case of syndromic bilateral OC with additional 
features such as microcornea, bone developmental anomalies, and mild 
intellectual disability. Whole exome sequencing revealed a homozygous rare 
missense variant in FZD5. Consistent with a loss-of-function effect, 
overexpressing of fzd5 mRNA harboring the missense variant in zebrafish embryos 
does not influence embryonic development, whereas overexpression of wild-type 
fzd5 mRNA results in body axis duplications. However, in vitro TOPFlash assays 
revealed that the missense variant only caused partial loss-of-function, 
behaving as a hypomorphic mutation. We further showed that the mutant protein 
still localized to the cell membrane and maintained proper conformation when 
modeled in silico, suggesting that the impairment lies in signal transduction. 
This hypothesis is further supported by the fact that the variant affects a 
highly conserved amino acid known to be crucial for protein-protein 
interactions.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-024-02712-y
PMCID: PMC11576812
PMID: 39503780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Competing interests The authors 
declare no competing interests. Rights retention statement This research was 
funded in part, by the Wellcome Trust [Seed Award in Sciences 213928/Z/18/Z to 
FC]. For the purpose of open access, the authors have applied a CC BY public 
copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this 
submission.