---
reference_id: "PMID:25729683"
title: Congenital hypothyroidism.
authors:
- Agrawal P
- Philip R
- Saran S
- Gutch M
- Razi MS
- Agroiya P
- Gupta K
journal: Indian J Endocrinol Metab
year: '2015'
doi: 10.4103/2230-8210.131748
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital hypothyroidism.
**Authors:** Agrawal P, Philip R, Saran S, Gutch M, Razi MS, Agroiya P, Gupta K
**Journal:** Indian J Endocrinol Metab (2015)
**DOI:** [10.4103/2230-8210.131748](https://doi.org/10.4103/2230-8210.131748)

## Content

1. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Mar-Apr;19(2):221-7. doi: 
10.4103/2230-8210.131748.

Congenital hypothyroidism.

Agrawal P(1), Philip R(2), Saran S(3), Gutch M(3), Razi MS(3), Agroiya P(4), 
Gupta K(3).

Author information:
(1)Consultant Endocrinologist, Hormone Care and Research Centre, Ghaziabad, 
Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Pushpagiri Medical College, Thiruvalla, Kerala, 
India.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, LLRM Medical College, Meerut, Uttar Pradesh, 
India.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Subharti Medical College, Meerut, Uttar Pradesh, 
India.

Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) is the one of the most common preventable cause 
of mental retardation. In the majority of patients, CH is caused by an abnormal 
development of the thyroid gland (thyroid dysgenesis) that is a sporadic 
disorder and accounts for 85% of cases and the remaining 15% of cases are caused 
by dyshormonogenesis. The clinical features of congenital hypothyroidism are so 
subtle that many newborn infants remain undiagnosed at birth and delayed 
diagnosis leads to the most severe outcome of CH, mental retardation, 
emphasizing the importance of neonatal screening. Dried capillary blood is used 
for screening and it is taken from heel prick optimally between 2 and 5 days of 
age. Blood spot TSH or thyroxine (T4) or both are being used for CH screening in 
different programs around the world. Neonates with abnormal thyroid screening 
tests should be recalled immediately for examination and a venipuncture blood 
sample should be drawn for confirmatory serum testing. Confirmatory serum should 
be tested for TSH and free T4, or total T4. Serum TSH and T4 undergo dynamic 
changes in the first weeks of life; it is important to compare serum results 
with age-normal reference ranges. Treatment should be started promptly and 
infant should be rendered euthyroid as early as possible, as there is an inverse 
relationship between intelligence quotient (IQ) and the age at diagnosis. 
Levothyroxine (l-thyroxine) is the treatment of choice and American academy of 
pediatrics and European society of pediatric endocrinology recommend 
10-15μgm/kg/day as initial dose. The immediate goal of therapy is to normalize 
T4 within 2 weeks and TSH within one month. The overall goal of treatment is to 
ensure growth and neurodevelopmental outcomes as close as possible to their 
genetic potential.

DOI: 10.4103/2230-8210.131748
PMCID: PMC4319261
PMID: 25729683

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.