---
reference_id: "PMID:32913098"
title: The GTEx Consortium atlas of genetic regulatory effects across human tissues.
authors:
- GTEx Consortium
journal: Science
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1126/science.aaz1776
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The GTEx Consortium atlas of genetic regulatory effects across human tissues.
**Authors:** GTEx Consortium
**Journal:** Science (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aaz1776](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaz1776)

## Content

1. Science. 2020 Sep 11;369(6509):1318-1330. doi: 10.1126/science.aaz1776.

The GTEx Consortium atlas of genetic regulatory effects across human tissues.

GTEx Consortium.

Collaborators: Aguet F, Anand S, Ardlie KG, Gabriel S, Getz GA, Graubert A, 
Hadley K, Handsaker RE, Huang KH, Kashin S, Li X, MacArthur DG, Meier SR, Nedzel 
JL, Nguyen DT, Segrè AV, Todres E, Balliu B, Barbeira AN, Battle A, Bonazzola R, 
Brown A, Brown CD, Castel SE, Conrad DF, Cotter DJ, Cox N, Das S, de Goede OM, 
Dermitzakis ET, Einson J, Engelhardt BE, Eskin E, Eulalio TY, Ferraro NM, Flynn 
ED, Fresard L, Gamazon ER, Garrido-Martín D, Gay NR, Gloudemans MJ, Guigó R, 
Hame AR, He Y, Hoffman PJ, Hormozdiari F, Hou L, Im HK, Jo B, Kasela S, Kellis 
M, Kim-Hellmuth S, Kwong A, Lappalainen T, Li X, Liang Y, Mangul S, Mohammadi P, 
Montgomery SB, Muñoz-Aguirre M, Nachun DC, Nobel AB, Oliva M, Park Y, Park Y, 
Parsana P, Rao AS, Reverter F, Rouhana JM, Sabatti C, Saha A, Stephens M, 
Stranger BE, Strober BJ, Teran NA, Viñuela A, Wang G, Wen X, Wright F, Wucher V, 
Zou Y, Ferreira PG, Li G, Melé M, Yeger-Lotem E, Barcus ME, Bradbury D, Krubit 
T, McLean JA, Qi L, Robinson K, Roche NV, Smith AM, Sobin L, Tabor DE, Undale A, 
Bridge J, Brigham LE, Foster BA, Gillard BM, Hasz R, Hunter M, Johns C, Johnson 
M, Karasik E, Kopen G, Leinweber WF, McDonald A, Moser MT, Myer K, Ramsey KD, 
Roe B, Shad S, Thomas JA, Walters G, Washington M, Wheeler J, Jewell SD, Rohrer 
DC, Valley DR, Davis DA, Mash DC, Branton PA, Barker LK, Gardiner HM, Mosavel M, 
Siminoff LA, Flicek P, Haeussler M, Juettemann T, Kent WJ, Lee CM, Powell CC, 
Rosenbloom KR, Ruffier M, Sheppard D, Taylor K, Trevanion SJ, Zerbino DR, Abell 
NS, Akey J, Chen L, Demanelis K, Doherty JA, Feinberg AP, Hansen KD, Hickey PF, 
Jasmine F, Jiang L, Kaul R, Kibriya MG, Li JB, Li Q, Lin S, Linder SE, Pierce 
BL, Rizzardi LF, Skol AD, Smith KS, Snyder M, Stamatoyannopoulos J, Tang H, Wang 
M, Carithers LJ, Guan P, Koester SE, Little AR, Moore HM, Nierras CR, Rao AK, 
Vaught JB, Volpi S.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2020 Dec;21(12):717. doi: 10.1038/s41576-020-00296-7.

The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project was established to characterize 
genetic effects on the transcriptome across human tissues and to link these 
regulatory mechanisms to trait and disease associations. Here, we present 
analyses of the version 8 data, examining 15,201 RNA-sequencing samples from 49 
tissues of 838 postmortem donors. We comprehensively characterize genetic 
associations for gene expression and splicing in cis and trans, showing that 
regulatory associations are found for almost all genes, and describe the 
underlying molecular mechanisms and their contribution to allelic heterogeneity 
and pleiotropy of complex traits. Leveraging the large diversity of tissues, we 
provide insights into the tissue specificity of genetic effects and show that 
cell type composition is a key factor in understanding gene regulatory 
mechanisms in human tissues.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aaz1776
PMCID: PMC7737656
PMID: 32913098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests F.A. is an inventor on a 
patent application related to TensorQTL; S.E.C. is a co-founder, chief 
technology officer and stock owner at Variant Bio; E.R.G. is on the Editorial 
Board of Circulation Research, and does consulting for the City of Hope / 
Beckman Research Institut; E.T.D. is chairman and member of the board of 
Hybridstat LTD.; B.E.E. is on the scientific advisory boards of Celsius 
Therapeutics and Freenome; G.G. receives research funds from IBM and 
Pharmacyclics, and is an inventor on patent applications related to MuTect, 
ABSOLUTE, MutSig, MSMuTect, MSMutSig, POLYSOLVER and TensorQTL. G.G. is a 
founder, consultant and holds privately held equity in Scorpion Therapeutics; 
S.B.M. is on the scientific advisory board of MyOme; D.G.M. is a co-founder with 
equity in Goldfinch Bio, and has received research support from AbbVie, 
Astellas, Biogen, BioMarin, Eisai, Merck, Pfizer, and Sanofi-Genzyme; H.K.I. has 
received speaker honoraria from GSK and AbbVie.; T.L. is a scientific advisory 
board member of Variant Bio with equity and Goldfinch Bio. P.F. is member of the 
scientific advisory boards of Fabric Genomics, Inc., and Eagle Genomes, Ltd. 
P.G.F. is a partner of Bioinf2Bio.