---
reference_id: "PMID:35413664"
title: "Fatal Dieulafoy lesion with IgG4-related disease: An autopsy case report."
authors:
- Miyao M
- Kawai C
- Kotani H
- Minami H
- Abiru H
- Hamayasu H
- Yamamoto A
- Tamaki K
journal: Leg Med (Tokyo)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.legalmed.2022.102059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatal Dieulafoy lesion with IgG4-related disease: An autopsy case report.
**Authors:** Miyao M, Kawai C, Kotani H, Minami H, Abiru H, Hamayasu H, Yamamoto A, Tamaki K
**Journal:** Leg Med (Tokyo) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.legalmed.2022.102059](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.legalmed.2022.102059)

## Content

1. Leg Med (Tokyo). 2022 Jul;57:102059. doi: 10.1016/j.legalmed.2022.102059. Epub
 2022 Apr 6.

Fatal Dieulafoy lesion with IgG4-related disease: An autopsy case report.

Miyao M(1), Kawai C(2), Kotani H(3), Minami H(4), Abiru H(4), Hamayasu H(4), 
Yamamoto A(2), Tamaki K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: miyaom@fp.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)Center for Medical Education, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Forensic Medicine and Sciences, Mie University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Mie, Japan.
(4)Department of Forensic Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

Dieulafoy lesions are rare vascular malformations of the gastrointestinal tract; 
however, they can lead to fatal vascular bleeding. Immunoglobulin G4-related 
disease (IgG4-RD) is a rare systemic fibroinflammatory disease involving 
multiple organs, including the vasculature. To date, no autopsy reports of 
Dieulafoy lesions with IgG4-RD have been described in the literature. A 
48-year-old man was found dead in his home with hematochezia. Postmortem 
computed tomography revealed high-density gastric contents and an enlarged 
iso-density area in the pancreas, indicating gastric hemorrhage and mass-forming 
lesions. Macroscopic and histological examinations revealed an ulcer of the body 
of the stomach with a large amount of hemorrhage from the enlarged artery in the 
submucosal layer, confirming the rupture of the Dieulafoy lesion. Moreover, 
lymphocyte infiltrations with increased IgG4 positive cells were found in the 
pancreas, thyroid gland, and arteries in non-ulcer regions of the stomach, 
suggesting IgG4-RD. Serum biochemical analysis showed elevated levels of 
inflammatory mediators, such as IgE, soluble-interleukin-2 receptor, and 
C-reactive protein. These findings suggest that systemic inflammation caused by 
IgG4-RD could, at least in part, contribute to the development of Dieulafoy 
lesions and fatal rupture of the lesion. This case report highlights the 
importance of autopsy research focusing on Dieulafoy lesions and IgG4-RD to 
promote awareness and a better understanding of the relationships between these 
treatable diseases to establish earlier and effective interventional strategies 
for better patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.legalmed.2022.102059
PMID: 35413664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]