---
reference_id: "PMID:18606002"
title: Congenital long QT syndrome.
authors:
- Crotti L
- Celano G
- Dagradi F
- Schwartz PJ
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-18
keywords:
- Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/therapeutic use
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Electrocardiography
- Humans
- Ion Channels/genetics
- KCNQ1 Potassium Channel/genetics
- "Long QT Syndrome/congenital, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital long QT syndrome.
**Authors:** Crotti L, Celano G, Dagradi F, Schwartz PJ
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-3-18](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-3-18)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2008 Jul 7;3:18. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-18.

Congenital long QT syndrome.

Crotti L(1), Celano G, Dagradi F, Schwartz PJ.

Author information:
(1)Section of Cardiology, Department of Lung, Blood and Heart, University of
Pavia, Pavia, Italy. l.crotti@smatteo.pv.it

Congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a hereditary cardiac disease characterized
by a prolongation of the QT interval at basal ECG and by a high risk of
life-threatening arrhythmias. Disease prevalence is estimated at close to 1 in
2,500 live births. The two cardinal manifestations of LQTS are syncopal
episodes, that may lead to cardiac arrest and sudden cardiac death, and
electrocardiographic abnormalities, including prolongation of the QT interval
and T wave abnormalities. The genetic basis of the disease was identified in the
mid-nineties and all the LQTS genes identified so far encode cardiac ion channel
subunits or proteins involved in modulating ionic currents. Mutations in these
genes (KCNQ1, KCNH2, KCNE1, KCNE2, CACNA1c, CAV3, SCN5A, SCN4B) cause the
disease by prolonging the duration of the action potential. The most prevalent
LQTS variant (LQT1) is caused by mutations in the KCNQ1 gene, with approximately
half of the genotyped patients carrying KCNQ1 mutations. Given the
characteristic features of LQTS, the typical cases present no diagnostic
difficulties for physicians aware of the disease. However, borderline cases are
more complex and require the evaluation of various electrocardiographic,
clinical, and familial findings, as proposed in specific diagnostic criteria.
Additionally, molecular screening is now part of the diagnostic process.
Treatment should always begin with beta-blockers, unless there are valid
contraindications. If the patient has one more syncope despite a full dose
beta-blockade, left cardiac sympathetic denervation (LCSD) should be performed
without hesitation and implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) therapy
should be considered with the final decision being based on the individual
patient characteristics (age, sex, clinical history, genetic subgroup including
mutation-specific features in some cases, presence of ECG signs - including
24-hour Holter recordings - indicating high electrical instability). The
prognosis of the disease is usually good in patients that are correctly
diagnosed and treated. However, there are a few exceptions: patients with
Timothy syndrome, patients with Jervell Lange-Nielsen syndrome carrying KCNQ1
mutations and LQT3 patients with 2:1 atrio-ventricular block and very early
occurrence of cardiac arrhythmias.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-18
PMCID: PMC2474834
PMID: 18606002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
