---
reference_id: "PMID:32493146"
title: Risk factors for poor asthma control and impaired quality of life in a Caribbean population.
authors:
- Sakhamuri S
- Rampersad C
- Ramsingh C
- Ivey MA
- Pinto Pereira LM
journal: J Asthma
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/02770903.2020.1778026
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk factors for poor asthma control and impaired quality of life in a Caribbean population.
**Authors:** Sakhamuri S, Rampersad C, Ramsingh C, Ivey MA, Pinto Pereira LM
**Journal:** J Asthma (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/02770903.2020.1778026](https://doi.org/10.1080/02770903.2020.1778026)

## Content

1. J Asthma. 2021 Sep;58(9):1261-1269. doi: 10.1080/02770903.2020.1778026. Epub 
2020 Jun 16.

Risk factors for poor asthma control and impaired quality of life in a Caribbean 
population.

Sakhamuri S(1), Rampersad C(1), Ramsingh C(1), Ivey MA(1), Pinto Pereira LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medical Sciences, The University of the West Indies, St. 
Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago.

OBJECTIVE: Asthma, a major cause of disability and reduced quality of life, has 
a high global prevalence and burden of death. Despite the propitious guidelines, 
a substantial portion of asthmatics reportedly have poorly controlled disease. 
In the current study, we have examined risk factors for uncontrolled asthma in 
specialty clinics and its association with impaired quality of life.
METHODS: A multicentre cross-sectional survey of asthma patients, 18 years and 
older, was conducted in Trinidad. Asthma Control Test (ACT) and the Juniper Mini 
Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire (Mini AQLQ-J) were used to assess the 
disease control and quality of life, respectively. Data were analyzed using the 
Chi-square test and multivariable logistic regression controlling for gender.
RESULTS: Of a total of 428 patients included, asthma was uncontrolled in 72.4% 
and asthma related quality of life was moderate to severely impaired in 86% of 
the studied population. In the multivariate regression models, poorly controlled 
asthma was associated with obesity (OR 2.25; 95% CI 1.30-3.39), late-onset 
asthma (OR 1.72; 95% CI 1.04-2.84), features of sleep apnea (OR 1.77; 95% CI 
1.01-3.07) and depression (OR 2.01; 95% CI 1.04-3.86). Impaired quality of life 
was associated with Indo-Caribbean ethnicity (OR 3.19; 95% CI = 1.68-6.06).
CONCLUSIONS: In this Caribbean population, uncontrolled asthma was independently 
associated with obesity, late-onset disease, and comorbidities of sleep apnea 
and depression. Poor asthma-related quality of life was independently associated 
with Indo-Caribbean ethnicity.

DOI: 10.1080/02770903.2020.1778026
PMID: 32493146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]