---
reference_id: "PMID:39364273"
title: "Obstructive hydrocephalus due to choroid plexus carcinoma of third ventricle in pediatric: A rare case report."
authors:
- Ashri FW
- Nugraha HG
- Mahmudah R
- Dewayani BM
journal: Radiol Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.radcr.2024.08.127
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obstructive hydrocephalus due to choroid plexus carcinoma of third ventricle in pediatric: A rare case report.
**Authors:** Ashri FW, Nugraha HG, Mahmudah R, Dewayani BM
**Journal:** Radiol Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.radcr.2024.08.127](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radcr.2024.08.127)

## Content

1. Radiol Case Rep. 2024 Sep 21;19(12):6112-6116. doi:
10.1016/j.radcr.2024.08.127.  eCollection 2024 Dec.

Obstructive hydrocephalus due to choroid plexus carcinoma of third ventricle in
pediatric: A rare case report.

Ashri FW(1), Nugraha HG(1), Mahmudah R(1), Dewayani BM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Padjadjaran, Dr.
Hasan Sadikin General Hospital, Bandung, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas
Padjadjaran, Dr. Hasan Sadikin General Hospital, Bandung, Indonesia.

Choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) is an uncommon tumor that accounts for less than
1% of all pediatric brain tumors. CPC usually originates in the lateral
ventricle, followed by the fourth ventricle; the incidence in the third
ventricle is only 5% of all CPC cases (children and adults). We report an
extremely rare tumor arising from the choroid plexus of the third ventricle in a
6-year-old child with progressive headache, macrocephaly, left hemiparesis, and
sunset eyes. The imaging found a well-defined, lobulated mass with strong
enhancement in the posterior part of the third ventricle, resulting in
obstructive hydrocephalus. The patient underwent an endoscopic biopsy and
histopathological examination, which resulted in choroid plexus carcinoma.

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of University of
Washington.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2024.08.127
PMCID: PMC11447345
PMID: 39364273
