---
reference_id: "PMID:15894597"
title: "Camurati-Engelmann disease: review of the clinical, radiological, and molecular data of 24 families and implications for diagnosis and treatment."
authors:
- Janssens K
- Vanhoenacker F
- Bonduelle M
- Verbruggen L
- Van Maldergem L
- Ralston S
- Guañabens N
- Migone N
- Wientroub S
- Divizia MT
- Bergmann C
- Bennett C
- Simsek S
- Melançon S
- Cundy T
- Van Hul W
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.033522
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Camurati-Engelmann disease: review of the clinical, radiological, and molecular data of 24 families and implications for diagnosis and treatment.
**Authors:** Janssens K, Vanhoenacker F, Bonduelle M, Verbruggen L, Van Maldergem L, Ralston S, Guañabens N, Migone N, Wientroub S, Divizia MT, Bergmann C, Bennett C, Simsek S, Melançon S, Cundy T, Van Hul W
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2005.033522](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2005.033522)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2006 Jan;43(1):1-11. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.033522. Epub 2005 May 
13.

Camurati-Engelmann disease: review of the clinical, radiological, and molecular 
data of 24 families and implications for diagnosis and treatment.

Janssens K(1), Vanhoenacker F, Bonduelle M, Verbruggen L, Van Maldergem L, 
Ralston S, Guañabens N, Migone N, Wientroub S, Divizia MT, Bergmann C, Bennett 
C, Simsek S, Melançon S, Cundy T, Van Hul W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED) is a rare autosomal dominant type of bone 
dysplasia. This review is based on the unpublished and detailed clinical, 
radiological, and molecular findings in 14 CED families, comprising 41 patients, 
combined with data from 10 other previously reported CED families. For all 100 
cases, molecular evidence for CED was available, as a mutation was detected in 
TGFB1, the gene encoding transforming growth factor (TGF) beta1. Pain in the 
extremities was the most common clinical symptom, present in 68% of the 
patients. A waddling gait (48%), easy fatigability (44%), and muscle weakness 
(39%) were other important features. Radiological symptoms were not fully 
penetrant, with 94% of the patients showing the typical long bone involvement. A 
large percentage of the patients also showed involvement of the skull (54%) and 
pelvis (63%). The review provides an overview of possible treatments, diagnostic 
guidelines, and considerations for prenatal testing. The detailed description of 
such a large set of CED patients will be of value in establishing the correct 
diagnosis, genetic counselling, and treatment.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2005.033522
PMCID: PMC2564495
PMID: 15894597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: none declared