---
reference_id: "PMID:41574892"
title: Age Does Not Affect Respiratory Characteristics in Children With Prader-Willi Syndrome Before and After Growth Hormone Therapy.
authors:
- Ip M
- Cheng SL
- Patoglu OR
- Plunkett G
- Nisbet LC
- Nixon GM
- Davey MJ
- Horne RSC
journal: Acta Paediatr
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1111/apa.70459
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Age Does Not Affect Respiratory Characteristics in Children With Prader-Willi Syndrome Before and After Growth Hormone Therapy.
**Authors:** Ip M, Cheng SL, Patoglu OR, Plunkett G, Nisbet LC, Nixon GM, Davey MJ, Horne RSC
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1111/apa.70459](https://doi.org/10.1111/apa.70459)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr. 2026 Jan 23. doi: 10.1111/apa.70459. Online ahead of print.

Age Does Not Affect Respiratory Characteristics in Children With Prader-Willi 
Syndrome Before and After Growth Hormone Therapy.

Ip M(1), Cheng SL(1), Patoglu OR(1), Plunkett G(1), Nisbet LC(1)(2), Nixon 
GM(1)(2), Davey MJ(1)(2), Horne RSC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Melbourne Children's Sleep Centre, Monash Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
Australia.

AIM: Children with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) are at increased risk of both 
central (CSA) and obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA). Studies examining the effects 
of growth hormone have focused on older children; however, therapy is often 
initiated before the age of 2 years. We determined the effects of age on (1) the 
number of children diagnosed with OSA and CSA; (2) the sleep and respiratory 
characteristics and (3) the effects of growth hormone on OSA and CSA.
METHODS: Retrospective review of children with PWS who underwent polysomnography 
pre- and post-growth hormone between January 2011 and June 2024.
RESULTS: Fifty-six children (35 < 2 years; 21 ≥ 2 years) pre-growth hormone; 28 
children < 2 years and 15 children ≥ 2 years after growth hormone. Pre-growth 
hormone, children ≥ 2 years had more severe OSA than children < 2 years 
(p < 0.05). There was no difference between age groups for CSA. Post-growth 
hormone, 21% of children < 2 years and 20% of children ≥ 2 years developed OSA. 
CSA resolved post-growth hormone in 21% of children < 2 years and 6% of children 
≥ 2 years, whilst CSA developed in 11% and 13%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Our study highlights that very young children do not appear to be at 
higher risk of development of OSA or CSA when treated with growth hormone.

© 2026 The Author(s). Acta Paediatrica published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Foundation Acta Paediatrica.

DOI: 10.1111/apa.70459
PMID: 41574892