---
reference_id: "PMID:38739383"
title: "Antithrombotic Treatment for Cervical Artery Dissection: A Systematic Review and Individual Patient Data Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Kaufmann JE
- Harshfield EL
- Gensicke H
- Wegener S
- Michel P
- Kägi G
- Nedeltchev K
- Kellert L
- Rosenbaum S
- Nolte CH
- Christensen H
- Arnold M
- Lyrer P
- Levi C
- Bath PM
- Engelter ST
- Traenka C
- Markus HS
- CADISS and TREAT-CAD Investigators
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2024.1141
keywords:
- Humans
- "Vertebral Artery Dissection/drug therapy, complications"
- Fibrinolytic Agents/therapeutic use
- Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Anticoagulants/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Stroke/prevention & control, drug therapy, etiology"
- "Carotid Artery, Internal, Dissection/drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antithrombotic Treatment for Cervical Artery Dissection: A Systematic Review and Individual Patient Data Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Kaufmann JE, Harshfield EL, Gensicke H, Wegener S, Michel P, Kägi G, Nedeltchev K, Kellert L, Rosenbaum S, Nolte CH, Christensen H, Arnold M, Lyrer P, Levi C, Bath PM, Engelter ST, Traenka C, Markus HS, CADISS and TREAT-CAD Investigators
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2024.1141](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2024.1141)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2024 Jun 1;81(6):630-637. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2024.1141.

Antithrombotic Treatment for Cervical Artery Dissection: A Systematic Review and
Individual Patient Data Meta-Analysis.

Kaufmann JE(1)(2), Harshfield EL(3), Gensicke H(1)(2), Wegener S(4), Michel
P(5), Kägi G(6)(7), Nedeltchev K(8), Kellert L(9)(10), Rosenbaum S(11), Nolte
CH(12)(13), Christensen H(11), Arnold M(6), Lyrer P(1), Levi C(14), Bath PM(15),
Engelter ST(1)(2), Traenka C(1)(2), Markus HS(3); CADISS and TREAT-CAD
Investigators.

Collaborators: Azlisham MN, Boswell R, Baldwin N, Rudd A, Burger I, Kalra L,
Hassan A, Price C, Dixit A, MacWalter R, Cohen D, Davey R, Cassidy T,
Gunathilagan G, Jenkinson D, Harrington F, James M, Venables G, Smyth N, Emsley
H, Shaw L, Lovett J, Guyler P, Markus HS, Gompertz P, Kelly D, Salih I, Davies
B, Shetty H, Mistri A, Hargrovers D, Rashed K, Clarke B, Collas D, Colam B,
Salman RA, Gerraty R, Sturm J, Levi C, Kleinig T, Wrong A, Hand P, Delcourt C,
King A, Madigan J, Morley A, Norris J, Peycke J, Wilson M, Hicks C, Hayter E,
Menon R, Kennedy F, Khan U, Feldman A, Hollocks M, Venebales GS, Kerry S, Hassan
A, Ford GA, Bath PM, Weir C, Briley D, Bhalla A, Engelter S, Traenka C,
Schaedelin S, Lyrer P, Kloss M, Droste D, Brandt T, Psychogius MN, Brehm A, Grau
A, Sandor P, von Felten S, Hammann A, Fabbro T, Maurer M, Ehrlich K, Rösler A,
Forst P, Kahles T, Nedeltchev K, Altersberger V, Bonati L, Brehm A, Bruni N, de
Marchis GM, Fisch U, Fladt J, Gensicke H, Hert L, Peters N, Polymeris A,
Stippich C, Thilemann S, Wagner B, Arnold M, Fischer U, Heldner MR, Seiffge DJ,
Sveikata L, Sztajzel R, Muller H, Correia P, Eskandari A, Meyer I, Michel P,
Nannoni S, Remillard S, Sirimarco G, Zachariadis A, Kaegi G, Mueller A, Vehoff
J, Hamann J, Luft A, Steiner L, Wegener S, Erdur JH, Nolte C, V Rennenberg R,
Scheitz JF, Fell K, Kellert L, Christensen H, Rosenbaum S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, University Hospital Basel and
University of Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, University Department of Geriatric
Medicine FELIX PLATTER, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Stroke Research Group, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Division of Vascular Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, Department of
Neurology, University Hospital of Zurich, and University of Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Stroke Center and Neurology Service, Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
(6)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Bern, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland.
(7)Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, Cantonal Hospital St Gallen, St
Gallen, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, Cantonal Hospital Aarau, Aarau,
Switzerland.
(9)Department of Neurology, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany.
(10)Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, University Hospital, LMU Munich,
Munich, Germany.
(11)Department of Neurology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Bispebjerg,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(12)Department of Neurology with Experimental Neurology, Center for Stroke
Research Berlin, Charite-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(13)Berlin Institute of Healths at Charite, Charite-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.
(14)Faculty of Health and Medicine, University of Newcastle, and John Hunter
Hospital, Newcastle, Australia.
(15)Stroke Trials Unit, Mental Health & Clinical Neuroscience, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

IMPORTANCE: Cervical artery dissection is the most common cause of stroke in
younger adults. To date, there is no conclusive evidence on which antithrombotic
therapy should be used to treat patients.
OBJECTIVE: To perform an individual patient data meta-analysis of randomized
clinical trials comparing anticoagulants and antiplatelets in prevention of
stroke after cervical artery dissection.
DATA SOURCES: PubMed.gov, Cochrane database, Embase, and ClinicalTrials.gov were
searched from inception to August 1, 2023.
STUDY SELECTION: Randomized clinical trials that investigated the effectiveness
and safety of antithrombotic treatment (antiplatelets vs anticoagulation) in
patients with cervical artery dissection were included in the meta-analysis. The
primary end point was required to include a composite of (1) any stroke, (2)
death, or (3) major bleeding (extracranial or intracranial) at 90 days of
follow-up.
DATA EXTRACTION/SYNTHESIS: Two independent investigators performed a systematic
review according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses guidelines, and inconsistencies were resolved by a principal
investigator.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was a composite of (1) ischemic
stroke, (2) death, or (3) major bleeding (extracranial or intracranial) at 90
days of follow-up. The components of the composite outcome were also secondary
outcomes. Subgroup analyses based on baseline characteristics with a putative
association with the outcome were performed. Logistic regression was performed
using the maximum penalized likelihood method including interaction in the
subgroup analyses.
RESULTS: Two randomized clinical trials, Cervical Artery Dissection in Stroke
Study and Cervical Artery Dissection in Stroke Study and the Biomarkers and
Antithrombotic Treatment in Cervical Artery Dissection, were identified, of
which all participants were eligible. A total of 444 patients were included in
the intention-to-treat population and 370 patients were included in the
per-protocol population. Baseline characteristics were balanced. There were
fewer primary end points in those randomized to anticoagulation vs antiplatelet
therapy (3 of 218 [1.4%] vs 10 of 226 [4.4%]; odds ratio [OR], 0.33 [95% CI,
0.08-1.05]; P = .06), but the finding was not statistically significant. In
comparison with aspirin, anticoagulation was associated with fewer strokes (1 of
218 [0.5%] vs 10 of 226 [4.0%]; OR, 0.14 [95% CI, 0.02-0.61]; P = .01) and more
bleeding events (2 vs 0).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This individual patient data meta-analysis of 2
currently available randomized clinical trial data found no significant
difference between anticoagulants and antiplatelets in preventing early
recurrent events.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2024.1141
PMCID: PMC11091821
PMID: 38739383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Kaufmann
reported receiving grants from the Goldschmidt-Jacobson Foundation during the
conduct of the study; and grants from the Internal Pool of the University
Hospital of Basel outside the submitted work. Dr Harshfield reported receiving
grants from the Alzheimer's Society, BHF program grant, and Cambridge NIHR
Biomedical Research Centre during the conduct of the study; and grants from
Cambridge BHF Centre of Research Excellence outside the submitted work. Dr
Michel reported receiving grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation,
Swiss Heart Foundation, and Faculty of Biology and Medicine of Lausanne
University outside the submitted work. Dr Kellert reported receiving funding for
travel or speaker honoraria from Alexion, AstraZeneca, Bayer Vital, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Bristol-Meyer-Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, and Pfizer outside the
submitted work. Dr Nolte reported receiving speaker honoraria from Abbott,
Alexion, AstraZeneca, BMS, Daiichi Sankyo, Novartis, Pfizer, Portola, and
Takeda. Dr Arnold reported receiving grants from the Swiss National Science
Foundation for Treat-CAD during the conduct of the study; and scientific
advisory board fees from Amgen; lecture fees from AstraZeneca; lecture and
scientific advisory board fees from Bayer; scientific advisory board fees from
BMS; scientific advisory board fees from Boehringer Ingelheim; lecture fees from
Covidien; scientific advisory board fees from Daiichi Sankyo; lecture and
scientific advisory board fees from Medtronic; and scientific advisory board
fees from Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, and Sanofi outside the submitted work.
Dr Bath reported receiving advisory board fees from CoMind, DiaMedica,
Phagenesis, and Roche outside the submitted work. Dr Engelter reported receiving
grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation, Swiss Heart Foundation,
Freiwillige Akademische Gesellschaft Basel, University of Basel, and University
Hospital Basel during the conduct of the study. Dr Traenka reported receiving
grants from University Hospital Basel, Novartis Foundation for Biological and
Medical Research, Swiss Heart Foundation, Bangerter Foundation Basel, and FAG
Basel outside the submitted work. Dr Markus reported receiving grants from
Stroke Association funded CADISS study during the conduct of the study. No other
disclosures were reported.
