---
reference_id: "PMID:26386541"
title: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
authors:
- Thapar A
- Cooper M
journal: Lancet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00238-X
keywords:
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Central Nervous System Stimulants/therapeutic use
- Child
- Comorbidity
- Gene-Environment Interaction
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
**Authors:** Thapar A, Cooper M
**Journal:** Lancet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00238-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00238-X)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2016 Mar 19;387(10024):1240-50. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00238-X.
Epub  2015 Sep 17.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.

Thapar A(1), Cooper M(2).

Author information:
(1)Child & Adolescent Psychiatry Section, Institute of Psychological Medicine
and Clinical Neurosciences, and MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and
Genomics, Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, UK. Electronic
address: thapar@cardiff.ac.uk.
(2)Child & Adolescent Psychiatry Section, Institute of Psychological Medicine
and Clinical Neurosciences, and MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and
Genomics, Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, UK.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a childhood-onset
neurodevelopmental disorder with a prevalence of 1·4-3·0%. It is more common in
boys than girls. Comorbidity with childhood-onset neurodevelopmental disorders
and psychiatric disorders is substantial. ADHD is highly heritable and
multifactorial; multiple genes and non-inherited factors contribute to the
disorder. Prenatal and perinatal factors have been implicated as risks, but
definite causes remain unknown. Most guidelines recommend a stepwise approach to
treatment, beginning with non-drug interventions and then moving to
pharmacological treatment in those most severely affected. Randomised controlled
trials show short-term benefits of stimulant medication and atomoxetine.
Meta-analyses of blinded trials of non-drug treatments have not yet proven the
efficacy of such interventions. Longitudinal studies of ADHD show heightened
risk of multiple mental health and social difficulties as well as premature
mortality in adult life.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00238-X
PMID: 26386541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
