---
reference_id: PMID:39103541
title: Co-targeting SOS1 enhances the antitumor effects of KRAS(G12C) inhibitors by addressing intrinsic and acquired resistance.
authors:
- Thatikonda V
- Lyu H
- Jurado S
- Kostyrko K
- Bristow CA
- Albrecht C
- Alpar D
- Arnhof H
- Bergner O
- Bosch K
- Feng N
- Gao S
- Gerlach D
- Gmachl M
- Hinkel M
- Lieb S
- Jeschko A
- Machado AA
- Madensky T
- Marszalek ED
- Mahendra M
- Melo-Zainzinger G
- Molkentine JM
- Jaeger PA
- Peng DH
- Schenk RL
- Sorokin A
- Strauss S
- Trapani F
- Kopetz S
- Vellano CP
- Petronczki M
- Kraut N
- Heffernan TP
- Marszalek JR
- Pearson M
- Waizenegger IC
- Hofmann MH
journal: Nat Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s43018-024-00800-6
keywords:
- SOS1 Protein/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- Humans
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/drug effects"
- Animals
- Mice
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Mutation
- Female
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Acetonitriles
- Piperazines
- Pyrimidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Co-targeting SOS1 enhances the antitumor effects of KRAS(G12C) inhibitors by addressing intrinsic and acquired resistance.
**Authors:** Thatikonda V, Lyu H, Jurado S, Kostyrko K, Bristow CA, Albrecht C, Alpar D, Arnhof H, Bergner O, Bosch K, Feng N, Gao S, Gerlach D, Gmachl M, Hinkel M, Lieb S, Jeschko A, Machado AA, Madensky T, Marszalek ED, Mahendra M, Melo-Zainzinger G, Molkentine JM, Jaeger PA, Peng DH, Schenk RL, Sorokin A, Strauss S, Trapani F, Kopetz S, Vellano CP, Petronczki M, Kraut N, Heffernan TP, Marszalek JR, Pearson M, Waizenegger IC, Hofmann MH
**Journal:** Nat Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s43018-024-00800-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-024-00800-6)

## Content

1. Nat Cancer. 2024 Sep;5(9):1352-1370. doi: 10.1038/s43018-024-00800-6. Epub
2024  Aug 5.

Co-targeting SOS1 enhances the antitumor effects of KRAS(G12C) inhibitors by 
addressing intrinsic and acquired resistance.

Thatikonda V(#)(1)(2), Lyu H(#)(3), Jurado S(4), Kostyrko K(4), Bristow CA(3), 
Albrecht C(4), Alpar D(4), Arnhof H(4), Bergner O(4), Bosch K(4), Feng N(3), Gao 
S(3), Gerlach D(4), Gmachl M(4), Hinkel M(4), Lieb S(4), Jeschko A(4), Machado 
AA(3), Madensky T(4), Marszalek ED(3), Mahendra M(3), Melo-Zainzinger G(4), 
Molkentine JM(3), Jaeger PA(4), Peng DH(3), Schenk RL(4), Sorokin A(5), Strauss 
S(4), Trapani F(4), Kopetz S(5), Vellano CP(3), Petronczki M(4), Kraut N(4), 
Heffernan TP(3), Marszalek JR(3), Pearson M(4), Waizenegger IC(4), Hofmann 
MH(6).

Author information:
(1)Boehringer Ingelheim RCV, Vienna, Austria. vthatikonda@exscientia.co.uk.
(2)Exscientia, Vienna, Austria. vthatikonda@exscientia.co.uk.
(3)Translational Research to Advance Therapeutics and Innovation in Oncology 
(TRACTION) Platform, Therapeutics Discovery Division, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim RCV, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(6)Boehringer Ingelheim RCV, Vienna, Austria. 
marco.hofmann@boehringer-ingelheim.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jan 23:2023.01.23.525210. doi: 10.1101/2023.01.23.525210.

Combination approaches are needed to strengthen and extend the clinical response 
to KRASG12C inhibitors (KRASG12Ci). Here, we assessed the antitumor responses of 
KRASG12C mutant lung and colorectal cancer models to combination treatment with 
a SOS1 inhibitor (SOS1i), BI-3406, plus the KRASG12C inhibitor, adagrasib. We 
found that responses to BI-3406 plus adagrasib were stronger than to adagrasib 
alone, comparable to adagrasib with SHP2 (SHP2i) or EGFR inhibitors and 
correlated with stronger suppression of RAS-MAPK signaling. BI-3406 plus 
adagrasib treatment also delayed the emergence of acquired resistance and 
elicited antitumor responses from adagrasib-resistant models. Resistance to 
KRASG12Ci seemed to be driven by upregulation of MRAS activity, which both SOS1i 
and SHP2i were found to potently inhibit. Knockdown of SHOC2, a MRAS complex 
partner, partially restored response to KRASG12Ci treatment. These results 
suggest KRASG12C plus SOS1i to be a promising strategy for treating both 
KRASG12Ci naive and relapsed KRASG12C-mutant tumors.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s43018-024-00800-6
PMCID: PMC11424490
PMID: 39103541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: V.T., S.J., K.K., D.A., H.A., O.B., K.B., D.G., 
M.G., M.H., S.L., A.J., C.A., T.M., G.M.-Z., P.A.J., R.L.S., S.S., F.T., M. 
Petronczki, N.K., M. Pearson, I.W. and M.H.H. report grants from the Austrian 
Research Promotion Agency (FFG) and have received personal fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim (full-time employee) during the conduct of the study. V.T. is now a 
full-time employee for Exscientia, Vienna, Austria. M.H.H. and M.G. have been 
listed as the inventors on patent applications for SOS1 inhibitors. A.S., S.K., 
H.L., A.A.M., M.M., E.D.M., S.G., N.F., C.A.B., D.H.P., J.M.M., C.P.V., T.P.H. 
and J.R.M. report other from Boehringer Ingelheim (sponsored research) during 
the conduct of the study and this work was performed under a sponsored research 
collaboration between MD Anderson and Boehringer Ingelheim, for which the latter 
provided funding support. S. K. has ownership interest in Lutris, Iylon, 
Frontier Medicines, Xilis and Navire and is a consultant for Genentech, EMD 
Serono, Merck, Holy Stone Healthcare, Novartis, Lilly, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
AstraZeneca/MedImmune, Bayer Health, Redx Pharma, Ipsen, HalioDx, Lutris, 
Jacobio, Pfizer, Repare Therapeutics, Inivata, GlaxoSmithKline, Jazz 
Pharmaceuticals, Iylon, Xilis, Abbvie, Amal Therapeutics, Gilead Sciences, 
Mirati Therapeutics, Flame Biosciences, Servier, Carina Biotech, Bicara 
Therapeutics, Endeavor BioMedicines, Numab, Johnson & Johnson/Janssen, Genomic 
Health, Frontier Medicines, Replimune, Taiho Pharmaceutical, Cardiff Oncology, 
Ono Pharmaceutical, Bristol-Myers Squibb-Medarex, Amgen, Tempus, Foundation 
Medicine, Harbinger Oncology, Takeda, CureTeq, Zentalis, Black Stone 
Therapeutics, NeoGenomics Laboratories and Accademia Nazionale Di Medicina, and 
receive research funding from Sanofi, Biocartis, Guardant Health, Array 
BioPharma, Genentech/Roche, EMD Serono, MedImmune, Novartis, Amgen, Lilly and 
Daiichi Sankyo. T.P.H. receives advisory fees from Cullgen and Roivant 
Discovery.