---
reference_id: PMID:35137054
title: The ciliary transition zone protein TMEM218 synergistically interacts with the NPHP module and its reduced dosage leads to a wide range of syndromic ciliopathies.
authors:
- Epting D
- Decker E
- Ott E
- Eisenberger T
- Bader I
- Bachmann N
- Bergmann C
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac027
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Caenorhabditis elegans/genetics
- "Cilia/genetics, metabolism"
- Ciliary Motility Disorders
- "Ciliopathies/genetics, metabolism"
- Encephalocele
- Humans
- Mutation
- Polycystic Kidney Diseases/genetics
- Retinitis Pigmentosa
- Zebrafish/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ciliary transition zone protein TMEM218 synergistically interacts with the NPHP module and its reduced dosage leads to a wide range of syndromic ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Epting D, Decker E, Ott E, Eisenberger T, Bader I, Bachmann N, Bergmann C
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddac027](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddac027)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2022 Jul 21;31(14):2295-2306. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac027.

The ciliary transition zone protein TMEM218 synergistically interacts with the 
NPHP module and its reduced dosage leads to a wide range of syndromic 
ciliopathies.

Epting D(1), Decker E(2), Ott E(1), Eisenberger T(2), Bader I(3), Bachmann N(2), 
Bergmann C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine IV, Faculty of Medicine, Medical Center-University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Medizinische Genetik Mainz, Limbach Genetics, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Paracelsus Medical 
University, Salzburg, Austria.

Mutations in genes that lead to dysfunctional cilia can cause a broad spectrum 
of human disease phenotypes referred to as ciliopathies. Many 
ciliopathy-associated proteins are localized to the evolutionary conserved 
ciliary transition zone (TZ) subdomain. We identified biallelic missense and 
nonsense mutations in the gene encoding the transmembrane protein TMEM218 in 
unrelated patients with features related to Bardet-Biedl, Joubert and 
Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) and characterized TMEM218 as a major component of 
the ciliary TZ module. Co-immunoprecipitation assays resulted in the physical 
interaction of TMEM218 with the MKS module member TMEM67/Meckelin that was 
significantly reduced by the TMEM218 missense change harboured by one of our 
patients. We could further validate its pathogenicity by functional in vivo 
analysis in zebrafish (Danio rerio) as a well-established vertebrate model for 
ciliopathies. Notably, ciliopathy-related phenotypes were most prominent by 
genetic interactions with the NPHP module component Nphp4. Conclusively, we 
describe TMEM218 as a new disease gene for patients with a wide spectrum of 
syndromic ciliopathy phenotypes and provide evidence for a synergistic 
interaction of TMEM218 and the NPHP module crucial for proper ciliary function.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddac027
PMID: 35137054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]