---
reference_id: "PMID:37915623"
title: "Scurvy in a young man: a rare case report."
authors:
- Lu RL
- Guo JW
- Sun BD
- Chen YL
- Liu DZ
journal: Front Nutr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fnut.2023.1265334
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scurvy in a young man: a rare case report.
**Authors:** Lu RL, Guo JW, Sun BD, Chen YL, Liu DZ
**Journal:** Front Nutr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnut.2023.1265334](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2023.1265334)

## Content

1. Front Nutr. 2023 Oct 17;10:1265334. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2023.1265334.
eCollection  2023.

Scurvy in a young man: a rare case report.

Lu RL(1), Guo JW(1), Sun BD(1)(2), Chen YL(2), Liu DZ(2).

Author information:
(1)The Second Clinical Medical College, Jinan University (Shenzhen People's 
Hospital), Shenzhen, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Shenzhen People's Hospital, 
Shenzhen, China.

Scurvy, resulting from vitamin C deficiency, has nonspecific constitutional 
symptoms, including weakness, malaise, and fatigue. It is frequently 
misdiagnosed due to the lack of specific clinical manifestations. Although there 
are sporadic cases of scurvy currently reported in children, scurvy in young 
people is seldom encountered. Here, we report on a 25-year-old male patient 
without any underlying conditions who presented with severe pain and ecchymoses 
of both lower extremities. He was diagnosed with scurvy due to a long history of 
staying indoors and inadequate intake of fruits or vegetables.

Copyright © 2023 Lu, Guo, Sun, Chen and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2023.1265334
PMCID: PMC10616463
PMID: 37915623

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.