---
reference_id: "PMID:38421181"
title: "Clostridioides difficile infection: history, epidemiology, risk factors, prevention, clinical manifestations, treatment, and future options."
authors:
- Di Bella S
- Sanson G
- Monticelli J
- Zerbato V
- Principe L
- Giuffrè M
- Pipitone G
- Luzzati R
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1128/cmr.00135-23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clostridioides difficile infection: history, epidemiology, risk factors, prevention, clinical manifestations, treatment, and future options.
**Authors:** Di Bella S, Sanson G, Monticelli J, Zerbato V, Principe L, Giuffrè M, Pipitone G, Luzzati R
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1128/cmr.00135-23](https://doi.org/10.1128/cmr.00135-23)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2024 Jun 13;37(2):e0013523. doi: 10.1128/cmr.00135-23.
Epub  2024 Feb 29.

Clostridioides difficile infection: history, epidemiology, risk factors, 
prevention, clinical manifestations, treatment, and future options.

Di Bella S(1), Sanson G(1), Monticelli J(2), Zerbato V(2), Principe L(3), 
Giuffrè M(1)(4), Pipitone G(5), Luzzati R(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, Trieste 
University, Trieste, Italy.
(2)Infectious Diseases Unit, Trieste University Hospital (ASUGI), Trieste, 
Italy.
(3)Microbiology and Virology Unit, Great Metropolitan Hospital 
"Bianchi-Melacrino-Morelli", Reggio Calabria, Italy.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine (Digestive Diseases), Yale School of 
Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(5)Infectious Diseases Unit, ARNAS Civico-Di Cristina Hospital, Palermo, Italy.

SUMMARYClostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is one of the major issues in 
nosocomial infections. This bacterium is constantly evolving and poses complex 
challenges for clinicians, often encountered in real-life scenarios. In the face 
of CDI, we are increasingly equipped with new therapeutic strategies, such as 
monoclonal antibodies and live biotherapeutic products, which need to be 
thoroughly understood to fully harness their benefits. Moreover, interesting 
options are currently under study for the future, including bacteriophages, 
vaccines, and antibiotic inhibitors. Surveillance and prevention strategies 
continue to play a pivotal role in limiting the spread of the infection. In this 
review, we aim to provide the reader with a comprehensive overview of 
epidemiological aspects, predisposing factors, clinical manifestations, 
diagnostic tools, and current and future prophylactic and therapeutic options 
for C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.1128/cmr.00135-23
PMCID: PMC11324037
PMID: 38421181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.