---
reference_id: "PMID:32506582"
title: Haploinsufficiency of the Primary Familial Brain Calcification Gene SLC20A2 Mediated by Disruption of a Regulatory Element.
authors:
- Cassinari K
- Rovelet-Lecrux A
- Tury S
- Quenez O
- Richard AC
- Charbonnier C
- Olaso R
- Boland A
- Deleuze JF
- Besancenot JF
- Delpont B
- Pouliquen D
- Lecoquierre F
- Chambon P
- Thauvin-Robinet C
- Campion D
- Frebourg T
- Battini JL
- Nicolas G
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/mds.28090
keywords:
- Brain/metabolism
- Brain Diseases
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- HEK293 Cells
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type III/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haploinsufficiency of the Primary Familial Brain Calcification Gene SLC20A2 Mediated by Disruption of a Regulatory Element.
**Authors:** Cassinari K, Rovelet-Lecrux A, Tury S, Quenez O, Richard AC, Charbonnier C, Olaso R, Boland A, Deleuze JF, Besancenot JF, Delpont B, Pouliquen D, Lecoquierre F, Chambon P, Thauvin-Robinet C, Campion D, Frebourg T, Battini JL, Nicolas G
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.28090](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28090)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2020 Aug;35(8):1336-1345. doi: 10.1002/mds.28090. Epub 2020 Jun 7.

Haploinsufficiency of the Primary Familial Brain Calcification Gene SLC20A2 
Mediated by Disruption of a Regulatory Element.

Cassinari K(1), Rovelet-Lecrux A(1), Tury S(2), Quenez O(1), Richard AC(1), 
Charbonnier C(1), Olaso R(3), Boland A(3), Deleuze JF(3), Besancenot JF(4), 
Delpont B(4), Pouliquen D(5), Lecoquierre F(1), Chambon P(1), Thauvin-Robinet 
C(6)(7)(8), Campion D(1)(9), Frebourg T(1), Battini JL(2), Nicolas G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and CNR-MAJ, Normandy Center for Genomic and 
Personalized Medicine, Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen 
University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(2)Institut de Recherche en Infectiologie de Montpellier, Université de 
Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France.
(3)Centre National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine, Institut de Biologie 
François Jacob, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, Evry, France.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Systemic Diseases, Dijon University 
Hospital, Dijon, France.
(5)Department of Neurology and CNR-MAJ, Normandy Center for Genomic and 
Personalized Medicine, Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen 
University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(6)Inserm UMR 1231 GAD, Genetics of Developmental Disorders, Université de 
Bourgogne-Franche Comté, FHU TRANSLAD, Dijon, France.
(7)CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Unité Fonctionnelle "Innovation diagnostique dans les 
maladies rares," laboratoire de génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, Plateau 
Technique de Biologie, Dijon, France.
(8)Centre de Référence Maladies Rares "Déficiences Intellectuelles de causes 
rares," FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France.
(9)Department of Research, Rouvray Psychiatric Hospital, Sotteville-les-Rouen, 
France.

OBJECTIVE: Primary familial brain calcification (PFBC) is a rare cerebral 
microvascular calcifying disorder with diverse neuropsychiatric expression. Five 
genes were reported as PFBC causative when carrying pathogenic variants. 
Haploinsufficiency of SLC20A2, which encodes an inorganic phosphate importer, is 
a major cause of autosomal-dominant PFBC. However, PFBC remains genetically 
unexplained in a proportion of patients, suggesting the existence of additional 
genes or cryptic mutations. We analyzed exome sequencing data of 71 unrelated, 
genetically unexplained PFBC patients with the aim to detect copy number 
variations that may disrupt the expression of core PFBC-causing genes.
METHODS: After the identification of a deletion upstream of SLC20A2, we assessed 
its consequences on gene function by reverse transcriptase droplet digital 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-ddPCR), an ex vivo inorganic phosphate uptake 
assay, and introduced the deletion of a putative SLC20A2 enhancer mapping to 
this region in human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells by clustered regularly 
interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) - CRISPR-associated protein 9 
(Cas9).
RESULTS: The 8p11.21 deletion, segregating with PFBC in a family, mapped 35 kb 
upstream of SLC20A2. The deletion carriers/normal controls ratio of relative 
SLC20A2 mRNA levels was 60.2% (P < 0.001). This was comparable with that of 
patients carrying an SLC20A2 premature stop codon (63.4%; P < 0.001). The 
proband exhibited a 39.3% decrease of inorganic phosphate uptake in blood (P = 
0.015). In HEK293 cells, we observed a 39.8% decrease in relative SLC20A2 mRNA 
levels after normalization on DNA copy number (P < 0.001).
DISCUSSION: We identified a deletion of an enhancer of SLC20A2 expression, with 
carriers showing haploinsufficiency in similar ranges to loss-of-function 
alleles, and we observed reduced mRNA levels after deleting this element in a 
cellular model. We propose a 3-step strategy to identify and easily assess the 
effect of such events. © 2020 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder 
Society.

© 2020 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.28090
PMID: 32506582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]