---
reference_id: "PMID:24944120"
title: Antimicrobial drugs for treating cholera.
authors:
- Leibovici-Weissman Y
- Neuberger A
- Bitterman R
- Sinclair D
- Salam MA
- Paul M
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008625.pub2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antimicrobial drugs for treating cholera.
**Authors:** Leibovici-Weissman Y, Neuberger A, Bitterman R, Sinclair D, Salam MA, Paul M
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD008625.pub2](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD008625.pub2)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Jun 19;2014(6):CD008625. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD008625.pub2.

Antimicrobial drugs for treating cholera.

Leibovici-Weissman Y(1), Neuberger A, Bitterman R, Sinclair D, Salam MA, Paul M.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 49100.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008625.

BACKGROUND: Cholera is an acute watery diarrhoea caused by infection with the 
bacterium Vibrio cholerae, which if severe can cause rapid dehydration and 
death. Effective management requires early diagnosis and rehydration using oral 
rehydration salts or intravenous fluids. In this review, we evaluate the 
additional benefits of treating cholera with antimicrobial drugs.
OBJECTIVES: To quantify the benefit of antimicrobial treatment for patients with 
cholera, and determine whether there are differences between classes of 
antimicrobials or dosing schedules.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Infectious Disease Group Specialized 
Register; the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL); PubMed; 
EMBASE; African Index Medicus; LILACS; Science Citation Index; metaRegister of 
Controlled Trials; WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform; 
conference proceedings; and reference lists to March 2014.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomized and quasi-randomized controlled clinical trials 
in adults and children with cholera that compared: 1) any antimicrobial 
treatment with placebo or no treatment; 2) different antimicrobials 
head-to-head; or 3) different dosing schedules or different durations of 
treatment with the same antimicrobial.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently applied inclusion and 
exclusion criteria, and extracted data from included trials. Diarrhoea duration 
and stool volume were defined as primary outcomes. We calculated mean difference 
(MD) or ratio of means (ROM) for continuous outcomes, with 95% confidence 
intervals (CI), and pooled data using a random-effects meta-analysis. The 
quality of evidence was assessed using the GRADE approach.
MAIN RESULTS: Thirty-nine trials were included in this review with 4623 
participants. Antimicrobials versus placebo or no treatment Overall, 
antimicrobial therapy shortened the mean duration of diarrhoea by about a day 
and a half compared to placebo or no treatment (MD -36.77 hours, 95% CI -43.51 
to -30.03, 19 trials, 1013 participants, moderate quality evidence). 
Antimicrobial therapy also reduced the total stool volume by 50% (ROM 0.5, 95% 
CI 0.45 to 0.56, 18 trials, 1042 participants, moderate quality evidence) and 
reduced the amount of rehydration fluids required by 40% (ROM 0.60, 95% CI 0.53 
to 0.68, 11 trials, 1201 participants, moderate quality evidence). The mean 
duration of fecal excretion of vibrios was reduced by almost three days (MD 2.74 
days, 95% CI -3.07 to -2.40, 12 trials, 740 participants, moderate quality 
evidence).There was substantial heterogeneity in the size of these benefits, 
probably due to differences in the antibiotic used, the trial methods 
(particularly effective randomization), and the timing of outcome assessment. 
The benefits of antibiotics were seen both in trials recruiting only patients 
with severe dehydration and in those recruiting patients with mixed levels of 
dehydration. Comparisons of antimicrobials In head-to-head comparisons, there 
were no differences detected in diarrhoea duration or stool volume for 
tetracycline compared to doxycycline (three trials, 230 participants, very low 
quality evidence); or tetracycline compared to ciprofloxacin or norfloxacin 
(three trials, 259 participants, moderate quality evidence). In indirect 
comparisons with substantially more trials, tetracycline appeared to have larger 
benefits than doxycycline, norfloxacin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for the 
primary review outcomes.Single dose azithromycin shortened the duration of 
diarrhoea by over a day compared to ciprofloxacin (MD -32.43, 95% CI -62.90 to 
-1.95, two trials, 375 participants, moderate quality evidence) and by half a 
day compared to erythromycin (MD -12.05, 95% CI -22.02 to -2.08, two trials, 179 
participants, moderate quality evidence). It was not compared with tetracycline.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: In treating cholera, antimicrobials result in substantial 
improvements in clinical and microbiological outcomes, with similar effects 
observed in severely and non-severely ill patients. Azithromycin and 
tetracycline may have some advantages over other antibiotics.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008625.pub2
PMCID: PMC4468928
PMID: 24944120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared. Prof. Mohammed Abdus Salam is an 
author of some of the trials included in our review.