---
reference_id: "PMID:17235395"
title: Digenic mutations account for variable phenotypes in idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
authors:
- Pitteloud N
- Quinton R
- Pearce S
- Raivio T
- Acierno J
- Dwyer A
- Plummer L
- Hughes V
- Seminara S
- Cheng YZ
- Li WP
- Maccoll G
- Eliseenkova AV
- Olsen SK
- Ibrahimi OA
- Hayes FJ
- Boepple P
- Hall JE
- Bouloux P
- Mohammadi M
- Crowley W
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1172/JCI29884
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Conserved Sequence
- DNA/genetics
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factor 8/metabolism
- Genotype
- Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone/deficiency
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Hypogonadism/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Kallmann Syndrome/genetics
- Male
- "Models, Genetic"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 1/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, LHRH/genetics"
- Sequence Deletion
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Digenic mutations account for variable phenotypes in idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
**Authors:** Pitteloud N, Quinton R, Pearce S, Raivio T, Acierno J, Dwyer A, Plummer L, Hughes V, Seminara S, Cheng YZ, Li WP, Maccoll G, Eliseenkova AV, Olsen SK, Ibrahimi OA, Hayes FJ, Boepple P, Hall JE, Bouloux P, Mohammadi M, Crowley W
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI29884](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI29884)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2007 Feb;117(2):457-63. doi: 10.1172/JCI29884. Epub 2007 Jan
18.

Digenic mutations account for variable phenotypes in idiopathic hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism.

Pitteloud N(1), Quinton R, Pearce S, Raivio T, Acierno J, Dwyer A, Plummer L,
Hughes V, Seminara S, Cheng YZ, Li WP, Maccoll G, Eliseenkova AV, Olsen SK,
Ibrahimi OA, Hayes FJ, Boepple P, Hall JE, Bouloux P, Mohammadi M, Crowley W.

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Endocrine Unit of the Department of Medicine and Harvard
Reproductive Endocrine Science Centers, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA. npitteloud@partners.org

Idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) due to defects of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion and/or action is a developmental
disorder of sexual maturation. To date, several single-gene defects have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of IHH. However, significant inter- and
intrafamilial variability and apparent incomplete penetrance in familial cases
of IHH are difficult to reconcile with the model of a single-gene defect. We
therefore hypothesized that mutations at different IHH loci interact in some
families to modify their phenotypes. To address this issue, we studied 2
families, one with Kallmann syndrome (IHH and anosmia) and another with
normosmic IHH, in which a single-gene defect had been identified: a heterozygous
FGF receptor 1 (FGFR1) mutation in pedigree 1 and a compound heterozygous
gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor (GNRHR) mutation in pedigree 2, both of
which varied markedly in expressivity within and across families. Further
candidate gene screening revealed a second heterozygous deletion in the nasal
embryonic LHRH factor (NELF) gene in pedigree 1 and an additional heterozygous
FGFR1 mutation in pedigree 2 that accounted for the considerable phenotypic
variability. Therefore, 2 different gene defects can synergize to produce a more
severe phenotype in IHH families than either alone. This genetic model could
account for some phenotypic heterogeneity seen in GnRH deficiency.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI29884
PMCID: PMC1765517
PMID: 17235395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
