---
reference_id: "PMID:38932991"
title: "Inflammation in Fabry disease: stages, molecular pathways, and therapeutic implications."
authors:
- Kurdi H
- Lavalle L
- Moon JCC
- Hughes D
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1420067
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inflammation in Fabry disease: stages, molecular pathways, and therapeutic implications.
**Authors:** Kurdi H, Lavalle L, Moon JCC, Hughes D
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2024.1420067](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2024.1420067)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2024 Jun 12;11:1420067. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1420067. 
eCollection 2024.

Inflammation in Fabry disease: stages, molecular pathways, and therapeutic 
implications.

Kurdi H(1)(2), Lavalle L(1)(3), Moon JCC(1)(2), Hughes D(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Cardiovascular Imaging Department, Barts Heart Centre, London, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Lysosomal Storage Disorders Unit, The Royal Free Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom.

Fabry disease, a multisystem X-linked disorder caused by mutations in the 
alpha-galactosidase gene. This leads to the accumulation of 
globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) and globotriaosylsphingosine (Lyso-Gb3), culminating 
in various clinical signs and symptoms that significantly impact quality of 
life. Although treatments such as enzyme replacement, oral chaperone, and 
emerging therapies like gene therapy exist; delayed diagnosis often curtails 
their effectiveness. Our review highlights the importance of delineating the 
stages of inflammation in Fabry disease to enhance the timing and efficacy of 
diagnosis and interventions, particularly before the progression to fibrosis, 
where treatment options are less effective. Inflammation is emerging as an 
important aspect of the pathogenesis of Fabry disease. This is thought to be 
predominantly mediated by the innate immune response, with growing evidence 
pointing towards the potential involvement of adaptive immune mechanisms that 
remain poorly understood. Highlighted by the fact that Fabry disease shares 
immune profiles with systemic autoinflammatory diseases, blurring the 
distinctions between these disorders and highlighting the need for a nuanced 
understanding of immune dynamics. This insight is crucial for developing 
targeted therapies and improving the administration of current treatments like 
enzyme replacement. Moreover, our review discusses the complex interplay between 
these inflammatory processes and current treatments, such as the challenges 
posed by anti-drug antibodies. These antibodies can attenuate the effectiveness 
of therapies, necessitating more refined approaches to mitigate their impact. By 
advancing our understanding of the molecular changes, inflammatory mediators and 
causative factors that drive inflammation in Fabry disease, we aim to clarify 
their role in the disease's progression. This improved understanding will help 
us see how these processes fit into the current landscape of Fabry disease. 
Additionally, it will guide the development of more effective diagnostic and 
therapeutic approaches, ultimately improving patient care.

© 2024 Kurdi, Lavalle, Moon and Hughes.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1420067
PMCID: PMC11199868
PMID: 38932991

Conflict of interest statement: DH has fees for speaking and advisory boards 
from Takeda, Sanofi, Amicus, Idorsia, Chiesi, Freeline, UniQure, administrated 
through UCL Consultants used in part to fund Fabry related research. The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.