---
reference_id: "PMID:21820099"
title: "Mutations in DNAJC5, encoding cysteine-string protein alpha, cause autosomal-dominant adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis."
authors:
- Nosková L
- Stránecký V
- Hartmannová H
- Přistoupilová A
- Barešová V
- Ivánek R
- Hůlková H
- Jahnová H
- van der Zee J
- Staropoli JF
- Sims KB
- Tyynelä J
- Van Broeckhoven C
- Nijssen PC
- Mole SE
- Elleder M
- Kmoch S
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.003
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Base Sequence
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- Chromosome Segregation/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Family
- Female
- Gene Dosage/genetics
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- Genetic Linkage
- HSP40 Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Lipoylation
- "Lysosomes/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- Pedigree
- Protein Transport
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in DNAJC5, encoding cysteine-string protein alpha, cause autosomal-dominant adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
**Authors:** Nosková L, Stránecký V, Hartmannová H, Přistoupilová A, Barešová V, Ivánek R, Hůlková H, Jahnová H, van der Zee J, Staropoli JF, Sims KB, Tyynelä J, Van Broeckhoven C, Nijssen PC, Mole SE, Elleder M, Kmoch S
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.003)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Aug 12;89(2):241-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.003.
Epub  2011 Aug 4.

Mutations in DNAJC5, encoding cysteine-string protein alpha, cause 
autosomal-dominant adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.

Nosková L(1), Stránecký V, Hartmannová H, Přistoupilová A, Barešová V, Ivánek R, 
Hůlková H, Jahnová H, van der Zee J, Staropoli JF, Sims KB, Tyynelä J, Van 
Broeckhoven C, Nijssen PC, Mole SE, Elleder M, Kmoch S.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct 7;89(4):589.

Autosomal-dominant adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (ANCL) is 
characterized by accumulation of autofluorescent storage material in neural 
tissues and neurodegeneration and has an age of onset in the third decade of 
life or later. The genetic and molecular basis of the disease has remained 
unknown for many years. We carried out linkage mapping, gene-expression 
analysis, exome sequencing, and candidate-gene sequencing in affected 
individuals from 20 families and/or individuals with simplex cases; we 
identified in five individuals one of two disease-causing mutations, 
c.346_348delCTC and c.344T>G, in DNAJC5 encoding cysteine-string protein alpha 
(CSPα). These mutations-causing a deletion, p.Leu116del, and an amino acid 
exchange, p.Leu115Arg, respectively-are located within the cysteine-string 
domain of the protein and affect both palmitoylation-dependent sorting and the 
amount of CSPα in neuronal cells. The resulting depletion of functional CSPα 
might cause in parallel the presynaptic dysfunction and the progressive 
neurodegeneration observed in affected individuals and lysosomal accumulation of 
misfolded and proteolysis-resistant proteins in the form of characteristic 
ceroid deposits in neurons. Our work represents an important step in the genetic 
dissection of a genetically heterogeneous group of ANCLs. It also confirms a 
neuroprotective role for CSPα in humans and demonstrates the need for detailed 
investigation of CSPα in the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses and other 
neurodegenerative diseases presenting with neuronal protein aggregation.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.003
PMCID: PMC3155175
PMID: 21820099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]