---
reference_id: PMID:32943623
title: Motile ciliopathies.
authors:
- Wallmeier J
- Nielsen KG
- Kuehni CE
- Lucas JS
- Leigh MW
- Zariwala MA
- Omran H
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0209-6
keywords:
- "Ciliopathies/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Genetic Association Studies/methods
- Humans
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Motile ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Wallmeier J, Nielsen KG, Kuehni CE, Lucas JS, Leigh MW, Zariwala MA, Omran H
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-020-0209-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-020-0209-6)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020 Sep 17;6(1):77. doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0209-6.

Motile ciliopathies.

Wallmeier J(1), Nielsen KG(2)(3), Kuehni CE(4)(5), Lucas JS(6)(7), Leigh MW(8), 
Zariwala MA(9), Omran H(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital Muenster, 
Muenster, Germany.
(2)Danish PCD Centre, Danish Paediatric Pulmonary Service, Department of 
Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(4)Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(5)Paediatric Respiratory Medicine, Children's University Hospital of Bern, 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Centre, NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, 
University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK.
(7)School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Marsico Lung Institute, School of Medicine, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Marsico Lung Institute, 
School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, 
NC, USA.
(10)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital Muenster, 
Muenster, Germany. Heymut.Omran@ukmuenster.de.

Motile cilia are highly complex hair-like organelles of epithelial cells lining 
the surface of various organ systems. Genetic mutations (usually with autosomal 
recessive inheritance) that impair ciliary beating cause a variety of motile 
ciliopathies, a heterogeneous group of rare disorders. The pathogenetic 
mechanisms, clinical symptoms and severity of the disease depend on the specific 
affected genes and the tissues in which they are expressed. Defects in the 
ependymal cilia can result in hydrocephalus, defects in the cilia in the 
fallopian tubes or in sperm flagella can cause female and male subfertility, 
respectively, and malfunctional motile monocilia of the left-right organizer 
during early embryonic development can lead to laterality defects such as situs 
inversus and heterotaxy. If mucociliary clearance in the respiratory epithelium 
is severely impaired, the disorder is referred to as primary ciliary dyskinesia, 
the most common motile ciliopathy. No single test can confirm a diagnosis of 
motile ciliopathy, which is based on a combination of tests including nasal 
nitric oxide measurement, transmission electron microscopy, immunofluorescence 
and genetic analyses, and high-speed video microscopy. With the exception of 
azithromycin, there is no evidence-based treatment for primary ciliary 
dyskinesia; therapies aim at relieving symptoms and reducing the effects of 
reduced ciliary motility.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-020-0209-6
PMID: 32943623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]