---
reference_id: "PMID:20822807"
title: Antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Ruiz-Irastorza G
- Crowther M
- Branch W
- Khamashta MA
journal: Lancet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60709-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Ruiz-Irastorza G, Crowther M, Branch W, Khamashta MA
**Journal:** Lancet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60709-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60709-X)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2010 Oct 30;376(9751):1498-509. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60709-X.
Epub  2010 Sep 6.

Antiphospholipid syndrome.

Ruiz-Irastorza G(1), Crowther M, Branch W, Khamashta MA.

Author information:
(1)Service of Internal Medicine, Hospital de Cruces-University of the Basque 
Country, Bizkaia, Spain. r.irastorza@euskalnet.net

The antiphospholipid syndrome causes venous, arterial, and small-vessel 
thrombosis; pregnancy loss; and preterm delivery for patients with severe 
pre-eclampsia or placental insufficiency. Other clinical manifestations are 
cardiac valvular disease, renal thrombotic microangiopathy, thrombocytopenia, 
haemolytic anaemia, and cognitive impairment. Antiphospholipid antibodies 
promote activation of endothelial cells, monocytes, and platelets; and 
overproduction of tissue factor and thromboxane A2. Complement activation might 
have a central pathogenetic role. Of the different antiphospholipid antibodies, 
lupus anticoagulant is the strongest predictor of features related to 
antiphospholipid syndrome. Therapy of thrombosis is based on long-term oral 
anticoagulation and patients with arterial events should be treated 
aggressively. Primary thromboprophylaxis is recommended in patients with 
systemic lupus erythematosus and probably in purely obstetric antiphospholipid 
syndrome. Obstetric care is based on combined medical-obstetric high-risk 
management and treatment with aspirin and heparin. Hydroxychloroquine is a 
potential additional treatment for this syndrome. Possible future therapies for 
non-pregnant patients with antiphospholipid syndrome are statins, rituximab, and 
new anticoagulant drugs.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60709-X
PMID: 20822807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]