---
reference_id: "PMID:38238335"
title: Altered DNA methylation within DNMT3A, AHRR, LTA/TNF loci mediates the effect of smoking on inflammatory bowel disease.
authors:
- Zhang H
- Kalla R
- Chen J
- Zhao J
- Zhou X
- Adams A
- Noble A
- Ventham NT
- Wellens J
- Ho GT
- Dunlop MG
- Nowak JK
- Ding Y
- Liu Z
- Satsangi J
- Theodoratou E
- Li X
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-44841-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered DNA methylation within DNMT3A, AHRR, LTA/TNF loci mediates the effect of smoking on inflammatory bowel disease.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Kalla R, Chen J, Zhao J, Zhou X, Adams A, Noble A, Ventham NT, Wellens J, Ho GT, Dunlop MG, Nowak JK, Ding Y, Liu Z, Satsangi J, Theodoratou E, Li X
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-44841-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44841-y)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Jan 18;15(1):595. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-44841-y.

Altered DNA methylation within DNMT3A, AHRR, LTA/TNF loci mediates the effect of 
smoking on inflammatory bowel disease.

Zhang H(#)(1), Kalla R(#)(2), Chen J(#)(1), Zhao J(1), Zhou X(1)(3), Adams A(4), 
Noble A(4), Ventham NT(5), Wellens J(4)(6), Ho GT(2), Dunlop MG(7), Nowak JK(8), 
Ding Y(9), Liu Z(10), Satsangi J(11), Theodoratou E(12)(13), Li X(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Big Data in Health Science School of Public Health and The 
Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(2)Edinburgh IBD Science Unit, Centre for Inflammation Research, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(3)Centre for Population Health Sciences, Usher Institute, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, Nuffield Department of Medicine, 
Experimental Medicine Division, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, UK.
(5)Academic Coloproctology, University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh, UK.
(6)Department of Chronic Diseases and Metabolism, Translational Research Center 
for Gastrointestinal Disorders (TARGID), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Cancer Research UK Scotland Centre and Medical Research Council Human 
Genetics Unit, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(8)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology and Metabolic Diseases, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(9)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, the Second Affiliated 
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(10)Center for IBD Research, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. liuzhanju88@126.com.
(11)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, Nuffield Department of Medicine, 
Experimental Medicine Division, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, UK. jack.satsangi@ndm.ox.ac.uk.
(12)Cancer Research UK Scotland Centre and Medical Research Council Human 
Genetics Unit, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. e.theodoratou@ed.ac.uk.
(13)Centre for Global Health, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK. e.theodoratou@ed.ac.uk.
(14)Department of Big Data in Health Science School of Public Health and The 
Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China. xueli157@zju.edu.cn.
(15)Centre for Population Health Sciences, Usher Institute, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. xueli157@zju.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

This work aims to investigate how smoking exerts effect on the development of 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). A prospective cohort study and a Mendelian 
randomization study are first conducted to evaluate the association between 
smoking behaviors, smoking-related DNA methylation and the risks of Crohn's 
disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). We then perform both genome-wide 
methylation analysis and co-localization analysis to validate the observed 
associations. Compared to never smoking, current and previous smoking habits are 
associated with increased CD (P = 7.09 × 10-10) and UC (P < 2 × 10-16) risk, 
respectively. DNA methylation alteration at cg17742416 [DNMT3A] is linked to 
both CD (P = 7.30 × 10-8) and UC (P = 1.04 × 10-4) risk, while cg03599224 
[LTA/TNF] is associated with CD risk (P = 1.91 × 10-6), and cg14647125 [AHRR] 
and cg23916896 [AHRR] are linked to UC risk (P = 0.001 and 0.002, respectively). 
Our study identifies biological mechanisms and pathways involved in the effects 
of smoking on the pathogenesis of IBD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-44841-y
PMCID: PMC10796384
PMID: 38238335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.K.N. declares to be funded by a grant from the 
Biocodex Microbiota Foundation. The remaining authors declare no competing 
interests.