---
reference_id: "PMID:34903638"
title: "Allosteric Modulation of NMDARs Reverses Patients' Autoantibody Effects in Mice."
authors:
- Radosevic M
- Planagumà J
- Mannara F
- Mellado A
- Aguilar E
- Sabater L
- Landa J
- García-Serra A
- Maudes E
- Gasull X
- Lewis M
- Dalmau J
journal: Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000001122
keywords:
- Animals
- "Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor Encephalitis/chemically induced, drug therapy"
- "Autoantibodies/administration & dosage, cerebrospinal fluid"
- "Behavior, Animal/drug effects"
- Cerebrospinal Fluid
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Hydroxycholesterols/analysis, pharmacology"
- Male
- "Memory Disorders/chemically induced, drug therapy"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Allosteric Modulation of NMDARs Reverses Patients' Autoantibody Effects in Mice.
**Authors:** Radosevic M, Planagumà J, Mannara F, Mellado A, Aguilar E, Sabater L, Landa J, García-Serra A, Maudes E, Gasull X, Lewis M, Dalmau J
**Journal:** Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXI.0000000000001122](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXI.0000000000001122)

## Content

1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2021 Dec 13;9(1):e1122. doi: 
10.1212/NXI.0000000000001122. Print 2022 Jan.

Allosteric Modulation of NMDARs Reverses Patients' Autoantibody Effects in Mice.

Radosevic M(1), Planagumà J(1), Mannara F(1), Mellado A(1), Aguilar E(1), 
Sabater L(1), Landa J(1), García-Serra A(1), Maudes E(1), Gasull X(1), Lewis 
M(1), Dalmau J(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS) 
(M.R., J.P., F.M., A.M., E.A., L.S., J.L., A.G.-S., E.M., X.G., J.D.), Hospital 
Clínic, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Laboratori de 
Neurofisiologia (X.G.), Departament de Biomedicina, Facultat de Medicina i 
Ciències de la Salut, Institut de Neurociències, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain; Sage Therapeutics (M.L.), Department of Research and 
Nonclinical Development, Cambridge, MA; Department of Neurology (J.D.), 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; Centro de Investigación Biomédica 
en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) (J.D.), Madrid, Spain; and Institució 
Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA) (J.D.), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)From the Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS) 
(M.R., J.P., F.M., A.M., E.A., L.S., J.L., A.G.-S., E.M., X.G., J.D.), Hospital 
Clínic, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Laboratori de 
Neurofisiologia (X.G.), Departament de Biomedicina, Facultat de Medicina i 
Ciències de la Salut, Institut de Neurociències, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain; Sage Therapeutics (M.L.), Department of Research and 
Nonclinical Development, Cambridge, MA; Department of Neurology (J.D.), 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; Centro de Investigación Biomédica 
en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) (J.D.), Madrid, Spain; and Institució 
Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA) (J.D.), Barcelona, Spain. 
jdalmau@clinic.cat.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: To demonstrate that an analog (SGE-301) of a 
brain-derived cholesterol metabolite, 24(S)-hydroxycholesterol, which is a 
selective positive allosteric modulator (PAM) of NMDA receptors (NMDARs), is 
able to reverse the memory and synaptic alterations caused by CSF from patients 
with anti-NMDAR encephalitis in an animal model of passive transfer of 
antibodies.
METHODS: Four groups of mice received (days 1-14) patients' or controls' CSF via 
osmotic pumps connected to the cerebroventricular system and from day 11 were 
treated with daily subcutaneous injections of SGE-301 or vehicle (no drug). 
Visuospatial memory, locomotor activity (LA), synaptic NMDAR cluster density, 
hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP), and paired-pulse facilitation (PPF) 
were assessed on days 10, 13, 18, and 26 using reported techniques.
RESULTS: On day 10, mice infused with patients' CSF, but not controls' CSF, 
presented a significant visuospatial memory deficit, reduction of NMDAR 
clusters, and impairment of LTP, whereas LA and PPF were unaffected. These 
alterations persisted until day 18, the time of maximal deficits in this model. 
In contrast, mice that received patients' CSF but from day 11 were treated with 
SGE-301 showed memory recovery (day 13), and on day 18, all paradigms (memory, 
NMDAR clusters, and LTP) had reversed to values similar to those of controls. On 
day 26, no differences were observed among experimental groups.
DISCUSSION: An oxysterol biology-based PAM of NMDARs is able to reverse the 
synaptic and memory deficits caused by CSF from patients with anti-NMDAR 
encephalitis. These findings suggest a novel adjuvant treatment approach that 
deserves future clinical evaluation.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000001122
PMCID: PMC8669659
PMID: 34903638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]