---
reference_id: "PMID:39570347"
title: "The Nightmare of AVM Surgery: Early Rupture of the Venous Drainage-Lessons from Personal Experience and a Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Florian IS
- Florian IA
journal: Acta Neurochir Suppl
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-61601-3_9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Nightmare of AVM Surgery: Early Rupture of the Venous Drainage-Lessons from Personal Experience and a Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Florian IS, Florian IA
**Journal:** Acta Neurochir Suppl (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-031-61601-3_9](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-61601-3_9)

## Content

1. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2025;133:51-57. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-61601-3_9.

The Nightmare of AVM Surgery: Early Rupture of the Venous Drainage-Lessons from 
Personal Experience and a Review of the Literature.

Florian IS(#)(1)(2), Florian IA(#)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Neurosurgery, Cluj County Clinical Emergency Hospital, Cluj-Napoca, 
Romania.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, "Iuliu Hatieganu" University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(#)Contributed equally

We describe the case of a 72-year-old man who presented with signs of increased 
intracranial pressure, right-sided motor deficit, and repeated episodes of 
epilepsy due to a left frontal arteriovenous malformation (AVM) with a large 
superficial draining vein. Despite great efforts to protect the vein from the 
start, it ruptured shortly after we removed the bone flap. This required 
rigorous hemorrhage control, which in turn led to profuse bleeding from the 
nidus throughout the process of the dissection and coagulation of the arterial 
feeders. The postoperative course was initially uneventful; however, the patient 
declined neurologically and became unresponsive on the second day after surgery. 
Emergent CT revealed a significant hematoma occupying the space where the AVM 
nidus had been resected. The patient was taken back to the OR for emergency 
evacuation of the hematoma. Despite these efforts, the neurological status 
remained poor, and the patient was transferred to a territorial hospital after 
spending 3 weeks in the ICU.An early rupture of the venous drainage represents a 
dreaded complication of AVM surgery, which can compromise the intervention 
before the start of the definite resection. We discuss our experience of and 
strategy for preventing and managing the intraoperative venous rupture of AVMs 
by describing our seven rules of "Don't." We also provide a brief overview of 
the relevant literature.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-61601-3_9
PMID: 39570347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest. The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to disclose. Ethical Statement: The consent to present and 
publish this case was given by the family of the patient. Funding: No funding 
was received for the writing of this manuscript.