---
reference_id: "PMID:37390106"
title: "Prognostic Value of Pretreatment Serum Carcinoembryonic Antigen Level in 1130 Patients With Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: A Propensity Score Matching Cohort Study and Cumulative Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Li F
- Lv Q
- Wang Y
- Zhao S
- Guo T
- Wang G
- Gu C
journal: Am J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/COC.0000000000001022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic Value of Pretreatment Serum Carcinoembryonic Antigen Level in 1130 Patients With Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: A Propensity Score Matching Cohort Study and Cumulative Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Li F, Lv Q, Wang Y, Zhao S, Guo T, Wang G, Gu C
**Journal:** Am J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/COC.0000000000001022](https://doi.org/10.1097/COC.0000000000001022)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Oncol. 2023 Sep 1;46(9):399-408. doi: 10.1097/COC.0000000000001022. 
Epub 2023 Jun 27.

Prognostic Value of Pretreatment Serum Carcinoembryonic Antigen Level in 1130 
Patients With Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: A Propensity Score Matching Cohort 
Study and Cumulative Meta-analysis.

Li F(1)(2), Lv Q(3)(4), Wang Y(5), Zhao S(1)(2), Guo T(1)(2), Wang G(4), Gu 
C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian 
Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning, People's Republic of China.
(2)Lung Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Center, Dalian, Liaoning, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, Liaoning, People's Republic of China.
(4)Graduate school, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning, People's 
Republic of China.
(5)Institute of Neurology, General Hospital of Shenyang Military Command, 
Shenyang, Liaoning, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVES: Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is the most frequently used tumor 
marker for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The current study aimed to 
provide the highest-level evidence of the prognostic value of pretreatment serum 
CEA level for NSCLC through the appropriate statistical methodology and 
large-sample cohorts.
METHODS: The current retrospective cohort study with 1130 patients with NSCLC 
treated by thoracic surgery with pretreatment serum CEA concentrations 
above/below 5 ng/mL. Propensity score matching, Kaplan-Miere survival analysis, 
and Cox proportional hazard regression models were used to study the intergroup 
variance. The overall/disease-free hazard ratios (HRs) of the current study were 
combined with the previously published studies using cumulative meta-analysis to 
provide the highest-level evidence.
RESULTS: Intergroup confounding variables were well controlled by propensity 
score matching, and the survival differences were statistically significant. The 
Cox univariate analysis showed that the overall and disease-free HRs of the high 
CEA towards patients with low CEA were 1.595 (95% CI: 1.329-1.863, P = 0.004) 
and 1.498 (95% CI: 1.271-1.881, P = 0.004). The HRs of multivariate analysis 
were adjusted to 1.586 (95% CI: 1.398-1.812, P = 0.016) and 1.413 (95% CI: 
1.22-1.734, P = 0.022) respectively. The cumulative meta-analysis showed that 
the cumulative overall HR was in accord with previous studies, and the 
cumulative disease-free HR turn to be statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Pretreatment serum CEA level was an independent influence factor of 
overall/disease-free survival of patients with NSCLC, and even for patients with 
the same pTNM stages or pathologic stages, it is used for prognosis.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/COC.0000000000001022
PMID: 37390106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.