---
reference_id: "PMID:33507552"
title: PD-L1 overexpression conveys tolerance of mesenchymal stem cell-derived cardiomyocyte-like cells in an allogeneic mouse model.
authors:
- Mardomi A
- Limoni SK
- Rahbarghazi R
- Mohammadi N
- Khorashadizadeh M
- Ranjbaran H
- Nataj HH
- Jafari N
- Hasani B
- Abediankenari S
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jcp.30299
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PD-L1 overexpression conveys tolerance of mesenchymal stem cell-derived cardiomyocyte-like cells in an allogeneic mouse model.
**Authors:** Mardomi A, Limoni SK, Rahbarghazi R, Mohammadi N, Khorashadizadeh M, Ranjbaran H, Nataj HH, Jafari N, Hasani B, Abediankenari S
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.30299](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.30299)

## Content

1. J Cell Physiol. 2021 Sep;236(9):6328-6343. doi: 10.1002/jcp.30299. Epub 2021
Jan  28.

PD-L1 overexpression conveys tolerance of mesenchymal stem cell-derived 
cardiomyocyte-like cells in an allogeneic mouse model.

Mardomi A(1)(2), Limoni SK(3), Rahbarghazi R(4), Mohammadi N(1)(2), 
Khorashadizadeh M(5), Ranjbaran H(2), Nataj HH(1), Jafari N(2), Hasani B(1), 
Abediankenari S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Mazandaran University of 
Medical Sciences, Sari, Iran.
(2)Immunogenetics Research Center, Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, 
Sari, Iran.
(3)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Mazandaran University of Medical 
Sciences, Sari, Mazandaran, Iran.
(4)Stem Cell Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(5)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Medicine, Birjand University 
of Medical Sciences, Birjand, Iran.

Although the autologously transplanted cells are immunologically durable, 
allogeneic cell transplantation is inevitable in a series of cases. Mesenchymal 
stem cells (MSCs) are one of the suitable candidates for cardiac tissue 
regeneration that have been shown to acquire immunogenicity concurrent with 
cardiomyogenic differentiation. The present study aimed to exploit PD-L1, as a 
key immunomodulatory checkpoint ligand to protect the MSCs-derived 
cardiomyocyte-like cells (CLCs) against the detrimental alloimmunity. Mouse bone 
marrow-derived MSCs were stably transduced to overexpress PD-L1. MSCs were in 
vitro differentiated into CLCs and the expressions of immunologic molecules were 
compared between MSCs and CLCs. The in vitro and in vivo allogeneic immune 
responses were also examined. The differentiated CLCs had higher expressions of 
MHC-I and CD80. Upon in vitro coculture with allogeneic splenocytes, CLCs caused 
more CD4+ and CD8+ T cell activation, lymphocyte proliferation, and interferon-γ 
(IFN-γ) release in comparison to MSCs. PD-L1 overexpression on CLCs decreased 
the activation of CD8+ T cells, proliferation of lymphocytes, and release of 
IFN-γ. The PD-L1-overexpressing CLCs elicited lower in vivo CD4+ and CD8+ T cell 
activation and reduced the anti-donor antibody response accompanied by increased 
durability and reduced T cell infiltration. The present study verified the 
potential of PD-L1 overexpression as a preparative strategy for the protection 
of allogeneic MSCs-derived CLCs against the detrimental alloreaction.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.30299
PMID: 33507552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]