---
reference_id: "PMID:26911863"
title: "A novel follicle-stimulating hormone receptor mutation causing primary ovarian failure: a fertility application of whole exome sequencing."
authors:
- Bramble MS
- Goldstein EH
- Lipson A
- Ngun T
- Eskin A
- Gosschalk JE
- Roach L
- Vashist N
- Barseghyan H
- Lee E
- Arboleda VA
- Vaiman D
- Yuksel Z
- Fellous M
- Vilain E
journal: Hum Reprod
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/humrep/dew025
keywords:
- Adult
- Consanguinity
- Exome
- Female
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- HEK293 Cells
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- Protein Transport
- "Receptors, FSH/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Recombinant Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Siblings
- Turkey
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel follicle-stimulating hormone receptor mutation causing primary ovarian failure: a fertility application of whole exome sequencing.
**Authors:** Bramble MS, Goldstein EH, Lipson A, Ngun T, Eskin A, Gosschalk JE, Roach L, Vashist N, Barseghyan H, Lee E, Arboleda VA, Vaiman D, Yuksel Z, Fellous M, Vilain E
**Journal:** Hum Reprod (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/humrep/dew025](https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/dew025)

## Content

1. Hum Reprod. 2016 Apr;31(4):905-14. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dew025. Epub 2016 Feb
23.

A novel follicle-stimulating hormone receptor mutation causing primary ovarian 
failure: a fertility application of whole exome sequencing.

Bramble MS(1), Goldstein EH(2), Lipson A(1), Ngun T(1), Eskin A(1), Gosschalk 
JE(1), Roach L(1), Vashist N(1), Barseghyan H(1), Lee E(1), Arboleda VA(1), 
Vaiman D(3), Yuksel Z(4), Fellous M(3), Vilain E(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at the 
University of California Los Angeles, 695 Charles E Young Drive South, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at the 
University of California Los Angeles, 695 Charles E Young Drive South, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of California Los Angeles, 
10833 Le Conte Avenue, Room 24-130 CHS, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(3)Department of Development, Reproduction, and Cancer, Institut Cochin, U1016 
Inserm, University Sorbonne Paris, CNRS UMR8104, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Women and Children Hospital, Halkkent Mh. 
Fatih Sultan Mehmet Boulevard No. 23, Mersin 33240, Turkey.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at the 
University of California Los Angeles, 695 Charles E Young Drive South, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA evilain@ucla.edu.

STUDY QUESTION: Can whole exome sequencing (WES) and in vitro validation studies 
be used to find the causative genetic etiology in a patient with primary ovarian 
failure and infertility?
SUMMARY ANSWER: A novel follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR) mutation 
was found by WES and shown, via in vitro flow cytometry studies, to affect 
membrane trafficking.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: WES may diagnose up to 25-35% of patients with suspected 
disorders of sex development (DSD). FSHR mutations are an extremely rare cause 
of 46, XX gonadal dysgenesis with primary amenorrhea due to hypergonadotropic 
ovarian failure.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: A WES study was followed by flow cytometry studies 
of mutant protein function.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: The study subjects were two Turkish 
sisters with hypergonadotropic primary amenorrhea, their parents and two 
unaffected sisters. The affected siblings and both parents were sequenced 
(trio-WES). Transient transfection of HEK 293T cells was performed with a vector 
containing wild-type FSHR as well as the novel FSHR variant that was discovered 
by WES. Cellular localization of FSHR protein as well as FSH-stimulated cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) production was evaluated using flow cytometry.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Both affected sisters were homozygous for a 
previously unreported missense mutation (c.1222G>T, p.Asp408Tyr) in the second 
transmembrane domain of FSHR. Modeling predicted disrupted secondary structure. 
Flow cytometry demonstrated an average of 48% reduction in cell-surface signal 
detection (P < 0.01). The mean fluorescent signal for cAMP (second messenger of 
FSHR), stimulated by FSH, was reduced by 50% in the mutant-transfected cells (P 
< 0.01).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: This is an in vitro validation. All novel 
purported genetic variants can be clinically reported only as 'variants of 
uncertain significance' until more patients with a similar phenotype are 
discovered with the same variant.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: We report the first WES-discovered FSHR 
mutation, validated by quantitative flow cytometry. WES is a valuable tool for 
diagnosis of rare genetic diseases, and flow cytometry allows for quantitative 
characterization of purported variants. WES-assisted diagnosis allows for 
treatments aimed at the underlying molecular etiology of disease. Future studies 
should focus on pharmacological and assisted reproductive treatments aimed at 
the disrupted FSHR, so that patients with FSH resistance can be treated by 
personalized medicine.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: E.V. is partially funded by the DSD 
Translational Research Network (NICHD 1R01HD068138). M.S.B. is funded by the 
Neuroendocrinology, Sex Differences and Reproduction training grant (NICHD 
5T32HD007228). The authors have no competing interests to disclose.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For 
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/dew025
PMCID: PMC5007606
PMID: 26911863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]