---
reference_id: "PMID:2996829"
title: Treatment of infectious complications of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
authors:
- Furio MM
- Wordell CJ
journal: Clin Pharm
year: '1985'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of infectious complications of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
**Authors:** Furio MM, Wordell CJ
**Journal:** Clin Pharm (1985)

## Content

1. Clin Pharm. 1985 Sep-Oct;4(5):539-54.

Treatment of infectious complications of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.

Furio MM, Wordell CJ.

The infectious complications of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) 
are discussed, and the conventional and nonconventional therapies used for these 
infections are reviewed. The infections most commonly encountered in patients 
with AIDS are Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (58%), Candida esophagitis (31%), 
toxoplasmosis (21%), cytomegalovirus infections (15%), and herpes-simplex virus 
infections (12%). Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia is the most common 
life-threatening process in these patients. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
(TMP-SMZ) is considered the drug of choice for its treatment. Oral candidiasis 
often indicates the progression to AIDS in the high-risk populations of 
homosexual or bisexual men, intravenous drug abusers, and individuals with 
hemophilia. Nystatin suspension is commonly used to treat oral candidiasis, 
while Candida esophagitis demands systemic therapy with ketoconazole. 
Toxoplasmosis most commonly manifests itself in patients with AIDS as a cerebral 
mass lesion. The recommended therapy includes sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine. 
AIDS patients frequently experience protozoal invasion of the intestinal tract 
with Giardia lamblia, Isospora belli, and Cryptosporidium muris. Various drugs 
have been tried for these infections, including quinacrine hydrochloride, 
metronidazole, TMP-SMZ, and spiramycin. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections 
commonly involve the lungs, gastrointestinal tract, eyes, brain, and nervous 
system. Attempts to treat these disseminated CMV infections with antiviral 
agents, including acyclovir, have not been successful. However, acyclovir has 
been found beneficial in the treatment of herpes-simplex virus infections. 
Multiple infectious complications may occur in patients with AIDS as a result of 
the cellular-immune deficiency associated with this disease. Until more research 
is done with AIDS patients, therapy must be based on the data available from the 
treatment of these infections in immunosuppressed patients without AIDS.

PMID: 2996829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]