---
reference_id: "PMID:39862309"
title: "Etiology, clinical characteristics, genetic profile, and outcomes of children with refractory rickets at a referral center in India: a cohort study."
authors:
- Mathew V
- Deepthi B
- Krishnasamy S
- Yadav P
- Sravani M
- Ramprabhu GS
- Bhatt GC
- Mandal K
- Krishnamurthy S
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-025-06656-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Child, Preschool"
- India/epidemiology
- Infant
- Child
- "Rickets/genetics, etiology"
- Adolescent
- Mutation
- Genetic Association Studies
- Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- "Acidosis, Renal Tubular/complications, genetics"
- Failure to Thrive/etiology
- Nephrocalcinosis/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Etiology, clinical characteristics, genetic profile, and outcomes of children with refractory rickets at a referral center in India: a cohort study.
**Authors:** Mathew V, Deepthi B, Krishnasamy S, Yadav P, Sravani M, Ramprabhu GS, Bhatt GC, Mandal K, Krishnamurthy S
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-025-06656-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-025-06656-x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2025 Jun;40(6):1915-1927. doi: 10.1007/s00467-025-06656-x.
Epub  2025 Jan 25.

Etiology, clinical characteristics, genetic profile, and outcomes of children
with refractory rickets at a referral center in India: a cohort study.

Mathew V(1), Deepthi B(1), Krishnasamy S(1), Yadav P(2), Sravani M(1), Ramprabhu
GS(1), Bhatt GC(3), Mandal K(4), Krishnamurthy S(5).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Nephrology Services, Department of Pediatrics, Jawaharlal Institute
of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), Pondicherry, 605006,
India.
(2)Department of Systems Biology, Centre of Biomedical Research, SGPGIMS Campus,
Lucknow, India.
(3)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Bhopal, India.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India.
(5)Pediatric Nephrology Services, Department of Pediatrics, Jawaharlal Institute
of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), Pondicherry, 605006,
India. drsriramk@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Limited research exists regarding the genetic profile, clinical
characteristics, and outcomes of refractory rickets in children from India.
METHODS: Patients with refractory rickets aged ≤ 18 years were enrolled. Data
regarding clinical features, etiology, genotype-phenotype correlation, and
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) were recorded.
RESULTS: Seventy-two patients with refractory rickets (non-nutritional, with
normal kidney function at presentation) from 65 families attending the pediatric
nephrology clinic from 2005-2024 were included. Median (IQR) age at first
presentation was 2 (1, 4) years. Clinical features included failure-to-thrive
(49 [68.1%]), polyuria (37 [51.4%]), nephrocalcinosis (33 [45.8%]), fractures
(10 [13.9%]), and hypokalemic paralysis (4 [5.6%]). Major etiologies included
distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) [34(47.2%)], hereditary hypophosphatemic
rickets (11 [15.3%]), cystinosis (9 [12.5%]), Lowe syndrome (3 [4.2%]), vitamin
D-dependent rickets (4 [5.5%]), and Fanconi-Bickel syndrome (3 [4.2%]).
Next-generation sequencing identified 61 variants among 71 children tested
(85.9%), of which 56 variants (among 55 children) were pathogenic
(P)/likely-pathogenic (LP) (77.5% diagnostic-yield). P/LP variants included
SLC4A1 (n = 14), CTNS (n = 9), PHEX (n = 8), WDR72 (n = 5), OCRL (n = 2), SLC2A2
(n = 3), ATP6V0A4 (n = 4), VDR (n = 3), CLDN16 (n = 2), ATP6V1B1 (n = 1),
SLC12A1 (n = 1), CLCN5 (n = 1), SLC34A3 (n = 1), ATP7B (n = 1), and KCNJ1
(n = 1). Fifteen novel P/LP variants and five novel
variants-of-uncertain-significance (VUS) were identified. c.2573C > A in exon 19
among SLC4A1-dRTA (n = 14) was a recurrent mutation. Five patients with
cystinosis, two patients with SLC4A1-dRTA, two with WDR72-dRTA, and two with
Bartter syndrome showed progression to CKD stage 2 or greater during follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: dRTA, X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets, and cystinosis were common
causes of refractory rickets. The c.2573C > A variant in exon 19 was a recurrent
mutation in SLC4A1-dRTA.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International Pediatric
Nephrology Association.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-025-06656-x
PMID: 39862309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval: The study
received the following approvals from the Institutional Ethics Committee of
Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (JIPMER),
Pondicherry, India (JIP/IEC/ 2022/021, date of approval: February 9, 2022, and
JIP/ IEC/ 2019/491, date of approval: January 6, 2020). Consent to participate
and publish the data: The authors affirm that human research participants
provided informed consent. Competing interest: The authors declare no competing
interests.
