---
reference_id: "PMID:9350481"
title: "Multiple carboxylase deficiency: inherited and acquired disorders of biotin metabolism."
authors:
- Baumgartner ER
- Suormala T
journal: Int J Vitam Nutr Res
year: '1997'
keywords:
- "Amidohydrolases/deficiency, metabolism"
- Biotin/metabolism
- Biotinidase
- "Carbon-Nitrogen Ligases/deficiency, metabolism"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Multiple Carboxylase Deficiency/diagnosis, enzymology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple carboxylase deficiency: inherited and acquired disorders of biotin metabolism.
**Authors:** Baumgartner ER, Suormala T
**Journal:** Int J Vitam Nutr Res (1997)

## Content

1. Int J Vitam Nutr Res. 1997;67(5):377-84.

Multiple carboxylase deficiency: inherited and acquired disorders of biotin
metabolism.

Baumgartner ER(1), Suormala T.

Author information:
(1)University Children's Hospital, Metabolic Unit, Basel, Switzerland.

Acquired biotin deficiency and the two known congenital disorders of biotin
metabolism, biotinidase and holocarboxylase synthetase (HCS) deficiency, all
lead to deficiency of the 4 biotin-dependent carboxylases, i.e. to multiple
carboxylase deficiency (MCD). The underlying mechanism in HCS-deficiency,
discovered in 1981, is decreased affinity of HCS for biotin impairing the
formation of holocarboxylases at physiological biotin levels. In biotinidase
deficiency, discovered in 1983, MCD results from progressive development of
biotin-deficiency due to inability to liberate and recycle biotin which is lost
in urine as biocytin. MCD leads to typical organic aciduria and severe
life-threatening illness. Main symptoms and signs are feeding difficulties,
neurologic abnormalities (hypotonia, impaired consciousness, seizures, ataxia)
and cutaneous changes (rash, alopecia). However, the clinical presentation and
age of onset are extremely variable, and organic aciduria may initially be
absent in biotinidase deficiency. Therefore, the definitive diagnosis requires
enzyme studies. MCD can be detected in lymphocytes obtained before treatment and
biotinidase deficiency is confirmed or excluded by a colorimetric enzyme assay
in plasma. Newborn screening for biotinidase deficiency has resulted in the
detection of patients with partial deficiency (10-30% of mean normal activity)
in addition to patients with profound deficiency (0-10%). Severe illness has
been observed mainly in patients with O-activity or a Km-mutation, detection of
which requires detailed investigation. HCS-deficiency has to be confirmed by
enzyme assay in cultured cells. Both congenital disorders respond clinically and
biochemically to oral biotin therapy. Whereas 10 mg/day or less is sufficient to
treat profound biotinidase deficiency, the optimal biotin dose for patients with
HCS-deficiency must be assessed individually. The prognosis of both disorders is
good if biotin therapy is introduced early and continued throughout life.
However, delayed commencement of therapy in biotinidase deficiency can result in
irreversible neurological damage, and in HCS-deficiency a few patients have
responded only partially even to massive biotin doses of up to 100 mg/day.

PMID: 9350481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
