---
reference_id: "PMID:34963310"
title: "Why Is Only Type 1 Electrocardiogram Diagnostic of Brugada Syndrome? Mechanistic Insights From Computer Modeling."
authors:
- Zhang Z
- Chen PS
- Weiss JN
- Qu Z
journal: Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCEP.121.010365
keywords:
- Action Potentials
- "Brugada Syndrome/diagnosis, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/metabolism"
- Electrocardiography
- "Heart Conduction System/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Heart Rate
- Humans
- "Models, Cardiovascular"
- Patient-Specific Modeling
- Potassium Channels/metabolism
- Predictive Value of Tests
- "Signal Processing, Computer-Assisted"
- Sodium Channels/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Why Is Only Type 1 Electrocardiogram Diagnostic of Brugada Syndrome? Mechanistic Insights From Computer Modeling.
**Authors:** Zhang Z, Chen PS, Weiss JN, Qu Z
**Journal:** Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCEP.121.010365](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCEP.121.010365)

## Content

1. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2022 Jan;15(1):e010365. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCEP.121.010365. Epub 2021 Dec 29.

Why Is Only Type 1 Electrocardiogram Diagnostic of Brugada Syndrome? Mechanistic 
Insights From Computer Modeling.

Zhang Z(1), Chen PS(2), Weiss JN(3), Qu Z(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, School of Physical Science and Technology, Ningbo 
University, Zhejiang, China (Z.Z.).
(2)Department of Cardiology, Smidt Heart Institute, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA (P.-S.C.).
(3)Department of Medicine (J.N.W., Z.Q.), David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles.
(4)Department of Computational Medicine (Z.Q.), David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles.

BACKGROUND: Three types of characteristic ST-segment elevation are associated 
with Brugada syndrome but only type 1 is diagnostic. Why only type 1 ECG is 
diagnostic remains unanswered.
METHODS: Computer simulations were performed in single cells, 1-dimensional 
cables, and 2-dimensional tissues to investigate the effects of the peak and 
late components of the transient outward potassium current (Ito), sodium 
current, and L-type calcium current (ICa,L) as well as other potassium currents 
on the genesis of ECG morphologies and phase 2 reentry (P2R).
RESULTS: Although a sufficiently large peak Ito was required to result in the 
type 1 ECG pattern and P2R, increasing the late component of Ito converted type 
1 ECG to type 2 ECG and suppressed P2R. Increasing the peak Ito promoted spiral 
wave breakup, potentiating the transition from tachycardia to fibrillation, but 
increasing the late Ito prevented spiral wave breakup by flattening the action 
potential duration restitution and preventing P2R. A sufficiently large ICa,L 
conductance was needed for P2R to occur, but once above the critical 
conductance, blocking ICa,L promoted P2R. However, selectively blocking the 
window and late components of ICa,L suppressed P2R, countering the effect of the 
late Ito. Blocking either the peak or late components of sodium current promoted 
P2R, with the late sodium current blockade having the larger effect. As 
expected, increasing other potassium currents potentiated P2R, with 
ATP-sensitive potassium current exhibiting a larger effect than rapid and slow 
component of the delayed rectifier potassium current.
CONCLUSIONS: The peak Ito promotes type 1 ECG and P2R, whereas the late Ito 
converts type 1 ECG to type 2 ECG and suppresses P2R. Blocking the peak ICa,L 
and either the peak or the late sodium current promotes P2R, whereas blocking 
the window and late ICa,L suppresses P2R. These results provide important 
insights into the mechanisms of arrhythmogenesis and potential therapeutic 
targets for treatment of Brugada syndrome. Graphic Abstract: A graphic abstract 
is available for this article.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCEP.121.010365
PMCID: PMC8766947
PMID: 34963310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]