---
reference_id: "PMID:31585338"
title: "Cutaneous keratinocyte cancers of the head and neck: Epidemiology, risk factors and clinical, dermoscopic and reflectance confocal microscopic features."
authors:
- Lee KJ
- Soyer HP
journal: Oral Oncol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2019.09.019
keywords:
- Animals
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Disease Susceptibility
- Environmental Exposure
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Keratinocytes/pathology
- "Microscopy, Confocal"
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Neoplasm Staging
- Occupational Exposure
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous keratinocyte cancers of the head and neck: Epidemiology, risk factors and clinical, dermoscopic and reflectance confocal microscopic features.
**Authors:** Lee KJ, Soyer HP
**Journal:** Oral Oncol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.oraloncology.2019.09.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oraloncology.2019.09.019)

## Content

1. Oral Oncol. 2019 Nov;98:109-117. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2019.09.019. Epub
 2019 Oct 1.

Cutaneous keratinocyte cancers of the head and neck: Epidemiology, risk factors
and clinical, dermoscopic and reflectance confocal microscopic features.

Lee KJ(1), Soyer HP(2).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Research Centre, The University of Queensland, The University of
Queensland Diamantina Institute, Brisbane, Australia.
(2)Dermatology Research Centre, The University of Queensland, The University of
Queensland Diamantina Institute, Brisbane, Australia; Department of Dermatology,
Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Australia. Electronic address:
p.soyer@uq.edu.au.

Erratum in
    Oral Oncol. 2020 Mar;102:104514. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2019.104514.

Keratinocyte cancers are the most common malignancy among people with European
ancestry, and are very common on sun-exposed areas of the head and neck.
Incidence is directly correlated with latitude and annual ultraviolet radiation
incidence, although there are a number of other environmental, occupational and
genetic risk factors, and keratinocyte cancers become more common at middle age.
Basal cell carcinomas (BCC) are the most common, comprising 80% of keratinocyte
cancers, but have a very low rate of metastases and low mortality. Squamous cell
carcinomas (SCC) make up 20% of keratinocyte cancers, and have relatively
infrequent metastases, at 5-16%. While there are no precursor lesions for BCC,
SCC represents the final stage in a spectrum of cellular atypia and dysplasia,
from actinic keratoses to in situ SCC to invasive SCC. Dermoscopy is a
well-established diagnostic tool for keratinocyte cancers, and reflectance
confocal microscopy is emerging as another useful diagnostic tool, particularly
on functionally and cosmetically sensitive sites like the face.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2019.09.019
PMID: 31585338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
