---
reference_id: "PMID:37600812"
title: Identification of eight novel proteasome variants in five unrelated cases of proteasome-associated autoinflammatory syndromes (PRAAS).
authors:
- Papendorf JJ
- Ebstein F
- Alehashemi S
- Piotto DGP
- Kozlova A
- Terreri MT
- Shcherbina A
- Rastegar A
- Rodrigues M
- Pereira R
- Park S
- Lin B
- Uss K
- Möller S
- da Silva Pina AF
- Sztajnbok F
- Torreggiani S
- Niemela J
- Stoddard J
- Rosenzweig SD
- Oler AJ
- McNinch C
- de Guzman MM
- Fonseca A
- Micheloni N
- Fraga MM
- Perazzio SF
- Goldbach-Mansky R
- de Jesus AA
- Krüger E
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1190104
keywords:
- Cytoplasm
- Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/genetics
- Humans
- Erythema Nodosum
- Dermatitis
- Syndrome
- Fingers/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of eight novel proteasome variants in five unrelated cases of proteasome-associated autoinflammatory syndromes (PRAAS).
**Authors:** Papendorf JJ, Ebstein F, Alehashemi S, Piotto DGP, Kozlova A, Terreri MT, Shcherbina A, Rastegar A, Rodrigues M, Pereira R, Park S, Lin B, Uss K, Möller S, da Silva Pina AF, Sztajnbok F, Torreggiani S, Niemela J, Stoddard J, Rosenzweig SD, Oler AJ, McNinch C, de Guzman MM, Fonseca A, Micheloni N, Fraga MM, Perazzio SF, Goldbach-Mansky R, de Jesus AA, Krüger E
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1190104](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1190104)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Aug 4;14:1190104. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1190104.
eCollection 2023.

Identification of eight novel proteasome variants in five unrelated cases of
proteasome-associated autoinflammatory syndromes (PRAAS).

Papendorf JJ(1), Ebstein F(1), Alehashemi S(2), Piotto DGP(3), Kozlova A(4),
Terreri MT(3), Shcherbina A(4), Rastegar A(2), Rodrigues M(5), Pereira R(6),
Park S(2), Lin B(2), Uss K(2), Möller S(1), da Silva Pina AF(3), Sztajnbok F(5),
Torreggiani S(2), Niemela J(7), Stoddard J(7), Rosenzweig SD(7), Oler AJ(8),
McNinch C(8), de Guzman MM(9), Fonseca A(5), Micheloni N(3), Fraga MM(3),
Perazzio SF(10), Goldbach-Mansky R(2), de Jesus AA(2), Krüger E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie (IMBM),
Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(2)Translational Autoinflammatory Diseases Section (TADS), Laboratory of
Clinical Immunology and Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(3)Division of Pediatric Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, Universidade
Federal de São Paulo (Unifesp), São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Immunology, D.Rogachev National Medical and Research Center for
Pediatric Hematology, Oncology, and Immunology, Moscow, Russia.
(5)Division of Pediatric Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, Universidade
Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Universidade Federal de Ciencias da Saude de Porto
Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(7)Immunology Service, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(8)Bioinformatics and Computational Biosciences Branch, Office of Cyber
Infrastructure and Computational Biology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(9)Section of Pediatric Rheumatology, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.
(10)Division of Rheumatology - Department of Medicine, Universidade Federal de
São Paulo (Unifesp), Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Mutations in genes coding for proteasome subunits and/or proteasome assembly
helpers typically cause recurring autoinflammation referred to as chronic
atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and elevated temperatures
(CANDLE) or proteasome-associated autoinflammatory syndrome (PRAAS). Patients
with CANDLE/PRAAS present with mostly chronically elevated type I interferon
scores that emerge as a consequence of increased proteotoxic stress by
mechanisms that are not fully understood. Here, we report on five unrelated
patients with CANDLE/PRAAS carrying novel inherited proteasome missense and/or
nonsense variants. Four patients were compound heterozygous for novel pathogenic
variants in the known CANDLE/PRAAS associated genes, PSMB8 and PSMB10, whereas
one patient showed additive loss-of-function mutations in PSMB8. Variants in two
previously not associated proteasome genes, PSMA5 and PSMC5, were found in a
patient who also carried the PSMB8 founder mutation, p.T75M. All newly
identified mutations substantially impact the steady-state expression of the
affected proteasome subunits and/or their incorporation into mature 26S
proteasomes. Our observations expand the spectrum of PRAAS-associated genetic
variants and improve a molecular diagnosis and genetic counseling of patients
with sterile autoinflammation.

Copyright © 2023 Papendorf, Ebstein, Alehashemi, Piotto, Kozlova, Terreri,
Shcherbina, Rastegar, Rodrigues, Pereira, Park, Lin, Uss, Möller, da Silva Pina,
Sztajnbok, Torreggiani, Niemela, Stoddard, Rosenzweig, Oler, McNinch, de Guzman,
Fonseca, Micheloni, Fraga, Perazzio, Goldbach-Mansky, de Jesus and Krüger.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1190104
PMCID: PMC10436547
PMID: 37600812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer SD declared a
past co-authorship with the authors FE and EK to the handling editor.
