---
reference_id: "PMID:12080867"
title: "A story of Pick's disease: a rare form of dementia."
authors:
- Hardin S
- Schooley B
journal: J Neurosci Nurs
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1097/01376517-200206000-00004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A story of Pick's disease: a rare form of dementia.
**Authors:** Hardin S, Schooley B
**Journal:** J Neurosci Nurs (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01376517-200206000-00004](https://doi.org/10.1097/01376517-200206000-00004)

## Content

1. J Neurosci Nurs. 2002 Jun;34(3):117-22. doi: 10.1097/01376517-200206000-00004.

A story of Pick's disease: a rare form of dementia.

Hardin S(1), Schooley B.

Author information:
(1)University of North Carolina, Charlotte, Adult Health Nursing Department, 
9201 University City Boulevard, Charlotte, NC 28078, USA.

Pick's disease is a progressive illness that affects brain function, eventually 
causing loss of verbal skills and problem-solving abilities. Pick's disease 
accounts for 5% of all dementias. The most common symptoms involve personality, 
behavior, and language changes. Diagnosis can be difficult; a differential 
diagnosis often requires several years. Frequently, the disorder is initially 
diagnosed as stress, depression, or Alzheimer's disease. A magnetic resonance 
imaging scan will show atrophied portions of the frontal and temporal lobes. One 
of the most difficult aspects of care for someone with Pick's disease is 
communication. The communication styles of nurses can alleviate the anxiety 
experienced by a person with Pick's disease. Nurses should try different 
strategies as an approach to communicating and caring for someone with Pick's 
disease, remembering that each person suffering from dementia is different. 
Pick's disease can be emotionally devastating to the families of those who 
develop this disease. Working with families confronting the disability of a 
loved one is perhaps the greatest challenge for nurses. Nurses have the 
responsibility of educating the primary caregiver about nutrition, skin 
protection, incontinence care, safety, and end-of-life decisions.

DOI: 10.1097/01376517-200206000-00004
PMID: 12080867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]