---
reference_id: "PMID:25921147"
title: Purple rice bran extract attenuates the aflatoxin B1-induced initiation stage of hepatocarcinogenesis by alteration of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes.
authors:
- Suwannakul N
- Punvittayagul C
- Jarukamjorn K
- Wongpoomchai R
journal: Asian Pac J Cancer Prev
year: '2015'
doi: 10.7314/apjcp.2015.16.8.3371
keywords:
- Aflatoxin B1/toxicity
- Animals
- Carcinogenesis/drug effects
- Cytochrome P-450 CYP1A2
- "Cytochrome P-450 CYP3A/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Cytochromes/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Glucuronosyltransferase/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Glutathione Transferase/drug effects, metabolism"
- Hepatocytes/drug effects
- Liver/drug effects
- "Liver Neoplasms, Experimental"
- Male
- "Micronuclei, Chromosome-Defective/chemically induced, drug effects"
- Micronucleus Tests
- NADPH-Ferrihemoprotein Reductase
- Oryza
- Plant Extracts/pharmacology
- Poisons/toxicity
- Rats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Purple rice bran extract attenuates the aflatoxin B1-induced initiation stage of hepatocarcinogenesis by alteration of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes.
**Authors:** Suwannakul N, Punvittayagul C, Jarukamjorn K, Wongpoomchai R
**Journal:** Asian Pac J Cancer Prev (2015)
**DOI:** [10.7314/apjcp.2015.16.8.3371](https://doi.org/10.7314/apjcp.2015.16.8.3371)

## Content

1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(8):3371-6. doi: 10.7314/apjcp.2015.16.8.3371.

Purple rice bran extract attenuates the aflatoxin B1-induced initiation stage of
hepatocarcinogenesis by alteration of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes.

Suwannakul N(1), Punvittayagul C, Jarukamjorn K, Wongpoomchai R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University,
Chiang Mai, Thailand E-mail : rawiwan.wong@cmu.ac.th.

Pigmented rice bran has been suggested to be a valuable source of beneficial
phytochemicals. We investigated genotoxic and anti-genotoxic effects of purple
rice bran extract (PRBE) in rats using a liver micronucleus assay. Purple rice
bran was extracted with methanol, obtaining large amounts of phenolic compounds,
including anthocyanins and small amounts of gamma-oryzanol. The experimental
protocols were divided into two sets. Male rats were divided into three groups.
Group 1 was a negative control, while Groups 2 and 3 were fed with 100 and 500
mg/kg bw of PRBE, respectively, for 28 days. PRBE had no effect on micronucleus
formation or xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes in rat liver. Experiments
concerning the effect of PRBE on AFB1 showed that PRBE significantly lessened
the amount of micronucleated hepatocytes in AFB1 treated rats. Furthermore, it
modulated metabolic activation of AFB1 metabolism in the liver by suppressing
activity and protein expression of CYP1A2, CYP3A and CYP 450 reductase, and
enhancing phase II enzymes including GST and UGT. Overall, purple rice bran
extract was not genotoxic in rats. It exhibited anti-genotoxicity by modulation
some xenobiotic enzymes active in AFB1 metabolism.

DOI: 10.7314/apjcp.2015.16.8.3371
PMID: 25921147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
