---
reference_id: "PMID:36546343"
title: "Novel Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1 Gene Mutation: Broadening of the Phenotype and Implications for Insulin Resistance."
authors:
- Giacomozzi C
- Martin A
- Fernández MC
- Gutiérrez M
- Iascone M
- Domené HM
- Dominici FP
- Bergadá I
- Cangiano B
- Persani L
- Pennisi PA
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgac738
keywords:
- Humans
- "Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/genetics, metabolism"
- Insulin Resistance/genetics
- "Receptor, IGF Type 1/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Dwarfism/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1 Gene Mutation: Broadening of the Phenotype and Implications for Insulin Resistance.
**Authors:** Giacomozzi C, Martin A, Fernández MC, Gutiérrez M, Iascone M, Domené HM, Dominici FP, Bergadá I, Cangiano B, Persani L, Pennisi PA
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgac738](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgac738)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2023 May 17;108(6):1355-1369. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgac738.

Novel Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1 Gene Mutation: Broadening of the Phenotype 
and Implications for Insulin Resistance.

Giacomozzi C(1), Martin A(2), Fernández MC(2), Gutiérrez M(2), Iascone M(3), 
Domené HM(2), Dominici FP(4), Bergadá I(2), Cangiano B(5)(6), Persani L(5)(6), 
Pennisi PA(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Pediatrics, Department of Maternal and Child Health, Carlo Poma 
Hospital, ASST-Mantova, 46100 Mantua, Italy.
(2)Centro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas 'Dr. César Bergadá' (CEDIE) 
CONICET-FEI-División de Endocrinología, Hospital de Niños Dr. Ricardo Gutiérrez, 
C1425EFD Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII, 24127 Bergamo, 
Italy.
(4)Universidad de Buenos Aires, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Departamento 
de Química Biológica (IQUIFIB-CONICET), 1113AAB Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of 
Milan, 20100 Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico 
Italiano, 20100 Milan, Italy.

CONTEXT: Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)1 gene mutations are extremely rare 
causes of pre- and postnatal growth retardation. Phenotype can be heterogenous 
with varying degrees of neurosensory deafness, cognitive defects, glucose 
metabolism impairment and short stature.
OBJECTIVE: This study describes a 12.6-year-old girl presenting with severe 
short stature and insulin resistance, but with normal hearing and neurological 
development at the lower limit of normal.
METHODS: DNA was obtained from the proband and both parents for whole exome 
sequencing (WES). In silico analysis was performed to predict the impact of the 
IGF1 variant on IGF1 and insulin receptors (IGF1R and IR) signaling. 
Phosphorylation of the IGF1R at activating Tyr residues and cell proliferation 
analyses were used to assess the ability of each subject's IGF1 to bind and 
activate IGF1R.
RESULTS: The proband had low immunoreactive IGF1 in serum and WES revealed a 
novel homozygous IGF1 missense variant (c.247A>T), causing a change of serine 83 
for cysteine (p.Ser83Cys; p.Ser35Cys in mature peptide). The proband's parents 
were heterozygous for this mutation. In silico analyses indicated the pathogenic 
potential of the variant with electrostatic variations with the potential of 
hampering the interaction with the IGF1R but strengthening the binding to IR. 
The mutant IGF1 protein had a significantly reduced activity on in vitro 
bioassays.
CONCLUSION: We describe a novel IGF1 mutation leading to severe loss of 
circulating IGF1 immunoreactivity and bioactivity. In silico modeling predicts 
that the mutant IGF1 could interfere with IR signaling, providing a possible 
explanation for the severe insulin resistance observed in the patient. The 
absence of significant hearing and neurodevelopmental involvement in the present 
case is unusual and broadens the clinical spectrum of IGF1 mutations.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgac738
PMID: 36546343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]