---
reference_id: "PMID:38357074"
title: "Mature Teratoma at the Lumbar Spinal Cord: A Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Zavala-Romero L
- Villanueva-Castro E
- Datta-Banik R
- Ortiz-Altamirano AG
- Rodriguez-Esquivel MM
- Cienfuegos-Meza J
- Arriada-Mendicoa JN
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.52307
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mature Teratoma at the Lumbar Spinal Cord: A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Zavala-Romero L, Villanueva-Castro E, Datta-Banik R, Ortiz-Altamirano AG, Rodriguez-Esquivel MM, Cienfuegos-Meza J, Arriada-Mendicoa JN
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.52307](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.52307)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jan 15;16(1):e52307. doi: 10.7759/cureus.52307. eCollection 2024 
Jan.

Mature Teratoma at the Lumbar Spinal Cord: A Case Report and Literature Review.

Zavala-Romero L(1), Villanueva-Castro E(1), Datta-Banik R(1), Ortiz-Altamirano 
AG(1), Rodriguez-Esquivel MM(1), Cienfuegos-Meza J(2), Arriada-Mendicoa JN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Instituto Nacional de Neurología y Neurocirugía 
Manuel Velasco Suárez, Mexico City, MEX.
(2)Department of Neuropathology, Instituto Nacional de Neurología y Neurocirugía 
Manuel Velasco Suárez, Mexico City, MEX.

Mature spinal teratoma is a rare type of germ cell tumor that arises from any of 
the three germ cell layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm) and consists of 
differentiated tissues and structures that reflect the cellular organization and 
morphology of normal adult tissues. It has the ability to grow independently and 
cause compressive symptoms when found in this rare location. In this article, we 
present the case of a 29-year-old male patient with the onset of neurological 
symptoms beginning with pelvic limb paresthesias and progressing to back pain. 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tumor at L1-L4, which was resected 
by laminotomy, and histopathology revealed a mature intradural teratoma. 
Fortunately, this histologic type had a good prognosis for our patient, who had 
a significant clinical improvement. A systematic review was performed using the 
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) 
methodology with PubMed and Google Scholar to find similar case reports and to 
summarize the main features of this disease, which contributes to the 
understanding of its diagnostic presentation, treatment, and prognosis, 
improving clinical practice in the management of similar cases. The rarity of 
this condition, together with its wide clinical heterogeneity and prognosis, 
underscores the importance of a thorough evaluation of cases of intramedullary 
lesions, where the consideration of uncommon diseases in the differential 
diagnosis should be highlighted.

Copyright © 2024, Zavala-Romero et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.52307
PMCID: PMC10866183
PMID: 38357074

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.