---
reference_id: "PMID:35788982"
title: "Clinical relevance of amyloid in prostate samples: a report on 40 patients."
authors:
- Foix MP
- Calvo DF
- Condom I Mundó E
- Novo JFS
- Serra EM
- Benett JRG
- Gàllego MG
- Viladomat SY
- Julià FV
- Vidal I Bel A
journal: Histopathology
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/his.14717
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical relevance of amyloid in prostate samples: a report on 40 patients.
**Authors:** Foix MP, Calvo DF, Condom I Mundó E, Novo JFS, Serra EM, Benett JRG, Gàllego MG, Viladomat SY, Julià FV, Vidal I Bel A
**Journal:** Histopathology (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/his.14717](https://doi.org/10.1111/his.14717)

## Content

1. Histopathology. 2022 Sep;81(3):363-370. doi: 10.1111/his.14717. Epub 2022 Jul 
18.

Clinical relevance of amyloid in prostate samples: a report on 40 patients.

Foix MP(1), Calvo DF(1), Condom I Mundó E(1), Novo JFS(2), Serra EM(3), Benett 
JRG(3), Gàllego MG(1), Viladomat SY(4), Julià FV(2), Vidal I Bel A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Bellvitge 
Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Urology, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Bellvitge 
Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)Department of Radiology, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Bellvitge 
Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(4)Community Heart Failure Program, Department of Internal Medicine, Bio-Heart 
Cardiovascular Diseases Research Group, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute 
(IDIBELL), Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, 
Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the clinical findings in patients with incidental 
prostatic amyloidosis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Retrospective search in the database of the Department of 
Pathology, Hospital de Bellvitge, for prostate specimens with amyloid. Congo red 
and immunohistochemical staining of the sections. Review of the patients' 
clinical charts for symptoms attributable to systemic amyloidosis.
RESULTS: Amyloid deposition in the prostate was identified and reported in 40 
patients between 2001 and 2022. Median age was 76.5 years (range = 62-90 years). 
Prostate cancer was diagnosed in 25 patients. Only four patients had a previous 
diagnosis of amyloidosis. In the remaining 36 the prostate sample (31 needle 
biopsies, two transurethral resections (TUR), two simple prostatectomies, one 
radical cystectomy for bladder cancer) provided the initial diagnosis. Amyloid 
deposits were mainly located in the wall of small vessels and rarely in the 
prostatic stroma. Immunohistochemistry was available in 32 cases, 26 of which 
were positive for TTR. All patients showed at least one symptom indicative of 
systemic amyloidosis, the most frequent being hearing loss (55%), carpal tunnel 
syndrome (42,5%) or other osteoarticular symptoms (tendinopathies, 
osteoarthritis), cataracts (37.5%) and cardiac symptoms (32.5%), among others.
CONCLUSION: The prostate is a target tissue for amyloid deposition. The 
incidental finding of amyloid in prostate corresponds, in the majority of cases, 
to previously undiagnosed systemic TTR amyloidosis in patients lacking signs of 
heart involvement but having mainly osteoarticular symptoms, hearing and visual 
impairment.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/his.14717
PMID: 35788982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]