---
reference_id: "PMID:32866123"
title: "Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia: mutations in SLC34A1 and CYP24A1 in two siblings and fathers."
authors:
- Güven A
- Konrad M
- Schlingmann KP
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2020-0169
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Fathers
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypercalcemia/genetics, pathology"
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Siblings
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type IIa/genetics"
- Vitamin D3 24-Hydroxylase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia: mutations in SLC34A1 and CYP24A1 in two siblings and fathers.
**Authors:** Güven A, Konrad M, Schlingmann KP
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2020-0169](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2020-0169)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2020 Aug 31;33(10):1353-1358. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2020-0169.

Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia: mutations in SLC34A1 and CYP24A1 in two
siblings and fathers.

Güven A(1), Konrad M(2), Schlingmann KP(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Health Science, Zeynep Kamil Women and Children Hospital,
Pediatric Endocrinology Clinic, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital Münster,
Münster, Germany.

Objectives Both CYP24A1 and SLC34A1 gene mutations are responsible for
idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia, whereas loss-of-function mutations in
CYP24A1 (25-OH-vitamin D-24-hydroxylase) lead to a defect in the inactivation of
active 1.25(OH)2D; mutations in SLC34A1 encoding renal sodium phosphate
cotransporter NaPi-IIa lead to primary renal phosphate wasting combined with an
inappropriate activation of vitamin D. The presence of mutations in both genes
has not been reported in the same patient until today. Case presentation
Hypercalcemia was incidentally detected when a 13-month-old boy was being
examined for urinary tract infection. After 21 months, hypercalcemia was
detected in his six-month-old sister. High dose of vitamin D was not given to
both siblings. Both of them also had hypophosphatemia and decreased tubular
phosphate reabsorption. Intensive hydration, furosemide and oral phosphorus
treatment were given. Bilateral medullary nephrocalcinosis was detected in both
siblings and their father. Serum Ca and P levels were within normal limits at
follow-up in both siblings. Siblings and their parents all carry a homozygous
stop codon mutation (p.R466*) in CYP24A1. Interestingly, both siblings and the
father also have a heterozygous splice-site mutation (IVS6(+1)G>A) in SLC34A1.
The father has nephrocalcinosis. Conclusions A biallelic loss-of-function
mutation in the CYP24A1 gene was identified as responsible for hypercalcemia,
hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis. In addition, a heterozygous mutation in the
SLC34A1 gene, although not being the main pathogenic factor, might contribute to
the severe phenotype of both patients.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2020-0169
PMID: 32866123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
