---
reference_id: "PMID:1329222"
title: "Carboplatin in non-small cell lung cancer: an update on the Cancer and Leukemia Group B experience."
authors:
- Green MR
- Kreisman H
- Doll DC
- Lyss AP
- Clamon GH
- Goutsou M
- Perry MC
- Propert KJ
journal: Semin Oncol
year: '1992'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carboplatin in non-small cell lung cancer: an update on the Cancer and Leukemia Group B experience.
**Authors:** Green MR, Kreisman H, Doll DC, Lyss AP, Clamon GH, Goutsou M, Perry MC, Propert KJ
**Journal:** Semin Oncol (1992)

## Content

1. Semin Oncol. 1992 Feb;19(1 Suppl 2):44-9.

Carboplatin in non-small cell lung cancer: an update on the Cancer and Leukemia 
Group B experience.

Green MR(1), Kreisman H, Doll DC, Lyss AP, Clamon GH, Goutsou M, Perry MC, 
Propert KJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego 92103-8421.

Since 1984, the Respiratory Committee of the Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) 
has evaluated carboplatin, either alone or in combination, in five separate 
phase II studies for patients with inoperable non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC). All patients had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance 
status of 0 to 2 and had not received previous treatment with chemotherapy. In 
70 patients with stage IIIB or IV disease, carboplatin 400 mg/m2 administered 
intravenously once every 4 weeks produced a 16% overall response rate and an 
acceptable toxicity profile. Subsequently, combinations of 
carboplatin/cisplatin, carboplatin/etoposide, and carboplatin/vinblastine have 
been evaluated in similar patient groups. Response rates of 11%, 12%, and 20%, 
respectively, were obtained. Myelosuppressive toxicity was substantially greater 
with carboplatin/etoposide and carboplatin/vinblastine than with carboplatin 
alone. Carboplatin/vinblastine demonstrated efficacy similar to that of the 
cisplatin/vinblastine combination previously evaluated by CALGB for treatment of 
similar patients with advanced NSCLC; ease of administration and lack of 
significant nephrotoxicity also compared favorably with cisplatin-based therapy. 
In regional NSCLC patients, carboplatin 100 mg/m2/wk can be administered 
intravenously concurrently with 60 Gy thoracic radiotherapy given over 6 weeks. 
The impact of concurrent carboplatin added to a sequential 
chemotherapy-radiotherapy program for patients with regional NSCLC is currently 
under study by the CALGB Respiratory Committee.

PMID: 1329222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]