---
reference_id: "PMID:36936432"
title: "Case report: Novel TBX5-related pathogenic mechanism of Holt-Oram syndrome."
authors:
- Lang Y
- Zheng Y
- Qi B
- Zheng W
- Zhao C
- Zhai H
- Wang G
- Luo Z
- Li T
journal: Front Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1063202
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Novel TBX5-related pathogenic mechanism of Holt-Oram syndrome.
**Authors:** Lang Y, Zheng Y, Qi B, Zheng W, Zhao C, Zhai H, Wang G, Luo Z, Li T
**Journal:** Front Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2023.1063202](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1063202)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Mar 1;14:1063202. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1063202.
eCollection  2023.

Case report: Novel TBX5-related pathogenic mechanism of Holt-Oram syndrome.

Lang Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Zheng Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Qi B(1)(3)(4)(5), Zheng 
W(1)(3)(4)(5), Zhao C(6), Zhai H(1)(3)(4)(5), Wang G(1)(3)(4)(5), Luo 
Z(1)(3)(4)(5), Li T(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Heart Center, Tianjin Third Central Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(2)School of Medicine, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
(3)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Extracorporeal Life Support for Critical Diseases, 
Tianjin, China.
(4)Artificial Cell Engineering Technology Research Center, Tianjin, China.
(5)Tianjin Institute of Hepatobiliary Disease, Tianjin, China.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology, Handan First Hospital, Handan, China.

Introduction: Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized 
by upper limb abnormalities, congenital heart defects, and/or conduction 
abnormalities. Sequence alteration of T-box transcription factor 5 (TBX5) is 
correlated with the incidence of HOS. Case description: We present the case of a 
24-year-old female with upper limb alterations (congenital dysplasia in the 
wrist and elbow joints) and an anomalous left main trunk arising from the right 
coronary sinus. The patient inherited a base T (reference C) at rs883079 from 
her mother and base C (reference T) at rs10850326 from her father, both of which 
belong to the 3'-untranslated region (UTR) of the TBX5 gene; no alterations in 
TBX5 expression or single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in other exon areas 
were found. We explored the effects of TBX5 on cardiomyocytes using the HL-1 
cell line and TBX5-knockdown cells. Discussion: Quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction analysis demonstrated that TEKT2, TEKT4, and SPTB expression decreased 
after TBX5 knockdown, while chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis further 
revealed that TBX5 binds to the TEKT2, TEKT4, and SPTB promoter regions to 
promote gene transcription. Our findings support a novel TBX5-related pathogenic 
mechanism in HOS.

Copyright © 2023 Lang, Zheng, Qi, Zheng, Zhao, Zhai, Wang, Luo and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1063202
PMCID: PMC10014717
PMID: 36936432

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.