---
reference_id: "PMID:37027026"
title: "Prodromal symptoms and the duration of untreated psychosis in first episode of psychosis patients: what differences are there between early vs. adult onset and between schizophrenia vs. bipolar disorder?"
authors:
- Baeza I
- de la Serna E
- Mezquida G
- Cuesta MJ
- Vieta E
- Amoretti S
- Lobo A
- González-Pinto A
- Díaz-Caneja CM
- Corripio I
- Valli I
- Puig O
- Mané A
- Bioque M
- Ayora M
- Bernardo M
- Castro-Fornieles J
- PEPs group
journal: Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00787-023-02196-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prodromal symptoms and the duration of untreated psychosis in first episode of psychosis patients: what differences are there between early vs. adult onset and between schizophrenia vs. bipolar disorder?
**Authors:** Baeza I, de la Serna E, Mezquida G, Cuesta MJ, Vieta E, Amoretti S, Lobo A, González-Pinto A, Díaz-Caneja CM, Corripio I, Valli I, Puig O, Mané A, Bioque M, Ayora M, Bernardo M, Castro-Fornieles J, PEPs group
**Journal:** Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00787-023-02196-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-023-02196-7)

## Content

1. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2024 Mar;33(3):799-810. doi: 
10.1007/s00787-023-02196-7. Epub 2023 Apr 7.

Prodromal symptoms and the duration of untreated psychosis in first episode of 
psychosis patients: what differences are there between early vs. adult onset and 
between schizophrenia vs. bipolar disorder?

Baeza I(1)(2)(3)(4), de la Serna E(5)(6), Mezquida G(6)(7)(8), Cuesta MJ(9), 
Vieta E(6)(10)(7)(11), Amoretti S(6)(7)(11)(12), Lobo A(6)(13), González-Pinto 
A(6)(14), Díaz-Caneja CM(6)(15), Corripio I(6)(16), Valli I(10)(17), Puig 
O(5)(6)(7), Mané A(6)(18), Bioque M(6)(10)(7)(8), Ayora M(6)(15), Bernardo 
M(6)(10)(7)(8), Castro-Fornieles J(5)(6)(10)(7); PEPs group.

Collaborators: García-Rizo C, González-Díaz J, de Matteis M, de Diego H, Grasa 
E, Roldán A, Zorrilla I, García-Corres E, Ruíz-Lázaro PM, de-la-Cámara C, Rivero 
O, Escarti MJ, Casanovas F, Toll A, Verdolini N, Sagué-Vilabella M, Sugranyes G, 
Ilzarbe D, Contreras F, González-Blanco L, García-Portilla MP, Gutierrez M, 
Zabala A, Rodríguez-Jiménez R, Sánchez-Pastor L, Usall J, Butjosa A, Pomarol E, 
Sarró S, Ibáñez A, Sánchez-Torres AM, Balanzá-Martínez V.

Author information:
(1)Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychology Department, Hospital Clínic de 
Barcelona, 2021SGR01319, Barcelona, Spain. ibaeza@clinic.cat.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental, CIBERSAM-ISCIII, 
Madrid, Spain. ibaeza@clinic.cat.
(3)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi Sunyer (CERCA-IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain. ibaeza@clinic.cat.
(4)Department of Medicine, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 
ibaeza@clinic.cat.
(5)Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychology Department, Hospital Clínic de 
Barcelona, 2021SGR01319, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental, CIBERSAM-ISCIII, 
Madrid, Spain.
(7)Department of Medicine, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Barcelona Clinic Schizophrenia Unit, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, 
Neuroscience Institute, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona. IdiSNA, 
Navarra Institute for Health Research, Pamplona, Spain.
(10)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi Sunyer (CERCA-IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Bipolar and Depressive Disorder Unit, Neuroscience Institute, Hospital 
Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Group of Psychiatry, Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Mental Health and 
Addictions, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Department of Medicine and Psychiatry, Hospital Clínico Universitario and 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria (IIS) Aragón, Universidad de Zaragoza, 
Zaragoza, Spain.
(14)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitario de Alava, BIOARABA, EHU, 
Vitoria, Spain.
(15)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry and 
Mental Health, School of Medicine, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio 
Marañón, Universidad Complutense, IiSGM, Madrid, Spain.
(16)Psychiatry Department, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica-Sant Pau (IIB-SANT 
PAU), Hospital de La Santa Creu I Sant Pau, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 
(UAB), Barcelona, Spain.
(17)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(18)Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute (IMIM), Pompeu Fabra University, 
Barcelona, Spain.

To assess the role of age (early onset psychosis-EOP < 18 years vs. adult onset 
psychosis-AOP) and diagnosis (schizophrenia spectrum disorders-SSD vs. bipolar 
disorders-BD) on the duration of untreated psychosis (DUP) and prodromal 
symptoms in a sample of patients with a first episode of psychosis. 331 patients 
with a first episode of psychosis (7-35 years old) were recruited and 174 
(52.6%) diagnosed with SSD or BD at one-year follow-up through a multicenter 
longitudinal study. The Symptom Onset in Schizophrenia (SOS) inventory, the 
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale and the structured clinical interviews for 
DSM-IV diagnoses were administered. Generalized linear models compared the main 
effects and group interaction. 273 AOP (25.2 ± 5.1 years; 66.5% male) and 58 EOP 
patients (15.5 ± 1.8 years; 70.7% male) were included. EOP patients had 
significantly more prodromal symptoms with a higher frequency of trouble with 
thinking, avolition and hallucinations than AOP patients, and significantly 
different median DUP (91 [33-177] vs. 58 [21-140] days; Z = - 2.006, p = 0.045). 
This was also significantly longer in SSD vs. BD patients (90 [31-155] vs. 30 
[7-66] days; Z = - 2.916, p = 0.004) who, moreover had different profiles of 
prodromal symptoms. When assessing the interaction between age at onset 
(EOP/AOP) and type of diagnosis (SSD/BD), avolition was significantly higher 
(Wald statistic = 3.945; p = 0.047), in AOP patients with SSD compared to AOP BD 
patients (p = 0.004). Awareness of differences in length of DUP and prodromal 
symptoms in EOP vs. AOP and SSD vs. BD patients could help improve the early 
detection of psychosis among minors.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00787-023-02196-7
PMCID: PMC10894175
PMID: 37027026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: IB has received honoraria and travel support 
from Angelini, Otsuka-Lundbeck and Janssen, grants from Spanish Ministry of 
Health, Instituto de Salud Carlos III. EV has received grants and served as 
consultant, advisor or CME speaker for the following entities (unrelated to the 
present work): AB-Biotics, Abbvie, Aimentia, Angelini, Biogen, Celon, Dainippon 
Sumitomo Pharma, Ferrer, Gedeon Richter, GH Research, Glaxo Smith-Kline, 
Janssen, Lundbeck, Organon, Otsuka, Sage, Sanofi-Aventis, Sunovion, and Takeda. 
AG–P has received grants and served as consultant, advisor or CME speaker for 
the following entities: Janssen-Cilag, Lundbeck, Otsuka, Pfizer, Sanofi-Aventis, 
Alter, Angelini, Exeltis, Takeda, the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation 
(CIBERSAM),the Ministry of Science (Carlos III Institute), the Basque 
Government, and the European Framework Program of Research. CD-C holds grants 
from Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation 
(PI17/00481, PI20/00721, JR19/00024) and has received fees from Exeltis and 
Angelini. AM has served as a speaker and received honoraria for travel expenses 
/attending conferences from Otsuka and Angelini. M. Bioque has been a consultant 
for, received grant/research support and honoraria from, and been on the 
speakers/advisory board of has received honoraria from talks and/or consultancy 
of Adamed, Angelini, Casen-Recordati, Ferrer, Janssen-Cilag, Lundbeck, 
Neuraxpharm, Otsuka, Pfizer and Sanofi, and grants from Spanish Ministry of 
Health, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI20/01066). MA has held a Río Hortega 
grant from Instituto de Salud Carlos III (Spanish Ministry of Science and 
Innovation). M. Bernardo has been a consultant for, received grant/ research 
support and honoraria from, and been on the speakers/advisory board of 
ABBiotics, Adamed, Angelini, Casen Recordati, Janssen-Cilag, Menarini, Rovi and 
Takeda. CG-R has received honoraria/travel support from Adamed, Angelini, 
Janssen-Cilag and Lundbeck. JG-D has been an advisor/speaker for, or received 
travel support from Janssen, Eurofarma, Servier, Sanofi, Lilly, and Pfizer. 
CD-L-C received financial support to attend scientific meetings from 
Janssen-Cilag, Almirall, Eli Lilly, Lundbeck, Rovi, Esteve, Novartis, and 
Astrazeneca. NV has received financial support for CME activities and travel 
funds from the following entities (unrelated to the present work): Angelini, 
Janssen-Cilag, Lundbeck, Otsuka. MS-V has received financial support for CME 
activities or travel funds from Janssen-Cilag and Lundbeck, and has served as a 
speaker for Casen Recordati. GS has received speaker fees by Angelini Pharma. 
RR-J has been a consultant for, spoken in activities of, or received grants 
from: Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Fondo de Investigación Sanitaria (FIS), 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Madrid 
Regional Government (S2010/ BMD-2422 AGES; S2017/BMD-3740), JanssenCilag, 
Lundbeck, Otsuka, Pfizer, Ferrer, Juste, Takeda, Exeltis, Casen-Recordati, 
Angelini. AI has received research support from or served as speaker or advisor 
for Janssen-Cilag, Lundbeck and Otsuka. The remaining authors have no personal 
affiliations or financial relationships with any commercial interests to 
disclose in connection with the article.