---
reference_id: "PMID:36837923"
title: Machine Learning Methods Improve Specificity in Newborn Screening for Isovaleric Aciduria.
authors:
- Zaunseder E
- Mütze U
- Garbade SF
- Haupt S
- Feyh P
- Hoffmann GF
- Heuveline V
- Kölker S
journal: Metabolites
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/metabo13020304
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Machine Learning Methods Improve Specificity in Newborn Screening for Isovaleric Aciduria.
**Authors:** Zaunseder E, Mütze U, Garbade SF, Haupt S, Feyh P, Hoffmann GF, Heuveline V, Kölker S
**Journal:** Metabolites (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/metabo13020304](https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo13020304)

## Content

1. Metabolites. 2023 Feb 18;13(2):304. doi: 10.3390/metabo13020304.

Machine Learning Methods Improve Specificity in Newborn Screening for Isovaleric 
Aciduria.

Zaunseder E(1)(2), Mütze U(3), Garbade SF(3), Haupt S(1)(2), Feyh P(3), Hoffmann 
GF(3), Heuveline V(1)(2), Kölker S(3).

Author information:
(1)Engineering Mathematics and Computing Lab (EMCL), Interdisciplinary Center 
for Scientific Computing (IWR), Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(2)Data Mining and Uncertainty Quantification (DMQ), Heidelberg Institute for 
Theoretical Studies (HITS), 69118 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Division of Child Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Center for Child and 
Adolescent Medicine, Heidelberg University Hospital, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Isovaleric aciduria (IVA) is a rare disorder of leucine metabolism and part of 
newborn screening (NBS) programs worldwide. However, NBS for IVA is hampered by, 
first, the increased birth prevalence due to the identification of individuals 
with an attenuated disease variant (so-called "mild" IVA) and, second, an 
increasing number of false positive screening results due to the use of 
pivmecillinam contained in the medication. Recently, machine learning (ML) 
methods have been analyzed, analogous to new biomarkers or second-tier methods, 
in the context of NBS. In this study, we investigated the application of machine 
learning classification methods to improve IVA classification using an NBS data 
set containing 2,106,090 newborns screened in Heidelberg, Germany. Therefore, we 
propose to combine two methods, linear discriminant analysis, and ridge logistic 
regression as an additional step, a digital-tier, to traditional NBS. Our 
results show that this reduces the false positive rate by 69.9% from 103 to 31 
while maintaining 100% sensitivity in cross-validation. The ML methods were able 
to classify mild and classic IVA from normal newborns solely based on the NBS 
data and revealed that besides isovalerylcarnitine (C5), the metabolite 
concentration of tryptophan (Trp) is important for improved classification. 
Overall, applying ML methods to improve the specificity of IVA could have a 
major impact on newborns, as it could reduce the newborns' and families' burden 
of false positives or over-treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo13020304
PMCID: PMC9962193
PMID: 36837923

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.