---
reference_id: "PMID:33827115"
title: CD27 is required for protective lytic EBV antigen-specific CD8+ T-cell expansion.
authors:
- Deng Y
- Chatterjee B
- Zens K
- Zdimerova H
- Müller A
- Schuhmachers P
- Ligeon LA
- Bongiovanni A
- Capaul R
- Zbinden A
- Holler A
- Stauss H
- Hammerschmidt W
- Münz C
journal: Blood
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2020009482
keywords:
- Animals
- B-Lymphocytes/immunology
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- "Cell Transformation, Viral/genetics, immunology"
- "Epstein-Barr Virus Infections/genetics, immunology"
- "Herpesvirus 4, Human/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- "Immunity, Cellular"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Phosphoproteins/genetics, immunology"
- "Trans-Activators/genetics, immunology"
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Superfamily, Member 7/genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD27 is required for protective lytic EBV antigen-specific CD8+ T-cell expansion.
**Authors:** Deng Y, Chatterjee B, Zens K, Zdimerova H, Müller A, Schuhmachers P, Ligeon LA, Bongiovanni A, Capaul R, Zbinden A, Holler A, Stauss H, Hammerschmidt W, Münz C
**Journal:** Blood (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2020009482](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2020009482)

## Content

1. Blood. 2021 Jun 10;137(23):3225-3236. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020009482.

CD27 is required for protective lytic EBV antigen-specific CD8+ T-cell
expansion.

Deng Y(1), Chatterjee B(1), Zens K(1)(2), Zdimerova H(1), Müller A(1),
Schuhmachers P(1), Ligeon LA(1), Bongiovanni A(3)(4), Capaul R(5), Zbinden A(5),
Holler A(6), Stauss H(6), Hammerschmidt W(7), Münz C(1).

Author information:
(1)Viral Immunobiology, Institute of Experimental Immunology, and.
(2)Institute of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Cellular Microbiology of Infectious Pathogens Group, Center for Infection and
Immunity of Lille, and.
(4)BioImaging Center Lille-Nord de France, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille,
France.
(5)Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Institute of Immunity and Transplantation, Royal Free Campus, University
College London, London, United Kingdom; and.
(7)Research Unit Gene Vectors, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center
for Environmental Health and German Center for Infection Research, Munich,
Germany.

Primary immunodeficiencies in the costimulatory molecule CD27 and its ligand,
CD70, predispose for pathologies of uncontrolled Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
infection in nearly all affected patients. We demonstrate that both depletion of
CD27+ cells and antibody blocking of CD27 interaction with CD70 cause
uncontrolled EBV infection in mice with reconstituted human immune system
components. While overall CD8+ T-cell expansion and composition are unaltered
after antibody blocking of CD27, only some EBV-specific CD8+ T-cell responses,
exemplified by early lytic EBV antigen BMLF1-specific CD8+ T cells, are
inhibited in their proliferation and killing of EBV-transformed B cells. This
suggests that CD27 is not required for all CD8+ T-cell expansions and
cytotoxicity but is required for a subset of CD8+ T-cell responses that protect
us from EBV pathology.

© 2021 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020009482
PMCID: PMC8351885
PMID: 33827115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
