---
reference_id: "PMID:28671413"
title: "Alzheimer Disease: Pharmacologic and Nonpharmacologic Therapies for Cognitive and Functional Symptoms."
authors:
- Epperly T
- Dunay MA
- Boice JL
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2017'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alzheimer Disease: Pharmacologic and Nonpharmacologic Therapies for Cognitive and Functional Symptoms.
**Authors:** Epperly T, Dunay MA, Boice JL
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2017)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2017 Jun 15;95(12):771-778.

Alzheimer Disease: Pharmacologic and Nonpharmacologic Therapies for Cognitive 
and Functional Symptoms.

Epperly T(1), Dunay MA(2), Boice JL(2).

Author information:
(1)Family Medicine Residency of Idaho, Boise, ID, USA.
(2)Boise Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Boise, ID, USA.

Comment in
    Am Fam Physician. 2017 Jun 15;95(12):766-767.

Alzheimer disease comprises a syndrome of progressive cognitive and functional 
decline. Treatments should target cognitive and functional symptoms. 
Cholinesterase inhibitors, memantine, and a combination of a cholinesterase 
inhibitor and memantine have produced statistically significant but clinically 
small delays in various domains of cognitive and functional decline in select 
patients with Alzheimer disease. Vitamin E has been shown to delay functional 
decline in patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer disease, especially when 
taken in combination with a cholinesterase inhibitor. Structured programs of 
physical exercise improve physical function and reduce rates of neuropsychiatric 
symptoms in patients with mild to severe Alzheimer disease. Cognitive 
stimulation programs show benefit in maintenance of cognitive function and 
improved self-reported quality of life in patients with mild to moderate 
Alzheimer disease.

PMID: 28671413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]