---
reference_id: "PMID:28875337"
title: "Clinical and molecular analysis of 6 Chinese patients with isoleucine metabolism defects: identification of 3 novel mutations in the HSD17B10 and ACAT1 gene."
authors:
- Su L
- Li X
- Lin R
- Sheng H
- Feng Z
- Liu L
journal: Metab Brain Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s11011-017-0097-y
keywords:
- 3-Hydroxyacyl CoA Dehydrogenases/genetics
- Acetyl-CoA C-Acetyltransferase/genetics
- "Acetyl-CoA C-Acyltransferase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism"
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- "Child, Preschool"
- China
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Dyskinesias/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism"
- "Epilepsy/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Isoleucine/metabolism
- Male
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular analysis of 6 Chinese patients with isoleucine metabolism defects: identification of 3 novel mutations in the HSD17B10 and ACAT1 gene.
**Authors:** Su L, Li X, Lin R, Sheng H, Feng Z, Liu L
**Journal:** Metab Brain Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11011-017-0097-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-017-0097-y)

## Content

1. Metab Brain Dis. 2017 Dec;32(6):2063-2071. doi: 10.1007/s11011-017-0097-y.
Epub  2017 Sep 5.

Clinical and molecular analysis of 6 Chinese patients with isoleucine metabolism
defects: identification of 3 novel mutations in the HSD17B10 and ACAT1 gene.

Su L(1), Li X(2), Lin R(2), Sheng H(2), Feng Z(3)(4), Liu L(5).

Author information:
(1)Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515, China.
(2)Department of Genetics and Endocrinology, Guangzhou Women and Children's
Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, 9 Jinsui Road, Guangzhou, 510623,
China.
(3)Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515, China. fengzc06@126.com.
(4)Department of Neonatology, Affiliated Bayi Children's Hospital, Clinical
Medical College in PLA Army General Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Beijing, 100007, China. fengzc06@126.com.
(5)Department of Genetics and Endocrinology, Guangzhou Women and Children's
Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, 9 Jinsui Road, Guangzhou, 510623,
China. liliuxia2010@foxmail.com.

Hydroxysteroid (17β) dehydrogenase 10 (HSD10) and mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA
thiolase (β-KT) are two adjacent enzymes for the degradation of isoleucine, thus
HSD10 and β-KT deficiencies are confusing at an early stage because of nearly
the same elevation of typical metabolites in urine, such as
2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyric acid (2M3HBA) and tiglylglycine (TG). In order to
better understand the differences between these two disorders, we described the
clinical and molecular characteristics of two HSD10 deficiency patients and four
β-KT deficiency patients. β-KT deficiency patients had a much more favorable
outcome than that of HSD10 deficiency patients, indicating that the
multifunction of HSD10, especially neurosteroid metabolic activity, other than
only enzymatic degradation of isoleucine, is involved in the pathogenesis of
HSD10 deficiency. Two different mutations, a novel mutation p.Ile175Met and a
reported mutation p.Arg226Gln, were detected in the HSD17B10 gene of HSD10
deficiency patients. Six different mutations, including four known mutations:
p.Ala333Pro, p.Thr297Lys, c.83_84delAT, c.1006-1G > C, and two novel mutations:
p.Thr277Pro and c.121-3C > G were identified in the ACAT1 gene of β-KT
deficiency patients. In general, DNA diagnosis played an important role in
distinguishing between these two disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s11011-017-0097-y
PMID: 28875337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
