---
reference_id: "PMID:36980277"
title: "The Role of Oxidative Stress in Vitiligo: An Update on Its Pathogenesis and Therapeutic Implications."
authors:
- Chang WL
- Ko CH
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12060936
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Oxidative Stress in Vitiligo: An Update on Its Pathogenesis and Therapeutic Implications.
**Authors:** Chang WL, Ko CH
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12060936](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12060936)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Mar 19;12(6):936. doi: 10.3390/cells12060936.

The Role of Oxidative Stress in Vitiligo: An Update on Its Pathogenesis and 
Therapeutic Implications.

Chang WL(1), Ko CH(2).

Author information:
(1)International Ph.D. Program for Cell Therapy and Regeneration Medicine, 
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(2)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 
110, Taiwan.

Vitiligo is an autoimmune skin disorder caused by dysfunctional 
pigment-producing melanocytes which are attacked by immune cells. Oxidative 
stress is considered to play a crucial role in activating consequent autoimmune 
responses related to vitiligo. Melanin synthesis by melanocytes is the main 
intracellular stressor, producing reactive oxygen species (ROS). Under normal 
physiological conditions, the antioxidative nuclear factor erythroid 2-related 
factor 2 (Nrf2) pathway functions as a crucial mediator for cells to resist 
oxidative stress. In pathological situations, such as with antioxidant defects 
or under inflammation, ROS accumulate and cause cell damage. Herein, we 
summarize events at the cellular level under excessive ROS in vitiligo and 
highlight exposure to melanocyte-specific antigens that trigger immune 
responses. Such responses lead to functional impairment and the death of 
melanocytes, which sequentially increase melanocyte cytotoxicity through both 
innate and adaptive immunity. This report provides new perspectives and advances 
our understanding of interrelationships between oxidative stress and 
autoimmunity in the pathogenesis of vitiligo. We describe progress with targeted 
antioxidant therapy, with the aim of providing potential therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12060936
PMCID: PMC10047323
PMID: 36980277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.