---
reference_id: "PMID:22639852"
title: "First step in the differential diagnosis of folliculitis: cytology."
authors:
- Durdu M
- Ilkit M
journal: Crit Rev Microbiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3109/1040841X.2012.682051
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First step in the differential diagnosis of folliculitis: cytology.
**Authors:** Durdu M, Ilkit M
**Journal:** Crit Rev Microbiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3109/1040841X.2012.682051](https://doi.org/10.3109/1040841X.2012.682051)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Microbiol. 2013 Feb;39(1):9-25. doi: 10.3109/1040841X.2012.682051.
Epub  2012 May 29.

First step in the differential diagnosis of folliculitis: cytology.

Durdu M(1), Ilkit M.

Author information:
(1)Başkent University, Department of Dermatology, Adana Hospital, Adana, Turkey. 
sivandr@hotmail.com

Folliculitis is a superficial inflammation of the hair follicles, and can be 
observed in individuals of any age or race. The incidence of folliculitis is 
unknown because most patients only consult a doctor in cases of increasing 
lesions. There are various infectious and non-infectious causes of folliculitis, 
and the most common causative agent is Staphylococcus aureus. In addition, 
several Gram-negative bacterial, fungal, parasitic, and viral pathogens can 
cause follicular papules and pustules. In routine practice, however, these 
lesions are usually thought to be bacterial. Therefore, topical and/or systemic 
antibacterial treatment is recommended, but this involves the risk of being 
misused for months or even years. Cytology, a simple, rapid, inexpensive, and 
repeatable diagnostic method, can reveal various bacterial, fungal, viral, and 
parasitic pathogens. This review discusses the use of clinical sampling and 
staining of cytologic samples for the differential diagnosis of folliculitis, 
cytologic findings, and the frequency with which dermatologists use cytology to 
diagnose folliculitis, particularly in the age of molecular biology and more 
expensive, sophisticated investigations.

DOI: 10.3109/1040841X.2012.682051
PMID: 22639852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]