---
reference_id: "PMID:23327370"
title: "Ebola virus outbreaks in Africa: past and present."
authors:
- Muyembe-Tamfum JJ
- Mulangu S
- Masumu J
- Kayembe JM
- Kemp A
- Paweska JT
journal: Onderstepoort J Vet Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.4102/ojvr.v79i2.451
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola virus outbreaks in Africa: past and present.
**Authors:** Muyembe-Tamfum JJ, Mulangu S, Masumu J, Kayembe JM, Kemp A, Paweska JT
**Journal:** Onderstepoort J Vet Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.4102/ojvr.v79i2.451](https://doi.org/10.4102/ojvr.v79i2.451)

## Content

1. Onderstepoort J Vet Res. 2012 Jun 20;79(2):451. doi: 10.4102/ojvr.v79i2.451.

Ebola virus outbreaks in Africa: past and present.

Muyembe-Tamfum JJ(1), Mulangu S, Masumu J, Kayembe JM, Kemp A, Paweska JT.

Author information:
(1)Institut national de Recherche Biomédicale, Kinshasa I. 
justin.masumu@sacids.org.

Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) is a zoonosis affecting both human and non-human 
primates (NHP). Outbreaks in Africa occur mainly in the Congo and Nile basins. 
The first outbreaks of EHF occurred nearly simultaneously in 1976 in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC, former Zaire) and Sudan with very high 
case fatality rates of 88% and 53%, respectively. The two outbreaks were caused 
by two distinct species of Ebola virus named Zaire ebolavirus (ZEBOV) and Sudan 
ebolavirus (SEBOV). The source of transmission remains unknown. After a long 
period of silence (1980-1993), EHF outbreaks in Africa caused by the two species 
erupted with increased frequency and new species were discovered, namely Côte 
d'Ivoire ebolavirus (CIEBOV) in 1994 in the Ivory Coast and Bundibugyo 
ebolavirus (BEBOV) in 2007 in Uganda. The re-emergence of EHF outbreaks in Gabon 
and Republic of the Congo were concomitant with an increase in mortality amongst 
gorillas and chimpanzees infected with ZEBOV. The human outbreaks were related 
to multiple, unrelated index cases who had contact with dead gorillas or 
chimpanzees. However, in areas where NHP were rare or absent, as in Kikwit (DRC) 
in 1995, Mweka (DRC) in 2007, Gulu (Uganda) in 2000 and Yambio (Sudan) in 2004, 
the hunting and eating of fruit bats may have resulted in the primary 
transmission of Ebola virus to humans. Human-to-human transmission is associated 
with direct contact with body fluids or tissues from an infected subject or 
contaminated objects. Despite several, often heroic field studies, the 
epidemiology and ecology of Ebola virus, including identification of its natural 
reservoir hosts, remains a formidable challenge for public health and scientific 
communities.

DOI: 10.4102/ojvr.v79i2.451
PMID: 23327370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]