---
reference_id: "PMID:38491143"
title: "Clinical report of microsurgical treatment of Kohler's disease."
authors:
- Pei Y
- Zhu L
- Xu Q
- Wang J
- Sun Y
- Wang G
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-57088-w
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Osteochondrosis
- Osteochondritis
- Tarsal Bones
- Flatfoot
- "Pain/etiology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical report of microsurgical treatment of Kohler's disease.
**Authors:** Pei Y, Zhu L, Xu Q, Wang J, Sun Y, Wang G
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-57088-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-57088-w)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Mar 15;14(1):6341. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-57088-w.

Clinical report of microsurgical treatment of Kohler's disease.

Pei Y(1), Zhu L(2), Xu Q(1), Wang J(1), Sun Y(1), Wang G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Department of Hand Surgery, Foot and Ankle 
Surgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, Department of Hand Surgery, Foot and Ankle 
Surgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, China. 
zhuleijn@aliyun.com.

The conservative treatment for Kohler's disease will take several months, but 
some patients still have flatfoot and persistent pain. From October 2013 to July 
2015, 3 children with Kohler's disease underwent navicular decompression and 
micro-circulation reconstruction surgery in our hospital. All the patients have 
received conservative treatment for more than 3 months and the effect was poor. 
X-ray showed the bone density of navicular increased significantly. All patients 
were followed up over 1 year. The 3 patients recovered well. VAS score decreased 
from 7.0 to 2.6 at 1 month after the operation. The pain symptom disappeared 
completely on 3 months after surgery. The density of navicular bone recovered to 
normal. Navicular decompression and micro-circulation reconstruction surgery may 
quickly improve the ischemic status of navicular bone, alleviate pain symptom 
and enable patients to resume normal activity as soon as possible.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-57088-w
PMCID: PMC10943104
PMID: 38491143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.