---
reference_id: "PMID:2671327"
title: "Hypercalciuria with Bartter syndrome: evidence for an abnormality of vitamin D metabolism."
authors:
- Restrepo de Rovetto C
- Welch TR
- Hug G
- Clark KE
- Bergstrom W
journal: J Pediatr
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(89)80838-8
keywords:
- Bartter Syndrome/complications
- "Calcium Metabolism Disorders/etiology, physiopathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chlorides/pharmacokinetics
- Dinoprostone/metabolism
- Humans
- "Hyperaldosteronism/complications, epidemiology"
- Indomethacin/therapeutic use
- Infant
- Kidney Tubules/physiopathology
- Male
- Potassium/pharmacokinetics
- Renin/metabolism
- Vitamin D/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypercalciuria with Bartter syndrome: evidence for an abnormality of vitamin D metabolism.
**Authors:** Restrepo de Rovetto C, Welch TR, Hug G, Clark KE, Bergstrom W
**Journal:** J Pediatr (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3476(89)80838-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3476(89)80838-8)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 1989 Sep;115(3):397-404. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(89)80838-8.

Hypercalciuria with Bartter syndrome: evidence for an abnormality of vitamin D
metabolism.

Restrepo de Rovetto C(1), Welch TR, Hug G, Clark KE, Bergstrom W.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio.

Some children with Bartter syndrome have hypercalciuria. To determine the
mechanism for this phenomenon, we studied tubular function and calcium
metabolism in six such children. All patients had hypokalemic alkalosis,
normotension, hyperreninemia, growth retardation, low fractional distal chloride
reabsorption (4/5), and elevated urinary prostaglandin E2 excretion (5/6). In
addition, all had hypercalciuria (urinary calcium 6.5 to 25.0 mg/kg/day), with
evidence of nephrocalcinosis in five. None, however, had evidence of rickets or
hyperparathyroidism. There was a marked elevation in the serum concentration of
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D in all, and four patients had a response to oral calcium
loading suggestive of absorptive hypercalciuria. Five children have had
long-term therapy with indomethacin. They have had improvement in hypokalemia
and reduced urinary prostaglandin E2 excretion as well as reductions in the
serum concentration of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and in urinary calcium excretion.
These data suggest that hypercalciuria in some children with Bartter syndrome is
associated with an excess of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. The improvement in
hypercalciuria with prostaglandin synthesis inhibition may result in part from
correction of this vitamin D abnormality.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3476(89)80838-8
PMID: 2671327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
