---
reference_id: "PMID:33387080"
title: "Upfront Management of ALK-Rearranged Metastatic Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: One Inhibitor Fits All?"
authors:
- Tabbò F
- Passiglia F
- Novello S
journal: Curr Oncol Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s11912-020-00989-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Upfront Management of ALK-Rearranged Metastatic Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: One Inhibitor Fits All?
**Authors:** Tabbò F, Passiglia F, Novello S
**Journal:** Curr Oncol Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11912-020-00989-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11912-020-00989-6)

## Content

1. Curr Oncol Rep. 2021 Jan 2;23(1):10. doi: 10.1007/s11912-020-00989-6.

Upfront Management of ALK-Rearranged Metastatic Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: One 
Inhibitor Fits All?

Tabbò F(1), Passiglia F(1), Novello S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Turin, San Luigi Hospital, Orbassano, 
TO, Italy.
(2)Department of Oncology, University of Turin, San Luigi Hospital, Orbassano, 
TO, Italy. silvia.novello@unito.it.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangements represent a 
seldom event in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Given the oncogene 
alteration, ALK targeting represents the main therapeutic strategy. Here, we 
review evidence regarding ALK inhibitors (ALKi): clinical activity, safety 
profiles, financial costs, and biomarkers of efficacy.
RECENT FINDINGS: During the past 10 years, multiple ALKi have been developed, 
and four different compounds are currently available as upfront options for ALK+ 
NSCLC patients: crizotinib, ceritinib, alectinib, and brigatinib. 
Second-generation (2G) ALKi demonstrated superior clinical activity in terms of 
median progression-free survival (mPFS), objective response rate (ORR), 
intracranial disease control, and duration of response (DOR) when compared with 
crizotinib. 2G ALKi represent the current gold-standard first-line treatment for 
ALK-rearranged metastatic NSCLC. Among all available options, in our opinion, 
alectinib has likely the best profile of clinical activity and safety, thus 
emerging as the best upfront therapy. More insights will come from ongoing 
trials and analysis of biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1007/s11912-020-00989-6
PMID: 33387080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]