---
reference_id: "PMID:12110406"
title: "Osteogenesis imperfecta type VII: an autosomal recessive form of brittle bone disease."
authors:
- Ward LM
- Rauch F
- Travers R
- Chabot G
- Azouz EM
- Lalic L
- Roughley PJ
- Glorieux FH
journal: Bone
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s8756-3282(02)00790-1
keywords:
- Bone Density/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen/genetics
- Collagen Type I
- "Collagen Type I, alpha 1 Chain"
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Male
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta type VII: an autosomal recessive form of brittle bone disease.
**Authors:** Ward LM, Rauch F, Travers R, Chabot G, Azouz EM, Lalic L, Roughley PJ, Glorieux FH
**Journal:** Bone (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s8756-3282(02)00790-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s8756-3282(02)00790-1)

## Content

1. Bone. 2002 Jul;31(1):12-8. doi: 10.1016/s8756-3282(02)00790-1.

Osteogenesis imperfecta type VII: an autosomal recessive form of brittle bone 
disease.

Ward LM(1), Rauch F, Travers R, Chabot G, Azouz EM, Lalic L, Roughley PJ, 
Glorieux FH.

Author information:
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable disease of bone with low bone mass 
and bone fragility. The disease is generally classified into four types based on 
clinical features and disease severity, although recently fifth and sixth forms 
have also been reported. Most forms of OI are autosomal dominant. Rarely, 
autosomal recessive disease has been described. We report the clinical, 
radiological, and histological features of four children (age 3.9-8.6 years at 
last follow-up; all girls) and four adults (age 28-33 years; two women) with a 
novel form of autosomal recessive OI living in an isolated First Nations 
community in northern Quebec. In keeping with the established numeric 
classification for OI forms, we have called this form of the disease OI type 
VII. The phenotype is moderate to severe, characterized by fractures at birth, 
bluish sclerae, early deformity of the lower extremities, coxa vara, and 
osteopenia. Rhizomelia is a prominent clinical feature. Histomorphometric 
analyses of iliac crest bone samples revealed findings similar to OI type I, 
with decreased cortical width and trabecular number, increased bone turnover, 
and preservation of the birefringent pattern of lamellar bone. The disease has 
subsequently been localized to chromosome 3p22-24.1, which is outside the loci 
for type I collagen genes. The underlying genetic basis for the disease remains 
to be determined.

DOI: 10.1016/s8756-3282(02)00790-1
PMID: 12110406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]