---
reference_id: "PMID:37804765"
title: Humoral response to Epstein-Barr virus in patients with multiple sclerosis treated with B cell depletion therapy.
authors:
- Rød BE
- Wergeland S
- Bjørnevik K
- Holmøy T
- Ulvestad E
- Njølstad G
- Myhr KM
- Torkildsen Ø
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2023.105037
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Humoral response to Epstein-Barr virus in patients with multiple sclerosis treated with B cell depletion therapy.
**Authors:** Rød BE, Wergeland S, Bjørnevik K, Holmøy T, Ulvestad E, Njølstad G, Myhr KM, Torkildsen Ø
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2023.105037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2023.105037)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2023 Nov;79:105037. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2023.105037.
 Epub 2023 Sep 30.

Humoral response to Epstein-Barr virus in patients with multiple sclerosis 
treated with B cell depletion therapy.

Rød BE(1), Wergeland S(2), Bjørnevik K(3), Holmøy T(4), Ulvestad E(5), Njølstad 
G(6), Myhr KM(7), Torkildsen Ø(7).

Author information:
(1)Neuro-SysMed, Department of Neurology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway; Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. 
Electronic address: brit.ellen.rod@helse-bergen.no.
(2)Neuro-SysMed, Department of Neurology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway; Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway; 
The Norwegian Multiple Sclerosis Registry and Biobank, Haukeland University 
Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Departments of Epidemiology and Nutrition, Harvard T. H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway; 
Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway; 
Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(7)Neuro-SysMed, Department of Neurology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway; Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: B cell depletion therapy is highly effective in relapsing-remitting 
multiple sclerosis (RRMS). However, the precise underlying mechanisms of action 
for its biological effects in MS have still not been clarified. Epstein-Barr 
virus (EBV) is a known risk factor for MS and seems to be a prerequisite for 
disease development. EBV resides latently in the memory B cells, and may not 
only increase the risk of developing MS, but also contribute to disease activity 
and disability progression. Therefore, the effects of B cell depletion in MS 
could be associated with the depletion of EBV-infected cells and the altered 
immune response to the virus. In this study, we investigate the impact of B cell 
depletion on the humoral immune response specific to EBV in patients with MS.
METHODS: Newly diagnosed, treatment-naïve patients with RRMS were followed up to 
18 months after initiation of B-cell depletion therapy in the Overlord-MS study, 
a phase III trial (NCT04578639). We analyzed serum sampled before treatment and 
after 3, 6, 12 and 18 months for immunoglobulin γ (IgG) against Epstein-Barr 
nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1) and Epstein-Barr viral capsid antigen (VCA). We 
analyzed antibodies to cytomegalovirus (CMV) and total IgG in serum, as controls 
for viral and overall humoral immunity. The risk allele, HLA-DRB1*15:01, and the 
protective allele, HLA-A*02:01, were determined in all participants. In 
addition, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for circulating EBV-DNA was performed 
in the first 156 samples drawn. The associations between time on B 
cell-depletion therapy and serum anti-EBV antibody levels were estimated using 
linear mixed-effects models.
RESULTS: A total of 290 serum samples from 99 patients were available for 
analysis. After 6, 12 and 18 months, the EBNA1 IgG levels decreased by 12.7 % 
(95 % CI -18.8 to -6.60, p < 0.001), 12.1 % (95 % CI -19.8 to -3.7, p = 0.006) 
and 14.6 % (95 % CI to -25.3 to -2.4, p = 0.02) respectively, compared to 
baseline level. Carriers of the HLA-DRB1*15:01 allele had higher EBNA1 IgG 
levels at baseline (p = 0.02). The VCA IgG levels significantly increased by 
13.7 % (95 % CI 9.4 to 18.1, p < 0.001) after 3 months, compared to baseline, 
and persisted at this level throughout the follow-up. CMV IgG levels decreased, 
but to a lesser extent than the decrease of EBNA1 IgG, and total IgG levels 
decreased during therapy. Circulating EBV-DNA was found in only three of 156 
samples from 64 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: EBNA1 IgG levels decreased, while VCA IgG levels increased, during 
B cell depletion therapy. This supports the hypothesis that the mechanism of 
action for B cell depletion therapy might be mediated by effects on EBV 
infection, which, in turn, mitigate immune cross-reactivity and disease 
perpetuation.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2023.105037
PMID: 37804765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest BER, KB, EU 
and GN declare no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. SW has received 
honoraria for lecturing and advice from Biogen, Janssen and Sanofi. His 
department has received unrestricted institutional grants from Biogen, Merck and 
Novartis. He is currently collaborating on research projects funded by Merck and 
EMD Serono. TH has received speaker honoraria, research support/grants and 
participated in clinical trials for Biogen, Merck, Sanofi, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Roche and Novartis. K-MM has received unrestricted research grants to his 
institution, scientific advisory board or speaker honoraria from Biogen, 
Novartis, and Sanofi, and has participated in clinical trials organized by 
Biogen, Merck, Novartis, Roche and Sanofi. ØT has received speaker honoraria 
from and served on scientific advisory boards for Biogen, Sanofi-Aventis, Merck 
and Novartis.