---
reference_id: "PMID:16469946"
title: "Cardiac and vascular hypertrophy in Fabry disease: evidence for a new mechanism independent of blood pressure and glycosphingolipid deposition."
authors:
- Barbey F
- Brakch N
- Linhart A
- Rosenblatt-Velin N
- Jeanrenaud X
- Qanadli S
- Steinmann B
- Burnier M
- Palecek T
- Bultas J
- Hayoz D
journal: Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1161/01.ATV.0000209649.60409.38
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Animals
- Blood Pressure
- Blood Proteins/pharmacology
- "Carotid Artery, Common/physiopathology"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Echocardiography
- "Fabry Disease/blood, etiology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Glycosphingolipids/metabolism
- Humans
- "Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular/etiology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/pathology"
- Rats
- "Tunica Intima/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Tunica Media/pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac and vascular hypertrophy in Fabry disease: evidence for a new mechanism independent of blood pressure and glycosphingolipid deposition.
**Authors:** Barbey F, Brakch N, Linhart A, Rosenblatt-Velin N, Jeanrenaud X, Qanadli S, Steinmann B, Burnier M, Palecek T, Bultas J, Hayoz D
**Journal:** Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.ATV.0000209649.60409.38](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.ATV.0000209649.60409.38)

## Content

1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006 Apr;26(4):839-44. doi:
10.1161/01.ATV.0000209649.60409.38. Epub 2006 Feb 9.

Cardiac and vascular hypertrophy in Fabry disease: evidence for a new mechanism
independent of blood pressure and glycosphingolipid deposition.

Barbey F(1), Brakch N, Linhart A, Rosenblatt-Velin N, Jeanrenaud X, Qanadli S,
Steinmann B, Burnier M, Palecek T, Bultas J, Hayoz D.

Author information:
(1)Nephrology Department, University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: Fabry disease is an X-linked disorder resulting from
alpha-galactosidase A deficiency. The cardiovascular findings include left
ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and increased intima-media thickness of the common
carotid artery (CCA IMT). The current study examined the possible correlation
between these parameters. To corroborate these clinical findings in vitro,
plasma from Fabry patients was tested for possible proliferative effect on rat
vascular smooth muscle cells (vascular smooth muscle cell [VSMC]) and mouse
neonatal cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Thirty male and 38 female patients were enrolled. LVH was
found in 60% of men and 39% of women. Increased CCA IMT was equally present in
males and females. There was a strong positive correlation between LV mass and
CCA IMT (r2=0.27; P<0.0001). VSMC and neonatal cardiomyocyte proliferative
response in vitro correlated with CCA IMT (r2=0.39; P<0.0004) and LV mass index
(r2=0.19; P=0.028), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: LVH and CCA IMT occur concomitantly in Fabry suggesting common
pathogenesis. The underlying cause may be a circulating growth-promoting factor
whose presence has been confirmed in vitro.

DOI: 10.1161/01.ATV.0000209649.60409.38
PMID: 16469946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
