---
reference_id: "PMID:25530118"
title: Plectin-related skin diseases.
authors:
- Natsuga K
journal: J Dermatol Sci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2014.11.005
keywords:
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Autoimmune Diseases/genetics, immunology"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex/complications, genetics"
- "Gastric Outlet Obstruction/complications, genetics"
- Humans
- "Muscular Dystrophies/complications, genetics"
- "Plectin/deficiency, genetics, immunology"
- Point Mutation
- Pylorus/abnormalities
- "Skin Diseases, Vesiculobullous/genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plectin-related skin diseases.
**Authors:** Natsuga K
**Journal:** J Dermatol Sci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jdermsci.2014.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdermsci.2014.11.005)

## Content

1. J Dermatol Sci. 2015 Mar;77(3):139-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2014.11.005.
Epub  2014 Nov 28.

Plectin-related skin diseases.

Natsuga K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
North 15 West 7, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. Electronic address: 
natsuga@med.hokudai.ac.jp.

Plectin has been characterized as a linker protein that is expressed in many 
cell types and is distinctive in various isoforms in the N-terminus and around 
the rod domain due to complicated alternative splicing of PLEC, the gene 
encoding plectin. Plectin deficiency causes autosomal recessive epidermolysis 
bullosa simplex (EBS) with involvement of the skin and other organs, such as 
muscle and gastrointestinal tract, depending on the expression pattern of the 
defective protein. In addition, a point mutation in the rod domain of plectin 
leads to autosomal dominant EBS, called as EBS-Ogna. Plectin can be targeted by 
circulating autoantibodies in subepidermal autoimmune blistering diseases. This 
review summarizes plectin-related skin diseases, from congenital to autoimmune 
disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by 
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2014.11.005
PMID: 25530118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]