---
reference_id: "PMID:16823493"
title: Suppression of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling by nuclear plakoglobin recapitulates phenotype of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Garcia-Gras E
- Lombardi R
- Giocondo MJ
- Willerson JT
- Schneider MD
- Khoury DS
- Marian AJ
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1172/JCI27751
keywords:
- Adipogenesis/physiology
- Animals
- "Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia/metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Nucleus/metabolism
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Desmoplakins/genetics, metabolism"
- Electrophysiology
- "Embryo, Mammalian/anatomy & histology, physiology"
- "Heart Atria/cytology, pathology"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/cytology, physiology"
- Phenotype
- "RNA, Small Interfering/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- TCF Transcription Factors/metabolism
- "Wnt Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "beta Catenin/genetics, metabolism"
- "gamma Catenin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Suppression of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling by nuclear plakoglobin recapitulates phenotype of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Garcia-Gras E, Lombardi R, Giocondo MJ, Willerson JT, Schneider MD, Khoury DS, Marian AJ
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI27751](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI27751)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2006 Jul;116(7):2012-21. doi: 10.1172/JCI27751.

Suppression of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling by nuclear plakoglobin 
recapitulates phenotype of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.

Garcia-Gras E(1), Lombardi R, Giocondo MJ, Willerson JT, Schneider MD, Khoury 
DS, Marian AJ.

Author information:
(1)Section of Cardiology and Center for Cardiac Development, Department of 
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2006 Jul;116(7):1825-8. doi: 10.1172/JCI29174.

Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a genetic 
disease caused by mutations in desmosomal proteins. The phenotypic hallmark of 
ARVC is fibroadipocytic replacement of cardiac myocytes, which is a unique 
phenotype with a yet-to-be-defined molecular mechanism. We established atrial 
myocyte cell lines expressing siRNA against desmoplakin (DP), responsible for 
human ARVC. We show suppression of DP expression leads to nuclear localization 
of the desmosomal protein plakoglobin and a 2-fold reduction in canonical 
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling through Tcf/Lef1 transcription factors. The ensuing 
phenotype is increased expression of adipogenic and fibrogenic genes and 
accumulation of fat droplets. We further show that cardiac-restricted deletion 
of Dsp, encoding DP, impairs cardiac morphogenesis and leads to high embryonic 
lethality in the homozygous state. Heterozygous DP-deficient mice exhibited 
excess adipocytes and fibrosis in the myocardium, increased myocyte apoptosis, 
cardiac dysfunction, and ventricular arrhythmias, thus recapitulating the 
phenotype of human ARVC. We believe our results provide for a novel molecular 
mechanism for the pathogenesis of ARVC and establish cardiac-restricted 
DP-deficient mice as a model for human ARVC. These findings could provide for 
the opportunity to identify new diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets in 
patients with ARVC.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI27751
PMCID: PMC1483165
PMID: 16823493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]