---
reference_id: "PMID:37742509"
title: mTOR-dependent loss of PON1 secretion and antiphospholipid autoantibody production underlie autoimmunity-mediated cirrhosis in transaldolase deficiency.
authors:
- Winans T
- Oaks Z
- Choudhary G
- Patel A
- Huang N
- Faludi T
- Krakko D
- Nolan J
- Lewis J
- Blair S
- Lai Z
- Landas SK
- Middleton F
- Asara JM
- Chung SK
- Wyman B
- Azadi P
- Banki K
- Perl A
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2023.103112
keywords:
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
- Animals
- Mice
- "Liver Cirrhosis/immunology, metabolism, etiology"
- "Transaldolase/metabolism, deficiency, genetics"
- Autoimmunity
- "Aryldialkylphosphatase/metabolism, genetics, deficiency"
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Humans
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# mTOR-dependent loss of PON1 secretion and antiphospholipid autoantibody production underlie autoimmunity-mediated cirrhosis in transaldolase deficiency.
**Authors:** Winans T, Oaks Z, Choudhary G, Patel A, Huang N, Faludi T, Krakko D, Nolan J, Lewis J, Blair S, Lai Z, Landas SK, Middleton F, Asara JM, Chung SK, Wyman B, Azadi P, Banki K, Perl A
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2023.103112](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2023.103112)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2023 Nov;140:103112. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2023.103112. Epub 2023
Sep  22.

mTOR-dependent loss of PON1 secretion and antiphospholipid autoantibody
production underlie autoimmunity-mediated cirrhosis in transaldolase deficiency.

Winans T(1), Oaks Z(1), Choudhary G(1), Patel A(1), Huang N(1), Faludi T(2),
Krakko D(2), Nolan J(2), Lewis J(2), Blair S(2), Lai Z(2), Landas SK(3),
Middleton F(4), Asara JM(5), Chung SK(6), Wyman B(1), Azadi P(7), Banki K(3),
Perl A(8).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine, State University of New York, Norton College of
Medicine, Syracuse, NY, 13210, USA; Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, State University of New York, Norton College of Medicine, Syracuse, NY,
13210, USA.
(2)Departments of Medicine, State University of New York, Norton College of
Medicine, Syracuse, NY, 13210, USA.
(3)Departments of Pathology, State University of New York, Norton College of
Medicine, Syracuse, NY, 13210, USA.
(4)Departments of Neuroscience, State University of New York, Norton College of
Medicine, Syracuse, NY, 13210, USA.
(5)Division of Signal Transduction, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa,
Macau.
(7)University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
(8)Departments of Medicine, State University of New York, Norton College of
Medicine, Syracuse, NY, 13210, USA; Departments of Microbiology and Immunology,
State University of New York, Norton College of Medicine, Syracuse, NY, 13210,
USA; Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, State University of New
York, Norton College of Medicine, Syracuse, NY, 13210, USA. Electronic address:
perla@upstate.edu.

Transaldolase deficiency predisposes to chronic liver disease progressing from
cirrhosis to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Transition from cirrhosis to
hepatocarcinogenesis depends on mitochondrial oxidative stress, as controlled by
cytosolic aldose metabolism through the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP).
Progression to HCC is critically dependent on NADPH depletion and polyol buildup
by aldose reductase (AR), while this enzyme protects from carbon trapping in the
PPP and growth restriction in TAL deficiency. Although AR inactivation blocked
susceptibility to hepatocarcinogenesis, it enhanced growth restriction, carbon
trapping in the non-oxidative branch of the PPP and failed to reverse the
depletion of glucose 6-phosphate (G6P) and liver cirrhosis. Here, we show that
inactivation of the TAL-AR axis results in metabolic stress characterized by
reduced mitophagy, enhanced overall autophagy, activation of the mechanistic
target of rapamycin (mTOR), diminished glycosylation and secretion of
paraoxonase 1 (PON1), production of antiphospholipid autoantibodies (aPL), loss
of CD161+ NK cells, and expansion of CD38+ Ito cells, which are responsive to
treatment with rapamycin in vivo. The present study thus identifies
glycosylation and secretion of PON1 and aPL production as mTOR-dependent
regulatory checkpoints of autoimmunity underlying liver cirrhosis in TAL
deficiency.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2023.103112
PMCID: PMC10957505
PMID: 37742509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
