---
reference_id: "PMID:37994477"
title: Inborn errors of amino acid metabolism - from underlying pathophysiology to therapeutic advances.
authors:
- Ziegler SG
- Kim J
- Ehmsen JT
- Vernon HJ
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.050233
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inborn errors of amino acid metabolism - from underlying pathophysiology to therapeutic advances.
**Authors:** Ziegler SG, Kim J, Ehmsen JT, Vernon HJ
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.050233](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.050233)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2023 Nov 1;16(11):dmm050233. doi: 10.1242/dmm.050233. Epub
2023  Nov 23.

Inborn errors of amino acid metabolism - from underlying pathophysiology to 
therapeutic advances.

Ziegler SG(1), Kim J(1), Ehmsen JT(1)(2), Vernon HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Amino acids are organic molecules that serve as basic substrates for protein 
synthesis and have additional key roles in a diverse array of cellular 
functions, including cell signaling, gene expression, energy production and 
molecular biosynthesis. Genetic defects in the synthesis, catabolism or 
transport of amino acids underlie a diverse class of diseases known as inborn 
errors of amino acid metabolism. Individually, these disorders are rare, but 
collectively, they represent an important group of potentially treatable 
disorders. In this Clinical Puzzle, we discuss the pathophysiology, clinical 
features and management of three disorders that showcase the diverse clinical 
presentations of disorders of amino acid metabolism: phenylketonuria, lysinuric 
protein intolerance and homocystinuria due to cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) 
deficiency. Understanding the biochemical perturbations caused by defects in 
amino acid metabolism will contribute to ongoing development of diagnostic and 
management strategies aimed at improving the morbidity and mortality associated 
with this diverse group of disorders.

© 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.050233
PMCID: PMC10690057
PMID: 37994477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.