---
reference_id: "PMID:18247425"
title: "Costello syndrome associated with novel germline HRAS mutations: an attenuated phenotype?"
authors:
- Gripp KW
- Innes AM
- Axelrad ME
- Gillan TL
- Parboosingh JS
- Davies C
- Leonard NJ
- Lapointe M
- Doyle D
- Catalano S
- Nicholson L
- Stabley DL
- Sol-Church K
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32227
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cognition/physiology
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Developmental Disabilities/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Facial Asymmetry/complications, congenital, genetics"
- Female
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- Psychological Tests
- "Pyloric Stenosis/complications, diagnosis"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Costello syndrome associated with novel germline HRAS mutations: an attenuated phenotype?
**Authors:** Gripp KW, Innes AM, Axelrad ME, Gillan TL, Parboosingh JS, Davies C, Leonard NJ, Lapointe M, Doyle D, Catalano S, Nicholson L, Stabley DL, Sol-Church K
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.32227](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32227)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Mar 15;146A(6):683-90. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32227.

Costello syndrome associated with novel germline HRAS mutations: an attenuated 
phenotype?

Gripp KW(1), Innes AM, Axelrad ME, Gillan TL, Parboosingh JS, Davies C, Leonard 
NJ, Lapointe M, Doyle D, Catalano S, Nicholson L, Stabley DL, Sol-Church K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, A. I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, 
Delaware 19899, USA. kgripp@nemours.org

Costello syndrome is a rare congenital disorder typically characterized by 
severe failure-to-thrive, cardiac abnormalities including tachyarrhythmia and 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, distinctive facial features, a predisposition to 
papillomata and malignant tumors, neurologic abnormalities, developmental delay, 
and mental retardation. Its underlying cause is de novo germline mutations in 
the oncogene HRAS. Almost all Costello syndrome mutations affect one of the 
glycine residues in position 12 or 13 of the protein product. More than 80% of 
patients with Costello syndrome share the same underlying mutation, resulting in 
a G12S amino acid change. We report on two patients with novel HRAS mutations 
affecting amino acids 58 (T58I) and 146 (A146V), respectively. Despite facial 
features that appear less coarse than those typically seen in Costello patients, 
both patients show many of the physical and developmental problems 
characteristic for Costello syndrome. These novel HRAS mutations may be less 
common than the frequently reported G12S change, or patients with these changes 
may be undiagnosed due to their less coarse facial features. In addition to the 
findings previously known to occur in Costello syndrome, one of our patients had 
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis. This led us to review the medical histories on a 
cohort of proven HRAS mutation positive Costello syndrome patients, and we found 
a statistically significantly (P < 0.001) increased frequency of pyloric 
stenosis in Costello syndrome (5/58) compared to the general population 
frequency of 2-3/1,000. Thus we add hypertrophic pyloric stenosis to the 
abnormalities seen with increased frequency in Costello syndrome.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32227
PMID: 18247425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]