---
reference_id: "PMID:32663738"
title: "The incidence of intraoperative hypotension in moderate to high risk patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery: A retrospective multicenter observational analysis."
authors:
- Shah NJ
- Mentz G
- Kheterpal S
journal: J Clin Anesth
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jclinane.2020.109961
keywords:
- Adult
- Arterial Pressure
- Humans
- "Hypotension/epidemiology, etiology"
- Incidence
- Retrospective Studies
- Vasoconstrictor Agents
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The incidence of intraoperative hypotension in moderate to high risk patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery: A retrospective multicenter observational analysis.
**Authors:** Shah NJ, Mentz G, Kheterpal S
**Journal:** J Clin Anesth (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jclinane.2020.109961](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinane.2020.109961)

## Content

1. J Clin Anesth. 2020 Nov;66:109961. doi: 10.1016/j.jclinane.2020.109961. Epub 
2020 Jul 11.

The incidence of intraoperative hypotension in moderate to high risk patients 
undergoing non-cardiac surgery: A retrospective multicenter observational 
analysis.

Shah NJ(1), Mentz G(2), Kheterpal S(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan, Department of Anesthesiology, 1H247 UH, SPC 5048, 
1500 E. Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5048, United States. 
Electronic address: nirshah@med.umich.edu.
(2)University of Michigan, Department of Anesthesiology, 1H247 UH, SPC 5048, 
1500 E. Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5048, United States. 
Electronic address: gmentz@med.umich.edu.
(3)University of Michigan, Department of Anesthesiology, 1H247 UH, SPC 5048, 
1500 E. Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5048, United States. 
Electronic address: sachinkh@med.umich.edu.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: Intraoperative hypotension is associated with perioperative 
morbidity. We undertook this project to describe the incidence of hypotension 
(defined as mean arterial pressure <65 mmHg).
DESIGN: Retrospective, observational study.
SETTING: This study was in the intraoperative setting.
PATIENTS: We studied 22,109 adult patients ASA 3 and 4 patients, undergoing 
surgeries ≥180 min, with arterial line monitoring, from January 1, 2017, to 
December 31, 2017.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MEASUREMENTS: Our primary measurement was the number of minutes of primarily 
invasive mean arterial blood pressure below 65 mmHg. Additionally, we collected 
patient medical history data as classified by the Elixhauser Comorbidity 
Enhanced ICD-9-CM/ICD-10 CM Algorithm. Additional study variables included age, 
gender, BMI, preoperative blood pressure, ASA physical status classification, 
presence of absence of vasopressor infusion (phenylephrine, norepinephrine, 
vasopressin), estimated blood loss, amount of PRBCs administered, and surgical 
procedure type, characterized by body region on the basis of primary 
anesthesiology Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) code.
MAIN RESULTS: The mean duration of MAP <65 mmHg was 28.2 min (SD 42.6). 88% of 
cases had at least one hypotensive event as defined as MAP <65 mmHg for 1 min. 
Across centers this varied from 83.2 to 91.6% of cases. The mean duration of 
hypotension ranged from 22.1 to 31.8 min.
CONCLUSION: There continues to be a significant burden of hypotension (defined 
as MAP <65 mmHg) across our multicenter cohort of hospitals.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jclinane.2020.109961
PMID: 32663738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Resources for 
data collection, aggregation, and integration were provided by departmental and 
institutional sources at each MPOG center. Some aspects of the current work were 
supported, in part, by Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, California.