---
reference_id: "PMID:10563394"
title: Cell biology of Leishmania.
authors:
- Handman E
journal: Adv Parasitol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0065-308x(08)60229-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cell biology of Leishmania.
**Authors:** Handman E
**Journal:** Adv Parasitol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0065-308x(08)60229-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0065-308x(08)60229-8)

## Content

1. Adv Parasitol. 1999;44:1-39. doi: 10.1016/s0065-308x(08)60229-8.

Cell biology of Leishmania.

Handman E(1).

Author information:
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Post Office Royal 
Melbourne Hospital, Victoria, Australia.

Leishmania are digenetic protozoa which inhabit two highly specific hosts, the 
sandfly, where they grow as motile flagellated promastigotes in the gut, and the 
mammalian macrophage, where they survive and grow intracellularly as 
non-flagellated amastigotes in the phagolysosome. Leishmaniasis is the outcome 
of an evolutionary 'arms race' between the host's immune system and the 
parasite's evasion mechanisms, which ensure survival and transmission in the 
population. The diverse spectrum of patterns and severity of disease reflect the 
varying contributions of parasite virulence factors and host responses, some of 
which act in a host protective manner while others exacerbate disease. This 
chapter describes the interaction of the Leishmania with their hosts, with 
emphasis on the molecules and mechanisms evolved by the parasites to avoid, 
subvert or exploit the environments in the sandfly and the macrophage, and to 
move from one to the other.

DOI: 10.1016/s0065-308x(08)60229-8
PMID: 10563394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]