---
reference_id: "PMID:30248333"
title: Kindlin-1 Regulates Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Signaling.
authors:
- Michael M
- Begum R
- Chan GK
- Whitewood AJ
- Matthews DR
- Goult BT
- McGrath JA
- Parsons M
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2018.08.020
keywords:
- "Blister/genetics, pathology"
- Cell Line
- Cell Movement
- EGF Family of Proteins/metabolism
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/genetics, pathology"
- ErbB Receptors/metabolism
- Humans
- Keratinocytes/pathology
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Periodontal Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Photosensitivity Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- Proteolysis
- Signal Transduction
- Skin/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kindlin-1 Regulates Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Signaling.
**Authors:** Michael M, Begum R, Chan GK, Whitewood AJ, Matthews DR, Goult BT, McGrath JA, Parsons M
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jid.2018.08.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2018.08.020)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2019 Feb;139(2):369-379. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2018.08.020.
Epub  2018 Sep 21.

Kindlin-1 Regulates Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Signaling.

Michael M(1), Begum R(2), Chan GK(1), Whitewood AJ(3), Matthews DR(4), Goult
BT(3), McGrath JA(1), Parsons M(5).

Author information:
(1)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's College London,
Guy's Campus, London, UK.
(2)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's College London,
Guy's Campus, London, UK; St. Johns Institute of Dermatology, King's College
London, Guy's Campus, London, UK.
(3)School of Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, Kent, UK.
(4)Nikon Imaging Centre, King's College London, Guy's Campus, London, UK.
(5)St. Johns Institute of Dermatology, King's College London, Guy's Campus,
London, UK; Nikon Imaging Centre, King's College London, Guy's Campus, London,
UK. Electronic address: maddy.parsons@kcl.ac.uk.

Kindler syndrome is an autosomal recessive genodermatosis that results from
mutations in the FERMT1 gene encoding t kindlin-1. Kindlin-1 localizes to focal
adhesion and is known to contribute to the activation of integrin receptors.
Most cases of Kindler syndrome show a reduction or complete absence of kindlin-1
in keratinocytes, resulting in defective integrin activation, cell adhesion, and
migration. However, roles for kindlin-1 beyond integrin activation remain poorly
defined. In this study we show that skin and keratinocytes from Kindler syndrome
patients have significantly reduced expression levels of the EGFR, resulting in
defective EGF-dependent signaling and cell migration. Mechanistically, we show
that kindlin-1 can associate directly with EGFR in vitro and in keratinocytes in
an EGF-dependent, integrin-independent manner and that formation of this complex
is required for EGF-dependent migration. We further show that kindlin-1 acts to
protect EGFR from lysosomal-mediated degradation. This shows a new role for
kindlin-1 that has implications for understanding Kindler syndrome disease
pathology.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2018.08.020
PMCID: PMC6345584
PMID: 30248333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
