---
reference_id: "PMID:20301776"
title: Geleophysic Dysplasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Marzin P
- Cormier-Daire V
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Geleophysic Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Marzin P, Cormier-Daire V

## Content

1. Geleophysic Dysplasia.

Marzin P(1), Cormier-Daire V(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2009 Sep 22 [updated 2024 Mar 28].

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Paris Cité University;, INSERM U1163, Imagine
Institute;, AP-HP, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Geleophysic dysplasia, a progressive condition
resembling a lysosomal storage disorder, is characterized by short stature,
short hands and feet, progressive joint limitation and contractures, distinctive
facial features, progressive cardiac valvular disease, and thickened skin.
Intellect is normal. The characteristic clinical findings are likely to be
present in the first year of life. Cardiac, airway, and pulmonary involvement
result in death before age five years in approximately 33% of individuals.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of geleophysic dysplasia can be
established in a proband with characteristic clinical and radiographic findings;
the molecular diagnosis of geleophysic dysplasia is established in a proband
with characteristic clinical and radiographic findings and one of the following
on molecular genetic testing: biallelic pathogenic variants in ADAMTSL2 or a
heterozygous pathogenic variant in either FBN1 or LTBP3.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Ongoing physiotherapy to prevent joint
limitation; treatment of hip dysplasia, osteochondritis, and carpal tunnel
syndrome per orthopedist; cardiac valve replacement in those with severe
stenosis or insufficiency; management of cardiac septal defect per cardiologist
and cardiac surgeon; tracheostomy as needed for severe tracheal stenosis;
treatment of restrictive lung disease, obstructive sleep apnea, and/or asthma
per pulmonologist; standard treatments for hearing loss and recurrent otitis
media; treatment of ophthalmologic manifestations per ophthalmologist.
Surveillance: Frequent assessments in infancy and early childhood of growth,
motor and speech development, frequency of ear infections, respiratory
compromise, cardiac and pulmonary examination, and liver size; annual clinical
assessments after age three years. Intermittent evaluation with clinical
genetics and genetic counseling. Annual orthopedic evaluation until age 18
years, then every two years. EMG for carpal tunnel syndrome every two years
beginning at age 11 years. Evaluation with cardiologist (including EKG and
echocardiogram), pulmonologist, ENT specialist, and audiologist annually from
birth until age three years, then at specific intervals. Thoracic CT examination
at age six years; polysomnography as needed. Ophthalmology and funduscopic
examination at specific intervals.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Geleophysic dysplasia caused by biallelic pathogenic
variants in ADAMTSL2 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Geleophysic
dysplasia caused by a heterozygous pathogenic variant in either FBN1 or LTBP3 is
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Autosomal recessive inheritance: If
both parents are known to be heterozygous for an ADAMTSL2 pathogenic variant,
each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of
being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives
requires prior identification of the ADAMTSL2 pathogenic variants in the family.
Autosomal dominant inheritance: All probands reported to date with FBN1- or
LTBP3-related geleophysic dysplasia whose parents have undergone molecular
genetic testing have had the disorder as the result of a de novo pathogenic
variant. If a molecular diagnosis has been established in the proband and the
pathogenic variant identified in the proband is not identified in either parent,
the recurrence risk to sibs is estimated to be 1% because of the possibility of
parental germline mosaicism. Once the geleophysic dysplasia-related pathogenic
variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301776
