---
reference_id: "PMID:23761391"
title: Infections of the respiratory system in patients with ataxia-telangiectasia.
authors:
- Schroeder SA
- Zielen S
journal: Pediatr Pulmonol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ppul.22817
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Ataxia Telangiectasia/complications
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Respiratory Tract Infections/diagnosis, etiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infections of the respiratory system in patients with ataxia-telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Schroeder SA, Zielen S
**Journal:** Pediatr Pulmonol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ppul.22817](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.22817)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2014 Apr;49(4):389-99. doi: 10.1002/ppul.22817. Epub 2013
Jun  13.

Infections of the respiratory system in patients with ataxia-telangiectasia.

Schroeder SA(1), Zielen S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine and Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, The
Floating Hospital, Tufts Medical Center, 800 Washington St., Boston,
Massachusetts, 02111.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive multiorgan disease
characterized by progressive neurologic deterioration in which the most common
causes of death are diseases of the respiratory system and cancer. This
retrospective case-series characterizes the pulmonary disease seen in 101
cancer-free A-T patients who were living with chronic respiratory symptoms or
who had pulmonary disease listed as the cause of their death. All of the 101
patients developed chronic progressive pulmonary disease with intermittent acute
exacerbations and irreversible radiographic changes. Seventy-nine patients had
microbiologic analysis of their respiratory secretions and of the patients less
than 15 years of age, 25/27 cultured Staphylococcus aureus, Hemophilus
influenzae, or Streptococcus pneumoniae and 35/47 older patients cultured
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Opportunistic infections of the lungs were not observed.
Thirty-two patients had histologic examination of their lungs and 21 of the
specimens had both acute and chronic inflammatory changes. The results of this
study describe the natural history of the suppurative lung disease in patients
with A-T that often progresses to bronchiectasis and pneumonias and ultimately
respiratory failure. The etiology of the progressive deterioration is unknown
but the pulmonary disease of A-T described in this study shows similarities to
the lung disease seen in cystic fibrosis. Treatment of the lung disease in
patients with A-T may benefit from many of the same therapies that have improved
the quality of life for patients with cystic fibrosis.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.22817
PMID: 23761391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
