---
reference_id: "PMID:40533571"
title: Treatment with gemcitabine/cisplatin and durvalumab for advanced biliary tract cancer - real-world data from a multicenter German patient population.
authors:
- Gerhardt F
- Müller C
- Venerito M
- Chater J
- Mohr R
- Egerer M
- Lindig U
- Schindler A
- Ebel S
- Fischer J
- Schwarz M
- Gehring S
- Berg T
- van Bömmel F
journal: J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00432-025-06239-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Aged
- Gemcitabine
- "Biliary Tract Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, mortality"
- Middle Aged
- "Deoxycytidine/analogs & derivatives, administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Cisplatin/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Retrospective Studies
- Germany
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment with gemcitabine/cisplatin and durvalumab for advanced biliary tract cancer - real-world data from a multicenter German patient population.
**Authors:** Gerhardt F, Müller C, Venerito M, Chater J, Mohr R, Egerer M, Lindig U, Schindler A, Ebel S, Fischer J, Schwarz M, Gehring S, Berg T, van Bömmel F
**Journal:** J Cancer Res Clin Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00432-025-06239-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00432-025-06239-1)

## Content

1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2025 Jun 18;151(6):191. doi: 
10.1007/s00432-025-06239-1.

Treatment with gemcitabine/cisplatin and durvalumab for advanced biliary tract 
cancer - real-world data from a multicenter German patient population.

Gerhardt F(1), Müller C(2), Venerito M(2), Chater J(3), Mohr R(4), Egerer M(4), 
Lindig U(5), Schindler A(1), Ebel S(6), Fischer J(1), Schwarz M(7), Gehring 
S(8), Berg T(1), van Bömmel F(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hepatology, Department of Medicine II, Leipzig University Medical 
Center, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases, Otto von 
Guericke University Hospital, Magdeburg, Germany.
(3)Medical Clinic III, Klinikum Chemnitz, Chemnitz, Germany.
(4)Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Charité University Medicine 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Medical Clinic II, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany.
(6)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Leipzig University 
Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany.
(7)MVZ Schöneck, Schöneck, Germany.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital Marburg, Marburg, 
Germany.
(9)Division of Hepatology, Department of Medicine II, Leipzig University Medical 
Center, Leipzig, Germany. florian.vanboemmel@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.

BACKGROUND: Biliary tract cancers (BTCs) are a heterogeneous group of malignant 
cancers with an overall poor prognosis. For more than a decade, the standard 
palliative first-line therapy was cytotoxic chemotherapy with 
gemcitabine/cisplatin. The results of the TOPAZ-1 and KEYNOTE-966 trials have 
now introduced immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) into first-line therapy.
METHODS: Between July 2022 and March 2024, we retrospectively analyzed patients 
with advanced BTC who were treated with gemcitabine/cisplatin and durvalumab 
(GCD) at collaborating German university hospitals, tertiary hospitals, and 
outpatient oncology practices.
RESULTS: A total of 90 patients were enrolled. The median overall survival (mOS) 
was 16 months, and the median progression-free survival (mPFS) was 5 months. The 
overall response rate (ORR) was 11.1%, and the disease control rate (DCR) was 
41.1%. A perihilar primary tumor was significantly associated with better mPFS, 
while age group between 70 and 75 years and performance status of ECOG 2 at 
treatment initiation were significantly associated with poorer mOS. Adverse 
events (AEs) occurred in a total of 64% of patients. The most common grade 1 and 
grade 2 AEs included anemia (23%), thrombocytopenia (16%), neutropenia (10%), 
nausea (14%), and fatigue (16%). Grade 3 and grade 4 AEs included anemia (10%), 
thrombocytopenia (5%), and neutropenia (11%). Only one case of immune-mediated 
hypothyroidism (imAE) was documented.
CONCLUSION: Our real-world data support previously reported findings and further 
validate ICI based therapy as the standard of care for patients with advanced 
BTCs.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-025-06239-1
PMCID: PMC12176970
PMID: 40533571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.