---
reference_id: "PMID:22791835"
title: PAPSS2 mutations cause autosomal recessive brachyolmia.
authors:
- Miyake N
- Elcioglu NH
- Iida A
- Isguven P
- Dai J
- Murakami N
- Takamura K
- Cho TJ
- Kim OH
- Hasegawa T
- Nagai T
- Ohashi H
- Nishimura G
- Matsumoto N
- Ikegawa S
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101039
keywords:
- Asian People
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genetic Loci
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Multienzyme Complexes/genetics
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, ethnology, genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Radiography
- Sulfate Adenylyltransferase/genetics
- TRPV Cation Channels/genetics
- Turkey
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PAPSS2 mutations cause autosomal recessive brachyolmia.
**Authors:** Miyake N, Elcioglu NH, Iida A, Isguven P, Dai J, Murakami N, Takamura K, Cho TJ, Kim OH, Hasegawa T, Nagai T, Ohashi H, Nishimura G, Matsumoto N, Ikegawa S
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101039](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101039)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2012 Aug;49(8):533-8. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101039. Epub
2012  Jul 11.

PAPSS2 mutations cause autosomal recessive brachyolmia.

Miyake N(1), Elcioglu NH, Iida A, Isguven P, Dai J, Murakami N, Takamura K, Cho 
TJ, Kim OH, Hasegawa T, Nagai T, Ohashi H, Nishimura G, Matsumoto N, Ikegawa S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. nmiyake@yokohama-cu.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Brachyolmia is a heterogeneous group of skeletal dysplasias that 
primarily affects the spine. Clinical and genetic heterogeneity have been 
reported; at least three types of brachyolmia are known. TRPV4 mutations have 
been identified in an autosomal dominant form of brachyolmia; however, disease 
genes for autosomal recessive (AR) forms remain totally unknown. We conducted a 
study on a Turkish family with an AR brachyolmia, with the aim of identifying a 
disease gene for AR brachyolmia.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We examined three affected individuals of the family using 
exon capture followed by next generation sequencing and identified its disease 
gene, PAPSS2 (phosphoadenosine-phosphosulfate synthetase 2). The patients had a 
homozygous loss of function mutation, c.337_338insG (p.A113GfsX18). We further 
examined three patients with similar brachyolmia phenotypes (two Japanese and a 
Korean) and also identified loss of function mutations in PAPSS2; one patient 
was homozygous for IVS3+2delT, and the other two were compound heterozygotes for 
c.616-634del19 (p.V206SfsX9) and c.1309-1310delAG (p.R437GfsX19), and 
c.480_481insCGTA (p.K161RfsX6) and c.661delA (p.I221SfsX40), respectively. The 
six patients had short-trunk short stature that became conspicuous during 
childhood with normal intelligence and facies. Their radiographic features 
included rectangular vertebral bodies with irregular endplates and narrow 
intervertebral discs, precocious calcification of rib cartilages, short femoral 
neck, and mildly shortened metacarpals. Spinal changes were very similar among 
the six patients; however, epiphyseal and metaphyseal changes of the tubular 
bones were variable.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified PAPSS2 as the disease gene for an AR brachyolmia. 
PAPSS2 mutations have produced a skeletal dysplasia family, with a gradation of 
phenotypes ranging from brachyolmia to spondylo-epi-metaphyseal dysplasia.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101039
PMID: 22791835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]