---
reference_id: "PMID:8782044"
title: "Human alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase (alpha-NAGA) deficiency: new mutations and the paradox between genotype and phenotype."
authors:
- Keulemans JL
- Reuser AJ
- Kroos MA
- Willemsen R
- Hermans MM
- van den Ouweland AM
- de Jong JG
- Wevers RA
- Renier WO
- Schindler D
- Coll MJ
- Chabas A
- Sakuraba H
- Suzuki Y
- van Diggelen OP
journal: J Med Genet
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.33.6.458
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genotype
- "Hexosaminidases/deficiency, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Rabbits
- "Skin/cytology, enzymology"
- alpha-N-Acetylgalactosaminidase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase (alpha-NAGA) deficiency: new mutations and the paradox between genotype and phenotype.
**Authors:** Keulemans JL, Reuser AJ, Kroos MA, Willemsen R, Hermans MM, van den Ouweland AM, de Jong JG, Wevers RA, Renier WO, Schindler D, Coll MJ, Chabas A, Sakuraba H, Suzuki Y, van Diggelen OP
**Journal:** J Med Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.33.6.458](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.33.6.458)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 1996 Jun;33(6):458-64. doi: 10.1136/jmg.33.6.458.

Human alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase (alpha-NAGA) deficiency: new mutations and 
the paradox between genotype and phenotype.

Keulemans JL(1), Reuser AJ, Kroos MA, Willemsen R, Hermans MM, van den Ouweland 
AM, de Jong JG, Wevers RA, Renier WO, Schindler D, Coll MJ, Chabas A, Sakuraba 
H, Suzuki Y, van Diggelen OP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    J Med Genet. 2007 Jan;44(1):e64. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.044966.

Up to now eight patients with alpha-NAGA deficiency have been described. This 
includes the newly identified patient reported here who died unexpectedly aged 1 
1/2 years of hypoxia during convulsions; necropsy was not performed. Three 
patients have been genotyped previously and here we report the mutations in the 
other five patients, including two new mutations (S160C and E193X). The newly 
identified patient is consanguineous with the first patients reported with 
alpha-NAGA deficiency and neuroaxonal dystrophy and they all had the alpha-NAGA 
genotype E325K/E325K. Clinical heterogeneity among patients with alpha-NAGA 
deficiency is extreme. Two affected sibs, homozygotes for E325K, are severely 
affected and have the signs and symptoms of infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, but 
prominent vacuolisation is lacking. The mildly affected patients (two families, 
three patients) at the opposite end of the clinical spectrum have clear 
vacuolisation and angiokeratoma but no overt neurological manifestations. Two of 
them are homozygous for the stop mutation E193X, leading to complete loss of 
alpha-NAGA protein. These observations are difficult to reconcile with a simple 
genotype-phenotype correlation and we suggest that factors or genes other than 
alpha-NAGA contribute to the clinical heterogeneity of the eight patients with 
alpha-NAGA deficiency. At the metabolic level, the patients with alpha-NAGA 
deficiency are similar. The major abnormal urinary oligosaccharides are 
sialylglycopeptides of the O linked type. Our enzymatic studies indicated that 
these compounds are not the primary lysosomal storage products.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.33.6.458
PMCID: PMC1050630
PMID: 8782044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]