---
reference_id: "PMID:28444290"
title: "Low-density lipoproteins cause atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. 1. Evidence from genetic, epidemiologic, and clinical studies. A consensus statement from the European Atherosclerosis Society Consensus Panel."
authors:
- Ference BA
- Ginsberg HN
- Graham I
- Ray KK
- Packard CJ
- Bruckert E
- Hegele RA
- Krauss RM
- Raal FJ
- Schunkert H
- Watts GF
- Borén J
- Fazio S
- Horton JD
- Masana L
- Nicholls SJ
- Nordestgaard BG
- van de Sluis B
- Taskinen MR
- Tokgözoglu L
- Landmesser U
- Laufs U
- Wiklund O
- Stock JK
- Chapman MJ
- Catapano AL
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx144
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low-density lipoproteins cause atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. 1. Evidence from genetic, epidemiologic, and clinical studies. A consensus statement from the European Atherosclerosis Society Consensus Panel.
**Authors:** Ference BA, Ginsberg HN, Graham I, Ray KK, Packard CJ, Bruckert E, Hegele RA, Krauss RM, Raal FJ, Schunkert H, Watts GF, Borén J, Fazio S, Horton JD, Masana L, Nicholls SJ, Nordestgaard BG, van de Sluis B, Taskinen MR, Tokgözoglu L, Landmesser U, Laufs U, Wiklund O, Stock JK, Chapman MJ, Catapano AL
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/ehx144](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehx144)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J. 2017 Aug 21;38(32):2459-2472. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx144.

Low-density lipoproteins cause atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. 1. 
Evidence from genetic, epidemiologic, and clinical studies. A consensus 
statement from the European Atherosclerosis Society Consensus Panel.

Ference BA(1), Ginsberg HN(2), Graham I(3), Ray KK(4), Packard CJ(5), Bruckert 
E(6), Hegele RA(7), Krauss RM(8), Raal FJ(9), Schunkert H(10)(11), Watts GF(12), 
Borén J(13), Fazio S(14), Horton JD(15)(16), Masana L(17), Nicholls SJ(18), 
Nordestgaard BG(19)(20)(21), van de Sluis B(22), Taskinen MR(23), Tokgözoglu 
L(24), Landmesser U(2)(6)(25), Laufs U(26), Wiklund O(27)(28), Stock JK(29), 
Chapman MJ(30), Catapano AL(31).

Author information:
(1)Division of Translational Research and Clinical Epidemiology, Division of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 
48202, USA.
(2)Irving Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Department of Primary Care and Public Health, Imperial Centre for 
Cardiovascular Disease Prevention, Imperial College, London, UK.
(5)College of Medical, Veterinary, and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UK.
(6)INSERM UMRS1166, Department of Endocrinology-Metabolism, ICAN - Institute of 
CardioMetabolism and Nutrition, AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié, Paris, France.
(7)Department of Medicine, Robarts Research Institute, Schulich School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Department of Atherosclerosis Research, Children's Hospital Oakland Research 
Institute, Oakland, CA 94609, USA.
(9)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South 
Africa.
(10)Deutsches Herzzentrum München, Technische Universität München, Munich 80636, 
Germany.
(11)Deutsches Zentrum für Herz und Kreislauferkrankungen (DZHK), Partner Site 
Munich Heart Alliance, Munich 81377, Germany.
(12)Lipid Disorders Clinic, Centre for Cardiovascular Medicine, Royal Perth 
Hospital, School of Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, 
Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
(13)Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, Wallenberg Laboratory, 
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(14)Department of Medicine, Center for Preventive Cardiology of the Knight 
Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, 
USA.
(15)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(16)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(17)Research Unit of Lipids and Atherosclerosis, University Rovira i Virgili, C. 
Sant Llorenç 21, Reus 43201, Spain.
(18)South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
(19)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and The Copenhagen General Population 
Study, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, Denmark.
(20)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(21)The Copenhagen City Heart Study, Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Denmark.
(22)Department of Pediatrics, Molecular Genetics Section, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 
Groningen AV 9713, The Netherlands.
(23)Helsinki University Central Hospital and Research Programs' Unit, Diabetes 
and Obesity, Heart and Lung Centre, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(24)Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(25)Department of Cardiology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin (CBF), 
Hindenburgdamm 30, Berlin 12203, Germany.
(26)Klinik für Innere Medizin III, Kardiologie, Angiologie und Internistische 
Intensivmedizin, Universitätsklinikum des Saarlandes, Homburg, Saar, Germany.
(27)Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, University of Gothenburg, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(28)Department of Cardiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
(29)European Atherosclerosis Society, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(30)INSERM, Dyslipidemia and Atherosclerosis Research, and University of Pierre 
and Marie Curie, Pitié-Sâlpetrière University Hospital, Paris, France.
(31)Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Milan 
and IRCCS Multimedica, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    J R Coll Physicians Edinb. 2017 Jun;47(2):153-155. doi: 
10.4997/JRCPE.2017.212.

AIMS: To appraise the clinical and genetic evidence that low-density 
lipoproteins (LDLs) cause atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We assessed whether the association between LDL and ASCVD 
fulfils the criteria for causality by evaluating the totality of evidence from 
genetic studies, prospective epidemiologic cohort studies, Mendelian 
randomization studies, and randomized trials of LDL-lowering therapies. In 
clinical studies, plasma LDL burden is usually estimated by determination of 
plasma LDL cholesterol level (LDL-C). Rare genetic mutations that cause reduced 
LDL receptor function lead to markedly higher LDL-C and a dose-dependent 
increase in the risk of ASCVD, whereas rare variants leading to lower LDL-C are 
associated with a correspondingly lower risk of ASCVD. Separate meta-analyses of 
over 200 prospective cohort studies, Mendelian randomization studies, and 
randomized trials including more than 2 million participants with over 20 
million person-years of follow-up and over 150 000 cardiovascular events 
demonstrate a remarkably consistent dose-dependent log-linear association 
between the absolute magnitude of exposure of the vasculature to LDL-C and the 
risk of ASCVD; and this effect appears to increase with increasing duration of 
exposure to LDL-C. Both the naturally randomized genetic studies and the 
randomized intervention trials consistently demonstrate that any mechanism of 
lowering plasma LDL particle concentration should reduce the risk of ASCVD 
events proportional to the absolute reduction in LDL-C and the cumulative 
duration of exposure to lower LDL-C, provided that the achieved reduction in 
LDL-C is concordant with the reduction in LDL particle number and that there are 
no competing deleterious off-target effects.
CONCLUSION: Consistent evidence from numerous and multiple different types of 
clinical and genetic studies unequivocally establishes that LDL causes ASCVD.

© The Author 2017. Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx144
PMCID: PMC5837225
PMID: 28444290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]