---
reference_id: "PMID:39334421"
title: "Aberrant copper metabolism and hepatic inflammation cause neurological manifestations in a mouse model of Wilson's disease."
authors:
- Dong J
- Xiang G
- Xia X
- Xu L
- Wen P
- Xu C
- Xu Y
- Su Y
- Song Y
- Tong H
- Zhu Q
- Han Y
- Han Y
- Cheng N
- Wang H
- Zhou H
journal: J Neuroinflammation
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12974-024-03178-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aberrant copper metabolism and hepatic inflammation cause neurological manifestations in a mouse model of Wilson's disease.
**Authors:** Dong J, Xiang G, Xia X, Xu L, Wen P, Xu C, Xu Y, Su Y, Song Y, Tong H, Zhu Q, Han Y, Han Y, Cheng N, Wang H, Zhou H
**Journal:** J Neuroinflammation (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12974-024-03178-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-024-03178-5)

## Content

1. J Neuroinflammation. 2024 Sep 27;21(1):235. doi: 10.1186/s12974-024-03178-5.

Aberrant copper metabolism and hepatic inflammation cause neurological 
manifestations in a mouse model of Wilson's disease.

Dong J(#)(1)(2), Xiang G(#)(3), Xia X(#)(1), Xu L(1), Wen P(1), Xu C(1), Xu 
Y(1), Su Y(4), Song Y(5), Tong H(6), Zhu Q(6), Han Y(1)(2), Han Y(1)(2), Cheng 
N(7)(8), Wang H(9), Zhou H(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurology, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, 357, Changjiang 
Rd. Middle, Hefei, Anhui, 230061, China.
(2)Center for Xin-An Medicine and Modernization of Traditional Chinese Medicine 
of IHM, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, Hefei, 230012, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Immune Response and Immunotherapy, Institute of Health and 
Medicine, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, 230601, China.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China.
(5)Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, 1 Beichen West Rd, Beijing, 100101, China.
(6)High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 230031, China.
(7)Institute of Neurology, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, 357, Changjiang 
Rd. Middle, Hefei, Anhui, 230061, China. NanCheng111065@ahtcm.edu.cn.
(8)Center for Xin-An Medicine and Modernization of Traditional Chinese Medicine 
of IHM, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, Hefei, 230012, China. 
NanCheng111065@ahtcm.edu.cn.
(9)Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, 1 Beichen West Rd, Beijing, 100101, China. 
wanghaoyi@ioz.ac.cn.
(10)School of Life Sciences, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China. 
hzhou@ahmu.edu.cn.
(11)School of Basic Medical Science, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, 
China. hzhou@ahmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Pathogenic germline mutations in the P-type copper-transporting ATPase (ATP7B) 
gene cause Wilson's disease (WD), a hereditary disorder characterized by 
disrupted copper metabolism. The Arg778Leu (R778L) mutation in exon 8 is 
prevalent among individuals with WD in East Asia and is associated with more 
severe phenotypes. In this study, we generated a WD mouse model harboring R778L 
mutation (R778L mice) using CRISPR/Cas9. R778L mice exhibit a range of 
pathological characteristics resembling those of patients with WD and the same 
point mutations, including aberrant copper metabolism, pathological cellular 
injury, inflammation, and severe hepatic fibrosis. At 3-5 months of age, these 
mice started to display neurological deficits in motor coordination and 
cognitive dysfunction, accompanied by increased expression of inflammatory 
cytokines in the central nervous system. Microglia in the striatum and cortex 
exhibit significant activation, shorter processes, and decreased branch points. 
However, the Cu2+ levels in the brain tissue of R778L mice did not differ 
significantly from those of wild-type mice. Notably, inhibition of hepatic 
inflammation with PJ34 or siNfkb markedly alleviated the deficiencies in 
cognitive performance and improved locomotor activity in R778L mice. Thus, this 
study establishes a novel murine model to investigate the pathophysiology of WD, 
highlights the liver-brain crosstalk responsible for neurological manifestations 
in individuals with WD caused by the R778L point mutation, and demonstrates the 
potential of modulating liver inflammation as a therapeutic strategy for 
alleviating the neurological manifestations of WD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-024-03178-5
PMCID: PMC11437830
PMID: 39334421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.