---
reference_id: "PMID:33174224"
title: Pharmacological treatment for continuous spike-wave during slow wave sleep syndrome and Landau-Kleffner Syndrome.
authors:
- Moresco L
- Bruschettini M
- Calevo MG
- Siri L
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD013132.pub2
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Landau-Kleffner Syndrome/drug therapy
- "Sleep, Slow-Wave/drug effects"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacological treatment for continuous spike-wave during slow wave sleep syndrome and Landau-Kleffner Syndrome.
**Authors:** Moresco L, Bruschettini M, Calevo MG, Siri L
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD013132.pub2](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD013132.pub2)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 Nov 6;11(11):CD013132. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD013132.pub2.

Pharmacological treatment for continuous spike-wave during slow wave sleep 
syndrome and Landau-Kleffner Syndrome.

Moresco L(1), Bruschettini M(2), Calevo MG(3), Siri L(4).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric and Neonatology Unit, Ospedale San Paolo, Savona, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Paediatrics, Lund University, Skåne 
University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Epidemiology, Biostatistics Unit, IRCCS, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, 
Italy.
(4)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.

Comment in
    Dev Med Child Neurol. 2022 Apr;64(4):411-412. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.15137.

BACKGROUND: Continuous spike-wave during slow wave sleep syndrome (CSWS) and 
Landau-Kleffner syndrome (LKS) are two epileptic encephalopathies that present 
with neurocognitive regression, aphasia, and clinical seizures, typically 
presenting in children around five years of age. The pathophysiology of these 
conditions is not completely understood. Some studies suggest a common origin 
for both. No systematic reviews have assessed the efficacy of pharmacological 
interventions for these conditions.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the benefit and adverse effects of pharmacological 
interventions for the treatment of CSWS and LKS.
SEARCH METHODS: On 8 September 2020, we searched the Cochrane Register of 
Studies (CRS Web) and MEDLINE Ovid (1946 to September 04, 2020). We applied no 
language restrictions. CRS Web includes randomised or quasi-randomised, 
controlled trials from CENTRAL, PubMed, Embase, ClinicalTrials.gov, and the 
World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials, quasi-randomised controlled 
trials, and cluster-randomised trials comparing antiepileptic drugs alone, or 
with steroids or intravenous immunoglobulins, or both versus other antiepileptic 
drugs, or placebo, or no treatment, administered to children with CSWS and LKS. 
We planned to compare treatments for the two conditions separately.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed studies 
identified by the search strategy for inclusion. The primary outcomes considered 
in this review were neuropsychological-neurolinguistic functions.
MAIN RESULTS: Our search strategy yielded 18 references. Two review authors 
independently assessed all references. We did not find any completed studies to 
include. We identified one ongoing trial, which was terminated because of lack 
of enrolment.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There was no evidence from trials to support or refute the 
use of pharmacological treatment for continuous spike-wave during slow wave 
sleep syndrome or Landau-Kleffner syndrome. Well-designed randomised controlled 
trials are needed to inform practice.

Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD013132.pub2
PMCID: PMC8078191
PMID: 33174224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LM: none known MB: none known MGC: none 
known LS: none known