---
reference_id: "PMID:28795510"
title: CNGB3 mutation spectrum including copy number variations in 552 achromatopsia patients.
authors:
- Mayer AK
- Van Cauwenbergh C
- Rother C
- Baumann B
- Reuter P
- De Baere E
- Wissinger B
- Kohl S
- ACHM Study Group
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23311
keywords:
- Alleles
- Chromosome Mapping
- Chromosome Segregation
- "Color Vision Defects/diagnosis, genetics"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated Cation Channels/genetics
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons
- Founder Effect
- Genotype
- Humans
- Mutation
- Mutation Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CNGB3 mutation spectrum including copy number variations in 552 achromatopsia patients.
**Authors:** Mayer AK, Van Cauwenbergh C, Rother C, Baumann B, Reuter P, De Baere E, Wissinger B, Kohl S, ACHM Study Group
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23311](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23311)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2017 Nov;38(11):1579-1591. doi: 10.1002/humu.23311. Epub 2017 Aug
28.

CNGB3 mutation spectrum including copy number variations in 552 achromatopsia 
patients.

Mayer AK(1), Van Cauwenbergh C(2)(3), Rother C(1), Baumann B(1), Reuter P(1), De 
Baere E(3), Wissinger B(1), Kohl S(1); ACHM Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Tuebingen, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University and Ghent University 
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Achromatopsia is a rare autosomal recessive cone disorder characterized by color 
vision defects, photophobia, nystagmus, and severely reduced visual acuity. The 
disease is caused by mutations in genes encoding crucial components of the cone 
phototransduction cascade (CNGA3, CNGB3, GNAT2, PDE6C, and PDE6H) or in ATF6, 
involved in the unfolded protein response. CNGB3 encoding the beta subunit of 
the cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channel in cone photoreceptors is the major 
achromatopsia gene. Here, we present a comprehensive spectrum of CNGB3 mutations 
and their prevalence in a cohort of 1074 independent families clinically 
diagnosed with achromatopsia. Of these, 485 (45.2%) carried mutations in CNGB3. 
We identified a total of 98 different potentially disease-causing CNGB3 
variants, 58 of which are novel. About 10% of patients with CNGB3 mutations only 
harbored a single heterozygous variant. Therefore, we performed quantitative 
real-time PCR in 43 of such single heterozygotes in search of the missing 
allele, followed by microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization and 
breakpoint mapping. We discovered nine different heterozygous copy number 
variations encompassing one to 10 consecutive exons in 16 unrelated patients. 
Moreover, one additional patient with a homozygous CNGB3 deletion encompassing 
exons 4-18 was identified, highlighting the importance of CNV analysis for this 
gene.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23311
PMID: 28795510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]