---
reference_id: "PMID:37261703"
title: Sporadic and Familial Acute Myeloid Leukemia with CEBPA Mutations.
authors:
- Yuan J
- He R
- Alkhateeb HB
journal: Curr Hematol Malig Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11899-023-00699-3
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Mutation
- "CCAAT-Enhancer-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sporadic and Familial Acute Myeloid Leukemia with CEBPA Mutations.
**Authors:** Yuan J, He R, Alkhateeb HB
**Journal:** Curr Hematol Malig Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11899-023-00699-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11899-023-00699-3)

## Content

1. Curr Hematol Malig Rep. 2023 Oct;18(5):121-129. doi:
10.1007/s11899-023-00699-3.  Epub 2023 Jun 1.

Sporadic and Familial Acute Myeloid Leukemia with CEBPA Mutations.

Yuan J(1), He R(1), Alkhateeb HB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Division of Hematopathology, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
Alkhateeb.Hassan@mayo.edu.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: CCAAT enhancer binding protein A (CEBPA) gene mutation is one 
of the common genetic alterations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), which can be 
associated with sporadic and familial AML.
RECENT FINDINGS: Due to the recent advances in molecular testing and the 
prognostic role of CEBPA mutation in AML, the definition for AML with CEBPA 
mutation (AML-CEBPA) has significantly changed. This review provides the 
rationale for the updates on classifications, and the impacts on laboratory 
evaluation and clinical management for sporadic and familial AML-CEBPA patients. 
In addition, minimal residual disease assessment post therapy to stratify 
disease risk and stem cell transplant in selected AML-CEBPA patients are 
discussed. Taken together, the recent progresses have shifted the definition, 
identification, and management of patients with AML-CEBPA.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11899-023-00699-3
PMCID: PMC10484814
PMID: 37261703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.