---
reference_id: "PMID:29202763"
title: Classification and sensitivity analysis of the transmission dynamic of hepatitis B.
authors:
- Khan T
- Jung IH
- Khan A
- Zaman G
journal: Theor Biol Med Model
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s12976-017-0068-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Classification and sensitivity analysis of the transmission dynamic of hepatitis B.
**Authors:** Khan T, Jung IH, Khan A, Zaman G
**Journal:** Theor Biol Med Model (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12976-017-0068-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12976-017-0068-3)

## Content

1. Theor Biol Med Model. 2017 Dec 5;14(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s12976-017-0068-3.

Classification and sensitivity analysis of the transmission dynamic of hepatitis 
B.

Khan T(1), Jung IH(2), Khan A(1)(3), Zaman G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, University of Malakand, Khyber Pakhtunkhawa, 
Chakdara Dir Lower, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Pusan National University, Busan, 46241, South 
Korea. ilhjung@pusan.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Mathematics, University of Swat, Mingora, Swat, Khyber 
Pakhtunkhawa, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis B infection caused by the hepatitis B virus is one of the 
most serious viral infections and a global health problem. In the transmission 
of hepatitis B infection, three different phases, i.e. acute infected, 
chronically infected, and carrier individuals, play important roles. Carrier 
individuals are especially significant, because they do not exhibit any symptoms 
and are able to transmit the infection. Here we assessed the transmissibility 
associated with different infection stages of hepatitis B and generated an 
epidemic model.
METHODS: To demonstrate the transmission dynamic of hepatitis B, we investigate 
an epidemic model by dividing the infectious class into three subclasses, namely 
acute infected, chronically infected, and carrier individuals with both 
horizontal and vertical transmission.
RESULTS: Numerical results and sensitivity analysis of some important parameters 
are presented to show that the proportion of births without successful 
vaccination, perinatally infected individuals, and direct contact rate are 
highest risk factors for the spread of hepatitis B in the community.
CONCLUSION: Our work provides a coherent platform for studying the full dynamics 
of hepatitis B and an effective direction for theoretical work.

DOI: 10.1186/s12976-017-0068-3
PMCID: PMC5716382
PMID: 29202763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.