---
reference_id: "PMID:7570751"
title: Familial aorto-cervicocephalic arterial dissections and congenitally bicuspid aortic valve.
authors:
- Schievink WI
- Mokri B
journal: Stroke
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1161/01.str.26.10.1935
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Aortic Dissection/genetics
- Aortic Aneurysm/genetics
- Aortic Valve/abnormalities
- Carotid Artery Diseases/genetics
- "Carotid Artery, Internal"
- Cerebral Infarction/pathology
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neural Crest/abnormalities
- Tunica Media/pathology
- Vertebral Artery/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial aorto-cervicocephalic arterial dissections and congenitally bicuspid aortic valve.
**Authors:** Schievink WI, Mokri B
**Journal:** Stroke (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.str.26.10.1935](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.str.26.10.1935)

## Content

1. Stroke. 1995 Oct;26(10):1935-40. doi: 10.1161/01.str.26.10.1935.

Familial aorto-cervicocephalic arterial dissections and congenitally bicuspid
aortic valve.

Schievink WI(1), Mokri B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn 55905, USA.

BACKGROUND: A primary arteriopathy is often implicated in the etiology of
spontaneous cervicocephalic arterial dissections, but its exact nature usually
remains unknown. We describe the familial occurrence of spontaneous arterial
dissections and congenitally bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) and propose a common
developmental defect in these families.
SUMMARY OF REPORT: In the first family, a 63-year-old man suffered an
extracranial internal carotid artery (ICA) dissection, and his 43-year-old
cousin with BAV suffered an intracranial vertebral artery (VA) dissection. Two
other family members had pathologically proven BAV. In the second family, a
31-year-old woman suffered bilateral extracranial ICA and VA dissections. Her
father, at age 46, suffered an aortic dissection associated with cystic medial
necrosis and BAV. Her paternal uncle died from an aortic dissection at age 59.
In the third family, a 39-year-old woman suffered extracranial ICA and VA
dissections, and her brother died at age 48 from an aortic dissection associated
with a BAV.
CONCLUSIONS: The familial occurrence of spontaneous arterial dissections and BAV
suggests a common developmental defect. The aortic valvular cusps and the
arterial media of the aortic arch and its branches are derived from neural crest
cells, suggesting that a neural crest defect may be the underlying abnormality
in these families.

DOI: 10.1161/01.str.26.10.1935
PMID: 7570751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
