---
reference_id: "PMID:26874523"
title: Modeling xeroderma pigmentosum associated neurological pathologies with patients-derived iPSCs.
authors:
- Fu L
- Xu X
- Ren R
- Wu J
- Zhang W
- Yang J
- Ren X
- Wang S
- Zhao Y
- Sun L
- Yu Y
- Wang Z
- Yang Z
- Yuan Y
- Qiao J
- Izpisua Belmonte JC
- Qu J
- Liu GH
journal: Protein Cell
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s13238-016-0244-y
keywords:
- DNA Damage
- DNA Repair
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- "Models, Biological"
- Mutation
- "Neural Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling xeroderma pigmentosum associated neurological pathologies with patients-derived iPSCs.
**Authors:** Fu L, Xu X, Ren R, Wu J, Zhang W, Yang J, Ren X, Wang S, Zhao Y, Sun L, Yu Y, Wang Z, Yang Z, Yuan Y, Qiao J, Izpisua Belmonte JC, Qu J, Liu GH
**Journal:** Protein Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13238-016-0244-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13238-016-0244-y)

## Content

1. Protein Cell. 2016 Mar;7(3):210-21. doi: 10.1007/s13238-016-0244-y. Epub 2016 
Feb 13.

Modeling xeroderma pigmentosum associated neurological pathologies with 
patients-derived iPSCs.

Fu L(1)(2), Xu X(1), Ren R(1)(3), Wu J(4)(5), Zhang W(1)(3), Yang J(1), Ren 
X(1), Wang S(1), Zhao Y(1), Sun L(6), Yu Y(7), Wang Z(8), Yang Z(6), Yuan Y(8), 
Qiao J(7), Izpisua Belmonte JC(9), Qu J(10), Liu GH(11)(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
(3)FSU-CAS Innovation Institute, Foshan University, Foshan, 528000, China.
(4)Gene Expression Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA.
(5)Universidad Católica San Antonio de Murcia (UCAM) Campus de los Jerónimos, Nº 
135 Guadalupe 30107, Murcia, Spain.
(6)Beijing Hospital of the Ministry of Health, Beijing, 100730, China.
(7)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Peking University Third Hospital, 
Beijing, 100191, China.
(8)Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 100034, 
China.
(9)Gene Expression Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA. belmonte@salk.edu.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China. qujing@ioz.ac.cn.
(11)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China. ghliu@ibp.ac.cn.
(12)FSU-CAS Innovation Institute, Foshan University, Foshan, 528000, China. 
ghliu@ibp.ac.cn.
(13)Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
100069, China. ghliu@ibp.ac.cn.
(14)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China. 
ghliu@ibp.ac.cn.

Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is a group of genetic disorders caused by mutations 
of XP-associated genes, resulting in impairment of DNA repair. XP patients 
frequently exhibit neurological degeneration, but the underlying mechanism is 
unknown, in part due to lack of proper disease models. Here, we generated 
patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) harboring mutations in 
five different XP genes including XPA, XPB, XPC, XPG, and XPV. These iPSCs were 
further differentiated to neural cells, and their susceptibility to DNA damage 
stress was investigated. Mutation of XPA in either neural stem cells (NSCs) or 
neurons resulted in severe DNA damage repair defects, and these neural cells 
with mutant XPA were hyper-sensitive to DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Thus, 
XP-mutant neural cells represent valuable tools to clarify the molecular 
mechanisms of neurological abnormalities in the XP patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s13238-016-0244-y
PMCID: PMC4791426
PMID: 26874523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]