---
reference_id: "PMID:40409799"
title: "Prader Willi syndrome: advances in genetics."
authors:
- Hingar S
- Schneeberger Pané M
- Romero MJO
journal: Adv Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/bs.adgen.2025.03.001
keywords:
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Humans
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
- Genomic Imprinting
- Quality of Life
- "RNA, Small Nucleolar/genetics"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prader Willi syndrome: advances in genetics.
**Authors:** Hingar S, Schneeberger Pané M, Romero MJO
**Journal:** Adv Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/bs.adgen.2025.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.adgen.2025.03.001)

## Content

1. Adv Genet. 2025;113:29-52. doi: 10.1016/bs.adgen.2025.03.001. Epub 2025 May 5.

Prader Willi syndrome: advances in genetics.

Hingar S(1), Schneeberger Pané M(2), Romero MJO(3).

Author information:
(1)Biology in the Commonwealth Honors College at University of Massachusetts 
Amherst, Amherst, United States; Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Physiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, United States.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale School of Medicine, New 
Haven, United States.
(3)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, United States. 
Electronic address: mariajose.ortunoromero@yale.edu.

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a complex genetic disorder arising from 
abnormalities on chromosome 15q11.2-q13, characterized by distinct physical, 
cognitive, and behavioral features that evolve across the lifespan. Early 
manifestations include severe hypotonia, feeding difficulties, and failure to 
thrive in infancy, progressing to hyperphagia, obesity, intellectual 
disabilities, and behavioral challenges in later stages. Additional features 
include growth hormone deficiency, short stature, delayed puberty, and other 
endocrine abnormalities. Genetic advances have illuminated the role of imprinted 
genes, such as SNORD116, in driving the syndrome's core features, offering 
insights into its variability and severity. Emerging research on targeted 
pathways, including oxytocin and ghrelin signaling, holds promise for innovative 
treatments addressing hyperphagia and behavioral symptoms. This chapter provides 
a comprehensive overview of PWS's clinical features, natural history, and 
molecular underpinnings, underscoring the importance of early diagnosis, 
multidisciplinary care, and precision medicine in optimizing outcomes and 
enhancing the quality of life for individuals with PWS.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.adgen.2025.03.001
PMID: 40409799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]