---
reference_id: "PMID:17152333"
title: "[Takayasu arteritis: a chronic vasculitis that is rare in children]."
authors:
- Greidanus PM
- Benninga MA
- Groothoff JW
- van Delden OM
- Davin JC
- Kuijpers TW
journal: Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd
year: '2006'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Angiography/methods
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Diagnostic Imaging
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography
- Male
- Stents
- "Takayasu Arteritis/diagnosis, drug therapy, surgery"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Takayasu arteritis: a chronic vasculitis that is rare in children].
**Authors:** Greidanus PM, Benninga MA, Groothoff JW, van Delden OM, Davin JC, Kuijpers TW
**Journal:** Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd (2006)

## Content

1. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2006 Nov 18;150(46):2549-54.

[Takayasu arteritis: a chronic vasculitis that is rare in children].

[Article in Dutch]

Greidanus PM(1), Benninga MA, Groothoff JW, van Delden OM, Davin JC, Kuijpers 
TW.

Author information:
(1)Afd. Kindergeneeskunde, Academisch Medisch Centrum/Universiteit van 
Amsterdam, Emma Kinderziekenhuis, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam.

Takayasu arteritis was diagnosed in two children, a 15-year-old girl and a 
10-year-old boy. The girl had suffered from fatigue, malaise, abdominal pain and 
weight loss for several months, but no clear cause could be found. A few weeks 
later, when a blood pressure of 222/155 mmHg was measured, the possibility of 
renal artery stenosis was considered and imaging studies revealed indications 
for Takayasu's disease. The patient was given methylprednisolone followed by a 
combination of prednisone and, initially, cyclophosphamide, later methotrexate. 
This resulted in a clinical remission of the inflammatory process. The boy 
presented with increasing fatigue and variable episodes of fever. After 3 years, 
sarcoidosis or Castleman's disease were considered. Imaging studies revealed 
aortic stenosis. He underwent stenting of the involved vessel segment. Takayasu 
arteritis is a chronic vasculitis of unknown origin, affecting mainly the aorta 
and its main branches. As a result of the inflammation, stenosis, occlusion or 
dilatation of the involved vessels may occur and cause a wide range of symptoms. 
Especially in the early phase, the symptoms often are non-specific. One should 
look for hypertension, blood pressure differences between the two arms, 
decreased peripheral pulsation or bruits over the aorta and its major branches. 
Radiological examination may consist ofangiography, magnetic resonance imaging 
or CT-scans. Treatment consists of corticosteroids and other immunosuppressants, 
such as cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, azathioprine, and antagonists of 
tumour-necrosis factor alpha. In addition, balloon dilatation or stenting is 
often necessary.

PMID: 17152333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]