---
reference_id: "PMID:32703543"
title: "Retrospective, dual-centre review of imaging findings in neurosarcoidosis at presentation: prevalence and imaging sub-types."
authors:
- Bathla G
- Freeman CW
- Moritani T
- Song JW
- Srivastava S
- Soni N
- Derdeyn C
- Mohan S
journal: Clin Radiol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.crad.2020.05.008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neuroimaging/methods
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrospective, dual-centre review of imaging findings in neurosarcoidosis at presentation: prevalence and imaging sub-types.
**Authors:** Bathla G, Freeman CW, Moritani T, Song JW, Srivastava S, Soni N, Derdeyn C, Mohan S
**Journal:** Clin Radiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.crad.2020.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crad.2020.05.008)

## Content

1. Clin Radiol. 2020 Oct;75(10):796.e1-796.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.crad.2020.05.008.
Epub 2020 Jul 20.

Retrospective, dual-centre review of imaging findings in neurosarcoidosis at
presentation: prevalence and imaging sub-types.

Bathla G(1), Freeman CW(2), Moritani T(3), Song JW(2), Srivastava S(4), Soni
N(5), Derdeyn C(5), Mohan S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City,
IA, USA. Electronic address: girish-bathla@uiowa.edu.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania Health System,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University of Iowa, Iowa,
USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City,
IA, USA.

AIM: To assess the prevalence of various imaging manifestations in
neurosarcoidosis (NS) patients at presentation and to explore if specific
imaging findings may cluster in different sub-groups.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective, dual-institution, systematic imaging
review was undertaken of the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings in 100
consecutive NS patients who presented over a 15-year period. Clustering analysis
(k-mode) was performed to evaluate co-occurrence of imaging findings.
RESULTS: Non-enhancing white matter (NEWM) lesions were the most common imaging
abnormality (56%), followed by leptomeningeal (47%) and pachymeningeal (32%)
involvement. Other common manifestations included cranial nerve involvement
(30%), parenchymal granulomas (27%), hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
involvement (26%), and hydrocephalus (14%). Additionally, a higher prevalence of
perivascular enhancement (23%), cerebrovascular events (including ischaemic and
haemorrhagic events; 17%), and ependymal involvement (20%) were noted than
recognised previously. Additional k-mode analysis was performed to explore
underlying disease sub-clusters. This was evaluated for clusters varying between
two though five (k=2-5). For k=4, the analysis revealed that the imaging
findings may possibly be divided into disease sub-sets of four groups, each with
varying distribution of imaging manifestations and clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION: Overall, NEWM lesions and meningeal involvement are the most common
imaging manifestations of NS. The prevalence of perivascular enhancement,
cerebrovascular events, and ependymal involvement is likely higher than reported
previously. Additionally, different imaging findings in NS may cluster together
and imaging subtypes in NS possibly exist.

Copyright © 2020 The Royal College of Radiologists. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crad.2020.05.008
PMID: 32703543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
