---
reference_id: "PMID:33631016"
title: "A phase II trial of selumetinib in children with recurrent optic pathway and hypothalamic low-grade glioma without NF1: a Pediatric Brain Tumor Consortium study."
authors:
- Fangusaro J
- Onar-Thomas A
- Poussaint TY
- Wu S
- Ligon AH
- Lindeman N
- Campagne O
- Banerjee A
- Gururangan S
- Kilburn LB
- Goldman S
- Qaddoumi I
- Baxter P
- Vezina G
- Bregman C
- Patay Z
- Jones JY
- Stewart CF
- Fisher MJ
- Doyle LA
- Smith M
- Dunkel IJ
- Fouladi M
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab047
keywords:
- Benzimidazoles
- Brain Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Child
- Humans
- Neurofibromatosis 1
- Optic Nerve Glioma/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A phase II trial of selumetinib in children with recurrent optic pathway and hypothalamic low-grade glioma without NF1: a Pediatric Brain Tumor Consortium study.
**Authors:** Fangusaro J, Onar-Thomas A, Poussaint TY, Wu S, Ligon AH, Lindeman N, Campagne O, Banerjee A, Gururangan S, Kilburn LB, Goldman S, Qaddoumi I, Baxter P, Vezina G, Bregman C, Patay Z, Jones JY, Stewart CF, Fisher MJ, Doyle LA, Smith M, Dunkel IJ, Fouladi M
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/noab047](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noab047)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2021 Oct 1;23(10):1777-1788. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab047.

A phase II trial of selumetinib in children with recurrent optic pathway and
hypothalamic low-grade glioma without NF1: a Pediatric Brain Tumor Consortium
study.

Fangusaro J(1), Onar-Thomas A(2), Poussaint TY(3)(4), Wu S(2), Ligon AH(5),
Lindeman N(5), Campagne O(6), Banerjee A(7), Gururangan S(8), Kilburn LB(9),
Goldman S(10)(11), Qaddoumi I(12), Baxter P(13)(14), Vezina G(15), Bregman
C(16), Patay Z(17), Jones JY(18), Stewart CF(6), Fisher MJ(19)(20), Doyle
LA(21), Smith M(22), Dunkel IJ(23)(24), Fouladi M(25).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplantation, Children's
Healthcare of Atlanta and Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics St. Jude Children's Research Center, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.
(3)St. Jude Children's Research Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences St. Jude Children's Research Center,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(7)Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(9)Division of Oncology Children's National Hospital , Washington DC, USA.
(10)Children's National Hospital, Washington DC, USA.
(11)Department of Hematology, Oncology, Neuro-Oncology and Stem Cell
Transplantation.
(12)Department of Oncology St. Jude Children's Research Center, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.
(13)Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
USA.
(14)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston,
Texas, USA.
(15)Department of Radiology Children's National Hospital , Washington DC, USA.
(16)Department of Medical Imaging.
(17)Department of Diagnostic Imaging St. Jude Children's Research Center,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(18)Department of Radiology Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(19)Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(20)Division of Oncology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(21)Investigational Drug Branch, National Cancer Institute and Cancer Therapy
Evaluation Program, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(22)Clinical Investigation Branch, National Cancer Institute and Cancer Therapy
Evaluation Program, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(23)National Cancer Institute and Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, Rockville,
Maryland, USA.
(24)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York, USA.
(25)Department of Hematology and Oncology Nationwide Children's Hospital,
Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Comment in
    Neuro Oncol. 2021 Oct 1;23(10):1627-1628. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab164.

BACKGROUND: Pediatric low-grade gliomas (pLGGs) are the most common childhood
brain tumor. Progression-free survival (PFS) is much lower than overall
survival, emphasizing the need for alternative treatments. Sporadic (without
neurofibromatosis type 1) optic pathway and hypothalamic gliomas (OPHGs) are
often multiply recurrent and cause significant visual deficits. Recently, there
has been a prioritization of functional outcomes.
METHODS: We present results from children with recurrent/progressive OPHGs
treated on a PBTC (Pediatric Brain Tumor Consortium) phase II trial evaluating
efficacy of selumetinib (AZD6244, ARRY-142886) a MEK-1/2 inhibitor. Stratum 4 of
PBTC-029 included patients with sporadic recurrent/progressive OPHGs treated
with selumetinib at the recommended phase II dose (25mg/m2/dose BID) for a
maximum of 26 courses.
RESULTS: Twenty-five eligible and evaluable patients were enrolled with a median
of 4 (1-11) previous therapies. Six of 25 (24%) had partial response, 14/25
(56%) had stable disease, and 5 (20%) had progressive disease while on
treatment. The median treatment courses were 26 (2-26); 14/25 patients completed
all 26 courses. Two-year PFS was 78 ± 8.5%. Nineteen of 25 patients were
evaluable for visual acuity which improved in 4/19 patients (21%), was stable in
13/19 (68%), and worsened in 2/19 (11%). Five of 19 patients (26%) had improved
visual fields and 14/19 (74%) were stable. The most common toxicities were grade
1/2 CPK elevation, anemia, diarrhea, headache, nausea/emesis, fatigue, AST and
ALT increase, hypoalbuminemia, and rash.
CONCLUSIONS: Selumetinib was tolerable and led to responses and prolonged
disease stability in children with recurrent/progressive OPHGs based upon
radiographic response, PFS, and visual outcomes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noab047
PMCID: PMC8485450
PMID: 33631016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
