---
reference_id: "PMID:10464619"
title: "Gaucher disease: gene frequencies and genotype/phenotype correlations."
authors:
- Grabowski GA
journal: Genet Test
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1089/gte.1997.1.5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gaucher disease: gene frequencies and genotype/phenotype correlations.
**Authors:** Grabowski GA
**Journal:** Genet Test (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1089/gte.1997.1.5](https://doi.org/10.1089/gte.1997.1.5)

## Content

1. Genet Test. 1997;1(1):5-12. doi: 10.1089/gte.1997.1.5.

Gaucher disease: gene frequencies and genotype/phenotype correlations.

Grabowski GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Gaucher disease is the most prevalent lysosomal storage disease and has its 
highest incidence in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. Over 100 mutant alleles 
have been identified in affected patients, but four alleles, termed N370S, 
L444P, 84GG, and IVS2, have significant frequencies in this population. In 
affected patients, genotype data show that the presence of a single N370S allele 
is diagnostic of the type 1 or nonneuronopathic variant, whereas the L444P/L444P 
genotype is highly associated with neuronopathic variants in the Caucasian 
population. Large screening studies also indicate a significant underestimation 
(approximately two-fold) of the prevalence of the N370S/N370S genotype in the 
affected Ashkenazi Jewish patient population. These results indicate that the 
N370S/N370S genotype provides a necessary but not sufficient condition for the 
development of the Gaucher disease phenotype. The genotype/phenotype 
correlations and gene frequencies have significant impact on genetic counseling 
of at-risk couples and the future need for therapy of affected patients.

DOI: 10.1089/gte.1997.1.5
PMID: 10464619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]