---
reference_id: "PMID:32832567"
title: Detection of Dengue Virus-Specific IgM and IgG Antibodies through Peptide Sequences of Envelope and NS1 Proteins for Serological Identification.
authors:
- Nagar PK
- Savargaonkar D
- Anvikar AR
journal: J Immunol Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1155/2020/1820325
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of Dengue Virus-Specific IgM and IgG Antibodies through Peptide Sequences of Envelope and NS1 Proteins for Serological Identification.
**Authors:** Nagar PK, Savargaonkar D, Anvikar AR
**Journal:** J Immunol Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2020/1820325](https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/1820325)

## Content

1. J Immunol Res. 2020 Aug 4;2020:1820325. doi: 10.1155/2020/1820325. eCollection
 2020.

Detection of Dengue Virus-Specific IgM and IgG Antibodies through Peptide 
Sequences of Envelope and NS1 Proteins for Serological Identification.

Nagar PK(1), Savargaonkar D(1), Anvikar AR(1).

Author information:
(1)ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Sec-8, Dwarka, New Delhi 110077, 
India.

Dengue is an acute febrile illness caused by positive-sense single-stranded RNA 
virus, belonging to the family Flaviviridae and genus Flavivirus. Transmission 
of virus among the individuals occurred by blood-feeding Aedes mosquitoes. This 
virus has four serotypes differentiated on the basis of antibody neutralization 
assay. At present, there is no particular treatment or vaccine candidate 
available for dengue infection. Approximately 3.9 billion human populations are 
at risk of dengue virus (DENV) infection. Thus, precise diagnosis of dengue at 
the early stage is very essential for disease control and effective therapy in 
order to treat or prevent severe complications. Indeed, the accurate diagnosis 
of DENV remains a problem because of low detection accuracy along with high 
testing price. Sensitivity and specificity of available kits vary from test to 
test, and cross-reactivity with other Flavivirus is a challenging issue for 
diagnosis. In this study, linear epitopes of envelope (E) and NS1 proteins were 
identified to diagnose the DENV. Whole protein sequences of E and NS1 of DENV 
were obtained from UniProtKB database. On the basis of algorithm prediction from 
DNASTAR, BCEPRED, and IEDB data resources, twelve peptides of E (EP1 to EP12) 
and eight peptides of NS1 (NS1-1 to NS1-8) were selected, which were common in 
all serotypes. Sequence homologies of peptides with other Flavivirus were 
checked by Multiple Sequence Alignment Tool ClustalX2. Peptide sequences were 
synthesized chemically by solid-phase peptide synthesis technique. 
Dengue-specific IgM and IgG (secondary response) antibodies in the patient's 
antisera were tested with the peptides using ELISA protocol. Peptides EP1, EP2, 
EP4, EP7, EP10, and EP12 of E protein and NS1-1, NS1-3, NS1-4, NS1-7, and NS1-8 
of NS1 protein were considered the best immunoreactive peptides with the 
sensitivity (73.33-96.66%) and specificity (82.14-100%). Such peptides together 
can be used to construct the multiple antigen peptides (MAP) or multiplexed 
microbeads for designing a precise, cost-effective, and easy-to-make 
peptide-based immunodiagnostic kit for DENV detection.

Copyright © 2020 Pradeep Kumar Nagar et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/1820325
PMCID: PMC7424411
PMID: 32832567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interests.