---
reference_id: "PMID:42063851"
title: Rational Design of Capsid Protein VP1 Degraders to Overcome Pleconaril Resistance in Inhibiting Enterovirus D68.
authors:
- Li K
- Ni J
- Fan G
- Wang J
journal: JACS Au
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1021/jacsau.6c00039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rational Design of Capsid Protein VP1 Degraders to Overcome Pleconaril Resistance in Inhibiting Enterovirus D68.
**Authors:** Li K, Ni J, Fan G, Wang J
**Journal:** JACS Au (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1021/jacsau.6c00039](https://doi.org/10.1021/jacsau.6c00039)

## Content

1. JACS Au. 2026 Mar 23;6(4):2433-2444. doi: 10.1021/jacsau.6c00039. eCollection
2026 Apr 27.

Rational Design of Capsid Protein VP1 Degraders to Overcome Pleconaril
Resistance in Inhibiting Enterovirus D68.

Li K(1), Ni J(1), Fan G(1), Wang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers,
The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, United States.

Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) is an emerging respiratory pathogen with pandemic
potential, yet no vaccines or antivirals are available. Capsid inhibitors, such
as pleconaril, that target the hydrophobic canyon on the viral capsid protein
VP1, exhibit potent antiviral activity but have a low barrier to resistance.
Here, we report a targeted protein degradation strategy to overcome antiviral
resistance by selectively degrading the capsid protein VP1. Through a
structure-based rational design, we developed a series of pleconaril-based
PROTACs that recruit the cereblon (CRBN) E3 ligase to degrade the capsid VP1
protein. We established a single-cycle replication assay integrating
immunofluorescence and Western blot to quantify VP1 protein levels when
compounds were added postviral entry. Linker and CRBN ligand optimization led to
the identification of Jun15702, a first-in-class VP1 degrader that displays
potent antiviral activity against multiple wild-type EV-D68 strains and retains
submicromolar potency against recombinant pleconaril-resistant variant, rMO-VP1
F159 V. Significantly, Jun15702 displayed a higher genetic barrier to drug
resistance than pleconaril. Mechanistic studies demonstrate that Jun15702 not
only inhibits viral entry, as does pleconaril, but also induces CRBN-dependent
degradation of VP1 when added post viral entry. Collectively, this work
demonstrates targeted degradation of a viral structural protein as a viable
strategy and introduces a new paradigm for overcoming drug resistance in
antiviral discovery against enteroviruses.

© 2026 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.6c00039
PMCID: PMC13126190
PMID: 42063851
