---
reference_id: "PMID:25205257"
title: Proposed guidelines for the diagnosis and management of methylmalonic and propionic acidemia.
authors:
- Baumgartner MR
- Hörster F
- Dionisi-Vici C
- Haliloglu G
- Karall D
- Chapman KA
- Huemer M
- Hochuli M
- Assoun M
- Ballhausen D
- Burlina A
- Fowler B
- Grünert SC
- Grünewald S
- Honzik T
- Merinero B
- Pérez-Cerdá C
- Scholl-Bürgi S
- Skovby F
- Wijburg F
- MacDonald A
- Martinelli D
- Sass JO
- Valayannopoulos V
- Chakrapani A
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-014-0130-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proposed guidelines for the diagnosis and management of methylmalonic and propionic acidemia.
**Authors:** Baumgartner MR, Hörster F, Dionisi-Vici C, Haliloglu G, Karall D, Chapman KA, Huemer M, Hochuli M, Assoun M, Ballhausen D, Burlina A, Fowler B, Grünert SC, Grünewald S, Honzik T, Merinero B, Pérez-Cerdá C, Scholl-Bürgi S, Skovby F, Wijburg F, MacDonald A, Martinelli D, Sass JO, Valayannopoulos V, Chakrapani A
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-014-0130-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-014-0130-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 Sep 2;9:130. doi: 10.1186/s13023-014-0130-8.

Proposed guidelines for the diagnosis and management of methylmalonic and 
propionic acidemia.

Baumgartner MR, Hörster F, Dionisi-Vici C, Haliloglu G, Karall D, Chapman KA, 
Huemer M, Hochuli M, Assoun M, Ballhausen D, Burlina A, Fowler B, Grünert SC, 
Grünewald S, Honzik T, Merinero B, Pérez-Cerdá C, Scholl-Bürgi S, Skovby F, 
Wijburg F, MacDonald A, Martinelli D, Sass JO, Valayannopoulos V, Chakrapani A.

Methylmalonic and propionic acidemia (MMA/PA) are inborn errors of metabolism 
characterized by accumulation of propionic acid and/or methylmalonic acid due to 
deficiency of methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT) or propionyl-CoA carboxylase (PCC). 
MMA has an estimated incidence of ~ 1: 50,000 and PA of ~ 1:100'000 -150,000. 
Patients present either shortly after birth with acute deterioration, metabolic 
acidosis and hyperammonemia or later at any age with a more heterogeneous 
clinical picture, leading to early death or to severe neurological handicap in 
many survivors. Mental outcome tends to be worse in PA and late complications 
include chronic kidney disease almost exclusively in MMA and cardiomyopathy 
mainly in PA. Except for vitamin B12 responsive forms of MMA the outcome remains 
poor despite the existence of apparently effective therapy with a low protein 
diet and carnitine. This may be related to under recognition and delayed 
diagnosis due to nonspecific clinical presentation and insufficient awareness of 
health care professionals because of disease rarity.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-014-0130-8
PMCID: PMC4180313
PMID: 25205257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]