---
reference_id: "PMID:30426482"
title: "The epidemiology of drug-resistant epilepsy: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Kalilani L
- Sun X
- Pelgrims B
- Noack-Rink M
- Villanueva V
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/epi.14596
keywords:
- "Drug Resistant Epilepsy/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Neuroimaging
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The epidemiology of drug-resistant epilepsy: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Kalilani L, Sun X, Pelgrims B, Noack-Rink M, Villanueva V
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.14596](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.14596)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2018 Dec;59(12):2179-2193. doi: 10.1111/epi.14596. Epub 2018 Nov
13.

The epidemiology of drug-resistant epilepsy: A systematic review and
meta-analysis.

Kalilani L(1), Sun X(1)(2), Pelgrims B(3), Noack-Rink M(4), Villanueva V(5).

Author information:
(1)UCB Pharma, Raleigh, North Carolina.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(3)UCB Pharma, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)UCB Pharma, Monheim, Germany.
(5)Refractory Epilepsy Unit, Neurology Service, Hospital Universitario y
Politécnico La Fe, Valencia, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: The definition of drug-resistant epilepsy (DRE) affects case
identification and treatment, and impacts prevalence or incidence estimates and
health burden estimation in epidemiology. The objective of this systematic
review is to evaluate the consistency between definitions of DRE in the
literature and the official definition in the International League Against
Epilepsy (ILAE) guidelines, and to estimate the incidence, prevalence, and risk
factors for DRE.
METHODS: MEDLINE and EMBASE were searched for observational studies of DRE
published between January 1980 and July 2015. The definitions of DRE in these
studies were compared with the definition in the ILAE guidelines. Random-effect
model meta-analyses were used to generate pooled estimates of prevalence or
incidence and pooled odds ratios of the association with risk factors.
RESULTS: Thirty-five studies met inclusion criteria, including 13 080 epilepsy
patients and 3941 patients with DRE. The definition of DRE varied widely across
studies, with only 12% meeting the requirements of the ILAE definition. The
pooled prevalence proportion of DRE among epilepsy patients was 0.30 (95%
confidence interval [CI] 0.19-0.42), and the pooled incidence proportion was
0.15 (95% CI 0.11-0.19). Age at onset, symptomatic epilepsy, abnormal
neuroimaging findings, abnormal electroencephalography results, history of
mental retardation, neuropsychiatric disorders, febrile seizure, and status
epilepticus increased risk for DRE.
SIGNIFICANCE: There are limited high-quality data available on DRE. Lack of
consistency in definitions limits the ability to obtain robust estimates on the
burden of DRE. More data based on the ILAE definition from well-designed
epidemiologic studies are needed to generate accurate and reliable results.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2018 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.14596
PMID: 30426482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
