---
reference_id: "PMID:37441989"
title: Timeline to dysphagia resolution after endoscopic intervention of an interarytenoid defect based on Video Fluoroscopic Swallow Study dysphagia severity.
authors:
- Wineski RE
- Beltran-Ale G
- Simpson R
- Evarts M
- Stein JS
- Rosen P
- Rogers JA
- Leonard MV
- Dimmitt R
- Soong A
- Kassel R
- Harris WT
- Wiatrak B
- Smith NJ
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2023.111657
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Timeline to dysphagia resolution after endoscopic intervention of an interarytenoid defect based on Video Fluoroscopic Swallow Study dysphagia severity.
**Authors:** Wineski RE, Beltran-Ale G, Simpson R, Evarts M, Stein JS, Rosen P, Rogers JA, Leonard MV, Dimmitt R, Soong A, Kassel R, Harris WT, Wiatrak B, Smith NJ
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijporl.2023.111657](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2023.111657)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2023 Aug;171:111657. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijporl.2023.111657. Epub 2023 Jul 10.

Timeline to dysphagia resolution after endoscopic intervention of an 
interarytenoid defect based on Video Fluoroscopic Swallow Study dysphagia 
severity.

Wineski RE(1), Beltran-Ale G(2), Simpson R(3), Evarts M(4), Stein JS(5), Rosen 
P(6), Rogers JA(7), Leonard MV(7), Dimmitt R(8), Soong A(8), Kassel R(8), Harris 
WT(3), Wiatrak B(6), Smith NJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of 
Medicine, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Pulmonology and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, 
AL, USA; Aerodigestive Center, Children's of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA. 
Electronic address: gjbeltranale@uabmc.edu.
(3)Division of Pediatric Pulmonology and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, 
AL, USA; Aerodigestive Center, Children's of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(4)Pediatric Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery Associates, St. Petersburg, 
FL, USA.
(5)University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(6)Aerodigestive Center, Children's of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA; Pediatric 
ENT Associates, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(7)Aerodigestive Center, Children's of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA; The Charity 
League Hearing and Speech Center, Children's of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(8)Aerodigestive Center, Children's of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA; Division of 
Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL, USA.

INTRODUCTION: We previously reported that endoscopic repair of a Type 1 
Laryngeal Cleft (LC1) or Deep Interarytenoid Groove (DIG) improves swallowing 
function postoperatively. However, caregivers often ask about the timeline to 
resolution of the need for thickening. This study re-examines this cohort to 
answer this important caregiver-centered question.
METHODS: We reassessed a 3-year retrospective, single-center dataset of children 
with dysphagia found to have a LC-1 or DIG on endoscopic exam. The primary 
outcome was rate of complete resolution of dysphagia at 2, 6, and 12 months 
after endoscopic intervention. A sub-group analysis was made based on severity 
of dysphagia prior to intervention and by type of endoscopic repair.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine patients with mean age 1.35 years that had a LC-1 or DIG 
met criteria for inclusion. Rate of complete dysphagia resolution increased over 
time. Those with mild dysphagia (flow-reducing nipple and/or IDDSI consistency 1 
or 2) had brisker resolution than those with moderate dysphagia (IDDSI 
consistency 3 or 4) at 2 months (67% vs 5%, p < 0.01) and at 6 months (80% vs 
18%, p < 0.01) after endoscopic repair. There was no difference in dysphagia 
resolution between patients grouped by type of endoscopic repair.
CONCLUSION: Addressing an interarytenoid defect in patients will not result in 
immediate, complete dysphagia resolution in most patients. However, patients 
that only require a flow-reducing nipple and/or thickening to an IDDSI 
consistency 1 or 2 have brisker resolution of the need for thickening than those 
that require an IDSSI consistency 3 or 4 prior to intervention. These results 
inform pre-operative discussions of the timeline to resolution based upon 
severity of dysphagia and help manage caregiver expectations.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2023.111657
PMID: 37441989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare they have no relevant conflicts of interests.