---
reference_id: "PMID:25308559"
title: "Biochemical and Hematologic Manifestations of Gastric Intrinsic Factor (GIF) Deficiency: A Treatable Cause of B12 Deficiency in the Old Order Mennonite Population of Southwestern Ontario."
authors:
- Ferrand A
- Siu VM
- Rupar CA
- Napier MP
- Al-Dirbashi OY
- Chakraborty P
- Prasad C
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_351
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biochemical and Hematologic Manifestations of Gastric Intrinsic Factor (GIF) Deficiency: A Treatable Cause of B12 Deficiency in the Old Order Mennonite Population of Southwestern Ontario.
**Authors:** Ferrand A, Siu VM, Rupar CA, Napier MP, Al-Dirbashi OY, Chakraborty P, Prasad C
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2014_351](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2014_351)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2015;18:69-77. doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_351. Epub 2014 Oct 12.

Biochemical and Hematologic Manifestations of Gastric Intrinsic Factor (GIF) 
Deficiency: A Treatable Cause of B12 Deficiency in the Old Order Mennonite 
Population of Southwestern Ontario.

Ferrand A(1), Siu VM, Rupar CA, Napier MP, Al-Dirbashi OY, Chakraborty P, Prasad 
C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, London Health Sciences Centre, Western University, 
London, ON, Canada.

Intrinsic factor deficiency (OMIM #261000, IFD) is a rare inherited disorder of 
vitamin B12 metabolism due to mutations in the gastric intrinsic factor (GIF) 
gene.We report three individuals from an Old Order Mennonite community who 
presented with B12 deficiency. Two cases are siblings born to consanguineous 
parents and the third case is not known to be closely related. The older male 
sib presented at 4 years with gastrointestinal symptoms, listlessness, and 
pallor. He had pancytopenia with megaloblastic anemia. Serum B12 was 61 (198-615 
pmol/L). Methylmalonic aciduria was present. C3 was elevated on acylcarnitine 
profile. Homocysteine was high at 16.7 (5.0-12.0 umol/L). His asymptomatic 
female sibling was also found to have B12 deficiency. Genetic testing for 
methylmalonic aciduria (MMAA), transcobalamin deficiency (TCN2), and 
Imerslund-Gräsbeck syndrome (AMN) showed no mutation in both siblings. The third 
patient, a 34-year-old woman, had presented in infancy with a diagnosis of 
pernicious anemia. Mutation analysis of GIF revealed compound heterozygosity for 
a c.79+1G>A substitution and a c.973delG deletion in all three individuals. Oral 
or parenteral vitamin B12 has led to complete recovery of clinical parameters 
and vitamin B12 levels. Newborn screening samples on the siblings revealed 
normal methylcitrate, C3, and C3/C2 ratios thus indicating no disruption of 
propionic or methylmalonic acid metabolism.A high index of suspicion should be 
maintained if children present with megaloblastic anemia since GIF deficiency is 
a treatable disorder and newborn screening may not be able to detect this 
condition.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2014_351
PMCID: PMC4361928
PMID: 25308559