---
reference_id: "PMID:28898679"
title: "Systemic treatment of renal cell cancer: A comprehensive review."
authors:
- Sánchez-Gastaldo A
- Kempf E
- González Del Alba A
- Duran I
journal: Cancer Treat Rev
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2017.08.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic treatment of renal cell cancer: A comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Sánchez-Gastaldo A, Kempf E, González Del Alba A, Duran I
**Journal:** Cancer Treat Rev (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ctrv.2017.08.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctrv.2017.08.010)

## Content

1. Cancer Treat Rev. 2017 Nov;60:77-89. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2017.08.010. Epub
2017  Sep 1.

Systemic treatment of renal cell cancer: A comprehensive review.

Sánchez-Gastaldo A(1), Kempf E(2), González Del Alba A(3), Duran I(4).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario "Virgen del Rocio", 
Seville, Spain.
(2)Medical Oncology Department, Hôpital Universitaire Henri Mondor - Albert 
Chenevier, AP-HP, Créteil, France.
(3)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario "Son Espasses", Palma de 
Mallorca, Spain.
(4)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, IBiS/Hospital Universitario Virgen del 
Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain. Electronic address: 
ignacioduranmartinez@gmail.com.

Kidney cancer represents about 5% of all new cancer diagnoses. The most common 
form of kidney cancer arises from renal epithelium, named renal cell carcinoma 
(RCC). This entity comprises different histological and molecular subtypes. 
Unraveling the molecular biology and cytogenetic of RCC has enabled the 
development of several targeted agents that have improved treatment outcomes of 
these patients. This article reviews all the agents currently approved for the 
treatment of RCC, and discuss upcoming molecules. Mechanism of action, 
preclinical and clinical development and ongoing trials, are presented for each 
agent, providing a broad vision of the current state of targeted therapy in RCC 
and possible future developments.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2017.08.010
PMID: 28898679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]