---
reference_id: "PMID:27811940"
title: "The endocrine manifestations of anorexia nervosa: mechanisms and management."
authors:
- Schorr M
- Miller KK
journal: Nat Rev Endocrinol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2016.175
keywords:
- Adipokines/blood
- "Anorexia Nervosa/blood, diagnosis, therapy"
- Disease Management
- "Endocrine System Diseases/blood, diagnosis, therapy"
- Female
- Growth Hormone/blood
- Humans
- Hypothalamo-Hypophyseal System/metabolism
- Leptin/blood
- Male
- Pituitary-Adrenal System/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The endocrine manifestations of anorexia nervosa: mechanisms and management.
**Authors:** Schorr M, Miller KK
**Journal:** Nat Rev Endocrinol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrendo.2016.175](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2016.175)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2017 Mar;13(3):174-186. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2016.175. Epub
 2016 Nov 4.

The endocrine manifestations of anorexia nervosa: mechanisms and management.

Schorr M(1)(2), Miller KK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroendocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street,
Bulfinch 457B, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
(2)Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Anorexia nervosa is a psychiatric disorder characterized by altered body image,
persistent food restriction and low body weight, and is associated with global
endocrine dysregulation in both adolescent girls and women. Dysfunction of the
hypothalamic-pituitary axis includes hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with relative
oestrogen and androgen deficiency, growth hormone resistance,
hypercortisolaemia, non-thyroidal illness syndrome, hyponatraemia and
hypooxytocinaemia. Serum levels of leptin, an anorexigenic adipokine, are
suppressed and levels of ghrelin, an orexigenic gut peptide, are elevated in
women with anorexia nervosa; however, levels of peptide YY, an anorexigenic gut
peptide, are paradoxically elevated. Although most, but not all, of these
endocrine disturbances are adaptive to the low energy state of chronic
starvation and reverse with treatment of the eating disorder, many contribute to
impaired skeletal integrity, as well as neuropsychiatric comorbidities, in
individuals with anorexia nervosa. Although 5-15% of patients with anorexia
nervosa are men, only limited data exist regarding the endocrine impact of the
disease in adolescent boys and men. Further research is needed to understand the
endocrine determinants of bone loss and neuropsychiatric comorbidities in
anorexia nervosa in both women and men, as well as to formulate optimal
treatment strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/nrendo.2016.175
PMCID: PMC5998335
PMID: 27811940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Review Criteria A PubMed database was searched
using the following search terms, “anorexia nervosa endocrine”, “anorexia
nervosa bone”, “anorexia nervosa gonadal dysfunction, “anorexia nervosa growth
hormone”, “anorexia nervosa thyroid”, “anorexia nervosa cortisol”, “anorexia
nervosa hyponatremia”, “anorexia nervosa oxytocin”, “anorexia nervosa bone
marrow fat”, “anorexia nervosa adipokines,” “anorexia nervosa gut peptides” and
“anorexia nervosa adolescent boys.” Full-text, English language articles were
selected that were published between October 1974 to May 2016. The reference
lists of several papers were searched for additional relevant publications.
Detailed focus was placed on articles published within the past 5 years.
Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests
