---
reference_id: "PMID:34662405"
title: Brachypodium distachyon UNICULME4 and LAXATUM-A are redundantly required for development.
authors:
- Liu S
- Magne K
- Daniel S
- Sibout R
- Ratet P
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiab456
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brachypodium distachyon UNICULME4 and LAXATUM-A are redundantly required for development.
**Authors:** Liu S, Magne K, Daniel S, Sibout R, Ratet P
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/plphys/kiab456](https://doi.org/10.1093/plphys/kiab456)

## Content

1. Plant Physiol. 2022 Jan 20;188(1):363-381. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiab456.

Brachypodium distachyon UNICULME4 and LAXATUM-A are redundantly required for 
development.

Liu S(1)(2), Magne K(1)(2), Daniel S(3), Sibout R(3), Ratet P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, CNRS, Université Evry, Institute of Plant 
Sciences Paris-Saclay (IPS2), Orsay 91405, France.
(2)Institute of Plant Sciences Paris-Saclay IPS2, Paris Diderot, Sorbonne 
Paris-Cité, Orsay 91405, France.
(3)UR1268 BIA (Biopolymères Interactions Assemblages), INRAE, Nantes 44300, 
France.

In cultivated grasses, tillering, leaf, and inflorescence architecture, as well 
as abscission ability, are major agronomical traits. In barley (Hordeum 
vulgare), maize (Zea mays), rice (Oryza sativa), and brachypodium (Brachypodium 
distachyon), NOOT-BOP-COCH-LIKE (NBCL) genes are essential regulators of 
vegetative and reproductive development. Grass species usually possess 2-4 NBCL 
copies and until now a single study in O. sativa showed that the disruption of 
all NBCL genes strongly altered O. sativa leaf development. To improve our 
understanding of the role of NBCL genes in grasses, we extended the study of the 
two NBCL paralogs BdUNICULME4 (CUL4) and BdLAXATUM-A (LAXA) in the 
nondomesticated grass B. distachyon. For this, we applied reversed genetics and 
generated original B. distachyon single and double nbcl mutants by clustered 
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats - CRISPR associated protein 9 
(CRISPR-Cas9) approaches and genetic crossing between nbcl targeting induced 
local lesions in genomes (TILLING) mutants. Through the study of original single 
laxa CRISPR-Cas9 null alleles, we validated functions previously proposed for 
LAXA in tillering, leaf patterning, inflorescence, and flower development and 
also unveiled roles for these genes in seed yield. Furthermore, the 
characterization of cul4laxa double mutants revealed essential functions for 
nbcl genes in B. distachyon development, especially in the regulation of 
tillering, stem cell elongation and secondary cell wall composition as well as 
for the transition toward the reproductive phase. Our results also highlight 
recurrent antagonist interactions between NBCLs occurring in multiple aspects of 
B. distachyon development.

© American Society of Plant Biologists 2021. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiab456
PMCID: PMC8774750
PMID: 34662405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]