---
reference_id: "PMID:26680580"
title: Sex Steroid Replacement Therapy in Female Hypogonadism from Childhood to Young Adulthood.
authors:
- Norjavaara E
- Ankarberg-Lindgren C
- Kriström B
journal: Endocr Dev
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000438892
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sex Steroid Replacement Therapy in Female Hypogonadism from Childhood to Young Adulthood.
**Authors:** Norjavaara E, Ankarberg-Lindgren C, Kriström B
**Journal:** Endocr Dev (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000438892](https://doi.org/10.1159/000438892)

## Content

1. Endocr Dev. 2016;29:198-213. doi: 10.1159/000438892. Epub 2015 Dec 17.

Sex Steroid Replacement Therapy in Female Hypogonadism from Childhood to Young 
Adulthood.

Norjavaara E, Ankarberg-Lindgren C, Kriström B.

The overall goal of pubertal sex hormone replacement therapy (HRT) in girls is 
not only about development of secondary sexual characteristics, but also to 
establish an adult endocrine and metabolic milieu, as well as adult cognitive 
function. Estradiol (E2) is the first choice for HRT compared to ethinyl 
estradiol (EE2). E2 is the most potent endogenous estrogen in the circulation, 
with established levels during spontaneous puberty. Transdermal E2, compared to 
oral administration, is the first choice to start pubertal HRT. Transdermal 
application avoids liver exposure to supraphysiologic estrogen concentrations 
and provides a more physiologic mechanism for hormone delivery. By cutting E2 
matrix patches in doses of 0.05-0.07 µg/kg or administrate E2 gel in doses of 
0.1 mg/day, serum concentrations of E2 seen in early spontaneous puberty can be 
obtained. Patches can be removed in the morning and thereby mimic the normal 
circadian rhythm. For those clinics with access to sensitive E2 determinations 
methods (extraction followed by radioimmunoassay or mass spectrometry) 
monitoring the attained E2 serum levels is recommended in order to optimally 
mimic the levels seen in early puberty as well as growth velocity, breast and 
uterus development. Mid- and late pubertal HRT is obtained by increased doses of 
E2, adding cyclic oral or transdermal progestin, as well as testosterone gel 
over the pubic area if indicated.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000438892
PMID: 26680580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]