---
reference_id: "PMID:34916231"
title: Impact of pathogenic FBN1 variant types on the development of severe scoliosis in patients with Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Taniguchi Y
- Takeda N
- Inuzuka R
- Matsubayashi Y
- Kato S
- Doi T
- Yagi H
- Yamauchi H
- Ando M
- Oshima Y
- Tanaka S
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108186
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of pathogenic FBN1 variant types on the development of severe scoliosis in patients with Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Taniguchi Y, Takeda N, Inuzuka R, Matsubayashi Y, Kato S, Doi T, Yagi H, Yamauchi H, Ando M, Oshima Y, Tanaka S
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108186](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108186)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2023 Jan;60(1):74-80. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108186. Epub
2021  Dec 16.

Impact of pathogenic FBN1 variant types on the development of severe scoliosis 
in patients with Marfan syndrome.

Taniguchi Y(1)(2), Takeda N(2)(3), Inuzuka R(2)(4), Matsubayashi Y(5), Kato 
S(5), Doi T(5), Yagi H(2)(3), Yamauchi H(2)(6), Ando M(2)(6), Oshima Y(5), 
Tanaka S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan taniguchi-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(2)Marfan Syndrome Center, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Cardiac Surgery, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Among the several musculoskeletal manifestations in patients with 
Marfan syndrome, spinal deformity causes pain and respiratory impairment and is 
a great hindrance to patients' daily activities. The present study elucidates 
the genetic risk factors for the development of severe scoliosis in patients 
with Marfan syndrome.
METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated 278 patients with pathogenic or likely 
pathogenic FBN1 variants. The patients were divided into those with (n=57) or 
without (n=221) severe scoliosis. Severe scoliosis was defined as (1) patients 
undergoing surgery before 50 years of age or (2) patients with a Cobb angle 
exceeding 50° before 50 years of age. The variants were classified as 
protein-truncating variants (PTVs), which included variants creating premature 
termination codons and inframe exon-skipping, or non-PTVs, based on their 
location and predicted amino acid alterations, and the effect of the FBN1 
genotype on the development of severe scoliosis was examined. The impact of 
location of FBN1 variants on the development of severe scoliosis was also 
investigated.
RESULTS: Univariate and multivariate analyses revealed that female sex, PTVs of 
FBN1 and variants in the neonatal region (exons 25-33) were all independent 
significant predictive factors for the development of severe scoliosis. 
Furthermore, these factors were identified as predictors of progression of 
existing scoliosis into severe state.
CONCLUSIONS: We elucidated the genetic risk factors for the development of 
severe scoliosis in patients with Marfan syndrome. Patients harbouring 
pathogenic FBN1 variants with these genetic risk factors should be monitored 
carefully for scoliosis progression.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108186
PMCID: PMC9811093
PMID: 34916231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.