---
reference_id: "PMID:31854052"
title: Coagulation abnormalities in dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever patients.
authors:
- Hassan J
- Borhany M
- Abid M
- Zaidi U
- Fatima N
- Shamsi T
journal: Transfus Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/tme.12658
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coagulation abnormalities in dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever patients.
**Authors:** Hassan J, Borhany M, Abid M, Zaidi U, Fatima N, Shamsi T
**Journal:** Transfus Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tme.12658](https://doi.org/10.1111/tme.12658)

## Content

1. Transfus Med. 2020 Feb;30(1):46-50. doi: 10.1111/tme.12658. Epub 2019 Dec 19.

Coagulation abnormalities in dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever patients.

Hassan J(1), Borhany M(1), Abid M(1), Zaidi U(1), Fatima N(1), Shamsi T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Hemostasis & Thrombosis, National Institute of 
Blood Disease & Bone Marrow Transplantation, Karachi, Pakistan.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess abnormality of coagulation and 
anticoagulation parameters in dengue fever patients and the impact of these 
tests on the management of patients.
BACKGROUND: Dengue fever is endemic in Pakistan with seasonal rise in cases. 
Morbidities and mortalities are proportionately reported to be increasing and 
associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation resulting in haemorrhagic 
or thrombotic manifestations in patients having deranged coagulation profiles.
METHODS/MATERIALS: This observational and descriptive study was conducted on 
confirmed Dengue patients at the National Institute of Blood Diseases during the 
years 2013 to 2016. Patients of all age groups were included in this study. 
Results were analysed by SPSS version 23.
RESULTS: A total of 200 patients were selected with the mean age being 
28.68 years (±13.28) and male predominance (147/200). The mean platelet count, 
haemoglobin and haematocrit at base line for bleeders and non-bleeders showed 
significant results, where platelet count at baseline for bleeders was 24 000, 
whereas for non-bleeders it was 29 000 and it showed significant correlation 
with bleeding (P-value .027). Platelets were transfused to 76 (38%) patients. 
However, none of the specialised haemostasis parameters beside the platelet 
count correlated with bleeding, requiring platelet transfusions.
CONCLUSION: Our study showed a significant association of platelet counts, 
haemoglobin and haematocrit with bleeding. It can be concluded that coagulation 
and anticoagulation profiles will not benefit the management of dengue patients 
and in countries like Pakistan, it will only add to the economic burden on the 
patients.

© 2019 British Blood Transfusion Society.

DOI: 10.1111/tme.12658
PMID: 31854052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]