---
reference_id: "PMID:37317962"
title: Brain microglia serve as a persistent HIV reservoir despite durable antiretroviral therapy.
authors:
- Tang Y
- Chaillon A
- Gianella S
- Wong LM
- Li D
- Simermeyer TL
- Porrachia M
- Ignacio C
- Woodworth B
- Zhong D
- Du J
- de la Parra Polina E
- Kirchherr J
- Allard B
- Clohosey ML
- Moeser M
- Sondgeroth AL
- Whitehill GD
- Singh V
- Dashti A
- Smith DM
- Eron JJ
- Bar KJ
- Chahroudi A
- Joseph SB
- Archin NM
- Margolis DM
- Jiang G
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/JCI167417
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain microglia serve as a persistent HIV reservoir despite durable antiretroviral therapy.
**Authors:** Tang Y, Chaillon A, Gianella S, Wong LM, Li D, Simermeyer TL, Porrachia M, Ignacio C, Woodworth B, Zhong D, Du J, de la Parra Polina E, Kirchherr J, Allard B, Clohosey ML, Moeser M, Sondgeroth AL, Whitehill GD, Singh V, Dashti A, Smith DM, Eron JJ, Bar KJ, Chahroudi A, Joseph SB, Archin NM, Margolis DM, Jiang G
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI167417](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI167417)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2023 Jun 15;133(12):e167417. doi: 10.1172/JCI167417.

Brain microglia serve as a persistent HIV reservoir despite durable 
antiretroviral therapy.

Tang Y(1)(2), Chaillon A(3), Gianella S(3), Wong LM(1), Li D(1), Simermeyer 
TL(1), Porrachia M(3), Ignacio C(3), Woodworth B(3), Zhong D(1), Du J(1), de la 
Parra Polina E(1), Kirchherr J(1), Allard B(1), Clohosey ML(1), Moeser M(4), 
Sondgeroth AL(4), Whitehill GD(5), Singh V(6), Dashti A(6), Smith DM(3), Eron 
JJ(2)(7), Bar KJ(5), Chahroudi A(6)(8), Joseph SB(1)(4)(9), Archin NM(1)(2), 
Margolis DM(1)(2)(7)(9), Jiang G(1)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)University of North Carolina (UNC) HIV Cure Center, and.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, UCSD, La Jolla, California, USA.
(4)UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(7)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(8)Center for Childhood Infections and Vaccines of Children's Healthcare of 
Atlanta and Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, UNC School of Medicine, University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Brain microglia (MG) may serve as a human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV) 
reservoir and ignite rebound viremia following cessation of antiretroviral 
therapy (ART), but they have yet to be proven to harbor replication-competent 
HIV. Here, we isolated brain myeloid cells (BrMCs) from nonhuman primates and 
rapid autopsy of people with HIV (PWH) on ART and sought evidence of persistent 
viral infection. BrMCs predominantly displayed microglial markers, in which up 
to 99.9% of the BrMCs were TMEM119+ MG. Total and integrated SIV or HIV DNA was 
detectable in the MG, with low levels of cell-associated viral RNA. Provirus in 
MG was highly sensitive to epigenetic inhibition. Outgrowth virus from parietal 
cortex MG in an individual with HIV productively infected both MG and PBMCs. 
This inducible, replication-competent virus and virus from basal ganglia 
proviral DNA were closely related but highly divergent from variants in 
peripheral compartments. Phenotyping studies characterized brain-derived virus 
as macrophage tropic based on the ability of the virus to infect cells 
expressing low levels of CD4. The lack of genetic diversity in virus from the 
brain suggests that this macrophage-tropic lineage quickly colonized brain 
regions. These data demonstrate that MG harbor replication-competent HIV and 
serve as a persistent reservoir in the brain.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI167417
PMCID: PMC10266791
PMID: 37317962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.