---
reference_id: "PMID:9144701"
title: Diagnosis and treatment of pustular disorders in the neonate.
authors:
- Van Praag MC
- Van Rooij RW
- Folkers E
- Spritzer R
- Menke HE
- Oranje AP
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1111/j.1525-1470.1997.tb00221.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and treatment of pustular disorders in the neonate.
**Authors:** Van Praag MC, Van Rooij RW, Folkers E, Spritzer R, Menke HE, Oranje AP
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1525-1470.1997.tb00221.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1525-1470.1997.tb00221.x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 1997 Mar-Apr;14(2):131-43. doi: 
10.1111/j.1525-1470.1997.tb00221.x.

Diagnosis and treatment of pustular disorders in the neonate.

Van Praag MC(1), Van Rooij RW, Folkers E, Spritzer R, Menke HE, Oranje AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Sint Franciscus Gasthuis, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

The diagnosis of a pustular dermatosis occurring during the first months of life 
is usually based on clinical findings. However, some cases may require simple 
investigations including microscopic examination of pustular content, cultures, 
and skin biopsies. The main benign transient neonatal types of pustulosis 
include erythema toxicum neonatorum, infantile acropustulosis, transient 
neonatal pustular melanosis, and neonatal acne. The most common causes of 
infectious pustular skin lesions include bacterial infections, which may be 
initially localized (Staphylococcus aureus) or septicemic (with Listeria 
monocytogenes as the leading causitive agent); viral infections (herpes simplex, 
varicella-zoster, and cytomegalovirus infections); fungal infections 
(candidiasis); or parasitic disorders (scabies). The main objective of this 
article is to propose a systematic approach to pustular eruptions in the 
neonate. The need for investigating every neonate with pustules for an 
infectious disease is emphasized. The Tzanck smear, the Gram's stain, and a 
potassium hydroxide preparation are the most important quick diagnostic tests. 
The Tzanck smear is a very easy, rapid, and sensitive test for detection of a 
herpetic infection (multinucleated giant cells) as well as noninfectious 
pustular eruptions (eosinophils, neutrophils). Therefore the Tzanck smear should 
be the first test performed. Moreover, a Gram's stain and potassium hydroxide 
preparation should be performed in cases of neonatal pustular disorders to 
detect bacterial and fungal infections. The goal of this diagnostic approach is 
to spare a healthy neonate with a benign transient condition an invasive 
evaluation for sepsis, potentially harmful antibiotic therapy, and prolonged 
hospitalization, with its own inherent morbidity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1525-1470.1997.tb00221.x
PMID: 9144701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]