---
reference_id: "PMID:15549396"
title: A novel 5q11.2 deletion detected by microarray comparative genomic hybridisation in a child referred as a case of suspected 22q11 deletion syndrome.
authors:
- Prescott K
- Woodfine K
- Stubbs P
- Super M
- Kerr B
- Palmer R
- Carter NP
- Scambler P
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-004-1195-6
keywords:
- Child
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 22"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 5"
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Nucleic Acid Hybridization
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel 5q11.2 deletion detected by microarray comparative genomic hybridisation in a child referred as a case of suspected 22q11 deletion syndrome.
**Authors:** Prescott K, Woodfine K, Stubbs P, Super M, Kerr B, Palmer R, Carter NP, Scambler P
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-004-1195-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-004-1195-6)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2005 Jan;116(1-2):83-90. doi: 10.1007/s00439-004-1195-6. Epub 2004 
Nov 10.

A novel 5q11.2 deletion detected by microarray comparative genomic hybridisation 
in a child referred as a case of suspected 22q11 deletion syndrome.

Prescott K(1), Woodfine K, Stubbs P, Super M, Kerr B, Palmer R, Carter NP, 
Scambler P.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, 30, Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

The 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is a developmental syndrome comprising of 
heart, palate, thymus and parathyroid glands defects. Individuals with 22q11DS 
usually carry a 1.5- to 3-Mb heterozygous deletion on chromosome 22q11.2. 
However, there are many patients with features of 22q11DS without a known cause 
from conventional karyotype and FISH analysis. Six patients with features of 
22q11DS, a normal chromosomal and FISH 22q11 analysis, were selected for 
investigation by microarray genomic comparative hybridisation (array CGH). 
Array-CGH is a powerful technology enabling detection of submicroscopic 
chromosome duplications and deletions by comparing a differentially labelled 
test sample to a control. The samples are co-hybridised to a microarray 
containing genomic clones and the resulting ratio of fluorescence intensities on 
each array element is proportional to the DNA copy number difference. No 
chromosomal changes were detected by hybridisation to a high resolution array 
representing chromosome 22q. However, one patient was found to have a 6-Mb 
deletion on 5q11.2 detected by a whole genome 1-Mb array. This deletion was 
confirmed with fluorescence in-situ hybridisation (FISH) and microsatellite 
marker analysis. It is the first deletion described in this region. The patient 
had tetralogy of Fallot, a bifid uvula and velopharyngeal insufficiency, short 
stature, learning and behavioural difficulties. This case shows the increased 
sensitivity of array CGH over detailed karyotype analysis for detection of 
chromosomal changes. It is anticipated that array CGH will improve the 
clinician's capacity to diagnose congenital syndromes with an unknown aetiology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-004-1195-6
PMID: 15549396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]