---
reference_id: "PMID:39687036"
title: Efficacy and Safety of Atezolizumab plus Bevacizumab versus Sorafenib in Hepatocellular Carcinoma with Main Trunk and/or Contralateral Portal Vein Invasion in IMbrave150.
authors:
- Finn RS
- Galle PR
- Ducreux M
- Cheng AL
- Reilly N
- Nicholas A
- Hernandez S
- Ma N
- Merle P
- Salem R
- Li D
- Breder V
journal: Liver Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000539897
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and Safety of Atezolizumab plus Bevacizumab versus Sorafenib in Hepatocellular Carcinoma with Main Trunk and/or Contralateral Portal Vein Invasion in IMbrave150.
**Authors:** Finn RS, Galle PR, Ducreux M, Cheng AL, Reilly N, Nicholas A, Hernandez S, Ma N, Merle P, Salem R, Li D, Breder V
**Journal:** Liver Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000539897](https://doi.org/10.1159/000539897)

## Content

1. Liver Cancer. 2024 Jun 21;13(6):655-668. doi: 10.1159/000539897. eCollection 
2024 Dec.

Efficacy and Safety of Atezolizumab plus Bevacizumab versus Sorafenib in 
Hepatocellular Carcinoma with Main Trunk and/or Contralateral Portal Vein 
Invasion in IMbrave150.

Finn RS(1), Galle PR(2), Ducreux M(3), Cheng AL(4), Reilly N(5), Nicholas A(5), 
Hernandez S(5), Ma N(5), Merle P(6), Salem R(7), Li D(8), Breder V(9).

Author information:
(1)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Paris-Saclay University, Gustave Roussy and INSERM-U1279, Collective 
Invasion, Villejuif, France.
(4)National Taiwan University Cancer Center and National Taiwan University 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Genentech Inc, South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Croix-Rousse University Hospital, Lyon, France.
(7)Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(8)City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center and Beckman Research Institute, 
Duarte, CA, USA.
(9)N.N. Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russia.

INTRODUCTION: Atezolizumab plus bevacizumab significantly improved overall 
survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) versus sorafenib in patients 
with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in IMbrave150. Efficacy and 
safety in patient subpopulations with Vp4 portal vein tumor thrombosis (PVTT) 
and other high-risk prognostic factors are reported.
METHODS: IMbrave150 was a global, randomized (2:1), open-label, phase 3 study in 
systemic treatment-naive patients with unresectable HCC; OS and PFS were 
co-primary endpoints. Exploratory analyses compared the efficacy and safety of 
atezolizumab 1,200 mg plus bevacizumab 15 mg/kg every 3 weeks versus sorafenib 
400 mg twice daily in patients (i) with and without Vp4 PVTT alone and (ii) with 
and without high-risk prognostic factors.
RESULTS: In patients with Vp4 PVTT, median OS was 7.6 months (95% CI: 6.0-13.9) 
with atezolizumab plus bevacizumab (n = 48) and 5.5 months (95% CI: 3.4-6.7) 
with sorafenib (n = 25; HR 0.62 [95% CI: 0.34-1.11]; descriptive p = 0.104). 
Median PFS in the respective arms was 5.4 months (95% CI: 3.6-6.9) and 2.8 
months (95% CI: 1.5-5.3; HR 0.62 [95% CI: 0.35-1.09]; descriptive p = 0.094). In 
patients without Vp4, median OS was 21.1 months (95% CI: 18.0-24.6) with 
atezolizumab plus bevacizumab (n = 288) and 15.4 months (95% CI: 12.6-18.6) with 
sorafenib (n = 140; HR 0.67 [95% CI: 0.51-0.88]; descriptive p = 0.003). Median 
PFS in the respective arms was 7.1 months (95% CI: 6.1-9.6) and 4.7 months (95% 
CI: 4.2-6.1; HR 0.64 [95% CI: 0.51-0.81]; descriptive p < 0.001). The high-risk 
versus non-high-risk populations had similar outcome patterns. In the respective 
treatment arms, grade ≥3 treatment-related adverse events occurred in 43% and 
48% of patients with Vp4 and 46% and 47% of patients without Vp4.
CONCLUSION: Regardless of VP4 PVTT or other high-risk features of unresectable 
HCC, which have often resulted in exclusion from other front-line trials, 
patients benefited from atezolizumab and bevacizumab versus sorafenib.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000539897
PMCID: PMC11649257
PMID: 39687036

Conflict of interest statement: Richard S. Finn reports receiving consulting 
fees from AstraZeneca, Bayer, CStone Pharmaceuticals, Eisai, Eli Lilly, 
Exelixis, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Hengrui, Merck, and Pfizer; research funding to 
institution from Adaptimmune, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Merck, 
Pfizer, and F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd; and is an Editorial Board Member of Liver 
Cancer. Peter R. Galle reports receiving consulting fees from Adaptimmune, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boston Scientific, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eisai, Eli Lilly, 
F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Guerbet, Ipsen, Merck Sharp and Dohme, and Sirtex 
Medical; honoraria from Adaptimmune, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boston Scientific, 
Bristol Myers Squibb, Eisai, Eli Lilly, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Guerbet, 
Ipsen, Merck Sharp and Dohme, and Sirtex Medical; advisory fees from 
Adaptimmune, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boston Scientific, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eisai, 
Eli Lilly, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Guerbet, Ipsen, Merck Sharp and Dohme, and 
Sirtex Medical; and research funding to institution from Bayer and F. 
Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. Michel Ducreux reports receiving honoraria, consulting 
fees, or advisory fees to self from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Eli Lilly, F. 
Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Ipsen, Merck Serono, Pierre Fabre, and Servier; travel 
support from Bayer, Eli Lilly, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Ipsen, Merck Sharp & 
Dohme, and Servier; speaker bureau participation for Amgen, Bayer, Eli Lilly, F. 
Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Ipsen, and Merck Serono; and research funding to 
institution from Bayer and F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. Ann-Lii Cheng reports 
receiving research funding to institution from F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. Alan 
Nicholas is an employee and stockholder of Roche/Genentech. Philippe Merle has 
had a consulting or advisory role for Bayer, Ipsen, Lilly, Eisai, AstraZeneca, 
Bristol Myers Squibb, and MSD; received institutional research funding from 
Ipsen; and travel and accommodation expenses from Bayer and Ipsen. Riad Salem is 
a consultant for Boston Scientific, Eisai, Genentech, Cook, Sirtex and 
AstraZeneca. Daneng Li has received honoraria and advisory/consultancy fees from 
AstraZeneca, Ipsen, Eisai, Exelixis, Coherus, Genentech, QED, Merck, Adagene, 
Delcath, Servier, Sumitomo, Transthera, and TerSera; and received institutional 
research funding from Brooklyn Immunotherapeutics and AstraZeneca. Valeriy 
Breder has received advisory/consultancy fees from F. Hoffmann-La Roche, MSD, 
Eisai, Bristol Myers Squibb, and Ipsen; and travel and accommodation expenses 
from F. Hoffmann-La Roche, MSD, Eisai, Bristol Myers Squibb, and Bayer. Ning Ma 
is an employee and stockholder of Roche/Genentech. Sairy Hernandez is an 
employee and stockholder of Roche/Genentech.