---
reference_id: "PMID:508630"
title: Impaired microtubule assembly and polymorphonuclear leucocyte function in the Chediak-Higashi syndrome correctable by ascorbic acid.
authors:
- Boxer LA
- Albertini DF
- Baehner RL
- Oliver JM
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '1979'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.1979.tb03743.x
keywords:
- Ascorbic Acid/pharmacology
- Cell Adhesion
- Chediak-Higashi Syndrome/pathology
- "Child, Preschool"
- Concanavalin A/pharmacology
- Female
- Humans
- Immunologic Capping/drug effects
- Infant
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Microtubules/ultrastructure
- "Neutrophils/drug effects, ultrastructure"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired microtubule assembly and polymorphonuclear leucocyte function in the Chediak-Higashi syndrome correctable by ascorbic acid.
**Authors:** Boxer LA, Albertini DF, Baehner RL, Oliver JM
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (1979)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2141.1979.tb03743.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2141.1979.tb03743.x)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 1979 Oct;43(2):207-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.1979.tb03743.x.

Impaired microtubule assembly and polymorphonuclear leucocyte function in the 
Chediak-Higashi syndrome correctable by ascorbic acid.

Boxer LA, Albertini DF, Baehner RL, Oliver JM.

It was previously shown that the abnormal surface characteristics and defective 
bactericidal function of polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMN) in the 
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) are correlated with impaired microtubule 
assembly, and in one patient direct electron microscopic evidence for an anomaly 
in microtubule assembly following surface membrane activation by concanavalin A 
(Con A). We show that very few microtubules are visible in CHS leucocytes from 
two additional patients under conditions where normal PMNs contain abundant 
microtubules, and that both in vivo and in vitro exposure of the CHS leucocytes 
to ascorbic acid promotes the assembly of microtubules. This agent, which 
normalizes chemotaxis and degranulation in CHS leucocytes, is shown also to 
correct granulocyte adherence in these leucocytes. It is suggested that the 
improved clinical course of patients with CHS following treatment with ascorbic 
acid is related at least in part to improvement of microtubule assembly and PMN 
function by the ascorbic acid.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.1979.tb03743.x
PMID: 508630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]