---
reference_id: "PMID:39536593"
title: "Biallelic Variants in LIPT2 as a Cause of Infantile-Onset Dystonia: Expanding the Clinical and Molecular Spectrum."
authors:
- Sen K
- Vera AZ
- Puronurmi A
- Gropman A
- Wongkittichote P
- Ganetzky R
- Autio K
- Kastaniotis A
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.09.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic Variants in LIPT2 as a Cause of Infantile-Onset Dystonia: Expanding the Clinical and Molecular Spectrum.
**Authors:** Sen K, Vera AZ, Puronurmi A, Gropman A, Wongkittichote P, Ganetzky R, Autio K, Kastaniotis A
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.09.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.09.013)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2025 Jan;162:32-39. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.09.013. 
Epub 2024 Sep 18.

Biallelic Variants in LIPT2 as a Cause of Infantile-Onset Dystonia: Expanding 
the Clinical and Molecular Spectrum.

Sen K(1), Vera AZ(2), Puronurmi A(3), Gropman A(4), Wongkittichote P(5), 
Ganetzky R(6), Autio K(3), Kastaniotis A(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurogenetics and Neurodevelopmental Pediatrics, Children's 
National Hospital, Washington DC. Electronic address: 
ksen2@childrensnational.org.
(2)Division of Child Neurology (Movement Disorders Program), Children's National 
Hospital, Washington DC.
(3)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, 
Finland.
(4)Division of Neurogenetics and Neurodevelopmental Pediatrics, Children's 
National Hospital, Washington DC.
(5)Mitochondrial Medicine Program, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Department of Pediatrics, Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Mitochondrial Medicine Program, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

BACKGROUND: Lipoyl transferase 2 is involved in the biosynthesis of lipoate. 
Lipoate is the cofactor for the glycine cleavage system and four dehydrogenase 
enzymes. Biallelic variants in LIPT2 causing severe neonatal encephalopathy was 
first described in 2017.
METHODS: Clinical data were collected by retrospective chart review after 
obtaining consent from parents. The pathogenicity of these variants was further 
delineated using a yeast model. The YEp352-LIPT2 plasmid was used as a template 
to generate the two patient variants using QuickChange Lightning Site-Directed 
Mutagenesis Kit.
RESULTS: The patient was a 15-month-old female who presented at one month with 
dystonia, developmental delay, and feeding difficulties. Brain magnetic 
resonance imaging showed cortical malformations including colpocephaly, 
polymicrogyria, and heterotopia. Patient had elevations in lactate (6.1 mmol/L) 
and glycine. Exome sequencing showed two variants of uncertain significance in 
trans in the LIPT2 gene: c.346 G>T and c.418C>T. Patient was started on lipoic 
acid, thiamine, and COQ10. Yeast complementation experiments indicate that both 
patient mutant variants result in diminished function versions of the LIPT2 
protein.
CONCLUSION: We report the fourth case of LIPT2-related disorder. Proband shared 
significant overlap with previous patients; however, there was a distinct 
movement disorder and brain malformations, which have not been previously 
described. Unlike most neurometabolic disorders where dystonia develops later 
after metabolic stroke in basal ganglia, LIPT2-related disorder seems unique due 
to early onset of dystonia due to energy deficit in the developing brain. Lipoic 
acid supplementation has not led to significant clinical improvement. Analyses 
in yeast indicate that novel variants are deleterious but have retained some 
functionality.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.09.013
PMID: 39536593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest We, the 
authors of the study titled “Biallelic Variants in LIPT-2 as a Cause of 
Infantile Onset Dystonia: Expanding the Clinical and Molecular Spectrum,” 
declare that we have no relevant financial or personal relationships that could 
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. None of the authors 
have any competing interests to disclose.