---
reference_id: "PMID:28515030"
title: Congenital Central Hypothyroidism Caused by a Novel Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone-Beta Subunit Gene Mutation in Two Siblings.
authors:
- Özhan B
- Boz Anlaş Ö
- Sarıkepe B
- Albuz B
- Semerci Gündüz N
journal: J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.4595
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Congenital Hypothyroidism/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Siblings
- "Thyrotropin, beta Subunit/genetics"
- Turkey
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Central Hypothyroidism Caused by a Novel Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone-Beta Subunit Gene Mutation in Two Siblings.
**Authors:** Özhan B, Boz Anlaş Ö, Sarıkepe B, Albuz B, Semerci Gündüz N
**Journal:** J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.4274/jcrpe.4595](https://doi.org/10.4274/jcrpe.4595)

## Content

1. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2017 Sep 1;9(3):278-282. doi:
10.4274/jcrpe.4595.  Epub 2017 May 17.

Congenital Central Hypothyroidism Caused by a Novel Thyroid-Stimulating 
Hormone-Beta Subunit Gene Mutation in Two Siblings.

Özhan B(1), Boz Anlaş Ö, Sarıkepe B, Albuz B, Semerci Gündüz N.

Author information:
(1)Pamukkale University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Division 
of Pediatric Endocrinology, Denizli, Turkey.

Congenital central hypothyroidism (CCH) is a very rare disease. Alterations in 
pituitary development genes as well as mutations of immunoglobulin superfamily 
member 1 and transducin β-like protein 1 can result in CCH and multiple 
pituitary hormone deficiencies. However, mutations of the thyrotropin-releasing 
hormone receptor or thyroid-stimulating hormone-beta (TSHB) gene are responsible 
for isolated CCH. In this paper, we present the cases of two siblings with a 
novel mutation of TSHB. Direct sequencing of the coding regions and exon/intron 
boundaries of the TSHB gene revealed two homozygous nucleotides changes. One of 
them was c.40A>G (rs10776792) which is a very common variation that is also seen 
in healthy individuals, the other was c.94G>A at codon 32 of exon 2 which 
resulted in a change from glutamic acid to lysine (p.E32K). Both patients were 
homozygous and the parents were heterozygous.

DOI: 10.4274/jcrpe.4595
PMCID: PMC5596811
PMID: 28515030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]