---
reference_id: "PMID:24696081"
title: Operant self-administration of alcohol and nicotine in a preclinical model of co-abuse.
authors:
- Lê AD
- Funk D
- Lo S
- Coen K
journal: Psychopharmacology (Berl)
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00213-014-3541-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Operant self-administration of alcohol and nicotine in a preclinical model of co-abuse.
**Authors:** Lê AD, Funk D, Lo S, Coen K
**Journal:** Psychopharmacology (Berl) (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00213-014-3541-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-014-3541-2)

## Content

1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2014 Oct;231(20):4019-29. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-014-3541-2. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

Operant self-administration of alcohol and nicotine in a preclinical model of 
co-abuse.

Lê AD(1), Funk D, Lo S, Coen K.

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology of Alcohol Laboratory, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 
33 Russell Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 2S1, Canada.

RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: Alcohol and nicotine are often taken together. In 
humans, intake of nicotine, via smoked tobacco, increases alcohol drinking, and 
alcohol increases smoking. Chronic nicotine treatment increases alcohol 
self-administration (SA) in laboratory animals; the reverse relationship is less 
clear. Most animal work modeling this has used passive administration, which 
lacks relevance to human co-abuse. Here, we describe a model based on sequential 
operant SA of alcohol and nicotine.
METHODS: Animals are first trained on alcohol SA (0.19 ml of 12 % alcohol 
(w/v)/delivery) and then receive separate alcohol (8 %, w/v) and nicotine 
(15 μg/kg/infusion) SA sessions on the same day ("daily dual access"). Animals 
then receive access to alcohol and then to nicotine (or in the reverse order) in 
alternating 5-min periods in 2-h sessions ("alternating access"). We then 
determine if alternating access modifies the effects of naltrexone on responding 
for alcohol and nicotine.
RESULTS: We found that with daily dual access, nicotine significantly increased 
alcohol SA when alcohol access occurred prior to nicotine access and that 
nicotine SA significantly decreased when the alcohol SA session preceded it. 
During alternating access, nicotine also significantly increased alcohol intake. 
Naltrexone (0.3 or 1 mg/kg) significantly reduced alcohol SA during these 
alternating access sessions in animals that also received nicotine SA, but had 
minimal effects on animals receiving alcohol SA alone. Naltrexone did not affect 
nicotine SA under any condition.
CONCLUSIONS: This sequential access procedure effectively models the effects of 
nicotine on alcohol intake noted in humans.

DOI: 10.1007/s00213-014-3541-2
PMCID: PMC5357119
PMID: 24696081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]