---
reference_id: "PMID:36912345"
title: Cranial and extracranial giant cell arteritis do not exhibit differences in the IL6 -174 G/C gene polymorphism.
authors:
- Genre F
- Prieto-Peña D
- Pulito-Cueto V
- Ocejo-Vinyals JG
- Atienza-Mateo B
- Muñoz Jiménez A
- Ortiz-Sanjuán F
- Romero-Yuste S
- Moriano C
- Galíndez-Agirregoikoa E
- Calvo I
- Ortego Centeno N
- Álvarez-Rivas N
- Miranda-Filloy JA
- Llorente I
- Blanco R
- Gualillo O
- Martín J
- Castañeda S
- López-Mejías R
- Remuzgo-Martínez S
- González-Gay MA
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/cbjnmo
keywords:
- Humans
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/genetics, pathology"
- Interleukin-6/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Gene Frequency
- Polymyalgia Rheumatica
- Ischemia/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cranial and extracranial giant cell arteritis do not exhibit differences in the IL6 -174 G/C gene polymorphism.
**Authors:** Genre F, Prieto-Peña D, Pulito-Cueto V, Ocejo-Vinyals JG, Atienza-Mateo B, Muñoz Jiménez A, Ortiz-Sanjuán F, Romero-Yuste S, Moriano C, Galíndez-Agirregoikoa E, Calvo I, Ortego Centeno N, Álvarez-Rivas N, Miranda-Filloy JA, Llorente I, Blanco R, Gualillo O, Martín J, Castañeda S, López-Mejías R, Remuzgo-Martínez S, González-Gay MA
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.55563/clinexprheumatol/cbjnmo](https://doi.org/10.55563/clinexprheumatol/cbjnmo)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2023 Apr;41(4):910-915. doi:
10.55563/clinexprheumatol/cbjnmo. Epub 2023 Mar 2.

Cranial and extracranial giant cell arteritis do not exhibit differences in the
IL6 -174 G/C gene polymorphism.

Genre F(#)(1), Prieto-Peña D(#)(2), Pulito-Cueto V(#)(1), Ocejo-Vinyals JG(3),
Atienza-Mateo B(2), Muñoz Jiménez A(4), Ortiz-Sanjuán F(5), Romero-Yuste S(6),
Moriano C(7), Galíndez-Agirregoikoa E(8), Calvo I(8), Ortego Centeno N(9),
Álvarez-Rivas N(10), Miranda-Filloy JA(11), Llorente I(12), Blanco R(2),
Gualillo O(13), Martín J(14), Castañeda S(12), López-Mejías R(#)(1),
Remuzgo-Martínez S(#)(1), González-Gay MA(#)(15).

Author information:
(1)Research Group on Genetic Epidemiology and Atherosclerosis in Systemic
Diseases and in Metabolic Bone Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System, IDIVAL,
Santander, Spain.
(2)Research Group on Genetic Epidemiology and Atherosclerosis in Systemic
Diseases and in Metabolic Bone Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System, IDIVAL,
Santander, and Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Marqués de
Valdecilla, Santander, Spain.
(3)Department of Immunology, Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla,
Santander, Spain.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla,
Spain.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe,
Valencia, Spain.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario Pontevedra,
Spain.
(7)Department of Rheumatology, Complejo Asistencial Universitario de León,
Spain.
(8)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Granada; Instituto de
Investigación Biosanitaria Ibs, Granada, Spain.
(10)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario San Agustín, Avilés,
Spain.
(11)Division of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Lucus Augusti, Lugo, Spain.
(12)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa,
IIS-Princesa, Cátedra EPID Future, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Madrid,
Spain.
(13)Health Research Institute of Santiago, Santiago de Compostela; and The
NEIRID Group (Neuroendocrine Interactions in Rheumatology and Inflammatory
Diseases), Santiago University Clinical Hospital, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(14)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina 'López-Neyra', CSIC, PTS Granada,
Spain.
(15)Research Group on Genetic Epidemiology and Atherosclerosis in Systemic
Diseases and in Metabolic Bone Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System, IDIVAL,
Santander; Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Marqués de
Valdecilla, Santander; School of Medicine, Universidad de Cantabria, Santander,
Spain; and Cardiovascular Pathophysiology and Genomics Research Unit, School of
Physiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa. miguelaggay@hotmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: Since interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a pivotal proinflammatory cytokine
implicated in the pathogenesis of giant cell arteritis (GCA), we aimed to
determine the potential association of the functional IL6 -174 G/C polymorphism
with GCA as well as if the single base change variation at the promoter region
in the human IL-6 gene may account for differences in the clinical spectrum of
GCA between cranial and extracranial large vessel vasculitis (LVV)-GCA.
METHODS: The IL6 -174 G/C polymorphism (rs1800795) was genotyped in 191 patients
with biopsy-proven GCA who had typical cranial manifestations of the disease,
109 patients with extracranial LVV-GCA, without cranial ischaemic manifestations
of GCA, and 877 ethnically matched unaffected controls. A comparative study was
carried out between patients with cranial and extracranial LVV-GCA and controls.
RESULTS: No significant differences in genotype and allele frequencies of IL6
-174 G/C polymorphism were found between the whole cohort of GCA patients and
healthy controls. It was also the case when cranial and extracranial LVV-GCA
were compared or when each of these subgroups was compared to controls.
Moreover, no significant results in genotype and allele frequencies of IL6 -174
G/C polymorphism were disclosed when the whole cohort of GCA patients were
stratified according to the presence of polymyalgia rheumatica, severe ischaemic
manifestations, including permanent visual loss and peripheral arteriopathy, and
HLA-DRB1*04:01 status.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that the IL6 -174 G/C polymorphism does not
influence the phenotypic expression of GCA.

DOI: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/cbjnmo
PMID: 36912345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
