---
reference_id: "PMID:21659547"
title: "Long-term outcome and lineage-specific chimerism in 194 patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome treated by hematopoietic cell transplantation in the period 1980-2009: an international collaborative study."
authors:
- Moratto D
- Giliani S
- Bonfim C
- Mazzolari E
- Fischer A
- Ochs HD
- Cant AJ
- Thrasher AJ
- Cowan MJ
- Albert MH
- Small T
- Pai SY
- Haddad E
- Lisa A
- Hambleton S
- Slatter M
- Cavazzana-Calvo M
- Mahlaoui N
- Picard C
- Torgerson TR
- Burroughs L
- Koliski A
- Neto JZ
- Porta F
- Qasim W
- Veys P
- Kavanau K
- Hönig M
- Schulz A
- Friedrich W
- Notarangelo LD
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-11-319376
keywords:
- Autoimmunity/immunology
- Blood Donors
- Cell Lineage
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/adverse effects, methods"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care/statistics & numerical data"
- "Postoperative Complications/blood, etiology, immunology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Analysis
- "Thrombocytopenia/blood, etiology"
- Time Factors
- Transplantation Chimera/blood
- "Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome/blood, genetics, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term outcome and lineage-specific chimerism in 194 patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome treated by hematopoietic cell transplantation in the period 1980-2009: an international collaborative study.
**Authors:** Moratto D, Giliani S, Bonfim C, Mazzolari E, Fischer A, Ochs HD, Cant AJ, Thrasher AJ, Cowan MJ, Albert MH, Small T, Pai SY, Haddad E, Lisa A, Hambleton S, Slatter M, Cavazzana-Calvo M, Mahlaoui N, Picard C, Torgerson TR, Burroughs L, Koliski A, Neto JZ, Porta F, Qasim W, Veys P, Kavanau K, Hönig M, Schulz A, Friedrich W, Notarangelo LD
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2010-11-319376](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2010-11-319376)

## Content

1. Blood. 2011 Aug 11;118(6):1675-84. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-11-319376. Epub
2011  Jun 9.

Long-term outcome and lineage-specific chimerism in 194 patients with
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome treated by hematopoietic cell transplantation in the
period 1980-2009: an international collaborative study.

Moratto D(1), Giliani S, Bonfim C, Mazzolari E, Fischer A, Ochs HD, Cant AJ,
Thrasher AJ, Cowan MJ, Albert MH, Small T, Pai SY, Haddad E, Lisa A, Hambleton
S, Slatter M, Cavazzana-Calvo M, Mahlaoui N, Picard C, Torgerson TR, Burroughs
L, Koliski A, Neto JZ, Porta F, Qasim W, Veys P, Kavanau K, Hönig M, Schulz A,
Friedrich W, Notarangelo LD.

Author information:
(1)A. Nocivelli Institute for Molecular Medicine, Pediatric Clinic, University
of Brescia, and Laboratory of Genetic Disorders of Childhood, Spedali Civili,
Brescia, Italy.

In this retrospective collaborative study, we have analyzed long-term outcome
and donor cell engraftment in 194 patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS)
who have been treated by hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) in the period
1980- 2009. Overall survival was 84.0% and was even higher (89.1% 5-year
survival) for those who received HCT since the year 2000, reflecting recent
improvement of outcome after transplantation from mismatched family donors and
for patients who received HCT from an unrelated donor at older than 5 years.
Patients who went to transplantation in better clinical conditions had a lower
rate of post-HCT complications. Retrospective analysis of lineage-specific donor
cell engraftment showed that stable full donor chimerism was attained by 72.3%
of the patients who survived for at least 1 year after HCT. Mixed chimerism was
associated with an increased risk of incomplete reconstitution of lymphocyte
count and post-HCT autoimmunity, and myeloid donor cell chimerism < 50% was
associated with persistent thrombocytopenia. These observations indicate
continuous improvement of outcome after HCT for WAS and may have important
implications for the development of novel protocols aiming to obtain full
correction of the disease and reduce post-HCT complications.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-11-319376
PMCID: PMC3156052
PMID: 21659547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
