---
reference_id: "PMID:33597120"
title: Pre-flight exercise and bone metabolism predict unloading-induced bone loss due to spaceflight.
authors:
- Gabel L
- Liphardt AM
- Hulme PA
- Heer M
- Zwart SR
- Sibonga JD
- Smith SM
- Boyd SK
journal: Br J Sports Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2020-103602
keywords:
- Body Composition
- Bone Density
- Bone and Bones
- Exercise
- Humans
- Space Flight
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pre-flight exercise and bone metabolism predict unloading-induced bone loss due to spaceflight.
**Authors:** Gabel L, Liphardt AM, Hulme PA, Heer M, Zwart SR, Sibonga JD, Smith SM, Boyd SK
**Journal:** Br J Sports Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjsports-2020-103602](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2020-103602)

## Content

1. Br J Sports Med. 2022 Feb;56(4):196-203. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2020-103602.
Epub  2021 Feb 17.

Pre-flight exercise and bone metabolism predict unloading-induced bone loss due 
to spaceflight.

Gabel L(1)(2), Liphardt AM(3), Hulme PA(2), Heer M(4), Zwart SR(5), Sibonga 
JD(6), Smith SM(6), Boyd SK(7)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Calgary Cumming School of Medicine, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Rheumatology and Immunology, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nurnberg and Universitätsklinikum 
Erlangen, Erlangen, Bavaria, Germany.
(4)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Bonn, Bonn, 
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Germany.
(5)Department of Preventive Medicine and Population Health, The University of 
Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(6)Human Health and Performance Directorate, NASA Lyndon B Johnson Space Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, University of Calgary Cumming School of Medicine, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada skboyd@ucalgary.ca.

OBJECTIVES: Bone loss remains a primary health concern for astronauts, despite 
in-flight exercise. We examined changes in bone microarchitecture, density and 
strength before and after long-duration spaceflight in relation to biochemical 
markers of bone turnover and exercise.
METHODS: Seventeen astronauts had their distal tibiae and radii imaged before 
and after space missions to the International Space Station using 
high-resolution peripheral quantitative CT. We estimated bone strength using 
finite element analysis and acquired blood and urine biochemical markers of bone 
turnover before, during and after spaceflight. Pre-flight exercise history and 
in-flight exercise logs were obtained. Mixed effects models examined changes in 
bone and biochemical variables and their relationship with mission duration and 
exercise.
RESULTS: At the distal tibia, median cumulative losses after spaceflight were 
-2.9% to -4.3% for bone strength and total volumetric bone mineral density 
(vBMD) and -0.8% to -2.6% for trabecular vBMD, bone volume fraction, thickness 
and cortical vBMD. Mission duration (range 3.5-7 months) significantly predicted 
bone loss and crewmembers with higher concentrations of biomarkers of bone 
turnover before spaceflight experienced greater losses in tibia bone strength 
and density. Lower body resistance training volume (repetitions per week) 
increased 3-6 times in-flight compared with pre-spaceflight. Increases in 
training volume predicted preservation of tibia bone strength and trabecular 
vBMD and thickness.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings highlight the fundamental relationship between mission 
duration and bone loss. Pre-flight markers of bone turnover and exercise history 
may identify crewmembers at greatest risk of bone loss due to unloading and may 
focus preventative measures.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bjsports-2020-103602
PMCID: PMC8862023
PMID: 33597120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.