---
reference_id: "PMID:39511247"
title: Rett syndrome.
authors:
- Gold WA
- Percy AK
- Neul JL
- Cobb SR
- Pozzo-Miller L
- Issar JK
- Ben-Zeev B
- Vignoli A
- Kaufmann WE
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-024-00568-0
keywords:
- "Rett Syndrome/physiopathology, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2/genetics
- Animals
- Female
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rett syndrome.
**Authors:** Gold WA, Percy AK, Neul JL, Cobb SR, Pozzo-Miller L, Issar JK, Ben-Zeev B, Vignoli A, Kaufmann WE
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-024-00568-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-024-00568-0)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2024 Nov 7;10(1):84. doi: 10.1038/s41572-024-00568-0.

Rett syndrome.

Gold WA(1)(2), Percy AK(3), Neul JL(4)(5), Cobb SR(6), Pozzo-Miller L(7), Issar
JK(1), Ben-Zeev B(8)(9), Vignoli A(10)(11), Kaufmann WE(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Research Laboratory, Kids Research and Kids
Neuroscience Centre, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, School of Medical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia.
(2)Children's Medical Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine and Health,
University of Sydney, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Department of Pediatrics (Neurology), University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL, USA.
(4)Vanderbilt Kennedy Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN, USA.
(6)Simons Initiative for the Developing Brain, Centre for Discovery Brain
Sciences, University of Edinburgh Medical School, Edinburgh, UK.
(7)Department of Pediatrics & Human Development, College of Human Medicine,
Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA.
(8)Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan,
Israel.
(9)Tel Aviv University School of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(10)Childhood and Adolescence Neurology & Psychiatry Unit, ASST Grande Ospedale
Metropolitano Niguarda, Milan, Italy.
(11)Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(12)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
walter.kaufmann@childrens.harvard.edu.
(13)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA, USA. walter.kaufmann@childrens.harvard.edu.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2025 Mar 24;11(1):19. doi: 10.1038/s41572-025-00610-9.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe, progressive, neurodevelopmental disorder, which
affects predominantly females. In most cases, RTT is associated with pathogenic
variants in MECP2. MeCP2, the protein product of MECP2, is known to regulate
gene expression and is highly expressed in the brain. RTT is characterized by
developmental regression of spoken language and hand use that, with hand
stereotypies and impaired ambulation, constitute the four core diagnostic
features. Affected individuals may present multiple other neurological
impairments and comorbidities, such as seizures, breathing irregularities,
anxiety and constipation. Studies employing neuroimaging, neuropathology,
neurochemistry and animal models show reductions in brain size and global
decreases in neuronal size, as well as alterations in multiple neurotransmitter
systems. Management of RTT is mainly focused on preventing the progression of
symptoms, currently improved by guidelines based on natural history studies.
Animal and cellular models of MeCP2 deficiency have helped in understanding the
pathophysiology of RTT and guided the development of trofinetide, an
IGF1-related compound, which is an approved drug for RTT, as well as of other
drugs and gene therapies currently under investigation.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-024-00568-0
PMID: 39511247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
