---
reference_id: "PMID:37788905"
title: "Spectrum of LYST mutations in Chediak-Higashi syndrome: a report of novel variants and a comprehensive review of the literature."
authors:
- Morimoto M
- Nicoli ER
- Kuptanon C
- Roney JC
- Serra-Vinardell J
- Sharma P
- Adams DR
- Gallin JI
- Holland SM
- Rosenzweig SD
- Barbot J
- Ciccone C
- Huizing M
- Toro C
- Gahl WA
- Introne WJ
- Malicdan MCV
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/jmg-2023-109420
keywords:
- Humans
- "Chediak-Higashi Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Mutation
- Proteins/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Base Sequence
- Vesicular Transport Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spectrum of LYST mutations in Chediak-Higashi syndrome: a report of novel variants and a comprehensive review of the literature.
**Authors:** Morimoto M, Nicoli ER, Kuptanon C, Roney JC, Serra-Vinardell J, Sharma P, Adams DR, Gallin JI, Holland SM, Rosenzweig SD, Barbot J, Ciccone C, Huizing M, Toro C, Gahl WA, Introne WJ, Malicdan MCV
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg-2023-109420](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg-2023-109420)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2024 Feb 21;61(3):212-223. doi: 10.1136/jmg-2023-109420.

Spectrum of LYST mutations in Chediak-Higashi syndrome: a report of novel 
variants and a comprehensive review of the literature.

Morimoto M(1), Nicoli ER(1), Kuptanon C(2), Roney JC(2), Serra-Vinardell J(2), 
Sharma P(1), Adams DR(1)(3), Gallin JI(4), Holland SM(5), Rosenzweig SD(6), 
Barbot J(7), Ciccone C(2), Huizing M(2), Toro C(1), Gahl WA(1)(2), Introne 
WJ(2), Malicdan MCV(8)(2).

Author information:
(1)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Human Biochemical Genetics Section, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Office of the Clinical Director, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.
(4)Clinical Pathophysiology Section, Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and 
Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)Immunopathogenesis Section, Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and 
Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(7)Unidade de Hematologia, Serviço de Pediatria, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(8)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA 
maychristine.malicdan@nih.gov.

INTRODUCTION: Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) is a rare autosomal recessive 
disorder characterised by partial oculocutaneous albinism, a bleeding diathesis, 
immunological dysfunction and neurological impairment. Bi-allelic 
loss-of-function variants in LYST cause CHS. LYST encodes the lysosomal 
trafficking regulator, a highly conserved 429 kDa cytoplasmic protein with an 
unknown function.
METHODS: To further our understanding of the pathogenesis of CHS, we conducted 
clinical evaluations on individuals with CHS enrolled in our natural history 
study. Using genomic DNA Sanger sequencing, we identified novel pathogenic LYST 
variants. Additionally, we performed an extensive literature review to curate 
reported LYST variants and classified these novel and reported variants 
according to the American College of Medical Genetics/Association for Molecular 
Pathology variant interpretation guidelines.
RESULTS: Our investigation unveiled 11 novel pathogenic LYST variants in eight 
patients with a clinical diagnosis of CHS, substantiated by the presence of 
pathognomonic giant intracellular granules. From these novel variants, together 
with a comprehensive review of the literature, we compiled a total of 147 
variants in LYST, including 61 frameshift variants (41%), 44 nonsense variants 
(30%), 23 missense variants (16%), 13 splice site variants or small genomic 
deletions for which the coding effect is unknown (9%), 5 in-frame variants (3%) 
and 1 start-loss variant (1%). Notably, a genotype-phenotype correlation 
emerged, whereby individuals harbouring at least one missense or in-frame 
variant generally resulted in milder disease, while those with two nonsense or 
frameshift variants generally had more severe disease.
CONCLUSION: The identification of novel pathogenic LYST variants and 
improvements in variant classification will provide earlier diagnoses and 
improved care to individuals with CHS.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg-2023-109420
PMCID: PMC12247055
PMID: 37788905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.