---
reference_id: "PMID:31532724"
title: "Pembrolizumab in Relapsed and Refractory Mycosis Fungoides and Sézary Syndrome: A Multicenter Phase II Study."
authors:
- Khodadoust MS
- Rook AH
- Porcu P
- Foss F
- Moskowitz AJ
- Shustov A
- Shanbhag S
- Sokol L
- Fling SP
- Ramchurren N
- Pierce R
- Davis A
- Shine R
- Li S
- Fong S
- Kim J
- Yang Y
- Blumenschein WM
- Yearley JH
- Das B
- Patidar R
- Datta V
- Cantu E
- McCutcheon JN
- Karlovich C
- Williams PM
- Subrahmanyam PB
- Maecker HT
- Horwitz SM
- Sharon E
- Kohrt HE
- Cheever MA
- Kim YH
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.19.01056
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Immunological/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "B7-H1 Antigen/biosynthesis, immunology"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Female
- Humans
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mycosis Fungoides/drug therapy, immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- Neoplasm Staging
- Recurrence
- "Sezary Syndrome/drug therapy, immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, immunology, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pembrolizumab in Relapsed and Refractory Mycosis Fungoides and Sézary Syndrome: A Multicenter Phase II Study.
**Authors:** Khodadoust MS, Rook AH, Porcu P, Foss F, Moskowitz AJ, Shustov A, Shanbhag S, Sokol L, Fling SP, Ramchurren N, Pierce R, Davis A, Shine R, Li S, Fong S, Kim J, Yang Y, Blumenschein WM, Yearley JH, Das B, Patidar R, Datta V, Cantu E, McCutcheon JN, Karlovich C, Williams PM, Subrahmanyam PB, Maecker HT, Horwitz SM, Sharon E, Kohrt HE, Cheever MA, Kim YH
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.19.01056](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.19.01056)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2020 Jan 1;38(1):20-28. doi: 10.1200/JCO.19.01056. Epub 2019 Sep
 18.

Pembrolizumab in Relapsed and Refractory Mycosis Fungoides and Sézary Syndrome:
A Multicenter Phase II Study.

Khodadoust MS(1), Rook AH(2), Porcu P(3), Foss F(4), Moskowitz AJ(5), Shustov
A(6), Shanbhag S(7), Sokol L(8), Fling SP(9), Ramchurren N(9), Pierce R(9),
Davis A(9), Shine R(9), Li S(1), Fong S(1), Kim J(1), Yang Y(9), Blumenschein
WM(10), Yearley JH(10), Das B(11), Patidar R(11), Datta V(11), Cantu E(11),
McCutcheon JN(11), Karlovich C(11), Williams PM(11), Subrahmanyam PB(1), Maecker
HT(1), Horwitz SM(5), Sharon E(12), Kohrt HE(1), Cheever MA(9), Kim YH(1).

Author information:
(1)Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
(2)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(3)Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA.
(4)Yale University, New Haven, CT.
(5)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(6)Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, Seattle, WA.
(7)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.
(8)Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL.
(9)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA.
(10)Merck Research Laboratories, Kenilworth, NJ.
(11)Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD.
(12)National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD.

PURPOSE: To assess the efficacy of pembrolizumab in patients with advanced
relapsed or refractory mycosis fungoides (MF) or Sézary syndrome (SS).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: CITN-10 is a single-arm, multicenter phase II trial of 24
patients with advanced MF or SS. Patients were treated with pembrolizumab 2
mg/kg every 3 weeks for up to 24 months. The primary end point was overall
response rate by consensus global response criteria.
RESULTS: Patients had advanced-stage disease (23 of 24 with stage IIB to IV
MF/SS) and were heavily pretreated with a median of four prior systemic
therapies. The overall response rate was 38% with two complete responses and
seven partial responses. Of the nine responding patients, six had 90% or more
improvement in skin disease by modified Severity Weighted Assessment Tool, and
eight had ongoing responses at last follow-up. The median duration of response
was not reached, with a median response follow-up time of 58 weeks.
Immune-related adverse events led to treatment discontinuation in four patients.
A transient worsening of erythroderma and pruritus occurred in 53% of patients
with SS. This cutaneous flare reaction did not result in treatment
discontinuation for any patient. The flare reaction correlated with high PD-1
expression on Sézary cells but did not associate with subsequent clinical
responses or lack of response. Treatment responses did not correlate with
expression of PD-L1, total mutation burden, or an interferon-γ gene expression
signature.
CONCLUSION: Pembrolizumab demonstrated significant antitumor activity with
durable responses and a favorable safety profile in patients with advanced
MF/SS.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.19.01056
PMCID: PMC6943974
PMID: 31532724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
