---
reference_id: "PMID:38917355"
title: ATM germ line pathogenic variants affect outcomes in children with ataxia-telangiectasia and hematological malignancies.
authors:
- Elitzur S
- Shiloh R
- Loeffen JLC
- Pastorczak A
- Takagi M
- Bomken S
- Baruchel A
- Lehrnbecher T
- Tasian SK
- Abla O
- Arad-Cohen N
- Astigarraga I
- Ben-Harosh M
- Bodmer N
- Brozou T
- Ceppi F
- Chugaeva L
- Dalla Pozza L
- Ducassou S
- Escherich G
- Farah R
- Gibson A
- Hasle H
- Hoveyan J
- Jacoby E
- Jazbec J
- Junk S
- Kolenova A
- Lazic J
- Lo Nigro L
- Mahlaoui N
- Miller L
- Papadakis V
- Pecheux L
- Pillon M
- Sarouk I
- Stary J
- Stiakaki E
- Strullu M
- Tran TH
- Ussowicz M
- Verdu-Amoros J
- Wakulinska A
- Zawitkowska J
- Stoppa-Lyonnet D
- Taylor AM
- Shiloh Y
- Izraeli S
- Minard-Colin V
- Schmiegelow K
- Nirel R
- Attarbaschi A
- Borkhardt A
journal: Blood
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2024024283
keywords:
- Humans
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
- Child
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/genetics, complications, mortality"
- Male
- Female
- Adolescent
- "Hematologic Neoplasms/genetics, mortality"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Infant
- Young Adult
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ATM germ line pathogenic variants affect outcomes in children with ataxia-telangiectasia and hematological malignancies.
**Authors:** Elitzur S, Shiloh R, Loeffen JLC, Pastorczak A, Takagi M, Bomken S, Baruchel A, Lehrnbecher T, Tasian SK, Abla O, Arad-Cohen N, Astigarraga I, Ben-Harosh M, Bodmer N, Brozou T, Ceppi F, Chugaeva L, Dalla Pozza L, Ducassou S, Escherich G, Farah R, Gibson A, Hasle H, Hoveyan J, Jacoby E, Jazbec J, Junk S, Kolenova A, Lazic J, Lo Nigro L, Mahlaoui N, Miller L, Papadakis V, Pecheux L, Pillon M, Sarouk I, Stary J, Stiakaki E, Strullu M, Tran TH, Ussowicz M, Verdu-Amoros J, Wakulinska A, Zawitkowska J, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Taylor AM, Shiloh Y, Izraeli S, Minard-Colin V, Schmiegelow K, Nirel R, Attarbaschi A, Borkhardt A
**Journal:** Blood (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2024024283](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2024024283)

## Content

1. Blood. 2024 Sep 12;144(11):1193-1205. doi: 10.1182/blood.2024024283.

ATM germ line pathogenic variants affect outcomes in children with 
ataxia-telangiectasia and hematological malignancies.

Elitzur S(1), Shiloh R(1)(2), Loeffen JLC(3), Pastorczak A(4), Takagi M(5), 
Bomken S(6), Baruchel A(7), Lehrnbecher T(8), Tasian SK(9), Abla O(10), 
Arad-Cohen N(11), Astigarraga I(12), Ben-Harosh M(13), Bodmer N(14), Brozou 
T(15), Ceppi F(16), Chugaeva L(17), Dalla Pozza L(18), Ducassou S(19), Escherich 
G(20), Farah R(21), Gibson A(22), Hasle H(23), Hoveyan J(24), Jacoby E(25), 
Jazbec J(26), Junk S(15), Kolenova A(27), Lazic J(28), Lo Nigro L(29), Mahlaoui 
N(30), Miller L(31), Papadakis V(32), Pecheux L(33), Pillon M(34), Sarouk I(35), 
Stary J(36), Stiakaki E(37), Strullu M(7), Tran TH(38), Ussowicz M(39), 
Verdu-Amoros J(40), Wakulinska A(41), Zawitkowska J(42), Stoppa-Lyonnet D(43), 
Taylor AM(44), Shiloh Y(45), Izraeli S(1), Minard-Colin V(46), Schmiegelow 
K(47), Nirel R(48), Attarbaschi A(49)(50), Borkhardt A(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Schneider Children's Medical 
Center and Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Petah Tikva, Israel.
(3)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Oncology and Hematology, and Department of Genetic 
Predisposition to Cancer, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Wolfson Childhood Cancer Research Centre, Translational and Clinical Research 
Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Immunology, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, 
France.
(8)Division of Hematology, Oncology and Hemostaseology, Department of 
Pediatrics, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
(9)Division of Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Department of 
Pediatrics and Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Medicine and Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.
(10)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(11)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, 
Israel.
(12)Pediatrics Department, Hospital Universitario Cruces, Osakidetza, Pediatric 
Oncology Group, Bizkaia Health Research Institute, Pediatric Department, 
Universidad del País Vasco UPV/EHU, Barakaldo, Spain.
(13)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Soroka Medical Center, Beer 
Sheva, Israel.
(14)Department of Oncology, University Children's Hospital Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(15)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, 
Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany.
(16)Division of Pediatrics, Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Unit, University 
Hospital of Lausanne and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(17)Dmitry Rogachev National Medical Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, 
Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(18)Cancer Centre for Children, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, 
NSW, Australia.
(19)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(20)Clinic of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(21)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Gilbert and 
Rose-Marie Chagoury School of Medicine, Lebanese American University, Beirut, 
Lebanon.
(22)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX.
(23)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(24)Pediatric Cancer and Blood Disorders Center of Armenia, Yeolyan Hematology 
and Oncology Center and Immune Oncology Research Institute, Yerevan, Armenia.
(25)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Safra Children's Hospital, 
Sheba Medical Center and Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
(26)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Children's 
Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljan, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(27)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, National Institute of 
Children's Diseases, Comenius University Children's Hospital, Bratislava, 
Slovakia.
(28)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Children's Hospital, 
School of Medicine University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(29)Azienda Policlinico, San Marco, Center of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, 
Catania, Italy.
(30)Immuno-Haematology and Rheumatology Unit, Necker Enfants Malades University 
Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, French National Reference 
Center for Primary Immune Deficiencies, Necker Enfants Malades University 
Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(31)Cancers and Blood Disorders Program, Children's Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(32)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Agia Sofia Children's Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.
(33)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Stollery Children Hospital, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(34)Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplant Center, University 
of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(35)Pediatric Pulmonology Unit and Ataxia Telangiectasia Center, The Edmond and 
Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(36)Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Second Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
(37)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University Hospital of 
Heraklion, Heraklion Crete, Greece.
(38)Division of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, CHU Sainte Justine, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.
(39)Clinical Department of Paediatric Bone Marrow Transplantation, Oncology and 
Haematology, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(40)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital 
Valencia, INCLIVA Biomedical Research Institute, Valencia, Spain.
(41)Department of Oncology, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(42)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Transplantation, Medical 
University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(43)Department of Genetics, Institut Curie, INSERM U830, and Université Paris 
Cité, Paris, France.
(44)Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(45)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Tel Aviv University 
School of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(46)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer 
Campus, Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(47)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Rigshospitalet University 
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(48)Department of Statistics and Data Science, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(49)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, St Anna Children's 
Hospital, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(50)St Anna Children's Cancer Research Institute, Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Blood. 2024 Sep 12;144(11):1137-1138. doi: 10.1182/blood.2024025756.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal-recessive disorder caused by 
pathogenic variants (PVs) of the ATM gene, predisposing children to 
hematological malignancies. We investigated their characteristics and outcomes 
to generate data-based treatment recommendations. In this multinational, 
observational study we report 202 patients aged ≤25 years with A-T and 
hematological malignancies from 25 countries. Ninety-one patients (45%) 
presented with mature B-cell lymphomas, 82 (41%) with acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia/lymphoma, 21 (10%) with Hodgkin lymphoma and 8 (4%) with other 
hematological malignancies. Four-year overall survival and event-free survival 
(EFS) were 50.8% (95% confidence interval [CI], 43.6-59.1) and 47.9% (95% CI 
40.8-56.2), respectively. Cure rates have not significantly improved over the 
last four decades (P = .76). The major cause of treatment failure was 
treatment-related mortality (TRM) with a four-year cumulative incidence of 25.9% 
(95% CI, 19.5-32.4). Germ line ATM PVs were categorized as null or hypomorphic 
and patients with available genetic data (n = 110) were classified as having 
absent (n = 81) or residual (n = 29) ATM kinase activity. Four-year EFS was 
39.4% (95% CI, 29-53.3) vs 78.7% (95% CI, 63.7-97.2), (P < .001), and TRM rates 
were 37.6% (95% CI, 26.4-48.7) vs 4.0% (95% CI, 0-11.8), (P = .017), for those 
with absent and residual ATM kinase activity, respectively. Absence of ATM 
kinase activity was independently associated with decreased EFS (HR = 0.362, 95% 
CI, 0.16-0.82; P = .009) and increased TRM (hazard ratio [HR] = 14.11, 95% CI, 
1.36-146.31; P = .029). Patients with A-T and leukemia/lymphoma may benefit from 
deescalated therapy for patients with absent ATM kinase activity and 
near-standard therapy regimens for those with residual kinase activity.

© 2024 American Society of Hematology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights are 
reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar 
technologies.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2024024283
PMID: 38917355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]