---
reference_id: "PMID:20351569"
title: The thyroid and the gut.
authors:
- Ebert EC
journal: J Clin Gastroenterol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d6bc3e
keywords:
- Gastrointestinal Motility/physiology
- Humans
- "Intestinal Diseases/etiology, physiopathology"
- "Thyroid Diseases/complications, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The thyroid and the gut.
**Authors:** Ebert EC
**Journal:** J Clin Gastroenterol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d6bc3e](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d6bc3e)

## Content

1. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2010 Jul;44(6):402-6. doi: 10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d6bc3e.

The thyroid and the gut.

Ebert EC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New 
Brunswick, NJ, USA. ebertec@umdnj.edu

Thyroid disease is common, and its effects on the gastrointestinal system are 
protean, affecting most hollow organs. Hashimoto disease, the most common cause 
of hypothyroidism, may be associated with an esophageal motility disorder 
presenting as dysphagia or heartburn. Dyspepsia, nausea, or vomiting may be due 
to delayed gastric emptying. Abdominal discomfort, flatulence, and bloating 
occur in those with bacterial overgrowth and improve with antibiotics. Reduced 
acid production may be due to autoimmune gastritis or low gastrin levels. 
Constipation may result from diminished motility, leading to an ileus, 
megacolon, or rarely pseudoobstruction. Ascites in myxedema is characterized by 
a high protein concentration. Graves' disease accounts for 60% to 80% of 
thyrotoxicosis. Hyperthyroidism is accompanied by normal gastric emptying with 
low acid production, partly due to an autoimmune gastritis with 
hypergastrinemia. Transit time from mouth to cecum is accelerated, resulting in 
diarrhea. Steatorrhea is due to hyperphagia and stimulation of the adrenergic 
system. Diarrhea in medullary carcinoma of the thyroid (MCT) may be due to 
elevated calcitonin, prostaglandins, or 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid. Ileal or 
colonic function may be abnormal. The esophagus may be compressed by benign 
processes, but more often by malignancies. MRI and CT scans are the best 
diagnostic modalities. The gastrointestinal manifestations of thyroid disease 
are generally due to reduced motility in hypothyroidism, increased motility in 
hyperthyroidism, autoimmune gastritis, or esophageal compression by a thyroid 
process. Symptoms usually resolve with treatment of the thyroid disease.

DOI: 10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d6bc3e
PMID: 20351569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]