---
reference_id: "PMID:25168790"
title: "Triadopathies: an emerging class of skeletal muscle diseases."
authors:
- Dowling JJ
- Lawlor MW
- Dirksen RT
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s13311-014-0300-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Malignant Hyperthermia/genetics
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- Muscular Diseases/genetics
- Muscular Dystrophies/genetics
- "Myopathies, Structural, Congenital/genetics"
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
- Selenoproteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Triadopathies: an emerging class of skeletal muscle diseases.
**Authors:** Dowling JJ, Lawlor MW, Dirksen RT
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13311-014-0300-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-014-0300-3)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2014 Oct;11(4):773-85. doi: 10.1007/s13311-014-0300-3.

Triadopathies: an emerging class of skeletal muscle diseases.

Dowling JJ(1), Lawlor MW, Dirksen RT.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology and Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, james.dowling@sickkids.ca.

The triad is a skeletal muscle substructure responsible for the regulation of 
excitation-contraction coupling. It is formed by the close apposition of the 
T-tubule and the terminal sarcoplasmic reticulum. A rapidly growing list of 
skeletal myopathies, here referred to as triadopathies, are caused by gene 
mutations in components of the triad. These disorders, at their root, are caused 
by defects in excitation contraction coupling and intracellular calcium 
homeostasis. Secondary abnormalities in triad structure and/or function are also 
reported in several muscle diseases, most notably certain muscular dystrophies. 
This review highlights the current understanding of both primary and secondary 
triadopathies, and identifies important concepts yet to be fully addressed in 
the field. The emphasis of the review is both on the pathogenesis of 
triadopathies and their potential treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-014-0300-3
PMCID: PMC4391390
PMID: 25168790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]