---
reference_id: "PMID:12444107"
title: SLUG (SNAI2) deletions in patients with Waardenburg disease.
authors:
- Sánchez-Martín M
- Rodríguez-García A
- Pérez-Losada J
- Sagrera A
- Read AP
- Sánchez-García I
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.25.3231
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Congenic"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor
- "Neural Crest/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/genetics
- Snail Family Transcription Factors
- "Transcription Factors/deficiency, genetics"
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
- Zebrafish Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SLUG (SNAI2) deletions in patients with Waardenburg disease.
**Authors:** Sánchez-Martín M, Rodríguez-García A, Pérez-Losada J, Sagrera A, Read AP, Sánchez-García I
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/11.25.3231](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/11.25.3231)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Dec 1;11(25):3231-6. doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.25.3231.

SLUG (SNAI2) deletions in patients with Waardenburg disease.

Sánchez-Martín M(1), Rodríguez-García A, Pérez-Losada J, Sagrera A, Read AP,
Sánchez-García I.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer (IBMCC), Centro de
Investigación del Cáncer, CSIC/Universidad de Salamanca, Campus Unamuno, 37007
Salamanca, Spain.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS; deafness with pigmentary abnormalities) is a
congenital disorder caused by defective function of the embryonic neural crest.
Depending on additional symptoms, WS is classified into four types: WS1, WS2,
WS3 and WS4. WS1 and WS3 are caused by mutations in PAX3, whereas WS2 is
heterogenous, being caused by mutations in the microphthalmia (MITF) gene in
some but not all affected families. The identification of Slugh, a zinc-finger
transcription factor expressed in migratory neural crest cells, as the gene
responsible for pigmentary disturbances in mice prompted us to analyse the role
of its human homologue SLUG in neural crest defects. Here we show that two
unrelated patients with WS2 have homozygous deletions in SLUG which result in
absence of the SLUG product. We further show that Mitf is present in
Slug-deficient cells and transactivates the SLUG promoter, and that Slugh and
Kit genetically interact in vivo. Our findings further define the locus
heterogeneity of WS2 and point to an essential role of SLUG in the development
of neural crest-derived human cell lineages: its absence causes the
auditory-pigmentary symptoms in at least some individuals with WS2.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/11.25.3231
PMID: 12444107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
