---
reference_id: "PMID:16138253"
title: "Congenital insensitivity to pain with Anhidrosis (NTRK1 mutation) and early onset renal disease: clinical report on three sibs with a 25-year follow-up in one of them."
authors:
- Barone R
- Lempereur L
- Anastasi M
- Parano E
- Pavone P
journal: Neuropediatrics
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1055/s-2005-872808
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- B-Lymphocytes/metabolism
- CD5 Antigens/metabolism
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypohidrosis/etiology, genetics"
- Immunoglobulin G/urine
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Mutation
- "Pain Insensitivity, Congenital/complications, genetics"
- "Receptor, trkA/genetics"
- Siblings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital insensitivity to pain with Anhidrosis (NTRK1 mutation) and early onset renal disease: clinical report on three sibs with a 25-year follow-up in one of them.
**Authors:** Barone R, Lempereur L, Anastasi M, Parano E, Pavone P
**Journal:** Neuropediatrics (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2005-872808](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2005-872808)

## Content

1. Neuropediatrics. 2005 Aug;36(4):270-3. doi: 10.1055/s-2005-872808.

Congenital insensitivity to pain with Anhidrosis (NTRK1 mutation) and early 
onset renal disease: clinical report on three sibs with a 25-year follow-up in 
one of them.

Barone R(1), Lempereur L, Anastasi M, Parano E, Pavone P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Catania, Italy.

Congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA) is an autosomal 
recessive disorder caused by mutations in the neurotrophic tyrosine receptor 
kinase 1 (NTRK1) gene which encodes the receptor for nerve growth factor (NGF). 
We report the clinical course in three sibs with CIPA and proven NTRK1 gene 
mutations with a follow-up over a 25-year period in one of them. They had the 
characteristic clinical features of an abnormally high pain threshold, and 
mental retardation; in addition their clinical course was marked by the 
occurrence of early onset renal disease with recurrent microhematuria and 
proteinuria and frequent observations of increased serum creatinine and blood 
urea levels. Light microscopy study of a renal biopsy performed in one of them 
at age of 20 months showed focal glomerulosclerosis, interstitial fibrosis and 
tubular atrophy. This patient and his younger brother died because of renal 
failure at the age of 25 years and 14 years, respectively. The sister still 
alive showed renal impairment and deep venous thrombosis associated with lupus 
anticoagulant activity, decrease of circulating autoreactive CD5 (+) B 
lymphocytes and increased urinary levels of IgG and kappa and lambda light 
chains, suggesting a possible defect in regulation of B-lymphocyte function. In 
the light of the NGF-related molecular defect, the extraneurological tissue 
involvement in CIPA might in part reflect dysregulation of immune mechanisms 
which possibly brings about a chronic inflammatory response. This, in turn, 
could result in renal disease which should be mentioned among the 
life-threatening complications associated with this disorder.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2005-872808
PMID: 16138253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]