---
reference_id: "PMID:11746288"
title: "Laboratory screening for electrolyte abnormalities and anemia in bulimia nervosa: a controlled study."
authors:
- Wolfe BE
- Metzger ED
- Levine JM
- Jimerson DC
journal: Int J Eat Disord
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1002/eat.1086
keywords:
- Adult
- "Bulimia/complications, diagnosis"
- Female
- Health Status
- Hemoglobins/analysis
- Humans
- Mass Screening
- Prevalence
- "Water-Electrolyte Imbalance/epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laboratory screening for electrolyte abnormalities and anemia in bulimia nervosa: a controlled study.
**Authors:** Wolfe BE, Metzger ED, Levine JM, Jimerson DC
**Journal:** Int J Eat Disord (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eat.1086](https://doi.org/10.1002/eat.1086)

## Content

1. Int J Eat Disord. 2001 Nov;30(3):288-93. doi: 10.1002/eat.1086.

Laboratory screening for electrolyte abnormalities and anemia in bulimia 
nervosa: a controlled study.

Wolfe BE(1), Metzger ED, Levine JM, Jimerson DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. bwolfe@caregroup.harvard.edu

OBJECTIVE: Abnormal eating patterns and recurrent purging behaviors can result 
in significant medical complications. The purpose of this study was to assess 
the frequency of abnormalities in clinical laboratory tests in patients with 
bulimia nervosa who reported being otherwise in good health.
METHODS: Subjects included nonhospitalized women (N = 74) who met criteria for 
bulimia nervosa outlined in the 3rd Rev. ed. of the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders. They also reported use of self-induced vomiting 
and/or laxatives as compensatory behaviors (purging subtype). The control group 
(N = 110) included female volunteers with no history of a psychiatric disorder. 
All subjects reported being in good medical health, were medication free, and 
were in a normal weight range. Blood samples were analyzed in the hospital 
clinical laboratory.
RESULTS: Compared with controls, patients showed more frequent occurrence of low 
values for serum potassium (6.8% vs. 0.9%; p <.05) and chloride (8.1% vs. 0.9%; 
p <.02). Electrolyte abnormalities occurred most often in patients with frequent 
bulimic episodes. Study groups did not differ significantly in frequency of 
abnormal hemoglobin concentrations.
DISCUSSION: These results help to clarify the expected frequency of electrolyte 
abnormalities in individuals with bulimia nervosa who report otherwise good 
medical health. The substantial frequency of hypokalemia and hypochloremia 
underscores the importance of an appropriate medical assessment for individuals 
with this disorder.

Copyright 2001 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/eat.1086
PMID: 11746288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]