---
reference_id: "PMID:2878984"
title: Folinic acid therapy in treatment of dihydropteridine reductase deficiency.
authors:
- Irons M
- Levy HL
- "O'Flynn ME"
- Stack CV
- Langlais PJ
- Butler IJ
- Milstien S
- Kaufman S
journal: J Pediatr
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(87)80289-5
keywords:
- 5-Hydroxytryptophan/therapeutic use
- Brain/metabolism
- Carbidopa/therapeutic use
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- "Folic Acid/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Leucovorin/therapeutic use
- Levodopa/therapeutic use
- Male
- "NADH, NADPH Oxidoreductases/deficiency"
- Neurotransmitter Agents/cerebrospinal fluid
- Phenylketonurias
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Folinic acid therapy in treatment of dihydropteridine reductase deficiency.
**Authors:** Irons M, Levy HL, O'Flynn ME, Stack CV, Langlais PJ, Butler IJ, Milstien S, Kaufman S
**Journal:** J Pediatr (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3476(87)80289-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3476(87)80289-5)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 1987 Jan;110(1):61-7. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(87)80289-5.

Folinic acid therapy in treatment of dihydropteridine reductase deficiency.

Irons M, Levy HL, O'Flynn ME, Stack CV, Langlais PJ, Butler IJ, Milstien S, 
Kaufman S.

We gave folinic acid to three siblings, and to a fourth child, who have or had 
dihydropteridine reductase (DHPR) deficiency. The youngest began folinic acid 
therapy in addition to neurotransmitter precursors and a 
phenylalanine-restricted diet at age 2 months, and at 2 years of age has near 
normal development without evidence of neurologic impairment. His older brother 
began similar treatment at 5 1/2 months of age, when early neurologic findings 
were evident. At age 6 years his mental retardation and neurologic impairment 
are less severe than reported in most patients with DHPR deficiency. Little 
improvement occurred in their sister, who first received treatment at 2 years of 
age, when she already had severe neurologic impairment. An unrelated boy with 
profound neurologic impairment showed subtle signs of improvement after he began 
treatment with folinic acid alone at age 9 years. These results provide evidence 
that folinic acid is important in the treatment of DHPR deficiency and, if begun 
early in infancy, may prevent irreversible neurologic damage. The mechanism of 
folinic acid action in DHPR deficiency may be to increase indirectly the 
synthesis of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3476(87)80289-5
PMID: 2878984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]