---
reference_id: "PMID:10512599"
title: Kawasaki disease.
authors:
- Newburger JW
- Burns JC
journal: Vasc Med
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1177/1358836X9900400310
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Newburger JW, Burns JC
**Journal:** Vasc Med (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1358836X9900400310](https://doi.org/10.1177/1358836X9900400310)

## Content

1. Vasc Med. 1999;4(3):187-202. doi: 10.1177/1358836X9900400310.

Kawasaki disease.

Newburger JW(1), Burns JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Kawasaki disease is a leading cause of acquired heart disease in children in the 
USA. An acute vasculitis of unknown etiology, it occurs predominantly in infancy 
and early childhood, and more rarely in teenagers. Coronary artery aneurysms or 
ectasia develop in approximately 15-25% of children with the disease. Treatment 
with intravenous gamma globulin, 2 g per kg, in the acute phase reduces this 
risk three- to fivefold. Angiographic resolution occurs in approximately 
one-half of aneurysmal arterial segments, but these show persistent histologic 
and functional abnormalities. The remainder continue to be aneurysmal, often 
with development of progressive stenosis or occlusion. The worst prognosis 
occurs in children with so-called 'giant aneurysms', i.e. those with a maximum 
diameter greater than 8 mm, because thrombosis is promoted both by sluggish 
blood flow within the massively dilated vascular space and by the frequent 
development of stenotic lesions. Serial stress tests with myocardial imaging are 
mandatory in the management of patients with Kawasaki disease and significant 
coronary artery disease to determine the need for coronary angiography and 
transcatheter interventions or coronary bypass surgery. Continued long-term 
surveillance in patients with and without detected coronary abnormalities is 
necessary to determine the natural history of Kawasaki disease.

DOI: 10.1177/1358836X9900400310
PMID: 10512599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]