---
reference_id: "PMID:33028033"
title: "Integrative Analysis of Cell Crosstalk within Follicular Lymphoma Cell Niche: Towards a Definition of the FL Supportive Synapse."
authors:
- Pangault C
- Amé-Thomas P
- Rossille D
- Dulong J
- Caron G
- Nonn C
- Chatonnet F
- Desmots F
- Launay V
- Lamy T
- Fest T
- Tarte K
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/cancers12102865
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrative Analysis of Cell Crosstalk within Follicular Lymphoma Cell Niche: Towards a Definition of the FL Supportive Synapse.
**Authors:** Pangault C, Amé-Thomas P, Rossille D, Dulong J, Caron G, Nonn C, Chatonnet F, Desmots F, Launay V, Lamy T, Fest T, Tarte K
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers12102865](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers12102865)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Oct 5;12(10):2865. doi: 10.3390/cancers12102865.

Integrative Analysis of Cell Crosstalk within Follicular Lymphoma Cell Niche: 
Towards a Definition of the FL Supportive Synapse.

Pangault C(1)(2), Amé-Thomas P(1)(3), Rossille D(1)(4), Dulong J(1)(4), Caron 
G(1)(2), Nonn C(1)(2), Chatonnet F(1)(2), Desmots F(1)(2), Launay V(5), Lamy 
T(1)(6), Fest T(1)(2), Tarte K(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)UMR_S 1236, Univ Rennes, INSERM, Établissement Français du Sang (EFS) 
Bretagne, LabEx IGO, F-35000 Rennes, France.
(2)Laboratoire Hématologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Rennes, F-35000 
Rennes, France.
(3)Laboratoire Immunologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Rennes, F-35000 
Rennes, France.
(4)Laboratoire Suivi Immunologique des Thérapeutiques Innovantes (SITI), Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire de Rennes, F-35000 Rennes, France.
(5)Service Hématologie Clinique, Centre Hospitalier Yves Le Fol, F-22000 Saint 
Brieuc, France.
(6)Service Hématologie Clinique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Rennes, 
F-35000 Rennes, France.

Follicular lymphoma (FL), the most frequent indolent non-Hodgkin's B cell 
lymphoma, is considered as a prototypical centrocyte-derived lymphoma, dependent 
on a specific microenvironment mimicking the normal germinal center (GC). In 
agreement, several FL genetic alterations affect the crosstalk between malignant 
B cells and surrounding cells, including stromal cells and follicular helper T 
cells (Tfh). In our study, we sought to deconvolute this complex FL supportive 
synapse by comparing the transcriptomic profiles of GC B cells, Tfh, and stromal 
cells, isolated from normal versus FL tissues, in order to identify 
tumor-specific pathways. In particular, we highlighted a high expression of IL-6 
and IL-7 in FL B cells that could favor the activation of FL Tfh overexpressing 
IFNG, able in turn to stimulate FL B cells without triggering MHC (major 
histocompatibility) class II expression. Moreover, the glycoprotein clusterin 
was found up-regulated in FL stromal cells and could promote FL B cell adhesion. 
Finally, besides its expression on Tfh, CD200 was found overexpressed on tumor B 
cells and could contribute to the induction of the immunosuppressive enzyme 
indoleamine-2,3 dioxygenase by CD200R-expressing dendritic cells. Altogether our 
findings led us to outline the contribution of major signals provided by the FL 
microenvironment and their interactions with malignant FL B cells.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12102865
PMCID: PMC7599549
PMID: 33028033

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.