---
reference_id: "PMID:1347148"
title: "Waardenburg's syndrome patients have mutations in the human homologue of the Pax-3 paired box gene."
authors:
- Tassabehji M
- Read AP
- Newton VE
- Harris R
- Balling R
- Gruss P
- Strachan T
journal: Nature
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1038/355635a0
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Homeobox/genetics"
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid"
- Transcription Factors
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Waardenburg's syndrome patients have mutations in the human homologue of the Pax-3 paired box gene.
**Authors:** Tassabehji M, Read AP, Newton VE, Harris R, Balling R, Gruss P, Strachan T
**Journal:** Nature (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1038/355635a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/355635a0)

## Content

1. Nature. 1992 Feb 13;355(6361):635-6. doi: 10.1038/355635a0.

Waardenburg's syndrome patients have mutations in the human homologue of the 
Pax-3 paired box gene.

Tassabehji M(1), Read AP, Newton VE, Harris R, Balling R, Gruss P, Strachan T.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Medical Genetics, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester, 
UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 1992 Feb 13;355(6361):590-1. doi: 10.1038/355590a0.

Waardenburg's syndrome (WS) is an autosomal dominant combination of deafness and 
pigmentary disturbances, probably caused by defective function of the embryonic 
neural crest. We have mapped one gene for WS to the distal part of chromosome 2. 
On the basis of their homologous chromosomal location, their close linkage to an 
alkaline phosphatase gene, and their related phenotype, we suggested that WS and 
the mouse mutant Splotch might be homologous. Splotch is caused by mutation in 
the mouse Pax-3 gene. This gene is one of a family of eight Pax genes known in 
mice which are involved in regulating embryonic development; each contains a 
highly conserved transcription control sequence, the paired box. Here we show 
that some families with WS have mutations in the human homologue of Pax-3. 
Mutations in a related gene, Pax-6, which, like Pax-3, has both a paired box and 
a paired-type homeobox sequence, cause the Small-eye mutation in mice and 
aniridia in man. Thus mutations in the Pax genes are important causes of human 
developmental defects.

DOI: 10.1038/355635a0
PMID: 1347148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]