---
reference_id: "PMID:38063857"
title: TFAP2 paralogs regulate midfacial development in part through a conserved ALX genetic pathway.
authors:
- Nguyen TT
- Mitchell JM
- Kiel MD
- Kenny CP
- Li H
- Jones KL
- Cornell RA
- Williams TJ
- Nichols JT
- Van Otterloo E
journal: Development
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1242/dev.202095
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Zebrafish/genetics, metabolism"
- Zebrafish Proteins/genetics
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- "Transcription Factor AP-2/genetics, metabolism"
- "Genes, Homeobox"
- Neural Crest
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TFAP2 paralogs regulate midfacial development in part through a conserved ALX genetic pathway.
**Authors:** Nguyen TT, Mitchell JM, Kiel MD, Kenny CP, Li H, Jones KL, Cornell RA, Williams TJ, Nichols JT, Van Otterloo E
**Journal:** Development (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.202095](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.202095)

## Content

1. Development. 2024 Jan 1;151(1):dev202095. doi: 10.1242/dev.202095. Epub 2024
Jan  2.

TFAP2 paralogs regulate midfacial development in part through a conserved ALX 
genetic pathway.

Nguyen TT(1)(2)(3)(4), Mitchell JM(5), Kiel MD(1)(2)(3), Kenny CP(6), Li H(5), 
Jones KL(7), Cornell RA(8), Williams TJ(5)(7)(9), Nichols JT(5), Van Otterloo 
E(1)(2)(3)(4)(10).

Author information:
(1)Iowa Institute for Oral Health Research, College of Dentistry and Dental 
Clinics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(2)Department of Periodontics, College of Dentistry and Dental Clinics, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(4)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Genetics, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA 52242, USA.
(5)Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical 
Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(6)Department of Surgery, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA 52242, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(8)Department of Oral Health Sciences, University of Washington, School of 
Dentistry, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(9)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(10)Craniofacial Anomalies Research Center, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 
52242, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jun 16:2023.06.16.545376. doi: 10.1101/2023.06.16.545376.

Cranial neural crest development is governed by positional gene regulatory 
networks (GRNs). Fine-tuning of the GRN components underlies facial shape 
variation, yet how those networks in the midface are connected and activated 
remain poorly understood. Here, we show that concerted inactivation of Tfap2a 
and Tfap2b in the murine neural crest, even during the late migratory phase, 
results in a midfacial cleft and skeletal abnormalities. Bulk and single-cell 
RNA-seq profiling reveal that loss of both TFAP2 family members dysregulates 
numerous midface GRN components involved in midface morphogenesis, patterning 
and differentiation. Notably, Alx1, Alx3 and Alx4 (ALX) transcript levels are 
reduced, whereas ChIP-seq analyses suggest TFAP2 family members directly and 
positively regulate ALX gene expression. Tfap2a, Tfap2b and ALX co-expression in 
midfacial neural crest cells of both mouse and zebrafish implies conservation of 
this regulatory axis across vertebrates. Consistent with this notion, tfap2a 
zebrafish mutants present with abnormal alx3 expression patterns, Tfap2a binds 
ALX loci and tfap2a-alx3 genetic interactions are observed. Together, these data 
demonstrate TFAP2 paralogs regulate vertebrate midfacial development in part by 
activating expression of ALX transcription factor genes.

© 2024. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.202095
PMCID: PMC10820886
PMID: 38063857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.