---
reference_id: "PMID:16088909"
title: Schmid type of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia and COL10A1 mutations--findings in 10 patients.
authors:
- Mäkitie O
- Susic M
- Ward L
- Barclay C
- Glorieux FH
- Cole WG
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30855
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schmid type of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia and COL10A1 mutations--findings in 10 patients.
**Authors:** Mäkitie O, Susic M, Ward L, Barclay C, Glorieux FH, Cole WG
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30855](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30855)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Sep 1;137A(3):241-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30855.

Schmid type of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia and COL10A1 mutations--findings in 
10 patients.

Mäkitie O(1), Susic M, Ward L, Barclay C, Glorieux FH, Cole WG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomic Biology, Research Institute, Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. outi.makitie@helsinki.fi

The Schmid type of metaphyseal chondrodyplasia (MCDS) is characterized by short 
stature, widened growth plates, and bowing of the long bones. It results from 
autosomal dominant mutations of COL10A1, the gene which encodes alpha1(X) chains 
of type X collagen. We report the clinical and radiographic findings in 10 
patients with MCDS and COL10A1 mutations. Six patients had lower limb 
deformities, which necessitated orthopedic surgeries in all of them. One patient 
demonstrated no deformities and normal stature at age 11 years (height -1.2 SDS) 
while the others manifested severe short stature (<-3.5 SDS). Radiographs showed 
metaphyseal changes which were most pronounced at the hips and knees. Five of 
the identified 10 mutations in COL10A1 were novel. Six mutations resulted in 
truncation of the NC1 domain while four mutations were single amino-acid 
substitutions. Our findings suggest that COL10A1 mutations result in a uniform 
pattern of growth plate abnormalities. However, the clinical variability in 
severity among affected individuals is greater than previously thought.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30855
PMID: 16088909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]