---
reference_id: "PMID:39276676"
title: "Gene therapy for the leukodystrophies: From preclinical animal studies to clinical trials."
authors:
- Metovic J
- Li Y
- Gong Y
- Eichler F
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurot.2024.e00443
keywords:
- "Genetic Therapy/methods, trends"
- Humans
- Animals
- Clinical Trials as Topic/methods
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene therapy for the leukodystrophies: From preclinical animal studies to clinical trials.
**Authors:** Metovic J, Li Y, Gong Y, Eichler F
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurot.2024.e00443](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurot.2024.e00443)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2024 Jul;21(4):e00443. doi: 10.1016/j.neurot.2024.e00443. 
Epub 2024 Sep 13.

Gene therapy for the leukodystrophies: From preclinical animal studies to 
clinical trials.

Metovic J(1), Li Y(1), Gong Y(1), Eichler F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: feichler@mgb.org.

Leukodystrophies are progressive single gene disorders affecting the white 
matter of the brain. Several gene therapy trials are in progress to address the 
urgent unmet need for this patient population. We performed a comprehensive 
literature review of all gene therapy clinical trials listed in 
www.clinicaltrials.gov through August 2024, and the relevant preclinical studies 
that enabled clinical translation. Of the approximately 50 leukodystrophies 
described to date, only eight have existing gene therapy clinical trials: 
metachromatic leukodystrophy, X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, globoid cell 
leukodystrophy, Canavan disease, giant axonal neuropathy, GM2 gangliosidoses, 
Alexander disease and Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. What led to the emergence of 
gene therapy trials for these specific disorders? What preclinical data or 
disease context was enabling? For each of these eight disorders, we first 
describe its pathophysiology and clinical presentation. We discuss the impact of 
gene therapy delivery route, targeted cell type, delivery modality, dosage, and 
timing on therapeutic efficacy. We note that use of allogeneic hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation in some leukodystrophies allowed for an accelerated 
path to clinic even in the absence of available animal models. In other 
leukodystrophies, small and large animal model studies enabled clinical 
translation of experimental gene therapies. Human clinical trials for the 
leukodystrophies include ex vivo lentiviral gene delivery, in vivo AAV-mediated 
gene delivery, and intrathecal antisense oligonucleotide approaches. We outline 
adverse events associated with each modality focusing specifically on 
genotoxicity and immunotoxicity. We review monitoring and management of events 
related to insertional mutagenesis and immune responses. The data presented in 
this review show that gene therapy, while promising, requires systematic 
monitoring to account for the precarious disease biology and the adverse events 
associated with new technology.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurot.2024.e00443
PMCID: PMC11418141
PMID: 39276676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest F.S. Eichler 
receives research support from NINDS (R01NS072446, R01NS082331, U54NS115052), 
institutional contracts from ASPA Therapeutics, Sanofi, Ionis, bluebird bio and 
Minoryx Therapeutics, and performs personal consulting for Sanofi, ASPA 
Therapeutics, UpToDate, Leal, Takeda, Atlas Venture, Acadia Pharmaceuticals and 
SwanBio Therapeutics.