---
reference_id: "PMID:21835786"
title: Varicella-zoster virus immediate-early protein ORF61 abrogates the IRF3-mediated innate immune response through degradation of activated IRF3.
authors:
- Zhu H
- Zheng C
- Xing J
- Wang S
- Li S
- Lin R
- Mossman KL
journal: J Virol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1128/JVI.05098-11
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella-zoster virus immediate-early protein ORF61 abrogates the IRF3-mediated innate immune response through degradation of activated IRF3.
**Authors:** Zhu H, Zheng C, Xing J, Wang S, Li S, Lin R, Mossman KL
**Journal:** J Virol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.05098-11](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.05098-11)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(21):11079-89. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05098-11. Epub 2011 Aug
10.

Varicella-zoster virus immediate-early protein ORF61 abrogates the IRF3-mediated 
innate immune response through degradation of activated IRF3.

Zhu H(1), Zheng C, Xing J, Wang S, Li S, Lin R, Mossman KL.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Virology and Viral Immunology Research Group, State Key Laboratory 
of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 
430071, China.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection of differentiated cells within the host 
and establishment of latency likely requires evasion of innate immunity and 
limits secretion of antiviral cytokines. Here we report that its immediate-early 
protein ORF61 antagonizes the beta interferon (IFN-β) pathway. VZV infection 
down-modulated the Sendai virus (SeV)-activated IFN-β pathway, including mRNA of 
IFN-β and its downstream interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), ISG54 and ISG56. 
Through a primary screening of VZV genes, we found that ORF61 inhibited 
SeV-mediated activation of IFN-β and ISRE (IFN-stimulated response element) 
promoter activities but only slightly affected NF-κB promoter activity, implying 
that the IFN-β pathway may be blocked in the IRF3 branch. An indirect 
immunofluorescence assay demonstrated that ectopic expression of ORF61 abrogated 
the detection of IRF3 in SeV-infected cells; however, it did not affect 
endogenous dormant IRF3 in noninfected cells. Additionally, ORF61 was shown to 
be partially colocalized with activated IRF3 in the nucleus upon treatment with 
MG132, an inhibitor of proteasomes, and the direct interaction between ORF61 and 
activated IRF3 was confirmed by a coimmunoprecipitation assay. Furthermore, 
Western blot analysis demonstrated that activated IRF3 was ubiquitinated in the 
presence of ORF61, suggesting that ORF61 degraded phosphorylated IRF3 via a 
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR 
(RT-PCR) analysis demonstrated that the level of ISG54 and ISG56 mRNAs was also 
downregulated by ORF61. Taken together, our results convincingly demonstrate 
that ORF61 down-modulates the IRF3-mediated IFN-β pathway by degradation of 
activated IRF3 via direct interaction, which may contribute to the pathogenesis 
of VZV infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05098-11
PMCID: PMC3194975
PMID: 21835786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]