---
reference_id: "PMID:17665002"
title: "Clinical, neurovascular and neuropathological features in Sneddon's syndrome."
authors:
- Marinho JL
- Piovesan EJ
- Leite Neto MP
- Kotze LR
- Noronha Ld
- Twardowschy CA
- Lange MC
- Scola RH
- Zétola VH
- Nóvak EM
- Werneck LC
journal: Arq Neuropsiquiatr
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1590/s0004-282x2007000300005
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Antiphospholipid/blood"
- Cerebral Angiography
- Echocardiography
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Sneddon Syndrome/blood, diagnosis, pathology"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, neurovascular and neuropathological features in Sneddon's syndrome.
**Authors:** Marinho JL, Piovesan EJ, Leite Neto MP, Kotze LR, Noronha Ld, Twardowschy CA, Lange MC, Scola RH, Zétola VH, Nóvak EM, Werneck LC
**Journal:** Arq Neuropsiquiatr (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1590/s0004-282x2007000300005](https://doi.org/10.1590/s0004-282x2007000300005)

## Content

1. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2007 Jun;65(2B):390-5. doi:
10.1590/s0004-282x2007000300005.

Clinical, neurovascular and neuropathological features in Sneddon's syndrome.

Marinho JL(1), Piovesan EJ, Leite Neto MP, Kotze LR, Noronha Ld, Twardowschy CA, 
Lange MC, Scola RH, Zétola VH, Nóvak EM, Werneck LC.

Author information:
(1)Ribeirão Preto Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, 
SP, Brazil.

Sneddon's syndrome (SS) is characterized by ischemic cerebrovascular episodes 
and livedo reticularis. It is more common in young women and can also be 
associated with valvulopathy, a history of spontaneous abortion, renal 
involvement and vascular dementia. We describe three cases of young women with 
this disease. The patients had repeated ischemic cerebral episodes, livedo 
reticularis and thrombocytopenia. CT and MRI showed strokes and cerebral 
atrophy. Autopsy in one of the patients revealed cerebral infarctions. 
Anticardiolipin antibodies were detected in two patients. Antiphospholipid 
antibodies may be found in some patients with ischemic cerebrovascular events 
and livedo reticularis. SS may thus be associated with antiphospholipid 
syndrome. We described three new cases of SS and discuss the pathophysiology of 
this disease.

DOI: 10.1590/s0004-282x2007000300005
PMID: 17665002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]