---
reference_id: "PMID:30982963"
title: CGRP and the Trigeminal System in Migraine.
authors:
- Iyengar S
- Johnson KW
- Ossipov MH
- Aurora SK
journal: Headache
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/head.13529
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcitonin Gene-Related Peptide/metabolism
- Humans
- "Migraine Disorders/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Neuroglia/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
- Nociception/physiology
- "Trigeminal Ganglion/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Trigeminal Nerve/metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CGRP and the Trigeminal System in Migraine.
**Authors:** Iyengar S, Johnson KW, Ossipov MH, Aurora SK
**Journal:** Headache (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/head.13529](https://doi.org/10.1111/head.13529)

## Content

1. Headache. 2019 May;59(5):659-681. doi: 10.1111/head.13529. Epub 2019 Apr 14.

CGRP and the Trigeminal System in Migraine.

Iyengar S(1), Johnson KW(1), Ossipov MH(2), Aurora SK(1).

Author information:
(1)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Syneos Health, Raleigh, NC, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this narrative review is to provide an overview of 
migraine pathophysiology, with an emphasis on the role of calcitonin 
gene-related peptide (CGRP) within the context of the trigeminovascular system.
BACKGROUND: Migraine is a prevalent and disabling neurological disease that is 
characterized in part by intense, throbbing, and unilateral headaches. Despite 
recent advances in understanding its pathophysiology, migraine still represents 
an unmet medical need, as it is often underrecognized and undertreated. Although 
CGRP has been known to play a pivotal role in migraine for the last 2 decades, 
this has now received more interest spurred by the early clinical successes of 
drugs that block CGRP signaling in the trigeminovascular system.
DESIGN: This narrative review presents an update on the role of CGRP within the 
trigeminovascular system. PubMed searches were used to find recent (ie, 2016 to 
November 2018) published articles presenting new study results. Review articles 
are also included not as primary references but to bring these to the attention 
of the reader. Original research is referenced in describing the core of the 
narrative, and review articles are used to support ancillary points.
RESULTS: The trigeminal ganglion neurons provide the connection between the 
periphery, stemming from the interface between the primary afferent fibers of 
the trigeminal ganglion and the meningeal vasculature and the central terminals 
in the trigeminal nucleus caudalis. The neuropeptide CGRP is abundant in 
trigeminal ganglion neurons, and is released from the peripheral nerve and 
central nerve terminals as well as being secreted within the trigeminal 
ganglion. Release of CGRP from the peripheral terminals initiates a cascade of 
events that include increased synthesis of nitric oxide and sensitization of the 
trigeminal nerves. Secreted CGRP in the trigeminal ganglion interacts with 
adjacent neurons and satellite glial cells to perpetuate peripheral 
sensitization, and can drive central sensitization of the second-order neurons. 
A shift in central sensitization from activity-dependent to activity-independent 
central sensitization may indicate a mechanism driving the progression of 
episodic migraine to chronic migraine. The pathophysiology of cluster headache 
is much more obscure than that of migraine, but emerging evidence suggests that 
it may also involve hypersensitivity of the trigeminovascular system. Ongoing 
clinical studies with therapies targeted at CGRP will provide additional, 
valuable insights into the pathophysiology of this disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: CGRP plays an essential role in the pathophysiology of migraine. 
Treatments that interfere with the functioning of CGRP in the peripheral 
trigeminal system are effective against migraine. Blocking sensitization of the 
trigeminal nerve by attenuating CGRP activity in the periphery may be sufficient 
to block a migraine attack. Additionally, the potential exists that this 
therapeutic strategy may also alleviate cluster headache as well.

© 2019 The Authors. Headache: The Journal of Head and Face Pain published by 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Headache Society.

DOI: 10.1111/head.13529
PMCID: PMC6593989
PMID: 30982963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]