---
reference_id: "PMID:33243837"
title: "Autonomic dysfunction in 'long COVID': rationale, physiology and management strategies."
authors:
- Dani M
- Dirksen A
- Taraborrelli P
- Torocastro M
- Panagopoulos D
- Sutton R
- Lim PB
journal: Clin Med (Lond)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7861/clinmed.2020-0896
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autonomic dysfunction in 'long COVID': rationale, physiology and management strategies.
**Authors:** Dani M, Dirksen A, Taraborrelli P, Torocastro M, Panagopoulos D, Sutton R, Lim PB
**Journal:** Clin Med (Lond) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7861/clinmed.2020-0896](https://doi.org/10.7861/clinmed.2020-0896)

## Content

1. Clin Med (Lond). 2021 Jan;21(1):e63-e67. doi: 10.7861/clinmed.2020-0896. Epub 
2020 Nov 26.

Autonomic dysfunction in 'long COVID': rationale, physiology and management 
strategies.

Dani M(1), Dirksen A(2), Taraborrelli P(2), Torocastro M(2), Panagopoulos D(2), 
Sutton R(3), Lim PB(2).

Author information:
(1)Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK and Imperial College London, London, UK 
melanie.dani@nhs.net.
(2)Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.
(3)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.

The SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic has caused unprecedented morbidity, mortality 
and global disruption. Following the initial surge of infections, focus shifted 
to managing the longer-term sequelae of illness in survivors. 'Post-acute COVID' 
(known colloquially as 'long COVID') is emerging as a prevalent syndrome. It 
encompasses a plethora of debilitating symptoms (including breathlessness, chest 
pain, palpitations and orthostatic intolerance) which can last for weeks or more 
following mild illness. We describe a series of individuals with symptoms of 
'long COVID', and we posit that this condition may be related to a virus- or 
immune-mediated disruption of the autonomic nervous system resulting in 
orthostatic intolerance syndromes. We suggest that all physicians should be 
equipped to recognise such cases, appreciate the symptom burden and provide 
supportive management. We present our rationale for an underlying impaired 
autonomic physiology post-COVID-19 and suggest means of management.

© Royal College of Physicians 2021. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.7861/clinmed.2020-0896
PMCID: PMC7850225
PMID: 33243837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]