---
reference_id: "PMID:36831560"
title: "Neurofibromatosis Type 1: Pediatric Aspects and Review of Genotype-Phenotype Correlations."
authors:
- Peduto C
- Zanobio M
- Nigro V
- Perrotta S
- Piluso G
- Santoro C
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers15041217
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurofibromatosis Type 1: Pediatric Aspects and Review of Genotype-Phenotype Correlations.
**Authors:** Peduto C, Zanobio M, Nigro V, Perrotta S, Piluso G, Santoro C
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers15041217](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15041217)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Feb 14;15(4):1217. doi: 10.3390/cancers15041217.

Neurofibromatosis Type 1: Pediatric Aspects and Review of Genotype-Phenotype 
Correlations.

Peduto C(1), Zanobio M(1), Nigro V(1)(2), Perrotta S(3), Piluso G(1), Santoro 
C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 
Via Luigi de Crecchio 7, 80138 Naples, Italy.
(2)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Via Campi Flegrei 34, 
80078 Pozzuoli, Italy.
(3)Department of Women's and Children's Health and General and Specialized 
Surgery, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Via Luigi de Crecchio 2, 
80138 Naples, Italy.
(4)Clinic of Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry, Department of Physical and 
Mental Health, and Preventive Medicine, University of Campania "Luigi 
Vanvitelli", Largo Madonna delle Grazie 1, 80138 Naples, Italy.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant condition, with a birth 
incidence of approximately 1:2000-3000, caused by germline pathogenic variants 
in NF1, a tumor suppressor gene encoding neurofibromin, a negative regulator of 
the RAS/MAPK pathway. This explains why NF1 is included in the group of 
RASopathies and shares several clinical features with Noonan syndrome. Here, we 
describe the main clinical characteristics and complications associated with 
NF1, particularly those occurring in pediatric age. NF1 has complete penetrance 
and shows wide inter- and intrafamilial phenotypic variability and age-dependent 
appearance of manifestations. Clinical presentation and history of NF1 are 
multisystemic and highly unpredictable, especially in the first years of life 
when penetrance is still incomplete. In this scenario of extreme phenotypic 
variability, some genotype-phenotype associations need to be taken into 
consideration, as they strongly impact on genetic counseling and prognostication 
of the disease. We provide a synthetic review, based on the most recent 
literature data, of all known genotype-phenotype correlations from a genetic and 
clinical perspective. Molecular diagnosis is fundamental for the confirmation of 
doubtful clinical diagnoses, especially in the light of recently revised 
diagnostic criteria, and for the early identification of genotypes, albeit few, 
that correlate with specific phenotypes.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15041217
PMCID: PMC9954221
PMID: 36831560

Conflict of interest statement: C.S.: paid consulting or advisory role for 
AstraZeneca. The other authors declare no conflict of interest.