---
reference_id: "PMID:37195288"
title: "ANK2 loss-of-function variants are associated with epilepsy, and lead to impaired axon initial segment plasticity and hyperactive network activity in hiPSC-derived neuronal networks."
authors:
- Teunissen MWA
- Lewerissa E
- van Hugte EJH
- Wang S
- Ockeloen CW
- Koolen DA
- Pfundt R
- Marcelis CLM
- Brilstra E
- Howe JL
- Scherer SW
- Le Guillou X
- Bilan F
- Primiano M
- Roohi J
- Piton A
- de Saint Martin A
- Baer S
- Seiffert S
- Platzer K
- Jamra RA
- Syrbe S
- Doering JH
- Lakhani S
- Nangia S
- Gilissen C
- Vermeulen RJ
- Rouhl RPW
- Brunner HG
- Willemsen MH
- Nadif Kasri N
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad081
keywords:
- Humans
- Axon Initial Segment/metabolism
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- "Ankyrins/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurons/metabolism
- "Epilepsy/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ANK2 loss-of-function variants are associated with epilepsy, and lead to impaired axon initial segment plasticity and hyperactive network activity in hiPSC-derived neuronal networks.
**Authors:** Teunissen MWA, Lewerissa E, van Hugte EJH, Wang S, Ockeloen CW, Koolen DA, Pfundt R, Marcelis CLM, Brilstra E, Howe JL, Scherer SW, Le Guillou X, Bilan F, Primiano M, Roohi J, Piton A, de Saint Martin A, Baer S, Seiffert S, Platzer K, Jamra RA, Syrbe S, Doering JH, Lakhani S, Nangia S, Gilissen C, Vermeulen RJ, Rouhl RPW, Brunner HG, Willemsen MH, Nadif Kasri N
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddad081](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddad081)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Jul 4;32(14):2373-2385. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad081.

ANK2 loss-of-function variants are associated with epilepsy, and lead to
impaired axon initial segment plasticity and hyperactive network activity in
hiPSC-derived neuronal networks.

Teunissen MWA(1)(2), Lewerissa E(3), van Hugte EJH(3), Wang S(3), Ockeloen
CW(4), Koolen DA(3), Pfundt R(4), Marcelis CLM(4), Brilstra E(5), Howe JL(6),
Scherer SW(6)(7), Le Guillou X(8), Bilan F(8)(9), Primiano M(10), Roohi
J(10)(11), Piton A(12)(13), de Saint Martin A(13)(14), Baer S(13)(14), Seiffert
S(15), Platzer K(16), Jamra RA(16), Syrbe S(17), Doering JH(17), Lakhani S(18),
Nangia S(19), Gilissen C(4), Vermeulen RJ(1), Rouhl RPW(1)(2)(20), Brunner
HG(2)(3)(20)(21), Willemsen MH(4), Nadif Kasri N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, HX
6229, The Netherlands.
(2)Academic Center for Epileptology Kempenhaeghe/Maastricht University Medical
Center, Heeze 5591 VE, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition, and Behaviour, Nijmegen, HB 6500, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, GA
6525, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, CX
3584, The Netherlands.
(6)The Centre for Applied Genomics and Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital
for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(7)McLaughlin Centre and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3H7, Canada.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Poitiers,
Poitiers 86000, France.
(9)Laboratory of Experimental and Clinical Neurosciences University of Poitiers,
INSERM U1084, Poitiers 86000, France.
(10)Department of Clinical Genetics, Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital of New
York-Presbytarian, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
(11)Clinical Genetics, Kaiser Permanente Mid-Atlantic Permanente Medical Group,
Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
(12)Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Institut de Génétique Médicale d'Alsace
(IGMA), Hôspitaux Universitaire de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, BP 426 67091, France.
(13)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch
67400, France.
(14)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Strasbourg University Hospital, Hôspital
de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, BP 426 67091, France.
(15)Department of Neurology and Epileptology, Hertie Institute for Clinical
Brain Research, Tuebingen, 72076, Germany.
(16)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Leipzig, Leipzig
04103, Germany.
(17)Division of Paediatric Epileptology, Centre for Paediatric and Adolescent
Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(18)Department of neurogenetics, Weill Cornell Medicine, Brain and Mind Research
Institute, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Child Neurology, New York Presbyterian
Hospital-Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
(20)School for Mental Health and Neuroscience, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, MD 6200, the Netherlands.
(21)Department of Clinical Genetics and GROW School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, MD
6299, the Netherlands.

PURPOSE: To characterize a novel neurodevelopmental syndrome due to
loss-of-function (LoF) variants in Ankyrin 2 (ANK2), and to explore the effects
on neuronal network dynamics and homeostatic plasticity in human-induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons.
METHODS: We collected clinical and molecular data of 12 individuals with
heterozygous de novo LoF variants in ANK2. We generated a heterozygous LoF
allele of ANK2 using CRISPR/Cas9 in human-induced pluripotent stem cells
(hiPSCs). HiPSCs were differentiated into excitatory neurons, and we measured
their spontaneous electrophysiological responses using micro-electrode arrays
(MEAs). We also characterized their somatodendritic morphology and axon initial
segment (AIS) structure and plasticity.
RESULTS: We found a broad neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD), comprising
intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders and early onset epilepsy.
Using MEAs, we found that hiPSC-derived neurons with heterozygous LoF of ANK2
show a hyperactive and desynchronized neuronal network. ANK2-deficient neurons
also showed increased somatodendritic structures and altered AIS structure of
which its plasticity is impaired upon activity-dependent modulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Phenotypic characterization of patients with de novo ANK2 LoF
variants defines a novel NDD with early onset epilepsy. Our functional in vitro
data of ANK2-deficient human neurons show a specific neuronal phenotype in which
reduced ANKB expression leads to hyperactive and desynchronized neuronal network
activity, increased somatodendritic complexity and AIS structure and impaired
activity-dependent plasticity of the AIS.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddad081
PMCID: PMC10321384
PMID: 37195288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
