---
reference_id: "PMID:35327681"
title: "Dupilumab Improves Pruritus in Netherton Syndrome: A Case Study."
authors:
- Inaba Y
- Kanazawa N
- Muraoka K
- Yariyama A
- Kawaguchi A
- Kunimoto K
- Kaminaka C
- Yamamoto Y
- Tsujioka K
- Yoshida A
- Yanagi T
- Jinnin M
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/children9030310
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dupilumab Improves Pruritus in Netherton Syndrome: A Case Study.
**Authors:** Inaba Y, Kanazawa N, Muraoka K, Yariyama A, Kawaguchi A, Kunimoto K, Kaminaka C, Yamamoto Y, Tsujioka K, Yoshida A, Yanagi T, Jinnin M
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children9030310](https://doi.org/10.3390/children9030310)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2022 Feb 24;9(3):310. doi: 10.3390/children9030310.

Dupilumab Improves Pruritus in Netherton Syndrome: A Case Study.

Inaba Y(1), Kanazawa N(1)(2), Muraoka K(1)(3), Yariyama A(1), Kawaguchi A(1), 
Kunimoto K(1), Kaminaka C(1), Yamamoto Y(1), Tsujioka K(3), Yoshida A(4), Yanagi 
T(5), Jinnin M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama 641-0012, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya 663-8501, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Japanese Red Cross Society Wakayama Medical 
Center, Wakayama 640-8558, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Japanese Red Cross Society Wakayama Medical Center, 
Wakayama 640-8558, Japan.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

The patient was a 26-year-old male. He had red and scaling skin of the entire 
body since birth, as well as an elevated level of serum IgE. Genetic testing 
revealed a mutation in the SPINK5 gene, which had confirmed the diagnosis with 
Netherton syndrome. He has had significant pruritis since birth, and 
subsequently had symptoms of sleeping disorders and concentration difficulty 
throughout the day. Since treatment with various antihistamines were not 
effective, we administered dupilumab and found that it was effective in 
immediate elimination of pruritus and gradual reduction of the rash. Dupilumab 
has been administered for one year without any adverse events or recurrence of 
symptoms. Although studies have previously described cases who used dupilumab 
for Netherton syndrome, reported effects have been limited or transient. 
Additional studies are needed to confirm the effect of dupilumab for Netherton 
syndrome, which currently lack any effective treatment strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/children9030310
PMCID: PMC8946880
PMID: 35327681

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.