---
reference_id: "PMID:2243144"
title: "Schindler disease: the molecular lesion in the alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase gene that causes an infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy."
authors:
- Wang AM
- Schindler D
- Desnick R
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1172/JCI114901
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Blotting, Northern"
- "Blotting, Southern"
- Cell Line
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Hexosaminidases/deficiency, genetics"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Nervous System Diseases/enzymology, genetics"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- alpha-N-Acetylgalactosaminidase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schindler disease: the molecular lesion in the alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase gene that causes an infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy.
**Authors:** Wang AM, Schindler D, Desnick R
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI114901](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI114901)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1990 Nov;86(5):1752-6. doi: 10.1172/JCI114901.

Schindler disease: the molecular lesion in the alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase 
gene that causes an infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy.

Wang AM(1), Schindler D, Desnick R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York 10029.

Schindler disease is a recently recognized infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy 
resulting from the deficient activity of the lysosomal hydrolase, 
alpha-N-acetylgalctosaminidase (alpha-GalNAc). The recent isolation and 
expression of the full-length cDNA encoding alpha-GalNAc facilitated the 
identification of the molecular lesions in the affected brothers from family D, 
the first cases described with this autosomal recessive disease. Southern and 
Northern hybridization analyses of DNA and RNA from the affected homozygotes 
revealed a grossly normal alpha-GalNAc gene structure and normal transcript 
sizes and amounts. Therefore, the alpha-GalNAc transcript from an affected 
homozygote was reverse-transcribed, amplified by the polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR), and sequenced. A single G to A transition at nucleotide 973 was detected 
in multiple subclones containing the PCR products. This point mutation resulted 
in a glutamic acid to lysine substitution in residue 325 (E325K) of the 
alpha-GalNAc polypeptide. The base substitution was confirmed by dot blot 
hybridization analyses of PCR-amplified genomic DNA from family members with 
allele-specific oligonucleotides. Furthermore, transient expression of an 
alpha-GalNAc construct containing the E325K mutation resulted in the expression 
of an immunoreactive polypeptide which had no detectable alpha-GalNAc activity.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI114901
PMCID: PMC296929
PMID: 2243144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]