---
reference_id: "PMID:26386968"
title: "Systemic thrombolysis in anterior spinal artery syndrome: what has to be considered?"
authors:
- Koch M
- Sepp D
- Prothmann S
- Poppert H
- Seifert CL
journal: J Thromb Thrombolysis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s11239-015-1281-8
keywords:
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Aortic Dissection/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography
- Male
- "Peripheral Arterial Disease/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, etiology"
- "Spinal Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Syndrome
- Thrombolytic Therapy
- "Tissue Plasminogen Activator/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic thrombolysis in anterior spinal artery syndrome: what has to be considered?
**Authors:** Koch M, Sepp D, Prothmann S, Poppert H, Seifert CL
**Journal:** J Thromb Thrombolysis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11239-015-1281-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11239-015-1281-8)

## Content

1. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2016 Apr;41(3):511-3. doi: 10.1007/s11239-015-1281-8.

Systemic thrombolysis in anterior spinal artery syndrome: what has to be
considered?

Koch M(1), Sepp D(1), Prothmann S(2), Poppert H(1), Seifert CL(3).

Author information:
(1)Klinikum rechts der Isar, Neurologische Klinik und Poliklinik, Technische
Universität München, Ismaninger Str. 22, 81675, Munich, Germany.
(2)Abteilung für Neuroradiologie, Institut für Röntgendiagnostik, Technische
Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(3)Klinikum rechts der Isar, Neurologische Klinik und Poliklinik, Technische
Universität München, Ismaninger Str. 22, 81675, Munich, Germany.
c.seifert@lrz.tu-muenchen.de.

Anterior spinal artery syndrome (ASAS) often leads to complete motor paralysis
with poor clinical outcome. There is a lack of controlled clinical trials on
acute treatment strategies in ASAS. However, systemic thrombolysis with
recombinant tissue-plasminogen activator (rt-PA) might be a useful therapeutic
option in ASAS. We report the management of a patient with ASAS below thoracic
level 10, who was treated with intravenous thrombolysis. An 81 year old patient
presented with flaccid paraplegia. After exclusion of aortal dissection, spinal
tumour or haemorrhage, the patient was treated with intravenous rt-PA 3 h 40 min
after symptom onset. The follow up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed
spinal infarction below thoracic segment 10. In the clinical course, the patient
partially recovered lower limb muscle strength and was able to walk with
assistance. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case in the
literature of ASAS with MRI-proven spinal ischemia and the application of rt-PA.
Systemic thrombolysis seems to be justifiable in patients with ASAS after the
rule-out of aortal dissection and spinal bleeding.

DOI: 10.1007/s11239-015-1281-8
PMID: 26386968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
