---
reference_id: "PMID:28953319"
title: "Bergmann glia translocation: a new disease marker for vanishing white matter identifies therapeutic effects of Guanabenz treatment."
authors:
- Dooves S
- Bugiani M
- Wisse LE
- Abbink TEM
- van der Knaap MS
- Heine VM
journal: Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/nan.12411
keywords:
- Adrenergic alpha-2 Receptor Agonists/therapeutic use
- Animals
- Astrocytes/pathology
- Biomarkers
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- Guanabenz/therapeutic use
- "Leukoencephalopathies/drug therapy, pathology"
- Mice
- Phosphorylation
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bergmann glia translocation: a new disease marker for vanishing white matter identifies therapeutic effects of Guanabenz treatment.
**Authors:** Dooves S, Bugiani M, Wisse LE, Abbink TEM, van der Knaap MS, Heine VM
**Journal:** Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nan.12411](https://doi.org/10.1111/nan.12411)

## Content

1. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2018 Jun;44(4):391-403. doi: 10.1111/nan.12411.
Epub  2017 Aug 1.

Bergmann glia translocation: a new disease marker for vanishing white matter 
identifies therapeutic effects of Guanabenz treatment.

Dooves S(1), Bugiani M(1)(2), Wisse LE(1), Abbink TEM(1), van der Knaap 
MS(1)(3), Heine VM(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics / Child Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU 
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Functional Genomics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive 
Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Complex Trait Genetics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive 
Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

AIM: Vanishing White Matter (VWM) is a devastating leucoencephalopathy without 
effective treatment options. Patients have mutations in the EIF2B1-5 genes, 
encoding the five subunits of eIF2B, a guanine exchange factor that is an 
important regulator of protein translation. We recently developed mouse models 
for VWM that replicate the human disease. To study disease improvement after 
treatment in these mice, it is essential to have sensitive biomarkers related to 
disease stage. The Bergmann glia of the cerebellum, an astrocytic subpopulation, 
translocate into the molecular layer in symptomatic VWM mice and patients. This 
study looked at the prospects of using Bergmann glia pathology as an objective 
disease marker for VWM.
METHODS: We defined a new quantitative measurement of Bergmann glia pathology in 
the cerebellum of VWM mice and patients. To test the sensitivity of this new 
marker for improvement, VWM mutant mice received long-term treatment with 
Guanabenz, an FDA-approved anti-hypertensive agent affecting eIF2B activity.
RESULTS: Bergmann glia translocation was significantly higher in symptomatic VWM 
mice and VWM patients than in controls and worsened over the disease course. 
Both Bergmann glia pathology and cerebellar myelin pathology improved with 
Guanabenz treatment in mice, showing that Bergmann glia translocation is a 
sensitive measurement for improvement.
CONCLUSIONS: Bergmann glia translocation can be used to objectively assess 
effects of treatment in VWM mice. Future treatment strategies involving 
compounds regulating eIF2 phosphorylation might benefit VWM patients.

© 2017 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Neuropathological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/nan.12411
PMID: 28953319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]