---
reference_id: "PMID:35762024"
title: "Monkeypox Disease Outbreak (2022): Epidemiology, Challenges, and the Way Forward."
authors:
- Lahariya C
- Thakur A
- Dudeja N
journal: Indian Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s13312-022-2578-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox Disease Outbreak (2022): Epidemiology, Challenges, and the Way Forward.
**Authors:** Lahariya C, Thakur A, Dudeja N
**Journal:** Indian Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13312-022-2578-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13312-022-2578-2)

## Content

1. Indian Pediatr. 2022 Aug 15;59(8):636-642. doi: 10.1007/s13312-022-2578-2.
Epub  2022 Jun 27.

Monkeypox Disease Outbreak (2022): Epidemiology, Challenges, and the Way 
Forward.

Lahariya C(1), Thakur A(2), Dudeja N(3).

Author information:
(1)Foundation for People-Centric Health Systems, New Delhi. Correspondence to: 
Dr Chandrakant Lahariya, B-2/173, First Floor, Safdarjung Enclave, New Delhi 110 
029, India. c.lahariya@gmail.com.
(2)Foundation for People-Centric Health Systems, New Delhi.
(3)Human Capital Lighthouse (Consulting) Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi.

Comment in
    Indian Pediatr. 2022 Sep 15;59(9):730.
    Indian Pediatr. 2022 Sep 15;59(9):730-731.

The biggest-ever outbreak of monkeypox disease in non-endemic countries started 
in May, 2022. Though no monkeypox case has been reported from India, till 
mid-June, 2022, yet, considering the rate of spread to the non-endemic 
countries, there is an urgent need of better understanding of the monkeypox 
virus and disease epidemiology to help clinicians, public health specialists, 
and policymakers to be prepared for any eventuality. This review summarises the 
monkeypox disease epidemiology, clinical features, therapies, vaccines and 
outlines the measures for preparedness and response for a possible outbreak. The 
disease is known to cause severe outcome in children, pregnant women, and 
immunocompromised hosts and this group need to be given special attention. The 
monkeypox disease outbreak (2022) in non-endemic countries should be used as an 
opportunity by India and other low and middle income countries to strengthen 
public health surveillance and health system capacity for outbreak and epidemic 
preparedness and response.

DOI: 10.1007/s13312-022-2578-2
PMCID: PMC9419123
PMID: 35762024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]