---
reference_id: "PMID:39456197"
title: Pioglitazone as a Possible Treatment for Ataxia-Telangiectasia.
authors:
- Shackelford R
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biom14101264
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Pioglitazone/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pioglitazone as a Possible Treatment for Ataxia-Telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Shackelford R
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom14101264](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom14101264)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2024 Oct 8;14(10):1264. doi: 10.3390/biom14101264.

Pioglitazone as a Possible Treatment for Ataxia-Telangiectasia.

Shackelford R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of South Alabama, 2451 University 
Hospital Drive, Mobile, AL 36617, USA.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized 
by immunodeficiency, progressive cerebellar ataxia, and an increased malignancy 
risk. Cells derived from individuals with AT show multiple defects, including 
high oxidant and ionizing radiation sensitivities, poor DNA repair, low 
iron-sulfur cluster levels, and low reduced glutathione. The clinical course of 
AT is progressive and unrelenting, with most individuals having a survival time 
of approximately twenty-five years. Presently, AT has no effective treatments, 
and most patients receive supportive care only. Recently, pioglitazone, a 
thiazolidinedione class used to treat type 2 diabetes, has been demonstrated to 
exert beneficial effects on AT cells and on diabetic individuals with AT. Here, 
I will discuss the possible molecular mechanisms of pioglitazone's favorable 
effects on the AT phenotype and why it may have utility in treating some aspects 
of AT.

DOI: 10.3390/biom14101264
PMCID: PMC11506080
PMID: 39456197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the 
work reported in this paper.