---
reference_id: "PMID:39189679"
title: Genetic testing and new variants in diagnosis of congenital ichthyoses.
authors:
- Salo M
- Kimpimäki T
- Huhtala H
- Saarela T
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.70000
keywords:
- Humans
- "Genetic Testing/methods, standards"
- Female
- Male
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- "Ichthyosis/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Infant
- Adolescent
- Adult
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing/methods
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic testing and new variants in diagnosis of congenital ichthyoses.
**Authors:** Salo M, Kimpimäki T, Huhtala H, Saarela T
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.70000](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.70000)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2024 Aug;12(8):e70000. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.70000.

Genetic testing and new variants in diagnosis of congenital ichthyoses.

Salo M(1), Kimpimäki T(1)(2), Huhtala H(3), Saarela T(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University, Tampere, 
Finland.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(3)Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere University, Tampere, Finland.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate how diagnostic practice in 
congenital ichthyoses has evolved during the years 2000-2020 and what kind of 
gene variants of congenital ichthyosis have been found.
METHODS: The study cohort of this register-based research consisted of a total 
of 88 patients, whose diagnostic testing was conducted, and ichthyosis diagnoses 
set at the Department of Dermatology and the Department of Clinical Genetics at 
Tampere University Hospital during the years 2000-2020.
RESULTS: Diagnosis of ichthyosis was confirmed with genetic testing in 33 cases, 
and with conventional diagnostic methods, such as clinical findings, skin biopsy 
and family history of ichthyoses, in 55 cases. We observed four novel variants 
in patients with the clinical diagnoses of congenital ichthyoses.
CONCLUSION: When genetic testing became available, it was offered primarily to 
patients with severe forms of ichthyosis. During the study period 
next-generation sequencing became the genetic testing method of choice providing 
new opportunities in diagnostics.

© 2024 The Author(s). Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.70000
PMCID: PMC11348405
PMID: 39189679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.