---
reference_id: "PMID:26493647"
title: "Rethinking ovarian cancer II: reducing mortality from high-grade serous ovarian cancer."
authors:
- Bowtell DD
- Böhm S
- Ahmed AA
- Aspuria PJ
- Bast RC Jr
- Beral V
- Berek JS
- Birrer MJ
- Blagden S
- Bookman MA
- Brenton JD
- Chiappinelli KB
- Martins FC
- Coukos G
- Drapkin R
- Edmondson R
- Fotopoulou C
- Gabra H
- Galon J
- Gourley C
- Heong V
- Huntsman DG
- Iwanicki M
- Karlan BY
- Kaye A
- Lengyel E
- Levine DA
- Lu KH
- McNeish IA
- Menon U
- Narod SA
- Nelson BH
- Nephew KP
- Pharoah P
- Powell DJ Jr
- Ramos P
- Romero IL
- Scott CL
- Sood AK
- Stronach EA
- Balkwill FR
journal: Nat Rev Cancer
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/nrc4019
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Rethinking ovarian cancer II: reducing mortality from high-grade serous ovarian cancer.
**Authors:** Bowtell DD, Böhm S, Ahmed AA, Aspuria PJ, Bast RC Jr, Beral V, Berek JS, Birrer MJ, Blagden S, Bookman MA, Brenton JD, Chiappinelli KB, Martins FC, Coukos G, Drapkin R, Edmondson R, Fotopoulou C, Gabra H, Galon J, Gourley C, Heong V, Huntsman DG, Iwanicki M, Karlan BY, Kaye A, Lengyel E, Levine DA, Lu KH, McNeish IA, Menon U, Narod SA, Nelson BH, Nephew KP, Pharoah P, Powell DJ Jr, Ramos P, Romero IL, Scott CL, Sood AK, Stronach EA, Balkwill FR
**Journal:** Nat Rev Cancer (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrc4019](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrc4019)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015 Nov;15(11):668-79. doi: 10.1038/nrc4019.

Rethinking ovarian cancer II: reducing mortality from high-grade serous ovarian 
cancer.

Bowtell DD(1), Böhm S(2), Ahmed AA(3), Aspuria PJ(4), Bast RC Jr(5), Beral V(6), 
Berek JS(7), Birrer MJ(8), Blagden S(9), Bookman MA(10), Brenton JD(11), 
Chiappinelli KB(12), Martins FC(11), Coukos G(13), Drapkin R(14), Edmondson 
R(15), Fotopoulou C(9), Gabra H(9), Galon J(16), Gourley C(17), Heong V(18), 
Huntsman DG(19), Iwanicki M(20), Karlan BY(4), Kaye A(21), Lengyel E(22), Levine 
DA(23), Lu KH(5), McNeish IA(24), Menon U(25), Narod SA(26), Nelson BH(27), 
Nephew KP(28), Pharoah P(29), Powell DJ Jr(30), Ramos P(31), Romero IL(22), 
Scott CL(18), Sood AK(5), Stronach EA(9), Balkwill FR(2).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Genomics and Genetics Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 
Melbourne, Victoria 8006, Australia; and the Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Garvan 
Institute for Medical Research, Darlinghurst, Sydney, 2010 New South Wales, 
Australia.
(2)Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, 
London EC1M6BQ, UK.
(3)Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology and the Weatherall 
Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 
9DS, UK.
(4)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8700 Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles, California 
90048, USA.
(5)MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 
77030-4009, USA.
(6)University of Oxford, Headington, Oxford, OX3 7LF, UK.
(7)Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
(8)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114 USA.
(9)Ovarian Cancer Action Research Centre, Imperial College London, Hammersmith 
Campus, London W12 0NN, UK.
(10)Arizona Oncology, Tucson, Arizona 85711, USA.
(11)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing 
Centre, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.
(12)The Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center at John Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
Maryland 21287, USA.
(13)University Hospital of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(14)University of Pennsylvania, Penn Ovarian Cancer Research Center, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(15)University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9WL, UK.
(16)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, UMRS1138, 
Laboratory of Integrative Cancer Immunology, Cordeliers Research Center, 
Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ 
Paris 06, 75006 Paris, France.
(17)Cancer Research Centre, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, UK.
(18)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(19)University of British Columbia, Departments of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine and Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Vancouver, British 
Columbia V6T 2B5, Canada.
(20)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
(21)Ovarian Cancer Action, London NW1 OJH, UK.
(22)University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
(23)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA.
(24)University of Glasgow, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK.
(25)Women's Cancer, Institute for Women's Health, University College London, 
London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(26)Women's College Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1N8, Canada.
(27)British Columbia Cancer Agency, Victoria, British Columbia V8R 6V5, Canada.
(28)Indiana University School of Medicine &Simon Cancer Center, Bloomington, IN 
47405-4401, USA.
(29)University of Cambridge, Strangeways Research Laboratory, Cambridge CB1 8RN, 
UK.
(30)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-5156, USA.
(31)Translational Genomics Research Institute (Tgen), Phoenix, Arizona 85004, 
USA.

High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) accounts for 70-80% of ovarian cancer 
deaths, and overall survival has not changed significantly for several decades. 
In this Opinion article, we outline a set of research priorities that we believe 
will reduce incidence and improve outcomes for women with this disease. This 
'roadmap' for HGSOC was determined after extensive discussions at an Ovarian 
Cancer Action meeting in January 2015.

DOI: 10.1038/nrc4019
PMCID: PMC4892184
PMID: 26493647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

A recognition of the cellular and molecular diversity of ovarian cancer, and the consequent need for a more refined approach to research and clinical trials, were the key points of a Nature Reviews Cancer Perspectives article arising from a Helene Harris Memorial Trust (HHMT) Ovarian Cancer Action (OCA) (BOX 1) meeting in 2011 (REF. 1). In contrast to that article, which considered ovarian cancer broadly, here we outline our consensus view on research priorities for a single subtype of ovarian cancer: high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC). HGSOC is of particular interest, as it accounts for most deaths from ovarian cancer, has shown little improvement in overall survival for decades, and shares substantial molecular similarity with basal-like breast cancer2. In addition, our understanding of the molecular aetiology and clinical pathology of HGSOC has greatly increased since 2011, making it important to review priorities in the light of recent research.

Although this disease is termed an ovarian cancer, pathological35, epidemiological6, molecular genetic7,8 and mouse model studies9 suggest that secretory epithelial cells of the distal fallopian tube (FTSECs) are the likely progenitors of a substantial proportion of HGSOCs (FIGS 1,2). However, even with improved methods for pathological assessment of fallopian tubes, some HGSOCs seem to arise without fallopian tube involvement. This is consistent with experimental mouse models of HGSOC: some models show a direct evolution from precursor cells in the fallopian tube9 and others seem to primarily involve precursor cells in the ovary10. It is unclear whether tumours arising without apparent fallopian tube involvement are associated with earlier seeding of the ovaries with FTSECs through a process known as endo salpingosis or whether they are truly ovary-derived diseases9,11. Missense or nonsense mutation mutations in TP53 are currently the earliest known molecular events in HGSOC and a near invariant feature of serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC)12 and HGSOC13,14 (FIG. 1).

With the exception of TP53, BRCA1 and BRCA2, point mutations in oncogenes or tumour suppressor genes are relatively uncommon in HGSOC14. Instead, HGSOCs are characterized by genomic structural variation, with frequent DNA gains and losses, making this cancer an extreme example of a chromosomally unstable (C-class) malignancy15 (FIG. 1). Structural change is an important mechanism for inactivation of tumour suppressors in HGSOC, through heterozygous and homozygous loss16 and gene breakage17. Approximately 50% of HGSOCs are defective in the homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair pathway14,18,19. HR defects arise mainly from germline, somatic and epigenetic mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 (REF 20) and, to a lesser extent, from mutations in other components of the HR pathway21 (FIG. 1). HR deficiency is a key determinant of platinum sensitivity in HGSOC and provides a rational basis for the use of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors, which further inactivate DNA repair in already compromised HR-defective tumours22–24.

The molecular characteristics of the other half of all HGSOC — those that have no apparent defects in HR — are relatively poorly defined. Approximately 30% of this subclass have amplification of CCNE1 (which encodes the G1/S-specific cyclin E1)14, and this is likely an early event in the development of HGSOC25. Moreover, HGSOC cell lines in which CCNE1 is amplified undergo cell cycle arrest or apoptosis following the loss of cyclin E1 or its protein partner, cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2)26, suggesting a novel therapeutic approach in patients.

Four molecular subtypes (C1/mesenchy-mal, C2/immune, C4/differentiated and C5/ prolifera tive) have been identified in HGSOC and vali dated by gene expression profiling14,27,28; these are associated with differential clinical outcomes and microenvironmental features such as immune and stromal cell activation. However, these molecular subtypes have not yet been integrated into the clinical setting. Recent studies have begun to unravel the determinants of metastatic spread of HGSOCs, including their tropism for adipocyte-rich omentum29 and a propensity for omental localization. Haematogenous peritoneal dissemination has been observed in a parabiosis preclinical mouse model, suggesting that spread of HGSOC throughout the abdomen may occur both passively and via the vasculature30.

MicroRNA (miRNA) dysregulation has been partially mapped in HGSOC, including the identification of mi RNAs that regulate genes associated with the C1/mesenchymal subtype31–33. A subset of HGSOCs have shown intratumoural infiltration with activated lymphocytes, in particular CD8+ T cells, and are generally associated with better overall survival. Patients with the C2/ immune subtype of HGSOC may benefit from use of immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy34.

In the light of this new information, at the January 2015 OCA meeting we considered areas of research and clinical practice that we believe will make the most impact on unravelling the molecular biology of HGSOC and developing more effective treatments. This Opinion article outlines seven key areas that we believe offer the most promise in tackling this disease (BOX 2). Supplementary information S1 (box) has a summary of this Opinion article for non-specialist clinicians and the interested public.

Cell lines, patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models and genetically engineered mouse (GEM) models of HGSOC are needed to address different experimental contexts.

Recent studies35,37 have highlighted the inadequacy of many commonly used ovarian cancer cell lines as models of HGSOC. We strongly recommend that research on HGSOC should use extensively characterized cell lines that accurately reflect the disease, and that their detailed characteristics should be provided in all manuscripts. Development of improved approaches to generate primary cultures from patients38,39 will assist in producing more effective and accessible models. Collaborative efforts should be directed at creating large sets of genomically and functionally characterized HGSOC cell lines, with clinical annotation and representation of key mutational drivers, such as loss of BRCA1, BRCA2, RB1 or NF1 (neurofibromin 1), amplification of AKT, PIK3CA (PI3K catalytic subunit-α), MYC or CCNE1, and those with a range of nonsense and missense TP53 mutations. Culture conditions that more closely resemble the tumour microenvironment — including three-dimensional (3D) matrices and co-cultures of malignant cells with fibroblasts and mesothelial cells40,41 — may also improve success in obtaining continuous, biologically relevant cell lines with stable biologic features. Immortalized FTSECs seem to be the most appropriate normal control for HGSOC42–44, but further molecular and functional characterization is required of the handful of currently available FTSEC lines42. Consideration should be given to generating additional ovarian surface epithelial lines to better understand the role of these cells in HGSOC development.

Considerable progress has been made in recent years in the development of mouse models of ovarian cancer. There are now several GEM models that direct transformation specifically to FTSECs and that histologically and molecularly9 resemble human HGSOC, including models with mutant Trp53 and conditional inactivation of Pten and Brca1 or Brca2 (REFS 8,9) (FIG. 2). Importantly, these models recapitulate the development of the STIC precursor lesion9,45. Additional GEM models of other driver events, such as CCNE1 or MYCN amplification, would facilitate studies of other molecular subsets of HGSOC. Novel genome editing technologies may simplify the generation and utility of these new GEM models46. Their value will be further enhanced by derivation of transplantable tumour cell lines from these mice with a fully syngeneic background, to allow well-controlled in vitro and in vivo experiments.

PDXs grown in immunocompromised mice at least partially recapitulate the clinical responses and resistance mechanisms that are observed in patients47–50. However, we believe that it is premature to use PDX models derived from specific patients, also known as avatars51, as a commercial assay to guide drug selection in individual patients. There may be value in exploring humanized mouse models, made by the engraftment of human haematopoietic bone marrow stem cells52, to overcome the limitations of immune-deficient PDX models. A comprehensive range of HGSOC models is needed to reflect the clonal diversity and the range of acquired resistance mechanisms that have recently been identified17.

Compared with other solid cancers, HGSOCs are unusually sensitive to platinum-based chemotherapy and other DNA-damaging agents, and are frequently amenable to retreatment, even with the same or similar agents to those that were used in the first-line setting. However, treatment resistance eventually emerges in 80–90% of those patients who are initially diagnosed with widespread disease. Genomic studies have shown that substantial clonal diversity exists in patients who have not yet received chemotherapy53–56, providing a mechanism for the development of resistance. Novel bioinformatic tools that accurately identify and quantify tumour subclones are needed to investigate the evolution of HGSOC genomes under the selective pressure of therapy57.

In contrast to the existing extensive genomic datasets obtained with primary HGSOC samples, only a handful of recurrent HGSOC samples collected at disease recurrence have been analysed in depth. Consortia such as OCTIPS (Ovarian Cancer Therapy – Innovative Models Prolong Survival) and the British Translational Research Ovarian Cancer Collaborative (BritROC) are focused on obtaining and analysing large intra-patient paired tumour sample sets. Even among the limited number of recurrent samples analysed so far, there is an apparent diversity of acquired resistance mechanisms, including the activation of AKT signalling58, the reversion of germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 through intragenic second-site mutations that restore the open reading frame of defective transcripts17,59,60, the loss of BRCA1 methylation17, a shift to a higher stromal content (known as a desmoplastic phenotype) and overexpression of the drug transporter ABCB1 through promoter hijacking17. Targeting of AKT has recently shown promising clinical activity in combination with carboplatin and paclitaxel in a Phase Ib/II study of platinum-resistant ovarian cancer61. Expression of markers of autophagy is increased in dormant, drug-resistant tumour nodules found on the peritoneal surface in recurrent disease compared with primary disease62, suggesting that targeting autophagic processes may be important in overcoming dormancy in HGSOC.

Because only a small number of recurrent tumour samples have been analysed and characterized so far, it is likely that we have underestimated the number of acquired resistance mechanisms. For example, it is unclear whether disease relapse results from the expansion of self-renewing cellular populations, a change in the extracellular matrix, the emergence of drug-resistant clones or a combination of these events, between and within individual patients. We therefore believe that there should be a major effort to characterize recurrent and end-stage samples. Given the importance of understanding resistance, biopsies should be collected at recurrence to generate collections of highly valuable paired pre- and post-treatment samples. Research autopsy studies17 allow comprehensive sampling to map the diversity of resistance and the collection of large amounts of material for genomic, proteomic, PDX, and immunological and biochemical studies of end-stage disease. Using laparoscopy (minimally invasive surgery for direct visualization of tumours) for tumour mapping, sample collection and prospective monitoring of response to chemotherapy, in particular in the neoadjuvant setting, in eligible patients also offers promise for understanding tumour evolution under primary chemotherapy. Moreover, recent advances in methods of isolating cell-free tumour DNA from patients’ plasma samples (liquid biopsies) provide additional, non-invasive means to measure changes in tumours and to understand how cancers evolve in response to treatment63.

Much of the research on HGSOC focuses on the reasons why some patients have a limited response to chemotherapy. However, it is also important to characterize the molecular determinants of exceptional responders64: those rare patients with extensive post-operative residual disease who have a dramatic and prolonged response to chemotherapy. Exceptional responders may provide insights into the contribution of immunological, stromal or other factors that are important for long-term survival. Comparison of patients with long versus short overall survival may help us to understand how clonal diversity before treatment, genomic instability and the type of host antitumour response influence the emergence of drug resistance. Indeed, a better understanding of host responses to primary and relapsed HGSOC is likely to be central to improving outcomes.

HGSOC was one of the first human cancers in which an association was found between an increased density of intraepithelial tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and longer patient survival34. Tumour-reactive TILs65 found in HGSOC (FIG. 3) recognize shared tumour antigens such as ERBB2 (also known as HER2), cancer/testis antigen 1 (CTAG1B), mesothelin (MSLN) and telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT)66, as well as neoantigens, all processed and presented by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules67. However, TILs are often suppressed or even functionally exhausted in solid cancers owing to a variety of factors, including: chronic antigen exposure; immune suppressive cytokines (such as interleukin-10 and transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ)); the leukocyte surface antigen CD47 (REF. 68); metabolite deprivation (including tryptophan depletion by overexpression of indoleamine 2,3-deoxygenase 1 (REF. 69)); immune checkpoint molecules such as programmed cell death protein 1 ligand 1 (PDL1)70,71; and the presence of immunosuppressive regulatory T cells and myeloid cells72 (FIG. 3). Further characterization of the role of immunosuppressive factors in HGSOC is required.

Immune checkpoint inhibition has yielded impressive clinical responses in melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer73, perhaps owing to the exceptionally high mutational loads in these malignancies74,75. By contrast, HGSOC has an intermediate mutational load14,67,76, and consequently the abundance of neoantigens derived from point mutations is expected to be lower in this disease76. TILs are particularly prominent in BRCA1 -mutant tumours77–80 for reasons that are unclear. A prominent TIL response is less commonly associated with BRCA2-mutant tumours even though they have more point mutations than tumours with a BRCA1 mutation81, indicating that factors other than point mutation load can influence TIL response. The immunogenicity of HGSOC may involve other classes of tumour antigens, such as amplified or aberrant gene products arising from gene fusions. The B cell repertoire is altered in BRCA1 -mutant carriers82, suggesting another means by which this germline mutation might affect the tumour microenvironment of HGSOC. An improved understanding of the determinants of TIL density in HGSOC may assist in the development of immune checkpoint therapies in this disease.

Although numerous studies have confirmed the prognostic significance of intraepithelial TILs in HGSOC27,34, there is currently no consensus on how best to classify immune infiltrates in HGSOC biopsy samples, either for up-front stratification of patients in clinical trials or for post-trial evaluation. With considerable attention now focused on understanding the drivers of the immune repertoire in HGSOC, there is a need to collaboratively develop standard criteria, similar to the ‘immunoscore’ used to characterize colorectal cancer samples83. The development of a well-defined HGSOC immunoscore may require multiplexed immunohistochemistry to capture essential prognostic features, such as immune cell type, functional orientation, location in the tumour and density. Codifying essential elements of an immunoscore would facilitate the comparison of findings from various clinical trials of immune modulators. Patients whose tumours have a high immunoscore may be suitable for immune checkpoint blockade or adoptive T cell therapies84, whereas those with an intermediate immunoscore may benefit from agents that stimulate CD8+ T cell trafficking and infiltration. Tumours with a low immunoscore could potentially be treated with vaccines that prime new T cell responses or with engineered T cells, such as chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells that circumvent deficiencies in the tumour-specific T cell repertoire. Studies in lung85, breast, colon and ovarian86 cancer cell lines and patient samples show that epigenetic therapies, including DNA demethylating agents87–89 and some chemotherapeutic agents, can stimulate immune signalling from epithelial cells and may therefore benefit patients with low or absent TILs.

Although TILs are a prominent feature of the tumour microenvironment, their functional phenotype and prognostic effects are strongly influenced by other cell types. The presence of CD20+ B cells in the tumour epithelium90 and of stromal plasma cells correlate with a better prognosis, whereas regulatory T cells, macrophages and immature myeloid cells may promote tumour formation91 (FIG. 3). These results are reminiscent of data from colorectal cancer illustrating a common immune phenotype between cancer types92,93.

Beyond immune cells, the tumour microenvironment of HGSOC has other important elements that may influence treatment response, including fibroblasts, endothelial cells and the extracellular matrix. Recent studies have revealed dynamic interactions between HGSOC and the single cell layer of mesothelial cells that line the peritoneum and pleural cavity41,94,95 as well as with cancer-associated fibroblasts96 and adipocytes29. These interactions influence tumour spread, metabolism, epithelial- mesenchymal transition and extracellular matrix deposition96,97, which may in turn affect drug penetration and response to chemotherapy98,99. To devise better targeting strategies, it is important to understand whether stromal responses promote or restrain HGSOC100,101. Although several Phase III trials have documented the long-term clinical effectiveness of intraperitoneal chemotherapy, the mechanism of action has not been resolved. It is assumed the effectiveness of intraperitoneal chemotherapy is associated with higher drug concentrations in the tumour; however, it is possible that intraperitoneal chemotherapy also alters the interaction of HGSOC with mesothelial cells, which can promote the establishment of metastases in HGSOC41,94.

Given the profound sensitivity of HGSOC to platinum-based chemotherapy, additional longitudinal studies are required to elucidate the impact of standard treatments on the various cell populations in the tumour microenvironment. Moreover, the complexity of the HGSOC tumour microenvironment means that combination therapies targeting different elements are more likely to be successful than single agent approaches. For example, a current clinical trial combines a Toll-like receptor 8 (TLR8) agonist to activate antigen-presenting cells, liposomal doxorubicin to stimulate immunogenic tumour cell death, and PDL1 blockade to activate T cells (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT02431559).

The realization that the different types of epithelial ovarian cancer are distinct malignancies has driven the development of histotype-specific clinical trials in recent years. Similarly, an improved understanding of the biology of HGSOC is providing impetus for stratified trials targeting distinct molecular subsets of HGSOC.

The pivotal observation of synthetic lethality using PARP inhibitors in BRCA1- and BRCA2-mutant ovarian cancer cell lines102 led to the development of one of the most important new classes of targeted agents in HGSOC23. Although PARP inhibitors have been most active in patients with either germline or somatic mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 (REF. 103), significant responses have also been observed in a proportion of non-BRCA-mutant tumours; these tumours might respond because they carry mutations in other genes involved in the HR pathway. The reliable prediction of patient response is an important priority for the development of PARP inhibitors in HGSOC. Although DNA sequencing of all genes involved in the HR pathway is technically feasible, tests that integrate the effects of HR loss, such as functional cellular assays18 or measuring the genome-wide consequences of defective HR104 (socalled genomic scarring), may provide a more effective way of identifying the patients who are most likely to respond to PARP inhibitors105. Reversion of germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 alleles may contribute to clinical drug resistance17,59,60,106. Emphasis should be placed on the identification of additional mechanisms of resistance through the analysis of samples collected during disease progression. As has been observed in patients treated conventionally with platinum agents, there are some exceptional responders to PARP inhibitors, and it will be interesting to discover whether the determinants of long-term response to platinum agents and PARP inhibitors are shared.

HGSOCs express high levels of pro-angiogenic proteins that contribute the development of ascites seen in many patients. Therefore, considerable effort has gone into exploring the activity of anti-angiogenic agents in HGSOC, particularly those attenuating the activity of vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFA and VEGFB). Although the VEGF-specific monoclonal antibody bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy results in improved progression- free survival in patients in a first-line setting107,108 and in platinum-resistant recurrent ovarian cancer109, its impact has been modest, and there is no evidence of an increase in overall survival110,111. Resistance to bevacizumab emerges in most patients with HGSOC who initially respond, but how this occurs remains unclear.

It seems that effective targeting of angiogenesis in this disease is unlikely to be established easily. We therefore recommend that greater effort should be placed on identifying predictive biomarkers, understanding the mechanisms of acquired resistance to angiogenesis inhibitors through the collection of tissue and blood samples from patients enrolled in clinical trials, and the rational development of combination strategies. One recent attempt to identify biomarkers of response to bevacizumab involved transcriptional profiling of samples112 collected during the ICON7 clinical trial. Surprisingly, patients whose tumour samples had high expression of immune response genes and who received bevacizumab had shorter a progression-free and overall survival than patients who did not receive bevacizumab maintenance therapy112. If validated, this gene expression profile may provide a useful approach to patient selection and improve our understanding of how different subtypes of HGSOC respond to anti-angiogenic agents. Other molecular agents targeting angiogenesis are in preclinical and clinical development113,114. Recent results with the VEGF receptor inhibitor cedarinib and the PARP inhibitor olaparib115 suggest that combinations of anti-angiogenic agents with other targeted treatments may be beneficial.

The identification of actionable mutations in solid cancers such as lung and breast cancer has led to socalled umbrella trials, in which patients are stratified for treatment according to the molecular properties of their tumours and not the site of cancer origin116. Although the limited number of actionable mutations in HGSOC14 makes the design of umbrella trials challenging, tumours with HR deficiency, amplified genes such as CCNE1 or AKT1 and AKT2 (also known as PKB and PKBB) or loss of PTEN are all suitable for this kind of stratification. The search for novel therapeutic targets should continue by using techniques such as synthetic lethal small hairpin RNA117,118 and CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) cell line screens, the high-throughput evaluation of drug combinations119, and making use of more appropriate HGSOC cell lines and sophisticated culture conditions. Highly multiplexed imaging120 of the cell surface of HGSOC may provide further novel molecular targets and insights to HGSOC biology.

Although receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are overexpressed in HGSOC, response to single-agent RTK inhibitors has been disappointing121. Recent findings suggest the expression of several RTKs may be deregulated through a novel mechanism associated with methylation-induced loss of expression of OPCML (opioid binding protein/cell adhesion molecule-like), which is a member of the IgLON family of cell surface proteins that modulate receptor recycling122. Understanding the pathway associated with OPCML signalling may provide new strategies to revisit the use of RTK inhibitors in HGSOC.

The simple genetic background of other, rarer histological subtypes may also offer the opportunity to study the consequences of some of the less frequent epigenetic and/ or mutational alterations found in HGSOC. For example, although missense or deletion mutations in the SWI/SNF ATPase subunit SMARCA4 (encoding the transcription activator BRG1) are reported in only 2% of HGSOC cases123,124, this gene is ubiquitously mutated in hypercalcaemic-type small cell carcinoma of the ovary125. The self-renewing compartment of HGSOC is only partially defined126 and may provide insights into new molecular targets for HGSOC. Specifically, molecular characterization of HGSOC stem cells is an important priority for developing maintenance therapeutic approaches that target residual cells following debulking surgery127–129.

There is a need for clinical trial protocols that allow rapid evaluation of new compounds and combinations of treatments. In breast cancer, window-of-opportunity studies130, in which new agents are evaluated for a short period of time before surgical resection of the primary cancer, are common. A similar approach could be used in HGSOC, whereby biopsies are carried out at initial diagnosis, followed by several cycles of treatment with a new agent or combination of agents before cytoreductive surgery. This approach would use pre- and post-treatment tumour material to evaluate pathological response as a surrogate endpoint for survival, and such samples could be used for biomarker studies. First relapse provides another setting for testing new agents in HGSOC patients. Although evaluation of new agents at relapse may delay the start of standard treatments, this may be acceptable, as the timing of initiating standard treatment during disease recurrence does not seem to affect outcome131.

Understanding the biology of HGSOC and developing new therapeutic approaches is challenging, complex and time consuming. However, there are already ways to reduce risk and improve clinical outcomes. Oral contraceptives provide lasting risk reduction in both the general female population and in women who carry germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations132, with duration of oral contraceptive use being proportional to the decrease in risk. It is important that women, especially those at increased genetic risk of ovarian cancer, are aware of this benefit. Further research is needed to understand the basis of protection provided by oral contraceptive usage, particularly at a time when intrauterine devices are increasingly favoured for contraception in younger women. Results from two epidemiological studies suggest that chronic use of aspirin to alleviate non-cancer conditions is associated with the unexpected benefit of reducing the incidence of epithelial ovarian cancer133,134 and that the diabetes drug metformin is associated with improved survival in women with ovarian cancer135,136. If these findings are confirmed, repurposing well-established drugs with low toxicity profiles may be valuable in reducing disease burden in high-risk individuals. Conversely, a meta-analysis of 52 epidemiological studies indicates that use of hormonal therapy for menopause moderately increases the risk of ovarian cancer, particularly for serous tumours, most of which are HGSOCs137. Obesity also increases the risk of serous ovarian cancer138. There is an urgent need to understand why there are substantial racial and socioeconomic disparities in the treatment and outcome of women with HGSOC and take steps to close the gap139.

Germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are present in 15–18% of patients with HGSOC, and approximately half of all carriers lack a significant family his-tory20,140–143. We believe that germline testing should be offered to all women with HGSOC, irrespective of age or family history, with testing done at diagnosis as it provides information about their likely response to therapy20,103,144. In addition, there is a case for population testing for founder mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 in high-risk populations such as Ashkenazi Jewish women, in whom BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations are prevalent. A recent randomized controlled trial involving Ashkenazi Jewish women aged 30 years and older showed that population-based testing could be achieved at an acceptable cost and did not adversely affect short-term psychological and quality-of-life outcomes145,146. There is also a need to develop more-effective approaches to ‘cascade genetic testing’ (REF. 147): predictive genetic testing offered to relatives of index mutation carriers to maximize the opportunities for breast and ovarian cancer risk reduction in female family members and prostate cancer in males.

Less commonly than BRCA1 or BRCA2, patients with HGSOC may have germline mutations in other genes involved in HR, including BRIP1 (BRCA1 -interacting protein 1), BARD1 (BRCA1 -assoociated RING domain 1), RAD51B and RAD51C148–151. In addition, a series of low risk alleles have been identified through genome-wide association studies152, but they are currently not clinically actionable. Large cohort studies of population-based cases and controls are needed to understand the penetrance of these mutations — including their interaction with high- and moderate-risk alleles, and the effect of carrying multiple low-risk alleles — and provide useful advice to carriers about their risk of developing ovarian cancer152. Clinical panel testing for both high- and moderate-penetrance genes is widely available. Care is needed in counselling unaffected women with moderate-penetrance mutations in terms of ovarian cancer risk-reducing options. In particular, until a better estimate of risk is obtained, we believe that it is premature to offer panel genetic testing beyond BRCA1 and BRCA2 as part of routine clinical care for HGSOC. As increasing numbers of women at elevated risk of HGSOC are identified through more comprehensive genetic screening, it will be important to understand the psychosocial153 and medical needs of women who are at risk but have not yet developed cancer154.

The improved understanding of the role of the fallopian tube in the genesis of HGSOC has important implications for clinical management. For example, as most hereditary HGSOC are thought to derive from the fallopian tube, removal of only the tubes (salpingectomy) is being considered in young BRCA1- or BRCA2-mutant carriers to avoid the effects of early menopause that are triggered by removal of the ovaries (oophorectomy)155. However, oophorectomy, and the consequent reduction in oestrogen levels, has an added benefit of breast cancer risk reduction in young mutation carriers, and this benefit is absent with salpingectomy only. Hence, there is a need to understand the overall benefits versus side effects of these different approaches in young patients carrying BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations.

Although most HGSOCs may be fallopian tube-derived, there is a subset of HGSOCs with no apparent precursor lesion in the fallopian tube, and so to develop additional prevention strategies we need to understand how these arise. For instance, further investigation is required of the impact of initial salpingectomy followed by oophorectomy once natural menopause has occurred. Researchers from the British Columbia Cancer Agency are currently investigating the value of removing fallopian tubes in every woman undergoing a hysterectomy, as a practical, population-based, opportunistic approach to reducing ovarian cancer incidence156.

The identification of increasing numbers of ‘at-risk’ mutation carriers through wider genetic screening157 highlights the need for continued efforts to develop an effective screening strategy. The Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial using the blood tumour biomarker CA125 and ultrasound showed no reduction in mortality158. Recent results from the United Kingdom Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening (UKCTOCS) based on serial CA125 profile seem encouraging159, although evidence of a mortality impact is awaited. Meanwhile, continued efforts are needed to improve early detection strategies, given the prognostic significance of disease burden at presentation160. Research efforts should be based on the understanding of the natural history of HGSOC, with a focus on detection of low-volume disease rather than low-stage disease alone161. Future strategies need to incorporate time series algorithms to interpret markers159,162. Other approaches include the development of cancer-specific markers such as targeted deep sequencing of DNA for TP53 and other gene mutations in plasma163 or cervical secretions164, and improved165,166 imaging. Early detection is always going to be a challenge in HGSOC because the disease is often asymptomatic before peritoneal spread.

Pre-operative tumour load and post-operative residual disease are the most important prognosticators of survival in advanced-stage HGSOC160,167–169. However, we still do not fully understand which patients are most likely to benefit from primary cytoreductive surgery (or debulking) or how extensive the surgical effort should be170. In addition, the timing of surgery remains contentious. The value of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and interval debulking (three cycles of chemotherapy followed by surgery and a further three cycles of chemotherapy) has been established in terms of equivalent overall survival with lower morbidity compared with primary debulking surgery169. However, this research was conducted in a setting of limited surgical resection, as evidenced by low rates of optimal cytoreduction and total macroscopic tumour clearance. New trials in specialized centres with experience in maximal surgical effort are needed to re-examine the value of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in advanced disease.

Surgical management of HGSOC should integrate molecular markers with current clinical and pathological factors into an algorithmic approach to surgery171. Surgical options include primary or interval debulking or, indeed, no surgery at all in patients with extensive disease and a reliance on chemotherapy alone. The development of biomarkers that reliably predict surgical resectability, or rapid relapse despite optimal surgery, is an important priority for the stratification of patients for these surgical options172. The ability to surgically clear all macroscopic tumour tissue (optimal debulking) is influenced by anatomical location and bulk of disease160, surgical skill, the fitness of the patient to undergo extensive surgery and the intrinsic biology of the epithelial and of other tumour microenvironment components, including TGFβ pathway activation96,173. For example C1/mesenchymal molecular subtype tumours have lower rates of optimal debulking and are characterized by a desmoplastic phenotype, which is associated with TGFβ activation27.

The wider use of an initial diagnostic laparoscopy to assess the extent of peritoneal and visceral involvement could assist in triaging patients to primary versus interval debulking surgery while obtaining highly valuable, high-quality research samples174. Expanded use of diagnostic laparoscopy may also allow improved prediction of surgical time and the expertise required to achieve optimum debulking surgery. However, no prospective randomized data exist so far to prove the accurate predictive and prognostic value of diagnostic laparoscopy in advanced ovarian cancer, so additional clinical testing is essential.

Although there is no prospective evidence for a survival benefit of secondary cytoreduction after completion of first-line treatment in platinum-sensitive tumours175, numerous retrospective studies have associated total macroscopic tumour clearance with a significantly prolonged progression-free and overall survival, even at the relapsed setting of the disease176,177. Two large, multicentre, prospectively randomized surgical trials (the AGO–OVAR OP.4/DESKTOP III and the GOG0213) are expected to define for the first time the value of secondary surgical cytoreduction at the time of first platinum-sensitive relapse. Cytoreductive surgery at relapse could also be combined with window-of-opportunity studies.

Genomic analyses, particularly The Cancer Genome Atlas exome, methylome, and transcriptome study of more than 500 primary HGSOC samples, have provided a comprehensive picture of the mutational landscape of primary HGSOC. Although this is an invaluable reference dataset, it falls short of explaining how specific mutations interact to achieve the hallmarks of cancer178 in an individual patient. Currently, other than understanding that mutation in TP53 is both an early and invariant event, we know little of the temporal sequence of other molecular changes or the dynamics of chromosomal instability that drive the high degree of genomic aberration in HGSOC. Studies of the molecular changes in precursor lesions, and examination of allelic frequencies of copy number changes and driver mutations, may identify common early, so-called trunk mutations16. The centrality of TP53 mutation for HGSOC suggests that understanding its impact on FTSEC behaviour may provide important insights into initiating events in HGSOC. Indeed, a better understanding of the normal cellular biology of FTSECs as a whole, including growth factor requirements and determinants of self-renewal, is warranted to help interpret how specific mutations and copy number changes affect the behaviour of HGSOC.

PAX8 is a critical determinant of development of the fallopian tube179 and is expressed180,181 and required117 in almost all HGSOCs. Therefore, PAX8 may also hold clues regarding the molecular circuitry of HGSOC. The tropism of HGSOC for the omentum derives from its propensity to use fat as an energy source29, which has provided some of the first insights into the metabolic requirements of HGSOC and the determinants of metastatic spread. Metabolomic and proteomic studies, such as the National Cancer Institute Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC)182, are needed to help interpret current genomic data and provide insights into post- transcriptional, metabolic183, signalling and growth factor requirements of HGSOC. Studies that integrate genomic, epigenomic, proteomic, immune and other tumour microenvironment characteristics in a common set of primary and recurrent tumours would be especially informative.

The experimental approaches described here reflect some of the questions that limit the successful management of patients with HGSOC. Only by implementing a more comprehensive and collaborative research approach can we reduce incidence and deliver the long-awaited improvements in survival from a disease that kills an estimated 150,000 women every year.