---
reference_id: "PMID:37755358"
title: "Migraine: Advances in the Pathogenesis and Treatment."
authors:
- Pleș H
- Florian IA
- Timis TL
- Covache-Busuioc RA
- Glavan LA
- Dumitrascu DI
- Popa AA
- Bordeianu A
- Ciurea AV
journal: Neurol Int
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/neurolint15030067
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Migraine: Advances in the Pathogenesis and Treatment.
**Authors:** Pleș H, Florian IA, Timis TL, Covache-Busuioc RA, Glavan LA, Dumitrascu DI, Popa AA, Bordeianu A, Ciurea AV
**Journal:** Neurol Int (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/neurolint15030067](https://doi.org/10.3390/neurolint15030067)

## Content

1. Neurol Int. 2023 Aug 31;15(3):1052-1105. doi: 10.3390/neurolint15030067.

Migraine: Advances in the Pathogenesis and Treatment.

Pleș H(1), Florian IA(2), Timis TL(3), Covache-Busuioc RA(4), Glavan LA(4), 
Dumitrascu DI(4), Popa AA(4), Bordeianu A(4), Ciurea AV(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Centre for Cognitive Research in Neuropsychiatric 
Pathology (NeuroPsy-Cog), "Victor Babeș" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
300041 Timișoara, Romania.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, "Iuliu Hatieganu" University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, 400012 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(3)Department of Physiology, "Iuliu Hatieganu" University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, 400012 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(4)Neurosurgery Department, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
020021 București, Romania.

This article presents a comprehensive review on migraine, a prevalent 
neurological disorder characterized by chronic headaches, by focusing on their 
pathogenesis and treatment advances. By examining molecular markers and 
leveraging imaging techniques, the research identifies key mechanisms and 
triggers in migraine pathology, thereby improving our understanding of its 
pathophysiology. Special emphasis is given to the role of calcitonin 
gene-related peptide (CGRP) in migraine development. CGRP not only contributes 
to symptoms but also represents a promising therapeutic target, with inhibitors 
showing effectiveness in migraine management. The article further explores 
traditional medical treatments, scrutinizing the mechanisms, benefits, and 
limitations of commonly prescribed medications. This provides a segue into an 
analysis of emerging therapeutic strategies and their potential to enhance 
migraine management. Finally, the paper delves into neuromodulation as an 
innovative treatment modality. Clinical studies indicating its effectiveness in 
migraine management are reviewed, and the advantages and limitations of this 
technique are discussed. In summary, the article aims to enhance the 
understanding of migraine pathogenesis and present novel therapeutic 
possibilities that could revolutionize patient care.

DOI: 10.3390/neurolint15030067
PMCID: PMC10535528
PMID: 37755358

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.