---
reference_id: "PMID:22512697"
title: Long-term follow-up of patients with Herlitz-type junctional epidermolysis bullosa.
authors:
- Yuen WY
- Duipmans JC
- Molenbuur B
- Herpertz I
- Mandema JM
- Jonkman MF
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.10997.x
keywords:
- Cause of Death
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa, Junctional/complications, mortality, therapy"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Growth/physiology
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Life Expectancy
- Male
- Netherlands/epidemiology
- Prognosis
- Registries
- Weight Gain/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term follow-up of patients with Herlitz-type junctional epidermolysis bullosa.
**Authors:** Yuen WY, Duipmans JC, Molenbuur B, Herpertz I, Mandema JM, Jonkman MF
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.10997.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.10997.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Aug;167(2):374-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.10997.x. 
Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Long-term follow-up of patients with Herlitz-type junctional epidermolysis 
bullosa.

Yuen WY(1), Duipmans JC, Molenbuur B, Herpertz I, Mandema JM, Jonkman MF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Center for Blistering Diseases, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9700 RB Groningen, 
The Netherlands. w.y.yuen@umcg.nl

BACKGROUND: Junctional epidermolysis bullosa, type Herlitz (JEB-H) is a rare, 
autosomal recessive disease caused by absence of the epidermal basement membrane 
adhesion protein laminin-332. It is characterized by extensive and devastating 
blistering of the skin and mucous membranes, leading to death in early 
childhood.
OBJECTIVES: To present the results of the long-term follow-up of a cohort of 
patients with JEB-H, and to provide guidelines for prognosis, treatment and 
care.
METHODS: All patients with JEB-H included in the Dutch Epidermolysis Bullosa 
(EB) Registry between 1988 and 2011 were followed longitudinally by our EB team. 
Diagnosis was established using immunofluorescence antigen mapping, electron 
microscopy and DNA analysis.
RESULTS: In total, we included 22 patients with JEB-H over a 23-year period. 
Their average age at death was 5.8 months (range 0.5-32.6 months). The causes of 
death were, in order of frequency: failure to thrive, respiratory failure, 
pneumonia, dehydration, anaemia, sepsis and euthanasia. The pattern of initial 
weight gain was a predictor of lifespan in these patients. Invasive treatments 
to extend life did not promote survival in our patients.
CONCLUSIONS: It is important to diagnose JEB-H as soon as possible after birth 
so that the management can be shifted from life-saving to comfort care. The 
palliative end-of-life care can take place in hospital, but is also safe in the 
home setting. Suffering in patients with JEB-H can become so unbearable that in 
some patients who do not respond to adequate analgesic and sedative treatment, 
newborn euthanasia, performed according to the Groningen protocol, is legally 
permitted in the Netherlands.

© 2012 The Authors. BJD © 2012 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.10997.x
PMID: 22512697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]