---
reference_id: "PMID:32408148"
title: "From Baló's concentric sclerosis to multiple sclerosis: a series of 6 patients."
authors:
- Ayrignac X
- Letourneau-Guillon L
- Carra-Dallière C
- Duquette P
- Girard M
- Poirier J
- Lahav B
- Larochelle C
- Prat A
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2020.102078
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From Baló's concentric sclerosis to multiple sclerosis: a series of 6 patients.
**Authors:** Ayrignac X, Letourneau-Guillon L, Carra-Dallière C, Duquette P, Girard M, Poirier J, Lahav B, Larochelle C, Prat A
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2020.102078](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2020.102078)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2020 Jul;42:102078. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2020.102078.
 Epub 2020 May 4.

From Baló's concentric sclerosis to multiple sclerosis: a series of 6 patients.

Ayrignac X(1), Letourneau-Guillon L(2), Carra-Dallière C(3), Duquette P(4), 
Girard M(4), Poirier J(4), Lahav B(4), Larochelle C(4), Prat A(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinique de Sclérose en plaques du Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier 
de l'Université de Montréal (CRCHUM), and department of Neurosciences, Faculty 
of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Département de 
Neurologie, CRC sclérose en plaques, CHU Montpellier, INSERM, Univ Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France. Electronic address: xavier.ayrignac@yahoo.fr.
(2)Département de Radiologie et Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de 
l'Université de Montréal (CRCHUM), Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de 
Montréal (CHUM), département de radiologie, radio-oncologie et médecine 
nucléaire, faculté de médecine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, 
Canada.
(3)Département de Neurologie, CRC sclérose en plaques, CHU Montpellier, INSERM, 
Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(4)Clinique de Sclérose en plaques du Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier 
de l'Université de Montréal (CRCHUM), and department of Neurosciences, Faculty 
of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Baló's concentric sclerosis (BCS) is a rare CNS disorder 
characterized by alternating bands of demyelination on MRI. One of the main 
issues is its relationship with multiple sclerosis (MS).
OBJECTIVES: To describe 6 BCS patients. To review the risk of developing MS in 
BCS patients.
METHODS: We retrospectively recorded clinical and radiological findings of 6 BCS 
patients and performed a review of the literature.
RESULTS: Six patients (5 women) with a mean age of 25 years old were included. 
Main symptoms were hemiparesis/hemihypoesthesia. On MRI, two patients had a 
single BCS lesion and four had additional MS-like lesions. Alternating bands 
were usually more visible on DWI. A patient had reduced central perfusion and 
SWI hypointensity suggestive of a central vein. Oligoclonal bands were 
identified in 5/6 patients. After 7 years of follow-up, all patients achieved MS 
criteria with mild disability (mean EDSS 1.75; 0-4). Our literature review 
included 65 BCS patients from 30 studies: although CSF oligoclonal bands and the 
presence of additional MS lesions were associated with subsequent relapses, this 
was not significant.
DISCUSSION/CONCLUSION: Our series allows a detailed MRI description in BCS and 
gives a new insight into BCS evolution and its strong relationship with MS.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2020.102078
PMID: 32408148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]