---
reference_id: "PMID:18091420"
title: The effect of rainfall on the incidence of cholera in Bangladesh.
authors:
- Hashizume M
- Armstrong B
- Hajat S
- Wagatsuma Y
- Faruque AS
- Hayashi T
- Sack DA
journal: Epidemiology
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e31815c09ea
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effect of rainfall on the incidence of cholera in Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Hashizume M, Armstrong B, Hajat S, Wagatsuma Y, Faruque AS, Hayashi T, Sack DA
**Journal:** Epidemiology (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1097/EDE.0b013e31815c09ea](https://doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0b013e31815c09ea)

## Content

1. Epidemiology. 2008 Jan;19(1):103-10. doi: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e31815c09ea.

The effect of rainfall on the incidence of cholera in Bangladesh.

Hashizume M(1), Armstrong B, Hajat S, Wagatsuma Y, Faruque AS, Hayashi T, Sack 
DA.

Author information:
(1)Public and Environmental Health Research Unit, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom. hashizum@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The incidence of cholera in Bangladesh shows clear seasonality, 
suggesting that weather factors could play a role in its epidemiology. We 
estimated the effects of rainfall on the incidence of cholera in Dhaka, 
Bangladesh.
METHODS: We examined time-series patterns of the weekly number of hospital 
visits due to cholera in relation to weekly rainfall from 1996 to 2002. We used 
Poisson regression models, adjusted for seasonal variation, between-year 
variation, public holidays, and temperature. The role of river level on the 
rainfall-cholera relationship was also examined by incorporating river-level 
terms into the models.
RESULTS: The weekly number of cholera cases increased by 14% (95% confidence 
interval = 10.1%-18.9%) for each 10-mm increase above the threshold of 45 mm for 
the average rainfall, over lags 0 to 8 weeks. Conversely, the number of cholera 
cases increased by 24% (10.7%-38.6%) for a 10-mm decrease below the same 
threshold of average rainfall, over lags 0 to 16 weeks. River level partly 
explained the association between high rainfall and the number of cholera cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The number of cholera cases increased with both high and low 
rainfall in the weeks preceding hospital visits. These results suggest that 
factors associated with river level are on the causal pathway between high 
rainfall and incidence of cholera.

DOI: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e31815c09ea
PMID: 18091420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]