---
reference_id: "PMID:32268133"
title: "Hepatitis C virus infection and tight junction proteins: The ties that bind."
authors:
- Mailly L
- Baumert TF
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2020.183296
keywords:
- "Hepacivirus/genetics, pathogenicity"
- "Hepatitis C/genetics, virology"
- Hepatocytes/virology
- Host-Pathogen Interactions/genetics
- Humans
- "Liver/pathology, virology"
- Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Occludin/genetics
- "Receptors, LDL/genetics"
- Tetraspanin 28/genetics
- "Tight Junctions/genetics, virology"
- Virus Internalization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis C virus infection and tight junction proteins: The ties that bind.
**Authors:** Mailly L, Baumert TF
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamem.2020.183296](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamem.2020.183296)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr. 2020 Jul 1;1862(7):183296. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2020.183296. Epub 2020 Apr 5.

Hepatitis C virus infection and tight junction proteins: The ties that bind.

Mailly L(1), Baumert TF(2).

Author information:
(1)Université de Strasbourg, INSERM, UMR-S1110, Institut de Recherche sur les
Maladies Virales et Hépatiques, F-67000 Strasbourg, France. Electronic address:
laurent.mailly@unistra.fr.
(2)Université de Strasbourg, INSERM, UMR-S1110, Institut de Recherche sur les
Maladies Virales et Hépatiques, F-67000 Strasbourg, France; Pôle
Hépato-digestif, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, F-67000 Strasbourg,
France; Institut Universitaire de France, F-75231 Paris, France. Electronic
address: thomas.baumert@unistra.fr.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major cause of liver diseases ranging from
liver inflammation to advanced liver diseases like cirrhosis and hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). HCV infection is restricted to the liver, and more specifically
to hepatocytes, which represent around 80% of liver cells. The mechanism of HCV
entry in human hepatocytes has been extensively investigated since the discovery
of the virus 30 years ago. The entry mechanism is a multi-step process relying
on several host factors including heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG), low
density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), tetraspanin CD81, Scavenger Receptor class
B type I (SR-BI), Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) and Niemann-Pick
C1-like 1 (NPC1L1). Moreover, in order to establish a persistent infection, HCV
entry is dependent on the presence of tight junction (TJ) proteins Claudin-1
(CLDN1) and Occludin (OCLN). In the liver, tight junction proteins play a role
in architecture and homeostasis including sealing the apical pole of adjacent
cells to form bile canaliculi and separating the basolateral domain drained by
sinusoidal blood flow. In this review, we will highlight the role of liver tight
junction proteins in HCV infection, and we will discuss the potential targeted
therapeutic approaches to improve virus eradication.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2020.183296
PMCID: PMC7613427
PMID: 32268133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Inserm, the
University of Strasbourg and the Strasbourg University Hospitals have filed
patent applications for the use of anti-Claudin1 antibodies for treatment of HCV
infection which have been licensed to Alentis Therapeutics, Basel, Switzerland.
