---
reference_id: "PMID:28396157"
title: Coupled brain and urine spectroscopy - in vivo metabolomic characterization of HMG-CoA lyase deficiency in 5 patients.
authors:
- Roland D
- Jissendi-Tchofo P
- Briand G
- Vamecq J
- Fontaine M
- Ultré V
- Acquaviva-Bourdain C
- Mention K
- Dobbelaere D
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.03.006
keywords:
- "Acetyl-CoA C-Acetyltransferase/chemistry, deficiency, metabolism, urine"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, urine"
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- Brain Chemistry
- Cerebellum/metabolism
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Hydrogen-Ion Concentration
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Meglutol/analogs & derivatives, metabolism, urine"
- Metabolomics/methods
- Proton Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- Urine/chemistry
- Valerates/metabolism
- White Matter/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coupled brain and urine spectroscopy - in vivo metabolomic characterization of HMG-CoA lyase deficiency in 5 patients.
**Authors:** Roland D, Jissendi-Tchofo P, Briand G, Vamecq J, Fontaine M, Ultré V, Acquaviva-Bourdain C, Mention K, Dobbelaere D
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.03.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.03.006)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2017 Jun;121(2):111-118. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.03.006.
Epub  2017 Mar 30.

Coupled brain and urine spectroscopy - in vivo metabolomic characterization of
HMG-CoA lyase deficiency in 5 patients.

Roland D(1), Jissendi-Tchofo P(2), Briand G(3), Vamecq J(4), Fontaine M(5),
Ultré V(6), Acquaviva-Bourdain C(7), Mention K(8), Dobbelaere D(9).

Author information:
(1)Centre Agréé des Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme, Centre de Génétique
Humaine, Institute of Pathology and Genetics, Gosselies (Charleroi), Belgium.
Electronic address: dominique.roland@ipg.be.
(2)Department of Neuroradiology, Roger Salengro Hospital, CHRU Lille, France.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Laboratory of
Endocrinology, Metabolism-Nutrition, Oncology, Pathology Center, CHRU Lille,
France.
(4)Inserm, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, HMNO, Center of Biology and
Pathology Pierre Marie Degand, CHRU Lille, France.
(5)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, HMNO, Center of Biology and Pathology
Pierre Marie Degand, CHRU Lille, France.
(6)UDSL, Laboratoire de RMN, UFR Pharmacie, CHRU Lille, France.
(7)Hereditary Metabolic Diseases Service, East Center for Biology and Pathology,
Lyon Civil Hospices 69677 Bron cedex, France.
(8)Centre de Référence Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme de l'Enfant et de
l'Adulte, Jeanne de Flandre Hospital, CHRU Lille, and RADEME EA 7364, Faculty of
Medicine, University Lille 2, Lille 59037, France.
(9)Centre de Référence Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme de l'Enfant et de
l'Adulte, Jeanne de Flandre Hospital, CHRU Lille, and RADEME EA 7364, Faculty of
Medicine, University Lille 2, Lille 59037, France. Electronic address:
dries.dobbelaere@chru-lille.fr.

BACKGROUND: 3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl-Coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) lyase deficiency is
a rare inborn error of leucine metabolism and ketogenesis. Despite recurrent
hypoglycemia and metabolic decompensations, most patients have a good clinical
and neurological outcome contrasting with abnormal brain magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) signals and consistent abnormal brain proton magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (1H-MRS) metabolite peaks. Identifying these metabolites could
provide surrogate markers of the disease and improve understanding of
MRI-clinical discrepancy and follow-up of affected patients.
METHODS: Urine samples, brain MRI and 1H-MRS in 5 patients with HMG-CoA lyase
deficiency (4 boys and 1 girl aged from 25days to 10years) were, for each
patient, obtained on the same day. Brain and urine spectroscopy were performed
at the same pH by studying urine at pH 7.4. Due to pH-induced modifications in
chemical shifts and because reference 1H NMR spectra are obtained at pH 2.5,
spectroscopy of normal urine added with the suspected metabolite was further
performed at this pH to validate the correct identification of compounds.
RESULTS: Mild to extended abnormal white matter MRI signals were observed in all
cases. Brain spectroscopy abnormal peaks at 0.8-1.1ppm, 1.2-1.4ppm and 2.4ppm
were also detected by urine spectroscopy at pH 7.4. Taking into account
pH-induced changes in chemical shifts, brain abnormal peaks in patients were
formally identified to be those of 3-hydroxyisovaleric, 3-methylglutaconic,
3-methylglutaric and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric acids.
CONCLUSION: 3-Methylglutaric, 3-hydroxyisovaleric and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric
acids identified on urine 1H-NMR spectra of 5 patients with HMG-CoA lyase
deficiency are responsible for the cerebral spectroscopy signature seen in these
patients, validating their local involvement in brain and putative contribution
to brain neuropathology.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.03.006
PMID: 28396157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
