---
reference_id: "PMID:15711092"
title: GNAS locus and pseudohypoparathyroidism.
authors:
- Bastepe M
- Jüppner H
journal: Horm Res
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1159/000083895
keywords:
- Chromogranins
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/genetics"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Pseudohypoparathyroidism/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GNAS locus and pseudohypoparathyroidism.
**Authors:** Bastepe M, Jüppner H
**Journal:** Horm Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000083895](https://doi.org/10.1159/000083895)

## Content

1. Horm Res. 2005;63(2):65-74. doi: 10.1159/000083895. Epub 2005 Feb 9.

GNAS locus and pseudohypoparathyroidism.

Bastepe M(1), Jüppner H.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. bastepe@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is characterized by hypocalcemia and 
hyperphosphatemia due to resistance to parathyroid hormone (PTH). Patients with 
PHP-Ia often present with additional hormonal resistance and show characteristic 
physical features that are collectively termed Albright's hereditary 
osteodystrophy (AHO). These features are also present in 
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP), but patients affected by this disorder do 
not show hormone resistance. PHP-Ib patients, on the other hand, present 
predominantly with renal PTH resistance and lack any features of AHO. Most of 
these PHP forms are caused by defects in GNAS (20q13.3), an imprinted gene locus 
with multiple transcriptional units. PHP-Ia and PPHP are caused by heterozygous 
inactivating mutations in those exons of GNAS encoding the alpha subunit of the 
stimulatory guanine nucleotide-binding protein (Gsalpha), and the autosomal 
dominant form of PHP-Ib (AD-PHP-Ib) is caused by heterozygous mutations 
disrupting a long-range imprinting control element of GNAS. Expressed nearly in 
all cells, Gsalpha plays essential roles in a multitude of physiological 
processes. Its expression in renal proximal tubules occurs predominantly from 
the maternal allele, and this tissue- and parent-specific imprinting of Gsalpha 
is an important determinant of hormone resistance in kindreds with PHP-Ia/PPHP 
and AD-PHP-Ib.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000083895
PMID: 15711092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]