---
reference_id: "PMID:24705254"
title: Genomic analysis of diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas identifies three molecular subgroups and recurrent activating ACVR1 mutations.
authors:
- Buczkowicz P
- Hoeman C
- Rakopoulos P
- Pajovic S
- Letourneau L
- Dzamba M
- Morrison A
- Lewis P
- Bouffet E
- Bartels U
- Zuccaro J
- Agnihotri S
- Ryall S
- Barszczyk M
- Chornenkyy Y
- Bourgey M
- Bourque G
- Montpetit A
- Cordero F
- Castelo-Branco P
- Mangerel J
- Tabori U
- Ho KC
- Huang A
- Taylor KR
- Mackay A
- Bendel AE
- Nazarian J
- Fangusaro JR
- Karajannis MA
- Zagzag D
- Foreman NK
- Donson A
- Hegert JV
- Smith A
- Chan J
- Lafay-Cousin L
- Dunn S
- Hukin J
- Dunham C
- Scheinemann K
- Michaud J
- Zelcer S
- Ramsay D
- Cain J
- Brennan C
- Souweidane MM
- Jones C
- Allis CD
- Brudno M
- Becher O
- Hawkins C
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/ng.2936
keywords:
- "Activin Receptors, Type I/genetics"
- Animals
- "Brain Stem Neoplasms/classification, genetics"
- Child
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- DNA Methylation
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/genetics"
- "Genome, Human/genetics"
- "Glioma/classification, genetics"
- Humans
- Inhibitor of Differentiation Protein 1/metabolism
- Inhibitor of Differentiation Protein 2/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Smad Proteins/metabolism
- Zebrafish
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Genomic analysis of diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas identifies three molecular subgroups and recurrent activating ACVR1 mutations.
**Authors:** Buczkowicz P, Hoeman C, Rakopoulos P, Pajovic S, Letourneau L, Dzamba M, Morrison A, Lewis P, Bouffet E, Bartels U, Zuccaro J, Agnihotri S, Ryall S, Barszczyk M, Chornenkyy Y, Bourgey M, Bourque G, Montpetit A, Cordero F, Castelo-Branco P, Mangerel J, Tabori U, Ho KC, Huang A, Taylor KR, Mackay A, Bendel AE, Nazarian J, Fangusaro JR, Karajannis MA, Zagzag D, Foreman NK, Donson A, Hegert JV, Smith A, Chan J, Lafay-Cousin L, Dunn S, Hukin J, Dunham C, Scheinemann K, Michaud J, Zelcer S, Ramsay D, Cain J, Brennan C, Souweidane MM, Jones C, Allis CD, Brudno M, Becher O, Hawkins C
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2936](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2936)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2014 May;46(5):451-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.2936. Epub 2014 Apr 6.

Genomic analysis of diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas identifies three molecular 
subgroups and recurrent activating ACVR1 mutations.

Buczkowicz P(1), Hoeman C(2), Rakopoulos P(3), Pajovic S(4), Letourneau L(5), 
Dzamba M(6), Morrison A(4), Lewis P(7), Bouffet E(8), Bartels U(8), Zuccaro 
J(4), Agnihotri S(4), Ryall S(4), Barszczyk M(3), Chornenkyy Y(3), Bourgey M(5), 
Bourque G(5), Montpetit A(5), Cordero F(9), Castelo-Branco P(4), Mangerel J(4), 
Tabori U(10), Ho KC(4), Huang A(10), Taylor KR(11), Mackay A(11), Bendel AE(12), 
Nazarian J(13), Fangusaro JR(14), Karajannis MA(15), Zagzag D(15), Foreman 
NK(16), Donson A(16), Hegert JV(17), Smith A(17), Chan J(18), Lafay-Cousin 
L(18), Dunn S(19), Hukin J(19), Dunham C(19), Scheinemann K(20), Michaud J(21), 
Zelcer S(22), Ramsay D(22), Cain J(23), Brennan C(24), Souweidane MM(24), Jones 
C(11), Allis CD(7), Brudno M(25), Becher O(2), Hawkins C(1).

Author information:
(1)1] Division of Pathology, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [2] Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour 
Research Centre, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [3] 
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [4].
(2)1] Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, North Carolina, USA. [2].
(3)1] Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [2] Department of Laboratory Medicine 
and Pathobiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(4)Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Génome Québec Innovation Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(6)Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(7)Laboratory of Chromatin Biology and Epigenetics, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York, USA.
(8)Division of Haematology/Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(9)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(10)1] Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [2] Division of Haematology/Oncology, 
The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(11)Division of Cancer Therapeutics, Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.
(12)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospitals and 
Clinics of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(13)Center for Genetic Medicine, Children's National Medical Center, Washington, 
DC, USA.
(14)Department of Pediatrics-Hematology, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's 
Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(15)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology and Neuropathology, New York 
University Cancer Institute, New York University Langone Medical Center, New 
York, New York, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Colorado, Denver, Colorado, 
USA.
(17)Department of Pathology, Arnold Palmer Hospital for Children, Orlando, 
Florida, USA.
(18)Clark H. Smith Brain Tumour Centre, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(19)Department of Pediatric Neurology and Neuro-Oncology, BC Children's 
Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(20)Division of Hematology/Oncology, McMaster Children's Hospital, Hamilton, 
Ontario, Canada.
(21)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of 
Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(22)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital London Health 
Sciences Centre, London, Ontario, Canada.
(23)Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash Medical Centre, Clayton, 
Victoria, Australia.
(24)Department of Neurological Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College and 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(25)1] Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada. [2] The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2014 May;46(5):421-2. doi: 10.1038/ng.2970.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014 Jun;11(6):300. doi: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2014.74.

Diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) is a fatal brain cancer that arises in 
the brainstem of children, with no effective treatment and near 100% fatality. 
The failure of most therapies can be attributed to the delicate location of 
these tumors and to the selection of therapies on the basis of assumptions that 
DIPGs are molecularly similar to adult disease. Recent studies have unraveled 
the unique genetic makeup of this brain cancer, with nearly 80% found to harbor 
a p.Lys27Met histone H3.3 or p.Lys27Met histone H3.1 alteration. However, DIPGs 
are still thought of as one disease, with limited understanding of the genetic 
drivers of these tumors. To understand what drives DIPGs, we integrated 
whole-genome sequencing with methylation, expression and copy number profiling, 
discovering that DIPGs comprise three molecularly distinct subgroups (H3-K27M, 
silent and MYCN) and uncovering a new recurrent activating mutation affecting 
the activin receptor gene ACVR1 in 20% of DIPGs. Mutations in ACVR1 were 
constitutively activating, leading to SMAD phosphorylation and increased 
expression of the downstream activin signaling targets ID1 and ID2. Our results 
highlight distinct molecular subgroups and novel therapeutic targets for this 
incurable pediatric cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2936
PMCID: PMC3997489
PMID: 24705254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Brain tumors are the largest group of solid tumors and the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in childhood1. The most devastating of these is DIPG, which is almost universally fatal2,3. Despite collaborative efforts to improve treatments, survival has remained static over decades, and DIPGs are now the main cause of brain tumor death in children. Diagnosis of DIPG is based on a combination of clinical and radiologic findings; a tissue biopsy is rarely acquired. Radiation is the mainstay of therapy but offers only symptom control and so far chemotherapy has shown no benefit4. A potential contributor to the failure of DIPG clinical trials is the use of agents targeting the genetic alterations of adult glioblastomas (GBMs)5. A number of recent studies have reported differences at both the copy number and expression level that distinguish pediatric DIPG from both their adult and pediatric supratentorial GBM counterparts6–9, indicating that they may be separate biologic entities requiring their own therapeutic strategies. Recent identification of frequent histone 3 mutations (K27M-H3) in DIPG has suggested that both genetic and epigenetic mechanisms may be important drivers of these tumors10–12. However, the complete genetic and epigenetic landscape of DIPG and the functional role that histone modifications may play in DIPG remain unknown. This data is critical for the development of better therapies for these children.

We integrated deep-sequencing analysis of 36 tumor–normal pairs (20 whole genome sequencing (WGS; Illumina Hiseq 2000) and 16 whole exome sequencing (WES; Applied Biosystems SOLiD 5500xl)), with comprehensive methylation (28 DIPGs; Illumina Infinium450K methylation array), copy number (45 DIPGs, Affymetrix SNP6.0) and expression data (35 DIPGs; Illumina HT-12 v4) (Supplementary Table 1). All coding somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) identified in the combined cohort are listed in Supplementary Table 2 including novel mutations in ACVR1. We did not find mutations in BRAF or IDH1 or structural rearrangements in FGFR1 or MYB in our DIPG cohort. Verification of somatic alterations was conducted on all 35 pairs using Fluidigm Array Ion Torrent chip sequencing (Supplementary Table 3). Further, for key SNVs, a validation cohort of an additional 25 tumors was also tested. This analysis reveals, in contrast to what was previously considered to be one disease, DIPG represents three distinct subgroups with different methylation, expression, copy number alteration (CNA) and mutational profiles.

Unsupervised subgrouping of DIPG patients based on CpG island methylation (see Methods section) resulted in three distinct subgroups; MYCN, Silent, and H3-K27M (Fig. 1a). This subgrouping was supported by multiple analyses including principal components analysis (Fig. 1b), non-negative matrix factorization (Fig. 1c) and consensus clustering (Fig. 1d). Subgroup-specific differences were supported by integration of mutation, structural, expression and clinical data (Fig. 2). The identification of DIPG subgroups will have important implications for design of appropriate therapy for these tumors.

The MYCN subgroup has no recurrent mutations but is instead characterized by hypermethylation, high grade histology, and chromothripsis on chromosome 2p leading to recurrent high level amplification of MYCN and ID2 (Table 1, Supplementary Fig. 1 – 3). It over-expresses MYCN 4-fold and 8-fold and ID2 2.5-fold and 5-fold vs. the H3-K27M and Silent groups, respectively. The top most over-expressed genes in the MYCN group include FAP, HRSP12, and DYX2. Therapies aimed at targeting altered histone modifications will not be effective in this subgroup. Rather these children will potentially benefit from therapies targeting MYCN or possibly ID2. The Silent subgroup has silent genomes based on both WGS structural and SNP6.0 copy number analysis and has a lower mutation rate than the other two subgroups (median of 0.11 mutations per Mb (range 0.02–0.19) in the silent cohort vs. 0.99 mutations per Mb (range 0.19–24) in the other two groups, p = 0.05 (Supplementary Table 4)). All DIPGs with low-grade astrocytoma (LGA) histology are from this group, although interestingly there is no difference in overall survival in comparison with the other subgroups. These patients were diagnosed at a significantly younger age (4.81 ± 1.64 years for Silent group patients vs. 6.89 ± 2.62 years for non-Silent group patients; p = 0.04). K27M-H3 is present in 44% (K27M-H3.3 at 33% and K27M-H3.1 at 11%) but there are no recurrent copy number changes as observed in the MYCN and H3-K27M subgroups. At the expression level, the Silent subgroup shows over-expression of WNT pathway genes (Supplementary Table 5), as well as MDM2, MSMP and ADAM33 compared with the other two subgroups (Table 1). Importantly, neither the MYCN nor the Silent subgroup DIPGs have receptor tyrosine kinase amplification suggesting this group of inhibitors will be less effective in these patients.

H3-K27M subgroup DIPGs are highly mutated in either H3.3 (H3F3A) or H3.1 (HIST1H3B and HIST1H3C). This group has highly unstable genomes (Segmentation Analysis of SNP6 data; 497 CNA per genome vs. 300 CNA per genome in the Silent group; p = 0.04). Alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT via Telomere Restriction Fragment assay13, C-circles14 and/or telomere length from WGS) is exclusively associated with the H3-K27M subgroup; only two of these harbor ATRX mutations. ALT positive patients are significantly older at the time of diagnosis (Supplementary Fig. 4, p < 0.001). Similarly, PVT-1/MYC and PDGFRA gains/amplifications (Fig. 2a) and structural variants (Supplementary Fig. 5) are exclusive to this group. TP53 mutations are enriched in this group (67.9% vs. other groups 33.3%, p = 0.007). Given the complexity and heterogeneity of H3-K27M subgroup genetics, if therapies targeting the histone mutations become available, this subgroup will likely require multi-modal therapies.

Certain mutations and structural variants are significantly more likely to co-occur - specifically K27M-H3.3 with PDGFRA amplifications (OR = 8.0, p = 0.0127), and K27M-H3.1 with ACVR1 mutations (OR = 15.8, p = 0.0004) (Fig. 2b). Conversely, MYCN amplifications are statistically less likely to occur if a K27M-H3 mutation is present (OR = 0.019, p = 0.0103; Fig. 2b). Patients carrying K27M-H3.3 mutations are more likely to have GBM histology (OR = 5.3 p = 0.0035), while K27M-H3.1 mutations are more likely to occur in patients with anaplastic astrocytoma histology (OR = 7.1, p = 0.016) and in younger patients (K27M-H3.1: 4.11 ± 2.03 years vs. WT-H3.1: 6.50 ± 3.50 year; p = 0.040) (Fig. 2c). TP53 mutations are more likely to occur in patients with GBM histology regardless of K27M-mutational status (OR = 8.3, p = 0.0039) and unlikely to occur in patients with LGA histology (OR = 0.046, p = 0.0040) (Fig. 2c). A summary of molecular and clinical features observed among MYCN, Silent and H3-K27M DIPG patients is found in Table 1.

After H3F3A and TP53, the next most frequently mutated gene in DIPG is ACVR1 (activin A receptor, type I), a novel cancer gene. Mutations of ACVR1 in four DIPGs (c.617G>A) result in a R206H (Fig. 3a) substitution. One DIPG had a mutation of a neighboring codon (Q207E). Two DIPGs had a c.983G>A (G328E) mutation and five DIPGs in our cohort had a c983G>T mutation which results in a G328V (Fig. 3a) substitution. In total 20% of DIPG have ACVR1 mutations. ACVR1 encodes for the Activin A (ALK-2) receptor involved in BMP (bone-morphogenic protein) signaling18. The R206H substitution is in the GS (glycine-serine rich) domain, and is the most common mutation responsible for an autosomal dominant disease of the connective tissue, fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP), in which endothelial cells are sensitized to bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signaling, transitioning to osteoblasts18. The G328E and Q207E mutations are described as rare mutations in FOP patients19,20. The G328V substitution has not been previously reported in FOP patients or in cancer. Mutations on the G328 residue occur in the kinase domain and are spatially near the GS-domain20 and similarly to the R206H substitution, are thought to weaken the GS-domain resulting in a ligand-independent, constitutively active receptor. Phospho-SMAD1/5 was increased in DIPG patients with ACVR1 mutations as compared to ACVR1-WT patients (Fig. 3b).

To determine the biological consequence of AVCR1 mutations in vitro, we transfected immortalized normal human astrocytes (iNHA) with 3x Flag tagged pCDH511b expression vectors containing either G328V-ACVR1 and/or K27M-H3.3. Western blot analysis showed endogenous expression of ACVR1 in all cells, with flag ACVR1 and higher total ACVR1 expression in transfected cells. To determine if the ACVR1 mutant activates the BMP signaling pathway we tested for phospho-SMAD1/5 by Western blot. Only cells transfected with G328V-ACVR1 showed phospho-SMAD1/5 positivity (Fig. 3c). To test downstream pathway activation, we performed quantitative-PCR for ID1 and ID2, which are known targets of BMP signaling15–17. Expression of either K27M-H3.3 or G328V-ACVR1 alone led to a 2-fold increase in ID1 and ID2 expression, while co-expression of K27M-H3.3 and G328V-ACVR1 resulted in a nearly 4-fold increase in ID1 and ID2 expression, suggesting an additive effect (Fig. 3d). G328V-ACVR1 increased growth rate of iNHA as compared to empty vector controls (p = 0.0034, Fig. 3e). An increase in phospho-SMAD1/5 was also seen by Western blot in P3 murine brainstem progenitor cells from Nestin tv-a p53 floxed mice infected in vitro with RCAS R206H-ACVR1 or G328V-ACVR1 vs. WT-ACVR1 (p<0.05, data not shown). Brainstem progenitor cells infected with mutant ACVR1 showed increased proliferation by BrdU incorporation (p<0.05, Fig. 3f).

To assess the impact of K27M-H3.3 on gene expression and methylation patterns as well as its potential transformative capacity, iNHA cells were transfected with N-terminally Flag tagged expression vectors containing WT-H3.3, K27M-H3.3 or empty vector (EV) control. Clones expressing comparable amounts of WT-H3.3 and K27M-H3.3 protein based on Western blot analysis (Supplementary Fig. 6a) and verified by immunofluorescence staining to localize to the nucleus (Supplementary Fig. 6b) were selected and pooled to remove clonal variations in phenotype. Compared to controls, K27M-H3.3 iNHA cells had a significantly reduced proliferation rate when grown adherently in DMEM (Supplementary Fig. 6c) and grew semi-adherently when seeded in neural stem cell media (NSC) (Supplementary Fig. 6e). Compared to adherent K27M-H3.3 iNHA, the semi-adherent K27M-H3.3 iNHA in NSC media had increased expression of SOX2 by immunofluorescence staining with no marked changes in GFAP, Nestin, TUJ1 or O4 (Supplementary Fig. 7). Alterations in both expression (Illumina HT-12v4) and methylation (Illumina Infinium450K) profiles of the K27M-H3.3 expressing cells vs. both WT and EV controls was observed (Supplementary Fig. 6f). The top pathways perturbed by K27M-H3.3 expression corresponded to molecular and cellular functions especially an increase in cell-to-cell signaling (p = 0.00882, z-score 2.365) and a decrease in cell cycle progression (p < 0.00001, z-score -1.347). The top molecular and cellular functions affected by methylation changes in K27M-H3.3 mutated cells were embryonic development (p < 0.00001), decreased cell growth and proliferation (p = 0.00103), and increased cell-to-cell signaling (p < 0.00001). K27M-H3.3 cells did not form colonies in soft agar. K27M-H3.3 cells showed reduced global H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) levels compared to controls (Supplementary Fig. 6d). Similarly, immunohistochemical staining of patient DIPGs showed a decrease in global H3K27me3 levels in K27M-H3.3 positive tumors compared to WT tumors (Supplementary Fig. 6g,h). Global levels of H3K27Ac, H3K4me3 and H3K9Ac were not altered in a mutation-dependent manner (data not shown).

Interestingly, K27M-H3.3 expression also leads to increased ID1 and ID2 expression yet does not induce pSMAD1/5 suggesting an alternate pathway. pSMAD1/5 expression was also only observed in DIPG patients with ACVR1 mutations and not in K27M-H3 mutated but ACVR1 wild-type DIPG. Our in vitro data suggest an additive effect of the combination of mutant ACVR1 and H3F3A in increasing ID1 and ID2 levels. Further, a subset of DIPG patients with K27M-H3.3 mutations overexpress ID2, and MYCN subgroup patients have genomic amplification of ID2 with corresponding increased expression suggesting a potential common ID2-related mechanism in DIPG tumorigenesis. ID2 may play a role in negatively regulating cell differentiation21 and its expression has been associated with poor prognosis in other cancers22–24. Morphological changes, differential expression of stem cell markers, as well as global methylation and gene expression changes in iNHA following K27M-H3.3 expression suggests a cellular reprogramming event. However, further investigation into the effects of K27M-H3.3 and ACVR1 mutations in DIPG tumorigenesis is warranted.

Our results highlight the many pathways to tumorigenesis in DIPG. This complexity needs to be considered when designing new therapeutic approaches in order to improve outcome for these children.

Biological material and clinical data was gathered for 74 DIPG samples, including normal brain and/or peripheral blood if available. DIPGs were diagnosed by a neuroradiologist based on MRI imaging. A contrasting lesion with diffuse involvement of at least 50% of the pons was required for DIPG diagnosis. All patient material was collected after receiving informed consent and was approved by the institutional review board of contributing centers. Twenty of these patients were pre-treatment samples (2 non-treated patients from autopsy), and 54 were post-treatment autopsy samples. The median age of diagnosis was 6.37 years with a median survival of 10.4 months.

The entire genomes of twenty DIPG tumor and matched normal DNA pairs were sequenced using next generation Illumina technologies. The DNA samples were paired-end-sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2000) using DNA fragments 259-333bp in size with 100bp read length. The mean coverage was 35-67X for tumor and 28-74X for normal. BWA alignment tool was used to map all reads to GRCh37/hg19 using default parameters25. PCR duplicates were removed from alignments using PicardTools 1.77 (Supplementary Table 6). Structural variants (SV) were identified using PRISM 1.1.6 and PRISM CTX 1.0.126. Recurrent SVs (Supplementary Table 7) were found after subtracting common SVs27 and all SVs found in normal tissue and were visually validated using DNAC algorithm and SNP6.0 data in Partek Genomics Suite (v.6.6) as well as WGS data in Savant (v2.0.3)28, and Integrated Genomics Viewer (v2.2). Prediction of structural variants in chromothriptic regions was performed by discordant read-pair clustering. Discordant read-pairs (fragment size > 3 · σ + μ) were initially selected for by greedy clustering using a sliding window of 15 · σ and refined by clipped read mappings (Supplementary Fig. 8). Localization of chromothriptic event was predicted using Hidden-Markov-Model (HMM) informed by depth of coverage and discordant read-pairs. Maximum likelihood copy counts of chromothriptic regions was determined as previously described29.

Exome capture was carried out with SOLiD (Applied Biosystems). Sequence data were aligned to the GRCh37/hg19 human reference genome assembly; duplicate and non-uniquely mapping reads were excluded. One hundred and fifty one sequence variants in 128 genes were validated using PCR amplification by Fluidigm arrays and ion torrent chips (Life Technologies). These SNVs were selected for validation based on variant allele frequency from WGS/WES and those found to be significantly altered upon analysis of the combined cohort with MutSig (Broad Institute), an algorithm testing whether the observed mutations in a gene are not simply a consequence of random background mutation processes (Supplementary Table 6).

Comprehensive methylation profiling of 28 DIPG samples at the Microarray Centre (University Health Network, Toronto, ON) using the Illumina Infunium450K array (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Bisulphite conversion was carried out using the EZ DNA Methylation Kit (Zymo Research, Irvine CA) as per manufacturer’s specifications. Methylation profiling iNHA transfected with K27M-H3.3 and WT-H3.3 vectors was also assessed on this array. DNA was extracted using the DNeasy kit (Qiagen, Mississauga, ON) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Subgrouping and clustering based on differential CpG probe methylation was performed and validated using multiple programs and algorithms including nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) (GenePattern, Broad Institute), consensus hierarchical clustering (GenePattern; Broad Institute, ConsensusClusterPlus; Bioconductor/R and MultiExperiment Viewer, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute), Kmeans clustering (GenePattern; Broad Institute and ConsensusClusterPlus; Bioconductor/R), silhouette clustering (ConsensusClusterPlus; Bioconductor/R) and significance analysis of microarrays (SAM; MultiExperiment Viewer, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute). Subgroups were validated for significance by SigClust (Bioconductor/R).

Expression profiling was conducted on 35 DIPG samples and 10 normal brain controls at the Microarray Centre (University Health Network, Toronto, ON) using the DASL protocol for Illumina HT-12 V4 BeadChip array (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Differential gene expression in NHA transfected with K27M-H3.3 and WT-H3.3 vectors was also assessed on this array. RNA was extracted using the QIAshdredder and RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Mississauga, ON) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Quality of the RNA was assessed using the Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies, Böblingen, Germany). RNA Integrity Number (RIN) ranged from 1.3 to 8.2. Microarray data was normalized in Partek Genomics Suite v6.6 (Partek Incorporated, St. Louis, MO) using per-probe median centered quantile normalization. Data analysis was conducted on Log2 transformed data or fold-change data (vs. non-neoplastic brain). Genes differentially expressed among the subgroups were identified using one-way ANOVA and significance was corrected for false discovery rate.

Copy number analysis was conducted for 40 DIPG samples using SNP6.0 (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). Digestion, labeling and hybridization of DNA were performed by The Centre for Applied Genomics at the Hospital for Sick Children or at the Microarray Centre at the University Health Network. CEL data was analyzed for copy number alterations using segmentation tool and hidden Markov model in Partek Genomics Suite (v6.6) (Partek Incorporated, St. Louis, MO) and Genotyping Console 4.1 (GTC4.1; Affymetix) as previously described9.

Immortalized NHA cells (iNHA)30 were grown in Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Invitrogen). Cells were tested and found to be negative for mycoplasma. Cells were passaged at 80% confluence. Wild-type (WT-H3.3) and mutant (K27M-H3.3) H3F3A clones were created by site direction mutagenesis and PCR using pCMV SPORT6 (Adgene, Cambridge, MA) plasmid containing mouse H3F3A cDNA. Expression of flag tagged H3F3A WT and K27M was established by cloning corresponding cDNAs into p3xflagCMV10 (Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, ON) vectors (see Supplementary Table 8 for primer sequences). Clones were confirmed by bidirectional Sanger sequencing. Cells were transfected by Fugene6 transfection reagent (Promega, Madison, WI) and according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

To make stable transfectants, iNHA cells were co-transfected with a DNA fragment containing the hygromycin gene. Stably transfected clones were selected with 300μg/ml of hygromycin and pooled to eliminate clonal variations in phenotype. For the isolation of DNA and RNA used for expression and methylation arrays, respectively, cells were harvested at P4 and P15 at about 80% confluence. Total cell pellet for each sample was divided into 2 parts, one used for the isolation of genomic DNA and the other used for the isolation of RNA. Genomic DNA was isolated using the DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Qiagen, Mississauga, ON) followed by bisulfite conversion using EZ DNA Methylation Kit (Zymo research). Total RNA was isolated by RNeasy kit (Qiagen). iNHA from p4 and p15 were analyzed on methylation (Infinium 450K) and expression arrays (Illumina HT-12 v4) by the similar methods described for patients.

ACVR1 mutants were created from ACVR1 cDNA using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, Mississauga, ON) (see Supplementary Table 8 for primer sequences). Mutation was created at position c.983G>T resulting in amino acid change G328V. The G328-ACVR1 mutant was then sub-cloned into the pCDH511b (System Biosciences, Mountain View, CA), in frame with 3x FLAG tag at the 3′ end of the cDNA with pCDH511b, pCDH511b-G328V-ACVR1, pCDH511b-K27M-H3.3, or pCDH511b-G328V-ACVR1 and pCDH511b-K27M-H3.3. Cells were harvested 72 hours after transfection and protein and RNA was extracted for Western blot and Q-PCR analysis, respectively. Western blot was conducted using the following antibodies: pSMAD1/5 (1:1000, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA), total SMAD1 (1:1000, Cell Signaling, Danversm MA), anti-FLAG (1:1000, Sigma, Oakville, ON) and ACVR1 (1:1000, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA). Reverse transcriptase was conducted using RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Scientific, Ottawa, ON). See Supplementary Table 8 for real-time PCR primer pairs.

Cell counting on K27M-H3.3 and G328V-ACVR1 as well as control iNHA cells was performed in triplicate using the automated Vi-Cell Viability Analyzer from Beckman-Coulter (Mississauga, ON). Cell proliferation was measured by bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation. In brief, Np53fl murine brainstem progenitors were plated in a 96-well flat bottom plate (10 × 103 cells/well) in triplicate and incubated with ACVR1 WT, R206H, or G328V virus for 48 hours. Subsequently, cells were then pulsed with BrdU and treated according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Absorbance was measured using a Molecular Devices Versa Max Tunable Microplate.

Available surgical and autopsy material was immunohistochemically stained with selected antibodies against H3K27me3, H3K27Ac, H3k4me3 and H3K9ac. Five micrometer sections of DIPG tissue-microarrays (TMA) constructed in our lab or tissue sections were cut from paraffin blocks and mounted on positively charged slides. The sections were baked overnight at 60°C. Wax was removed by several xylene washes followed by tissue hydration by immersion in decreasing concentrations of ethanol in distilled water. The tissue sections were heat treated in citrate buffer for the purpose of antigen retrieval. Immunodetection was performed with the automated Benchmark XT stainer (Ventana, Tucson, AZ) using the Ultraview Universal DAB Detection kit (Ventana). Slides were counterstaining with hematoloxilin II kit (Ventana).

Statistical analysis was performed on GraphPad Prism 5 software (La Jolla, CA) or SPSS v21 (IBM Corp, Armonk, NY). Odds ratios were calculated as previously shown31. Two group comparisons were analyzed with two-sided Fisher’s exact test. Continuous scale data were calculated with unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test. P values ≤ 0.05 were considered significant. Cox proportional hazards model and significance testing (α = 0.05) based on the Wald test were used for multivariate analysis.