---
reference_id: "PMID:16168933"
title: Symptomatic therapy and neurorehabilitation in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Kesselring J
- Beer S
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70193-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Symptomatic therapy and neurorehabilitation in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Kesselring J, Beer S
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70193-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70193-9)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2005 Oct;4(10):643-52. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70193-9.

Symptomatic therapy and neurorehabilitation in multiple sclerosis.

Kesselring J(1), Beer S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, Rehabilitation Centre, 
CH-7317, Valens, Switzerland. kesselring.klival@spin.ch

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is associated with a variety of symptoms and functional 
deficits that result in a range of progressive impairments and handicap. 
Symptoms that contribute to loss of independence and restrictions in social 
activities lead to continuing decline in quality of life. Our aim is to give an 
updated overview on the management of symptoms and rehabilitation measures in 
MS. Appropriate use of these treatment options might help to reduce long-term 
consequences of MS in daily life. First, we review treatment of the main 
symptoms of MS: fatigue, bladder and bowel disturbances, sexual dysfunction, 
cognitive and affective disorders, and spasticity. Even though these symptomatic 
therapies have benefits, their use is limited by possible side-effects. 
Moreover, many common disabling symptoms, such as weakness, are not amenable to 
drug treatment. However, neurorehabilitation has been shown to ease the burden 
of these symptoms by improving self-performance and independence. Second, we 
discuss comprehensive multidisciplinary rehabilitation and specific treatment 
options. Even though rehabilitation has no direct influence on disease 
progression, studies to date have shown that this type of intervention improves 
personal activities and ability to participate in social activities, thereby 
improving quality of life. Treatment should be adapted depending on: the 
individual patient's needs, demands of their surrounding environment, type and 
degree of disability, and treatment goals. Improvement commonly persists for 
several months beyond the treatment period, mostly as a result of reconditioning 
and adaptation and appropriate use of medical and social support at home. These 
findings suggest that quality of life is determined by disability and handicap 
more than by functional deficits and disease progression.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70193-9
PMID: 16168933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]