---
reference_id: "PMID:30064963"
title: "Alström syndrome: Renal findings in correlation with obesity, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia and cardiomyopathy in 38 patients prospectively evaluated at the NIH clinical center."
authors:
- Waldman M
- Han JC
- Reyes-Capo DP
- Bryant J
- Carson KA
- Turkbey B
- Choyke P
- Naggert JK
- Gahl WA
- Marshall JD
- Gunay-Aygun M
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.07.010
keywords:
- Adult
- "Alstrom Syndrome/complications, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cardiomyopathies/complications, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "Dyslipidemias/complications, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Insulin Resistance/genetics
- "Kidney/metabolism, pathology"
- "Kidney Diseases/complications, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Obesity/complications, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Proteins/genetics
- Retinal Degeneration
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alström syndrome: Renal findings in correlation with obesity, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia and cardiomyopathy in 38 patients prospectively evaluated at the NIH clinical center.
**Authors:** Waldman M, Han JC, Reyes-Capo DP, Bryant J, Carson KA, Turkbey B, Choyke P, Naggert JK, Gahl WA, Marshall JD, Gunay-Aygun M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.07.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.07.010)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2018 Sep;125(1-2):181-191. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.07.010.
Epub 2018 Jul 24.

Alström syndrome: Renal findings in correlation with obesity, insulin
resistance, dyslipidemia and cardiomyopathy in 38 patients prospectively
evaluated at the NIH clinical center.

Waldman M(1), Han JC(2), Reyes-Capo DP(3), Bryant J(4), Carson KA(5), Turkbey
B(6), Choyke P(6), Naggert JK(7), Gahl WA(8), Marshall JD(7), Gunay-Aygun M(9).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(2)Unit on Metabolism and Neuroendocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, United States; Section on Growth and Obesity, National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, United States; Departments of Pediatrics and Physiology, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center, Le Bonheur Children's Foundation Research
Institute, Memphis, TN, United States.
(3)Unit on Metabolism and Neuroendocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, United States.
(4)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Baltimore, MD, USA; Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of
Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United
States.
(6)Molecular Imaging Program, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States.
(7)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States.
(8)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States; Office of the Clinical
Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, United States; NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common
Fund, Office of the Director, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda 20892, MD,
United States.
(9)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States; Office of the Clinical
Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, United States; Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Department of Pediatrics and McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. Electronic address:
mgaygun@mail.nih.gov.

Alström Syndrome is a ciliopathy associated with obesity, insulin
resistance/type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiomyopathy, retinal degeneration,
hearing loss, progressive liver and kidney disease, and normal cognitive
function. ALMS1, the protein defective in this disorder, localizes to the
cytoskeleton, microtubule organizing center, as well as the centrosomes and
ciliary basal bodies and plays roles in formation and maintenance of cilia, cell
cycle regulation, and endosomal trafficking. Kidney disease in this disorder has
not been well characterized. We performed comprehensive multisystem evaluations
on 38 patients. Kidney function decreased progressively; eGFR varied inversely
with age (p = 0.002). Eighteen percent met the definition for chronic kidney
disease (eGFR < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 and proteinuria); all were adults with median
age of 32.8 (20.6-37.9) years. After adjusting for age, there were no
significant associations of kidney dysfunction with type 2 diabetes mellitus,
dyslipidemia, hypertension, cardiomyopathy or portal hypertension suggesting
that kidney disease in AS is a primary manifestation of the syndrome due to lack
of ALMS1 protein. Approximately one-third of patients had hyperechogenicity of
the renal parenchyma on imaging. While strict control of type 2 diabetes
mellitus may decrease kidney-related morbidity and mortality in Alström
syndrome, identification of novel targeted therapies is needed.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.07.010
PMCID: PMC7984722
PMID: 30064963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
