---
reference_id: "PMID:30901771"
title: Progressive Characterization of Visual Phenotype in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Mutant Mice.
authors:
- Kretschmer V
- Patnaik SR
- Kretschmer F
- Chawda MM
- Hernandez-Hernandez V
- May-Simera HL
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.18-25210
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progressive Characterization of Visual Phenotype in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Mutant Mice.
**Authors:** Kretschmer V, Patnaik SR, Kretschmer F, Chawda MM, Hernandez-Hernandez V, May-Simera HL
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.18-25210](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.18-25210)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2019 Mar 1;60(4):1132-1143. doi: 
10.1167/iovs.18-25210.

Progressive Characterization of Visual Phenotype in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Mutant 
Mice.

Kretschmer V(1), Patnaik SR(1), Kretschmer F(2), Chawda MM(3), 
Hernandez-Hernandez V(3)(4), May-Simera HL(1).

Author information:
(1)Cilia Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Physiology, Johannes Gutenberg 
University, Mainz, Germany.
(2)Scientific Computing Facility, Max Planck Institute for Brain Research, 
Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)Genetics and Genomic Medicine Programme, Great Ormond Street Institute of 
Child Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, College of Health and Life Sciences, Brunel 
University London, London, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an archetypical ciliopathy caused by 
defective ciliary trafficking and consequent function. Insights gained from BBS 
mouse models are applicable to other syndromic and nonsyndromic retinal 
diseases. This progressive characterization of the visual phenotype in three BBS 
mouse models sets a baseline for testing therapeutic interventions.
METHODS: Longitudinal acquisition of electroretinograms, optical coherence 
tomography scans, and visual acuity using the optomotor reflex in Bbs6/Mkks, 
Bbs8/Ttc8, and Bbs5 knockout mice. Gene and protein expression analysis in vivo 
and in vitro.
RESULTS: Complete loss of BBS5, BBS6, or BBS8 leads to different rates of 
retinal degeneration and visual function over time. BBS8-deficient mice showed 
the fastest rate of degeneration, and BBS8 seems to be required for cone 
photoreceptors to reach functional maturity. In contrast, the loss of BBS5 (a 
further BBSome component) showed very little degeneration. Loss of BBS8 versus 
BBS5 resulted in different physiologic responses both in vivo and in vitro. 
BBS6-deficient mice show a slower rate of degeneration with both rod and cone 
function reducing at a similar rate.
CONCLUSIONS: The mouse models analyzed show distinct and diverging courses of 
degeneration upon loss of BBS5, BBS6, or BBS8, which can be used as a benchmark 
to test therapeutic interventions. Close consideration of the different 
phenotypes reveal subtle but important differences relating to their function. 
Because we also see differences in terms of phenotype depending on the type of 
visual assessment used, our data highlight the importance of using a 
combinatorial approach for assessment of visual function.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.18-25210
PMID: 30901771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]