---
reference_id: "PMID:19029950"
title: Merlin regulates transmembrane receptor accumulation and signaling at the plasma membrane in primary mouse Schwann cells and in human schwannomas.
authors:
- Lallemand D
- Manent J
- Couvelard A
- Watilliaux A
- Siena M
- Chareyre F
- Lampin A
- Niwa-Kawakita M
- Kalamarides M
- Giovannini M
journal: Oncogene
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.427
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Cell Proliferation
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/metabolism
- Mice
- "Models, Biological"
- Neurilemmoma/metabolism
- "Neurofibromin 2/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Platelet-Derived Growth Factor/metabolism
- Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases/metabolism
- "Receptor, ErbB-3/metabolism"
- Schwann Cells/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Merlin regulates transmembrane receptor accumulation and signaling at the plasma membrane in primary mouse Schwann cells and in human schwannomas.
**Authors:** Lallemand D, Manent J, Couvelard A, Watilliaux A, Siena M, Chareyre F, Lampin A, Niwa-Kawakita M, Kalamarides M, Giovannini M
**Journal:** Oncogene (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2008.427](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2008.427)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2009 Feb 12;28(6):854-65. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.427. Epub 2008 Nov
24.

Merlin regulates transmembrane receptor accumulation and signaling at the plasma 
membrane in primary mouse Schwann cells and in human schwannomas.

Lallemand D(1), Manent J, Couvelard A, Watilliaux A, Siena M, Chareyre F, Lampin 
A, Niwa-Kawakita M, Kalamarides M, Giovannini M.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U674, Paris, France.

The NF2 gene product, merlin/schwannomin, is a cytoskeleton organizer with 
unique growth-inhibiting activity in specific cell types. A narrow spectrum of 
tumors is associated with NF2 deficiency, mainly schwannomas and meningiomas, 
suggesting cell-specific mechanisms of growth control. We have investigated 
merlin function in mouse Schwann cells (SCs). We found that merlin regulates 
contact inhibition of proliferation by limiting the delivery of several growth 
factor receptors at the plasma membrane of primary SCs. Notably, upon 
cell-to-cell contact, merlin downregulates the membrane levels of ErbB2 and 
ErbB3, thus inhibiting the activity of the downstream mitogenic signaling 
pathways protein kinase B and mitogen-activated protein kinase. Consequently, 
loss of merlin activity is associated with elevated levels of ErbB receptors in 
primary SCs. We also observed accumulation of growth factor receptors such as 
ErbB2 and 3, insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor and platelet-derived growth 
factor receptor in peripheral nerves of Nf2-mutant mice and in human NF2 
schwannomas, suggesting that this mechanism could play an important role in 
tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2008.427
PMID: 19029950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]