---
reference_id: "PMID:25145518"
title: The symptom complex of familial sinus node dysfunction and myocardial noncompaction is associated with mutations in the HCN4 channel.
authors:
- Schweizer PA
- Schröter J
- Greiner S
- Haas J
- Yampolsky P
- Mereles D
- Buss SJ
- Seyler C
- Bruehl C
- Draguhn A
- Koenen M
- Meder B
- Katus HA
- Thomas D
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.06.1155
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- Echocardiography
- "Electrophysiologic Techniques, Cardiac"
- Female
- Germany/epidemiology
- HEK293 Cells
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, genetics"
- Humans
- Hyperpolarization-Activated Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated Channels/genetics
- Male
- Membrane Potentials
- Middle Aged
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Potassium Channels/genetics
- Prevalence
- "Sick Sinus Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, genetics"
- Syndrome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The symptom complex of familial sinus node dysfunction and myocardial noncompaction is associated with mutations in the HCN4 channel.
**Authors:** Schweizer PA, Schröter J, Greiner S, Haas J, Yampolsky P, Mereles D, Buss SJ, Seyler C, Bruehl C, Draguhn A, Koenen M, Meder B, Katus HA, Thomas D
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2014.06.1155](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2014.06.1155)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Aug 26;64(8):757-67. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.06.1155.

The symptom complex of familial sinus node dysfunction and myocardial 
noncompaction is associated with mutations in the HCN4 channel.

Schweizer PA(1), Schröter J(2), Greiner S(3), Haas J(4), Yampolsky P(3), Mereles 
D(3), Buss SJ(3), Seyler C(3), Bruehl C(5), Draguhn A(5), Koenen M(6), Meder 
B(4), Katus HA(4), Thomas D(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; DZHK 
(German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Heidelberg/Mannheim, 
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: 
patrick.schweizer@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Department of Cardiology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; 
Institute for Physiology and Pathophysiology, University of Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Cardiology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Cardiology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; DZHK 
(German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Heidelberg/Mannheim, 
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Institute for Physiology and Pathophysiology, University of Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)Department of Cardiology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; 
Institute for Physiology and Pathophysiology, University of Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Max-Planck-Institute 
for Medical Research, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Cardiology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; DZHK 
(German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Heidelberg/Mannheim, 
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: 
dierk.thomas@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Aug 26;64(8):768-71. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2014.06.1154.

BACKGROUND: Inherited arrhythmias were originally considered isolated electrical 
defects. There is growing evidence that ion channel dysfunction also contributes 
to myocardial disorders, but genetic overlap has not been reported for sinus 
node dysfunction (SND) and noncompaction cardiomyopathy (NCCM).
OBJECTIVES: The study sought to investigate a familial electromechanical 
disorder characterized by SND and NCCM, and to identify the underlying genetic 
basis.
METHODS: The index family and a cohort of unrelated probands with sinus 
bradycardia were examined by electrocardiography, Holter recording, exercise 
stress test, echocardiography, and/or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. 
Targeted next-generation and direct sequencing were used for candidate gene 
analysis and mutation scanning. Ion channels were expressed in HEK293 cells and 
studied using patch-clamp recordings.
RESULTS: SND and biventricular NCCM were diagnosed in multiple members of a 
German family. Segregation analysis suggested autosomal-dominant inheritance of 
the combined phenotype. When looking for potentially disease-causing gene 
variants with cosegregation, a novel hyperpolarization-activated cyclic 
nucleotide channel 4 (HCN4)-G482R mutation and a common cysteine and 
glycine-rich protein 3 (CSRP3)-W4R variant were identified. HCN4-G482R is 
located in the highly conserved channel pore domain. Mutant subunits were 
nonfunctional and exerted dominant-negative effects on wild-type current. 
CSRP3-W4R has previously been linked to dilated and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
but was also found in healthy subjects. Moreover, different truncation (695X) 
and missense (P883R) HCN4 mutations segregated with a similar combined phenotype 
in an additional, unrelated family and a single unrelated proband respectively, 
which both lacked CSRP3-W4R.
CONCLUSIONS: The symptom complex of SND and NCCM is associated with heritable 
HCN4 defects. The NCCM phenotype may be aggravated by a common CSRP3 variant in 
one of the families.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.06.1155
PMID: 25145518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]