---
reference_id: "PMID:35199613"
title: "WAGR, Sex Reversal, Bilateral Gonadoblastomas, and Intralobar Nephrogenic Rests: Uncertainties of Pre-Biopsy Chemotherapy in a High Risk Syndrome for Nephroblastoma."
authors:
- Craver R
- Stark M
- Moss S
- Long S
- Prasad P
- C Roth C
journal: Fetal Pediatr Pathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/15513815.2022.2043962
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Gonadoblastoma/genetics, pathology"
- Rest
- "Wilms Tumor/drug therapy, genetics"
- Syndrome
- "Kidney Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Ovarian Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WAGR, Sex Reversal, Bilateral Gonadoblastomas, and Intralobar Nephrogenic Rests: Uncertainties of Pre-Biopsy Chemotherapy in a High Risk Syndrome for Nephroblastoma.
**Authors:** Craver R, Stark M, Moss S, Long S, Prasad P, C Roth C
**Journal:** Fetal Pediatr Pathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15513815.2022.2043962](https://doi.org/10.1080/15513815.2022.2043962)

## Content

1. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2023 Feb;42(1):63-71. doi:
10.1080/15513815.2022.2043962.  Epub 2022 Feb 24.

WAGR, Sex Reversal, Bilateral Gonadoblastomas, and Intralobar Nephrogenic Rests: 
Uncertainties of Pre-Biopsy Chemotherapy in a High Risk Syndrome for 
Nephroblastoma.

Craver R(1), Stark M(1), Moss S(1), Long S(2), Prasad P(3), C Roth C(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pathology, Children's Hospital of New Orleans and Louisiana 
State University Health Science Centers, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Tulane University Medical School, New Orleans, LA, 
USA.
(3)Hematology and Oncology Section, Department of Pediatrics, Children's 
Hospital of New Orleans and Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 
New Orleans, LA, USA.
(4)Department of Urology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New 
Orleans, LA, USA.

Background: WT1 deletions are associated with nephroblastomas, WT mutations are 
associated with 46, XY sex reversal. It is unclear why only a few WT1 deletions 
are associated with sex reversal. Case report. This 46, XY female had a 15.2 MB 
interstitial deletion of 11p14.1p11.2, which included WT1 and FSHB. No 
pathogenic abnormalities were identified in 156 other genes associated with 
disorders of sexual development. Bilateral gonadoblastomas were incidentally 
diagnosed at 17 months of age at the time of prophylactic gonadectomies. She was 
treated without biopsy for bilateral nephroblastomas radiologically identified 
at 18 months of age. Bilateral partial nephrectomies contained treated 
intralobular nephrogenic rests. Conclusion: It is unclear why WT1 deletions are 
less associated with 46, XY sex reversal than WT1 mutations. Treating suspected 
nephroblastomas without biopsy, even in patients with syndromes associated with 
bilateral nephroblastomas, may still lead to diagnostic and therapeutic 
uncertainties.

DOI: 10.1080/15513815.2022.2043962
PMID: 35199613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]