---
reference_id: "PMID:35398346"
title: Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth-Pathophysiology and Its Implications for Definition and Management.
authors:
- Bushyhead D
- Quigley EMM
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2022.04.002
keywords:
- "Blind Loop Syndrome/diagnosis, microbiology, therapy"
- Breath Tests
- Humans
- "Intestine, Small/microbiology"
- "Irritable Bowel Syndrome/diagnosis, microbiology, therapy"
- "Malabsorption Syndromes/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth-Pathophysiology and Its Implications for Definition and Management.
**Authors:** Bushyhead D, Quigley EMM
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2022.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2022.04.002)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2022 Sep;163(3):593-607. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2022.04.002.
Epub 2022 Apr 7.

Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth-Pathophysiology and Its Implications for
Definition and Management.

Bushyhead D(1), Quigley EMM(2).

Author information:
(1)Lynda K. and David M. Underwood Center for Digestive Disorders, Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Houston Methodist Hospital and Weill Cornell
Medical College, Houston, Texas. Electronic address:
dwbushyhead@houstonmethodist.org.
(2)Lynda K. and David M. Underwood Center for Digestive Disorders, Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Houston Methodist Hospital and Weill Cornell
Medical College, Houston, Texas.

The concept of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) arose in the context
of maldigestion and malabsorption among patients with obvious risk factors that
permitted the small bowel to be colonized by potentially injurious colonic
microbiota. Such colonization resulted in clinical signs, symptoms, and
laboratory abnormalities that were explicable within a coherent
pathophysiological framework. Coincident with advances in medical science,
diagnostic testing evolved from small bowel culture to breath tests and on to
next-generation, culture-independent microbial analytics. The advent and ready
availability of breath tests generated a dramatic expansion in both the rate of
diagnosis of SIBO and the range of associated gastrointestinal and
nongastrointestinal clinical scenarios. However, issues with the specificity of
these same breath tests have clouded their interpretation and aroused some
skepticism regarding the role of SIBO in this expanded clinical repertoire.
Furthermore, the pathophysiological plausibility that underpins SIBO as a cause
of maldigestion/malabsorption is lacking in regard to its purported role in
irritable bowel syndrome, for example. One hopes that the application of an
ever-expanding armamentarium of modern molecular microbiology to the human small
intestinal microbiome in both health and disease will ultimately resolve this
impasse and provide an objective basis for the diagnosis of SIBO.

Copyright © 2022 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2022.04.002
PMID: 35398346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
