---
reference_id: "PMID:39143735"
title: "Mitochondrial HMG-CoA Synthase Deficiency: A Cyclic Vomiting Mimic Without Reliable Biochemical Markers."
authors:
- Niehaus AD
- Cooper H
- Lee CU
journal: J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/23247096241267154
keywords:
- Humans
- Vomiting/etiology
- Female
- "Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase/genetics, deficiency"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Biomarkers/urine, blood"
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics, complications"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Acetyl-CoA C-Acetyltransferase/deficiency
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial HMG-CoA Synthase Deficiency: A Cyclic Vomiting Mimic Without Reliable Biochemical Markers.
**Authors:** Niehaus AD, Cooper H, Lee CU
**Journal:** J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/23247096241267154](https://doi.org/10.1177/23247096241267154)

## Content

1. J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep. 2024 Jan-Dec;12:23247096241267154. doi:
10.1177/23247096241267154.

Mitochondrial HMG-CoA Synthase Deficiency: A Cyclic Vomiting Mimic Without
Reliable Biochemical Markers.

Niehaus AD(1), Cooper H(1), Lee CU(1).

Author information:
(1)Stanford University, CA, USA.

Here, we report an individual, eventually diagnosed with HMG-CoA synthase
deficiency, who presented with a cyclic vomiting phenotype. HMG-CoA synthase
deficiency is a rare disorder affecting ketone body synthesis in which affected
individuals typically present at a young age with hypoketotic hypoglycemia,
lethargy, encephalopathy, and hepatomegaly, usually triggered by catabolism
(e.g., infection or prolonged fasting). This individual presented with recurrent
episodes of vomiting and lethargy, often associated with hypoglycemia or
hyperglycemia, at 3 years of age. Metabolic labs revealed nonspecific
abnormalities in her urine organic acids (showing mild elevation of dicarboxylic
acids with relatively low excretion of ketones) and a normal acylcarnitine
profile. Given her clinical presentation, as well as a normal upper
gastrointestinal series, esophagogastroduodenoscopy with biopsies, and abdominal
ultrasound, she was diagnosed with cyclic vomiting syndrome at 3 years of age.
Molecular testing completed at 7 years of age revealed a previously reported
pathogenic sequence variant (c.1016+1G>A) and a novel likely pathogenic deletion
(1.57 kB deletion, including exon 1) within HMGCS2 consistent with HMG-CoA
synthase deficiency. This individual's presentation, mimicking cyclic vomiting
syndrome, widens the clinical spectrum of HMG-CoA synthase deficiency. In
addition, this case highlights the importance of molecular genetic testing in
such presentations, as this rare disorder lacks specific metabolic markers.

DOI: 10.1177/23247096241267154
PMCID: PMC11325301
PMID: 39143735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
