---
reference_id: "PMID:24419060"
title: The selective anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor ASP3026 induces tumor regression and prolongs survival in non-small cell lung cancer model mice.
authors:
- Mori M
- Ueno Y
- Konagai S
- Fushiki H
- Shimada I
- Kondoh Y
- Saito R
- Mori K
- Shindou N
- Soga T
- Sakagami H
- Furutani T
- Doihara H
- Kudoh M
- Kuromitsu S
journal: Mol Cancer Ther
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0395
keywords:
- 3T3 Cells
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- Cell Survival/drug effects
- Drug Synergism
- Glutamates/pharmacology
- "Guanine/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Molecular Structure
- Paclitaxel/pharmacology
- Pemetrexed
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/chemistry, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology"
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Sulfones/chemistry, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology"
- Survival Analysis
- "Triazines/chemistry, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology"
- Tumor Burden/drug effects
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The selective anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor ASP3026 induces tumor regression and prolongs survival in non-small cell lung cancer model mice.
**Authors:** Mori M, Ueno Y, Konagai S, Fushiki H, Shimada I, Kondoh Y, Saito R, Mori K, Shindou N, Soga T, Sakagami H, Furutani T, Doihara H, Kudoh M, Kuromitsu S
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Ther (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0395](https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0395)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Feb;13(2):329-40. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0395.
Epub  2014 Jan 13.

The selective anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor ASP3026
induces tumor regression and prolongs survival in non-small cell lung cancer
model mice.

Mori M(1), Ueno Y, Konagai S, Fushiki H, Shimada I, Kondoh Y, Saito R, Mori K,
Shindou N, Soga T, Sakagami H, Furutani T, Doihara H, Kudoh M, Kuromitsu S.

Author information:
(1)Corresponding Author: Masamichi Mori, Pharmacology Research Labs, Oncology,
Drug Discovery Research, Astellas Pharma Inc., 21, Miyukigaoka, Tsukuba-shi,
Ibaraki 305-8585, Japan. masamichi.mori@astellas.com.

Activation of anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase (ALK) is involved in
the pathogenesis of several carcinomas, including non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Echinoderm microtubule-associated protein like 4 (EML4)-ALK, which is
derived from the rearrangement of ALK and EML4 genes, has been validated as a
therapeutic target in a subset of patients with NSCLC. Here, we investigated the
effects of ASP3026, a novel small-molecule ALK inhibitor, against ALK-driven
NSCLC. ASP3026 inhibited ALK activity in an ATP-competitive manner and had an
inhibitory spectrum that differed from that of crizotinib, a dual ALK/MET
inhibitor. In mice xenografted with NCI-H2228 cells expressing EML4-ALK, orally
administered ASP3026 was well absorbed in tumor tissues, reaching concentrations
>10-fold higher than those in plasma, and induced tumor regression with a wide
therapeutic margin between efficacious and toxic doses. In the same mouse model,
ASP3026 enhanced the antitumor activities of paclitaxel and pemetrexed without
affecting body weight. ASP3026 also showed potent antitumor activities,
including tumor shrinkage to a nondetectable level, in hEML4-ALK transgenic mice
and prolonged survival in mice with intrapleural NCI-H2228 xenografts. In an
intrahepatic xenograft model using NCI-H2228 cells, ASP3026 induced continuous
tumor regression, whereas mice treated with crizotinib showed tumor relapse
after an initial response. Finally, ASP3026 exhibited potent antitumor activity
against cells expressing EML4-ALK with a mutation in the gatekeeper position
(L1196M) that confers crizotinib resistance. Taken together, these findings
indicate that ASP3026 has potential efficacy for NSCLC and is expected to
improve the therapeutic outcomes of patients with cancer with ALK abnormality.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0395
PMID: 24419060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
