---
reference_id: "PMID:37108955"
title: Diagnosis and Treatment of Invasive Aspergillosis Caused by Non-fumigatus Aspergillus spp.
authors:
- Stemler J
- Többen C
- Lass-Flörl C
- Steinmann J
- Ackermann K
- Rath PM
- Simon M
- Cornely OA
- Koehler P
journal: J Fungi (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jof9040500
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Treatment of Invasive Aspergillosis Caused by Non-fumigatus Aspergillus spp.
**Authors:** Stemler J, Többen C, Lass-Flörl C, Steinmann J, Ackermann K, Rath PM, Simon M, Cornely OA, Koehler P
**Journal:** J Fungi (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jof9040500](https://doi.org/10.3390/jof9040500)

## Content

1. J Fungi (Basel). 2023 Apr 21;9(4):500. doi: 10.3390/jof9040500.

Diagnosis and Treatment of Invasive Aspergillosis Caused by Non-fumigatus 
Aspergillus spp.

Stemler J(1)(2)(3), Többen C(1)(2)(3), Lass-Flörl C(4), Steinmann J(5)(6), 
Ackermann K(5), Rath PM(6), Simon M(7), Cornely OA(1)(2)(3)(8), Koehler P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department I of Internal Medicine, Center for Integrated Oncology Aachen Bonn 
Cologne Duesseldorf (CIO ABCD), European Diamond Excellence Center for Medical 
Mycology (ECMM), Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital of Cologne, University 
of Cologne, 50937 Cologne, Germany.
(2)Institute of Translational Research, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular 
Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, 
50923 Cologne, Germany.
(3)German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Bonn-Cologne, 50923 
Cologne, Germany.
(4)Institute of Hygiene and Medical Microbiology, European Diamond Excellence 
Center for Medical Mycology (ECMM), Medical University of Innsbruck, 6020 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(5)Institute of Clinical Hygiene, Medical Microbiology and Infectiology, 
Paracelsus Medical University, Klinikum Nürnberg, 90419 Nuremberg, Germany.
(6)Institute of Medical Microbiology, University Hospital Essen, European 
Diamond Excellence Center for Medical Mycology (ECMM), 45147 Essen, Germany.
(7)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, Faculty of 
Medicine, University Hospital of Cologne, University of Cologne, 50937 Cologne, 
Germany.
(8)Clinical Trials Centre Cologne (ZKS Köln), University of Cologne, 50935 
Cologne, Germany.

With increasing frequency, clinical and laboratory-based mycologists are 
consulted on invasive fungal diseases caused by rare fungal species. This review 
aims to give an overview of the management of invasive aspergillosis (IA) caused 
by non-fumigatus Aspergillus spp.-namely A. flavus, A. terreus, A. niger and A. 
nidulans-including diagnostic and therapeutic differences and similarities to A. 
fumigatus. A. flavus is the second most common Aspergillus spp. isolated in 
patients with IA and the predominant species in subtropical regions. Treatment 
is complicated by its intrinsic resistance against amphotericin B (AmB) and high 
minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) for voriconazole. A. nidulans has been 
frequently isolated in patients with long-term immunosuppression, mostly in 
patients with primary immunodeficiencies such as chronic granulomatous disease. 
It has been reported to disseminate more often than other Aspergillus spp. 
Innate resistance against AmB has been suggested but not yet proven, while MICs 
seem to be elevated. A. niger is more frequently reported in less severe 
infections such as otomycosis. Triazoles exhibit varying MICs and are therefore 
not strictly recommended as first-line treatment for IA caused by A. niger, 
while patient outcome seems to be more favorable when compared to IA due to 
other Aspergillus species. A. terreus-related infections have been reported 
increasingly as the cause of acute and chronic aspergillosis. A recent 
prospective international multicenter surveillance study showed Spain, Austria, 
and Israel to be the countries with the highest density of A. terreus species 
complex isolates collected. This species complex seems to cause dissemination 
more often and is intrinsically resistant to AmB. Non-fumigatus aspergillosis is 
difficult to manage due to complex patient histories, varying infection sites 
and potential intrinsic resistances to antifungals. Future investigational 
efforts should aim at amplifying the knowledge on specific diagnostic measures 
and their on-site availability, as well as defining optimal treatment strategies 
and outcomes of non-fumigatus aspergillosis.

DOI: 10.3390/jof9040500
PMCID: PMC10141595
PMID: 37108955

Conflict of interest statement: J.S. (Jannik Stemler) has received research 
grants by the Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and Basilea 
Pharmaceuticals Inc.; has received speaker honoraria by Pfizer Inc., Gilead and 
AbbVie; has been a consultant to Gilead, Produkt&Markt GmbH, Alvea Vax. and 
Micron Research, and has received travel grants by German Society for Infectious 
Diseases (DGI e.V.) and Meta-Alexander Foundation. C.T. declares no conflict of 
interest. C.L.-F. reports grants, consulting fees, support for travel to 
meetings, and payment for lectures including service on speakers’ bureaus from 
Gilead Sciences, Astellas Pharma, Merck Sharp and Dahme, Basilea, and Angelini. 
J.S. (Jörg Steinmann) has received speakers’ honoraria by Pfizer Inc., Gilead 
Sciences and bioMerieux. K.A. declares no conflict of interest. P.-M.R. declares 
no conflict of interestMS declares no conflict of interestOAC reports grants or 
contracts from Amplyx, Basilea, BMBF, Cidara, DZIF, EU-DG RTD (101037867), F2G, 
Gilead, Matinas, MedPace, MSD, Mundipharma, Octapharma, Pfizer, Scynexis; 
Consulting fees from Abbvie, Amplyx, Biocon, Biosys, Cidara, Da Volterra, 
Gilead, IQVIA, Janssen, Matinas, MedPace, Menarini, Molecular Partners, MSG-ERC, 
Noxxon, Octapharma, Pardes, Pfizer, PSI, Scynexis, Seres; Honoraria for lectures 
from Abbott, Abbvie, Al-Jazeera Pharmaceuticals, Astellas, Gilead, Grupo 
Biotoscana/United Medical/Knight, Hikma, MedScape, MedUpdate, Merck/MSD, Mylan, 
Noscendo, Pfizer, Shionogi; Payment for expert testimony from Cidara; 
Participation on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory Board from Actelion, 
Allecra, Cidara, Entasis, IQVIA, Janssen, MedPace, Paratek, PSI, Pulmocide, 
Shionogi, The Prime Meridian Group; A patent at the German Patent and Trade Mark 
Office (DE 10 2021 113 007.7). Stocks from CoRe Consulting. P.K. reports grants 
or contracts from German Federal Ministry of Research and Education (BMBF) 
B-FAST (Bundesweites Forschungsnetz Angewandte Surveillance und Testung) and 
NAPKON (Nationales Pandemie Kohorten Netz, German National Pandemic Cohort 
Network) of the Network University Medicine (NUM) and the State of North 
Rhine-Westphalia; Consulting fees Ambu GmbH, Gilead Sciences, Mundipharma 
Resarch Limited, Noxxon N.V. and Pfizer Pharma; Honoraria for lectures from 
Akademie für Infektionsmedizin e.V., Ambu GmbH, Astellas Pharma, BioRad 
Laboratories Inc., Datamed GmbH, European Confederation of Medical Mycology, 
Gilead Sciences, GPR Academy Ruesselsheim, HELIOS Kliniken GmbH, 
Lahn-Dill-Kliniken GmbH, medupdate GmbH, MedMedia GmbH, MSD Sharp & Dohme GmbH, 
Pfizer Pharma GmbH, Scilink Comunicación Científica SC and University Hospital 
and LMU Munich; Participation on an Advisory Board from Ambu GmbH, Gilead 
Sciences, Mundipharma Resarch Limited and Pfizer Pharma; A pending patent 
currently reviewed at the German Patent and Trade Mark Office (DE 10 2021 113 
007.7); Other non-financial interests from Elsevier, Wiley and Taylor & Francis 
online outside the submitted work.