---
reference_id: "PMID:39260330"
title: International perspective of injection laryngoplasty for laryngeal cleft - A survey study.
authors:
- van Stigt MJB
- Coenraad S
- Stegeman I
- Stokroos RJ
- Tytgat SHAJ
- Lindeboom MYA
- Bittermann AJN
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2024.112097
content_type: abstract_only
---

# International perspective of injection laryngoplasty for laryngeal cleft - A survey study.
**Authors:** van Stigt MJB, Coenraad S, Stegeman I, Stokroos RJ, Tytgat SHAJ, Lindeboom MYA, Bittermann AJN
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijporl.2024.112097](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2024.112097)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2024 Nov;186:112097. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijporl.2024.112097. Epub 2024 Sep 10.

International perspective of injection laryngoplasty for laryngeal cleft - A 
survey study.

van Stigt MJB(1), Coenraad S(2), Stegeman I(3), Stokroos RJ(3), Tytgat SHAJ(4), 
Lindeboom MYA(4), Bittermann AJN(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery, University Medical 
Center Utrecht,Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, the Netherlands; Brain 
Center, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, 
the Netherlands; Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic 
address: m.j.b.vanstigt-3@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery, University Medical 
Center Utrecht,Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery, University Medical 
Center Utrecht,Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, the Netherlands; Brain 
Center, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, 
the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery, University Medical 
Center Utrecht,Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic 
address: a.j.n.Bittermann@umcutrecht.nl.

OBJECTIVES: Laryngeal Cleft (LC) is an anatomical defect that can cause 
swallowing difficulties and subsequent recurrent respiratory symptoms. LC can be 
treated surgically by performing suture repair or by Injection Laryngoplasty 
(IL). The indications and efficacy of IL are debated among pediatric 
otolaryngologists. The aim of this survey study was to review the international 
perspective on IL for LC.
METHODS: An online survey was conducted to assess international opinions on the 
indications and efficacy of IL for LC patients. An online survey was sent to 250 
pediatric otolaryngologists worldwide. The survey included questions on the 
management of LC, the physicians' experience with IL, and their use of IL.
RESULTS: Sixty two (25 %) pediatric otolaryngologists, from 47 medical centers, 
completed the survey. Of the respondents, 38 (62 %) perform IL. The most 
reported indication was as a diagnostic tool. For the respondents who did not 
perform IL, the reasons most reported were that the effect is temporary and that 
there is a need for a second surgery after IL.
CONCLUSION: According to this survey, the perspectives on the use of IL for LC 
differ among pediatric otolaryngologists, and there is variation in peri-and 
postoperative standard of care. The respondents' opinions on IL were partly 
dependent on the intended outcome of its use, i.e., as a permanent treatment or 
for other indications.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2024.112097
PMID: 39260330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.