---
reference_id: "PMID:33896535"
title: Movement Disorder Emergencies.
authors:
- Apetauerova D
- Patel PA
- Burns JD
- Lerner DP
journal: Neurol Clin
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2021.01.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Movement Disorder Emergencies.
**Authors:** Apetauerova D, Patel PA, Burns JD, Lerner DP
**Journal:** Neurol Clin (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ncl.2021.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ncl.2021.01.005)

## Content

1. Neurol Clin. 2021 May;39(2):615-630. doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2021.01.005. Epub 2021
 Mar 31.

Movement Disorder Emergencies.

Apetauerova D(1), Patel PA(2), Burns JD(3), Lerner DP(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, Burlington, MA 
01805, USA; Department of Neurology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA 02111, USA.
(2)Division of Neurology, Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, Burlington, MA 
01805, USA.
(3)Division of Neurology, Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, Burlington, MA 
01805, USA; Department of Neurology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA 02111, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, Tufts University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
(4)Division of Neurology, Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, Burlington, MA 
01805, USA; Department of Neurology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA 02111, USA. Electronic address: david.lerner@lahey.org.

Acute presentation of new movement disorders and acute decompensation of chronic 
movement disorders are uncommon but potentially life-threatening. Inadvertent or 
purposeful overdose of many psychiatric medications can result in acute 
life-threatening movement disorders including serotonin syndrome, neuroleptic 
malignant syndrome, and malignant catatonia. Early withdrawal of potentiating 
medications, treatment with benzodiazepines and other diagnosis-specific drugs, 
and providing appropriate supportive care including airway and breathing 
management, hemodynamic stabilization, fluid resuscitation, and renal support 
including possible hemodialysis are the mainstays of acute management. Many of 
these conditions require admission to the neurologic intensive care unit.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ncl.2021.01.005
PMID: 33896535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors have nothing to disclose.