---
reference_id: "PMID:35265728"
title: Identification of Distinct Long COVID Clinical Phenotypes Through Cluster Analysis of Self-Reported Symptoms.
authors:
- Kenny G
- McCann K
- "O'Brien C"
- Savinelli S
- Tinago W
- Yousif O
- Lambert JS
- "O'Broin C"
- Feeney ER
- De Barra E
- Doran P
- Mallon PWG
- All-Ireland Infectious Diseases (AIID) Cohort Study Group
journal: Open Forum Infect Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofac060
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Distinct Long COVID Clinical Phenotypes Through Cluster Analysis of Self-Reported Symptoms.
**Authors:** Kenny G, McCann K, O'Brien C, Savinelli S, Tinago W, Yousif O, Lambert JS, O'Broin C, Feeney ER, De Barra E, Doran P, Mallon PWG, All-Ireland Infectious Diseases (AIID) Cohort Study Group
**Journal:** Open Forum Infect Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ofid/ofac060](https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofac060)

## Content

1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2022 Mar 7;9(4):ofac060. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofac060. 
eCollection 2022 Apr.

Identification of Distinct Long COVID Clinical Phenotypes Through Cluster 
Analysis of Self-Reported Symptoms.

Kenny G(1)(2), McCann K(2), O'Brien C(3), Savinelli S(1)(2), Tinago W(1), Yousif 
O(4), Lambert JS(1)(3)(5), O'Broin C(1)(2), Feeney ER(1)(2), De Barra E(6)(7), 
Doran P(3), Mallon PWG(1)(2); All-Ireland Infectious Diseases (AIID) Cohort 
Study Group.

Collaborators: Cotter A, Muldoon E, Sheehan G, McGinty T, Lambert JS, Green S, 
Leamy K, Kenny G, McCann K, McCann R, O'Broin C, Waqas S, Savinelli S, Feeney E, 
Mallon PWG, Garcia Leon A, Miles S, Alalwan D, Negi R, de Barra E, McConkey S, 
Hurley K, Sulaiman I, Horgan M, Sadlier C, Eustace J, Kelly C, Bracken T, Whelan 
B, Low J, Yousif O, McNicholas B, Courtney G, Gavin P.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Experimental Pathogen Host Research, University College Dublin, 
Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, St Vincent's University Hospital, Elm 
Park, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Endocrinology Department, Wexford General Hospital, Carricklawn, Wexford, 
Ireland.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, 
Dublin, Ireland.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Beaumont Hospital, Beaumont, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(7)Department of International Health and Tropical Medicine, Royal College of 
Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: We aimed to describe the clinical presentation of individuals 
presenting with prolonged recovery from coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), 
known as long COVID.
METHODS: This was an analysis within a multicenter, prospective cohort study of 
individuals with a confirmed diagnosis of COVID-19 and persistent symptoms >4 
weeks from onset of acute symptoms. We performed a multiple correspondence 
analysis (MCA) on the most common self-reported symptoms and hierarchical 
clustering on the results of the MCA to identify symptom clusters.
RESULTS: Two hundred thirty-three individuals were included in the analysis; the 
median age of the cohort was 43 (interquartile range [IQR], 36-54) years, 74% 
were women, and 77.3% reported a mild initial illness. MCA and hierarchical 
clustering revealed 3 clusters. Cluster 1 had predominantly pain symptoms with a 
higher proportion of joint pain, myalgia, and headache; cluster 2 had a 
preponderance of cardiovascular symptoms with prominent chest pain, shortness of 
breath, and palpitations; and cluster 3 had significantly fewer symptoms than 
the other clusters (2 [IQR, 2-3] symptoms per individual in cluster 3 vs 6 [IQR, 
5-7] and 4 [IQR, 3-5] in clusters 1 and 2, respectively; P < .001). Clusters 1 
and 2 had greater functional impairment, demonstrated by significantly longer 
work absence, higher dyspnea scores, and lower scores in SF-36 domains of 
general health, physical functioning, and role limitation due to physical 
functioning and social functioning.
CONCLUSIONS: Clusters of symptoms are evident in long COVID patients that are 
associated with functional impairments and may point to distinct underlying 
pathophysiologic mechanisms of disease.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofac060
PMCID: PMC8900926
PMID: 35265728