---
reference_id: "PMID:27402657"
title: "Barraquer-Simons syndrome: a unique patient's perspective on diagnosis, disease progression and recontouring treatment."
authors:
- Heidemann LN
- Thomsen JB
- Sørensen JA
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2016-216134
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- Adipose Tissue/surgery
- Adult
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Lipodystrophy/surgery
- Quality of Life
- Syndrome
- Tissue Transplantation/methods
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Barraquer-Simons syndrome: a unique patient's perspective on diagnosis, disease progression and recontouring treatment.
**Authors:** Heidemann LN, Thomsen JB, Sørensen JA
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2016-216134](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2016-216134)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2016 Jul 11;2016:bcr2016216134. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2016-216134.

Barraquer-Simons syndrome: a unique patient's perspective on diagnosis, disease 
progression and recontouring treatment.

Heidemann LN(1), Thomsen JB(1), Sørensen JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.

Erratum in
    BMJ Case Rep. 2021 Jul 6;14(7):e216134corr1. doi: 
10.1136/bcr-2016-216134corr1.

This case report describes a female patient diagnosed with Barraquer-Simons 
syndrome, a rare form of acquired partial lipodystrophy characterised by 
symmetrical loss of adipose tissue from face, neck, upper extremities and the 
trunk with onset in early childhood. Initial symptoms were seen at the age of 
8 years. Our patient did not show signs of renal impairment and this may be 
associated with the syndrome. Treatment of lipoatrophy in these patients is 
limited to cosmetic restoration, and autologous fat grafting has shown sustained 
positive effects with no or very little loss of volume at follow-ups. 
Furthermore, the treatment has resulted in considerable improvements in her 
quality of life and daily functioning. She has not experienced any adverse 
effects. Accurate and early diagnosis is important, and clinicians should 
consider early intervention for these patients. Autologous fat grafting is 
recommended as a safe procedure.

2016 BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2016-216134
PMCID: PMC4956967
PMID: 27402657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]