---
reference_id: "PMID:29739104"
title: Prevalence of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency in Sichuan, China.
authors:
- Zhang J
- Cui Y
- Wang X
- Li Y
- Jiang D
- Dai W
- Jiang Y
journal: Clin Lab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2017.170330
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency in Sichuan, China.
**Authors:** Zhang J, Cui Y, Wang X, Li Y, Jiang D, Dai W, Jiang Y
**Journal:** Clin Lab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.7754/Clin.Lab.2017.170330](https://doi.org/10.7754/Clin.Lab.2017.170330)

## Content

1. Clin Lab. 2018 Mar 1;64(3):383-386. doi: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2017.170330.

Prevalence of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency in Sichuan, China.

Zhang J, Cui Y, Wang X, Li Y, Jiang D, Dai W, Jiang Y.

BACKGROUND: Our goals were to screen newborns and characterize the occurrence of 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency in southwestern China. 
Meanwhile, we would like to analyze the factors that might affect the results of 
neonatal dried blood spots for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase screening test, 
to improve the clinical quality control level, effectively reduce the external 
factors in the process of detection.
METHODS: This study involved an evaluation of G6PD data for 20,644 newborns from 
a universal newborn screening program. Heel prick blood specimens were collected 
around 72 hours after birth and were dried on filter papers. For G6PD deficiency 
the fluorescent spot test was employed. We studied the association between 
incidence of G6PD deficiency and influence factors.
RESULTS: This study involved an evaluation of G6PD data for 20,644 neonatal heel 
prick blood samples from 10,984 males and 9,660 females. There were 503 positive 
results for G6PD deficiency (299 males and 204 females), and the G6PD 
deficiency-positive rate was estimated to be around 2.4%. The gender-specific 
prevalence for males was 2.7%, and for females 2.1%. Multiple factors may 
influence the result of the G6PD test, such as season, temperature, and specimen 
of indwelling time.
CONCLUSIONS: This study analyzed the prevalence of G6PD deficiency in Sichuan, 
China. Accelerating the speed of sample delivery and ensuring availability of 
screening results can aid the screening and diagnosis.

DOI: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2017.170330
PMID: 29739104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]