---
reference_id: "PMID:35344283"
title: Insights from shotgun metagenomics into bacterial species and metabolic pathways associated with NAFLD in obese youth.
authors:
- Testerman T
- Li Z
- Galuppo B
- Graf J
- Santoro N
journal: Hepatol Commun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/hep4.1944
keywords:
- Bacteria/genetics
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome/genetics
- Humans
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways/genetics
- Metagenomics
- Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease/genetics
- Obesity/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights from shotgun metagenomics into bacterial species and metabolic pathways associated with NAFLD in obese youth.
**Authors:** Testerman T, Li Z, Galuppo B, Graf J, Santoro N
**Journal:** Hepatol Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep4.1944](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep4.1944)

## Content

1. Hepatol Commun. 2022 Aug;6(8):1962-1974. doi: 10.1002/hep4.1944. Epub 2022 Mar
 28.

Insights from shotgun metagenomics into bacterial species and metabolic pathways
associated with NAFLD in obese youth.

Testerman T(1), Li Z(2), Galuppo B(2), Graf J(1), Santoro N(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell BiologyUniversity of
ConnecticutStorrsConnecticutUSA.
(2)Department of PediatricsYale University School of MedicineNew
HavenConnecticutUSA.
(3)Department of Medicine and Health Sciences"V. Tiberio" University of
MoliseCampobassoItaly.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common form of liver
disease and is often the precursor for more serious liver conditions such as
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and cirrhosis. Although the gut microbiome has been
implicated in the development of NAFLD, the strong association of obesity with
NAFLD and its effect on microbiome structure has made interpreting study
outcomes difficult. In the present study, we examined the taxonomic and
functional differences between the microbiomes of youth with obesity and with
and without NAFLD. Shotgun metagenome sequencing was performed to profile the
microbiomes of 36 subjects, half of whom were diagnosed with NAFLD using
abdominal magnetic resonance imaging. Beta diversity analysis showed
community-wide differences between the groups (p = 0.002). Specific taxonomic
differences included increased relative abundances of the species
Fusicatenibacter saccharivorans (p = 0.042), Romboutsia ilealis (p = 0.046), and
Actinomyces sp. ICM47 (p = 0.0009), and a decrease of Bacteroides
thetaiotamicron (p = 0.0002), in the NAFLD group as compared with the non-NAFLD
group. At the phylum level, Bacteroidetes (p < 0.0001) was decreased in the
NAFLD group. Functionally, branched-chain amino acid (p = 0.01343) and aromatic
amino acid (p = 0.01343) synthesis pathways had increased relative abundances in
the NAFLD group along with numerous energy use pathways, including pyruvate
fermentation to acetate (p = 0.01318). Conclusion: Community-wide differences
were noted based on NAFLD status, and individual bacterial species along with
specific metabolic pathways were identified as potential drivers of these
differences. The results of the present study support the idea that the NAFLD
phenotype displays a differentiated microbial and functional signature from the
obesity phenotype.

© 2022 The Authors. Hepatology Communications published by Wiley Periodicals LLC
on behalf of American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep4.1944
PMCID: PMC9315112
PMID: 35344283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Nothing to report.
