---
reference_id: "PMID:19593144"
title: "Antiphospholipid syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus: are they separate entities or just clinical presentations on the same scale?"
authors:
- Shoenfeld Y
- Meroni PL
- Toubi E
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32832effdd
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus: are they separate entities or just clinical presentations on the same scale?
**Authors:** Shoenfeld Y, Meroni PL, Toubi E
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0b013e32832effdd](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0b013e32832effdd)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2009 Sep;21(5):495-500. doi:
10.1097/BOR.0b013e32832effdd.

Antiphospholipid syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus: are they separate 
entities or just clinical presentations on the same scale?

Shoenfeld Y(1), Meroni PL, Toubi E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine B and Center for Autoimmune Diseases, Sheba 
Medical Center, Tel-Aviv University, Israel. Shoenfel@post.tau.ac.il

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Although originally described in the context of systemic 
lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid syndrome was then recognized as a primary 
antiphospholipid syndrome without any underlying autoimmune disease in almost 
half of the cases. However, cases of primary antiphospholipid syndrome were 
reported to evolve into systemic lupus erythematosus over time suggesting that 
these apparently different diseases are somehow related.
RECENT FINDINGS: Peculiar biological systemic lupus erythematosus markers such 
as an autoantibody response against chromatin antigens and complement activation 
have been also described in patients with primary antiphospholipid syndrome. 
Distinct polymorphisms of common genetic factors have been associated with 
systemic lupus erythematosus and primary antiphospholipid syndrome supporting 
the notion that these entities are indeed variants within a continuum of the 
same disease.
SUMMARY: A multiorgan involvement that cannot be explained by the thrombophilic 
state per se and similar to the well known clinical manifestations in lupus is 
reported in patients with primary antiphospholipid syndrome. Further studies, 
mainly genetic, will better underline the proximity between primary 
antiphospholipid syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32832effdd
PMID: 19593144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]