---
reference_id: "PMID:20301605"
title: X-Linked Myotubular Myopathy.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Dowling JJ
- Lawlor MW
- Das S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-Linked Myotubular Myopathy.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Dowling JJ, Lawlor MW, Das S

## Content

1. X-Linked Myotubular Myopathy.

Dowling JJ(1), Lawlor MW(2), Das S(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2002 Feb 25 [updated 2018 Aug 23].

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology Program for Genetics and Genome Biology Hospital for 
Sick Children Toronto, Ontario, Canada
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Neuroscience Research 
Center Medical College of Wisconsin Milwaukee, Wisconsin
(3)Department of Human Genetics University of Chicago Chicago, Illinois

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: X-linked myotubular myopathy (X-MTM), also known as 
myotubular myopathy (MTM), is characterized by muscle weakness that ranges from 
severe to mild. Approximately 80% of affected males present with severe 
(classic) X-MTM characterized by polyhydramnios, decreased fetal movement, and 
neonatal weakness, hypotonia, and respiratory failure. Motor milestones are 
significantly delayed and most individuals fail to achieve independent 
ambulation. Weakness is profound and often involves facial and extraocular 
muscles. Respiratory failure is nearly uniform, with most individuals requiring 
24-hour ventilatory assistance. It is estimated that at least 25% of boys with 
severe X-MTM die in the first year of life, and those who survive rarely live 
into adulthood. Males with mild or moderate X-MTM (~20%) achieve motor 
milestones more quickly than males with the severe form; many ambulate 
independently, and may live into adulthood. Most require gastrostomy tubes 
and/or ventilator support. In all subtypes of X-MTM, the muscle disease is not 
obviously progressive. Female carriers of X-MTM are generally asymptomatic, 
although manifesting heterozygotes are increasingly being identified. In 
affected females, symptoms range from severe, generalized weakness presenting in 
childhood, with infantile onset similar to affected male patients, to mild 
(often asymmetric) weakness manifesting in adulthood. Affected adult females may 
experience progressive respiratory decline and ultimately require ventilatory 
support.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of X-MTM is established in a proband with 
suggestive clinical findings and identification of a hemizygous pathogenic 
variant in MTM1 by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is supportive. Management 
optimally involves a team of specialists with expertise in the long-term care of 
children and/or adults with neuromuscular disorders, often including a 
pulmonologist, neurologist, physical therapist and/or rehabilitation medicine 
specialist, and clinical geneticist. Tracheostomy, G-tube feeding, and assistive 
communication devices are often required. Ophthalmologists, orthopedists, and 
orthodontists should address specific medical complications related to the 
underlying myopathy. Surveillance: Annual pulmonary assessment; polysomnography 
every one to three years; routine examination for scoliosis; annual 
ophthalmologic examinations to evaluate for ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, and myopia; 
routine assessment for dental malocclusion.
GENETIC COUNSELING: X-MTM is inherited in an X-linked manner. The risk to sibs 
of a male proband depends on the carrier status of the mother. If the mother is 
a carrier, each sib has a 50% chance of inheriting the MTM1 pathogenic variant. 
Males who inherit the variant will be affected; females who inherit the variant 
will be carriers and will generally not be affected. To date, there are no 
reported males with incomplete penetrance. In simplex cases (i.e., a single 
occurrence in a family), there is a probability of 80%-90% that a woman is a 
carrier if her son has a confirmed MTM1 pathogenic variant. Thus, about 10%-20% 
of males who represent simplex cases have a de novo pathogenic variant in MTM1 
and a mother who is not a carrier. Germline mosaicism has been reported. Carrier 
testing of at-risk female relatives and prenatal testing for a pregnancy at risk 
are possible if the MTM1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
male relative.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301605