---
reference_id: "PMID:20839288"
title: Mutations in FKBP10 cause recessive osteogenesis imperfecta and Bruck syndrome.
authors:
- Kelley BP
- Malfait F
- Bonafe L
- Baldridge D
- Homan E
- Symoens S
- Willaert A
- Elcioglu N
- Van Maldergem L
- Verellen-Dumoulin C
- Gillerot Y
- Napierala D
- Krakow D
- Beighton P
- Superti-Furga A
- De Paepe A
- Lee B
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.250
keywords:
- Adult
- "Arthrogryposis/complications, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Pregnancy
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- Radiography
- Tacrolimus Binding Proteins/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in FKBP10 cause recessive osteogenesis imperfecta and Bruck syndrome.
**Authors:** Kelley BP, Malfait F, Bonafe L, Baldridge D, Homan E, Symoens S, Willaert A, Elcioglu N, Van Maldergem L, Verellen-Dumoulin C, Gillerot Y, Napierala D, Krakow D, Beighton P, Superti-Furga A, De Paepe A, Lee B
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.250](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.250)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Mar;26(3):666-72. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.250.

Mutations in FKBP10 cause recessive osteogenesis imperfecta and Bruck syndrome.

Kelley BP(1), Malfait F, Bonafe L, Baldridge D, Homan E, Symoens S, Willaert A, 
Elcioglu N, Van Maldergem L, Verellen-Dumoulin C, Gillerot Y, Napierala D, 
Krakow D, Beighton P, Superti-Furga A, De Paepe A, Lee B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a genetic disorder of connective tissue 
characterized by bone fragility and alteration in synthesis and 
posttranslational modification of type I collagen. Autosomal dominant OI is 
caused by mutations in the genes (COL1A1 or COL1A2) encoding the chains of type 
I collagen. Bruck syndrome is a recessive disorder featuring congenital 
contractures in addition to bone fragility; Bruck syndrome type 2 is caused by 
mutations in PLOD2 encoding collagen lysyl hydroxylase, whereas Bruck syndrome 
type 1 has been mapped to chromosome 17, with evidence suggesting region 17p12, 
but the gene has remained elusive so far. Recently, the molecular spectrum of OI 
has been expanded with the description of the basis of a unique 
posttranslational modification of type I procollagen, that is, 
3-prolyl-hydroxylation. Three proteins, cartilage-associated protein (CRTAP), 
prolyl-3-hydroxylase-1 (P3H1, encoded by the LEPRE1 gene), and the prolyl 
cis-trans isomerase cyclophilin-B (PPIB), form a complex that is required for 
fibrillar collagen 3-prolyl-hydroxylation, and mutations in each gene have been 
shown to cause recessive forms of OI. Since then, an additional putative 
collagen chaperone complex, composed of FKBP10 (also known as FKBP65) and 
SERPINH1 (also known as HSP47), also has been shown to be mutated in recessive 
OI. Here we describe five families with OI-like bone fragility in association 
with congenital contractures who all had FKBP10 mutations. Therefore, we 
conclude that FKBP10 mutations are a cause of recessive osteogenesis imperfecta 
and Bruck syndrome, possibly Bruck syndrome Type 1 since the location on 
chromosome 17 has not been definitely localized.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.250
PMCID: PMC3179293
PMID: 20839288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]