---
reference_id: "PMID:31157963"
title: Maintenance Olaparib for Germline BRCA-Mutated Metastatic Pancreatic Cancer.
authors:
- Golan T
- Hammel P
- Reni M
- Van Cutsem E
- Macarulla T
- Hall MJ
- Park JO
- Hochhauser D
- Arnold D
- Oh DY
- Reinacher-Schick A
- Tortora G
- Algül H
- "O'Reilly EM"
- McGuinness D
- Cui KY
- Schlienger K
- Locker GY
- Kindler HL
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1903387
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maintenance Olaparib for Germline BRCA-Mutated Metastatic Pancreatic Cancer.
**Authors:** Golan T, Hammel P, Reni M, Van Cutsem E, Macarulla T, Hall MJ, Park JO, Hochhauser D, Arnold D, Oh DY, Reinacher-Schick A, Tortora G, Algül H, O'Reilly EM, McGuinness D, Cui KY, Schlienger K, Locker GY, Kindler HL
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1903387](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1903387)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2019 Jul 25;381(4):317-327. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1903387. Epub
2019  Jun 2.

Maintenance Olaparib for Germline BRCA-Mutated Metastatic Pancreatic Cancer.

Golan T(1), Hammel P(1), Reni M(1), Van Cutsem E(1), Macarulla T(1), Hall MJ(1), 
Park JO(1), Hochhauser D(1), Arnold D(1), Oh DY(1), Reinacher-Schick A(1), 
Tortora G(1), Algül H(1), O'Reilly EM(1), McGuinness D(1), Cui KY(1), Schlienger 
K(1), Locker GY(1), Kindler HL(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Oncology Institute, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Aviv University, Tel 
Aviv, Israel (T.G.); Hôpital Beaujon (Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris), 
Clichy, and University Paris VII, Paris (P.H.); IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan (M.R.), Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata 
Verona, Verona (G.T.), and Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Gemelli IRCCS, 
Rome (G.T.) - all in Italy; University Hospitals Gasthuisberg and KU Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium (E.V.C.); Vall d'Hebron University Hospital and Vall d'Hebron 
Institute of Oncology, Barcelona (T.M.); Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia 
(M.J.H.); Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine 
(J.-O.P.), and Seoul National University Hospital, Cancer Research Institute, 
Seoul National University College of Medicine (D.-Y.O.) - both in Seoul, South 
Korea; University College London Cancer Institute, London (D.H.), and 
AstraZeneca, Cambridge (D.M.) - both in the United Kingdom; Asklepios 
Tumorzentrum Hamburg Asklepios Klinik Altona, Hamburg (D.A.), St. 
Josef-Hospital, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum (A.R.-S.), and Klinikum rechts 
der Isar, Department of Internal Medicine II, Technische Universität München, 
Munich (H.A.) - all in Germany; Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York 
(E.M.O.); AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD (K.Y.C., G.Y.L.); Merck, Kenilworth, NJ 
(K.S.); and the University of Chicago, Chicago (H.L.K.).

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2019 Aug;9(8):OF6. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2019-065.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2019 Oct;16(10):595-596. doi: 10.1038/s41571-019-0257-6.
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Oct 10;381(15):1491. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1911185.
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Oct 10;381(15):1491-1492. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1911185.
    Transl Cancer Res. 2020 Apr;9(4):2154-2156. doi: 10.21037/tcr.2020.03.07.
    Transl Cancer Res. 2020 Apr;9(4):2157-2160. doi: 10.21037/tcr.2020.02.75.

BACKGROUND: Patients with a germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation make up a small 
subgroup of those with metastatic pancreatic cancer. The poly(adenosine 
diphosphate-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor olaparib has had antitumor 
activity in this population.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 
trial to evaluate the efficacy of olaparib as maintenance therapy in patients 
who had a germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation and metastatic pancreatic cancer and 
disease that had not progressed during first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. 
Patients were randomly assigned, in a 3:2 ratio, to receive maintenance olaparib 
tablets (300 mg twice daily) or placebo. The primary end point was 
progression-free survival, which was assessed by blinded independent central 
review.
RESULTS: Of the 3315 patients who underwent screening, 154 underwent 
randomization and were assigned to a trial intervention (92 to receive olaparib 
and 62 to receive placebo). The median progression-free survival was 
significantly longer in the olaparib group than in the placebo group (7.4 months 
vs. 3.8 months; hazard ratio for disease progression or death, 0.53; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], 0.35 to 0.82; P = 0.004). An interim analysis of 
overall survival, at a data maturity of 46%, showed no difference between the 
olaparib and placebo groups (median, 18.9 months vs. 18.1 months; hazard ratio 
for death, 0.91; 95% CI, 0.56 to 1.46; P = 0.68). There was no significant 
between-group difference in health-related quality of life, as indicated by the 
overall change from baseline in the global quality-of-life score (on a 100-point 
scale, with higher scores indicating better quality of life) based on the 
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life 
Questionnaire (between-group difference, -2.47 points; 95% CI, -7.27 to 2.33). 
The incidence of grade 3 or higher adverse events was 40% in the olaparib group 
and 23% in the placebo group (between-group difference, 16 percentage points; 
95% CI, -0.02 to 31); 5% and 2% of the patients, respectively, discontinued the 
trial intervention because of an adverse event.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with a germline BRCA mutation and metastatic 
pancreatic cancer, progression-free survival was longer with maintenance 
olaparib than with placebo. (Funded by AstraZeneca and others; POLO 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02184195.).

Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1903387
PMCID: PMC6810605
PMID: 31157963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]