---
reference_id: "PMID:35715567"
title: "Onasemnogene abeparvovec for presymptomatic infants with three copies of SMN2 at risk for spinal muscular atrophy: the Phase III SPR1NT trial."
authors:
- Strauss KA
- Farrar MA
- Muntoni F
- Saito K
- Mendell JR
- Servais L
- McMillan HJ
- Finkel RS
- Swoboda KJ
- Kwon JM
- Zaidman CM
- Chiriboga CA
- Iannaccone ST
- Krueger JM
- Parsons JA
- Shieh PB
- Kavanagh S
- Wigderson M
- Tauscher-Wisniewski S
- McGill BE
- Macek TA
journal: Nat Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-01867-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Onasemnogene abeparvovec for presymptomatic infants with three copies of SMN2 at risk for spinal muscular atrophy: the Phase III SPR1NT trial.
**Authors:** Strauss KA, Farrar MA, Muntoni F, Saito K, Mendell JR, Servais L, McMillan HJ, Finkel RS, Swoboda KJ, Kwon JM, Zaidman CM, Chiriboga CA, Iannaccone ST, Krueger JM, Parsons JA, Shieh PB, Kavanagh S, Wigderson M, Tauscher-Wisniewski S, McGill BE, Macek TA
**Journal:** Nat Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-022-01867-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01867-3)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2022 Jul;28(7):1390-1397. doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-01867-3. Epub 2022 
Jun 17.

Onasemnogene abeparvovec for presymptomatic infants with three copies of SMN2 at 
risk for spinal muscular atrophy: the Phase III SPR1NT trial.

Strauss KA(1)(2)(3), Farrar MA(4)(5), Muntoni F(6)(7), Saito K(8), Mendell 
JR(9)(10), Servais L(11)(12), McMillan HJ(13), Finkel RS(14)(15), Swoboda 
KJ(16), Kwon JM(17), Zaidman CM(18), Chiriboga CA(19), Iannaccone ST(20), 
Krueger JM(21), Parsons JA(22), Shieh PB(23), Kavanagh S(24), Wigderson M(24), 
Tauscher-Wisniewski S(24), McGill BE(25), Macek TA(24).

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Special Children, Strasburg, PA, USA. 
kstrauss@clinicforspecialchildren.org.
(2)Penn Medicine-Lancaster General Hospital, Lancaster, PA, USA. 
kstrauss@clinicforspecialchildren.org.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular, Cell & Cancer Biology, University of 
Massachusetts School of Medicine, Worcester, MA, USA. 
kstrauss@clinicforspecialchildren.org.
(4)Department of Neurology, Sydney Children's Hospital Network, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(5)School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW Medicine and Health, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia.
(6)The Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, University College London, Great Ormond 
Street Institute of Child Health & Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK.
(7)National Institute of Health Research, Great Ormond Street Hospital 
Biomedical Research Centre, London, UK.
(8)Institute of Medical Genetics, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(9)Center for Gene Therapy, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics and Department of Neurology, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(11)Department of Paediatrics, MDUK Oxford Neuromuscular Centre, Oxford, UK.
(12)Neuromuscular Reference Center, Department of Pediatrics, CHU & University 
of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Neurology & Neurosurgery, Montreal Children's 
Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Nemours Children's Hospital, Orlando, FL, USA.
(15)Center for Experimental Neurotherapeutics, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.
(16)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(17)Department of Neurology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(18)Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(19)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York, NY, USA.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(21)Department of Neurology, Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, Grand Rapids, MI, 
USA.
(22)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
CO, USA.
(23)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(24)Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., Bannockburn, IL, USA.
(25)Translational Medicine, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2022 Jul;28(7):1348-1349. doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-01889-x.
    Cell Rep Med. 2022 Aug 16;3(8):100725. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2022.100725.

Most children with biallelic SMN1 deletions and three SMN2 copies develop spinal 
muscular atrophy (SMA) type 2. SPR1NT ( NCT03505099 ), a Phase III, multicenter, 
single-arm trial, investigated the efficacy and safety of onasemnogene 
abeparvovec for presymptomatic children with biallelic SMN1 mutations treated 
within six postnatal weeks. Of 15 children with three SMN2 copies treated before 
symptom onset, all stood independently before 24 months (P < 0.0001; 14 within 
normal developmental window), and 14 walked independently (P < 0.0001; 11 within 
normal developmental window). All survived without permanent ventilation at 
14 months; ten (67%) maintained body weight (≥3rd WHO percentile) without 
feeding support through 24 months; and none required nutritional or respiratory 
support. No serious adverse events were considered treatment-related by the 
investigator. Onasemnogene abeparvovec was effective and well-tolerated for 
presymptomatic infants at risk of SMA type 2, underscoring the urgency of early 
identification and intervention.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-022-01867-3
PMCID: PMC9205287
PMID: 35715567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc. sponsored this 
clinical trial. The authors declare the following competing interests. K.A.S. 
has received personal compensation from Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc. (formerly 
AveXis, Inc.) for serving as an advisory board member and from Biogen for 
serving as a visiting professor, and has received research support from clinical 
trials sponsored by Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., and Biogen. M.A.F. has 
received honoraria for scientific advisory boards from Novartis Gene Therapies, 
Inc., Biogen, and Roche and research grants from Biogen. F.M. reports grants and 
personal fees from Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., including participation in the 
STR1VE-EU grant and the SPR1NT study; grants, personal fees, and other 
(participation in the SHINE clinical trial and principal investigator of the 
investigator-initiated UK SMA REACH UK registry) from Biogen; and grants and 
personal fees from Roche, including participation in the JEWELFISH clinical 
trial of risdiplam and participation in the olesoxime clinical trial, during the 
conduct of the study. F.M. has also received honoraria for scientific advisory 
boards from Biogen, Novartis, Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., PTC, Roche, and 
Sarepta Therapeutics. K.S. has served on advisory boards for Biogen, Novartis 
Gene Therapies, Inc./Novartis, and Chugai (Roche) and has received search 
funding from Biogen. J.R.M. has received personal compensation for clinical 
trial consulting and for serving on scientific advisory boards, as well as 
research support, from Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc. L.S. has received personal 
compensation as an advisory committee board member/consultant from Novartis Gene 
Therapies, Inc., Biogen, Biophytis, Cytokinetics, Dynacure, Roche, Santhera, and 
Sarepta Therapeutics, and has received research support from Novartis Gene 
Therapies, Inc., Biogen, Dynacure, and Roche. H.J.M. has received honoraria for 
scientific advisory boards from Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., and has received 
research funding from Roche. R.S.F. has received personal compensation for 
advisory board participation from Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., Biogen, Roche, 
and Scholar Rock, and for consulting from Novartis; editorial fees from Elsevier 
for co-editing a neurology textbook; license fees from the Children’s Hospital 
of Philadelphia; and research funding from Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., 
Biogen, Roche/Genentech, and Scholar Rock. K.J.S. has received personal 
compensation for a speaking engagement from Biogen, and research funding as a 
principal investigator for clinical trials sponsored by Novartis Gene Therapies, 
Inc. and Biogen. J.M.K. was site principal investigator for clinical trials 
sponsored by Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., Biogen, and Scholar Rock. C.M.Z. has 
received research support from Biogen. C.A.C. has served on advisory boards for 
Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., and Roche/Genentech; has served as an educational 
speaker for Biogen; and has received research funding from Novartis Gene 
Therapies, Inc., Biogen, and Roche. S.T.I. has received personal compensation 
for service on advisory boards or consulting from Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., 
Biogen, Roche/Genentech, and Sarepta Therapeutics; and research support from 
Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., Biogen, Capricor, PTC, Scholar Rock, and Sarepta 
Therapeutics. J.M.K. is a principal investigator for clinical trials sponsored 
by Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., Scholar Rock, and Roche/Genentech. J.A.P. has 
served as an investigator on clinical trials for Biogen, Novartis, PTC 
Therapeutics, and Scholar Rock, and has served in an advisory capacity for 
Biogen, Scholar Rock, Roche/Genentech, and Novartis. P.B.S. has served as a 
consultant for Alexion, Biogen, Genentech, Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., and 
Sarepta and has served as a speaker for Alexion, Biogen, Genentech, Grifols, 
Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., and PTC Therapeutics. S.K. is an employee of 
Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., and receives consulting fees from UCB Pharma, 
Karuna Therapeutics, Worldwide Clinical Trials, CPC Clinical Research, Zosano 
Pharmaceuticals, PharPoint Research, and Nesos, Inc. M.W. is an employee of 
Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., and owns Novartis stock or other equities. 
S.T.-W. is an employee of Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., and owns Novartis stock 
or other equities. B.E.M. is an employee of Translational Medicine, Novartis 
Institutes for BioMedical Research (Cambridge), and owns Novartis stock or other 
equities. T.A.M. is an employee of Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc., and owns 
Novartis stock or other equities.