---
reference_id: "PMID:24620350"
title: Heme-induced neutrophil extracellular traps contribute to the pathogenesis of sickle cell disease.
authors:
- Chen G
- Zhang D
- Fuchs TA
- Manwani D
- Wagner DD
- Frenette PS
journal: Blood
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-529982
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heme-induced neutrophil extracellular traps contribute to the pathogenesis of sickle cell disease.
**Authors:** Chen G, Zhang D, Fuchs TA, Manwani D, Wagner DD, Frenette PS
**Journal:** Blood (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2013-10-529982](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2013-10-529982)

## Content

1. Blood. 2014 Jun 12;123(24):3818-27. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-529982. Epub
2014  Mar 11.

Heme-induced neutrophil extracellular traps contribute to the pathogenesis of 
sickle cell disease.

Chen G(1), Zhang D(1), Fuchs TA(2), Manwani D(3), Wagner DD(4), Frenette PS(1).

Author information:
(1)Ruth L. and David S. Gottesman Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative 
Medicine Research, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY;
(2)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Boston, MA, and Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA;
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY; 
and.
(4)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Boston, MA, and Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; 
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Jun 12;123(24):3689-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-03-563874.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is characterized by recurring episodes of vascular 
occlusion in which neutrophil activation plays a major role. The disease is 
associated with chronic hemolysis with elevated cell-free hemoglobin and heme. 
The ensuing depletion of heme scavenger proteins leads to nonspecific heme 
uptake and heme-catalyzed generation of reactive oxygen species. Here, we have 
identified a novel role for heme in the induction of neutrophil extracellular 
trap (NET) formation in SCD. NETs are decondensed chromatin decorated by 
granular enzymes and are released by activated neutrophils. In humanized SCD 
mice, we have detected NETs in the lungs and soluble NET components in plasma. 
The presence of NETs was associated with hypothermia and death of these mice, 
which could be prevented and delayed, respectively, by dismantling NETs with 
DNase I treatment. We have identified heme as the plasma factor that stimulates 
neutrophils to release NETs in vitro and in vivo. Increasing or decreasing 
plasma heme concentrations can induce or prevent, respectively, in vivo NET 
formation, indicating that heme plays a crucial role in stimulating NET release 
in SCD. Our results thus suggest that NETs significantly contribute to SCD 
pathogenesis and can serve as a therapeutic target for treating SCD.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-529982
PMCID: PMC4055928
PMID: 24620350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]