---
reference_id: "PMID:18946580"
title: Rare gross deletion in T-cell immune regulator-1 gene in Iranian family with infantile malignant osteopetrosis.
authors:
- Abbaszadegan MR
- Modarresi A
- Khadivi-Zand F
- Velayati A
journal: Saudi Med J
year: '2008'
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Iran
- Osteopetrosis/genetics
- Vacuolar Proton-Translocating ATPases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare gross deletion in T-cell immune regulator-1 gene in Iranian family with infantile malignant osteopetrosis.
**Authors:** Abbaszadegan MR, Modarresi A, Khadivi-Zand F, Velayati A
**Journal:** Saudi Med J (2008)

## Content

1. Saudi Med J. 2008 Oct;29(10):1494-6.

Rare gross deletion in T-cell immune regulator-1 gene in Iranian family with 
infantile malignant osteopetrosis.

Abbaszadegan MR(1), Modarresi A, Khadivi-Zand F, Velayati A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Immunology Reasearch Center, Avicenna Research 
Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Bu-Ali Square, Mashhad, Iran. 
abbaszadeganmr@mums.ac.ir

Infantile malignant osteopetrosis (arOP) is an autosomal recessive disorder. 
Mutations in the T-cell immune regulator 1 (TCIRG1) gene were found as the cause 
of arOP. We found the first Iranian patient with a rare gross deletion in this 
gene. The patient was a 5-year-old girl with macrocephaly, facial dysmorphism, 
blindness, mental retardation, hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia, and 
osteosclerotic changes in the skull and limb. Molecular analysis was performed 
using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction for exons 10-19 of the 
TCIRG1 gene followed by whole gene sequencing. She showed a 275 bp unexpected 
amplified segment. Sequencing revealed a gross deletion in exons 10-15 
transcript region of TCIRG1 that affected codon 389 to 518. Various types of 
mutations in the TCIRG1 gene in arOP have been reported, however, gross 
deletions are reported rarely. This gross deletion is the first mutation 
reported among Iranian patients in this gene. This deletion is also the largest 
deletion of TCIRG1 gene reported to date.

PMID: 18946580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]