---
reference_id: "PMID:8402893"
title: Complementation cloning of an MHC class II transactivator mutated in hereditary MHC class II deficiency (or bare lymphocyte syndrome).
authors:
- Steimle V
- Otten LA
- Zufferey M
- Mach B
journal: Cell
year: '1993'
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Cell Line
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- "DNA, Complementary/isolation & purification, metabolism"
- Exons
- Gene Expression Regulation/immunology
- "Genes, MHC Class II/genetics"
- "Genes, Regulator"
- Genetic Complementation Test
- HLA-D Antigens/genetics
- Humans
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics, immunology"
- Lymphocytes/immunology
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutagenesis, Insertional"
- Nuclear Proteins
- Oligodeoxyribonucleotides
- RNA Splicing
- Sequence Deletion
- "Trans-Activators/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Transfection
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complementation cloning of an MHC class II transactivator mutated in hereditary MHC class II deficiency (or bare lymphocyte syndrome).
**Authors:** Steimle V, Otten LA, Zufferey M, Mach B
**Journal:** Cell (1993)

## Content

1. Cell. 1993 Oct 8;75(1):135-46.

Complementation cloning of an MHC class II transactivator mutated in hereditary
MHC class II deficiency (or bare lymphocyte syndrome).

Steimle V(1), Otten LA, Zufferey M, Mach B.

Author information:
(1)Jeantet Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Genetics and
Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School, Switzerland.

Hereditary major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II deficiency (or bare
lymphocyte syndrome) is a form of severe primary immunodeficiency with a total
lack of MHC class II expression. It is due to a defect in the regulation of MHC
class II genes. A novel gene was isolated by complementation cloning, using an
MHC class II-negative mutant cell line. This gene (CIITA) functions as a
transactivator of MHC class II gene expression and restores expression of all
MHC class II isotypes in mutant cells. In addition, CIITA fully corrects the MHC
class II regulatory defect of cells from patients with bare lymphocyte syndrome.
In this disease we have identified a splicing mutation that results in a 24
amino acid deletion in CIITA, resulting in loss of function of the
transactivator. Hence, the CIITA gene is essential for MHC class II gene
expression and has been shown to be responsible for hereditary MHC class II
deficiency.

PMID: 8402893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
