---
reference_id: "PMID:6372470"
title: "Bacterial meningitis in the patient at risk: intrinsic risk factors and host defense mechanisms."
authors:
- Scheld WM
journal: Am J Med
year: '1984'
doi: 10.1016/0002-9343(84)90265-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial meningitis in the patient at risk: intrinsic risk factors and host defense mechanisms.
**Authors:** Scheld WM
**Journal:** Am J Med (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0002-9343(84)90265-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-9343(84)90265-1)

## Content

1. Am J Med. 1984 May 15;76(5A):193-207. doi: 10.1016/0002-9343(84)90265-1.

Bacterial meningitis in the patient at risk: intrinsic risk factors and host 
defense mechanisms.

Scheld WM.

Bacterial meningitis remains a relatively common disease worldwide (40,000 cases 
per year in the United States) and the mortality rate has not improved in over 
30 years. Certain host factors increase the risk of acquiring meningitis and 
include: age (increased at extremes of life), male sex, low socioeconomic status 
(crowding), black race, recent nasopharyngeal carriage of a virulent strain, 
absence of specific bactericidal antibody, maternal factors at birth (neonatal 
disease), various immunologic defects (neonates, antibody or terminal complement 
component deficiency, splenectomy, and immunosuppression including the acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome), and certain chronic diseases (such as alcoholism, 
cirrhosis, and diabetes mellitus). Bacterial meningitis represents an infection 
in an area of impaired host resistance. The blood-brain barrier is a major 
protective mechanism for the central nervous system against circulating 
bacteria. However, once bacteria gain entry into the subarachnoid space, host 
defenses are inadequate. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes are at a disadvantage in 
the fluid medium of the cerebrospinal fluid and surface phagocytosis is 
inefficient. In addition, antibody and complement concentrations are low (or 
absent) in purulent cerebrospinal fluid early in the disease course. Functional 
opsonic and bactericidal activity is lacking; therefore, efficient phagocytosis 
of encapsulated meningeal pathogens is limited. The result is huge population 
densities (often 10(7) to 10(8) cfu per milliliter) of bacteria in cerebrospinal 
fluid. This finding suggests that bactericidal antibiotics with cerebrospinal 
fluid concentrations much greater than the minimal bacterial concentration of 
the pathogen are optimal for therapy of meningitis; this principle has been 
shown in experimental animal models and supported by therapeutic studies in 
human subjects.

DOI: 10.1016/0002-9343(84)90265-1
PMID: 6372470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]