---
reference_id: "PMID:27068007"
title: Mutations in LTBP3 cause acromicric dysplasia and geleophysic dysplasia.
authors:
- McInerney-Leo AM
- Le Goff C
- Leo PJ
- Kenna TJ
- Keith P
- Harris JE
- Steer R
- Bole-Feysot C
- Nitschke P
- Kielty C
- Brown MA
- Zankl A
- Duncan EL
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103647
keywords:
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics"
- Exome/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Fibrillin-1/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Latent TGF-beta Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Phenotype
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/genetics
- Weill-Marchesani Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in LTBP3 cause acromicric dysplasia and geleophysic dysplasia.
**Authors:** McInerney-Leo AM, Le Goff C, Leo PJ, Kenna TJ, Keith P, Harris JE, Steer R, Bole-Feysot C, Nitschke P, Kielty C, Brown MA, Zankl A, Duncan EL, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103647](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103647)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2016 Jul;53(7):457-64. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103647. Epub
2016 Apr 11.

Mutations in LTBP3 cause acromicric dysplasia and geleophysic dysplasia.

McInerney-Leo AM(1), Le Goff C(2), Leo PJ(1), Kenna TJ(1), Keith P(1), Harris
JE(1), Steer R(3), Bole-Feysot C(4), Nitschke P(5), Kielty C(3), Brown MA(1),
Zankl A(6), Duncan EL(7), Cormier-Daire V(2).

Author information:
(1)Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Institute of Health and Biomedical
Innovation (IHBI), Queensland, Australia The University of Queensland Diamantina
Institute, University of Queensland, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Department of Genetics, Reference Center for Skeletal Dysplasia, Paris
Descartes University-Sorbonne Paris Cité, INSERM U MR1163, IMAGINE Institute,
Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
(3)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK.
(4)Plateforme de Génomique, Fondation IMAGINE, Paris, France.
(5)Plateforme de Bioinformatique, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(6)Discipline of Genetic Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
Academic Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Children's Hospital Network
(Westmead), Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(7)Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Institute of Health and Biomedical
Innovation (IHBI), Queensland, Australia Department of Endocrinology, James
Mayne Building, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Herston, Queensland,
Australia The University of Queensland, University of Queensland Centre for
Clinical Research, Herston, Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Acromelic dysplasias are a group of disorders characterised by short
stature, brachydactyly, limited joint extension and thickened skin and comprises
acromicric dysplasia (AD), geleophysic dysplasia (GD), Myhre syndrome and
Weill-Marchesani syndrome. Mutations in several genes have been identified for
these disorders (including latent transforming growth factor β (TGF-β)-binding
protein-2 (LTBP2), ADAMTS10, ADAMSTS17 and fibrillin-1 (FBN1) for
Weill-Marchesani syndrome, ADAMTSL2 for recessive GD and FBN1 for AD and
dominant GD), encoding proteins involved in the microfibrillar network. However,
not all cases have mutations in these genes.
METHODS: Individuals negative for mutations in known acromelic dysplasia genes
underwent whole exome sequencing.
RESULTS: A heterozygous missense mutation (exon 14: c.2087C>G: p.Ser696Cys) in
latent transforming growth factor β (TGF-β)-binding protein-3 (LTBP3) was
identified in a dominant AD family. Two distinct de novo heterozygous LTPB3
mutations were also identified in two unrelated GD individuals who had died in
early childhood from respiratory failure-a donor splice site mutation (exon 12
c.1846+5G>A) and a stop-loss mutation (exon 28: c.3912A>T: p.1304*Cysext*12).
CONCLUSIONS: The constellation of features in these AD and GD cases, including
postnatal growth retardation of long bones and lung involvement, is reminiscent
of the null ltbp3 mice phenotype. We conclude that LTBP3 is a novel component of
the microfibrillar network involved in the acromelic dysplasia spectrum.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103647
PMID: 27068007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
