---
reference_id: "PMID:28556417"
title: "Dengue data and surveillance in Tanzania: a systematic literature review."
authors:
- Ward T
- Samuel M
- Maoz D
- Runge-Ranzinger S
- Boyce R
- Toledo J
- Velayudhan R
- Horstick O
journal: Trop Med Int Health
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/tmi.12903
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue data and surveillance in Tanzania: a systematic literature review.
**Authors:** Ward T, Samuel M, Maoz D, Runge-Ranzinger S, Boyce R, Toledo J, Velayudhan R, Horstick O
**Journal:** Trop Med Int Health (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tmi.12903](https://doi.org/10.1111/tmi.12903)

## Content

1. Trop Med Int Health. 2017 Aug;22(8):960-970. doi: 10.1111/tmi.12903. Epub 2017
 Jul 10.

Dengue data and surveillance in Tanzania: a systematic literature review.

Ward T(1), Samuel M(2), Maoz D(3), Runge-Ranzinger S(2)(4), Boyce R(5), Toledo 
J(6), Velayudhan R(7), Horstick O(2).

Author information:
(1)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(2)Teaching Unit of the Institute of Public Health, University of Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Public Health, Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Consultant in Public Health, Ludwigsburg, Germany.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(6)Public Health Specialist, Ministry of Health, Brasilia, Brazil.
(7)Department for the Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases, World Health 
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: Although there is evidence that dengue virus is circulating in 
Tanzania, the country lacks a dengue surveillance system. Consequently, the true 
estimate of dengue seroprevalence, as well as the incidence in the population, 
the frequency and magnitude of outbreaks is unknown. This study therefore sought 
to systematically review available dengue data from Tanzania.
METHODS: The systematic review was conducted and reported using the PRISMA tool. 
Five databases (PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, WHOLIS and Google Scholar) were 
searched for articles using various keywords on the illness, data and 
geographical location. Identified articles were assessed for inclusion based on 
predefined eligibility criteria. Data were extracted from included articles, 
analysed and reported.
RESULTS: Based on the 10 seroprevalence studies in defined populations with 
estimates of acute confirmed infections that were included in the review, the 
estimated seroprevalence of past dengue infection in Tanzania ranged from 50.6% 
in a health facility-based study to 11% in a population-based study. Acute 
confirmed infections of dengue were estimated to be as high as 38.2% of 
suspected cases. Only one study reported on an outbreak.
CONCLUSIONS: It is evident that dengue needs to become part of regular disease 
surveillance in Tanzania. Control measures need to be instituted with a focus on 
building human resource capacity and integrating dengue control measures in 
ongoing health programmes, for both preventive and curative interventions. 
Systematic reviews are valuable in assessing health issues when surveillance 
data are not available.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tmi.12903
PMID: 28556417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]