---
reference_id: PMID:34053705
title: Acetaminophen Poisoning.
authors:
- Chiew AL
- Buckley NA
journal: Crit Care Clin
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccc.2021.03.005
keywords:
- Acetaminophen
- Acetylcysteine/therapeutic use
- "Analgesics, Non-Narcotic/therapeutic use"
- "Chemical and Drug Induced Liver Injury/etiology, therapy"
- Drug Overdose/therapy
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acetaminophen Poisoning.
**Authors:** Chiew AL, Buckley NA
**Journal:** Crit Care Clin (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccc.2021.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccc.2021.03.005)

## Content

1. Crit Care Clin. 2021 Jul;37(3):543-561. doi: 10.1016/j.ccc.2021.03.005.

Acetaminophen Poisoning.

Chiew AL(1), Buckley NA(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Toxicology Unit, Prince of Wales Hospital, Barker Street, Randwick, 
New South Wales 2031, Australia. Electronic address: 
angela.chiew@health.nsw.gov.au.
(2)Pharmacology and Biomedical Informatics and Digital Health, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Camperdown, New South Wales 2050, 
Australia.

Acetaminophen is a common medication taken in deliberate self-poisoning and 
unintentional overdose. It is the commonest cause of severe acute liver injury 
in Western countries. The optimal management of most acetaminophen poisonings is 
usually straightforward. Patients who present early should be offered activated 
charcoal and those at risk of acute liver injury should receive acetylcysteine. 
This approach ensures survival in most. The acetaminophen nomogram is used to 
assess the need for treatment in acute immediate-release overdoses with a known 
time of ingestion. However, scenarios that require different management pathways 
include modified-release, large/massive, and repeated supratherapeutic 
ingestions.

Crown Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccc.2021.03.005
PMID: 34053705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors have no financial or 
other conflicts of interest relevant to this article to disclose.