---
reference_id: "PMID:40802283"
title: Sequence variability of BamA and FadL candidate vaccinogens suggests divergent evolutionary paths of Treponema pallidum outer membrane proteins.
authors:
- Bettin EB
- Aghakhanian F
- Hennelly CM
- Chen W
- Davenport TC
- Hackl ST
- Grassmann AA
- Vargas-Cely F
- Silva S
- García-Luna JA
- Ramirez LG
- Jiang Y
- Yang L
- Zheng H
- Yang B
- Pospíšilová P
- Šmajs D
- Matoga MM
- Hoffman IF
- López-Medina E
- Nieselt K
- Moody MA
- Seña AC
- Salazar JC
- Parr JB
- Caimano MJ
- Hawley KL
- Radolf JD
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1128/jb.00159-25
keywords:
- "Bacterial Outer Membrane Proteins/genetics, immunology, chemistry"
- "Treponema pallidum/genetics, immunology, classification"
- "Evolution, Molecular"
- Phylogeny
- "Syphilis/microbiology, prevention & control"
- "Bacterial Vaccines/genetics, immunology"
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- China
- Colombia
- Malawi
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sequence variability of BamA and FadL candidate vaccinogens suggests divergent evolutionary paths of Treponema pallidum outer membrane proteins.
**Authors:** Bettin EB, Aghakhanian F, Hennelly CM, Chen W, Davenport TC, Hackl ST, Grassmann AA, Vargas-Cely F, Silva S, García-Luna JA, Ramirez LG, Jiang Y, Yang L, Zheng H, Yang B, Pospíšilová P, Šmajs D, Matoga MM, Hoffman IF, López-Medina E, Nieselt K, Moody MA, Seña AC, Salazar JC, Parr JB, Caimano MJ, Hawley KL, Radolf JD
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.00159-25](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.00159-25)

## Content

1. J Bacteriol. 2025 Aug 21;207(8):e0015925. doi: 10.1128/jb.00159-25. Epub 2025
Jul 14.

Sequence variability of BamA and FadL candidate vaccinogens suggests divergent
evolutionary paths of Treponema pallidum outer membrane proteins.

Bettin EB(1), Aghakhanian F(2), Hennelly CM(2), Chen W(3), Davenport TC(4),
Hackl ST(5), Grassmann AA(1), Vargas-Cely F(6)(7), Silva S(7), García-Luna
JA(7)(8), Ramirez LG(7)(8), Jiang Y(3), Yang L(3), Zheng H(3), Yang B(3),
Pospíšilová P(9), Šmajs D(9), Matoga MM(10), Hoffman IF(2), López-Medina
E(7)(11), Nieselt K(5), Moody MA(12), Seña AC(2), Salazar JC(1)(13), Parr JB(2),
Caimano MJ(1)(13), Hawley KL(1)(13), Radolf JD(1)(13).

Author information:
(1)UConn Health, Farmington, Connecticut, USA.
(2)The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
USA.
(3)Dermatology Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong,
China.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Baden-Württemberg, Germany.
(6)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, Arizona,
USA.
(7)Centro Internacional de Entrenamiento e Investigaciones Médicas (CIDEIM),
Pance, Valle del Cauca, Colombia.
(8)Universidad Icesi, Cali, Valle del Cauca, Colombia.
(9)Czech Republic Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk
University, Brno, South Moravian Region, Czechia.
(10)UNC Project-Malawi, Lilongwe, Central Region, Malawi.
(11)Universidad del Valle, Cali, Valle del Cauca, Colombia.
(12)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(13)Connecticut Children's, Hartford, Connecticut, USA.

Knowledge of Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum (TPA) outer membrane protein
(OMP) sequence variability is essential for understanding spirochete
proliferation within endemic populations as well as the design of a globally
effective syphilis vaccine. Our group has identified extracellular loops (ECLs)
of TPA BamA (TP0326) and members of the FadL family (TP0548, TP0856, TP0858,
TP0859, and TP0865) as potential components of a multivalent vaccine cocktail.
As part of a consortium to explore TPA strain diversity, we mapped the
variability of BamA and FadL orthologs in 186 TPA strains from Malawi, China,
and Colombia onto predicted 3D structures. The 186 genomes fell into eight
subclades (five Nichols- and three SS14-lineage) with substantial geographic
restriction. Single nucleotide variants accounted for the large majority of
proteoforms, with variability notably higher within the Nichols-lineage strains.
Most mutations were in regions of the proteins predicted to be extracellular and
harboring B cell epitopes. We observed a striking difference in the degree of
variability between the six OMPs, suggesting that these proteins are following
divergent evolutionary paths. Concatenation of OMP sequences recapitulated the
phylogenetic structure of the TPA strains, effectively segregating within clades
and largely clustering by subclades. Finally, we noted that BamA and FadL
candidate ECL vaccinogens, previously shown to elicit antibodies that kill
treponemes during in vitro cultivation, are well conserved. Taken as a whole,
our study establishes a structural-phylogenetic approach for analyzing the
forces shaping the host-pathogen interface in syphilis within endemic
populations while informing the selection of vaccine targets.IMPORTANCESyphilis
remains a major global health concern, reinforcing the need for a safe and
effective vaccine. Understanding the variability of TPA OMPs is essential for
tracking pathogen evolution and informing vaccine design. Here, we analyzed the
variability of six TPA OMPs in 186 strains from Malawi, China, and Colombia,
identifying protein-specific evolutionary patterns. Most mutations were
localized in extracellular regions and, notably, appeared to correlate with the
phylogenetic structure of TPA. Despite OMP heterogeneity, several candidate
vaccinogens remained highly conserved, reinforcing their potential as globally
effective vaccine targets. Our study establishes a structural-phylogenetic
framework for dissecting the forces shaping the host-spirochete interface within
endemic populations and provides a foundation for designing a globally effective
syphilis vaccine.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.00159-25
PMCID: PMC12369335
PMID: 40802283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.B.P. reports research support from Gilead
Sciences and non-financial support from Abbott Laboratories, outside the scope
of this manuscript. J.A.G-L. reports support from Janssen, Carnott, Epidermique,
Medivelius, Boehringer Ingelheim, Pharmalab, and Pharmaderm laboratories to
attend dermatology meetings in Colombia, outside the scope of this work.
J.A.G-L. also received support from ISDIN laboratories to study an advanced
diploma on skin exposoma at University of Barcelona and has received speaker
fees from Jansenn to give a presentation on psoriasis outside the scope of this
work.
