---
reference_id: "PMID:27873227"
title: "The Relationship Between Aortic Root Size and Hypertension: An Unsolved Conundrum."
authors:
- Mulè G
- Nardi E
- Morreale M
- Castiglia A
- Geraci G
- Altieri D
- Cacciatore V
- Schillaci M
- Vaccaro F
- Cottone S
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/5584_2016_86
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Relationship Between Aortic Root Size and Hypertension: An Unsolved Conundrum.
**Authors:** Mulè G, Nardi E, Morreale M, Castiglia A, Geraci G, Altieri D, Cacciatore V, Schillaci M, Vaccaro F, Cottone S
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/5584_2016_86](https://doi.org/10.1007/5584_2016_86)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2017;956:427-445. doi: 10.1007/5584_2016_86.

The Relationship Between Aortic Root Size and Hypertension: An Unsolved 
Conundrum.

Mulè G(1), Nardi E(2), Morreale M(2), Castiglia A(2), Geraci G(2), Altieri D(2), 
Cacciatore V(2), Schillaci M(2), Vaccaro F(2), Cottone S(2).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna, e Specialistica (DIBIMIS), 
Cattedra di Nefrologia, European Society of Hypertension Excellence Centre, 
Università di Palermo, Palermo, Italy. giuseppe.mule@unipa.it.
(2)Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna, e Specialistica (DIBIMIS), 
Cattedra di Nefrologia, European Society of Hypertension Excellence Centre, 
Università di Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Thoracic aortic aneurysms rupture and dissection are among the most devastating 
vascular diseases, being characterized by elevated mortality, despite 
improvements in diagnostic imaging and surgical techniques.An increased aortic 
root diameter (ARD) represents the main risk factor for thoracic aortic 
dissection and rupture and for aortic valve regurgitation.Even though arterial 
hypertension is commonly regarded as a predisposing condition for the 
development of thoracic aorta aneurysms, the role of blood pressure (BP) as 
determinant of aortic root enlargement is still controversial. The use of 
different methods for indexation of ARD may have in part contributed to the 
heterogeneous findings obtained in the investigations exploring the 
relationships between ARD and BP. Indeed, the best methods for ARD indexation, 
as well as the normal values of aortic root size, are still a matter of 
debate.Several non-hemodynamic factors influence ARD, including age, gender, and 
anthropometric variables, such as height, weight and their derivatives body 
surface area (BSA) and body mass index. Of these factors, anthropometric 
variables have the greatest impact.Several studies documented an association 
between ARD enlargement, assessed by echocardiography, and some indices of 
hypertensive target organ damage such as left ventricular hypertrophy, diastolic 
dysfunction, and carotid intima-media thickening. Recently, we found that ARD, 
expressed either as absolute values or normalized for BSA (ARD/BSA) or height 
(ARD/H), was significantly greater in hypertensive subjects with chronic kidney 
disease (CKD) when compared to their counterparts with normal renal function. 
Moreover, at univariate analyses estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 
showed significant inverse correlations with ARD not indexed and with ARD/BSA 
and ARD/H. Taking into account the effect of age, sex, duration of hypertension 
and other potentially confounding factors, in multiple regression analyses, only 
the association of GFR with ARD/H and that between GFR and ARD/BSA remained 
statistically significant. The receiver-operating characteristic curve analysis 
revealed that an estimated GFR of about 50 ml/min/1.73 m2 represents the better 
threshold to distinguish hypertensive patients with dilated aortic root from 
those with a normal one.Some population-based studies showed that an enlarged 
ARD might predict an adverse prognosis, even in absence of aneurysmatic 
alterations.In the Cardiovascular Health Study, a dilated aortic root was 
independently associated with an increased risk for stroke, cardiovascular and 
total mortality in both sexes and with incident congestive heart failure only in 
men. The relationship between ARD and heart failure has been observed also in 
the Framingham Heart Study. More recently, the PAMELA (Pressioni Arteriose 
Monitorate E Loro Associazioni) study demonstrated an independent relationship 
of ARD/H with incident cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.Although the 
relationship between BP and aortic root size is still a matter of debate, 
increasing evidence seems to support the notion that aortic root dilatation, 
even in absence of aneurysmatic alterations, may be regarded as an hypertensive 
organ damage paralleling other preclinical markers whose unfavourable prognostic 
significance is firmly established. Future studies are needed to assess whether 
or not antihypertensive therapy is able to reduce aortic root dimension and the 
increased risk associated with its enlargement.

DOI: 10.1007/5584_2016_86
PMID: 27873227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]