---
reference_id: "PMID:32780955"
title: Dysostosis Multiplex in Human Mucopolysaccharidosis Type 1 H and in Animal Models of the Disease.
authors:
- Hampe CS
- Polgreen LE
- Lund TC
- McIvor RS
journal: Pediatr Endocrinol Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.17458/per.vol17.2020.hpl.dysostosismultiplexhumananimal
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysostosis Multiplex in Human Mucopolysaccharidosis Type 1 H and in Animal Models of the Disease.
**Authors:** Hampe CS, Polgreen LE, Lund TC, McIvor RS
**Journal:** Pediatr Endocrinol Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.17458/per.vol17.2020.hpl.dysostosismultiplexhumananimal](https://doi.org/10.17458/per.vol17.2020.hpl.dysostosismultiplexhumananimal)

## Content

1. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2020 Aug;17(4):317-326. doi: 
10.17458/per.vol17.2020.hpl.dysostosismultiplexhumananimal.

Dysostosis Multiplex in Human Mucopolysaccharidosis Type 1 H and in Animal 
Models of the Disease.

Hampe CS(1), Polgreen LE(2), Lund TC(3), McIvor RS(4).

Author information:
(1)Immusoft Corp, Seattle, WA 98103, USA, E-mail: chris.hampe@immusoft.com.
(2)The Lundquist Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA 90502, 
USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(4)Immusoft Corp, Minneapolis, MN 55413, USA, Department of Genetics, Cell 
Biology and Development and Center for Genome Engineering, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, 
caused by deficiency of α-L-iduronidase, and consequent accumulation of dermatan 
and heparan sulfates. Severity of the disease ranges from mild (Scheie) to 
moderate (Hurler-Scheie) to severe (Hurler or MPS-IH). A prominent clinical 
manifestation of MPS-IH is dysostosis multiplex, a constellation of skeletal 
abnormalities. We performed a retrospective review comparing manifestations of 
dysostosis multiplex in patients presenting with MPSIH and relevant animal 
models. Dog, cat and mouse models of MPS-IH are extensively studied to better 
understand the pathology of the disease. While all animal models display certain 
characteristics of human MPSIH, species-specific manifestations must be 
considered when evaluating skeletal abnormalities. Moreover, some skeletal 
abnormalities emerge at species-specific developmental stages, e.g. 
thoracolumbar kyphosis is an early manifestation in humans, while it appears 
late in the mouse model. The choice of the appropriate diagnostic test is of 
importance to avoid misleading conclusions.

Copyright© of YS Medical Media ltd.

DOI: 10.17458/per.vol17.2020.hpl.dysostosismultiplexhumananimal
PMID: 32780955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]