---
reference_id: "PMID:38861215"
title: "Huntington's Disease: Latest Frontiers in Therapeutics."
authors:
- Saade J
- Mestre TA
journal: Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11910-024-01345-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Huntington Disease/therapy, genetics, drug therapy"
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/therapeutic use"
- Huntingtin Protein/genetics
- Animals
- Drug Development
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington's Disease: Latest Frontiers in Therapeutics.
**Authors:** Saade J, Mestre TA
**Journal:** Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11910-024-01345-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-024-01345-y)

## Content

1. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2024 Aug;24(8):255-264. doi: 
10.1007/s11910-024-01345-y. Epub 2024 Jun 11.

Huntington's Disease: Latest Frontiers in Therapeutics.

Saade J(1), Mestre TA(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada. tmestre@toh.ca.
(3)The University of Ottawa Brain and Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada. 
tmestre@toh.ca.
(4)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorder Clinic, Division of Neurology, 
Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, ON, Canada. tmestre@toh.ca.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal-dominant disorder 
caused by a pathological expansion of a trinucleotide repeat (CAG) on exon 1 of 
the huntingtin (HTT) gene. HD is characterized by the presence of chorea, 
alongside other hyperkinesia, parkinsonism and a combination of cognitive and 
behavioural features. Currently, there are no disease-modifying therapies (DMTs) 
for HD, and the only intervention(s) with approved indication target the 
treatment of chorea. This article reviews recent research on the clinical 
development of DMTs and newly developed tools that enhance clinical trial design 
towards a successful DMT in the future.
RECENT FINDINGS: HD is living in an era of target-specific drug development with 
emphasis on the mechanisms related to mutant Huntingtin (HTT) protein. Examples 
include antisense oligonucleotides (ASO), splicing modifiers and microRNA 
molecules that aim to reduce the levels of mutant HTT protein. After initial 
negative results with ASO molecules Tominersen and WVE-120101/ WVE-120102, the 
therapeutic landscape continues to expand, with various trials currently under 
development to document proof-of-concept and safety/tolerability. 
Immune-targeted therapies have also been evaluated in early-phase clinical 
trials, with promising preliminary findings. The possibility of quantifying mHTT 
in CSF, along with the development of an integrated biological staging system in 
HD are important innovations applicable to clinical trial design that enhance 
the drug development process. Although a future in HD with DMTs remains a hope 
for those living with HD, care partners and care providers, the therapeutic 
landscape is promising, with various drug development programs underway 
following a targeted approach supported by disease-specific biomarkers and 
staging frameworks.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-024-01345-y
PMID: 38861215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]