---
reference_id: "PMID:26720027"
title: "Acute Flaccid Myelitis of Unknown Etiology in California, 2012-2015."
authors:
- Van Haren K
- Ayscue P
- Waubant E
- Clayton A
- Sheriff H
- Yagi S
- Glenn-Finer R
- Padilla T
- Strober JB
- Aldrovandi G
- Wadford DA
- Chiu CY
- Xia D
- Harriman K
- Watt JP
- Glaser CA
journal: JAMA
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.17275
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age Distribution
- California/epidemiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electromyography
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Incidence
- "Injections, Intravenous/statistics & numerical data"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Motor Neurons
- "Muscle Hypotonia/cerebrospinal fluid, epidemiology, therapy"
- "Myelitis/cerebrospinal fluid, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- "Plasma Exchange/statistics & numerical data"
- Recovery of Function
- Retrospective Studies
- Sex Distribution
- "Steroids/administration & dosage"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Flaccid Myelitis of Unknown Etiology in California, 2012-2015.
**Authors:** Van Haren K, Ayscue P, Waubant E, Clayton A, Sheriff H, Yagi S, Glenn-Finer R, Padilla T, Strober JB, Aldrovandi G, Wadford DA, Chiu CY, Xia D, Harriman K, Watt JP, Glaser CA
**Journal:** JAMA (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2015.17275](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2015.17275)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2015 Dec 22-29;314(24):2663-71. doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.17275.

Acute Flaccid Myelitis of Unknown Etiology in California, 2012-2015.

Van Haren K(1), Ayscue P(2), Waubant E(3), Clayton A(4), Sheriff H(4), Yagi
S(4), Glenn-Finer R(4), Padilla T(4), Strober JB(3), Aldrovandi G(5), Wadford
DA(4), Chiu CY(6), Xia D(4), Harriman K(4), Watt JP(4), Glaser CA(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California2Division of Child Neurology, Lucile Packard Children's Hospital,
Stanford, California.
(2)US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia4Center for
Infectious Diseases, Division of Communicable Disease Control, California
Department of Public Health, Richmond5Now with Metabiota, San Francisco,
California.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco7Department
of Pediatrics, Benioff Children's Hospital, University of California, San
Francisco.
(4)Center for Infectious Diseases, Division of Communicable Disease Control,
California Department of Public Health, Richmond.
(5)Children's Hospital Los Angeles and University of Southern California, Los
Angeles.
(6)Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Medicine, Division of Infectious
Diseases, University of California, San Francisco10University of California, San
Francisco, Viral Diagnostics and Discovery Center, San Francisco.
(7)Center for Infectious Diseases, Division of Communicable Disease Control,
California Department of Public Health, Richmond7Department of Pediatrics,
Benioff Children's Hospital, University of California, San Francisco11Now with
Department of Pediatrics, K.

IMPORTANCE: There has been limited surveillance for acute flaccid paralysis in
North America since the regional eradication of poliovirus. In 2012, the
California Department of Public Health received several reports of acute flaccid
paralysis cases of unknown etiology.
OBJECTIVE: To quantify disease incidence and identify potential etiologies of
acute flaccid paralysis cases with evidence of spinal motor neuron injury.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Case series of acute flaccid paralysis in
patients with radiological or neurophysiological findings suggestive of spinal
motor neuron involvement reported to the California Department of Public Health
with symptom onset between June 2012 and July 2015. Patients meeting diagnostic
criteria for other acute flaccid paralysis etiologies were excluded.
Cerebrospinal fluid, serum samples, nasopharyngeal swab specimens, and stool
specimens were submitted to the state laboratory for infectious agent testing.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Case incidence and infectious agent association.
RESULTS: Fifty-nine cases were identified. Median age was 9 years (interquartile
range [IQR], 4-14 years; 50 of the cases were younger than 21 years). Symptoms
that preceded or were concurrent included respiratory or gastrointestinal
illness (n = 54), fever (n = 47), and limb myalgia (n = 41). Fifty-six patients
had T2 hyperintensity of spinal gray matter on magnetic resonance imaging and 43
patients had cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis. During the course of the initial
hospitalization, 42 patients received intravenous steroids; 43, intravenous
immunoglobulin; and 13, plasma exchange; or a combination of these treatments.
Among 45 patients with follow-up data, 38 had persistent weakness at a median
follow-up of 9 months (IQR, 3-12 months). Two patients, both immunocompromised
adults, died within 60 days of symptom onset. Enteroviruses were the most
frequently detected pathogen in either nasopharynx swab specimens, stool
specimens, serum samples (15 of 45 patients tested). No pathogens were isolated
from the cerebrospinal fluid. The incidence of reported cases was significantly
higher during a national enterovirus D68 outbreak occurring from August 2014
through January 2015 (0.16 cases per 100,000 person-years) compared with other
monitoring periods (0.028 cases per 100,000 person-years; P <.001).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this series of patients identified in California
from June 2012 through July 2015, clinical manifestations indicated a rare but
distinct syndrome of acute flaccid paralysis with evidence of spinal motor
neuron involvement. The etiology remains undetermined, most patients were
children and young adults, and motor weakness was prolonged.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2015.17275
PMID: 26720027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
