---
reference_id: "PMID:24342231"
title: CSF neurofilament light chain is elevated in OMS (decreasing with immunotherapy) and other pediatric neuroinflammatory disorders.
authors:
- Pranzatelli MR
- Tate ED
- McGee NR
- Verhulst SJ
journal: J Neuroimmunol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2013.11.004
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adrenocorticotropic Hormone/therapeutic use
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived/therapeutic use"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Cytokines/metabolism
- Encephalitis/cerebrospinal fluid
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Immunologic Factors/therapeutic use
- Male
- Neurofilament Proteins/cerebrospinal fluid
- Observation
- Opsoclonus-Myoclonus Syndrome/cerebrospinal fluid
- Retrospective Studies
- Rituximab
- Severity of Illness Index
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CSF neurofilament light chain is elevated in OMS (decreasing with immunotherapy) and other pediatric neuroinflammatory disorders.
**Authors:** Pranzatelli MR, Tate ED, McGee NR, Verhulst SJ
**Journal:** J Neuroimmunol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jneuroim.2013.11.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2013.11.004)

## Content

1. J Neuroimmunol. 2014 Jan 15;266(1-2):75-81. doi:
10.1016/j.jneuroim.2013.11.004.  Epub 2013 Nov 16.

CSF neurofilament light chain is elevated in OMS (decreasing with immunotherapy) 
and other pediatric neuroinflammatory disorders.

Pranzatelli MR(1), Tate ED(2), McGee NR(2), Verhulst SJ(3).

Author information:
(1)National Pediatric Myoclonus Center and Neuroimmunology Laboratory, Southern 
Illinois University School of Medicine, PO Box 19643, Springfield, IL 
62794-9643, USA; Department of Neurology, Southern Illinois University School of 
Medicine, PO Box 19643, Springfield, IL 62794-9643, USA. Electronic address: 
mpranzatelli@siumed.edu.
(2)National Pediatric Myoclonus Center and Neuroimmunology Laboratory, Southern 
Illinois University School of Medicine, PO Box 19643, Springfield, IL 
62794-9643, USA; Department of Neurology, Southern Illinois University School of 
Medicine, PO Box 19643, Springfield, IL 62794-9643, USA.
(3)Department of Statistics and Research Consulting, Southern Illinois 
University School of Medicine, PO Box 19664, Springfield, IL 62794-9664, USA.

Using a panel of seven brain cell-specific biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF), pediatric opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome (OMS) (n=234) was compared to 
pediatric non-inflammatory neurological controls (n=84) and other inflammatory 
neurological disorders (OIND) (n=44). Only CSF NFL was elevated in untreated OMS 
versus controls (+83%). It was 87% higher in OIND than in OMS. On combination 
treatment with front-loaded ACTH, IVIg, rituximab, median CSF NFL decreased by 
60% to control levels. These biochemical data suggest neuronal/axonal injury in 
some children with OMS without indicators of astrogliosis, and reduction on 
sufficient immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2013.11.004
PMID: 24342231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]