---
reference_id: "PMID:1869648"
title: "Neurocutaneous melanosis: definition and review of the literature."
authors:
- Kadonaga JN
- Frieden IJ
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1016/0190-9622(91)70115-i
keywords:
- Arachnoid
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Melanoma/diagnosis
- Melanosis
- "Meningeal Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Nevus, Pigmented/diagnosis, pathology"
- Pia Mater
- Prognosis
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurocutaneous melanosis: definition and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Kadonaga JN, Frieden IJ
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0190-9622(91)70115-i](https://doi.org/10.1016/0190-9622(91)70115-i)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1991 May;24(5 Pt 1):747-55. doi: 
10.1016/0190-9622(91)70115-i.

Neurocutaneous melanosis: definition and review of the literature.

Kadonaga JN(1), Frieden IJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San 
Francisco 94143.

Neurocutaneous melanosis is a rare congenital syndrome characterized by the 
presence of large or multiple congenital melanocytic nevi and benign or 
malignant pigment cell tumors of the leptomeninges. The syndrome is thought to 
represent an error in the morphogenesis of the embryonal neuroectoderm. We 
review 39 reported cases of neurocutaneous melanosis and propose revised 
criteria for diagnosis. Most patients with neurocutaneous melanosis presented in 
the first 2 years of life with neurologic manifestations of increased 
intracranial pressure, mass lesions, or spinal cord compression. Leptomeningeal 
melanoma was present in 62% of the cases, but even in the absence of melanoma, 
symptomatic neurocutaneous melanosis had an extremely poor prognosis. Useful 
diagnostic procedures include cerebrospinal fluid cytology and magnetic 
resonance imaging with gadolinium contrast. Patients may be aided by palliative 
measures such as shunt placement to reduce intracranial pressure. Dermatologists 
in their follow-up of patients with large or multiple congenital melanocytic 
nevi should be aware of this condition, to aid in prompt diagnosis and because 
the treatment of cutaneous lesions may be altered in the presence of symptomatic 
neurocutaneous melanosis.

DOI: 10.1016/0190-9622(91)70115-i
PMID: 1869648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]