---
reference_id: "PMID:33570214"
title: "A missense mutation (c.226C>A) in HMG box SRY gene affects nNLS function in 46,XY sex reversal female."
authors:
- Ambulkar PS
- Waghmare JE
- Verma Shivkumar P
- Narang P
- Pal AK
journal: Andrologia
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/and.14011
keywords:
- Adult
- Base Sequence
- Female
- "Genes, sry/genetics"
- Gonadal Dysgenesis
- "Gonadal Dysgenesis, 46,XY/genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Sex-Determining Region Y Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A missense mutation (c.226C>A) in HMG box SRY gene affects nNLS function in 46,XY sex reversal female.
**Authors:** Ambulkar PS, Waghmare JE, Verma Shivkumar P, Narang P, Pal AK
**Journal:** Andrologia (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/and.14011](https://doi.org/10.1111/and.14011)

## Content

1. Andrologia. 2021 Jun;53(5):e14011. doi: 10.1111/and.14011. Epub 2021 Feb 11.

A missense mutation (c.226C>A) in HMG box SRY gene affects nNLS function in 
46,XY sex reversal female.

Ambulkar PS(1), Waghmare JE(1), Verma Shivkumar P(2), Narang P(1)(3), Pal AK(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Genetics & Genomics, Department of Anatomy, Mahatma Gandhi 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Sevagram, Wardha, India.
(2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Sevagram, Wardha, India.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Sevagram, Wardha, India.

The SRY initiates cascade of gene expression that transforms the 
undifferentiated gonad, genital ridge into testis. Mutations of the SRY gene is 
associated with complete gonadal dysgenesis in females with 46,XY karyotype. 
Primary amenorrhea is one of the clinical findings to express the genetic cause 
in 46,XY sex reversal. Here, we report a 26-year-old married woman presenting 
with primary amenorhea and complete gonadal dysgenesis. The clinical phenotypes 
were hypoplastic uterus with streak gonad and underdeveloped secondary sexual 
characters. The cytogenetic analysis confirmed 46,XY sex reversal karyotype of a 
female. Using molecular approach, we screened open reading frame of the SRY gene 
by PCR and targeted DNA Sanger sequencing. The patient was confirmed with 
nucleotide substitution (c.226C>A; p.Arg76Ser) at in HMG box domain of SRY gene 
that causes 46,XY sex reversal female. Mutation prediction algorithms suggest 
that alteration might be disease causing mutation and mutated (p.Arg76Ser) amino 
acid deleteriously affects HMG box nNLS region of SRY protein. Clinical 
phenotypes and in silico analysis confirmed that missense substitution 
(p.Arg76Ser) impaired nNLS binding Calmodulin-mediated nuclear transport of SRY 
from cytoplasm to nucleus. The mutation affects down regulation of male sex 
differentiation pathway and is responsible for 46,XY sex reversal female with 
gonadal dysgenesis.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/and.14011
PMID: 33570214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]