---
reference_id: "PMID:30244162"
title: "Reduced phenotypic expression in genetic hemochromatosis with time: Role of exposure to non-genetic modifiers."
authors:
- Deugnier Y
- Morcet J
- Lainé F
- Hamdi-Roze H
- Bollard AS
- Guyader D
- Moirand R
- Bardou-Jacquet E
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2018.09.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced phenotypic expression in genetic hemochromatosis with time: Role of exposure to non-genetic modifiers.
**Authors:** Deugnier Y, Morcet J, Lainé F, Hamdi-Roze H, Bollard AS, Guyader D, Moirand R, Bardou-Jacquet E
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2018.09.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.09.009)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2019 Jan;70(1):118-125. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2018.09.009. Epub 2018 
Sep 21.

Reduced phenotypic expression in genetic hemochromatosis with time: Role of 
exposure to non-genetic modifiers.

Deugnier Y(1), Morcet J(2), Lainé F(3), Hamdi-Roze H(4), Bollard AS(5), Guyader 
D(6), Moirand R(6), Bardou-Jacquet E(7).

Author information:
(1)CHU Rennes, Liver Unit, Pontchaillou Hospital, F-35033 Rennes, France; CHU 
Rennes, National Reference Centre of Hemochromatosis and Other Iron-related 
Disorders, Pontchaillou Hospital, F-35033 Rennes, France; University Rennes 1, 
Faculty of Medicine, F-35340 Rennes, France; INSERM, CIC 1414, Pontchaillou 
Hospital, F-35033 Rennes, France. Electronic address: 
yves.deugnier@univ-rennes1.fr.
(2)INSERM, CIC 1414, Pontchaillou Hospital, F-35033 Rennes, France.
(3)CHU Rennes, Liver Unit, Pontchaillou Hospital, F-35033 Rennes, France; 
INSERM, CIC 1414, Pontchaillou Hospital, F-35033 Rennes, France.
(4)CHU Rennes, Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Pontchaillou Hospital, F-35033 
Rennes, France.
(5)CHU Rennes, Liver Unit, Pontchaillou Hospital, F-35033 Rennes, France.
(6)CHU Rennes, Liver Unit, Pontchaillou Hospital, F-35033 Rennes, France; 
University Rennes 1, Faculty of Medicine, F-35340 Rennes, France.
(7)CHU Rennes, Liver Unit, Pontchaillou Hospital, F-35033 Rennes, France; CHU 
Rennes, National Reference Centre of Hemochromatosis and Other Iron-related 
Disorders, Pontchaillou Hospital, F-35033 Rennes, France; University Rennes 1, 
Faculty of Medicine, F-35340 Rennes, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Genetic hemochromatosis is mainly related to the homozygous 
p.Cys282Tyr (C282Y) mutation in the HFE gene, which causes hepcidin deficiency. 
Its low penetrance suggests the involvement of cofactors that modulate its 
expression. We aimed to describe the evolution of disease presentation and of 
non-genetic factors liable to impact hepcidin production in the long term.
METHODS: Clinical symptoms, markers of iron load, and risk factors according to 
the year of diagnosis were recorded over 30 years in a cohort of adult C282Y 
homozygotes. A total of 2,050 patients (1,460 probands [804 males and 656 
females] and 542 relatives [244 males and 346 females]) were studied.
RESULTS: Over time: (i) the proband-to-relative ratio remained roughly stable; 
(ii) the gender ratio tended towards equilibrium among probands; (iii) age at 
diagnosis did not change among males and increased among females; (iv) the 
frequency of diabetes and hepatic fibrosis steadily decreased while that of 
chronic fatigue and distal joint symptoms remained stable; (v) transferrin 
saturation, serum ferritin and the amount of iron removed decreased; and (vi) 
the prevalence of excessive alcohol consumption decreased while that of patients 
who were overweight increased. Tobacco smoking was associated with increased 
transferrin saturation.
CONCLUSION: Genetic testing did not alter the age at diagnosis, which contrasts 
with the dramatic decrease in iron load in both genders. Tobacco smoking could 
be involved in the extent of iron loading. Besides HFE testing, which enables 
the diagnosis of minor forms of the disease, the reduction of alcohol 
consumption and the increased frequency of overweight patients may have played a 
role in the decreased long-term iron load, as these factors are likely to 
improve hepcidin production.
LAY SUMMARY: Genetic hemochromatosis is an inherited disorder that leads to 
progressive iron overload in the body. It results in chronic fatigue and in 
potential liver (cirrhosis), pancreas (diabetes) and joint (arthritis) damage in 
adulthood. The present study showed that tobacco smoking may aggravate iron 
loading, but that hemochromatosis has become less and less severe over the last 
30 years despite patients being older at diagnosis, likely because of the 
protective effects of lower alcohol consumption and of increased weight in the 
French population.

Copyright © 2018 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2018.09.009
PMID: 30244162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]