---
reference_id: "PMID:28093536"
title: "Noma: Overview of a Neglected Disease and Human Rights Violation."
authors:
- Srour ML
- Marck K
- Baratti-Mayer D
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2017'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0718
keywords:
- Africa South of the Sahara/epidemiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Human Rights Abuses
- Humans
- "Neglected Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- "Noma/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Noma: Overview of a Neglected Disease and Human Rights Violation.
**Authors:** Srour ML, Marck K, Baratti-Mayer D
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2017)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.16-0718](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.16-0718)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2017 Feb 8;96(2):268-274. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0718. Epub
2017 Jan 16.

Noma: Overview of a Neglected Disease and Human Rights Violation.

Srour ML(1), Marck K(2), Baratti-Mayer D(3).

Author information:
(1)Health Frontiers, Vientiane, Laos. leila@butterflychildren.org.
(2)Department of Plastic Surgery, Medisch Centrum Leeuwarden, Leeuwarden, The
Netherlands.
(3)Geneva Study Group on Noma (GESNOMA), Service of Plastic and Reconstructive
Surgery, Department of Surgery, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2017 Feb 8;96(2):263-264. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0997.

Noma is an orofacial gangrene affecting malnourished children and mainly
observed in tropical countries, particularly sub-Saharan Africa. Epidemiological
data on noma are scarce, but a current estimate of the global incidence is
30,000-40,000 cases per year, with a mortality rate of approximately 85% and a
burden of disease calculated to be a loss of 1-10 million disability-adjusted
life years. The etiology of noma is multifactorial with malnutrition as an ever
present factor, often in combination with concomitant diseases, such as measles,
malaria, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and poor oral hygiene. The
pathogenesis is a fast-spreading, noncontagious gangrenous infection occurring
in the face, often preceded by acute necrotizing gingivitis, and stomatitis.
Rare microbiological studies suggest an opportunistic infection caused by an
imbalance in normal intraoral microorganisms. Prevention lies in food security,
measles vaccination, prevention of malaria and HIV, including the early
detection and treatment of necrotizing gingivitis and stomatitis. Early
treatment with antibiotics may prevent gangrene or reduce its extent. Late
treatment consists of surgical rehabilitation, which is often complex. However,
access to medical care is very limited for noma patients due to the extremely
poor conditions in which they live that are frequently located in remote rural
areas. The authors support the United Nations Human Rights Council Resolution
19/7 adopted on March 22, 2012 "The right to food," and advocate for the
inclusion of noma on the list of neglected tropical diseases to encourage more
medical and institutional attention for this often lethal or very mutilating
infectious gangrene.

© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0718
PMCID: PMC5303022
PMID: 28093536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
