---
reference_id: "PMID:25696020"
title: A case report of a fetus with mosaic autosomal variegated aneuploidies and literature review.
authors:
- Cho CH
- Oh MJ
- Lim CS
- Lee CK
- Cho Y
- Yoon SY
journal: Ann Clin Lab Sci
year: '2015'
keywords:
- Adult
- Amnion/pathology
- Aneuploidy
- Chromosome Disorders/pathology
- Cytogenetic Analysis
- Female
- Fetus/abnormalities
- Humans
- Karyotyping
- Male
- Mosaicism
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case report of a fetus with mosaic autosomal variegated aneuploidies and literature review.
**Authors:** Cho CH, Oh MJ, Lim CS, Lee CK, Cho Y, Yoon SY
**Journal:** Ann Clin Lab Sci (2015)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2015 Winter;45(1):106-9.

A case report of a fetus with mosaic autosomal variegated aneuploidies and
literature review.

Cho CH(1), Oh MJ(2), Lim CS(1), Lee CK(1), Cho Y(1), Yoon SY(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, College of Medicine, Korea University,
Seoul and.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, Korea
University, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, College of Medicine, Korea University,
Seoul and labmd@korea.ac.kr.

Mosaic variegated aneuploidy (MVA) is a recessive condition characterized by
mosaic aneuploidies, predominantly trisomies and monosomies, involving multiple
chromosomes and tissues. The phenotype of MVA syndrome includes severe
microcephaly and growth deficiency, central nervous system anomalies, mental
retardation, mild physical anomalies, and predisposition to cancer. We report a
case of true fetal mosaicism for variegated aneuploidies detected in amniotic
fluid cells. A 33-year-old primigravida woman at 5 weeks 1 day of gestation was
referred to our tertiary hospital because of a high-risk pregnancy associated
with IgA nephropathy. In a quadruple screening test performed at the 15(th) week
of gestation, alpha fetoprotein was 73.4 IU/mL (2.792 MoM), suggesting that she
was at high risk of neural tube defect. Following amniocentesis performed at the
17 weeks' gestation, chromosome examination of amniocyte culture showed
premature chromatic separation in 63% of the metaphases (58/92) and a high
frequency of gain and loss of chromosomes. Repeat amniocentesis at 21 weeks'
gestation consistently showed the presence of multiple mosaic autosomal
variegated aneuploidies. Ultrasonography at 21 weeks' gestation revealed
relatively small head circumference for gestational age (<3%) and vermis defect,
suggesting that the fetus would have microcephaly and Dandy-Walker malformation.
Cytogenetic analysis with peripheral blood of the parents showed normal
karyotype. In summary, we hereby report the cytogenetic analysis and prenatal
findings of MVA.

© 2015 by the Association of Clinical Scientists, Inc.

PMID: 25696020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
