---
reference_id: "PMID:37564735"
title: "Adult-onset leukodystrophies: a practical guide, recent treatment updates, and future directions."
authors:
- Muthusamy K
- Sivadasan A
- Dixon L
- Sudhakar S
- Thomas M
- Danda S
- Wszolek ZK
- Wierenga K
- Dhamija R
- Gavrilova R
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1219324
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult-onset leukodystrophies: a practical guide, recent treatment updates, and future directions.
**Authors:** Muthusamy K, Sivadasan A, Dixon L, Sudhakar S, Thomas M, Danda S, Wszolek ZK, Wierenga K, Dhamija R, Gavrilova R
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1219324](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1219324)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Jul 26;14:1219324. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1219324. 
eCollection 2023.

Adult-onset leukodystrophies: a practical guide, recent treatment updates, and 
future directions.

Muthusamy K(1), Sivadasan A(2), Dixon L(3), Sudhakar S(4), Thomas M(2), Danda 
S(5), Wszolek ZK(6), Wierenga K(1), Dhamija R(7), Gavrilova R(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, United 
States.
(2)Department of Neurological Sciences, Christian Medical College, Tamil Nadu, 
Vellore, India.
(3)Department of Radiology, Imperial College, NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Radiology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Christian Medical College, Vellore, Tamil 
Nadu, India.
(6)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, United States.
(7)Department of Clinical Genomics and Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, AZ, 
United States.
(8)Department of Clinical Genomics and Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
United States.

Adult-onset leukodystrophies though individually rare are not uncommon. This 
group includes several disorders with isolated adult presentations, as well as 
several childhood leukodystrophies with attenuated phenotypes that present at a 
later age. Misdiagnoses often occur due to the clinical and radiological overlap 
with common acquired disorders such as infectious, immune, inflammatory, 
vascular, metabolic, and toxic etiologies. Increased prevalence of non-specific 
white matter changes in adult population poses challenges during diagnostic 
considerations. Clinico-radiological spectrum and molecular landscape of 
adult-onset leukodystrophies have not been completely elucidated at this time. 
Diagnostic approach is less well-standardized when compared to the childhood 
counterpart. Absence of family history and reduced penetrance in certain 
disorders frequently create a dilemma. Comprehensive evaluation and molecular 
confirmation when available helps in prognostication, early initiation of 
treatment in certain disorders, enrollment in clinical trials, and provides 
valuable information for the family for reproductive counseling. In this review 
article, we aimed to formulate an approach to adult-onset leukodystrophies that 
will be useful in routine practice, discuss common adult-onset leukodystrophies 
with usual and unusual presentations, neuroimaging findings, recent advances in 
treatment, acquired mimics, and provide an algorithm for comprehensive clinical, 
radiological, and genetic evaluation that will facilitate early diagnosis and 
consider active treatment options when available. A high index of suspicion, 
awareness of the clinico-radiological presentations, and comprehensive genetic 
evaluation are paramount because treatment options are available for several 
disorders when diagnosed early in the disease course.

Copyright © 2023 Muthusamy, Sivadasan, Dixon, Sudhakar, Thomas, Danda, Wszolek, 
Wierenga, Dhamija and Gavrilova.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1219324
PMCID: PMC10410460
PMID: 37564735

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.