---
reference_id: "PMID:30454753"
title: Lupus Nephritis.
authors:
- Wenderfer SE
- Eldin KW
journal: Pediatr Clin North Am
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.pcl.2018.08.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lupus Nephritis.
**Authors:** Wenderfer SE, Eldin KW
**Journal:** Pediatr Clin North Am (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pcl.2018.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcl.2018.08.007)

## Content

1. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2019 Feb;66(1):87-99. doi: 10.1016/j.pcl.2018.08.007.

Lupus Nephritis.

Wenderfer SE(1), Eldin KW(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Texas Children's Hospital, 1102 Bates Avenue, Suite 245, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 
Electronic address: wenderfe@bcm.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas 
Children's Hospital, 6621 Fannin Street, Suite AB195, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a subset of SLE with an 
onset before 18 years of age. Patients with early onset SLE tend to have a 
greater genetic component to their disease cause, more multisystemic 
involvement, and a more severe disease course, which includes greater risks for 
developing nephritis and end-stage kidney disease. Five- and 10-year mortality 
is lower than in adult-onset SLE. Although patient and renal survival have 
improved with advances in induction and maintenance immunosuppression, 
accumulation of irreversible damage is common. Cardiovascular and infectious 
complications are frequent, as are relapses during adolescence and the 
transition to adulthood.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcl.2018.08.007
PMID: 30454753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]