---
reference_id: "PMID:15800308"
title: "Randomized trial of amifostine in locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer patients receiving chemotherapy and hyperfractionated radiation: radiation therapy oncology group trial 98-01."
authors:
- Movsas B
- Scott C
- Langer C
- Werner-Wasik M
- Nicolaou N
- Komaki R
- Machtay M
- Smith C
- Axelrod R
- Sarna L
- Wasserman T
- Byhardt R
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2005.07.167
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized trial of amifostine in locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer patients receiving chemotherapy and hyperfractionated radiation: radiation therapy oncology group trial 98-01.
**Authors:** Movsas B, Scott C, Langer C, Werner-Wasik M, Nicolaou N, Komaki R, Machtay M, Smith C, Axelrod R, Sarna L, Wasserman T, Byhardt R
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2005.07.167](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2005.07.167)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Apr 1;23(10):2145-54. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2005.07.167.

Randomized trial of amifostine in locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer 
patients receiving chemotherapy and hyperfractionated radiation: radiation 
therapy oncology group trial 98-01.

Movsas B(1), Scott C, Langer C, Werner-Wasik M, Nicolaou N, Komaki R, Machtay M, 
Smith C, Axelrod R, Sarna L, Wasserman T, Byhardt R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Henry Ford Health System, 2799 W Grand 
Blvd, Detroit, MI 48202, USA. bmovsas1@hfhs.org

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2005 Oct 1;23(28):7232-3; author reply 7233-5. doi: 
10.1200/JCO.2005.02.2533.

PURPOSE: To test the ability of the cytoprotectant, amifostine, to reduce 
chemoradiotherapy-induced esophagitis and evaluate its influence on quality of 
life (QOL) and swallowing symptoms.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 243 patients with stage II to IIIA/B 
non-small-cell lung cancer received induction paclitaxel 225 mg/m(2) 
intravenously (IV) days 1 and 22 and carboplatin area under the curve (AUC) days 
1 and 22, followed by concurrent weekly paclitaxel (50 mg/m(2) IV) and 
carboplatin (AUC 2), and hyperfractionated radiation therapy (69.6 Gy at 1.2 Gy 
bid). Patients were randomly assigned at registration to amifostine (AM) 500 mg 
IV four times per week or no AM during chemoradiotherapy. Beyond standard 
toxicity end points, physician dysphagia logs (PDLs), daily patient swallowing 
diaries, and QOL (EORTC QLQ-C30/LC-13) were also collected. Swallowing AUC 
analyses were calculated from patient diaries and PDLs.
RESULTS: A total of 120 patients were randomly assigned to receive AM, and 122, 
to receive no AM (one patient was ineligible); 72% received AM per protocol or 
with a minor deviation. AM was associated with higher rates of acute nausea (P = 
.03), vomiting (P = .007), cardiovascular toxicity (P = .0001), and infection or 
febrile neutropenia (P = .03). The rate of >/= grade 3 esophagitis was 30% with 
AM versus 34% without AM (P = .9). Patient diaries demonstrated lower swallowing 
dysfunction AUC with amifostine (z test P = .025). QOL was not significantly 
different between the two arms, except for pain, which showed more clinically 
meaningful improvement and less deterioration at 6 weeks follow-up (v 
pretreatment) in the AM arm (P = .003). The median survival rates for both arms 
were comparable (AM, 17.3 v no AM, 17.9 months; P = .87).
CONCLUSION: AM did not significantly reduce esophagitis >/= grade 3 in patients 
receiving hyperfractionated radiation and chemotherapy. However, patient 
self-assessments suggested a possible advantage to AM that is being explored 
with modified dosing route strategies.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2005.07.167
PMID: 15800308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]