---
reference_id: "PMID:10829097"
title: "Ischemia and fibrosis: the risk mechanisms of hypertensive heart disease."
authors:
- Frohlich ED
journal: Braz J Med Biol Res
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1590/s0100-879x2000000600010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ischemia and fibrosis: the risk mechanisms of hypertensive heart disease.
**Authors:** Frohlich ED
**Journal:** Braz J Med Biol Res (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1590/s0100-879x2000000600010](https://doi.org/10.1590/s0100-879x2000000600010)

## Content

1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2000 Jun;33(6):693-700. doi: 
10.1590/s0100-879x2000000600010.

Ischemia and fibrosis: the risk mechanisms of hypertensive heart disease.

Frohlich ED(1).

Author information:
(1)Alton Ochsner Medical Foundation, New Orleans, LA 70121, USA.

Mechanisms underlying risk associated with hypertensive heart disease (HHD) and 
left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) are discussed in this report and provide a 
rationale for understanding this very common and important cause of death from 
hypertension and its complications. Emphasized are impaired coronary 
hemodynamics, endothelial dysfunction, and ventricular fibrosis from increased 
collagen deposition intramurally and perivascularly. Each is exacerbated by 
aging and, perhaps, also by increased dietary salt intake. These functional and 
structural changes promote further endothelial dysfunction, altered coronary 
hemodynamics, and diastolic as well as systolic ventricular contractile function 
in HHD. The clinical endpoints of HHD include angina pectoris (with or without 
atherosclerosis of the epicardial coronary arteries), myocardial infarction, 
cardiac failure, lethal dysrhythmias, and sudden death. The major concept to be 
derived from these alterations is that not all that is clinically recognized as 
LVH is true myocytic hypertrophy and structural remodeling. Other major 
co-morbid changes occur that serve to increase cardiovascular risk including 
impaired coronary hemodynamics, endothelial dysfunction, and ventricular 
fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1590/s0100-879x2000000600010
PMID: 10829097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]