---
reference_id: "PMID:36630963"
title: Capturing the conversion of the pathogenic alpha-1-antitrypsin fold by ATF6 enhanced proteostasis.
authors:
- Sun S
- Wang C
- Zhao P
- Kline GM
- Grandjean JMD
- Jiang X
- Labaudiniere R
- Wiseman RL
- Kelly JW
- Balch WE
journal: Cell Chem Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2022.12.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Capturing the conversion of the pathogenic alpha-1-antitrypsin fold by ATF6 enhanced proteostasis.
**Authors:** Sun S, Wang C, Zhao P, Kline GM, Grandjean JMD, Jiang X, Labaudiniere R, Wiseman RL, Kelly JW, Balch WE
**Journal:** Cell Chem Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chembiol.2022.12.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2022.12.004)

## Content

1. Cell Chem Biol. 2023 Jan 19;30(1):22-42.e5. doi:
10.1016/j.chembiol.2022.12.004.  Epub 2023 Jan 10.

Capturing the conversion of the pathogenic alpha-1-antitrypsin fold by ATF6 
enhanced proteostasis.

Sun S(1), Wang C(1), Zhao P(1), Kline GM(2), Grandjean JMD(3), Jiang X(3), 
Labaudiniere R(3), Wiseman RL(1), Kelly JW(2), Balch WE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Protego Biopharma, 10945 Vista Sorrento Parkway, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
CA, USA. Electronic address: webalch@scripps.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Chem Biol. 2023 Jan 19;30(1):1-2. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2022.12.008.

Genetic variation in alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) causes AAT deficiency (AATD) 
through liver aggregation-associated gain-of-toxic pathology and/or insufficient 
AAT activity in the lung manifesting as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Here, we utilize 71 AATD-associated variants as input through Gaussian 
process (GP)-based machine learning to study the correction of AAT folding and 
function at a residue-by-residue level by pharmacological activation of the ATF6 
arm of the unfolded protein response (UPR). We show that ATF6 activators 
increase AAT neutrophil elastase (NE) inhibitory activity, while reducing 
polymer accumulation for the majority of AATD variants, including the prominent 
Z variant. GP-based profiling of the residue-by-residue response to ATF6 
activators captures an unexpected role of the "gate" area in managing 
AAT-specific activity. Our work establishes a new spatial covariant (SCV) 
understanding of the convertible state of the protein fold in response to 
genetic perturbation and active environmental management by proteostasis 
enhancement for precision medicine.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2022.12.004
PMCID: PMC9930901
PMID: 36630963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests S.S., C.W., P.Z., 
G.M.K., and W.E.B. declare no competing interests. J.W.K. and R.L.W. are 
shareholders and scientific advisory board members of Protego Biopharma. J.W.K., 
X.J., and R.L. are co-founders of Protego Biopharma. J.M.D.G. was an employee of 
Protego Biopharma. Protego Biopharma is exploring UPR activating compounds, 
including AA-147 and AA-263. for the treatment of protein misfolding diseases.