---
reference_id: "PMID:38178940"
title: Postural fall in systolic blood pressure is a useful warning sign in dengue fever.
authors:
- Mahabala C
- Boloor A
- Upadhya S
- Nimmagadda SS
- Lakshmikeshava T
- Anand R
journal: F1000Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.12688/f1000research.132714.2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postural fall in systolic blood pressure is a useful warning sign in dengue fever.
**Authors:** Mahabala C, Boloor A, Upadhya S, Nimmagadda SS, Lakshmikeshava T, Anand R
**Journal:** F1000Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.12688/f1000research.132714.2](https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.132714.2)

## Content

1. F1000Res. 2023 Dec 18;12:816. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.132714.2.
eCollection  2023.

Postural fall in systolic blood pressure is a useful warning sign in dengue 
fever.

Mahabala C(1), Boloor A(1), Upadhya S(1), Nimmagadda SS(2), Lakshmikeshava T(1), 
Anand R(1).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, Kasturba Medical College , Mangalore , Manipal Academy Of Higher 
Education, Manipal, Karnataka, 575001, India.
(2)Cardiology, Andhra Medical College, Vishakapatanam, Andhra Pradesh, 530002, 
India.

BACKGROUND: Capillary leak is the hallmark of development of severe dengue. A 
rise in haematocrit has been a major warning sign in WHO guidelines. Postural 
hypotension, which could reflect the intravascular volume reduction in capillary 
leak has been noted as warning sign in CDC and Pan American Health Organisation 
guidelines. We evaluated the diagnostic accuracy of postural hypotension as a 
marker of development of severe dengue.
METHODS: 150 patients admitted with dengue fever were recruited in this 
prospective observational study. Diagnostic accuracy of conventional warning 
signs (abdominal pain, persistent vomiting, fluid accumulation, mucosal 
bleeding, lethargy, liver enlargement, increasing hematocrit with decreasing 
platelets) and postural hypotension was evaluated.
RESULTS: 23 (15.3%) subjects developed severe dengue. Multiple logistic 
regression analysis showed that ascites/pleural effusion and postural fall in 
systolic blood pressure of >10.33% had odds ratio of 5.024(95%CI:1.11 - 22.75) 
and 11.369 (95% CI:2.27 - 56.87), respectively. Other parameters did not reach 
statistical significance. Sensitivity and specificity of ascites/pleural 
effusion were 82.6% and 88.2% for development of severe dengue whereas postural 
fall in systolic blood pressure had sensitivity and specificity of 87% and 
82.7%.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings present a strong case for including postural 
hypotension as a warning sign in patients with dengue fever, especially in 
resource limited settings.

Copyright: © 2023 Mahabala C et al.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.132714.2
PMCID: PMC10765096
PMID: 38178940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.