---
reference_id: "PMID:39161484"
title: "What Makes It Tick: Exploring the Mechanisms of Post-treatment Lyme Disease Syndrome."
authors:
- Wester KE
- Nwokeabia BC
- Hassan R
- Dunphy T
- Osondu M
- Wonders C
- Khaja M
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.64987
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What Makes It Tick: Exploring the Mechanisms of Post-treatment Lyme Disease Syndrome.
**Authors:** Wester KE, Nwokeabia BC, Hassan R, Dunphy T, Osondu M, Wonders C, Khaja M
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.64987](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.64987)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jul 20;16(7):e64987. doi: 10.7759/cureus.64987. eCollection 2024 
Jul.

What Makes It Tick: Exploring the Mechanisms of Post-treatment Lyme Disease 
Syndrome.

Wester KE(1), Nwokeabia BC(1), Hassan R(1), Dunphy T(1), Osondu M(1), Wonders 
C(1), Khaja M(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, American University of the Caribbean, Cupecoy, SXM.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, BronxCare Health System, Bronx, USA.

Post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome (PTLDS), which may also be referred to 
incorrectly as "chronic Lyme disease," is defined by the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America (IDSA) as the presence of fatigue, pain, and/or cognitive 
complaints with the functional impact that persists for more than six months 
after completing treatment for Lyme disease (LD). These symptoms occur in 
10%-20% of patients previously diagnosed with LD caused by the bacteria Borrelia 
burgdorferi and appropriately treated with a course of antibiotics. The symptoms 
of PTLDS can be easily overlooked or misdiagnosed as a psychiatric manifestation 
in geographic locations that rarely see LD. In contrast, geographic locations 
with a higher prevalence of LD may be more aware of PTLDS symptoms and have 
higher clinical suspicion leading to this diagnosis. The pathophysiology behind 
the persistent symptoms some people experience from a primary infection is still 
largely unknown. Some mechanisms that have been proposed include permanent 
tissue damage and inflammation, immune system dysfunction, autoimmune response, 
co-infection, and even persistent infection refractory to treatment. We propose 
that ongoing PTLDS symptoms seem to be related to an autoimmune response to the 
tissue damage and inflammation caused by the viable or nonviable spirochete 
pathogen. At this point, PTLDS is diagnosed clinically as no quantifiable 
methods are available from laboratory or tissue diagnostics as of 2024. Similar 
pathophysiological features of PTLDS are seen in diseases such as COVID-19 or 
chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). More effective diagnostic approaches might 
include further studies looking at a possible connection in the genomes of 
individuals developing PTLDS, quantifiable biomarkers, common inflammatory 
markers/pathways, and careful histopathological studies of human tissues.

Copyright © 2024, Wester et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.64987
PMCID: PMC11332314
PMID: 39161484

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.