---
reference_id: "PMID:31755570"
title: "Disseminated bullous impetigo and atopic dermatitis: Case series and literature review."
authors:
- Mannschreck D
- Feig J
- Selph J
- Cohen B
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/pde.14032
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Blister
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Dermatitis, Atopic/diagnosis"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- "Impetigo/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Infant
- Male
- Phenotype
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disseminated bullous impetigo and atopic dermatitis: Case series and literature review.
**Authors:** Mannschreck D, Feig J, Selph J, Cohen B
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.14032](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.14032)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2020 Jan;37(1):103-108. doi: 10.1111/pde.14032. Epub 2019
Nov  22.

Disseminated bullous impetigo and atopic dermatitis: Case series and literature 
review.

Mannschreck D(1), Feig J(2), Selph J(2), Cohen B(2).

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Dermatology, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Bullous impetigo (BI) is a common skin infection of early childhood, 
resulting from desmoglein-1 cleavage by Staphylococcus aureus exfoliative 
toxins. Due to compromised barrier function and immune dysregulation, children 
with atopic dermatitis (AD) are at increased risk of cutaneous infections, yet 
no literature has been published on disseminated bullous impetigo (DBI) in 
children with atopic dermatitis (AD). We sought to explore the atopic 
phenotypes, antibiotic sensitivities, and treatment courses of children 
diagnosed with disseminated bullous impetigo at our institution.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective case series of 12 children diagnosed with 
disseminated bullous impetigo at Johns Hopkins from 12/2016 to 5/2017.
RESULTS: Eleven children (92%) had severe AD. All children were initially 
misdiagnosed; the majority (67%) were misdiagnosed with AD flares, and other 
misdiagnoses included scabies, eczema herpeticum, ecthyma, varicella, and eczema 
coxsackium. All cultures were positive for methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus 
aureus (MSSA). Three children (25%) had clindamycin-resistant strains of MSSA, 
and only one child was positive for both MSSA and methicillin-resistant 
S aureus. All children were treated with systemic antibiotics and experienced 
resolution of symptoms within 24-48 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: This case series is the first of its kind exploring children with 
DBI with the atopic diathesis. Our results indicate that DBI is often 
misdiagnosed, and increased training is likely needed for pediatricians, 
emergency room physicians, and dermatologists. Earlier diagnosis of bullous 
impetigo may prevent dissemination and spare a patient treatment with systemic 
antibiotics. Given the high rate of clindamycin resistance observed in this 
series, we recommend cephalosporins to treat uncomplicated cases of DBI.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.14032
PMID: 31755570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]