---
reference_id: "PMID:30352948"
title: ER-mitochondria cross-talk is regulated by the Ca(2+) sensor NCS1 and is impaired in Wolfram syndrome.
authors:
- Angebault C
- Fauconnier J
- Patergnani S
- Rieusset J
- Danese A
- Affortit CA
- Jagodzinska J
- Mégy C
- Quiles M
- Cazevieille C
- Korchagina J
- Bonnet-Wersinger D
- Milea D
- Hamel C
- Pinton P
- Thiry M
- Lacampagne A
- Delprat B
- Delettre C
journal: Sci Signal
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aaq1380
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Ear, Inner/metabolism"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "Membrane Potential, Mitochondrial"
- Mice
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Neuronal Calcium-Sensor Proteins/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
- Neuropeptides/metabolism
- Oxygen Consumption
- "RNA, Small Interfering/metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Wolfram Syndrome/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ER-mitochondria cross-talk is regulated by the Ca(2+) sensor NCS1 and is impaired in Wolfram syndrome.
**Authors:** Angebault C, Fauconnier J, Patergnani S, Rieusset J, Danese A, Affortit CA, Jagodzinska J, Mégy C, Quiles M, Cazevieille C, Korchagina J, Bonnet-Wersinger D, Milea D, Hamel C, Pinton P, Thiry M, Lacampagne A, Delprat B, Delettre C
**Journal:** Sci Signal (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scisignal.aaq1380](https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.aaq1380)

## Content

1. Sci Signal. 2018 Oct 23;11(553):eaaq1380. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aaq1380.

ER-mitochondria cross-talk is regulated by the Ca(2+) sensor NCS1 and is
impaired in Wolfram syndrome.

Angebault C(1)(2), Fauconnier J(2), Patergnani S(3)(4), Rieusset J(5), Danese
A(3), Affortit CA(1), Jagodzinska J(1), Mégy C(1), Quiles M(1), Cazevieille
C(1), Korchagina J(1), Bonnet-Wersinger D(1), Milea D(6)(7), Hamel C(1)(8),
Pinton P(3), Thiry M(9), Lacampagne A(2), Delprat B(10)(11), Delettre C(10).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurosciences of Montpellier, INSERM, University of Montpellier,
34090 Montpellier, France.
(2)PhyMedExp, University of Montpellier, INSERM, CNRS, CHRU Montpellier, 34295
Montpellier, France.
(3)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, Section of
Pathology, Oncology and Experimental Biology and Laboratory for Technologies of
Advanced Therapies (LTTA), University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy.
(4)Maria Cecilia Hospital, GVM Care & Research, Cotignola, 48033 Ravenna, Italy.
(5)INSERM U1060, UMR INRA 1397, CarMeN Laboratory, Lyon 1 University, F-69003
Lyon, France.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Angers University Hospital, 43933 Angers,
France.
(7)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 169857
Singapore, Singapore.
(8)CHRU Montpellier, Centre of Reference for Genetic Sensory Diseases, CHU, Gui
de Chauliac Hospital, 34090 Montpellier, France.
(9)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire, Université de Liège, Bât. B36 (Tour 4)
GIGA-Neurosciences, Quartier Hôpital, Avenue Hippocrate 15, 4000 Liège 1,
Belgium.
(10)Institute of Neurosciences of Montpellier, INSERM, University of
Montpellier, 34090 Montpellier, France. cecile.delettre@inserm.fr
benjamin.delprat@inserm.fr.
(11)MMDN, Univ. Montpellier, EPHE, INSERM U1198, F-34095 Montpellier, France.

Communication between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria plays a
pivotal role in Ca2+ signaling, energy metabolism, and cell survival.
Dysfunction in this cross-talk leads to metabolic and neurodegenerative
diseases. Wolfram syndrome is a fatal neurodegenerative disease caused by
mutations in the ER-resident protein WFS1. Here, we showed that WFS1 formed a
complex with neuronal calcium sensor 1 (NCS1) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate
receptor (IP3R) to promote Ca2+ transfer between the ER and mitochondria. In
addition, we found that NCS1 abundance was reduced in WFS1-null patient
fibroblasts, which showed reduced ER-mitochondria interactions and Ca2+
exchange. Moreover, in WFS1-deficient cells, NCS1 overexpression not only
restored ER-mitochondria interactions and Ca2+ transfer but also rescued
mitochondrial dysfunction. Our results describe a key role of NCS1 in
ER-mitochondria cross-talk, uncover a pathogenic mechanism for Wolfram syndrome,
and potentially reveal insights into the pathogenesis of other neurodegenerative
diseases.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.aaq1380
PMID: 30352948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
