---
reference_id: "PMID:30155657"
title: "Neuroimaging Predictors and Mechanisms of Treatment Response in Social Anxiety Disorder: an Overview of the Amygdala."
authors:
- Klumpp H
- Fitzgerald JM
journal: Curr Psychiatry Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s11920-018-0948-1
keywords:
- "Amygdala/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Brain Mapping
- Fear
- Humans
- "Phobia, Social/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroimaging Predictors and Mechanisms of Treatment Response in Social Anxiety Disorder: an Overview of the Amygdala.
**Authors:** Klumpp H, Fitzgerald JM
**Journal:** Curr Psychiatry Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11920-018-0948-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-018-0948-1)

## Content

1. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2018 Aug 28;20(10):89. doi: 10.1007/s11920-018-0948-1.

Neuroimaging Predictors and Mechanisms of Treatment Response in Social Anxiety
Disorder: an Overview of the Amygdala.

Klumpp H(1), Fitzgerald JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Psychology, University of Illinois at Chicago,
1747 W. Roosevelt Rd, Chicago, IL, 60608, USA. hklumpp@psych.uic.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI,
USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Aberrant amygdala activity is implicated in the neurobiology
of social anxiety disorder (SAD) and is, therefore, a treatment target. However,
the extent to which amygdala predicts clinical improvement or is impacted by
treatment has not been critically examined. This review highlights recent
neuroimaging findings from clinical trials and research that test links between
amygdala and mechanisms of action.
RECENT FINDINGS: Neuropredictor studies largely comprised psychotherapy where
improvement was foretold by amygdala activity and regions beyond amygdala such
as frontal structures (e.g., anterior cingulate cortex, medial prefrontal
cortex) and areas involved in visual processes (e.g., occipital regions,
superior temporal gyrus). Pre-treatment functional connectivity between amygdala
and frontal areas was also shown to predict improvement signifying circuits that
support emotion processing and regulation interact with treatment. Pre-to-post
studies revealed decreases in amygdala response and altered functional
connectivity in amygdala pathways regardless of treatment modality. In analogue
studies of fear exposure, greater reduction in anxiety was predicted by less
amygdala response to a speech challenge and amygdala activity decreased
following exposures. Yet, studies have also failed to detect amygdala effects
reporting instead treatment-related changes in regions and functional systems
that support sensory, emotion, and regulation processes. An array of regions in
the corticolimbic subcircuits and extrastriate cortex appear to be viable sites
of action. The amygdala and amygdala pathways predict treatment outcome and are
altered following treatment. However, further study is needed to establish the
role of the amygdala and other candidate regions and brain circuits as sites of
action.

DOI: 10.1007/s11920-018-0948-1
PMCID: PMC9278878
PMID: 30155657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest.
