---
reference_id: "PMID:27533513"
title: "Dacryolithiasis: A Review."
authors:
- Mishra K
- Hu KY
- Kamal S
- Andron A
- Della Rocca RC
- Ali MJ
- Nair AG
journal: Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000000769
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dacryolithiasis: A Review.
**Authors:** Mishra K, Hu KY, Kamal S, Andron A, Della Rocca RC, Ali MJ, Nair AG
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IOP.0000000000000769](https://doi.org/10.1097/IOP.0000000000000769)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2017 Mar/Apr;33(2):83-89. doi: 
10.1097/IOP.0000000000000769.

Dacryolithiasis: A Review.

Mishra K(1), Hu KY, Kamal S, Andron A, Della Rocca RC, Ali MJ, Nair AG.

Author information:
(1)*Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, U.S.A.; 
†ProAdnexa Oculoplasty Solutions, Faridabad, Haryana, India; ‡Ophthalmic 
Plastic, Orbital, and Reconstructive Surgery, New York Eye & Ear Infirmary of 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, U.S.A.; §Department of Ophthalmology, Mount 
Sinai West Hospital & Mount Sinai St. Luke' s Hospital, New York, New York, 
U.S.A.; ‖Institute of Dacryology, L V Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, India; 
¶Ophthalmic Plastic Surgery & Ocular Oncology Services, Advanced Eye Hospital & 
Institute, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra, India; and #Department of Ophthalmology, 
Lokmanya Tilak Municipal Medical College & General Hospital, Sion, Mumbai, 
India.

PURPOSE: To review and summarize the clinical features, presentations, 
diagnostic modalities and management of dacryolithiasis.
METHODS: A comprehensive PubMed search of all English articles on 
dacryolithiasis was reviewed. Although this review primarily relied on articles 
written in English, non-English-language articles that had abstracts translated 
into English were also reviewed. Data reviewed included epidemiology, 
pathogenesis, appearance and composition, clinical features, presentations, 
diagnostic modalities, management of dacryolithiasis and the implications of 
incidental dacryoliths found during lacrimal surgery.
RESULTS: Although an unknown proportion of dacryolithiasis cases may remain 
asymptomatic; epiphora, acute and/or recurrent dacryocystitis, punctal 
discharge, and localized swelling are the most common presenting features of 
dacryolithiasis. It may also present as partial nasolacrimal duct obstruction. 
Dacryoliths exhibit a variety in external appearances. While some minimally 
invasive techniques for the removal of dacryoliths have been described, 
dacryocystorhinostomy with removal of the dacryoliths remain the most effective 
treatment in cases of symptomatic dacryolithiasis. The expression and production 
of certain proteins and peptides, namely those of the trifoil factor family play 
a significant role in the pathogenesis of dacryoliths.
CONCLUSIONS: The management of dacryolithiasis is driven by the goal of 
resolution of secondary obstruction and/or inflammation. Although a large number 
of dacryoliths are incidentally found during dacryocystorhinostomy, certain 
clinical features such as unilateral sac distension, particularly those with a 
palpable firm medial canthal mass, might lead one to have a high index of 
suspicion. It remains unclear if the incidental finding of a dacryolith during a 
dacryocystorhinostomy has a favorable prognostic value.

DOI: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000000769
PMID: 27533513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]