---
reference_id: "PMID:19480335"
title: "A rare cause of mental motor retardation: recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type II."
authors:
- Yüksel D
- Senbil N
- Yilmaz D
- Yarali N
- Gürer YK
journal: Turk J Pediatr
year: '2009'
keywords:
- Ascorbic Acid/therapeutic use
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Methemoglobinemia/congenital, diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Siblings
- Vitamins/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare cause of mental motor retardation: recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type II.
**Authors:** Yüksel D, Senbil N, Yilmaz D, Yarali N, Gürer YK
**Journal:** Turk J Pediatr (2009)

## Content

1. Turk J Pediatr. 2009 Mar-Apr;51(2):187-9.

A rare cause of mental motor retardation: recessive congenital methemoglobinemia
type II.

Yüksel D(1), Senbil N, Yilmaz D, Yarali N, Gürer YK.

Author information:
(1)Dr. Sami Ulus Child Health and Diseases Training and Research Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey.

Recessive congenital methemoglobinemia (RCM) is a very rare disorder caused by
NADH- cytochrome b5 reductase (cytb5r) deficiency. It has been classified into
four types. Type I presents with mild cyanosis due to a significant deficiency
of cytb5r in erythrocytes only. In type II, the deficiency occurs in all tissues
and causes growth and mental retardation and other neurological impairments. RCM
types I and II are caused by a defect in a single gene, which is located on
chromosome 22 (locus DIA 1: q 13.31-qter). Prenatal diagnosis is possible.
Cyanosis can be well treated by 200-500 mg of ascorbic acid daily; there is no
effective therapy for the progressive neurological impairments. This report
presents two siblings with central cyanosis, growth retardation, mental
retardation, microcephaly, dystonia and hypertonia diagnosed as RCM type II.

PMID: 19480335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
