---
reference_id: "PMID:31487384"
title: Revisiting the initial diagnosis and blood staging of mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome with the KIR3DL2 marker.
authors:
- Roelens M
- de Masson A
- Ram-Wolff C
- Maki G
- Cayuela JM
- Marie-Cardine A
- Bensussan A
- Toubert A
- Bagot M
- Moins-Teisserenc H
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.18481
keywords:
- Humans
- Mycosis Fungoides/diagnosis
- Prospective Studies
- "Receptors, KIR3DL2"
- Reproducibility of Results
- Sezary Syndrome/diagnosis
- Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revisiting the initial diagnosis and blood staging of mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome with the KIR3DL2 marker.
**Authors:** Roelens M, de Masson A, Ram-Wolff C, Maki G, Cayuela JM, Marie-Cardine A, Bensussan A, Toubert A, Bagot M, Moins-Teisserenc H
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.18481](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.18481)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2020 Jun;182(6):1415-1422. doi: 10.1111/bjd.18481. Epub 2019
Oct  22.

Revisiting the initial diagnosis and blood staging of mycosis fungoides and
Sézary syndrome with the KIR3DL2 marker.

Roelens M(1)(2), de Masson A(1)(3)(4), Ram-Wolff C(1)(3)(4), Maki G(5), Cayuela
JM(1)(6), Marie-Cardine A(1)(3), Bensussan A(1)(3), Toubert A(1)(2)(5), Bagot
M(1)(3)(4), Moins-Teisserenc H(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(2)INSERM, UMR-1160, Institut de Recherche Saint-Louis, 75010, Paris, France.
(3)INSERM, UMR-976, Institut de Recherche Saint-Louis, 75010, Paris, France.
(4)Service de Dermatologie, AP-HP, Hôpital Saint Louis, 75010, Paris, France.
(5)Laboratoire d'Immunologie-Histocompatibilité, AP-HP, Hôpital Saint Louis,
75010, Paris, France.
(6)Laboratoire d'Hématologie Biologique, AP-HP, Hôpital Saint Louis, 75010,
Paris, France.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2020 Jun;182(6):1325-1326. doi: 10.1111/bjd.18682.

BACKGROUND: The early diagnosis of Sézary syndrome (SS) is challenging. Loss of
CD7 and CD26 expression on CD4+ T cells is the currently used criterion in the
initial diagnosis and staging of patients with SS.
OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to evaluate the respective value of CD26, CD7 and
KIR3DL2 expression on CD4+ T cells and total lymphocytes at initial diagnosis of
SS.
METHODS: This prospective study included 254 patients with clinical features
consistent with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma seen at our institution between March
2014 and February 2019. Peripheral blood analysis by flow cytometry was
performed for each patient at the time of diagnosis and during follow-up. The
diagnosis of SS was based on ISCL/EORTC criteria.
RESULTS: The presence of KIR3DL2+ Sézary cells (SCs) ≥ 200 μL-1 correlated with
the diagnosis of SS, with sensitivity of 88·6% and specificity of 96·3%. All 154
patients with either inflammatory skin disease or other haematological disease
had KIR3DL2+ cells < 200 μL-1 , while eight of them had CD4+ CD26- T cells ≥
1000 μL-1 . Of five patients with SS and lymphopenia, four had CD4+ CD7- T cells
< 1000 μL-1 and three had CD4+ CD26- T cells < 1000 μL-1 . However, all of them
had KIR3DL2+ CD4+ T cells ≥ 200 μL-1 . Among patients with available samples
during evolution, all B1-staged patients with ≥ 200 μL-1 KIR3DL2+ SCs at
diagnosis evolved to B2 stage within 7 months.
CONCLUSIONS: KIR3DL2 expression on T cells is highly specific and helps the
early diagnosis of SS, especially in those patients with lymphopenia. What's
already known about this topic? In the ISCL/EORTC cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
(CTCL) categorization of blood involvement (B0-B2), B2 is defined as a T-cell
receptor clonal rearrangement in blood, associated with high blood-smear Sézary
cell (SC) count. Flow cytometry was developed to circumvent interobserver
variability of SC manual counts; however, it mostly relies on detection of cells
lacking CD7 and/or CD26 expression. We previously reported the reliability of
KIR3DL2 as the first positive SC marker. What does this study add? Based on our
analysis of 254 patients, we propose that KIR3DL2 be added to the ISCL/EORTC
criteria for initial diagnosis of Sézary syndrome (SS) and B2 staging. This
marker improved sensitivity of SS B2-stage CTCL diagnosis with a specificity >
95%, especially for patients with lymphopenia. We found KIR3DL2 helped early
diagnosis of SS and was more reliable than CD26 in assessing blood tumour burden
during therapy. What is the translational message? SC quantification is the
major means of staging at initial diagnosis and monitoring blood tumour burden
in a clinical trials setting. We recommend using a threshold value of KIR3DL2+
SCs ≥ 200 μL-1 or KIR3DL2+ SCs/lymphocytes ≥ 10% in the diagnostic criteria of
SS and propose a novel algorithm for CTCL B2 blood staging.

© 2019 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.18481
PMID: 31487384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
