---
reference_id: "PMID:27350263"
title: A review of the mechanisms of cone degeneration in retinitis pigmentosa.
authors:
- Narayan DS
- Wood JP
- Chidlow G
- Casson RJ
journal: Acta Ophthalmol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/aos.13141
keywords:
- Humans
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/pathology
- Retinal Degeneration/physiopathology
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of the mechanisms of cone degeneration in retinitis pigmentosa.
**Authors:** Narayan DS, Wood JP, Chidlow G, Casson RJ
**Journal:** Acta Ophthalmol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/aos.13141](https://doi.org/10.1111/aos.13141)

## Content

1. Acta Ophthalmol. 2016 Dec;94(8):748-754. doi: 10.1111/aos.13141. Epub 2016 Jun
 27.

A review of the mechanisms of cone degeneration in retinitis pigmentosa.

Narayan DS(1)(2), Wood JP(1)(2), Chidlow G(1)(2), Casson RJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmic Research Laboratories, Hanson Institute Centre for Neurological 
Diseases, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(2)South Australian Institute of Ophthalmology, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is an inherited condition that features degeneration 
of rod and cone photoreceptors. In all forms of RP, the genetic mutation is 
expressed exclusively in rods; however, cones die too. The secondary death of 
cones in RP remains somewhat mysterious. A better understanding of the 
mechanisms that cause cone degeneration in RP could lead to novel treatments 
that preserve cones. There are a number of prevailing theories that attempt to 
explain cone degeneration in RP. One concept is that cone survival is dependent 
on trophic factors produced by rods. Another hypothesis is that cones suffer 
from a nutrient shortage after rods have been lost. Additionally, oxidative 
stress and pro-inflammatory microglial activation have also been suggested to 
play a role in cone death. The present review evaluates the evidence supporting 
these theories and provides an update on the mechanisms of cone degeneration in 
RP.

© 2016 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation. Published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/aos.13141
PMID: 27350263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]