---
reference_id: "PMID:4031069"
title: "Biosynthesis of bile acids in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. Relationship of bile acid pool sizes and synthesis rates to hydroxylations at C-12, C-25, and C-26."
authors:
- Salen G
- Shefer S
- Tint GS
- Nicolau G
- Dayal B
- Batta AK
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1985'
doi: 10.1172/JCI112030
keywords:
- Adult
- Bile Acids and Salts/biosynthesis
- "Brain Diseases/complications, metabolism"
- Chemical Phenomena
- Chemistry
- Chenodeoxycholic Acid/biosynthesis
- Cholic Acid
- Cholic Acids/biosynthesis
- Female
- Humans
- Hydroxylation
- Male
- "Microsomes, Liver/enzymology"
- Middle Aged
- "Mitochondria, Liver/enzymology"
- "Tendinopathy/complications, metabolism"
- "Xanthomatosis/complications, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biosynthesis of bile acids in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. Relationship of bile acid pool sizes and synthesis rates to hydroxylations at C-12, C-25, and C-26.
**Authors:** Salen G, Shefer S, Tint GS, Nicolau G, Dayal B, Batta AK
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI112030](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI112030)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1985 Aug;76(2):744-51. doi: 10.1172/JCI112030.

Biosynthesis of bile acids in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. Relationship of
bile acid pool sizes and synthesis rates to hydroxylations at C-12, C-25, and
C-26.

Salen G, Shefer S, Tint GS, Nicolau G, Dayal B, Batta AK.

To examine the defect in side-chain oxidation during the formation of bile acids
in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, we measured in vitro hepatic microsomal
hydroxylations at C-12 and C-25 and mitochondrial hydroxylation at C-26 and
related them to the pool size and synthesis rates of cholic acid and
chenodeoxycholic acid as determined by the isotope dilution technique. Hepatic
microsomes and mitochondria were prepared from seven subjects with
cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis and five controls. Primary bile acid synthesis
was markedly reduced in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis as follows: cholic acid,
133 +/- 30 vs. 260 +/- 60 mg/d in controls; and chenodeoxycholic acid, 22 +/- 10
vs. 150 +/- 30 mg/d in controls. As postulated for chenodeoxycholic acid
synthesis, mitochondrial 26-hydroxylation of 5 beta-cholestane-3 alpha, 7
alpha-diol was present in all specimens and was 30-fold more active than the
corresponding microsomal 25-hydroxylation. However, mean mitochondrial
26-hydroxylation of 5 beta-cholestane-3 alpha,7 alpha-diol was less active in
cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis than in controls: 59 +/- 17 compared with 126 +/-
21 pmol/mg protein per min. As for cholic acid synthesis, microsomal
25-hydroxylation of 5 beta-cholestane-3 alpha,7 alpha,12 alpha-triol was
substantially higher in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis and control preparations
(620 +/- 103 and 515 +/- 64 pmol/mg protein per min, respectively) than the
corresponding control mitochondrial 26-hydroxylation of the same substrate (165
+/- 25 pmol/mg protein per min). Moreover in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis,
mitochondrial 5 beta-cholestane-3 alpha,7 alpha,12 alpha-triol-26-hydroxylase
activity was one-seventh as great as in controls. Hepatic microsomal 12
alpha-hydroxylation, which may be rate-controlling for the cholic acid pathway,
was three times more active in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis than in controls:
1,600 vs. 500 pmol/mg protein per min. These results demonstrate severely
depressed primary bile acid synthesis in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis with a
reduction in chenodeoxycholic acid formation and pool size disproportionately
greater than that for cholic acid. The deficiency of chenodeoxycholic acid can
be accounted for by hyperactive microsomal 12 alpha-hydroxylation that diverts
precursors into the cholic acid pathway combined with decreased side-chain
oxidation (mitochondrial 26-hydroxylation). However, side-chain oxidation in
cholic acid biosynthesis may be initiated via microsomal 25-hydroxylation of
5beta-cholestane-3alpha,7alpha,12alpha-triol was substantially lower in control
and cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis liver. Thus, separate mechanisms may exist
for the cleavage of the cholesterol side chain in cholic acid and
chenodeoxycholic acid biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI112030
PMCID: PMC423892
PMID: 4031069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
