---
reference_id: "PMID:37377590"
title: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome without STK11 mutation may correlate with less severe clinical manifestations in Chinese patients.
authors:
- Jiang LX
- Chen YR
- Xu ZX
- Zhang YH
- Zhang Z
- Yu PF
- Dong ZW
- Yang HR
- Gu GL
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i21.3302
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peutz-Jeghers syndrome without STK11 mutation may correlate with less severe clinical manifestations in Chinese patients.
**Authors:** Jiang LX, Chen YR, Xu ZX, Zhang YH, Zhang Z, Yu PF, Dong ZW, Yang HR, Gu GL
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v29.i21.3302](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v29.i21.3302)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2023 Jun 7;29(21):3302-3317. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v29.i21.3302.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome without STK11 mutation may correlate with less severe 
clinical manifestations in Chinese patients.

Jiang LX(1), Chen YR(1), Xu ZX(2), Zhang YH(3), Zhang Z(3), Yu PF(3), Dong 
ZW(3), Yang HR(3), Gu GL(4).

Author information:
(1)Air Force Clinical College of China Medical University, Beijing 100142, 
China.
(2)Fifth Clinical College (Air Force Clinical College) of Anhui Medical 
University, Beijing 100142, China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Air Force Medical Center, Chinese People's 
Liberation Army, Fifth Clinical (Air Force Clinical College) of China Medical 
University, Beijing 100142, China.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Air Force Medical Center, Chinese People's 
Liberation Army, Fifth Clinical (Air Force Clinical College) of China Medical 
University, Beijing 100142, China. kzggl@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominant genetic 
disease with skin mucosal pigment spots and gastrointestinal (GI) multiple 
hamartoma polyps as clinical characteristics. At present, it is considered that 
the germline mutation of STK11 gene is the genetic cause of PJS. However, not 
all PJS patients can be detected STK11 germline mutations. The specific clinical 
characteristics of these PJS patients without STK11 mutation is an interesting 
clinical question. Or, like wild type GI stromal tumor, whether these PJS 
without STK11 mutation are also called PJS is worth discussing. Therefore, we 
designed the study to understand the clinical characteristics of these PJS 
patients without STK11 mutation.
AIM: To investigates whether PJS patients with known STK11 mutations have a more 
severe spectrum of clinical phenotypes compared to those without.
METHODS: A total of 92 patients with PJS admitted to the Air Force Medical 
Center from 2010 to 2022 were randomly selected for study. Genomic DNA samples 
were extracted from peripheral blood samples, and pathogenic germline mutations 
of STK11 were detected by high-throughput next-generation gene sequencing. 
Clinical-pathologic manifestations of patients with and without STK11/LKB1 
mutations were compared.
RESULTS: STK11 germline mutations were observed in 73 patients with PJS. Among 
19 patients with no detectable STK11 mutations, six had no pathogenic germline 
mutations of other genes, while 13 had other genetic mutations. Compared with 
PJS patients with STK11 mutations, those without tended to be older at the age 
of initial treatment, age of first intussusception and age of initial surgery. 
They also had a lower number of total hospitalizations relating to 
intussusception or intestinal obstruction, and a lower load of small intestine 
polyps.
CONCLUSION: PJS patients without STK11 mutations might have less severe 
clinical-pathologic manifestations than those with.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i21.3302
PMCID: PMC10292148
PMID: 37377590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.