---
reference_id: "PMID:36274490"
title: Monkeypox virus vaccine evolution and global preparedness for vaccination.
authors:
- Chakraborty C
- Bhattacharya M
- Ranjan Sharma A
- Dhama K
journal: Int Immunopharmacol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2022.109346
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox virus vaccine evolution and global preparedness for vaccination.
**Authors:** Chakraborty C, Bhattacharya M, Ranjan Sharma A, Dhama K
**Journal:** Int Immunopharmacol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.intimp.2022.109346](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2022.109346)

## Content

1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2022 Dec;113(Pt A):109346. doi: 
10.1016/j.intimp.2022.109346. Epub 2022 Oct 20.

Monkeypox virus vaccine evolution and global preparedness for vaccination.

Chakraborty C(1), Bhattacharya M(2), Ranjan Sharma A(3), Dhama K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Adamas 
University, Kolkata, West Bengal 700126, India. Electronic address: 
drchiranjib@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Zoology, Fakir Mohan University, Vyasa Vihar, Balasore 756020, 
Odisha, India.
(3)Institute for Skeletal Aging & Orthopedic Surgery, Hallym 
University-Chuncheon Sacred Heart Hospital, Chuncheon-si 24252, Gangwon-do, 
Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Pathology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, 
Bareilly 243122, Uttar Pradesh, India.

The recent emergence of monkeypox (MPX) has created a global threat. The number 
of infected and suspected cases of MPX is increasing in different parts of the 
world, especially in non-African countries. However, vaccines are available to 
fight against this disease. It has been observed that smallpox vaccines can be 
used to protect against MPX. The present article highlights the significant 
points and various issues for vaccines and vaccinations that should be 
considered related to MPX. This paper illustrates current vaccines for smallpox 
that can be utilized to protect against MPX infection. The article also 
describes the different significant research on MPXV, especially smallpox 
vaccines, and its outcome in MPX infection. We have also tried to depict the 
smallpox vaccination eradication model through the statistical interface using 
smallpox eradication data from Central and West Africa between 1967 and 1972. We 
suggest that these models might be helpful for the eradication of MPX in the 
middle to low-economic countries. Simultaneously, we have also discussed 
vaccination preparedness in different countries like the USA, UK, Canada, 
Denmark, Germany, etc. Our report might be helpful to scientists and 
policymakers in understanding the vaccines and vaccination against MPX and 
formulating effective strategies to fight against the disease.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2022.109346
PMCID: PMC9582788
PMID: 36274490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.