---
reference_id: "PMID:39473441"
title: Preimplantation genetic testing for Cockayne syndrome with a novel ERCC6 variant in a Chinese family.
authors:
- He X
- Zhang Y
- Huang X
- Qiu P
- Ji H
- Ding L
- Shi Y
- Huang Y
- Li P
- Mei L
journal: Front Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1435622
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preimplantation genetic testing for Cockayne syndrome with a novel ERCC6 variant in a Chinese family.
**Authors:** He X, Zhang Y, Huang X, Qiu P, Ji H, Ding L, Shi Y, Huang Y, Li P, Mei L
**Journal:** Front Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2024.1435622](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2024.1435622)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2024 Oct 15;15:1435622. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1435622. 
eCollection 2024.

Preimplantation genetic testing for Cockayne syndrome with a novel ERCC6 variant 
in a Chinese family.

He X(#)(1)(2), Zhang Y(#)(1)(2)(3), Huang X(1)(2), Qiu P(1)(2), Ji H(1)(2), Ding 
L(1)(2), Shi Y(1)(2), Huang Y(4)(5), Li P(1)(2), Mei L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Women and Children's Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(2)Xiamen Key Laboratory of Reproduction and Genetics, Women and Children's 
Hospital, School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(4)Department of Central Laboratory, Women and Children's Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(5)School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a rare, multisystem, autosomal recessive 
disorder characterized by cachectic dwarfism, nervous system abnormalities, and 
premature aging. Mutations in the ERCC6 and ERCC8 genes are the predominant 
causes of Cockayne syndrome, with ERCC6 gene mutations present in approximately 
75% of cases.
METHODS: Trio-based whole-exome sequencing (trio-WES) was employed to identify 
potential pathogenic variants associated with CS. Preimplantation genetic 
testing for monogenic disorders (PGT-M) was conducted to prevent the 
transmission of the pathogenic variant.
RESULTS: Two compound heterozygous mutations were identified in ERCC6-c.1297G>T 
(p. Glu433*) and c.1607T>G (p. Leu536Trp)-with c.1297G>T representing a novel 
mutation. Four blastocysts resulting from intracytoplasmic sperm injection were 
subjected to biopsy. Genetic analyses revealed that E1 harbored maternal 
mutations in diploid embryos, E2 and E3 carried both paternal and maternal 
mutations in non-diploid embryos, and E4 did not carry paternal or maternal 
mutations in diploid embryos. Following the transfer of the E4 embryos, a single 
successful pregnancy was achieved.
CONCLUSION: The successful application of PGT-M in this family offers a 
potential approach for addressing other monogenic diseases. The findings of this 
study broaden the variant spectrum of ERCC6 and will contribute to the molecular 
diagnosis and genetic counseling of CS. This case highlights the feasibility and 
effectiveness of PGT-M in preventing CS and provides valuable insights for 
similarly affected families.

Copyright © 2024 He, Zhang, Huang, Qiu, Ji, Ding, Shi, Huang, Li and Mei.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1435622
PMCID: PMC11518784
PMID: 39473441

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.