---
reference_id: "PMID:17616709"
title: Positive cross-regulatory loop ties GATA-3 to estrogen receptor alpha expression in breast cancer.
authors:
- Eeckhoute J
- Keeton EK
- Lupien M
- Krum SA
- Carroll JS
- Brown M
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0746
keywords:
- Breast Neoplasms/metabolism
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Estradiol/metabolism
- Estrogen Receptor alpha/metabolism
- GATA3 Transcription Factor/physiology
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Gene Silencing
- Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 3-alpha/metabolism
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- "Models, Genetic"
- "Neoplasms, Hormone-Dependent/metabolism"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- RNA Polymerase II/metabolism
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Positive cross-regulatory loop ties GATA-3 to estrogen receptor alpha expression in breast cancer.
**Authors:** Eeckhoute J, Keeton EK, Lupien M, Krum SA, Carroll JS, Brown M
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0746](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0746)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 1;67(13):6477-83. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0746.

Positive cross-regulatory loop ties GATA-3 to estrogen receptor alpha expression 
in breast cancer.

Eeckhoute J(1), Keeton EK, Lupien M, Krum SA, Carroll JS, Brown M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-3 is required for normal mammary gland 
development, and its expression is highly correlated with estrogen receptor 
alpha (ER alpha) in human breast tumors. However, the functional role of GATA-3 
in ER alpha-positive breast cancers is yet to be established. Here, we show that 
GATA-3 is required for estradiol stimulation of cell cycle progression in breast 
cancer cells. The role of GATA-3 in estradiol signaling requires the direct 
positive regulation of the expression of the ER alpha gene itself by GATA-3. 
GATA-3 binds to two cis-regulatory elements located within the ER alpha gene, 
and this is required for RNA polymerase II recruitment to ER alpha promoters. 
Reciprocally, ER alpha directly stimulates the transcription of the GATA-3 gene, 
indicating that these two factors are involved in a positive cross-regulatory 
loop. Moreover, GATA-3 and ER alpha regulate their own expression in breast 
cancer cells. Hence, this transcriptional coregulatory mechanism accounts for 
the robust coexpression of GATA-3 and ER alpha in human breast cancers. In 
addition, these results highlight the crucial role of GATA-3 for the response of 
ER alpha-positive breast cancers to estradiol. Moreover, they identify GATA-3 as 
a critical component of the master cell-type-specific transcriptional network 
including ER alpha and FoxA1 that dictates the phenotype of hormone-dependent 
breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0746
PMID: 17616709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]