---
reference_id: "PMID:34881838"
title: Transgenic Epidermal Cultures for Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa - 5-Year Outcomes.
authors:
- Kueckelhaus M
- Rothoeft T
- De Rosa L
- Yeni B
- Ohmann T
- Maier C
- Eitner L
- Metze D
- Losi L
- Secone Seconetti A
- De Luca M
- Hirsch T
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2108544
keywords:
- Cell Self Renewal
- "Cells, Cultured/transplantation"
- Child
- Clone Cells
- "Epidermis/pathology, transplantation"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa, Junctional/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/pathology, therapy"
- Genetic Therapy
- Genetic Vectors
- Humans
- "Keratinocytes/cytology, physiology, transplantation"
- Male
- Regeneration
- Stem Cells/physiology
- "Transduction, Genetic"
- Transgenes
- "Transplantation, Autologous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transgenic Epidermal Cultures for Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa - 5-Year Outcomes.
**Authors:** Kueckelhaus M, Rothoeft T, De Rosa L, Yeni B, Ohmann T, Maier C, Eitner L, Metze D, Losi L, Secone Seconetti A, De Luca M, Hirsch T
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2108544](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2108544)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2021 Dec 9;385(24):2264-2270. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2108544.

Transgenic Epidermal Cultures for Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa - 5-Year 
Outcomes.

Kueckelhaus M(1), Rothoeft T(1), De Rosa L(1), Yeni B(1), Ohmann T(1), Maier 
C(1), Eitner L(1), Metze D(1), Losi L(1), Secone Seconetti A(1), De Luca M(1), 
Hirsch T(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Plastic Surgery, Department of Trauma, Hand and 
Reconstructive Surgery, University Hospital Muenster, and the Department of 
Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgery, Hand Surgery, Fachklinik 
Hornheide (M.K., B.Y., T.H.), and the Department of Dermatology, University of 
Muenster (D.M.), Muenster, the Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive 
Care (T.R.) and the Department of Neuropediatrics (L.E.), University Children's 
Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum (C.M.), Bochum, and the Research Department, BG 
Klinikum Duisburg, Duisburg (T.O.) - all in Germany; and Holostem Terapie 
Avanzate, Center for Regenerative Medicine Stefano Ferrari (L.D.R., A.S.S.), and 
the Unit of Pathology (L.L.) and the Center for Regenerative Medicine Stefano 
Ferrari (M.D.L.), Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio 
Emilia, Modena, Italy.

Inherited junctional epidermolysis bullosa is a severe genetic skin disease that 
leads to epidermal loss caused by structural and mechanical fragility of the 
integuments. There is no established cure for junctional epidermolysis bullosa. 
We previously reported that genetically corrected autologous epidermal cultures 
regenerated almost an entire, fully functional epidermis on a child who had a 
devastating form of junctional epidermolysis bullosa. We now report long-term 
clinical outcomes in this patient. (Funded by POR FESR 2014-2020 - Regione 
Emilia-Romagna and others.).

Copyright © 2021 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2108544
PMID: 34881838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]