---
reference_id: "PMID:25614308"
title: "Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency: experience with four cases in Spain and review of the literature."
authors:
- Vitoria I
- Martín-Hernández E
- Peña-Quintana L
- Bueno M
- Quijada-Fraile P
- Dalmau J
- Molina-Marrero S
- Pérez B
- Merinero B
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_382
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency: experience with four cases in Spain and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Vitoria I, Martín-Hernández E, Peña-Quintana L, Bueno M, Quijada-Fraile P, Dalmau J, Molina-Marrero S, Pérez B, Merinero B
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2014_382](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2014_382)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2015;20:11-20. doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_382. Epub 2015 Jan 23.

Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency: experience with four cases in 
Spain and review of the literature.

Vitoria I(1), Martín-Hernández E, Peña-Quintana L, Bueno M, Quijada-Fraile P, 
Dalmau J, Molina-Marrero S, Pérez B, Merinero B.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Metabolopathies, Hospital la Fe, Bulevar sur s/n, 46021, Valencia, 
Spain, Vitoria_isi@gva.es.

BACKGROUND: Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase (CACT) deficiency is a rare 
autosomal recessive disease in the mitochondrial transport of long-chain fatty 
acids. Despite early diagnosis and treatment, the disease still has a high 
mortality rate.
METHODS: Clinical symptoms, long-term follow-up, and biochemical and molecular 
results of four cases are described and compared with the reviewed literature 
data of 55 cases.
RESULTS: Two cases with neonatal onset, carrying in homozygosity the novel 
variant sequences p.Gly20Asp (c.59G>A) and p.Arg179Gly (c.536A>G), died during 
an intercurrent infectious process in the first year of life despite adequate 
dietetic treatment (frequent feeding, high-carbohydrate/low-fat diet, MCT, 
carnitine). The other two cases, one with infantile onset and the other 
diagnosed in the newborn period after a previous affected sibling, show 
excellent development at 4 and 16 years of age under treatment. The review shows 
that the most frequent presenting symptoms of CACT deficiency are hypoketotic 
hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, hepatomegaly, cardiomyopathy and/or arrhythmia, 
and respiratory distress. The onset of symptoms is predominantly neonatal in 82% 
and infantile in 18%. The mortality rate is high (65%), most in the first year 
of life due to myocardiopathy or sudden death. Outcomes seem to correlate better 
with the absence of cardiac disease and with a higher long-chain fatty acid 
oxidation rate in cultured fibroblasts than with residual enzyme activity.
CONCLUSION: Diagnosis before the occurrence of clinical symptoms by tandem MS-MS 
and very early therapeutic intervention together with good dietary compliance 
could lead to a better prognosis, especially in milder clinical cases.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2014_382
PMCID: PMC4375124
PMID: 25614308