---
reference_id: "PMID:36325687"
title: Novel mutations in BBS genes and clinical characterization of Chinese families with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Tao T
- Liu J
- Wang B
- Pang J
- Li X
- Huang L
journal: Eur J Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/11206721221136324
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel mutations in BBS genes and clinical characterization of Chinese families with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Tao T, Liu J, Wang B, Pang J, Li X, Huang L
**Journal:** Eur J Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/11206721221136324](https://doi.org/10.1177/11206721221136324)

## Content

1. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2022 Nov 3:11206721221136324. doi:
10.1177/11206721221136324.  Online ahead of print.

Novel mutations in BBS genes and clinical characterization of Chinese families 
with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Tao T(1)(2)(3), Liu J(1)(2)(3), Wang B(4), Pang J(4), Li X(1)(2)(3)(4), Huang 
L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, 71185Peking University People's Hospital, Eye 
Diseases and Optometry Institute, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing Key 
Laboratory of Diagnosis and Therapy of Retinal and Choroid Diseases, Beijing, 
China.
(3)College of Optometry, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, 
China.
(4)Eye Research Institute, 599608Xiamen Eye Center of Xiamen University, Xiamen, 
China.

PURPOSE: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare autosomal-recessive inherited 
disorder characterized by multisystem anomalies. The objective of this study was 
to detect and analyse pathogenic variants in four Chinese families with BBS.
METHODS: Comprehensive clinical examinations were performed to investigate and 
evaluate the phenotypes of the affected individuals from four families. Genomic 
DNA was extracted from peripheral blood. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) was 
performed for four families, and the presence of pathogenic variants was 
confirmed via Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: There were two males and three females with a mean age of 16.00 years. 
All probands displayed the primary clinical features of BBS. Mutation screening 
demonstrated four novel mutations: c.613C>T; p.Q205* in the BBS5 gene, 
c.1391C>G; p.S464* in the BBS10 gene, and c.155delC; p.S52* and c.1584T>G; 
p.Y528* in the BBS12 gene. Two previously reported mutations were also 
identified, including c.534 + 1G>T in the BBS2 gene and c.539G>A; p.G180E in the 
BBS10 gene. The bioinformatic analysis revealed that all the detected mutations 
in BBS genes were disease causing.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified four novel BBS gene mutations in these 
Chinese families and further expanded the genotypic spectrum of BBS, thus 
contributing to the literature and understanding of this multisystem disease.

DOI: 10.1177/11206721221136324
PMID: 36325687