---
reference_id: "PMID:41278357"
title: "Clinical Characteristics, Symptoms, and Long-Term Outcomes in Gitelman Syndrome."
authors:
- Wieërs MLAJ
- Allard L
- "D'Ambrosio V"
- Arango-Sancho P
- de Baaij JHF
- Becherucci F
- Bertholet-Thomas A
- Besouw M
- Blanchard A
- Cacciapuoti M
- Carbone V
- Cornelissen EA
- Daffara F
- Degenhardt J
- Devuyst O
- Dorresteijn E
- Evans R
- Figueres L
- Fila M
- Giliberti M
- Gillion V
- Haumann S
- Hawkins-van der Cingel G
- Houillier P
- Hureaux M
- Knauf F
- Knebelmann B
- Konrad M
- Kwon T
- Lemoine S
- Longo G
- Nijenhuis T
- Engberink RHGO
- Duro HR
- Saadé C
- Sayer JA
- Schlingmann KP
- Simon T
- Speeckaert MM
- Tan HL
- Trepiccione F
- Vargas-Poussou R
- Veligratti F
- Walsh SB
- Salih M
- Imenez Silva PH
- Hoorn EJ
- Gitelman Survey Study
journal: Kidney Int Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2025.09.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characteristics, Symptoms, and Long-Term Outcomes in Gitelman Syndrome.
**Authors:** Wieërs MLAJ, Allard L, D'Ambrosio V, Arango-Sancho P, de Baaij JHF, Becherucci F, Bertholet-Thomas A, Besouw M, Blanchard A, Cacciapuoti M, Carbone V, Cornelissen EA, Daffara F, Degenhardt J, Devuyst O, Dorresteijn E, Evans R, Figueres L, Fila M, Giliberti M, Gillion V, Haumann S, Hawkins-van der Cingel G, Houillier P, Hureaux M, Knauf F, Knebelmann B, Konrad M, Kwon T, Lemoine S, Longo G, Nijenhuis T, Engberink RHGO, Duro HR, Saadé C, Sayer JA, Schlingmann KP, Simon T, Speeckaert MM, Tan HL, Trepiccione F, Vargas-Poussou R, Veligratti F, Walsh SB, Salih M, Imenez Silva PH, Hoorn EJ, Gitelman Survey Study
**Journal:** Kidney Int Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ekir.2025.09.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ekir.2025.09.006)

## Content

1. Kidney Int Rep. 2025 Sep 4;10(11):3967-3983. doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2025.09.006.
eCollection 2025 Nov.

Clinical Characteristics, Symptoms, and Long-Term Outcomes in Gitelman Syndrome.

Wieërs MLAJ(1), Allard L(2), D'Ambrosio V(3), Arango-Sancho P(4), de Baaij
JHF(5), Becherucci F(6)(7), Bertholet-Thomas A(8), Besouw M(9), Blanchard
A(10)(11)(12)(13), Cacciapuoti M(14), Carbone V(7), Cornelissen EA(15), Daffara
F(16), Degenhardt J(17), Devuyst O(18)(19), Dorresteijn E(20), Evans R(21),
Figueres L(22)(23), Fila M(24), Giliberti M(25), Gillion V(19), Haumann S(26),
Hawkins-van der Cingel G(27), Houillier P(28), Hureaux M(10)(11)(29)(30), Knauf
F(28)(31), Knebelmann B(32), Konrad M(33), Kwon T(34), Lemoine S(35), Longo
G(14), Nijenhuis T(36), Engberink RHGO(37), Duro HR(38), Saadé C(27), Sayer
JA(39)(40)(41), Schlingmann KP(34), Simon T(42), Speeckaert MM(43), Tan HL(44),
Trepiccione F(45)(46), Vargas-Poussou R(11)(13)(30), Veligratti F(44), Walsh
SB(21), Salih M(1), Imenez Silva PH(1), Hoorn EJ(1); Gitelman Survey Study.

Collaborators: Auñón P, Bockenhauer D, Conlon PJ, Erhardt C, Flammier S, Gómez
CB, Guven S, Hawkins G, Halbritter J, Herthelius M, Herreros A, Klaric D, Ledó
N, Marzuillo P, Schäfer S, Schmitt R, Stanczyk M, Taroni F, Zagorec N.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Transplantation, Department of Internal Medicine,
Erasmus Medical Center, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(2)Pediatric Nephrology Unit, Centre de Référence Maladies Rénales Rares Sorare,
Bordeaux University Hospital, Bordeaux, France.
(3)UOC Nefrologia, Dialisi e Trapianto, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario "A.
Gemelli" IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona,
Spain.
(5)Department of Medical BioSciences, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, Florence,
Italy.
(7)Department of Biomedical, Experimental and Clinical Sciences "Mario Serio,"
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(8)Pediatric Nephrology Unit, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Centre de référence
Maladies Rénales Rares MAREGE - Filière ORKiD, Lyon, France.
(9)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(10)Paris Cité University, Paris, France.
(11)Reference Center of Rare Renal Disease of Children and Adults (MARHEA),
Paris, France.
(12)INSERM, Clinical Investigation Center CIC1418, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux
de Paris, European Georges Pompidou hospital, Paris, France.
(13)INSERM, UMRS 1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France.
(14)Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, Department of Medicine,
University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(15)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(16)Nephrology Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Specialties,
Radiological Sciences and Public Health, Spedali Civili Hospital, University of
Brescia, Brescia, BS, Italy.
(17)Department II of Internal Medicine, University of Cologne, Koln,
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Germany.
(18)Institute of Physiology, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(19)Division of Nephrology, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, UCLouvain
Medical School, Brussels, Belgium.
(20)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Sophia Children's Hospital, Erasmus
Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(21)Department of Renal Medicine, London Tubular Centre, University College
London Medical School, London, UK.
(22)Nephrology, Nantes University Hospital, CR2TI ITUN, Nantes, UK.
(23)Reference Centers for Rare Diseases of Calcium and Phosphate (Filière OSCAR)
and Nephrogenetic (Filière ORKID), Paris, France.
(24)Pediatric Nephrology Unit, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Arnaud de
Villeneuve-Université de Montpellier, Centre de Référence Maladies Rénales Rares
Sorare, France.
(25)Department of Precision and Regenerative Medicine and Ionian
Area-Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, University of Bari "Aldo
Moro", Bari, Italy.
(26)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine,
University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(27)Department of Nephrology and Medical Intensive Care,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(28)Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, INSERM, Sorbonne Université, Université
Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(29)Service de Médecine Génomique des Maladies Rares, Hôpital Européen Georges
Pompidou, Groupe Hospitalier Universitaire Centre, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux
de Paris, Paris, France.
(30)INSERM, PARCC U970, F-75015 Paris, France.
(31)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(32)APHP, Service de Nephrologie, Hôpital Universitaire Necker, Université de
Paris, Paris, France.
(33)Department of General Pediatrics, University Hospital Münster, Münster,
Germany.
(34)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Hôpital Robert Debré, Assistance
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(35)Department of Nephrology, Edouard Herriot Hospital, Rare Disease Reference
Center (MAREGE), ORKID Network, Lyon, France.
(36)Department of Nephrology, Research Institute of Medical Innovations, Radboud
University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(37)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Amsterdam
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(38)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Vall d'Hebron Universitary Hospital,
Barcelona, Spain.
(39)Faculty of Medical Sciences, Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(40)Renal Services, The Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Freeman Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(41)NIHR Newcastle Biomedical Research Centre, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
(42)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Hospital Toulouse, Toulouse,
France.
(43)Department of Nephrology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(44)Paediatric Nephrology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(45)Department of Medical Translational Sciences, University of Campania "Luigi
Vanvitelli,", Naples, Italy.
(46)Biogem, Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Ariano Irpino, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Gitelman syndrome (GS) is a rare inherited salt-losing tubulopathy
with limited clinical data.
METHODS: Surveys were conducted with GS physicians in Europe and patients with
GS in the Netherlands to compare findings with the general population.
RESULTS: Data from 587 patients (25% pediatric) across 13 countries showed 93%
were genotyped, with 94% having variants in SLC12A3. Children with GS were
shorter and lighter than the general population, with lower bodyweight
persisting into adulthood. The sex distribution was uneven, with more males in
childhood and more females in adulthood. Patients with GS had the expected
electrolyte disorders as well as significantly lower blood phosphate levels.
Positive correlations were found between blood magnesium and potassium, and
potassium and aldosterone. Physicians reported muscle cramps, salt craving, and
muscle weakness as most common GS symptoms. Patients with GS scored worse than
the general population in fatigue, physical, and cognitive function; and ranked
salt craving and polydipsia-polyuria as the most severe symptoms. Symptom burden
was higher in adult females and patients with lower blood magnesium. Treatment
mainly consisted of potassium (94%) and magnesium (50%) supplementation.
Potassium-sparing medication (used in 33%) slightly increased blood potassium
levels (3.2 vs. 3.1 mmol/l). Adult patients with GS had a high prevalence of
chondrocalcinosis (15%) and elevated blood cell counts (26%). Compared with the
general population, adult patients with GS had lower rates of chronic kidney
disease (CKD) and hypertension, a similar rate of diabetes, but a higher rate of
albuminuria or proteinuria (28%).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide new insights into GS, highlight disease
burden, and suggest areas for future research.

© 2025 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ekir.2025.09.006
PMCID: PMC12640036
PMID: 41278357
