---
reference_id: "PMID:4583182"
title: Luteinizing hormone and follicle stimulating hormone-releasing hormone test in patients with hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal dysfunction.
authors:
- Mortimer CH
- Besser GM
- McNeilly AS
- Marshall JC
- Harsoulis P
- Tunbridge WM
- Gomez-Pan A
- Hall R
journal: Br Med J
year: '1973'
doi: 10.1136/bmj.4.5884.73
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Luteinizing hormone and follicle stimulating hormone-releasing hormone test in patients with hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal dysfunction.
**Authors:** Mortimer CH, Besser GM, McNeilly AS, Marshall JC, Harsoulis P, Tunbridge WM, Gomez-Pan A, Hall R
**Journal:** Br Med J (1973)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmj.4.5884.73](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.4.5884.73)

## Content

1. Br Med J. 1973 Oct 13;4(5884):73-7. doi: 10.1136/bmj.4.5884.73.

Luteinizing hormone and follicle stimulating hormone-releasing hormone test in 
patients with hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal dysfunction.

Mortimer CH, Besser GM, McNeilly AS, Marshall JC, Harsoulis P, Tunbridge WM, 
Gomez-Pan A, Hall R.

A standard intravenous 100 mug luteinizing hormone/follicle stimulating 
hormone-releasing hormone (LH/FSH-RH) test was used to assess the pituitary 
gonadotrophin responses in 155 patients with a variety of diseases of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. In all but nine patients there was an 
increase in circulating levels of either LH or FSH in response to the releasing 
hormone though 137 (88%) were clinically hypogonadal. It was not possible with 
this test to distinguish between hypothalamic and pituitary causes of 
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism, since a variety of LH and FSH responses emerged 
within the disease groups. However, primary gonadal failure characteristically 
resulted in exaggerated gonadotrophin response. The potential therapeutic use of 
the gonadotrophin releasing decapeptide is suggested in certain patients with 
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.4.5884.73
PMCID: PMC1587204
PMID: 4583182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]