---
reference_id: "PMID:30423175"
title: Clinical manifestations and molecular aspects of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase superactivity in females.
authors:
- Zikánová M
- Wahezi D
- Hay A
- Stiburková B
- Pitts C 3rd
- Mušálková D
- Škopová V
- Barešová V
- Soucková O
- Hodanová K
- Živná M
- Stránecký V
- Hartmannová H
- Hnízda A
- Bleyer AJ
- Kmoch S
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/key041
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Arthritis, Gouty/etiology, genetics"
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Structure
- Mutation
- "Nephrolithiasis/etiology, genetics"
- Pedigree
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Ribose-Phosphate Pyrophosphokinase/genetics, metabolism"
- Whole Genome Sequencing/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical manifestations and molecular aspects of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase superactivity in females.
**Authors:** Zikánová M, Wahezi D, Hay A, Stiburková B, Pitts C 3rd, Mušálková D, Škopová V, Barešová V, Soucková O, Hodanová K, Živná M, Stránecký V, Hartmannová H, Hnízda A, Bleyer AJ, Kmoch S
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/key041](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/key041)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2018 Jul 1;57(7):1180-1185. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/key041.

Clinical manifestations and molecular aspects of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate
synthetase superactivity in females.

Zikánová M(1), Wahezi D(2), Hay A(3), Stiburková B(1)(4), Pitts C 3rd(5),
Mušálková D(1), Škopová V(1), Barešová V(1), Soucková O(1), Hodanová K(1), Živná
M(1), Stránecký V(1), Hartmannová H(1), Hnízda A(6), Bleyer AJ(1)(5), Kmoch
S(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Pediatric Rheumatology, Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY, USA.
(3)Pediatric Rheumatology, Nicklaus Children's Hospital, Miami, FL, USA.
(4)Institute of Rheumatology, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Section on Nephrology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC.
(6)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.

OBJECTIVES: Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (PRPS1) superactivity is an
X-linked disorder characterized by urate overproduction Online Mendelian
Inheritance in Man (OMIM) gene reference 300661. This condition is thought to
rarely affect women, and when it does, the clinical presentation is mild. We
describe a 16-year-old African American female who developed progressive tophi,
nephrolithiasis and acute kidney failure due to urate overproduction. Family
history included a mother with tophaceous gout who developed end-stage kidney
disease due to nephrolithiasis and an affected sister with polyarticular gout.
The main aim of this study was to describe the clinical manifestations of PRPS1
superactivity in women.
METHODS: Whole exome sequencing was performed in affected females and their
fathers.
RESULTS: Mutational analysis revealed a new c.520 G > A (p.G174R) mutation in
the PRPS1 gene. The mutation resulted in decreased PRPS1 inhibition by ADP.
CONCLUSION: Clinical findings in previously reported females with PRPS1
superactivity showed a high clinical penetrance of this disorder with a mean
serum urate level of 8.5 (4.1) mg/dl [506 (247) μmol/l] and a high prevalence of
gout. These findings indicate that all women in families with PRPS1
superactivity should be genetically screened for a mutation (for clinical
management and genetic counselling). In addition, women with tophaceous gout,
gout presenting in childhood, or a strong family history of severe gout should
be considered for PRPS1 mutational analysis.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/key041
PMCID: PMC6232955
PMID: 30423175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
