---
reference_id: "PMID:38595283"
title: "Dysfunction of synaptic endocytic trafficking in Parkinson's disease."
authors:
- Ng XY
- Cao M
journal: Neural Regen Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4103/NRR.NRR-D-23-01624
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysfunction of synaptic endocytic trafficking in Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Ng XY, Cao M
**Journal:** Neural Regen Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4103/NRR.NRR-D-23-01624](https://doi.org/10.4103/NRR.NRR-D-23-01624)

## Content

1. Neural Regen Res. 2024 Dec 1;19(12):2649-2660. doi:
10.4103/NRR.NRR-D-23-01624.  Epub 2024 Mar 1.

Dysfunction of synaptic endocytic trafficking in Parkinson's disease.

Ng XY(1), Cao M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Programme in Neuroscience and Behavioural Disorders, Duke-NUS Medical School, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Physiology, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.

Parkinson's disease is characterized by the selective degeneration of dopamine 
neurons in the nigrostriatal pathway and dopamine deficiency in the striatum. 
The precise reasons behind the specific degeneration of these dopamine neurons 
remain largely elusive. Genetic investigations have identified over 20 causative 
PARK genes and 90 genomic risk loci associated with both familial and sporadic 
Parkinson's disease. Notably, several of these genes are linked to the synaptic 
vesicle recycling process, particularly the clathrin-mediated endocytosis 
pathway. This suggests that impaired synaptic vesicle recycling might represent 
an early feature of Parkinson's disease, followed by axonal degeneration and the 
eventual loss of dopamine cell bodies in the midbrain via a "dying back" 
mechanism. Recently, several new animal and cellular models with Parkinson's 
disease-linked mutations affecting the endocytic pathway have been created and 
extensively characterized. These models faithfully recapitulate certain 
Parkinson's disease-like features at the animal, circuit, and cellular levels, 
and exhibit defects in synaptic membrane trafficking, further supporting the 
findings from human genetics and clinical studies. In this review, we will first 
summarize the cellular and molecular findings from the models of two Parkinson's 
disease-linked clathrin uncoating proteins: auxilin (DNAJC6/PARK19) and 
synaptojanin 1 (SYNJ1/PARK20). The mouse models carrying these two PARK gene 
mutations phenocopy each other with specific dopamine terminal pathology and 
display a potent synergistic effect. Subsequently, we will delve into the 
involvement of several clathrin-mediated endocytosis-related proteins (GAK, 
endophilin A1, SAC2/INPP5F, synaptotagmin-11), identified as Parkinson's disease 
risk factors through genome-wide association studies, in Parkinson's disease 
pathogenesis. We will also explore the direct or indirect roles of some common 
Parkinson's disease-linked proteins (alpha-synuclein (PARK1/4), Parkin (PARK2), 
and LRRK2 (PARK8)) in synaptic endocytic trafficking. Additionally, we will 
discuss the emerging novel functions of these endocytic proteins in downstream 
membrane traffic pathways, particularly autophagy. Given that synaptic 
dysfunction is considered as an early event in Parkinson's disease, a deeper 
understanding of the cellular mechanisms underlying synaptic vesicle endocytic 
trafficking may unveil novel targets for early diagnosis and the development of 
interventional therapies for Parkinson's disease. Future research should aim to 
elucidate why generalized synaptic endocytic dysfunction leads to the selective 
degeneration of nigrostriatal dopamine neurons in Parkinson's disease.

Copyright © 2024 Copyright: © 2024 Neural Regeneration Research.

DOI: 10.4103/NRR.NRR-D-23-01624
PMCID: PMC11168511
PMID: 38595283

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.