---
reference_id: "PMID:35018490"
title: Frequent FGFR1 hotspot alterations in driver-unknown low-grade glioma and mixed neuronal-glial tumors.
authors:
- Engelhardt S
- Behling F
- Beschorner R
- Eckert F
- Kohlhof P
- Tatagiba M
- Tabatabai G
- Schuhmann MU
- Ebinger M
- Schittenhelm J
journal: J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00432-021-03906-x
keywords:
- Astrocytoma/pathology
- Brain Neoplasms/pathology
- Child
- "Glioma/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Oncogenes
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 1/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequent FGFR1 hotspot alterations in driver-unknown low-grade glioma and mixed neuronal-glial tumors.
**Authors:** Engelhardt S, Behling F, Beschorner R, Eckert F, Kohlhof P, Tatagiba M, Tabatabai G, Schuhmann MU, Ebinger M, Schittenhelm J
**Journal:** J Cancer Res Clin Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00432-021-03906-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00432-021-03906-x)

## Content

1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2022 Apr;148(4):857-866. doi: 
10.1007/s00432-021-03906-x. Epub 2022 Jan 11.

Frequent FGFR1 hotspot alterations in driver-unknown low-grade glioma and mixed 
neuronal-glial tumors.

Engelhardt S(1), Behling F(2)(3), Beschorner R(1)(3), Eckert F(3)(4)(5), Kohlhof 
P(6), Tatagiba M(2)(3), Tabatabai G(3)(5)(7)(8), Schuhmann MU(2)(3)(9), Ebinger 
M(10), Schittenhelm J(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology, 
University Hospital of Tuebingen, Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen, 
Calwerstr. 3, 72076, Tuebingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital of Tuebingen, Eberhard Karls 
University Tuebingen, 72076, Tuebingen, Germany.
(3)Center for Neuro-Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center Tuebingen-Stuttgart, 
University Hospital of Tuebingen, Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospital Tuebingen, 
Hoppe-Seyler-Str. 3, 72076, Tuebingen, Germany.
(5)German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), DKFZ Partner Site 
Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(6)Institute for Pathology, Katharinenhospital Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology and Interdisciplinary Neurooncology, University 
Hospital Tübingen, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Eberhard Karls 
University Tübingen, 72076, Tuebingen, Germany.
(8)Center for Personalized Medicine, Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany.
(9)Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Department of Neurosurgery, University 
Hospital of Tuebingen, Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, 
Germany.
(10)Department Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's University Hospital, 
Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(11)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology, 
University Hospital of Tuebingen, Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen, 
Calwerstr. 3, 72076, Tuebingen, Germany. jens.schittenhelm@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(12)Center for Neuro-Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center Tuebingen-Stuttgart, 
University Hospital of Tuebingen, Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany. jens.schittenhelm@med.uni-tuebingen.de.

PURPOSE: Low-grade gliomas (LGG) and mixed neuronal-glial tumors (MNGT) show 
frequent MAPK pathway alterations. Oncogenic fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 
(FGFR1) tyrosinase kinase domain has been reported in brain tumors of various 
histologies. We sought to determine the frequency of FGFR1 hotspot mutations 
N546 and K656 in driver-unknown LGG/MNGT and examined FGFR1 immunohistochemistry 
as a potential tool to detect those alterations.
METHODS: We analyzed 476 LGG/MNGT tumors for KIAA-1549-BRAF fusion, IDH1/2, TERT 
promotor, NF1, H3F3A and the remaining cases for FGFR1 mutation frequency and 
correlated FGFR1 immunohistochemistry in 106 cases.
RESULTS: 368 of 476 LGG/MNGT tumors contained non-FGFR1 alterations. We 
identified 9 FGFR1 p.N546K and 4 FGFR1 p.K656E mutations among the 108 remaining 
driver-unknown samples. Five tumors were classified as dysembryoplastic 
neuroepithelial tumor (DNT), 4 as pilocytic astrocytoma (PA) and 3 as 
rosette-forming glioneuronal tumor (RGNT). FGFR1 mutations were associated with 
oligodendroglia-like cells, but not with age or tumor location. FGFR1 
immunohistochemical expression was observed in 92 cases. FGFR1 immunoreactivity 
score was higher in PA and DNT compared to diffuse astrocytoma, but no 
correlation between FGFR1 mutation in tumors and FGFR1 expression level was 
observed.
CONCLUSION: FGFR1 hotspot mutations are the fifth most prevailing alteration in 
LGG/MNGT. Performing FGFR1 sequencing analysis in driver-unknown low-grade brain 
tumors could yield up to 12% FGFR1 N546/K656 mutant cases.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-021-03906-x
PMCID: PMC8930952
PMID: 35018490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: GT served on Advisory Boards of BMS, MSD and 
AbbVie; received research and/or travel grants from Roche Diagnostics, Novocure 
and Medac, received speakers` fees from Medac, Novocure. FB received funding for 
industry sponsored workshops from Medac and Arbor Pharmaceuticals. SE, RB, FE, 
ME and JS have no conflict of interest to declare.