---
reference_id: "PMID:18377309"
title: Management of severe cervical kyphosis in a patient with Larsen syndrome. Case report.
authors:
- Madera M
- Crawford A
- Mangano FT
journal: J Neurosurg Pediatr
year: '2008'
doi: 10.3171/PED/2008/1/4/320
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of severe cervical kyphosis in a patient with Larsen syndrome. Case report.
**Authors:** Madera M, Crawford A, Mangano FT
**Journal:** J Neurosurg Pediatr (2008)
**DOI:** [10.3171/PED/2008/1/4/320](https://doi.org/10.3171/PED/2008/1/4/320)

## Content

1. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2008 Apr;1(4):320-4. doi: 10.3171/PED/2008/1/4/320.

Management of severe cervical kyphosis in a patient with Larsen syndrome. Case 
report.

Madera M(1), Crawford A, Mangano FT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine 
Surgery, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Larsen syndrome is a rare genetic disorder of the connective tissue that is 
characterized by multiple joint dislocations, distinctive deformities of the 
hands and feet, characteristic facial features, kyphoscoliosis, and segmentation 
anomalies of the vertebrae. Diverse treatment options, including conservative 
observation and surgical correction, have been reported for patients who present 
with cervical spine pathophysiology. Differences in surgical approaches, timing 
of the correction, and pre- or postoperative bracing have been reported. 
According to the authors, the present case is the first report of a pediatric 
patient with Larsen syndrome in whom an asymptomatic cervical instability was 
treated before neurological deterioration with synchronous anterior 
decompression and fixation, posterior fusion and fixation, and halo placement. A 
review of the literature on similar patients reveals the variety of practices 
associated with a diagnosis of Larsen syndrome.

DOI: 10.3171/PED/2008/1/4/320
PMID: 18377309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]