---
reference_id: "PMID:18451998"
title: The E1784K mutation in SCN5A is associated with mixed clinical phenotype of type 3 long QT syndrome.
authors:
- Makita N
- Behr E
- Shimizu W
- Horie M
- Sunami A
- Crotti L
- Schulze-Bahr E
- Fukuhara S
- Mochizuki N
- Makiyama T
- Itoh H
- Christiansen M
- McKeown P
- Miyamoto K
- Kamakura S
- Tsutsui H
- Schwartz PJ
- George AL Jr
- Roden DM
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1172/JCI34057
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Anti-Arrhythmia Agents/pharmacology
- Biophysics/methods
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Flecainide/pharmacology
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- "Muscle Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Mutation
- NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel
- Phenotype
- "Sodium Channels/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The E1784K mutation in SCN5A is associated with mixed clinical phenotype of type 3 long QT syndrome.
**Authors:** Makita N, Behr E, Shimizu W, Horie M, Sunami A, Crotti L, Schulze-Bahr E, Fukuhara S, Mochizuki N, Makiyama T, Itoh H, Christiansen M, McKeown P, Miyamoto K, Kamakura S, Tsutsui H, Schwartz PJ, George AL Jr, Roden DM
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI34057](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI34057)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2008 Jun;118(6):2219-29. doi: 10.1172/JCI34057.

The E1784K mutation in SCN5A is associated with mixed clinical phenotype of type 
3 long QT syndrome.

Makita N(1), Behr E, Shimizu W, Horie M, Sunami A, Crotti L, Schulze-Bahr E, 
Fukuhara S, Mochizuki N, Makiyama T, Itoh H, Christiansen M, McKeown P, Miyamoto 
K, Kamakura S, Tsutsui H, Schwartz PJ, George AL Jr, Roden DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

Phenotypic overlap of type 3 long QT syndrome (LQT3) with Brugada syndrome (BrS) 
is observed in some carriers of mutations in the Na channel SCN5A. While this 
overlap is important for patient management, the clinical features, prevalence, 
and mechanisms underlying such overlap have not been fully elucidated. To 
investigate the basis for this overlap, we genotyped a cohort of 44 LQT3 
families of multiple ethnicities from 7 referral centers and found a high 
prevalence of the E1784K mutation in SCN5A. Of 41 E1784K carriers, 93% had LQT3, 
22% had BrS, and 39% had sinus node dysfunction. Heterologously expressed E1784K 
channels showed a 15.0-mV negative shift in the voltage dependence of Na channel 
inactivation and a 7.5-fold increase in flecainide affinity for resting-state 
channels, properties also seen with other LQT3 mutations associated with a mixed 
clinical phenotype. Furthermore, these properties were absent in Na channels 
harboring the T1304M mutation, which is associated with LQT3 without a mixed 
clinical phenotype. These results suggest that a negative shift of steady-state 
Na channel inactivation and enhanced tonic block by class IC drugs represent 
common biophysical mechanisms underlying the phenotypic overlap of LQT3 and BrS 
and further indicate that class IC drugs should be avoided in patients with Na 
channels displaying these behaviors.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI34057
PMCID: PMC2350431
PMID: 18451998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]