---
reference_id: PMID:23024150
title: "Ten-year follow-up of a prospective, randomized clinical study of mosaic osteochondral autologous transplantation versus microfracture for the treatment of osteochondral defects in the knee joint of athletes."
authors:
- Gudas R
- Gudaite A
- Pocius A
- Gudiene A
- Cekanauskas E
- Monastyreckiene E
- Basevicius A
journal: Am J Sports Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1177/0363546512458763
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Arthroplasty, Subchondral"
- Athletic Injuries/surgery
- Bone Transplantation
- Chondrocytes/transplantation
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Knee Injuries/surgery
- Knee Joint/surgery
- Male
- "Transplantation, Autologous"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ten-year follow-up of a prospective, randomized clinical study of mosaic osteochondral autologous transplantation versus microfracture for the treatment of osteochondral defects in the knee joint of athletes.
**Authors:** Gudas R, Gudaite A, Pocius A, Gudiene A, Cekanauskas E, Monastyreckiene E, Basevicius A
**Journal:** Am J Sports Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0363546512458763](https://doi.org/10.1177/0363546512458763)

## Content

1. Am J Sports Med. 2012 Nov;40(11):2499-508. doi: 10.1177/0363546512458763. Epub
 2012 Sep 28.

Ten-year follow-up of a prospective, randomized clinical study of mosaic 
osteochondral autologous transplantation versus microfracture for the treatment 
of osteochondral defects in the knee joint of athletes.

Gudas R(1), Gudaite A, Pocius A, Gudiene A, Cekanauskas E, Monastyreckiene E, 
Basevicius A.

Author information:
(1)Sports Traumatology and Arthroscopy Unit and Sport Institute, Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Hospital of 
Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania. 
rimtautas.gudas@kaunoklinikos.lt

BACKGROUND: Various techniques have proven to be effective for treating 
articular cartilage defect (ACD) and osteochondral defect (OCD) of the knee 
joint, but knowledge regarding which method is best still remains uncertain.
PURPOSE: To evaluate and compare the outcomes of mosaic-type osteochondral 
autologous transplantation (OAT) and microfracture (MF) procedures for the 
treatment of articular cartilage defects of the knee joint in young active 
athletes. This article represents an update of the clinical results at 10 years.
STUDY DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial; Level of evidence, 1.
METHODS: Between 1998 and 2002, a total of 60 athletes with a mean age of 24.3 
years (range, 15-40 years) and with a symptomatic ACD or OCD in the knee were 
randomized to undergo either OAT or MF. Patients were then evaluated 
postoperatively using the International Cartilage Repair Society (ICRS) score, 
Tegner activity score, radiographs, and magnetic resonance imaging. The mean 
follow-up time was 10.4 years (range, 9-11 years).
RESULTS: Three to 10 years after the OAT and MF procedures, patients had lower 
ICRS and Tegner scores (P < .05), but both groups still had significant clinical 
improvement over presurgery scores according to ICRS scores at 10-year 
follow-up. Statistically significantly better results were detected in patients 
in the OAT group compared with those in the MF group at 10 years (P < .005). At 
10-year follow-up, there were 15 failures (26%), including 4 failures (14%) of 
the OAT and 11 failures (38%) of MF treatment (P < .05). Seven patients (25%) 
from the OAT group and 14 patients (48%) from the MF group had radiographic 
evidence of Kellgren-Lawrence grade I osteoarthritis at 10 years, but these 
differences were not significant (P = .083) or related to the clinical results. 
The ICRS and Tegner scores of younger athletes (<25 years at the time of primary 
surgery) remained significantly higher after 10 years compared with older 
patients (P < .05); 15 of 20 patients (75%) in the OAT group and 8 of 22 
patients (37%) in the MF group maintained the same physical activity level.
CONCLUSION: The OAT technique for ACD or OCD repair in the athletic population 
allows for a higher rate of return to and maintenance of sports at the preinjury 
level compared with MF.

DOI: 10.1177/0363546512458763
PMID: 23024150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]