---
reference_id: "PMID:24444506"
title: Noonan syndrome.
authors:
- Bhambhani V
- Muenke M
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Noonan syndrome.
**Authors:** Bhambhani V, Muenke M
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2014)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2014 Jan 1;89(1):37-43.

Noonan syndrome.

Bhambhani V(1), Muenke M(1).

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Noonan syndrome is a common genetic disorder that causes multiple congenital 
abnormalities and a large number of potential health conditions. Most affected 
individuals have characteristic facial features that evolve with age; a broad, 
webbed neck; increased bleeding tendency; and a high incidence of congenital 
heart disease, failure to thrive, short stature, feeding difficulties, sternal 
deformity, renal malformation, pubertal delay, cryptorchidism, developmental or 
behavioral problems, vision problems, hearing loss, and lymphedema. Familial 
recurrence is consistent with an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance, but 
most cases are due to de novo mutations. Diagnosis can be made on the basis of 
clinical features, but may be missed in mildly affected patients. Molecular 
genetic testing can confirm diagnosis in 70% of cases and has important 
implications for genetic counseling and management. Most patients with Noonan 
syndrome are intellectually normal as adults, but some may require 
multidisciplinary evaluation and regular follow-up care. Age-based Noonan 
syndrome-specific growth charts and treatment guidelines are available.

PMCID: PMC4099190
PMID: 24444506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]