---
reference_id: "PMID:22087341"
title: "Life quality impairment caused by hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans in resource-poor communities in Manaus, Brazil."
authors:
- Schuster A
- Lesshafft H
- Talhari S
- Guedes de Oliveira S
- Ignatius R
- Feldmeier H
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001355
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- "Anthelmintics/administration & dosage"
- Brazil
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- "Ivermectin/administration & dosage"
- "Larva Migrans/drug therapy, pathology, psychology"
- Male
- Poverty Areas
- Prospective Studies
- Quality of Life/psychology
- Treatment Outcome
- Urban Population
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Life quality impairment caused by hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans in resource-poor communities in Manaus, Brazil.
**Authors:** Schuster A, Lesshafft H, Talhari S, Guedes de Oliveira S, Ignatius R, Feldmeier H
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0001355](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0001355)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011 Nov;5(11):e1355. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001355. 
Epub 2011 Nov 8.

Life quality impairment caused by hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans in 
resource-poor communities in Manaus, Brazil.

Schuster A(1), Lesshafft H, Talhari S, Guedes de Oliveira S, Ignatius R, 
Feldmeier H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Hygiene, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Germany. schuster_angela@gmx.de

BACKGROUND: Hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is a common but 
neglected tropical skin disease caused by the migration of animal hookworm 
larvae in the epidermis. The disease causes intense pruritus and is associated 
with important morbidity. The extent to which CLM impairs skin 
disease-associated life quality has never been studied.
METHODS: A modified version of the Dermatology Life Quality Index (mDLQI) was 
used to determine skin disease-associated life quality in 91 adult and child 
patients with CLM, living in resource-poor communities in Manaus, Brazil. 
Symptoms and signs were documented and skin disease-associated life quality was 
semi-quantitatively assessed using mDLQI scores. The assessment was repeated two 
and four weeks after treatment with ivermectin.
RESULTS: Ninety-one point five percent of the study participants showed a 
considerable reduction of skin disease-associated life quality at the time of 
diagnosis. The degree of impairment correlated with the intensity of infection 
(rho = 0.76, p<0.001), the number of body areas affected (rho = 0.30; 
p = 0.004), and the presence of lesions on visible areas of the skin 
(p = 0.002). Intense pruritus, sleep disturbance (due to itching) and the 
feeling of shame were the most frequent skin disease-associated life quality 
restrictions (reported by 93.4%, 73.6%, and 64.8% of the patients, 
respectively). No differences were observed in skin disease-associated life 
quality restriction between boys and girls or men and women. Two weeks after 
treatment with ivermectin, skin disease-associated life quality improved 
significantly. After four weeks, 73.3% of the patients considered their 
disease-associated life quality to have returned to normal.
CONCLUSIONS: CLM significantly impaired the skin disease-associated life quality 
in child and adult patients living in urban slums in North Brazil. After 
treatment with ivermectin, life quality normalised rapidly.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001355
PMCID: PMC3210737
PMID: 22087341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.