---
reference_id: "PMID:24534057"
title: Correlation of augmented startle reflex with brainstem electrophysiological responses in Tay-Sachs disease.
authors:
- Nakamura S
- Saito Y
- Ishiyama A
- Sugai K
- Iso T
- Inagaki M
- Sasaki M
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2014.01.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correlation of augmented startle reflex with brainstem electrophysiological responses in Tay-Sachs disease.
**Authors:** Nakamura S, Saito Y, Ishiyama A, Sugai K, Iso T, Inagaki M, Sasaki M
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2014.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2014.01.011)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2015 Jan;37(1):101-6. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2014.01.011. Epub
2014  Feb 15.

Correlation of augmented startle reflex with brainstem electrophysiological 
responses in Tay-Sachs disease.

Nakamura S(1), Saito Y(2), Ishiyama A(2), Sugai K(2), Iso T(3), Inagaki M(4), 
Sasaki M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Neurology, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry 
(NCNP), Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: nsadao@ncnp.go.jp.
(2)Department of Child Neurology, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry 
(NCNP), Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, NCNP, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Developmental Disorders, National Institute of Mental Health, 
NCNP, Tokyo, Japan.

AIM: To clarify the evolution of an augmented startle reflex in Tay-Sachs 
disease and compare the temporal relationship between this reflex and brainstem 
evoked potentials.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Clinical and electrophysiological data from 3 patients 
with Tay-Sachs disease were retrospectively collected.
RESULTS: The augmented startle reflex appeared between the age of 3 and 17 
months and disappeared between the age of 4 and 6 years. Analysis of brainstem 
auditory evoked potentials revealed that poor segregation of peak I, but not 
peak III, coincided with the disappearance of the augmented startle reflex. A 
blink reflex with markedly high amplitude was observed in a patient with an 
augmented startle reflex.
CONCLUSION: The correlation between the augmented startle reflex and the 
preservation of peak I but not peak III supports the theory that the superior 
olivary nucleus is dispensable for this reflex. The blink reflex with high 
amplitudes may represent augmented excitability of reticular formation at the 
pontine tegmentum in Tay-Sachs disease, where the pattern generators for the 
augmented startle and blink reflexes may functionally overlap.

Copyright © 2014 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2014.01.011
PMID: 24534057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]