---
reference_id: "PMID:37558300"
title: "Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia: A Review of Therapeutic Strategies."
authors:
- Bergeman AT
- Wilde AAM
- van der Werf C
journal: Card Electrophysiol Clin
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccep.2023.04.002
keywords:
- Humans
- Anti-Arrhythmia Agents
- "Tachycardia, Ventricular/genetics, therapy"
- Exercise
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
- Mutation
- Polymorphic Catecholaminergic Ventricular Tachycardia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia: A Review of Therapeutic Strategies.
**Authors:** Bergeman AT, Wilde AAM, van der Werf C
**Journal:** Card Electrophysiol Clin (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccep.2023.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccep.2023.04.002)

## Content

1. Card Electrophysiol Clin. 2023 Sep;15(3):293-305. doi: 
10.1016/j.ccep.2023.04.002. Epub 2023 Jun 20.

Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia: A Review of Therapeutic 
Strategies.

Bergeman AT(1), Wilde AAM(1), van der Werf C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Heart Centre, Amsterdam UMC Location Academic 
Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands; Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Heart Failure and Arrhythmias, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Heart Centre, Amsterdam UMC Location Academic 
Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands; Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Heart Failure and Arrhythmias, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: c.vanderwerf@amsterdamumc.nl.

Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is an inherited 
arrhythmia syndrome characterized by bidirectional or polymorphic ventricular 
arrhythmia provoked by exercise or emotion. Most cases are caused by pathogenic 
variants in the gene encoding the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RYR2). The options 
for treating patients with CPVT have increased during the years, and evidence 
suggests that these have led to lower arrhythmic event rates. In addition, 
numerous potential new therapies are being investigated. In this review, we 
summarize the state of knowledge on both established and potential future 
treatment strategies for patients with CPVT and describe our approach to their 
management.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccep.2023.04.002
PMID: 37558300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]