---
reference_id: "PMID:20472861"
title: Physical activity, lung function, and shortness of breath in the daily life of individuals with asthma.
authors:
- Ritz T
- Rosenfield D
- Steptoe A
journal: Chest
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1378/chest.08-3073
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Physical activity, lung function, and shortness of breath in the daily life of individuals with asthma.
**Authors:** Ritz T, Rosenfield D, Steptoe A
**Journal:** Chest (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1378/chest.08-3073](https://doi.org/10.1378/chest.08-3073)

## Content

1. Chest. 2010 Oct;138(4):913-8. doi: 10.1378/chest.08-3073. Epub 2010 May 14.

Physical activity, lung function, and shortness of breath in the daily life of 
individuals with asthma.

Ritz T(1), Rosenfield D, Steptoe A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX 75205, 
USA. tritz@smu.edu

BACKGROUND: The effects of physical activity on asthma have been explored 
extensively. Exercise can trigger later bronchoconstriction in many patients, 
and deconditioning due to a sedentary lifestyle may be the consequence. However, 
the immediate effect of physical activity in asthma and health is 
bronchodilation. To date, little is known about the association between physical 
activity and lung function in the daily life of asthma patients.
METHODS: We studied 20 individuals with asthma and 20 control subjects using an 
electronic diary of activities and spirometry (peak expiratory flow [PEF], 
FEV(1)). Participants rated their shortness of breath and their intensity of 
physical and social activity for the preceding 30 min. Assessments were made 
over the course of 3 weeks, tid (morning, afternoon, evening/night).
RESULTS: Stronger physical activity was concurrently associated with 
significantly higher lung function. In contrast, it also showed a positive 
concurrent association with shortness of breath. In prospective cross-lag 
analyses, lower PEF and FEV(1) earlier in the day predicted lower physical and 
social activity levels later in the day, but shortness of breath did not.
CONCLUSION: The findings show that detrimental effects observed in 
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction cannot be generalized to physical activity 
in daily lives of individuals with asthma. Nevertheless, people with asthma 
still feel more shortness of breath when being more physically active. They 
adjust their activity levels throughout the day according to their earlier lung 
function, but this does not fully explain the concurrent positive association of 
physical activity and lung function.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.08-3073
PMID: 20472861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]