---
reference_id: "PMID:33367186"
title: Ocular hypertension in Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.
authors:
- Espinosa-Barberi G
- Galván González JF
- Antón A
journal: Rom J Ophthalmol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.22336/rjo.2020.70
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular hypertension in Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.
**Authors:** Espinosa-Barberi G, Galván González JF, Antón A
**Journal:** Rom J Ophthalmol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.22336/rjo.2020.70](https://doi.org/10.22336/rjo.2020.70)

## Content

1. Rom J Ophthalmol. 2020 Oct-Dec;64(4):455-458. doi: 10.22336/rjo.2020.70.

Ocular hypertension in Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.

Espinosa-Barberi G(1)(2), Galván González JF(3), Antón A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institut Català de Retina, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Postgraduate and Doctorate School, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 
Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.
(3)Hospital Universitario de Gran Canaria Doctor Negrín, Department of 
Ophthalmology, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.
(4)Universitat Internacional de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.

Purpose: to describe a clinical case of ocular hypertension (OHT) in 
Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome (ARS). Method: Observational case report of a 
43-year-old woman with background of OHT. The data was collected originally with 
a standardized electronic medical record. A complete ophthalmologic examination 
was performed. Results: In the biomicroscopy, a posterior embryotoxon, iris 
atrophy with absence of crypts and irregularity of pigmentation, and discoria in 
OU were observed. Gonioscopy revealed an open angle with a prominent and 
anterior displaced Schwalbe line. Ocular fundus (OF) demonstrated small and 
oblique papillae, with normal neurorretinal ring. Functional tests were normal. 
The patient did not present systemic pathologies, so the diagnosis of Rieger 
anomaly was made. The IOP control was achieved with aqueous humor suppressants. 
Conclusions: Glaucoma is the main cause of visual morbidity in patients with 
ARS, therefore a complete periodic ophthalmological exam is a priority. 
Abbreviations :ARS = Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome, RP = retinitis pigmentosa, IOP = 
Intraocular Pressure, BCVA = Best Corrected Visual Acuity, OR = right eye, OS = 
left eye, OU = both eyes, OF = ocular fundus, OCT = optical coherence 
tomography, VF = visual field, TBC = trabeculectomy.

©Romanian Society of Ophthalmology.

DOI: 10.22336/rjo.2020.70
PMCID: PMC7739019
PMID: 33367186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]