---
reference_id: "PMID:25256237"
title: Genotype-phenotype relationships in Freeman-Sheldon syndrome.
authors:
- Beck AE
- McMillin MJ
- Gildersleeve HI
- Shively KM
- Tang A
- Bamshad MJ
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36762
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Craniofacial Dysostosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons
- Facies
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Radiography
- "Spine/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype relationships in Freeman-Sheldon syndrome.
**Authors:** Beck AE, McMillin MJ, Gildersleeve HI, Shively KM, Tang A, Bamshad MJ
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36762](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36762)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Nov;164A(11):2808-13. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36762. Epub 
2014 Sep 25.

Genotype-phenotype relationships in Freeman-Sheldon syndrome.

Beck AE(1), McMillin MJ, Gildersleeve HI, Shively KM, Tang A, Bamshad MJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington; Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, 
Washington.

Distal arthrogryposis (DA) syndromes are a group of disorders characterized by 
multiple congenital contractures. DA type 2A (DA2A or Freeman-Sheldon syndrome), 
caused by mutations in MYH3, is typically considered the most severe of the DA 
syndromes. However, there is wide phenotypic variability among individuals with 
DA2A. We characterized genotype-phenotype relationships in 46 families with 
DA2A. MYH3 mutations were found in 43/46 (93%) kindreds, with three mutations 
(p.T178I, p.R672C, and p.R672H) explaining 39/43 (91%) of cases. Phenotypic 
severity varied significantly by genotype (P=0.0055). Individuals with p.T178I 
were the most severely affected with both facial contractures and congenital 
scoliosis. Classification of individuals with DA2A into phenotypic groups of 
varying severity should facilitate providing families with more accurate 
information about natural history and suggests that individuals might benefit 
from personalized medical management motivated by MYH3 genotype.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36762
PMID: 25256237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]