---
reference_id: "PMID:10822430"
title: Cervical dural sac and spinal cord in juvenile muscular atrophy of distal upper extremity.
authors:
- Hirayama K
- Tokumaru Y
journal: Neurology
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.10.1922
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Arm/innervation
- Cervical Vertebrae/pathology
- Child
- Dura Mater/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myelography
- Spinal Cord/pathology
- Spinal Cord Compression/diagnosis
- Spinal Muscular Atrophies of Childhood/diagnosis
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cervical dural sac and spinal cord in juvenile muscular atrophy of distal upper extremity.
**Authors:** Hirayama K, Tokumaru Y
**Journal:** Neurology (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.54.10.1922](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.54.10.1922)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2000 May 23;54(10):1922-6. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.10.1922.

Cervical dural sac and spinal cord in juvenile muscular atrophy of distal upper 
extremity.

Hirayama K(1), Tokumaru Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Chiba University, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate specificity and significance of dynamic changes of the 
cervical dural sac and spinal cord during neck flexion in juvenile muscular 
atrophy of the distal upper extremity.
BACKGROUND: The disorder affects young people-predominantly men-and is 
progressive for several years. One autopsy case showed ischemic necrosis of the 
cervical anterior horn, suggesting that the disorder is a type of cervical 
myelopathy. Some authors classify it as monomelic amyotrophy, implying that it 
is a focal motor neuron disease.
METHODS: Neuroradiologic examinations including myelography, CT myelography, and 
MRI in a fully flexed neck position were performed on 73 patients with this 
disorder and on 20 disease control subjects.
RESULTS: A distinctive finding in the disorder was forward displacement of the 
cervical dural sac and compressive flattening of the lower cervical cord during 
neck flexion. The forward displacement was significantly greater in patients 
with disease duration less than 10 years than in age-matched control subjects 
and patients in a late, nonprogressive stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Radiologic abnormalities of the lower cervical dural sac and spinal 
cord support the hypothesis that this disorder is a type of cervical myelopathy.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.54.10.1922
PMID: 10822430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]