---
reference_id: "PMID:25518532"
title: "Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency in children: clinical characteristics and diagnosis."
authors:
- Radlović N
- Leković Z
- Radlović V
- Simić D
- Topić A
- Ristić D
- Dučić S
- Beletić A
journal: Srp Arh Celok Lek
year: '2014'
doi: 10.2298/sarh1410547r
keywords:
- Cholestasis/etiology
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency in children: clinical characteristics and diagnosis.
**Authors:** Radlović N, Leković Z, Radlović V, Simić D, Topić A, Ristić D, Dučić S, Beletić A
**Journal:** Srp Arh Celok Lek (2014)
**DOI:** [10.2298/sarh1410547r](https://doi.org/10.2298/sarh1410547r)

## Content

1. Srp Arh Celok Lek. 2014 Sep-Oct;142(9-10):547-50. doi: 10.2298/sarh1410547r.

Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency in children: clinical characteristics and
diagnosis.

Radlović N, Leković Z, Radlović V, Simić D, Topić A, Ristić D, Dučić S, Beletić
A.

Erratum in
    Srp Arh Celok Lek. 2014 Nov-Dec;142(11-12):777. Baletić, Andjelo [corrected
to Beletić, Andjelo].

INTRODUCTION: Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a relatively rare and
clinically very heterogeneous autosomal recessive disorder.
OBJECTIVE: Presentation of clinical characteristics of AATD in the first months
after birth, as well as the significance of testing brothers and sisters for its
presence.
METHODS: Objectives of the study were analyzed on a sample of eight children
(four male and four female, aged 63 months (mean 14.81 ± 23.96 months; range
1-63 months) with AATD confirmed based on its low serum value and pathological
phenotype. RESULTS Of the total of eight patients, six manifested cholestasis
syndrome (three male and three female, mean age 2.25 ± 1.37 months; range 1-4.5
months), while two patients, a 3.5-year-old girl and a 5.25-year-old boy, were
without symptoms and clinical-laboratory signs of the disease, disclosed during
family testing. Serum alpha-1-antitrypsin level rated 0.30-0.66 g/L (0.37 ±
0.12), among which seven were with ZZ phenotype 0.30-0.39 (0.33 ± 0.04), and in
a boy with FZ the phenotype was disclosed on family screening, 0.66 g/L. In the
group of patients with cholestasis syndrome (serum GTT 444.80 ± 203.15 U/L;
range 201-676 U/L), three had mild to moderate hepatomegaly, one had
longitudinal growth delay (< P3; -10.50%) and two had icterus with conjugated
hyperbilirubinemia (92 and 109 μmol/L) and prolonged prothrombin time (PT 14.8
and 17 sec). All children with cholestasis syndrome also had
hypertransaminasemia (ALT 80.83 ± 33 U/L; range 37-124 U/L and AST 116.67 ±
62.82 U/L; range 58-230 U/L).
CONCLUSION: Cholestasis syndrome represents a basic manifestation of AATD in the
first months after birth, while early testing of brothers and sisters enables
early disclosure and adequate treatment of the subclinical forms of the disease.

DOI: 10.2298/sarh1410547r
PMID: 25518532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
