---
reference_id: "PMID:2749111"
title: The clinical pathology of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever.
authors:
- Swanepoel R
- Gill DE
- Shepherd AJ
- Leman PA
- Mynhardt JH
- Harvey S
journal: Rev Infect Dis
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1093/clinids/11.supplement_4.s794
keywords:
- Animals
- Blood Chemical Analysis
- Blood Coagulation Tests
- "Cross Infection/blood, epidemiology, mortality"
- Democratic Republic of the Congo
- Female
- "Hemorrhagic Fever, Crimean/blood, epidemiology, mortality"
- Humans
- Male
- Namibia
- Platelet Count
- South Africa
- Tanzania
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical pathology of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever.
**Authors:** Swanepoel R, Gill DE, Shepherd AJ, Leman PA, Mynhardt JH, Harvey S
**Journal:** Rev Infect Dis (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1093/clinids/11.supplement_4.s794](https://doi.org/10.1093/clinids/11.supplement_4.s794)

## Content

1. Rev Infect Dis. 1989 May-Jun;11 Suppl 4:S794-800. doi: 
10.1093/clinids/11.supplement_4.s794.

The clinical pathology of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever.

Swanepoel R(1), Gill DE, Shepherd AJ, Leman PA, Mynhardt JH, Harvey S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, University of the Witwatersrand, Republic of South 
Africa.

Observations were made of 15 fatal and 35 nonfatal Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic 
fever (CCHF) infections diagnosed from February 1981 to March 1987 in Kimberly 
and Sandringham, Republic of South Africa. Following an incubation period of 2-9 
days after exposure to infection, patients had a sudden onset of disease with 
fever, nausea, severe headache, and myalgia. Petechial rash and hemorrhagic 
signs such as epistaxis, hematemesis, and melena supervened on days 3-6 of 
illness. Deaths occurred on days 5-14 of illness. Patients with fatal infections 
had thrombocytopenia and markedly elevated levels of serum aspartate and alanine 
aminotransaminases, gamma-glutamyltransferase, lactic dehydrogenase, creatine 
kinase, bilirubin, creatinine, and urea. Total protein, albumin, fibrinogen, and 
hemoglobin levels were depressed. Values for prothrombin ratio, activated 
partial thromboplastin time, thrombin time, and fibrin degradation products were 
grossly elevated, findings that indicate the occurrence of disseminated 
intravascular coagulopathy. Many of the clinical pathologic changes were evident 
at an early stage of the disease and had a highly predictive value for fatal 
outcome of infection. Changes were present but less marked in nonfatal 
infections.

DOI: 10.1093/clinids/11.supplement_4.s794
PMID: 2749111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]