---
reference_id: "PMID:34667502"
title: "Osteogenesis imperfecta type III: Oral, craniofacial characteristics and atypical radiographic findings oral."
authors:
- Arantes C
- Sica I
- Bezerra M
- Amaral C
- Bellato C
- Logar G
journal: J Clin Exp Dent
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4317/jced.58263
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta type III: Oral, craniofacial characteristics and atypical radiographic findings oral.
**Authors:** Arantes C, Sica I, Bezerra M, Amaral C, Bellato C, Logar G
**Journal:** J Clin Exp Dent (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4317/jced.58263](https://doi.org/10.4317/jced.58263)

## Content

1. J Clin Exp Dent. 2021 Oct 1;13(10):e1053-e1056. doi: 10.4317/jced.58263.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Osteogenesis imperfecta type III: Oral, craniofacial characteristics and
atypical radiographic findings oral.

Arantes C(1), Sica I(1), Bezerra M(1), Amaral C(2), Bellato C(3), Logar G(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Dentistry, University of Western São Paulo, Presidente
Prudente, Brazil.
(2)DDS, Ms, Department of Special Care Dentistry, Dental School, University of
Western Sao Paulo, Presidente Prudente, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(3)DDS, MS, Department of Surgery, University of Western Sao Paulo, Presidente
Prudente, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a disease characterized by decreased bone
mineral density, causing susceptibility to bone fractures by mild trauma and
bone deformities. The aim of this study was to describe an osteogenesis
imperfecta type III clinical case, its craniofacial and oral changes as well as
its atypical radiographic findings. An eighteen-year-old, male patient diagnosed
with osteogenesis imperfecta type III was referred for dental evaluation; the
clinical examination showed the craniofacial and oral changes of the disease
such as triangular face, class III malocclusion, anterior open bite and
posterior crossbite, dentinogenesis imperfecta presenting amber discoloration.
The radiographic examination revealed teeth with pulp chamber obliteration and
root canals, however unusual findings were also observed such as: bilateral
increase of the mandibular canals and preservation of the pulp chamber and third
molar root canals. Our findings show that is essential an adequate knowledge of
anatomy, a careful anamnestic evaluation and a complete radiological evaluation
of the patient with OI. Key words:Dental anomalies, developmental disability,
rare disorders.

Copyright: © 2021 Medicina Oral S.L.

DOI: 10.4317/jced.58263
PMCID: PMC8501861
PMID: 34667502

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors confirm that
there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication.
