---
reference_id: "PMID:15213106"
title: Connexin30 mutations responsible for hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia cause abnormal hemichannel activity.
authors:
- Essenfelder GM
- Bruzzone R
- Lamartine J
- Charollais A
- Blanchet-Bardon C
- Barbe MT
- Meda P
- Waksman G
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh191
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphate/metabolism
- Animals
- Connexin 30
- "Connexins/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Primers
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Electrophysiology
- Epidermis/metabolism
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Ion Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- Microinjections
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Mutation/genetics
- Nucleic Acid Amplification Techniques
- Oocytes/metabolism
- Transfection
- Xenopus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Connexin30 mutations responsible for hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia cause abnormal hemichannel activity.
**Authors:** Essenfelder GM, Bruzzone R, Lamartine J, Charollais A, Blanchet-Bardon C, Barbe MT, Meda P, Waksman G
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddh191](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddh191)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Aug 15;13(16):1703-14. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh191. Epub 2004 
Jun 22.

Connexin30 mutations responsible for hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia cause 
abnormal hemichannel activity.

Essenfelder GM(1), Bruzzone R, Lamartine J, Charollais A, Blanchet-Bardon C, 
Barbe MT, Meda P, Waksman G.

Author information:
(1)Service de Génomique Fonctionnelle, CEA-Evry, France.

Clouston syndrome or hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is a rare dominant 
genodermatosis characterized by palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, generalized 
alopecia and nail defects. The disease is caused by mutations in the human GJB6 
gene which encodes the gap junction protein connexin30 (Cx30). To gain insight 
into the molecular mechanisms underlying HED, we have analyzed the consequences 
of two of these mutations (G11R Cx30 and A88V Cx30) on the functional properties 
of the connexons they form. Here, we show that the distribution of Cx30 is 
similar in affected palmoplantar skin and in normal epidermis. We further 
demonstrate that the presence of the wild-type protein (wt Cx30) improves the 
trafficking of mutated Cx30 to the plasma membrane where both G11R and A88V Cx30 
co-localize with wt Cx30 and form functional intercellular channels. The 
electrophysiological properties of channels made of G11R and A88V Cx30 differ 
slightly from those of wt Cx30 but allow for dye transfer between transfected 
HeLa cells. Finally, we document a gain of function of G11R and A88V Cx30, which 
form functional hemichannels at the cell surface and, when expressed in HeLa 
cells, generate a leakage of ATP into the extracellular medium. Such increased 
ATP levels might act as a paracrine messenger that, by altering the epidermal 
factors which control the proliferation and differentiation of keratinocytes, 
may play an important role in the pathophysiological processes leading to the 
HED phenotype.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddh191
PMID: 15213106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]