---
reference_id: "PMID:23675304"
title: T-Cell tropism of simian varicella virus during primary infection.
authors:
- Ouwendijk WJ
- Mahalingam R
- de Swart RL
- Haagmans BL
- van Amerongen G
- Getu S
- Gilden D
- Osterhaus AD
- Verjans GM
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003368
content_type: abstract_only
---

# T-Cell tropism of simian varicella virus during primary infection.
**Authors:** Ouwendijk WJ, Mahalingam R, de Swart RL, Haagmans BL, van Amerongen G, Getu S, Gilden D, Osterhaus AD, Verjans GM
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1003368](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1003368)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 May;9(5):e1003368. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003368. Epub 
2013 May 9.

T-Cell tropism of simian varicella virus during primary infection.

Ouwendijk WJ(1), Mahalingam R, de Swart RL, Haagmans BL, van Amerongen G, Getu 
S, Gilden D, Osterhaus AD, Verjans GM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) causes varicella, establishes a life-long latent 
infection of ganglia and reactivates to cause herpes zoster. The cell types that 
transport VZV from the respiratory tract to skin and ganglia during primary 
infection are unknown. Clinical, pathological, virological and immunological 
features of simian varicella virus (SVV) infection of non-human primates 
parallel those of primary VZV infection in humans. To identify the host cell 
types involved in virus dissemination and pathology, we infected African green 
monkeys intratracheally with recombinant SVV expressing enhanced green 
fluorescent protein (SVV-EGFP) and with wild-type SVV (SVV-wt) as a control. The 
SVV-infected cell types and virus kinetics were determined by flow cytometry and 
immunohistochemistry, and virus culture and SVV-specific real-time PCR, 
respectively. All monkeys developed fever and skin rash. Except for pneumonitis, 
pathology produced by SVV-EGFP was less compared to SVV-wt. In lungs, SVV 
infected alveolar myeloid cells and T-cells. During viremia the virus 
preferentially infected memory T-cells, initially central memory T-cells and 
subsequently effector memory T-cells. In early non-vesicular stages of 
varicella, SVV was seen mainly in perivascular skin infiltrates composed of 
macrophages, dendritic cells, dendrocytes and memory T-cells, implicating 
hematogenous spread. In ganglia, SVV was found primarily in neurons and 
occasionally in memory T-cells adjacent to neurons. In conclusion, the data 
suggest the role of memory T-cells in disseminating SVV to its target organs 
during primary infection of its natural and immunocompetent host.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003368
PMCID: PMC3649965
PMID: 23675304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Co-author ADMEO wishes to declare, for the 
avoidance of any misunderstanding on competing interests, that he co-founded and 
is chief scientific officer of Viroclinics Biosciences, a company set up in 
collaboration with Erasmus MC. However, for clarification, no materials or 
support were received from the company, and no agreements were in place 
concerning the execution or publication of this work. This does not alter our 
adherence to all PLoS Pathogens policies on sharing data and materials. The 
authors have no additional financial interests.