---
reference_id: "PMID:3752898"
title: Congenital enzymopenic methaemoglobinaemia.
authors:
- Kueh YK
- Chio LF
- Guan R
journal: Ann Acad Med Singap
year: '1986'
keywords:
- Adult
- Ascorbic Acid/therapeutic use
- China/ethnology
- Cytochrome-B(5) Reductase/deficiency
- Humans
- Male
- Methemoglobin/metabolism
- "Methemoglobinemia/congenital, drug therapy, metabolism"
- "NADH, NADPH Oxidoreductases/deficiency"
- Singapore
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital enzymopenic methaemoglobinaemia.
**Authors:** Kueh YK, Chio LF, Guan R
**Journal:** Ann Acad Med Singap (1986)

## Content

1. Ann Acad Med Singap. 1986 Apr;15(2):250-4.

Congenital enzymopenic methaemoglobinaemia.

Kueh YK, Chio LF, Guan R.

Methaemoglobin is haemoglobin in which the sixth coordination position of heme
iron is in the ferric state, having lost an unpaired electron. In normal human
blood the level of methaemoglobin is 1% or less. This stable level results from
an equilibrium between the rate at which ferric heme is formed and the rate at
which it is reduced back to the ferrous state. Congenital methaemoglobinaemia
caused by a deficiency or absence of methaemoglobin reductase represents a
disturbance of this equilibrium wherein the methaemoglobin formed at
physiological rate is not efficiently reduced. A chronically elevated level of
oxidized haemoglobin results. Methaemoglobin is incapable of binding oxygen.
Instead of the bright red colour imparted by oxyhaemoglobin, blood containing
more than 10% methaemoglobin is dark brown. A concentration exceeding 1.5 g/d1
gives rise to cyanosis. The majority of patients with congenital enzymopenic
methaemoglobinaemia are asymptomatic despite the intense cyanosis. This is a
very important differentiating point from the cyanosis of cardiopulmonary
causes. Methaemoglobin reductase deficiency is uncommon. Most proven cases had
been in persons of European descent with sporadic reports of non-Caucasoid
patients. We report here a Chinese patient whom we believe is the first in South
East Asia to have methaemoglobin reductase deficiency unequivocally documented.

PMID: 3752898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
