---
reference_id: "PMID:38052687"
title: Colonization factors of human and animal-specific enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC).
authors:
- von Mentzer A
- Svennerholm AM
journal: Trends Microbiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2023.11.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Colonization factors of human and animal-specific enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC).
**Authors:** von Mentzer A, Svennerholm AM
**Journal:** Trends Microbiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tim.2023.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2023.11.001)

## Content

1. Trends Microbiol. 2024 May;32(5):448-464. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2023.11.001. Epub
 2023 Dec 4.

Colonization factors of human and animal-specific enterotoxigenic Escherichia 
coli (ETEC).

von Mentzer A(1), Svennerholm AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of 
Gothenburg, Sweden; Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK. Electronic address: 
astrid.von.mentzer@gu.se.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of 
Gothenburg, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Trends Microbiol. 2025 May;33(5):571. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2025.03.006.

Colonization factors (CFs) are major virulence factors of enterotoxigenic 
Escherichia coli (ETEC). This pathogen is among the most common causes of 
bacterial diarrhea in children in low- and middle-income countries, travelers, 
and livestock. CFs are major candidate antigens in vaccines under development as 
preventive measures against ETEC infections in humans and livestock. Recent 
molecular studies have indicated that newly identified CFs on human ETEC are 
closely related to animal ETEC CFs. Increased knowledge of pathogenic 
mechanisms, immunogenicity, regulation, and expression of ETEC CFs, as well as 
the possible spread of animal ETEC to humans, may facilitate the future 
development of ETEC vaccines for humans and animals. Here, we present an updated 
review of CFs in ETEC.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2023.11.001
PMID: 38052687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.