---
reference_id: "PMID:26986877"
title: "The expanding clinical phenotype of Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome: 20 new cases and possible genotype-phenotype correlations."
authors:
- Chen CA
- Bosch DG
- Cho MT
- Rosenfeld JA
- Shinawi M
- Lewis RA
- Mann J
- Jayakar P
- Payne K
- Walsh L
- Moss T
- Schreiber A
- Schoonveld C
- Monaghan KG
- Elmslie F
- Douglas G
- Boonstra FN
- Millan F
- Cremers FP
- McKnight D
- Richard G
- Juusola J
- Kendall F
- Ramsey K
- Anyane-Yeboa K
- Malkin E
- Chung WK
- Niyazov D
- Pascual JM
- Walkiewicz M
- Veluchamy V
- Li C
- Hisama FM
- de Vries BB
- Schaaf C
journal: Genet Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2016.18
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- COUP Transcription Factor I/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Optic Atrophy/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The expanding clinical phenotype of Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome: 20 new cases and possible genotype-phenotype correlations.
**Authors:** Chen CA, Bosch DG, Cho MT, Rosenfeld JA, Shinawi M, Lewis RA, Mann J, Jayakar P, Payne K, Walsh L, Moss T, Schreiber A, Schoonveld C, Monaghan KG, Elmslie F, Douglas G, Boonstra FN, Millan F, Cremers FP, McKnight D, Richard G, Juusola J, Kendall F, Ramsey K, Anyane-Yeboa K, Malkin E, Chung WK, Niyazov D, Pascual JM, Walkiewicz M, Veluchamy V, Li C, Hisama FM, de Vries BB, Schaaf C
**Journal:** Genet Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2016.18](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2016.18)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2016 Nov;18(11):1143-1150. doi: 10.1038/gim.2016.18. Epub 2016 Mar 
17.

The expanding clinical phenotype of Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy 
syndrome: 20 new cases and possible genotype-phenotype correlations.

Chen CA(1)(2), Bosch DG(3)(4)(5)(6), Cho MT(7), Rosenfeld JA(1), Shinawi M(8), 
Lewis RA(1)(9), Mann J(10), Jayakar P(11), Payne K(12), Walsh L(12)(13), Moss 
T(14), Schreiber A(14), Schoonveld C(15), Monaghan KG(7), Elmslie F(16), Douglas 
G(7), Boonstra FN(4)(6), Millan F(7), Cremers FP(3)(5), McKnight D(7), Richard 
G(7), Juusola J(7), Kendall F(17)(18), Ramsey K(19), Anyane-Yeboa K(20), Malkin 
E(21), Chung WK(20)(22), Niyazov D(23), Pascual JM(24), Walkiewicz M(1), 
Veluchamy V(25), Li C(26), Hisama FM(27), de Vries BB(3)(6), Schaaf C(1)(2)(28).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Bartiméus, Institute for the Visually Impaired, Zeist, The Netherlands.
(5)Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
(8)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(10)Genetics, Kaiser-Permanente Fresno Medical Center, Clovis, California, USA.
(11)Nicklaus Children's Hospital, Miami, Florida, USA.
(12)Riley Hospital for Children, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(13)Departments of Neurology, Medical and Molecular Genetics, and Pediatrics, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(14)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(15)University of Minnesota Health, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(16)South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, St. George's Healthcare NHS 
Trust, London, UK.
(17)VMP Genetics, LLC, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(18)University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(19)Center for Rare Childhood Disorders, Translational Genomics Research 
Institute, Phoenix, Arizona, USA.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New 
York, USA.
(21)Nyack Hospital, Nyack, New York, USA.
(22)Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New 
York, USA.
(23)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Ochsner Clinic 
Foundation, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(24)Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(25)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Akron Children's Hospital, Akron, Ohio, 
USA.
(26)McMaster University Medical Center, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(27)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(28)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.

Erratum in
    Genet Med. 2017 Aug;19(8):962. doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.12.

PURPOSE: Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome (BBSOAS) is an 
autosomal-dominant disorder characterized by optic atrophy and intellectual 
disability caused by loss-of-function mutations in NR2F1. We report 20 new 
individuals with BBSOAS, exploring the spectrum of clinical phenotypes and 
assessing potential genotype-phenotype correlations.
METHODS: Clinical features of individuals with pathogenic NR2F1 variants were 
evaluated by review of medical records. The functional relevance of coding 
nonsynonymous NR2F1 variants was assessed with a luciferase assay measuring the 
impact on transcriptional activity. The effects of two start codon variants on 
protein expression were evaluated by western blot analysis.
RESULTS: We recruited 20 individuals with novel pathogenic NR2F1 variants (seven 
missense variants, five translation initiation variants, two frameshifting 
insertions/deletions, one nonframeshifting insertion/deletion, and five 
whole-gene deletions). All the missense variants were found to impair 
transcriptional activity. In addition to visual and cognitive deficits, 
individuals with BBSOAS manifested hypotonia (75%), seizures (40%), autism 
spectrum disorder (35%), oromotor dysfunction (60%), thinning of the corpus 
callosum (53%), and hearing defects (20%).
CONCLUSION: BBSOAS encompasses a broad range of clinical phenotypes. Functional 
studies help determine the severity of novel NR2F1 variants. Some 
genotype-phenotype correlations seem to exist, with missense mutations in the 
DNA-binding domain causing the most severe phenotypes.Genet Med 18 11, 
1143-1150.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2016.18
PMID: 26986877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]