---
reference_id: "PMID:37548074"
title: "Subdural hemorrhage, macrocephaly, rash, and developmental delay in an infant: A pathogenic variant in NLRP3 causes CINCA/NOMID."
authors:
- Koti AS
- Lanis A
- Finlayson S
- Canny S
- Feldman EA
- Miller DE
- Rosenwasser N
- Scott AA
- Wong SC
- Feldman KW
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63366
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subdural hemorrhage, macrocephaly, rash, and developmental delay in an infant: A pathogenic variant in NLRP3 causes CINCA/NOMID.
**Authors:** Koti AS, Lanis A, Finlayson S, Canny S, Feldman EA, Miller DE, Rosenwasser N, Scott AA, Wong SC, Feldman KW
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63366](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63366)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 Dec;191(12):2825-2830. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63366. Epub 
2023 Aug 7.

Subdural hemorrhage, macrocephaly, rash, and developmental delay in an infant: A 
pathogenic variant in NLRP3 causes CINCA/NOMID.

Koti AS(1), Lanis A(2), Finlayson S(3), Canny S(2), Feldman EA(4), Miller DE(5), 
Rosenwasser N(2), Scott AA(6), Wong SC(2), Feldman KW(1).

Author information:
(1)Safe Child and Adolescent Network, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Division of Genetic Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)Safe Child and Adolescent Network, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(5)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle Children's 
Hospital, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(6)Division of Genetic Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.

Subdural hemorrhages (SDHs) in children are most often observed in abusive head 
trauma (AHT), a distinct form of traumatic brain injury, but they may occur in 
other conditions as well, typically with clear signs and symptoms of an 
alternative diagnosis. We present a case of an infant whose SDH initially raised 
the question of AHT, but multidisciplinary evaluation identified multiple 
abnormalities, including rash, macrocephaly, growth failure, and elevated 
inflammatory markers, which were all atypical for trauma. These, along with 
significant cerebral atrophy, ventriculomegaly, and an absence of other 
injuries, raised concerns for a genetic disorder, prompting genetic 
consultation. Clinical trio exome sequencing identified a de novo likely 
pathogenic variant in NLRP3, which is associated with chronic infantile 
neurological, cutaneous, and articular (CINCA) syndrome, also known as 
neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID). He was successfully 
treated with interleukin-1 blockade, highlighting the importance of prompt 
treatment in CINCA/NOMID patients. This case also illustrates how atraumatic 
cases of SDH can be readily distinguished from AHT with multidisciplinary 
collaboration and careful consideration of the clinical history and exam 
findings.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63366
PMID: 37548074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]