---
reference_id: "PMID:34287852"
title: "Mucha-Habermann disease: a pediatric case report and proposal of a risk score."
authors:
- Blohm ME
- Ebenebe CU
- Rau C
- Escherich C
- Johannsen J
- Escherich G
- Driemeyer J
- Nagel PD
- Kobbe R
- Lütgehetmann M
- Lennartz M
- Booken N
- Schneider SW
- Singer D
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/ijd.15770
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Herpes Simplex
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pityriasis Lichenoides/complications
- Risk Factors
- Thrombocytopenia
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucha-Habermann disease: a pediatric case report and proposal of a risk score.
**Authors:** Blohm ME, Ebenebe CU, Rau C, Escherich C, Johannsen J, Escherich G, Driemeyer J, Nagel PD, Kobbe R, Lütgehetmann M, Lennartz M, Booken N, Schneider SW, Singer D
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijd.15770](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.15770)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2022 Apr;61(4):401-409. doi: 10.1111/ijd.15770. Epub 2021 Jul
20.

Mucha-Habermann disease: a pediatric case report and proposal of a risk score.

Blohm ME(1)(2), Ebenebe CU(1)(2), Rau C(1)(2), Escherich C(3), Johannsen J(1),
Escherich G(4), Driemeyer J(1), Nagel PD(1)(2), Kobbe R(5), Lütgehetmann M(6),
Lennartz M(7), Booken N(8), Schneider SW(8), Singer D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Division of Neonatology and Paediatric Intensive Care, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Paediatric Oncology, Haematology and Clinical Immunology,
University Hospital Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, First Department of Medicine, University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(6)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Virology and Hygiene, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(7)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany.
(8)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

Febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann disease (FUMHD) is a rare inflammatory
dermatological disease. A case of a 13-year-old boy with FUMHD possibly
triggered by mycoplasma infection is presented. Based on FUMHD cases identified
in a MEDLINE literature search, demographic, treatment, and outcome data were
analyzed. An FUMHD mortality risk score is proposed based on the likelihood
ratios of risk factors for a fatal outcome. Our FUMHD case had marked leukopenia
and thrombocytopenia at admission. He recovered without systemic
immunosuppressive treatment. Literature review revealed 119 FUMHD cases. Overall
lethality was 14/119 (12%, CI 6-17%), and lethality in children was lower (1/54,
2%, CI 0-6%) compared to adults (13/65, 20%, CI 11-31%). Risk factors for a
fatal outcome (likelihood ratio; P) were sepsis (24.97, P < 0.001), adult vs.
pediatric patient age (11.19; P = 0.001), systemic involvement (19.97,
P < 0.001), and mucosal involvement (4.58; P = 0.032). The proposed FUMHD
mortality risk score = Age/10 + 4 + 4 (if systemic involvement) + 1 (if mucosal
involvement) was discriminative (sensitivity 93%, specificity 77%). In FUMHD,
immune-suppressive treatment intensity should be balanced against the mortality
risk, as infectious complications are a frequent cause of death.

© 2021 The Authors. International Journal of Dermatology published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC on behalf of the International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.15770
PMID: 34287852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
