---
reference_id: "PMID:17477206"
title: Delusional thinking and cognitive disorder.
authors:
- Maher B
journal: Integr Physiol Behav Sci
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/BF03159710
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delusional thinking and cognitive disorder.
**Authors:** Maher B
**Journal:** Integr Physiol Behav Sci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF03159710](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03159710)

## Content

1. Integr Physiol Behav Sci. 2005 Jul-Sep;40(3):136-46. doi: 10.1007/BF03159710.

Delusional thinking and cognitive disorder.

Maher B(1).

Author information:
(1)Harvard University, USA.

A hypothesis is presented regarding the genesis of paranoid delusion that 
attempts to take into account certain data. The data of interest are (a) the 
failure to find evidence of cognitive impairment in diagnosed paranoid patients, 
(b) the evidence of perceptual disorder as a primary and prior condition in the 
natural history of the clinical development of delusions and the empirical 
relationship of the perceptual disorder to presence of "thought disorder," (c) 
the failure to find evidence supporting universal psychodynamic patterns of 
etiology, (d) appearance of "delusional" phenomena in normal subjects in 
situations of deviant sensory experience, and (e) the reports of articulate 
patients writing of their experiences. This hypothesis suggests that there 
exists a group of patients who suffer from primary perceptual anomalies, 
fundamentally biological in nature although probably fluctuating with current 
stresses, and that these anomalies involve vivid and intense sensory input. 
These experiences demand explanation which the patient develops through the same 
cognitive mechanisms that are found in normal and scientific theory-building. As 
the data that are available to the patient are crucially different from those 
available to an observer, the latter judges the explanation to be bizarre and 
pathological. Being unable to check the validity of the patient's descriptions 
of his sensory experience the assumption is made that the patient is having the 
same experience as the observer but is defective in reality-testing and/or 
inferential thinking. As the evidence for the presence of perceptual disorder is 
stronger than the direct evidence for cognitive impairment, the hypothesis 
outlined here places central importance on the former. In brief, it is suggested 
that for many paranoid patients the delusion should be seen as the reaction of a 
normal, "sane" individual to abnormal but genuine perceptual experiences.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03159710
PMID: 17477206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]