---
reference_id: "PMID:34324282"
title: Periodontal Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Kapferer-Seebacher I
- van Dijk FS
- Zschocke J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Periodontal Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Kapferer-Seebacher I, van Dijk FS, Zschocke J

## Content

1. Periodontal Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.

Kapferer-Seebacher I(1), van Dijk FS(2)(3), Zschocke J(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2025.
2021 Jul 29.

Author information:
(1)Department of Operative and Restorative Dentistry Medical University of 
Innsbruck Innsbruck, Austria
(2)National Ehlers Danlos Syndrome Service London North West University 
Healthcare NHS Trust Harrow, London, United Kingdom
(3)Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction Section of Genetics and 
Genomics Imperial College London London, United Kingdom
(4)Institute of Human Genetics Medical University of Innsbruck Innsbruck, 
Austria

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Periodontal Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (pEDS) is 
characterized by distinct oral manifestations. Periodontal tissue breakdown 
beginning in the teens results in premature loss of teeth. Lack of attached 
gingiva and thin and fragile gums lead to gingival recession. Connective tissue 
abnormalities of pEDS typically include easy bruising, pretibial plaques, distal 
joint hypermobility, hoarse voice, and less commonly manifestations such as 
organ or vessel rupture. Since the first descriptions of pEDS in the 1970s, 148 
individuals have been reported in the literature; however, future in-depth 
descriptions of non-oral manifestations in newly diagnosed individuals with a 
molecularly confirmed diagnosis of pEDS will be important to further define the 
clinical features.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of pEDS is established in a proband with 
suggestive clinical findings and a heterozygous pathogenic gain-of-function 
variant in either C1R or C1S identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is individualized based on 
the clinical manifestations present. Due to the characteristic features of early 
and severe periodontitis, all individuals should be regularly seen by a 
periodontist beginning in early childhood. Excellent oral hygiene is also a 
major element of the treatment of existing periodontitis. Prosthetic 
rehabilitation after tooth loss is challenging as most of the alveolar bone is 
destroyed. Joint hypermobility may benefit from physiotherapy, occupational 
therapy, pain management, and appropriate exercise. Surveillance: Due to high 
risk of progression of the periodontal disease, supportive periodontal care 
including reevaluation of periodontal parameters, oral hygiene instructions 
(e.g., use of interdental cleaning devices and electric toothbrushes), and 
supra- and sub-gingival debridement is recommended every three to six months, 
according to the needs of the individual. Complications of joint hypermobility 
addressed by consultant rheumatologist, physical therapist, and occupational 
therapist as needed. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to 
clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk 
relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible 
those who would benefit from prompt initiation of preventive dental hygiene and 
routine dental care and surveillance.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Periodontal EDS is inherited in an autosomal dominant 
manner. Most individuals with pEDS have the disorder as the result of a C1R or 
C1S pathogenic variant inherited from an affected parent. Each child of an 
affected individual has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant and 
developing the disorder. Once the pEDS-causing pathogenic variant has been 
identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic 
testing are technically possible.

Copyright © 1993-2025, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 34324282