---
reference_id: "PMID:15943496"
title: "Imiquimod: in superficial basal cell carcinoma."
authors:
- Oldfield V
- Keating GM
- Perry CM
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.2165/00128071-200506030-00006
keywords:
- "Aminoquinolines/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/drug therapy, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Imiquimod
- Male
- Multicenter Studies as Topic
- Ointments
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imiquimod: in superficial basal cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Oldfield V, Keating GM, Perry CM
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00128071-200506030-00006](https://doi.org/10.2165/00128071-200506030-00006)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2005;6(3):195-200; discussion 201-2. doi:
10.2165/00128071-200506030-00006.

Imiquimod: in superficial basal cell carcinoma.

Oldfield V(1), Keating GM, Perry CM.

Author information:
(1)Adis International Inc., Yardley, Pennsylvania, USA. demail@adis.co.nz

Imiquimod, available as a 5% cream, is a new topical treatment for adults with
superficial basal cell carcinoma (BCC). The exact mechanism of action of
imiquimod in superficial BCC is unknown. Imiquimod may act as a toll-like
receptor-7 agonist, and is thought to exert its anti-tumor effect via
modification of the immune response and stimulation of apoptosis in BCC cells.
Topical imiquimod 5% cream effectively increased clinical and histologic
clearance of single superficial BCC lesions compared with vehicle in patients
enrolled in two large, well designed trials. Patients applied imiquimod five or
seven times per week or vehicle for 6 weeks, and the composite clearance rates
at 12 weeks post-treatment for the corresponding treatment groups were 75%, 73%,
and 2%, respectively. In a trial investigating the long-term efficacy of
imiquimod 5% cream following application five times per week for 6 weeks, a
clinical clearance rate of 90% was reported at the initial 12-week
post-treatment examination. The estimated rate of clinical clearance at the
1-year follow-up visit was 84%. Application site and local skin reactions were
the most common adverse events reported by imiquimod recipients. The severity of
erythema, erosion, and scabbing/crusting correlated positively with the
composite and histologic response rates.

DOI: 10.2165/00128071-200506030-00006
PMID: 15943496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
