---
reference_id: "PMID:39930301"
title: "Antibiotic-induced IgA vasculitis: insights from a real-world retrospective analysis and pharmacovigilance assessment."
authors:
- Zheng H
- Liu L
- Yang M
- Wang S
journal: Arch Dermatol Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00403-025-03925-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/adverse effects
- Middle Aged
- Female
- Pharmacovigilance
- Aged
- Adult
- "Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting Systems/statistics & numerical data"
- Immunoglobulin A/immunology
- Vancomycin/adverse effects
- Young Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "IgA Vasculitis/chemically induced, epidemiology, immunology"
- Adolescent
- Clarithromycin/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antibiotic-induced IgA vasculitis: insights from a real-world retrospective analysis and pharmacovigilance assessment.
**Authors:** Zheng H, Liu L, Yang M, Wang S
**Journal:** Arch Dermatol Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00403-025-03925-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-025-03925-5)

## Content

1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2025 Feb 11;317(1):383. doi: 10.1007/s00403-025-03925-5.

Antibiotic-induced IgA vasculitis: insights from a real-world retrospective
analysis and pharmacovigilance assessment.

Zheng H(1)(2), Liu L(1)(2), Yang M(3)(4), Wang S(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, No. 138 Tongzipo Road, Changsha, 410013, Hunan, China.
(2)Hunan Clinical Research Center of Pediatric Cancer, The Third Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 410013, Hunan, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, No. 138 Tongzipo Road, Changsha, 410013, Hunan, China.
yangminghua@csu.edu.cn.
(4)Hunan Clinical Research Center of Pediatric Cancer, The Third Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 410013, Hunan, China.
yangminghua@csu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, No. 138 Tongzipo Road, Changsha, 410013, Hunan, China.
sunfeelwang@csu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Pharmacy, The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, 410013, Hunan, China. sunfeelwang@csu.edu.cn.

IgA vasculitis (IgAV) is a small-vessel vasculitis characterized by the
deposition of immunoglobulin A (IgA) in the vessel walls, often presenting with
cutaneous manifestations such as palpable purpura. Drug-induced IgAV is a rare
but potentially severe condition. Several studies have suggested a possible
association between antibiotics and IgAV. However, research on this link remains
limited. This study aimed to identify antibiotics implicated in the onset of
IgAV and to analyze the clinical characteristics of IgAV induced by antibiotics.
Data on antibiotic-induced IgAV events were extracted from the FDA Adverse Event
Reporting System (FAERS) database, and case reports were collected through
literature searches. A pharmacovigilance analysis was conducted using FAERS data
from 2003 to 2023 to evaluate adverse events related to IgAV caused by
antibiotics, and case reports up to November 23, 2024, were reviewed for
retrospective analysis. A total of 150 reports of antibiotic-induced IgAV were
analyzed, with 13 antibiotics identified as associated with IgAV. The three
antibiotics most strongly linked to IgAV were ofloxacin, vancomycin, and
clarithromycin based on the FAERS database analysis. The median age of the cases
was 58 years, with a male predominance. IgAV typically developed 4 days
(1-15 days) after drug administration. Clarithromycin, vancomycin, and
ciprofloxacin were the most frequently reported antibiotics in the literature,
and they were also associated with poor renal outcomes, emphasizing the
importance of regular follow-up to improve long-term renal prognosis. In
conclusion, this study identified 13 antibiotics associated with IgAV, with
ofloxacin, vancomycin, and clarithromycin being the most strongly linked to the
condition.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-025-03925-5
PMID: 39930301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: All authors
of this article declare no conflicts of interest. Informed consent: Not
applicable.
