---
reference_id: "PMID:22112923"
title: Graves' disease following subacute thyroiditis.
authors:
- Nakano Y
- Kurihara H
- Sasaki J
journal: Tohoku J Exp Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1620/tjem.225.301
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Graves' disease following subacute thyroiditis.
**Authors:** Nakano Y, Kurihara H, Sasaki J
**Journal:** Tohoku J Exp Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1620/tjem.225.301](https://doi.org/10.1620/tjem.225.301)

## Content

1. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2011 Dec;225(4):301-9. doi: 10.1620/tjem.225.301.

Graves' disease following subacute thyroiditis.

Nakano Y(1), Kurihara H, Sasaki J.

Author information:
(1)Kurihara Thyroid Clinic, Morioka, Japan.

Subacute thyroiditis is a painful, inflammatory disease frequently accompanied 
with fever. It is suspected to be a viral infectious disease, while Graves' 
disease is an autoimmune disease. Thus, there appears to be no etiological 
relationship between the two diseases. A total of 25,267 thyroid disease 
patients made their first visits to our thyroid clinic during a period of 24 
years between 1985 and 2008. Among them, subacute thyroiditis and Graves' 
disease accounted for 918 patients (3.6%) and 4,617 patients (18.2%), 
respectively. We have encountered 7 patients (one male and six female) with 
subacute thyroiditis followed by Graves' disease in this period (0.15% of the 
4,617 patients with Graves' disease and 0.76% of the 918 patients with subacute 
thyroiditis). The age ranges were 40~66 years (mean 48.7 years) at the onset of 
subacute thyroiditis. The intervals between the onsets of subacute thyroiditis 
and Graves' disease were 1~8 months (mean 4.7 months). Because Graves' disease 
was preceded by subacute thyroiditis, the signs and symptoms of both diseases 
were evident together in the intervening period. The diagnosis of Graves' 
disease in those patients is always difficult because of atypical signs and 
symptoms and an unclear onset time. The causes of the Graves'disease that 
followed subacute thyroiditis are still unknown. However, the inflammatory 
nature of subacute thyroiditis may lead to the activation of the autoimmune 
response in susceptible subjects, resulting in the onset of Graves' disease. 
Graves' disease should be suspected when a high blood level of thyroid hormone 
persists after subacute thyroiditis.

DOI: 10.1620/tjem.225.301
PMID: 22112923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]