---
reference_id: "PMID:32174067"
title: Rare Cases of PLOD1-Related Kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome in a Korean Family Identified by Next Generation Sequencing.
authors:
- Shin YL
- Park YN
- Jang MA
journal: J Korean Med Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e96
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare Cases of PLOD1-Related Kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome in a Korean Family Identified by Next Generation Sequencing.
**Authors:** Shin YL, Park YN, Jang MA
**Journal:** J Korean Med Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e96](https://doi.org/10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e96)

## Content

1. J Korean Med Sci. 2020 Mar 16;35(10):e96. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e96.

Rare Cases of PLOD1-Related Kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome in a Korean 
Family Identified by Next Generation Sequencing.

Shin YL(1), Park YN(2), Jang MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital, 
Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine, Bucheon, Korea. 
ylshin@schmc.ac.kr.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital, 
Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine, Bucheon, Korea.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Genetics, Soonchunhyang University 
Bucheon Hospital, Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine, Bucheon, Korea.

Kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (kEDS) is an autosomal recessive 
connective tissue disorder characterized by muscular hypotonia, hyperextensible 
skin, skin fragility, joint hypermobility, and progressive kyphoscoliosis. The 
disorder results from a deficiency of the enzyme collagen lysyl hydroxylase 1 
due to mutations in the gene PLOD1. We describe the rare cases of kEDS in Korean 
siblings with two novel compound heterozygous variants, c.926_934del 
(p.Leu309_Leu311del) and c.2170_2172del (p.Phe724del) in the PLOD1 gene. They 
had congenital hypotonia, joint laxity, skin hyperextensibility, Marfanoid 
habitus, high myopia and atrophic scarring. The younger sibling had an 
early-onset progressive kyphoscoliosis, while the older sibling showed mild 
scoliosis during childhood. Intrafamilial variability of the clinical severity 
and age of kyphoscoliosis onset observed in our cases.

© 2020 The Korean Academy of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e96
PMCID: PMC7073314
PMID: 32174067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.