---
reference_id: "PMID:23529829"
title: Skeletal clinical characteristics of osteogenesis imperfecta caused by haploinsufficiency mutations in COL1A1.
authors:
- Ben Amor IM
- Roughley P
- Glorieux FH
- Rauch F
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1942
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skeletal clinical characteristics of osteogenesis imperfecta caused by haploinsufficiency mutations in COL1A1.
**Authors:** Ben Amor IM, Roughley P, Glorieux FH, Rauch F
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.1942](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.1942)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Sep;28(9):2001-7. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1942.

Skeletal clinical characteristics of osteogenesis imperfecta caused by 
haploinsufficiency mutations in COL1A1.

Ben Amor IM(1), Roughley P, Glorieux FH, Rauch F.

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children and McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada. mbenamor@shriners.mcgill.ca

COL1A1 haploinsufficiency mutations lead to the mildest form of osteogenesis 
imperfecta (OI), OI type I. The skeletal clinical characteristics resulting from 
such mutations have not been characterized in detail. In this study we assessed 
86 patients (36 male, 50 female; mean age 13.3 years; range, 0.6 to 54 years) 
with COL1A1 haploinsufficiency mutations, of whom 70 were aged 21 years or less 
("pediatric" patients). Birth history was positive for fracture or long-bone 
deformity in 12% of patients. The average rate of long-bone fracture (femur, 
tibia/fibula, humerus, radius/ulna) in pediatric patients was 0.62 fractures per 
year, one-half of which affected the tibia/fibula. Long-bone fracture rate was 
negatively associated with age and lumbar spine areal bone mineral density. 
Vertebral compression fractures were observed in 71% of the 58 pediatric 
patients who had lateral spine radiographs. The median number of vertebral 
fractures was higher for females (median 4; range, 0 to 14) than for males 
(median 1; range, 0 to 8) (p = 0.03). Lumbar spine areal bone mineral density 
was negatively associated with the severity of vertebral compression fractures, 
as reflected in the spine deformity index. Scoliosis was present in about 30% of 
pediatric patients but the Cobb angle was <30 degrees in all cases. The average 
final height Z-score was -1.1, representing a deficit of 8 to 10 cm compared to 
the general population. In summary, OI patients with COL1A1 haploinsufficiency 
mutations have high rates of significant skeletal involvement. Systematic 
follow-up of growing patients with COL1A1 haploinsufficiency mutations including 
radiographic screening for vertebral compression fractures and scoliosis is 
warranted.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.1942
PMID: 23529829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]