---
reference_id: "PMID:36108117"
title: TNXB-Related Classical-Like Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- van Dijk FS
- Ghali N
- Demirdas S
- Baker D
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TNXB-Related Classical-Like Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, van Dijk FS, Ghali N, Demirdas S, Baker D

## Content

1. TNXB-Related Classical-Like Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.

van Dijk FS(1), Ghali N(1), Demirdas S(2), Baker D(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2025.
2022 Sep 15.

Author information:
(1)North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, London North West University 
Healthcare NHS Trust;, Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, 
Genetics and Genomics Section, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom
(2)Clinical Geneticist, Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, 
Erasmus University, Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(3)Sheffield Diagnostic Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation 
Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The clinical features of TNXB-related classical-like 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (clEDS) strongly resemble those seen in classic EDS 
(cEDS). Affected individuals have generalized joint hypermobility, 
hyperextensible skin, and easy bruising, but do not have atrophic scarring, as 
is seen in cEDS. There are also several other distinguishing clinical findings 
including anomalies of feet and hands, edema in the legs in the absence of 
cardiac failure, mild proximal and distal muscle weakness, and axonal 
polyneuropathy. Vaginal, uterine, and/or rectal prolapse can also occur. Tissue 
fragility with resulting rupture of the trachea, esophagus, and small and large 
bowel has been reported. Vascular fragility causing a major event occurs in a 
minority of individuals. Significant variability in the severity of 
musculoskeletal symptoms and their effect on day-to-day function between 
unrelated affected individuals as well as among affected individuals in the same 
family has been reported. Fatigue has been reported in more than half of 
affected individuals. The severity of symptoms in middle-aged individuals can 
range from joint hypermobility without complications to being wheelchair-bound 
as a result of severe and painful foot deformities and fatigue.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of TNXB-related clEDS is established in a 
proband with suggestive clinical findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in 
TNXB identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Non-weight-bearing exercise, physical 
therapy, and careful selection of analgesic medication to address joint pain; if 
pain is severe or debilitating, consider referral to a pain management 
specialist or clinic. The use of opioid medication should be avoided for chronic 
pain, as this does not lead to long-term pain relief and has the potential for 
addiction issues. Long-term chronic pain may result in the need for mental 
health services. Prompt assessment and management in a tertiary center is 
required for bowel rupture, arterial rupture, or organ rupture. Ascorbic acid 
(vitamin C) may reduce easy bruising but has no effect on the key 
characteristics of skin hyperextensibility and joint hypermobility. DDAVP® 
(deamino-delta-D-arginine vasopressin) may also be useful to normalize bleeding 
time in those with easy bruising. Standard treatment is applicable for joint 
dislocations, subjective muscle weakness, and cardiac abnormalities. Prevention 
of primary manifestations: Maintenance of a health body weight; low threshold 
for referral to gastroenterologist for evaluation of gastrointestinal symptoms; 
special attention during general anesthesia in order to provide adequate 
positioning and support as well as being aware of tissue fragility, which has 
been reported after intubation. Avoid invasive procedures unless absolutely 
medically necessary; consider carrying medical information or wearing jewelry 
denoting an increased risk of tissue fragility. Surveillance: Routine follow up 
ideally with rheumatologist, pain management clinic, and/or specialized EDS 
services, if available. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Sports with heavy joint 
strain, as well as contact sports; invasive procedures unless they are 
absolutely medically necessary; acetylsalicylate (aspirin) and long-term use of 
NSAIDS; use of opioid medication for chronic pain. Pregnancy management: It is 
important that the obstetrician and midwives are made aware of the diagnosis of 
clEDS during a pregnancy. Reported pregnancy and postpartum issues in affected 
women include miscarriage, premature rupture of membranes, post- or peripartum 
hemorrhage, and prolapse of the rectum, vagina, and/or uterus. Specialist 
delivery is strongly advised in view of reported trachea rupture during 
intubation and esophagus rupture after insertion of a transesophageal ultrasound 
probe.
GENETIC COUNSELING: TNXB-related clED is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a TNXB pathogenic 
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of 
being affected, a 50% chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of 
inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Once the TNXB pathogenic 
variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing and 
prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are theoretically possible.

Copyright © 1993-2025, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 36108117