---
reference_id: "PMID:25810494"
title: "Failed Tubule Recovery, AKI-CKD Transition, and Kidney Disease Progression."
authors:
- Venkatachalam MA
- Weinberg JM
- Kriz W
- Bidani AK
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2015010006
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/complications, physiopathology"
- Capillaries/physiopathology
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- Hypoxia/complications
- "Kidney Tubules/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Nephrosclerosis/etiology, metabolism"
- Renal Circulation
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/etiology"
- Vasoconstriction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Failed Tubule Recovery, AKI-CKD Transition, and Kidney Disease Progression.
**Authors:** Venkatachalam MA, Weinberg JM, Kriz W, Bidani AK
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2015010006](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2015010006)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Aug;26(8):1765-76. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2015010006. Epub
2015  Mar 25.

Failed Tubule Recovery, AKI-CKD Transition, and Kidney Disease Progression.

Venkatachalam MA(1), Weinberg JM(2), Kriz W(3), Bidani AK(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San 
Antonio, Texas; venkatachal@uthscsa.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Ann Arbor Healthcare System and 
University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan;
(3)Medical Fakultät Mannheim, Abteilung Anatomie und Entwicklungsbiologie 
Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Baden-Wuerttemberg, Germany; and.
(4)Department of Medicine, Loyola University and Hines Veterans Affairs 
Hospital, Maywood, Illinois.

The transition of AKI to CKD has major clinical significance. As reviewed here, 
recent studies show that a subpopulation of dedifferentiated, proliferating 
tubules recovering from AKI undergo pathologic growth arrest, fail to 
redifferentiate, and become atrophic. These abnormal tubules exhibit persistent, 
unregulated, and progressively increasing profibrotic signaling along multiple 
pathways. Paracrine products derived therefrom perturb normal interactions 
between peritubular capillary endothelium and pericyte-like fibroblasts, leading 
to myofibroblast transformation, proliferation, and fibrosis as well as 
capillary disintegration and rarefaction. Although signals from injured 
endothelium and inflammatory/immune cells also contribute, tubule injury alone 
is sufficient to produce the interstitial pathology required for fibrosis. 
Localized hypoxia produced by microvascular pathology may also prevent tubule 
recovery. However, fibrosis is not intrinsically progressive, and microvascular 
pathology develops strictly around damaged tubules; thus, additional 
deterioration of kidney structure after the transition of AKI to CKD requires 
new acute injury or other mechanisms of progression. Indeed, experiments using 
an acute-on-chronic injury model suggest that additional loss of parenchyma 
caused by failed repair of AKI in kidneys with prior renal mass reduction 
triggers hemodynamically mediated processes that damage glomeruli to cause 
progression. Continued investigation of these pathologic mechanisms should 
reveal options for preventing renal disease progression after AKI.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2015010006
PMCID: PMC4520181
PMID: 25810494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]