---
reference_id: "PMID:14978175"
title: Patients with mutations in NPHS2 (podocin) do not respond to standard steroid treatment of nephrotic syndrome.
authors:
- Ruf RG
- Lichtenberger A
- Karle SM
- Haas JP
- Anacleto FE
- Schultheiss M
- Zalewski I
- Imm A
- Ruf EM
- Mucha B
- Bagga A
- Neuhaus T
- Fuchshuber A
- Bakkaloglu A
- Hildebrandt F
- Arbeitsgemeinschaft Für Pädiatrische Nephrologie Study Group
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1097/01.asn.0000113552.59155.72
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Prednisone/therapeutic use
- Treatment Failure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patients with mutations in NPHS2 (podocin) do not respond to standard steroid treatment of nephrotic syndrome.
**Authors:** Ruf RG, Lichtenberger A, Karle SM, Haas JP, Anacleto FE, Schultheiss M, Zalewski I, Imm A, Ruf EM, Mucha B, Bagga A, Neuhaus T, Fuchshuber A, Bakkaloglu A, Hildebrandt F, Arbeitsgemeinschaft Für Pädiatrische Nephrologie Study Group
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.asn.0000113552.59155.72](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.asn.0000113552.59155.72)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004 Mar;15(3):722-32. doi: 
10.1097/01.asn.0000113552.59155.72.

Patients with mutations in NPHS2 (podocin) do not respond to standard steroid 
treatment of nephrotic syndrome.

Ruf RG(1), Lichtenberger A, Karle SM, Haas JP, Anacleto FE, Schultheiss M, 
Zalewski I, Imm A, Ruf EM, Mucha B, Bagga A, Neuhaus T, Fuchshuber A, Bakkaloglu 
A, Hildebrandt F; Arbeitsgemeinschaft Für Pädiatrische Nephrologie Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004 Mar;15(3):832-4. doi: 
10.1097/01.asn.0000118135.00519.b0.

Nephrotic syndrome (NS) represents the association of proteinuria, 
hypoalbuminemia, edema, and hyperlipidemia. Steroid-resistant NS (SRNS) is 
defined by primary resistance to standard steroid therapy. It remains one of the 
most intractable causes of ESRD in the first two decades of life. Mutations in 
the NPHS2 gene represent a frequent cause of SRNS, occurring in approximately 20 
to 30% of sporadic cases of SRNS. On the basis of a very small number of 
patients, it was suspected that children with homozygous or compound 
heterozygous mutations in NPHS2 might exhibit primary steroid resistance and a 
decreased risk of FSGS recurrence after kidney transplantation. To test this 
hypothesis, NPHS2 mutational analysis was performed with direct sequencing for 
190 patients with SRNS from 165 different families and, as a control sample, 124 
patients with steroid-sensitive NS from 120 families. Homozygous or compound 
heterozygous mutations in NPHS2 were detected for 43 of 165 SRNS families (26%). 
Conversely, no homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in NPHS2 were 
observed for the 120 steroid-sensitive NS families. Recurrence of FSGS in a 
renal transplant was noted for seven of 20 patients with SRNS (35%) without 
NPHS2 mutations, whereas it occurred for only two of 24 patients with SRNS (8%) 
with homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in NPHS2. None of 29 patients 
with homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in NPHS2 who were treated 
with cyclosporine A or cyclophosphamide demonstrated complete remission of NS. 
It was concluded that patients with SRNS with homozygous or compound 
heterozygous mutations in NPHS2 do not respond to standard steroid treatment and 
have a reduced risk for recurrence of FSGS in a renal transplant. Because these 
findings might affect the treatment plan for childhood SRNS, it might be 
advisable to perform mutational analysis of NPHS2, if the patient consents, in 
parallel with the start of the first course of standard steroid therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/01.asn.0000113552.59155.72
PMID: 14978175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]