---
reference_id: "PMID:38049626"
title: First in man study of intravitreal tripeptidyl peptidase 1 for CLN2 retinopathy.
authors:
- Wawrzynski J
- Martinez AR
- Thompson DA
- Ram D
- Bowman R
- Whiteley R
- Gan C
- Harding L
- Mortensen A
- Mills P
- Gissen P
- Henderson RH
journal: Eye (Lond)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41433-023-02859-4
keywords:
- Animals
- Child
- Humans
- Aminopeptidases/therapeutic use
- Dipeptidyl-Peptidases and Tripeptidyl-Peptidases/therapeutic use
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Intravitreal Injections
- Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/drug therapy
- Retinal Dystrophies/drug therapy
- Serine Proteases/therapeutic use
- "Tripeptidyl-Peptidase 1/genetics, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First in man study of intravitreal tripeptidyl peptidase 1 for CLN2 retinopathy.
**Authors:** Wawrzynski J, Martinez AR, Thompson DA, Ram D, Bowman R, Whiteley R, Gan C, Harding L, Mortensen A, Mills P, Gissen P, Henderson RH
**Journal:** Eye (Lond) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41433-023-02859-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433-023-02859-4)

## Content

1. Eye (Lond). 2024 Apr;38(6):1176-1182. doi: 10.1038/s41433-023-02859-4. Epub
2023  Dec 4.

First in man study of intravitreal tripeptidyl peptidase 1 for CLN2 retinopathy.

Wawrzynski J(1)(2), Martinez AR(2), Thompson DA(2), Ram D(3), Bowman R(2),
Whiteley R(2), Gan C(2), Harding L(2), Mortensen A(4), Mills P(1)(2), Gissen
P(1)(2), Henderson RH(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(2)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(4)Batten Disease Family Association, Shipley, UK.
(5)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
Robert.Henderson@gosh.nhs.uk.
(6)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK.
Robert.Henderson@gosh.nhs.uk.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: CLN2 Batten Disease is a fatal neurodegenerative
condition of childhood associated with retinal dystrophy and blindness.
Intracerebroventricular infusion of rhTPP1 greatly slows the rate of
neurodegenerative decline but not retinopathy. Intravitreal rhTPP1 is known to
slow retinal degeneration in a canine model of CLN2. We report a first-in-man
controlled clinical trial of intravitreal rhTPP1 for CLN2 associated retinal
dystrophy.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: 8 children aged 5-9 with CLN2 Batten Disease were
prospectively enroled. Severely affected patients were preferentially selected,
provided that vision was better than no perception of light. Children underwent
8 weekly intravitreal injections of rhTPP1 (0.2 mg in 0.05 ml) into the right
eye for 12-18 months. The left eye was untreated and acts as a paired control.
The primary outcome was safety based on the clinical detection of complications.
A secondary outcome was paracentral macular volume (PMV) measured by spectral
domain OCT. Linear regression/paired t tests were used to compare rates of
decline.
RESULTS: No severe adverse reactions (uveitis, raised IOP, media opacity)
occurred. The mean baseline PMV was 1.28 mm3(right), 1.27 mm3(left). 3 of the
youngest patients exhibited bilateral progressive retinal thinning (p < 0.05),
whereas retinal volume was stable in the remaining 5 patients. In the 3 patients
undergoing retinal degeneration, the rate of PMV loss was slower in the treated
vs. untreated eye (p = 0.000042, p = 0.0011, p = 0.00022).
CONCLUSIONS: Intravitreal rhTPP1 appears to be a safe and effective treatment
for CLN2 related retinopathy however commencement of treatment early in the
course of disease is more likely to be efficacious.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41433-023-02859-4
PMCID: PMC11009280
PMID: 38049626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
