---
reference_id: "PMID:21298458"
title: Human antimicrobial proteins in ear wax.
authors:
- Schwaab M
- Gurr A
- Neumann A
- Dazert S
- Minovi A
journal: Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s10096-011-1185-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human antimicrobial proteins in ear wax.
**Authors:** Schwaab M, Gurr A, Neumann A, Dazert S, Minovi A
**Journal:** Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10096-011-1185-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10096-011-1185-2)

## Content

1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2011 Aug;30(8):997-1004. doi: 
10.1007/s10096-011-1185-2. Epub 2011 Feb 6.

Human antimicrobial proteins in ear wax.

Schwaab M(1), Gurr A, Neumann A, Dazert S, Minovi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolarnygology, Head and Neck surgery, St. Marienhospital 
Vechta, Marienstr. 6-8, 49377, Vechta, Germany. matthiasschwaab@gmx.de

The external auditory canal is vulnerable to bacterial infections, but little is 
known about thechemical compositions of ear wax regarding antimicrobial 
peptides. We, therefore, studied the proteinconcentrations of ten well-known 
human antimicrobial peptides from ear wax.Twenty ear wax samples from healthy 
individuals were analysed using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to 
determine theprotein concentrations of the antimicrobial peptides hBD1-3, 
lactoferrin, LL-37, BPI, hSLPI and HNP1-3. All ten antimicrobial peptides are 
present in ear wax. Some of these proteins seem to be merelycell-bound in ear 
wax. Antimicrobial peptides in ear wax prevent bacteria and fungi from causing 
infections inthe external auditory canal. The role and importance of these 
proteins for the blind-ending ear externalcanal is discussed. If this local 
defence system fails, infections of the external auditory canal may result.The 
knowledge about the presence of antimicrobial peptides in cerumen may lead to 
new concepts ofthe local treatment of external auditory canal diseases in the 
future.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-011-1185-2
PMID: 21298458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]