---
reference_id: "PMID:28864536"
title: Changes in the clinicopathological characteristics and genetic alterations of follicular thyroid cancer.
authors:
- Song YS
- Lim JA
- Min HS
- Kim MJ
- Choi HS
- Cho SW
- Moon JH
- Yi KH
- Park DJ
- Cho BY
- Park YJ
journal: Eur J Endocrinol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1530/EJE-17-0456
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma, Follicular/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Age Factors
- Codon
- Female
- "GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- Health Transition
- Humans
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Mutation Rate
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics, metabolism"
- Retrospective Studies
- Seoul
- "Telomerase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Thyroid Gland/metabolism, pathology"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Tumor Burden
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Changes in the clinicopathological characteristics and genetic alterations of follicular thyroid cancer.
**Authors:** Song YS, Lim JA, Min HS, Kim MJ, Choi HS, Cho SW, Moon JH, Yi KH, Park DJ, Cho BY, Park YJ
**Journal:** Eur J Endocrinol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EJE-17-0456](https://doi.org/10.1530/EJE-17-0456)

## Content

1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2017 Dec;177(6):465-473. doi: 10.1530/EJE-17-0456. Epub 2017
 Sep 1.

Changes in the clinicopathological characteristics and genetic alterations of 
follicular thyroid cancer.

Song YS(1), Lim JA(2), Min HS(3), Kim MJ(1), Choi HS(4), Cho SW(1), Moon JH(5), 
Yi KH(6), Park DJ(1)(7), Cho BY(8), Park YJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Kangwon National University Hospital, 
Chuncheon, Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Boramae Medical 
Center, Seoul, Korea.
(7)Korea National Institute of Health, Cheongju, Korea.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Changes in the clinicopathological characteristics and genetic 
alterations of follicular thyroid cancer (FTC) over time have not been reported. 
Moreover, the prognostic effects of RAS and TERT promoter mutations in FTC have 
not been clearly elucidated. We investigated changes in the clinicopathological 
characteristics of patients with FTC over four decades, as well as the clinical 
significance of genetic mutations of FTC.
DESIGN AND METHODS: This retrospective study included 690 patients with FTC who 
underwent thyroidectomy between 1973 and 2015 at the Seoul National University 
Hospital. In 134 samples, genetic tests for N/H/KRAS and TERT promoter mutations 
and PAX8/PPARγ rearrangement were performed.
RESULTS: The age at diagnosis has increased (P < 0.001) in recent decades and 
extrathyroidal extension of the tumor has become less common (P = 0.033). Other 
clinicopathological characteristics and prognosis of FTC have not significantly 
changed. The prevalence of RAS mutations decreased (P = 0.042) over time, 
whereas that of TERT promoter mutations remained stable. RAS mutations were 
associated with distant metastasis and persistent disease, and TERT promoter 
mutations were associated with distant metastasis, advanced TNM stage, 
recurrence and disease-specific mortality. FTC patients with coexistent RAS and 
TERT promoter mutations showed a higher recurrence risk than those with only one 
mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: The age at diagnosis of FTC and the frequency of extrathyroidal 
extension have changed over four decades. Moreover, the prevalence of RAS 
mutations decreased. RAS and TERT promoter mutations may be associated with poor 
clinical outcomes in FTC, especially when the two mutations coexist.

© 2017 European Society of Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1530/EJE-17-0456
PMID: 28864536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]