---
reference_id: "PMID:12420916"
title: Alagille syndrome.
authors:
- Hadchouel M
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1007/BF02723697
keywords:
- "Alagille Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- India/epidemiology
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Risk Factors
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alagille syndrome.
**Authors:** Hadchouel M
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02723697](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02723697)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 2002 Sep;69(9):815-8. doi: 10.1007/BF02723697.

Alagille syndrome.

Hadchouel M(1).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U347 and Départment de Pédiatrie, Hĵpital de Bicêtre, Le 
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. hadchoue@kb.inserm.fr

Alagille syndrome (AGS) was described more than 35 years ago as a genetic entity 
characterised by five major features: chronic cholestasis owing to paucity of 
interlobular bile ducts; peripheral pulmonary stenosis; butterfly like vertebral 
arch defect; posterior embryotoxon and peculiar facies. AGS has long been said 
to have a relative good prognosis but overall survival at twenty years averages 
70%. Complex congenital heart disease and hepatic disease with or without liver 
transplantation contribute significantly to mortality. JAGGED1 has been 
identified as a responsible gene by demonstration of mutations in AGS patients. 
Studies of JAGGED1 expression pattern demonstrate that minor features and almost 
all the elements in the long list of manifestations described in AGS patients 
are not coincidental. This suggests that Alagille syndrome definition may be 
revisited in the light of JAGGED1 mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02723697
PMID: 12420916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]