---
reference_id: PMID:30454752
title: Nephrotic Syndrome.
authors:
- Wang CS
- Greenbaum LA
journal: Pediatr Clin North Am
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.pcl.2018.08.006
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nephrotic Syndrome.
**Authors:** Wang CS, Greenbaum LA
**Journal:** Pediatr Clin North Am (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pcl.2018.08.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcl.2018.08.006)

## Content

1. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2019 Feb;66(1):73-85. doi: 10.1016/j.pcl.2018.08.006.

Nephrotic Syndrome.

Wang CS(1), Greenbaum LA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University 
School of Medicine and Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, 2015 Uppergate Drive 
Northeast, Atlanta, GA 30322-1015, USA. Electronic address: 
chia-shi.wang@emory.edu.
(2)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University 
School of Medicine and Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, 2015 Uppergate Drive 
Northeast, Atlanta, GA 30322-1015, USA.

Nephrotic syndrome is characterized by edema, proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, and 
hyperlipidemia. Minimal change disease, the most common cause in childhood, 
generally responds to corticosteroids, although most patients experience disease 
relapses. Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis is usually resistant to 
corticosteroids and carries a significant risk of kidney failure, necessitating 
renal transplantation. Nephrotic syndrome may also be secondary to gene 
mutations and systemic diseases such as lupus. Clinical evaluation involves 
distinguishing primary and secondary causes and monitoring for disease 
complications, including blood clots and serious infections such as spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis. Immunosuppressive medications are used to prevent 
relapses and treat corticosteroid-resistant disease.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcl.2018.08.006
PMID: 30454752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]