---
reference_id: "PMID:22140091"
title: Muscle weakness in myotonic dystrophy associated with misregulated splicing and altered gating of Ca(V)1.1 calcium channel.
authors:
- Tang ZZ
- Yarotskyy V
- Wei L
- Sobczak K
- Nakamori M
- Eichinger K
- Moxley RT
- Dirksen RT
- Thornton CA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr568
keywords:
- Alternative Splicing
- Animals
- CELF1 Protein
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/physiology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Exons/genetics
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- Ion Channel Gating/physiology
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Morpholinos/pharmacology
- "Muscle Weakness/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/cytology, metabolism"
- "Myoblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- Myotonic Disorders/physiopathology
- Myotonic Dystrophy/physiopathology
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- "RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Muscle weakness in myotonic dystrophy associated with misregulated splicing and altered gating of Ca(V)1.1 calcium channel.
**Authors:** Tang ZZ, Yarotskyy V, Wei L, Sobczak K, Nakamori M, Eichinger K, Moxley RT, Dirksen RT, Thornton CA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddr568](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddr568)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Mar 15;21(6):1312-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr568. Epub 2011
Dec  2.

Muscle weakness in myotonic dystrophy associated with misregulated splicing and
altered gating of Ca(V)1.1 calcium channel.

Tang ZZ(1), Yarotskyy V, Wei L, Sobczak K, Nakamori M, Eichinger K, Moxley RT,
Dirksen RT, Thornton CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester,
NY 14642, USA.

Myotonic dystrophy type 1 and type 2 (DM1 and DM2) are genetic diseases in which
mutant transcripts containing expanded CUG or CCUG repeats cause cellular
dysfunction by altering the processing or metabolism of specific mRNAs and
miRNAs. The toxic effects of mutant RNA are mediated partly through effects on
proteins that regulate alternative splicing. Here we show that alternative
splicing of exon 29 (E29) of Ca(V)1.1, a calcium channel that controls skeletal
muscle excitation-contraction coupling, is markedly repressed in DM1 and DM2.
The extent of E29 skipping correlated with severity of weakness in tibialis
anterior muscle of DM1 patients. Two splicing factors previously implicated in
DM1, MBNL1 and CUGBP1, participated in the regulation of E29 splicing. In muscle
fibers of wild-type mice, the Ca(V)1.1 channel conductance and voltage
sensitivity were increased by splice-shifting oligonucleotides that induce E29
skipping. In contrast to human DM1, expression of CUG-expanded RNA caused only a
modest increase in E29 skipping in mice. However, forced skipping of E29 in
these mice, to levels approaching those observed in human DM1, aggravated the
muscle pathology as evidenced by increased central nucleation. Together, these
results indicate that DM-associated splicing defects alter Ca(V)1.1 function,
with potential for exacerbation of myopathy.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddr568
PMCID: PMC3284119
PMID: 22140091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
