---
reference_id: "PMID:26542886"
title: Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A Regulates the Secretion of Different Angiogenic Factors in Lung Cancer Cells.
authors:
- Frezzetti D
- Gallo M
- Roma C
- "D'Alessio A"
- Maiello MR
- Bevilacqua S
- Normanno N
- De Luca A
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/jcp.25243
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A Regulates the Secretion of Different Angiogenic Factors in Lung Cancer Cells.
**Authors:** Frezzetti D, Gallo M, Roma C, D'Alessio A, Maiello MR, Bevilacqua S, Normanno N, De Luca A
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.25243](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.25243)

## Content

1. J Cell Physiol. 2016 Jul;231(7):1514-21. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25243. Epub 2015 Nov
 24.

Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A Regulates the Secretion of Different 
Angiogenic Factors in Lung Cancer Cells.

Frezzetti D(1), Gallo M(1), Roma C(2), D'Alessio A(1), Maiello MR(1), Bevilacqua 
S(1), Normanno N(1), De Luca A(1).

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology and Biotherapy Unit, Istituto Nazionale Tumori "Fondazione G. 
Pascale"-IRCCS, Naples, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Pharmacogenomics, Centro di Ricerche Oncologiche di Mercogliano 
(CROM)-Istituto Nazionale Tumori "Fondazione G. Pascale"-IRCCS, Naples, Italy.

Vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) is one of the main mediators of 
angiogenesis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Recently, it has been 
described an autocrine feed-forward loop in NSCLC cells in which tumor-derived 
VEGFA promoted the secretion of VEGFA itself, amplifying the proangiogenic 
signal. In order to investigate the role of VEGFA in lung cancer progression, we 
assessed the effects of recombinant VEGFA on proliferation, migration, and 
secretion of other angiogenic factors in A549, H1975, and HCC827 NSCLC cell 
lines. We found that VEGFA did not affect NSCLC cell proliferation and 
migration. On the other hand, we demonstrated that VEGFA not only produced a 
strong and persistent increase of VEGFA itself but also significantly induced 
the secretion of a variety of angiogenic factors, including follistatin (FST), 
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), angiopoietin-2 (ANGPT2), granulocyte-colony 
stimulating factor (G-CSF), interleukin (IL)-8, leptin (LEP), 
platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1 (PECAM-1), and platelet-derived 
growth factor bb (PDGF-BB). PI3K/AKT, RAS/ERK, and STAT3 signalling pathways 
were found to mediate the effects of VEGFA in NSCLC cell lines. We also observed 
that VEGFA regulation mainly occurred at post-transcriptional level and that 
NSCLC cells expressed different isoforms of VEGFA. Collectively, our data 
suggested that VEGFA contributes to lung cancer progression by inducing a 
network of angiogenic factors, which might offer potential for therapeutic 
intervention.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.25243
PMID: 26542886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]