---
reference_id: "PMID:36107466"
title: "Effect of the phosphate binder sucroferric oxyhydroxide in dialysis patients on endogenous calciprotein particles, inflammation, and vascular cells."
authors:
- Thiem U
- Hewitson TD
- Toussaint ND
- Holt SG
- Haller MC
- Pasch A
- Cejka D
- Smith ER
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfac271
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Renal Dialysis/adverse effects
- Interleukin-6
- Cross-Over Studies
- Interleukin-8
- "Inflammation/drug therapy, etiology"
- Cytokines/metabolism
- "Vascular Calcification/etiology, prevention & control"
- Phosphates
- Drug Combinations
- Ferric Compounds
- Sucrose
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of the phosphate binder sucroferric oxyhydroxide in dialysis patients on endogenous calciprotein particles, inflammation, and vascular cells.
**Authors:** Thiem U, Hewitson TD, Toussaint ND, Holt SG, Haller MC, Pasch A, Cejka D, Smith ER
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfac271](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfac271)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2023 May 4;38(5):1282-1296. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfac271.

Effect of the phosphate binder sucroferric oxyhydroxide in dialysis patients on 
endogenous calciprotein particles, inflammation, and vascular cells.

Thiem U(1)(2), Hewitson TD(3)(4), Toussaint ND(3)(4), Holt SG(4), Haller 
MC(1)(5), Pasch A(6)(7)(8), Cejka D(1), Smith ER(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine III - Nephrology, Hypertension, Transplantation 
Medicine, Rheumatology, Geriatrics, Ordensklinikum Linz - Elisabethinen 
Hospital, Linz, Austria.
(2)Johannes Kepler University Linz, Medical Faculty, Linz, Austria.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(5)CeMSIIS - Center for Medical Statistics, Informatics, and Intelligent 
Systems, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Calciscon AG, Nidau, Switzerland.
(7)Lindenhofspital Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Johannes Kepler University 
Linz, Linz, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Calciprotein particles (CPPs), colloidal mineral-protein 
nanoparticles, have emerged as potential mediators of phosphate toxicity in 
dialysis patients, with putative links to vascular calcification, endothelial 
dysfunction and inflammation. We hypothesized that phosphate binder therapy with 
sucroferric oxyhydroxide (SO) would reduce endogenous CPP levels and attenuate 
pro-calcific and pro-inflammatory effects of patient serum towards human 
vascular cells in vitro.
METHODS: This secondary analysis of a randomised controlled crossover study 
compared the effect of 2-week phosphate binder washout with high-dose 
(2000 mg/day) and low-dose (250 mg/day) SO therapy in 28 haemodialysis patients 
on serum CPP levels, inflammatory cytokine/chemokine arrays and human aortic 
smooth muscle cell (HASMC) and coronary artery endothelial cell (HCAEC) 
bioassays.
RESULTS: In our cohort (75% male, 62 ± 12 years) high-dose SO reduced primary 
(amorphous) and secondary (crystalline) CPP levels {-62% [95% confidence 
interval (CI) -76 to -44], P < .0001 and -38% [-62 to -0.14], P < .001, 
respectively} compared with washout. Nine of 14 plasma cytokines/chemokines 
significantly decreased with high-dose SO, with consistent reductions in 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and IL-8. Exposure of HASMC and HCAEC cultures to serum of 
SO-treated patients reduced calcification and markers of activation (IL-6, IL-8 
and vascular cell adhesion protein 1) compared with washout. Serum-induced HASMC 
calcification and HCAEC activation was ameliorated by removal of the 
CPP-containing fraction from patient sera. Effects of CPP removal were confirmed 
in an independent cohort of chronic kidney disease patients.
CONCLUSIONS: High-dose SO reduced endogenous CPP formation in dialysis patients 
and yielded serum with attenuated pro-calcific and inflammatory effects in 
vitro.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfac271
PMCID: PMC10157755
PMID: 36107466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D.C. has received research funding from Vifor 
Pharma and speaker's honoraria, travel support and research funding from Amgen, 
Astellas, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Chiesi, Medice, Novartis, Sandoz, Takeda, UCB and 
Vifor Pharma and holds advisory board positions at Alnylam, Amgen, Astellas, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Gedeon Richter, Stada, Takeda, UCB 
and Vifor Pharma. S.G.H. has received research funding and travel support from 
Amgen and AstraZeneca. A.P. is an inventor of the T50 test and holds a patent on 
it. He is president of the board of directors, a part-time employee and 
stockholder of Calciscon AG, Nidau, Switzerland, which commercialises the T50 
test. E.R.S has received research funding from the Royal Melbourne Hospital 
Project Grant, Amgen and Sanofi and holds stock in Calciscon AG. U.T. reports a 
research grant from the Medical Society of Upper Austria and received travel 
support from AstraZeneca, Baxter, Sandoz and Vifor Pharma. N.D.T. has received 
speaker's honoraria from Amgen, Shire and Takeda and travel support from Amgen, 
Shire, Takeda and Sanofi. M.C.H. and T.D.H. declare no relevant conflicts of 
interest. The results presented in this article have not been published 
previously in whole or part, except in abstract format.