---
reference_id: "PMID:26250685"
title: TDP-43 repression of nonconserved cryptic exons is compromised in ALS-FTD.
authors:
- Ling JP
- Pletnikova O
- Troncoso JC
- Wong PC
journal: Science
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1126/science.aab0983
keywords:
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/genetics
- Animals
- Autophagy-Related Proteins
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cysteine Endopeptidases/genetics
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Embryonic Stem Cells
- Exons/genetics
- Frontotemporal Dementia/genetics
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
- RNA Splicing
- RNA Stability
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# TDP-43 repression of nonconserved cryptic exons is compromised in ALS-FTD.
**Authors:** Ling JP, Pletnikova O, Troncoso JC, Wong PC
**Journal:** Science (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aab0983](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aab0983)

## Content

1. Science. 2015 Aug 7;349(6248):650-5. doi: 10.1126/science.aab0983.

TDP-43 repression of nonconserved cryptic exons is compromised in ALS-FTD.

Ling JP(1), Pletnikova O(1), Troncoso JC(2), Wong PC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205-2196, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205-2196, USA. Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205-2196, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205-2196, USA. Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205-2196, USA. wong@jhmi.edu.

Cytoplasmic aggregation of TDP-43, accompanied by its nuclear clearance, is a
key common pathological hallmark of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and
frontotemporal dementia (ALS-FTD). However, a limited understanding of this
RNA-binding protein (RBP) impedes the clarification of pathogenic mechanisms
underlying TDP-43 proteinopathy. In contrast to RBPs that regulate splicing of
conserved exons, we found that TDP-43 repressed the splicing of nonconserved
cryptic exons, maintaining intron integrity. When TDP-43 was depleted from mouse
embryonic stem cells, these cryptic exons were spliced into messenger RNAs,
often disrupting their translation and promoting nonsense-mediated decay.
Moreover, enforced repression of cryptic exons prevented cell death in
TDP-43-deficient cells. Furthermore, repression of cryptic exons was impaired in
ALS-FTD cases, suggesting that this splicing defect could potentially underlie
TDP-43 proteinopathy.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aab0983
PMCID: PMC4825810
PMID: 26250685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal adult-onset motor neuron disease characterized by progressive loss of upper and lower motor neurons, and frontotemporal dementia (FTD), a common form of dementia characterized by a gradual deterioration in behavior, personality, and/or language, share a common disease spectrum (1, 2). Transactivation response element DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43, TARDBP), is a heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) thought to provide the neuropathological link to establish such a disease spectrum (1, 3). In sporadic ALS (~97% of all cases) and sporadic FTD (~45% of all cases), TDP-43 clears from the nucleus and forms ubiquitinated, cytoplasmic inclusions, termed TDP-43 proteinopathy (2). Missense mutations in TDP-43 are also linked to familial ALS, strongly supporting the idea that TDP-43 proteinopathy is central to the pathogenesis of sporadic disease (4, 5). Numerous genetic mutations associated with familial ALS-FTD—VCP, GRN, OPTN, ATXN2, SQSTM1, UBQLN2, PFN1, TBK1, and especially C9ORF72—result in TDP-43 proteinopathy, suggesting a convergent mechanism of neurodegeneration (6–9). Indeed, Tdp-43 is a tightly autoregulated (10), essential gene (11–13) that is required for neuronal physiology in mice (14), fruit flies (15), and zebrafish (16).

TDP-43's consensus binding motif has been identified as the “UG” dinucleotide repeat (17). Using a high-throughput sequencing approach combined with cross-linking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP), direct targets of Tdp-43 have been identified (18, 19). Tdp-43 regulates alternative splicing of a subset of conserved exons by binding to UG-rich domains within proximal intronic regions (18, 19). However, the majority of Tdp-43 binds to repetitive elements within distal introns, locations where Tdp-43 has no clear function. To explore the RNA splicing role of Tdp-43, we assessed the transcriptome of cells lacking Tdp-43 with RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) (12). These CreER-inducible Tdp-43 knockout mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells (iTDPKO) permit genetic deletion of Tdp-43 within 2 to 3 days of 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4HT) treatment. However, previous sequencing technologies were unable to provide robust transcriptome-wide splicing data. RNA-seq analyses performed on data with greater read length and coverage improved the splicing resolution and allowed us to identify cryptic exons in mES cells lacking Tdp-43 (Fig. 1).

These splicing variants have not been previously documented in any public databases and strictly appear in nonconserved regions of the genome. Traces of cryptic exons, however, can be detected from previously published RNA-seq data (fig. S1). Most cryptic exons introduce frameshifts and/or premature stop codons, characteristic of nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) (table S1). Additionally, we identified a subset of nonstandard cryptic exons that could be categorized as alternative transcriptional start sites, premature polyadenylation sites, or expansions of conserved canonical exons (Fig. 1, C to E).

To determine whether these cryptic exons were direct targets of Tdp-43 binding or missplicing events caused by indirect downstream effects, we looked for evidence of protein-RNA association. Tdp-43 has a very high affinity for UG repeats, with a dissociation constant (Kd) of 14 nM for only six repeats (20). As predicted, long UG dinucleotide repeats are adjacent to each cryptic exon (Fig. 1F). Tdp-43 localized to these flanking repeats could potentially act as a general splicing repressor. Further evidence of Tdp-43's role in repressing cryptic exons comes from previous HITS-CLIP data that mapped Tdp-43's direct RNA targets (19). As expected, clusters of HITS-CLIP reads were mapped onto cryptic exons, further supporting the hypothesis that Tdp-43 represses cryptic exons via direct interaction (fig. S2).

We next wanted to establish whether these cryptic exons were a main contributor to the cell death observed after genetic deletion of Tdp-43 (12). To this end, we designed a fusion protein by coupling TDP-43's N-terminal fragment (N-TDP) to a well-characterized splicing repressor domain, replacing TDP-43's C-terminal fragment (C-TDP) (Fig. 2A). N-TDP contains a dimerization domain, nuclear localization signal, and two UG binding RNA recognition motifs but is insufficient to act as a splicing repressor (21–23). In contrast, C-TDP is a glycine rich, prion-like domain that harbors the vast majority of mutations associated with ALS and mediates the protein-protein interac tions important for splicing (24). We replaced the C-TDP in our fusion protein with the minimal splicing repressor domain derived from ribonucleoprotein, PTB-binding 1 (RAVER1) (25, 26). This chimeric protein, termed GTR, translocated to the nucleus, bound to UG repeats, and repressed nearby exons (Fig. 2).

The GTR construct and associated controls were then transiently transfected into 4HT-treated iTDPKO cells and screened for survivors by means of flow cytometry (fig. S3). After exposure to 4HT, the majority of Tdp-43–depleted iTDPKO cells underwent apoptosis. Whereas 4HT-treated iTDPKO cells transfected with control constructs also failed to survive, a portion of those transfected with the GTR construct remained viable.

To rule out the possibility that this rescue was only a transient effect of the GTR expression, we generated a stable transfected line of Tdp-43–deficient cells expressing GTR, termed GTR1 (Fig. 2B). The growth rate of GTR1 cells was almost identical to iTDPKO cells (fig. S4), and the majority of up-regulated and down-regulated transcripts in Tdp-43 knockout cells were also restored to normal values in GTR1 cells (Fig. 2G), including several transcripts markedly down-regulated because of nonsense-mediated decay (table S1). To verify that the rescue effect was correlated with repression of cryptic exons, we RNA-sequenced the GTR1 cells. Indeed, the majority of cryptic exons were highly repressed (Fig. 2, C to E, and table S2), with the remaining cryptic exons experiencing varying degrees of partial repression (Fig. 2F). Thus, a deficiency in cryptic exon repression could contribute to cell death.

Because mouse cryptic exons are embedded within nonconserved sequences of the mouse genome, we predicted that human cryptic exons would be located in different regions of the human genome. HeLa cells treated with TDP-43 small interfering RNA (siRNA) (Fig. 3A) expressed numerous cryptic exons (Fig. 3, B to F, and table S3). These human-specific cryptic exons were flanked by UG tandem repeats (Fig. 3G) and were direct targets of TDP-43 (fig. S5). The human cryptic exons shared no overlap with mouse cryptic exons and instead influenced an entirely different set of genes (table S4).

To further validate this model of cryptic exon repression, we engineered a mini-gene reporter construct encompassing a cryptic exon locus identified in ATG4B and transfected human HeLa cells lacking TDP-43 (Fig. 4). Under normal conditions, only isoform A was expressed (Fig. 4C, lanes 1, 4, and 7). After TDP-43 was depleted from the cell, cryptic isoforms B and C were no longer repressed (Fig. 4C, lanes 2, 5, and 8). Isoform C was not initially detected through RNA-seq owing to masking by an overlapping cryptic cassette exon; sequencing confirmed its identity as an exon extension (fig. S6). Isoforms B and C were repressed by GTR (Fig. 4C, lanes 3, 6, and 9), supporting the notion that TDP-43 may function as a general repressor whose specificity is determined by its affinity for UG repeats rather than its C-terminal domain.

Having identified a set of cryptic exons that TDP-43 regulates in humans, we then screened postmortem brain tissues from an ALS-FTD cohort (table S5) for the presence of cryptic exons. A reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) protocol was designed to amplify across the cryptic exon splice junctions of GPSM2 and ATG4B (Fig. 4D). Corresponding PCR products were readily observed in all ALS-FTD cases tested but not in controls (Fig. 4E) and validated by means of DNA sequencing (fig. S7). Thus, TDP-43 proteinopathy may be correlated with TDP-43 loss of function.

We have found that TDP-43 functions as a splicing repressor of nonconserved cryptic exons (fig. S8). A defect in this regulatory mechanism could be linked to TDP-43 proteinopathy in ALSFTD. Acting as an inhibitory hnRNP, TDP-43 may also regulate conserved exons (18, 19, 27). Analysis of mouse embryonic stem cell RNA-seq data suggests that some alternatively spliced conserved exons contain UG repeats and may be direct targets of TDP-43 (fig. S9). Further work will be required to determine TDP-43's role regarding splicing of conserved exons.

Although the subset of cryptic exons in mice (table S1) is entirely different from that of humans (table S3), TDP-43's cryptic exon repression function has been maintained across evolution. The protein sequence of TDP-43 is conserved and interchangeable across humans, mice, flies, and nematodes (17, 22), suggesting that TDP-43 cryptic exon repression could extend beyond mammals as well. From the perspective of human disease, however, we believe that studying genes specifically affected by cryptic exons in the human context could help clarify the development of TDP-43 proteinopathy. Two genes in particular—ATG4B and RANBP1—function in autophagy and nuclear import, respectively. We envision a feed-forward loop in which loss of TDP-43 function could undermine the cell's ability to restore TDP-43 to the nucleus, leading to further loss of function (fig. S10).

The discovery of TDP-43's role in repressing cryptic exons will advance our understanding of human diseases with TDP-43 proteinopathy and form the basis for previously unidentified bio-markers and therapeutic strategies.
