---
reference_id: "PMID:10522815"
title: Environmental factors in the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes mellitus.
authors:
- Knip M
- Akerblom HK
journal: Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1212160
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental factors in the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Knip M, Akerblom HK
**Journal:** Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0029-1212160](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0029-1212160)

## Content

1. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 1999;107 Suppl 3:S93-100. doi: 
10.1055/s-0029-1212160.

Environmental factors in the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes mellitus.

Knip M(1), Akerblom HK.

Author information:
(1)Medical School, University of Tampere, and Department of Pediatrics, Tampere 
University Hospital, Finland. llmikn@uta.fi

Type 1 diabetes mellitus is perceived as a chronic autoimmune disease with a 
subclinical prodrome characterized by selective loss of insulin producing beta 
cells in the pancreatic islets in genetically predisposed subjects. Less than 
10% of those with increased genetic susceptibility progress to clinical disease 
suggesting a strong environmental modification of the prediabetic process. 
Various exogenous triggers, such as certain dietary factors and viruses, are 
thought to induce the autoimmune process leading in some individuals to 
extensive beta-cell destruction and ultimately to the clinical manifestation of 
type 1 diabetes. In addition to their role as triggers, environmental factors 
are also likely affecting the outcome of the process and the rate of progression 
to clinical disease in those who do develop Type 1 diabetes. The present review 
focuses on relatively recent data on environmental factors potentially involved 
in the pathogenesis of Type 1 diabetes with an emphasis on dietary factors, and 
cow's milk (CM) proteins in particular. The CM hypothesis has remained 
controversial for a decade, and therefore an intervention trial should be 
performed to settle the issue. Recent prospective studies have indicated that 
enterovirus infections may induce beta-cell autoimmunity and potentiate the 
humoral immune response to beta-cell antigens in subjects with an ongoing 
process. There are also very preliminary data suggesting a similar role for 
rotavirus infections. Although there may be a single trigger of beta-cell 
autoimmunity in a given individual, it is highly unlikely that there is only one 
exogenous determinant of Type 1 diabetes. Rather we have a complicated 
interaction between a series of environmental factors and between environmental 
factors and genetic disease predisposition resulting in progression to clinical 
Type 1 diabetes in those genetically susceptible individuals who experience an 
unfortunate timing and/or clustering of diabetogenic exogenous culprits and/or a 
lack of protective environmental modifiers. Ongoing prospective studies starting 
from birth provide an optimal setting for the identification of environmental 
factors affecting the risk of progression to clinical Type 1 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0029-1212160
PMID: 10522815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]