---
reference_id: "PMID:35226656"
title: Delayed Diagnosis of Clostridium difficile Colitis in a 48-Year-Old Woman with a Homozygous Mutation of the UGT1A1 Gene While on Chemotherapy for Colorectal Carcinoma.
authors:
- Caramoci A
- Grigorescu A
- Pop M
- Ionescu AM
journal: Am J Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.12659/AJCR.934361
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delayed Diagnosis of Clostridium difficile Colitis in a 48-Year-Old Woman with a Homozygous Mutation of the UGT1A1 Gene While on Chemotherapy for Colorectal Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Caramoci A, Grigorescu A, Pop M, Ionescu AM
**Journal:** Am J Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.12659/AJCR.934361](https://doi.org/10.12659/AJCR.934361)

## Content

1. Am J Case Rep. 2022 Feb 28;23:e934361. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.934361.

Delayed Diagnosis of Clostridium difficile Colitis in a 48-Year-Old Woman with a 
Homozygous Mutation of the UGT1A1 Gene While on Chemotherapy for Colorectal 
Carcinoma.

Caramoci A(1), Grigorescu A(2), Pop M(3), Ionescu AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department 9, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, 
Romania.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Clinical Hospital Carol Davila, Bucharest, 
Romania.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation, Mirmed Clinical, Bucharest, Romania.

BACKGROUND There are many causes of chronic colitis and diarrhea, including the 
effects of chemotherapy. Mutations in the UGT1A1 gene can be associated with 
increased toxicity from irinotecan-based chemotherapy. This report is of a case 
of delayed diagnosis of Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) colitis in a 
48-year-old woman with a homozygous mutation of the UGT1A1 gene treated with 
chemotherapy for colorectal carcinoma. CASE REPORT A 48-year-old woman with a 
low-differentiated colonic adenocarcinoma was treated after surgery with 
irinotecan, 5 fluorouracil, and panitumumab and had a history of chronic and 
severe diarrhea. Genetic testing identified a mutation in the UGT1A1 gene 
associated with increased toxicity to irinotecan, and the EIA tests performed 
for evaluation of C. difficile toxins A and B showed repeatedly negative 
results. Replacement of irinotecan with oxaliplatin did not have significant 
therapeutic results, but these were achieved by the administration of active 
antibiotics against C. difficile (metronidazole, vancomycin, and fidaxomicin). 
CONCLUSIONS This report has shown that in complex cases where patients are 
treated with chemotherapy and have increased susceptibility to drug toxicity, 
chronic diarrhea may still have an infectious cause. Only when the diagnosis is 
correctly made can the patient be appropriately treated.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.934361
PMCID: PMC8895255
PMID: 35226656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared