---
reference_id: "PMID:30276971"
title: "First data from a parent-reported registry of 81 individuals with Coffin-Siris syndrome: Natural history and management recommendations."
authors:
- Mannino EA
- Miyawaki H
- Santen G
- Schrier Vergano SA
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.40471
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- "Face/abnormalities, pathology"
- Foot/pathology
- Genetic Association Studies
- Hand/pathology
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Micrognathism/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Neck/abnormalities, pathology"
- Parents
- Registries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First data from a parent-reported registry of 81 individuals with Coffin-Siris syndrome: Natural history and management recommendations.
**Authors:** Mannino EA, Miyawaki H, Santen G, Schrier Vergano SA
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.40471](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.40471)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Nov;176(11):2250-2258. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.40471. Epub 
2018 Oct 1.

First data from a parent-reported registry of 81 individuals with Coffin-Siris 
syndrome: Natural history and management recommendations.

Mannino EA(1), Miyawaki H(2), Santen G(3), Schrier Vergano SA(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Doctor of Medicine Program, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, 
Virginia.
(2)Master of Public Health Program, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Old 
Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Division of Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital of The 
King's Daughters, Norfolk, Virginia.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia.

Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS; MIM 135900) is a multisystem congenital anomaly 
syndrome caused by mutations in the genes in the Brg-1 associated factors (BAF) 
complex. Classically, individuals with CSS have been described with hypo- or 
aplasia of the fifth digit nails or phalanges (hence the term "fifth digit 
syndrome"). Other physical features seen include growth restriction, coarse 
facial features, hypertrichosis or hirsutism, sparse scalp hair, dental 
anomalies, and other organ-system abnormalities. Varying degrees of 
developmental and intellectual delay are universal. To date, approximately 200 
individuals have been described in the literature. With the advent of 
large-scale genetic testing such as whole-exome sequencing is becoming more 
available, more individuals are being found to have mutations in this pathway, 
and the phenotypic spectrum appears to be broadening. We report here a large 
cohort of 81 individuals with the diagnosis of CSS from the first 
parent-reported CSS/BAF complex registry in an effort to describe this variation 
among individuals, the natural history of the syndrome, and draw some 
gene-phenotype correlations. We propose that changes in the BAF complex may 
represent a spectrum of disorders, including both ARID1B-related nonsyndromic 
intellectual disability (ARID1B-ID) and CSS with classic physical features. In 
addition, we offer surveillance and management recommendations based on the 
medical issues encountered in this cohort to help guide physicians and patients' 
families.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.40471
PMID: 30276971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]