---
reference_id: "PMID:20739008"
title: "Gestational trophoblastic disease II: classification and management of gestational trophoblastic neoplasia."
authors:
- Lurain JR
journal: Am J Obstet Gynecol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2010.06.072
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Chorionic Gonadotropin/analysis
- Dactinomycin/therapeutic use
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Female
- "Gestational Trophoblastic Disease/blood, classification, diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- Hysterectomy/methods
- Leucovorin/therapeutic use
- Methotrexate/therapeutic use
- Neoplasm Staging/methods
- Pregnancy
- Remission Induction
- Treatment Failure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gestational trophoblastic disease II: classification and management of gestational trophoblastic neoplasia.
**Authors:** Lurain JR
**Journal:** Am J Obstet Gynecol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajog.2010.06.072](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2010.06.072)

## Content

1. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2011 Jan;204(1):11-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2010.06.072.
Epub  2010 Aug 24.

Gestational trophoblastic disease II: classification and management of 
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia.

Lurain JR(1).

Author information:
(1)John I. Brewer Trophoblastic Disease Center, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. jlurain@nmff.org

Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) includes invasive mole, 
choriocarcinoma, placental site trophoblastic tumor, and epithelioid 
trophoblastic tumor. The overall cure rate in treating these tumors is currently 
>90%. Thorough evaluation and staging allow selection of appropriate therapy 
that maximizes chances for cure while minimizing toxicity. Nonmetastatic (stage 
I) and low-risk metastatic (stages II and III, score <7) GTN can be treated with 
single-agent chemotherapy resulting in a survival rate approaching 100%. 
High-risk GTN (stages II-IV, score ≥7) requires initial multiagent chemotherapy 
with or without adjuvant radiation and surgery to achieve a survival rate of 
80-90%.

Copyright © 2011 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2010.06.072
PMID: 20739008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]