---
reference_id: "PMID:39576336"
title: "Omphalocele prevalence and co-occurring malformations: a nationwide register-based study of Danish live births in 1997-2021."
authors:
- Lausten-Thomsen U
- Hedley PL
- Conway KM
- Løfberg KM
- Johansen LS
- Romitti PA
- Christiansen M
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-024-05897-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hernia, Umbilical/epidemiology"
- Denmark/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Registries
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Retrospective Studies
- Female
- Male
- Live Birth/epidemiology
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/epidemiology"
- Pregnancy
- Congenital Abnormalities/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Omphalocele prevalence and co-occurring malformations: a nationwide register-based study of Danish live births in 1997-2021.
**Authors:** Lausten-Thomsen U, Hedley PL, Conway KM, Løfberg KM, Johansen LS, Romitti PA, Christiansen M
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-024-05897-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-024-05897-5)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2024 Nov 22;41(1):1. doi: 10.1007/s00383-024-05897-5.

Omphalocele prevalence and co-occurring malformations: a nationwide 
register-based study of Danish live births in 1997-2021.

Lausten-Thomsen U(1)(2), Hedley PL(3)(4), Conway KM(4), Løfberg KM(5), Johansen 
LS(5), Romitti PA(3)(4), Christiansen M(3)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, 
Blegdamsvej 9, 2100, Copenhagen, Denmark. ulrik.lausten-thomsen@regionh.dk.
(2)Department for Congenital Disorders, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, 
Denmark. ulrik.lausten-thomsen@regionh.dk.
(3)Department for Congenital Disorders, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, The University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Hospital Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.

PURPOSE: Omphalocele is a congenital abdominal wall defect associated with a 
high risk of morbidity and mortality, with co-occurring congenital malformations 
often being the most important prognostic factor. High rates of spontaneous and 
medical terminations have been reported among pregnancies with omphalocele and 
co-occurring malformations. Few studies have focused on co-occurring 
malformations, particularly non-gastrointestinal malformations among live 
births. This study examined birth prevalence of omphalocele and co-occurring 
major malformations among a 25-year Danish liveborn cohort.
METHODS: This nationwide retrospective prevalence study used data from the 
Danish National Patient Register and Danish Civil Registration System for 
infants who were delivered in Denmark during 1997-2021 and included in the 
Danish neonatal screening biobank. Diagnoses of omphalocele and co-occurring 
malformations were ascertained and prevalence estimated using Poisson 
regression.
RESULTS: Among 1,498,685 live births, 147 infants with omphalocele were 
identified, yielding a combined and stable prevalence (per 10,000 infants) of 
0.98 (95% CI 0.83-1.15). Over one-half (53.7%) presented with one or more major 
malformations, and an additional 17.0% were diagnosed with a syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: Omphalocele birth prevalence in Denmark was stable over a recent 
25-year period. The proportion of infants with co-occurring major malformations 
or diagnosed syndrome has important implications for long-term healthcare 
demands.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-024-05897-5
PMCID: PMC11584431
PMID: 39576336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper. Previous communication: This is the first submission of the manuscript to 
the journal. This manuscript or parts of it is not being considered for 
publication by another journal, nor has it been published or posted elsewhere. 
Ethical considerations: All data were from publicly available sources; thus, 
approvals from neither scientific ethics committees nor data authorities were 
required as per Danish law and regulations. Declaration of generative AI in 
scientific writing: AI and/or AI-assisted technologies were not used in the 
writing of this manuscript.