---
reference_id: "PMID:35715315"
title: "[Alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency]."
authors:
- Mornex JF
journal: Rev Mal Respir
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2022.02.062
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency].
**Authors:** Mornex JF
**Journal:** Rev Mal Respir (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmr.2022.02.062](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmr.2022.02.062)

## Content

1. Rev Mal Respir. 2022 Oct;39(8):698-707. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2022.02.062. Epub 
2022 Jun 14.

[Alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency].

[Article in French]

Mornex JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Lyon, université Lyon 1, INRAE, EPHE, UMR754, IVPC, Lyon, 
France; Centre de référence des maladies respiratoires rares, Orphalung, 
RESPIFIL, 69500 Bron, Bron, France; Service de pneumologie, hôpital 
Louis-Pradel, hospices civils de Lyon, 69500 Bron, France. Electronic address: 
mornex@univ-lyon1.fr.

INTRODUCTION: Pulmonary emphysema and liver disease are the clinical expressions 
of alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency, an autosomal recessive genetic disease.
STATE OF THE ART: Alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency is usually associated with the 
homozygous Z variant of the SERPINA1 gene. Its clinical expression always 
consists in a substantial reduction of alpha 1-antitrypsin serum concentration 
and its variants are analyzed by isoelectric focalization or molecular 
techniques. Assessed by CO transfer alteration and CT scan, risk of pulmonary 
emphysema is increased by tobacco consumption. Assessed by transient 
elastography and liver ultrasound, risk of liver disease is increased by alcohol 
consumption or obesity. Treatment of COPD-associated alpha 1-antitrypsin 
deficiency does not differ from that of other forms of COPD. In patients 
presenting with severe deficiency, augmentation therapy with plasma-derived 
alpha 1-antitrypsin reduces the progression of emphysema, as shown in terms of 
CT-based lung density metrics. Patients with alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency with 
a ZZ genotype should refrain from alcohol or tobacco consumption, and watch 
their weight; so should their close relatives.
PERSPECTIVES: Modulation of alpha 1-antitrypsin liver production offers an 
interesting new therapeutic perspective.
CONCLUSION: Homozygous (Z) variants of the SERPINA1 gene confer an increased 
risk of pulmonary emphysema and liver disease, particularly among smokers, 
drinkers and obese persons.

Copyright © 2022 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2022.02.062
PMID: 35715315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]