---
reference_id: "PMID:39143639"
title: "GABRG2 mutations in genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus: structure, roles, and molecular genetics."
authors:
- Li X
- Guo S
- Sun Y
- Ding J
- Chen C
- Wu Y
- Li P
- Sun T
- Wang X
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-024-05387-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Receptors, GABA-A/genetics"
- "Seizures, Febrile/genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GABRG2 mutations in genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus: structure, roles, and molecular genetics.
**Authors:** Li X, Guo S, Sun Y, Ding J, Chen C, Wu Y, Li P, Sun T, Wang X
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-024-05387-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-024-05387-1)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2024 Aug 14;22(1):767. doi: 10.1186/s12967-024-05387-1.

GABRG2 mutations in genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus: structure, 
roles, and molecular genetics.

Li X(1), Guo S(2), Sun Y(3), Ding J(4), Chen C(5), Wu Y(5), Li P(5), Sun T(6), 
Wang X(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450052, People's Republic of China. 
lxx985@163.com.
(2)Department of Rehabilitative Medicine, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450052, People's Republic of China.
(3)Ningxia Key Laboratory of Cerebrocranial Disease, The Incubation Base of 
National Key Laboratory, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, Ningxia, 750001, 
People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450052, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450052, People's Republic of China.
(6)Ningxia Key Laboratory of Cerebrocranial Disease, The Incubation Base of 
National Key Laboratory, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, Ningxia, 750001, 
People's Republic of China. suntao6699@163.com.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450052, People's Republic of China. 
wangxj@zzu.edu.cn.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450052, People's Republic of China. 
wangxj@zzu.edu.cn.

Genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) is a genetic epilepsy 
syndrome characterized by a marked hereditary tendency inherited as an autosomal 
dominant trait. Patients with GEFS+ may develop typical febrile seizures (FS), 
while generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCSs) with fever commonly occur 
between 3 months and 6 years of age, which is generally followed by febrile 
seizure plus (FS+), with or without absence seizures, focal seizures, or GTCSs. 
GEFS+ exhibits significant genetic heterogeneity, with polymerase chain 
reaction, exon sequencing, and single nucleotide polymorphism analyses all 
showing that the occurrence of GEFS+ is mainly related to mutations in the 
gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor gamma 2 subunit (GABRG2) gene. The most 
common mutations in GABRG2 are separated in large autosomal dominant families, 
but their pathogenesis remains unclear. The predominant types of GABRG2 
mutations include missense (c.983A → T, c.245G → A, p.Met199Val), nonsense 
(R136*, Q390*, W429*), frameshift (c.1329delC, p.Val462fs*33, p.Pro59fs*12), 
point (P83S), and splice site (IVS6+2T → G) mutations. All of these mutations 
types can reduce the function of ion channels on the cell membrane; however, the 
degree and mechanism underlying these dysfunctions are different and could be 
linked to the main mechanism of epilepsy. The γ2 subunit plays a special role in 
receptor trafficking and is closely related to its structural specificity. This 
review focused on investigating the relationship between GEFS+ and GABRG2 
mutation types in recent years, discussing novel aspects deemed to be great 
significance for clinically accurate diagnosis, anti-epileptic treatment 
strategies, and new drug development.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-024-05387-1
PMCID: PMC11323400
PMID: 39143639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no potential 
conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article.