---
reference_id: "PMID:32341816"
title: "Novel COL11A2 Pathogenic Variants in a Child with Autosomal Recessive Otospondylomegaepiphyseal Dysplasia: A Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Selvam P
- Singh S
- Jain A
- Atwal H
- Atwal PS
journal: J Pediatr Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1698446
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel COL11A2 Pathogenic Variants in a Child with Autosomal Recessive Otospondylomegaepiphyseal Dysplasia: A Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Selvam P, Singh S, Jain A, Atwal H, Atwal PS
**Journal:** J Pediatr Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0039-1698446](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0039-1698446)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Genet. 2020 Jun;9(2):117-120. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1698446. Epub 2019
 Oct 16.

Novel COL11A2 Pathogenic Variants in a Child with Autosomal Recessive
Otospondylomegaepiphyseal Dysplasia: A Review of the Literature.

Selvam P(1), Singh S(1), Jain A(1), Atwal H(1), Atwal PS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Biochemical Genetics, The Atwal Clinic: Genomic &
Personalized Medicine, Jacksonville, Florida, United States.

Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED) is an inherited autosomal dominant
and recessive skeletal dysplasia caused by both heterozygous and homozygous
pathogenic variants in COL11A2 encoding the α2(XI) collagen chains, a part of
type XI collagen. Here, we describe a 2-year-old girl presenting from birth with
a phenotype suggestive of OSMED. On whole exome sequence analysis of the family
via commercially available methods, we detected two novel heterozygous
pathogenic variants in the proband. In addition, we reviewed the phenotype of
autosomal recessive OSMED cases with COL11A2 pathogenic variants reported to
date and quantitatively highlighted the phenotypic spectrum.

© Thieme Medical Publishers.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1698446
PMCID: PMC7183404
PMID: 32341816

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.
