---
reference_id: "PMID:38016438"
title: "Cochlear Implantation in Children with Auditory Neuropathy: Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Bernardes M
- Costa C
- Ramos H
- Almeida R
- Gobbo D
- Carasek N
- Bahmad F
- Lamounier P
journal: Audiol Neurootol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000533298
keywords:
- Humans
- Cochlear Implantation
- "Hearing Loss, Central/surgery, rehabilitation, physiopathology"
- Child
- Speech Perception
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/surgery, rehabilitation"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cochlear Implants
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cochlear Implantation in Children with Auditory Neuropathy: Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Bernardes M, Costa C, Ramos H, Almeida R, Gobbo D, Carasek N, Bahmad F, Lamounier P
**Journal:** Audiol Neurootol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000533298](https://doi.org/10.1159/000533298)

## Content

1. Audiol Neurootol. 2024;29(3):167-180. doi: 10.1159/000533298. Epub 2023 Nov
28.

Cochlear Implantation in Children with Auditory Neuropathy: Meta-Analysis.

Bernardes M(1), Costa C(1), Ramos H(1), Almeida R(1), Gobbo D(2), Carasek N(1), 
Bahmad F(3), Lamounier P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Cervicofacial Surgery, Rehabilitation and 
Readaptation State Center Dr. Henrique Santillo (CRER), Goiânia, Brazil.
(2)Audiology Department of Rehabilitation and Readaptation State Center Dr. 
Henrique Santillo (CRER), Goiânia, Brazil.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology and Cervicofacial Surgery, University of 
Brasília - UNB, Brasília, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Auditory neuropathy (AN) is a nosological entity of unknown 
etiology, which is associated with fluctuations in rates of speech 
discrimination. Its diagnosis is based on presence of otoacoustic emissions and 
lack of, or abnormal, brainstem auditory evoked potential. With respect to 
treatment, we have variable results in the literature about development of 
speech perception and skills, in children with AN and cochlear implant (CI) 
rehabilitation.
OBJECTIVES: Comparatively assessing results recorded for the development of 
auditory and speech skills in children with auditory neuropathy spectrum 
disorder (ANSD), who were subjected to cochlear implantation, in comparison to 
results recorded for children with sensorineural hearing loss associated with 
other causes was the objective of this study.
METHOD: A systematic literature review with meta-analysis was performed, with 
studies published from 1975 to 2023.
RESULTS: Nineteen studies were included in the systematic review, and eight were 
selected for the meta-analysis, which showed there was no evidence allowing the 
conclusion that the two groups were different from each other about results in 
speech performance after 1 year of CI placement.
CONCLUSION: Therefore, this study shows that CI provides the comparable benefit 
to children with ANSD in comparison to children with neurosensory hearing loss 
associated with other causes in their speech development.

© 2023 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000533298
PMID: 38016438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]