---
reference_id: "PMID:34734747"
title: "Dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma: current standards of care."
authors:
- Kattepur AK
- Jones RL
- Gulia A
journal: Future Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2217/fon-2021-0830
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Biopsy
- "Bone Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics"
- "Chondrosarcoma/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Disease Management
- Disease Susceptibility
- Drug Development
- Drug Discovery
- Four-Dimensional Computed Tomography
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Grading
- Radiography
- Standard of Care
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma: current standards of care.
**Authors:** Kattepur AK, Jones RL, Gulia A
**Journal:** Future Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2217/fon-2021-0830](https://doi.org/10.2217/fon-2021-0830)

## Content

1. Future Oncol. 2021 Dec;17(35):4983-4991. doi: 10.2217/fon-2021-0830. Epub 2021
 Nov 4.

Dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma: current standards of care.

Kattepur AK(1), Jones RL(2), Gulia A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Sri Devaraj Urs Academy of Higher Education
& Research, Tamaka, Kolar 563101, Karnataka, India.
(2)Consultant Medical Oncologist, Royal Marsden Hospital NHS Trust, 203 Fulham
Rd, London SW3 6JJ, UK.
(3)Department of Surgical Oncology, Tata Memorial Hospital & Homi Bhabha
National Institute (HBNI), Parel, Mumbai 400012, India.

Dedifferentiated chondrosarcomas are aggressive variants of chondrosarcoma,
associated with poor outcomes. Tumor biphasism is the norm. The majority of
these tumors are symptomatic at presentation. Radiologically, large soft tissue
masses with bony destruction predominate. Treatment protocols of these tumors
are not well defined. Surgical resection forms the standard of care for
localized disease. (Neo)adjuvant therapies remain controversial as the results
from multiple (mainly retrospective) studies remain conflicting. Age at
presentation, stage and ability to obtain negative resection margins are
important prognostic factors. The overall prognosis is dismal. Newer and novel
therapies targeting the complex genetic makeup of these tumors have renewed
interest in the adjuvant setting that could hold promise in the near future.

Plain Language Summary: Lay abstract Dedifferentiated chondrosarcomas are rare
cancers composed of two components: a high-grade component and a low-grade
component, with one abruptly blending into another. These rare tumors affect
middle-aged individuals and present with pain and swelling in the affected site.
X-rays and other scans often show tumor within the soft tissue with bony
destruction. Although the precise treatment protocol is not well defined,
surgery remains the standard of care for those where the tumor has not spread
elsewhere. Once the disease spreads to other parts of the body, the outcome is
very poor. The role of certain drugs targeting the tumor (chemotherapeutic
agents) is controversial. This review briefly describes the genetic basis,
treatment modalities involved and newer agents being developed for this lethal
cancer.

DOI: 10.2217/fon-2021-0830
PMID: 34734747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
