---
reference_id: "PMID:28838409"
title: Epidemiology, Natural History, and Risk Stratification of Crohn's Disease.
authors:
- Aniwan S
- Park SH
- Loftus EV Jr
journal: Gastroenterol Clin North Am
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.gtc.2017.05.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology, Natural History, and Risk Stratification of Crohn's Disease.
**Authors:** Aniwan S, Park SH, Loftus EV Jr
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Clin North Am (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gtc.2017.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gtc.2017.05.003)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2017 Sep;46(3):463-480. doi: 
10.1016/j.gtc.2017.05.003. Epub 2017 Jul 19.

Epidemiology, Natural History, and Risk Stratification of Crohn's Disease.

Aniwan S(1), Park SH(2), Loftus EV Jr(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street, 
South west, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Division of Gastroenterology, Thai Red 
Cross Society, King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, Chulalongkorn University, 
Rama IV Road, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street, 
South west, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Gastroenterology, Asan 
Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88, Olympic-ro 43-gil, 
Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Korea.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street, 
South west, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. Electronic address: 
Loftus.Edward@mayo.edu.

Crohn's disease (CD) is a chronic condition that can result in significant 
morbidity and disability. By studying the association between demographics and 
initial clinical features and subsequent natural history, one may be able to 
stratify patients by their risks of clinical relapse, hospitalization, and 
surgery. Understanding the potential environmental risk factors and natural 
history of CD in a given patient guides the physician when counseling the 
patient and selecting a treatment strategy. In this review, updated data 
regarding the incidence and prevalence of CD, important environmental risk 
factors, natural history of the disease, and important prognostic factors are 
discussed.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gtc.2017.05.003
PMID: 28838409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]