---
reference_id: "PMID:36933107"
title: "Satralizumab: A Review in Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder."
authors:
- Fung S
- Shirley M
journal: CNS Drugs
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40263-023-00995-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Satralizumab: A Review in Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder.
**Authors:** Fung S, Shirley M
**Journal:** CNS Drugs (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40263-023-00995-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-023-00995-9)

## Content

1. CNS Drugs. 2023 Apr;37(4):363-370. doi: 10.1007/s40263-023-00995-9. Epub 2023 
Mar 18.

Satralizumab: A Review in Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder.

Fung S(1), Shirley M(2).

Author information:
(1)Springer Nature, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand. demail@springer.com.
(2)Springer Nature, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand.

Satralizumab (Enspryng®) is a monoclonal antibody that blocks the interleukin-6 
(IL-6) receptor and is approved for the treatment of neuromyelitis optica 
spectrum disorder (NMOSD) in patients who are aquaporin-4 immunoglobulin G 
(AQP4-IgG) seropositive. Patients with NMOSD are at risk of recurrent autoimmune 
attacks that primarily target the optic nerves and spinal cord but may also 
target other regions of the central nervous system; these attacks can lead to 
life-long disability. In the randomized, placebo-controlled phase III SAkuraSky 
and SAkuraStar trials, subcutaneous satralizumab as an add-on to 
immunosuppressive therapy or as a monotherapy, respectively, significantly 
reduced the risk of relapse compared with placebo in patients who were AQP4-IgG 
seropositive with NMOSD. Satralizumab was well tolerated; the most common 
adverse events were infection, headache, arthralgia, decreased white blood cell 
count, hyperlipidaemia and injection-related reactions. In the EU, satralizumab 
is the first IL-6 receptor blocker to be approved for treatment of 
AQP4-IgG-seropositive patients with NMOSD, has the potential advantage of 
subcutaneous administration, and is the only targeted treatment approved for 
adolescent patients with this disorder. Thus, satralizumab is a valuable 
treatment option for patients with NMOSD.

Plain Language Summary: Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) is an 
autoimmune disorder, in which recurrent attacks by the body’s own immune system 
can cause severe morbidity and disability. Immunoglobulin G antibodies targeting 
the aquaporin-4 (AQP4-IgG) water channel in cells of the central nervous system 
can be detected in the majority of patients with NMOSD. Satralizumab 
(Enspryng®), which is designed to suppress autoantibody production by blocking 
the interleukin-6 (IL-6) receptor, was found to significantly reduce the rate of 
immune attack recurrence compared with placebo when used as an add-on to 
standard immunosuppressive therapy (SAkuraSky trial) or when used alone 
(SAkuraStar trial). Satralizumab was well tolerated in the SAkuraSky and 
SAkuraStar trials, with infections (e.g. nasopharyngitis, upper respiratory 
tract infections) being the most common associated adverse event. In the EU, 
satralizumab is the first IL-6 receptor blocker approved for 
AQP4-IgG-seropositive patients with NMOSD and is the only subcutaneously 
administration targeted drug approved for NMOSD. Therefore, satralizumab 
represents a valuable treatment option for NMOSD.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40263-023-00995-9
PMID: 36933107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]