---
reference_id: "PMID:28611653"
title: Familial Retinal Arteriolar Tortuosity with Acute Hippocampal Infarction.
authors:
- Kim TH
- Lee S
- Lim SJ
journal: Case Rep Ophthalmol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1159/000456069
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Retinal Arteriolar Tortuosity with Acute Hippocampal Infarction.
**Authors:** Kim TH, Lee S, Lim SJ
**Journal:** Case Rep Ophthalmol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000456069](https://doi.org/10.1159/000456069)

## Content

1. Case Rep Ophthalmol. 2017 Mar 10;8(1):185-189. doi: 10.1159/000456069. 
eCollection 2017 Jan-Apr.

Familial Retinal Arteriolar Tortuosity with Acute Hippocampal Infarction.

Kim TH(1), Lee S(2), Lim SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Ophthalmology, Saevit Eye Hospital, Goyang, Republic of Korea, 
California, USA.
(2)bDepartment of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, 
San Francisco, California, USA.

PURPOSE: To report a case of familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity with acute 
hippocampal infarction.
METHOD: Single-patient case report.
RESULTS: A 50-year-old woman presented with blurred vision and was found to have 
cataract, retinal hemorrhages, and tortuous retinal arterioles in both eyes. 
Similar findings of tortuous retinal arterioles were observed in her daughter 
and son. In her past history of 6 years prior to the visit, she had been 
diagnosed with transient global amnesia after brain magnetic resonance imaging, 
which showed hippocampal infarction and multiple chronic ischemic lesions in the 
periventricular and subcortical white matter.
CONCLUSION: Familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity is known to affect the 
retinal vessels only. To our knowledge, this is the first report of ischemic 
injury to the brain in a patient with familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity.

DOI: 10.1159/000456069
PMCID: PMC5465648
PMID: 28611653