---
reference_id: "PMID:10431238"
title: Tangier disease is caused by mutations in the gene encoding ATP-binding cassette transporter 1.
authors:
- Rust S
- Rosier M
- Funke H
- Real J
- Amoura Z
- Piette JC
- Deleuze JF
- Brewer HB
- Duverger N
- Denèfle P
- Assmann G
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1038/11921
keywords:
- ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Apolipoproteins E/blood
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9"
- Exons
- Female
- Gene Library
- Genetic Markers
- Glycoproteins/genetics
- Humans
- "Lipoproteins, HDL"
- Male
- "Models, Biological"
- "Models, Genetic"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Tangier Disease/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tangier disease is caused by mutations in the gene encoding ATP-binding cassette transporter 1.
**Authors:** Rust S, Rosier M, Funke H, Real J, Amoura Z, Piette JC, Deleuze JF, Brewer HB, Duverger N, Denèfle P, Assmann G
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/11921](https://doi.org/10.1038/11921)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Aug;22(4):352-5. doi: 10.1038/11921.

Tangier disease is caused by mutations in the gene encoding ATP-binding cassette
transporter 1.

Rust S(1), Rosier M, Funke H, Real J, Amoura Z, Piette JC, Deleuze JF, Brewer
HB, Duverger N, Denèfle P, Assmann G.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Arterioskleroseforschung an der Westfälischen
Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Germany. Rusts@uni-muenster.de

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1999 Aug;22(4):316-8. doi: 10.1038/11878.

Tangier disease (TD) was first discovered nearly 40 years ago in two siblings
living on Tangier Island. This autosomal co-dominant condition is characterized
in the homozygous state by the absence of HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) from plasma,
hepatosplenomegaly, peripheral neuropathy and frequently premature coronary
artery disease (CAD). In heterozygotes, HDL-C levels are about one-half those of
normal individuals. Impaired cholesterol efflux from macrophages leads to the
presence of foam cells throughout the body, which may explain the increased risk
of coronary heart disease in some TD families. We report here refining of our
previous linkage of the TD gene to a 1-cM region between markers D9S271 and
D9S1866 on chromosome 9q31, in which we found the gene encoding human ATP
cassette-binding transporter 1 (ABC1). We also found a change in ABC1 expression
level on cholesterol loading of phorbol ester-treated THP1 macrophages,
substantiating the role of ABC1 in cholesterol efflux. We cloned the full-length
cDNA and sequenced the gene in two unrelated families with four TD homozygotes.
In the first pedigree, a 1-bp deletion in exon 13, resulting in truncation of
the predicted protein to approximately one-fourth of its normal size,
co-segregated with the disease phenotype. An in-frame insertion-deletion in exon
12 was found in the second family. Our findings indicate that defects in ABC1,
encoding a member of the ABC transporter superfamily, are the cause of TD.

DOI: 10.1038/11921
PMID: 10431238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
