---
reference_id: "PMID:15778503"
title: Sclerostin binds to LRP5/6 and antagonizes canonical Wnt signaling.
authors:
- Li X
- Zhang Y
- Kang H
- Liu W
- Liu P
- Zhang J
- Harris SE
- Wu D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413274200
keywords:
- 3T3 Cells
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- Binding Sites
- "Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Line
- Genetic Markers/genetics
- "Glycoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "LDL-Receptor Related Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-5
- Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-6
- Mice
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Protein Binding
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, LDL/genetics, metabolism"
- "Recombinant Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Wnt Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sclerostin binds to LRP5/6 and antagonizes canonical Wnt signaling.
**Authors:** Li X, Zhang Y, Kang H, Liu W, Liu P, Zhang J, Harris SE, Wu D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M413274200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M413274200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 20;280(20):19883-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413274200. Epub
2005  Mar 18.

Sclerostin binds to LRP5/6 and antagonizes canonical Wnt signaling.

Li X(1), Zhang Y, Kang H, Liu W, Liu P, Zhang J, Harris SE, Wu D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut 
Health Center, Farmington, 06030, USA.

The loss of the SOST gene product sclerostin leads to sclerosteosis 
characterized by high bone mass. In this report, we found that sclerostin could 
antagonize canonical Wnt signaling in human embryonic kidney A293T cells and 
mouse osteoblastic MC3T3 cells. This sclerostin-mediated antagonism could be 
reversed by overexpression of Wnt co-receptor low density lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein (LRP) 5. In addition, we found that sclerostin bound to 
LRP5 as well as LRP6 and identified the first two YWTD-EGF repeat domains of 
LRP5 as being responsible for the binding. Although these two repeat domains are 
required for transduction of canonical Wnt signals, canonical Wnt did not appear 
to compete with sclerostin for binding to LRP5. Examination of the expression of 
sclerostin and Wnt7b, an autocrine canonical Wnt, during primary calvarial 
osteoblast differentiation revealed that sclerostin is expressed at late stages 
of osteoblast differentiation coinciding with the expression of osteogenic 
marker osteocalcin and trailing after the expression of Wnt7b. Given the 
plethora of evidence indicating that canonical Wnt signaling stimulates 
osteogenesis, we believe that the high bone mass phenotype associated with the 
loss of sclerostin may be attributed, at least in part, to an increase in 
canonical Wnt signaling resulting from the reduction in sclerostin-mediated Wnt 
antagonism.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413274200
PMID: 15778503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]