---
reference_id: "PMID:38386425"
title: Protein aggregates containing wild-type and mutant NOTCH3 are major drivers of arterial pathology in CADASIL.
authors:
- Dupré N
- Gueniot F
- Domenga-Denier V
- Dubosclard V
- Nilles C
- Hill-Eubanks D
- Morgenthaler-Roth C
- Nelson MT
- Keime C
- Danglot L
- Joutel A
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI175789
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein aggregates containing wild-type and mutant NOTCH3 are major drivers of arterial pathology in CADASIL.
**Authors:** Dupré N, Gueniot F, Domenga-Denier V, Dubosclard V, Nilles C, Hill-Eubanks D, Morgenthaler-Roth C, Nelson MT, Keime C, Danglot L, Joutel A
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI175789](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI175789)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 Feb 22;134(8):e175789. doi: 10.1172/JCI175789.

Protein aggregates containing wild-type and mutant NOTCH3 are major drivers of 
arterial pathology in CADASIL.

Dupré N(1), Gueniot F(1), Domenga-Denier V(1), Dubosclard V(1), Nilles C(1), 
Hill-Eubanks D(2), Morgenthaler-Roth C(3), Nelson MT(2)(4), Keime C(3), Danglot 
L(1), Joutel A(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Cité, Institute of Psychiatry and Neuroscience of Paris 
(IPNP), INSERM U1266, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of Vermont, 
Burlington, Vermont, USA.
(3)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 
7104, INSERM U1258, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
(4)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, 
United Kingdom.
(5)GHU Paris Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, Hôpital Sainte Anne, Paris, France.

Loss of arterial smooth muscle cells (SMCs) and abnormal accumulation of the 
extracellular domain of the NOTCH3 receptor (Notch3ECD) are the 2 core features 
of CADASIL, a common cerebral small vessel disease caused by highly stereotyped 
dominant mutations in NOTCH3. Yet the relationship between NOTCH3 receptor 
activity, Notch3ECD accumulation, and arterial SMC loss has remained elusive, 
hampering the development of disease-modifying therapies. Using dedicated 
histopathological and multiscale imaging modalities, we could detect and 
quantify previously undetectable CADASIL-driven arterial SMC loss in the CNS of 
mice expressing the archetypal Arg169Cys mutation. We found that arterial 
pathology was more severe and Notch3ECD accumulation greater in transgenic mice 
overexpressing the mutation on a wild-type Notch3 background (TgNotch3R169C) 
than in knockin Notch3R170C/R170C mice expressing this mutation without a 
wild-type Notch3 copy. Notably, expression of Notch3-regulated genes was 
essentially unchanged in TgNotch3R169C arteries. We further showed that 
wild-type Notch3ECD coaggregated with mutant Notch3ECD and that elimination of 1 
copy of wild-type Notch3 in TgNotch3R169C was sufficient to attenuate Notch3ECD 
accumulation and arterial pathology. These findings suggest that Notch3ECD 
accumulation, involving mutant and wild-type NOTCH3, is a major driver of 
arterial SMC loss in CADASIL, paving the way for NOTCH3-lowering therapeutic 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI175789
PMCID: PMC11014667
PMID: 38386425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: AJ has received honoraria 
from Biogen.