---
reference_id: "PMID:14974078"
title: "Molecular basis of Refsum disease: sequence variations in phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase (PHYH) and the PTS2 receptor (PEX7)."
authors:
- Jansen GA
- Waterham HR
- Wanders RJ
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/humu.10315
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence/genetics
- Gene Duplication
- Genetic Variation/genetics
- Humans
- Mixed Function Oxygenases/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Peroxisomal Targeting Signal 2 Receptor
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/genetics"
- Refsum Disease/genetics
- Sequence Deletion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular basis of Refsum disease: sequence variations in phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase (PHYH) and the PTS2 receptor (PEX7).
**Authors:** Jansen GA, Waterham HR, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.10315](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.10315)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2004 Mar;23(3):209-18. doi: 10.1002/humu.10315.

Molecular basis of Refsum disease: sequence variations in phytanoyl-CoA
hydroxylase (PHYH) and the PTS2 receptor (PEX7).

Jansen GA(1), Waterham HR, Wanders RJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Department of Clinical Chemistry,
Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Refsum disease has long been known to be an inherited disorder of lipid
metabolism characterized by the accumulation of phytanic acid
(3,7,11,15-tetramethylhexadecanoic acid) caused by an alpha-oxidation deficiency
of this branched chain fatty acid in peroxisomes. The mechanism of phytanic acid
alpha-oxidation and the enzymes involved had long remained mysterious, but they
have been resolved in recent years. This has led to the resolution of the
molecular basis of Refsum disease. Interestingly, Refsum disease is genetically
heterogeneous; two genes, PHYH (also named PAHX) and PEX7, have been identified
to cause Refsum disease, as reviewed in this work.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.10315
PMID: 14974078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
