---
reference_id: "PMID:17510920"
title: "The first prenatal diagnosis for veno-occlusive disease and immunodeficiency syndrome, an autosomal recessive condition associated with mutations in SP110."
authors:
- Cliffe ST
- Wong M
- Taylor PJ
- Ruga E
- Wilcken B
- Lindeman R
- Buckley MF
- Roscioli T
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/pd.1759
keywords:
- Chorionic Villi Sampling
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease/congenital, diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/congenital, diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Minor Histocompatibility Antigens
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The first prenatal diagnosis for veno-occlusive disease and immunodeficiency syndrome, an autosomal recessive condition associated with mutations in SP110.
**Authors:** Cliffe ST, Wong M, Taylor PJ, Ruga E, Wilcken B, Lindeman R, Buckley MF, Roscioli T
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pd.1759](https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.1759)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 2007 Jul;27(7):674-6. doi: 10.1002/pd.1759.

The first prenatal diagnosis for veno-occlusive disease and immunodeficiency 
syndrome, an autosomal recessive condition associated with mutations in SP110.

Cliffe ST(1), Wong M, Taylor PJ, Ruga E, Wilcken B, Lindeman R, Buckley MF, 
Roscioli T.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney, 
Australia. simon.cliffe@sesiahs.health.nsw.gov.au

OBJECTIVES: We present the first prenatal diagnosis of familial hepatic 
veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI). Homozygous mutations in the 
gene SP110 are the genetic basis of VODI. The proband in this report presented 
at three months of age with hepatomegaly hepatic failure and was found to have 
hypogammaglobulinemia. He died one month after hepatic transplant at eight 
months of age due to hemophagocytic syndrome. DNA testing detected a homozygous 
truncating mutation in exon 5; SP110 c.642delC. Prenatal testing was offered to 
this family in a subsequent pregnancy.
METHODS: Chorion villus was sampled at 12 weeks' gestation. DNA was extracted 
using standard techniques, and sequencing of SP110 exon 5 was performed using 
flanking primers. Maternal contamination was excluded by examining STR markers 
in CVS and maternal DNA.
RESULTS: A heterozygous SP110 c.642delC mutation was detected in exon 5. This 
mutation was present in heterozygous form in both parents.
CONCLUSIONS: The prenatal test result is predictive of a child with a normal 
immune and hepatic phenotype. This report presents the first prenatal molecular 
diagnosis for VODI and shows the importance of molecular genetic research in not 
only defining the aetiology of syndromes but also in assisting reproductive 
choices through the collaboration of genetic and feto-maternal services.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.1759
PMID: 17510920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]