---
reference_id: "PMID:17185244"
title: Novel SOX9 gene mutation in campomelic dysplasia with autosomal sex reversal.
authors:
- Hsiao HP
- Tsai LP
- Chao MC
- Tseng HI
- Chang YC
journal: J Formos Med Assoc
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/S0929-6646(09)60286-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel SOX9 gene mutation in campomelic dysplasia with autosomal sex reversal.
**Authors:** Hsiao HP, Tsai LP, Chao MC, Tseng HI, Chang YC
**Journal:** J Formos Med Assoc (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0929-6646(09)60286-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0929-6646(09)60286-2)

## Content

1. J Formos Med Assoc. 2006 Dec;105(12):1013-6. doi:
10.1016/S0929-6646(09)60286-2.

Novel SOX9 gene mutation in campomelic dysplasia with autosomal sex reversal.

Hsiao HP(1), Tsai LP, Chao MC, Tseng HI, Chang YC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Municipal Hsiao Kang Hospital, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.

Campomelic dysplasia (CD; OMIM #114290) is an autosomal dominant, frequently 
lethal dysplasia syndrome whose primary features include angular bowing and 
shortening of the limbs, and sex reversal in the majority of affected XY 
individuals. Most CD cases have heterozygous de novo mutations in the coding 
region of the transcription factor gene SOX9 (SRY-related high-mobility group 
[HMG] box 9) in chromosome 17q. Here, we report a novel mutation of SOX9 in a 
female neonate with CD with autosomal sex reversal. Respiratory distress and 
cyanosis were noted at birth, and endotracheal intubation with mechanical 
ventilation was performed due to respiratory failure. The presenting phenotypes 
included dysmorphic face with macrocephaly, prominent forehead, low nasal 
bridge, cleft palate and micrognathia. Skeletal deformities characteristic of CD 
were observed, including narrow thoracic cage, hypoplastic scapulae, scoliosis 
and short limbs with anterolateral femoral and tibial bowing. The karyotype was 
46,XY despite female external genitalia. SOX9 gene analysis revealed frameshift 
mutation (at nucleotide position 1095G-->AT) in the open reading frame, 
resulting in a frameshift with 211 new amino acids.

DOI: 10.1016/S0929-6646(09)60286-2
PMID: 17185244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]