---
reference_id: "PMID:16121315"
title: "Brain natriuretic peptide: diagnostic and therapeutic implications in pulmonary arterial hypertension."
authors:
- Hargett CW
- Tapson VF
journal: Semin Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1055/s-2005-916153
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain natriuretic peptide: diagnostic and therapeutic implications in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
**Authors:** Hargett CW, Tapson VF
**Journal:** Semin Respir Crit Care Med (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2005-916153](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2005-916153)

## Content

1. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2005 Aug;26(4):385-93. doi: 10.1055/s-2005-916153.

Brain natriuretic peptide: diagnostic and therapeutic implications in pulmonary 
arterial hypertension.

Hargett CW(1), Tapson VF.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Brain or B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) is one of the new biomarkers employed 
within the last decade to help clarify difficult cardiovascular problems. Plasma 
BNP is elevated in cardiac ventricular dysfunction and plays a key role in 
protecting the body from volume overload by maintaining renal function and 
sodium balance. Studies in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) 
have demonstrated that plasma BNP levels are raised proportionally to the extent 
of right ventricular (RV) dysfunction. There is growing evidence that BNP may be 
a potential biomarker for PAH in screening for occult disease, diagnostic 
evaluation, prognosis, and estimating a response to therapy. Additionally, 
augmentation of the natriuretic peptide system through exogenous administration 
of BNP or by preventing its degradation may be a promising option for the 
management of decompensated RV failure. Because plasma BNP levels rise in a 
variety of cardiopulmonary conditions and are affected by several physiological 
factors, BNP interpretation must not occur in isolation but rather within the 
context of good clinical judgment.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2005-916153
PMID: 16121315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]