---
reference_id: "PMID:34145040"
title: "Fatty Acid Synthesis in Prostate Cancer: Vulnerability or Epiphenomenon?"
authors:
- Sena LA
- Denmeade SR
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-21-1392
keywords:
- Adipogenesis
- Animals
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- Cell Proliferation
- Disease Progression
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- Lipogenesis
- Male
- Mice
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Prostatic Neoplasms/metabolism
- "Receptors, Androgen/metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatty Acid Synthesis in Prostate Cancer: Vulnerability or Epiphenomenon?
**Authors:** Sena LA, Denmeade SR
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-21-1392](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-21-1392)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2021 Sep 1;81(17):4385-4393. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-21-1392.
Epub 2021 Jun 18.

Fatty Acid Synthesis in Prostate Cancer: Vulnerability or Epiphenomenon?

Sena LA(1), Denmeade SR(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. laura.sena@jhmi.edu.
(2)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)Department of Urology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland.

Tumor metabolism supports the energetic and biosynthetic needs of rapidly
proliferating cancer cells and modifies intra- and intercellular signaling to
enhance cancer cell invasion, metastasis, and immune evasion. Prostate cancer
exhibits unique metabolism with high rates of de novo fatty acid synthesis
driven by activation of the androgen receptor (AR). Increasing evidence suggests
that activation of this pathway is functionally important to promote prostate
cancer aggressiveness. However, the mechanisms by which fatty acid synthesis are
beneficial to prostate cancer have not been well defined. In this review, we
summarize evidence indicating that fatty acid synthesis drives progression of
prostate cancer. We also explore explanations for this phenomenon and discuss
future directions for targeting this pathway for patient benefit.

©2021 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-21-1392
PMCID: PMC8416800
PMID: 34145040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
