---
reference_id: "PMID:31662445"
title: Frequency of Signs and Symptoms in Persons With Asthma.
authors:
- He Z
- Feng J
- Xia J
- Wu Q
- Yang H
- Ma Q
journal: Respir Care
year: '2020'
doi: 10.4187/respcare.06714
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of Signs and Symptoms in Persons With Asthma.
**Authors:** He Z, Feng J, Xia J, Wu Q, Yang H, Ma Q
**Journal:** Respir Care (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4187/respcare.06714](https://doi.org/10.4187/respcare.06714)

## Content

1. Respir Care. 2020 Feb;65(2):252-264. doi: 10.4187/respcare.06714. Epub 2019
Oct  29.

Frequency of Signs and Symptoms in Persons With Asthma.

He Z(1), Feng J(2), Xia J(3), Wu Q(4), Yang H(5), Ma Q(6).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Center of Suining Central Hospital, Sichuan, China.
(2)Respiratory Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Hunan, 
China.
(3)Respiratory Medicine, Hangzhou 1st People's Hospital affiliated with Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)Respiratory Medicine, Zhejiang Traditional Chinese Medicine University 2nd 
Affiliated Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(5)Respiratory Medicine, Huangdao District Traditional Chinese Medicine 
Hospital, Shandong, China.
(6)Institution of Respiratory Disease, Xinqiao Hospital of 3rd Military Medical 
University, Chongqing, China. cqmql@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Signs and symptoms of asthma are well established; however, no study 
has been performed to rank them. Therefore, we performed this systematic review 
and meta-analysis to determine the pooled frequencies of different signs and 
symptoms of asthma in subjects age ≥ 14 y to develop a patient-specific 
questionnaire.
METHODS: Specific search queries were developed to include records published in 
Embase, PubMed, Cochrane Library, and Google Scholar, until November 2016. We 
planned to include randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and observational studies 
for determining the pooled proportions of signs and symptoms and association 
between combination of symptoms and asthma severity in subjects age ≥ 14 y. The 
quality assessment was performed using 3 parameters: reported number or 
percentage of subjects with asthma symptoms, respiratory disorder history, and 
method for data collection.
RESULTS: Of the 4,939 records retrieved, 67 observational studies (N = 57,033 
subjects; age ≥ 14 y) were considered eligible for inclusion in the analysis. A 
total of 10 symptoms were reported across the studies, with pooled proportions 
of nasal congestion, sleep disturbances, breathlessness, chest tightness, and 
wheezing being 61.57%, 56.56%, 50.31%, 50.41%, and 46.97%, respectively. In 
records of medical history, the pooled proportion of rhinitis was 76.37%, 
followed by allergy/atopy at 63.53%. The pooled proportion of asthma medication 
use was 83.27%. In terms of the symptom combinations, the combination of 
wheezing, breathlessness, chest tightness, and cough was reported in 71.26% of 
subjects from 4 studies (n = 12,014 subjects). Nasal congestion, sleep 
disturbance, and chest tightness were the most common symptoms of asthma, 
followed by wheezing and breathlessness with a combination of symptoms (ie, 
wheezing, breathlessness, chest tightness, and cough) affecting the highest 
proportion of subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Asthma severity was dependent on variety of symptoms, consisting 
mostly of wheezing, breathlessness, chest tightness, and cough. On the basis of 
our analysis, we recommend a combination of symptoms be included in 
diagnostic-based questionnaires to aid early diagnosis.

Copyright © 2020 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.06714
PMID: 31662445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]