---
reference_id: "PMID:24553931"
title: Mirror movement-like defects in startle behavior of zebrafish dcc mutants are caused by aberrant midline guidance of identified descending hindbrain neurons.
authors:
- Jain RA
- Bell H
- Lim A
- Chien CB
- Granato M
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2420-13.2014
keywords:
- Animals
- Axons/physiology
- "Behavior, Animal/physiology"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "DNA, Complementary/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Gene Deletion
- "Genes, DCC/genetics, physiology"
- Genotype
- Interneurons/physiology
- Larva
- Mutation/physiology
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics, physiology"
- Neural Pathways/physiology
- Neurons/physiology
- Phenotype
- "Reflex, Startle/physiology"
- "Rhombencephalon/cytology, metabolism, physiology"
- Swimming/physiology
- Touch/physiology
- Zebrafish/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mirror movement-like defects in startle behavior of zebrafish dcc mutants are caused by aberrant midline guidance of identified descending hindbrain neurons.
**Authors:** Jain RA, Bell H, Lim A, Chien CB, Granato M
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2420-13.2014](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2420-13.2014)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2014 Feb 19;34(8):2898-909. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2420-13.2014.

Mirror movement-like defects in startle behavior of zebrafish dcc mutants are 
caused by aberrant midline guidance of identified descending hindbrain neurons.

Jain RA(1), Bell H, Lim A, Chien CB, Granato M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, Department of 
Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, and 
Molecular Medicine Program, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112.

Mirror movements are involuntary movements on one side of the body that occur 
simultaneously with intentional movements on the contralateral side. Humans with 
heterozygous mutations in the axon guidance receptor DCC display such mirror 
movements, where unilateral stimulation results in inappropriate bilateral motor 
output. Currently, it is unclear whether mirror movements are caused by 
incomplete midline crossing and reduced commissural connectivity of 
DCC-dependent descending pathways or by aberrant ectopic ipsilateral axonal 
projections of normally commissural neurons. Here, we show that in response to 
unilateral tactile stimuli, zebrafish dcc mutant larvae perform involuntary 
turns on the inappropriate body side. We show that these mirror movement-like 
deficits are associated with axonal guidance defects of two identified groups of 
commissural reticulospinal hindbrain neurons. Moreover, we demonstrate that in 
dcc mutants, axons of these identified neurons frequently fail to cross the 
midline and instead project ipsilaterally. Whereas laser ablation of these 
neurons in wild-type animals does not affect turning movements, their ablation 
in dcc mutants restores turning movements. Thus, our results demonstrate that in 
dcc mutants, turns on the inappropriate side of the body are caused by aberrant 
ipsilateral axonal projections, and suggest that aberrant ipsilateral 
connectivity of a very small number of descending axons is sufficient to induce 
incorrect movement patterns.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2420-13.2014
PMCID: PMC3931503
PMID: 24553931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]