---
reference_id: "PMID:33609325"
title: Oral mucosal and skin lesions observed in the first 48 hr in newborns.
authors:
- Aktaş H
- Alp Erdal S
journal: J Cosmet Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jocd.14013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral mucosal and skin lesions observed in the first 48 hr in newborns.
**Authors:** Aktaş H, Alp Erdal S
**Journal:** J Cosmet Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jocd.14013](https://doi.org/10.1111/jocd.14013)

## Content

1. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2021 Nov;20(11):3649-3655. doi: 10.1111/jocd.14013. Epub
2021  Mar 2.

Oral mucosal and skin lesions observed in the first 48 hr in newborns.

Aktaş H(1), Alp Erdal S(2).

Author information:
(1)Private Memorial Hospital Department of Dermatology, Diyarbakır, Turkey.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Health Sciences University Diyarbakır Gazi 
Yaşargil Training and Research Hospital, Diyarbakır, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Newborn period is a definition used for the first 4 weeks of life 
and it has some different characteristics compared with adult skin.
AIMS: In this study, we tried to define the pathological and physiological skin 
manifestations and demographic data observed in newborns PATIENTS/METHODS: In 
this study, newborns born between 2018 and 2019 were evaluated prospectively. 
Along with demographic findings, temporary neonatal skin manifestations, 
congenital spots, benign neonatal pustulosis, congenital anomalies and other 
lesions were statistically evaluated.
RESULTS: A total of 2109 newborns, consisting of 1157 (54.9%) boys and 952 
(45.1%) girls, were enrolled in the study. 94% of the newborns evaluated had at 
least one skin lesion. The most common skin manifestations in the study were 
Epstein pearls at a rate of 49.4%. This was followed by salmon patch (38.4%), 
Mongolian spot (20.1%), edema in the eyelids (15.5%), lanugo (15.4%), and 
erythema toxicum neonatarum (11.6%), respectively.
CONCLUSION: Several studies on dermatological findings observed in newborns have 
been conducted in many different countries around the world. In this study, we 
tried to identify many temporary and pathological skin manifestations and 
congenital anomalies observed in the first 48 h in newborns.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jocd.14013
PMID: 33609325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]