---
reference_id: "PMID:27538664"
title: "One family, one gene and three phenotypes: A novel VCP (valosin-containing protein) mutation associated with myopathy with rimmed vacuoles, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia."
authors:
- Abrahao A
- Abath Neto O
- Kok F
- Zanoteli E
- Santos B
- Pinto WB
- Barsottini OG
- Oliveira AS
- Pedroso JL
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2016.07.048
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics
- Adult
- Aged
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/genetics
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Family Health
- Frontotemporal Dementia/genetics
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Muscular Diseases/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- Valosin Containing Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# One family, one gene and three phenotypes: A novel VCP (valosin-containing protein) mutation associated with myopathy with rimmed vacuoles, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia.
**Authors:** Abrahao A, Abath Neto O, Kok F, Zanoteli E, Santos B, Pinto WB, Barsottini OG, Oliveira AS, Pedroso JL
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2016.07.048](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2016.07.048)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2016 Sep 15;368:352-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2016.07.048. Epub 2016
 Jul 21.

One family, one gene and three phenotypes: A novel VCP (valosin-containing
protein) mutation associated with myopathy with rimmed vacuoles, amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia.

Abrahao A(1), Abath Neto O(2), Kok F(3), Zanoteli E(2), Santos B(4), Pinto
WB(1), Barsottini OG(1), Oliveira AS(5), Pedroso JL(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of General Neurology and Ataxias, Department of Neurology and
Neurosurgery, Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Neurologia, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São
Paulo (FMUSP), São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Neurologia, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São
Paulo (FMUSP), São Paulo, Brazil; Mendelics Genomic Analysis, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.
(4)Mendelics Genomic Analysis, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(5)Division of Neuromuscular Diseases, Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery,
Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(6)Division of General Neurology and Ataxias, Department of Neurology and
Neurosurgery, Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Electronic address: jlpedroso.neuro@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: VCP (valosin-containing protein gene) variants have been associated
with peripheral and central neurodegenerative processes, including inclusion
body myopathy (IBM), Paget disease of bone (PDB), frontotemporal dementia (FTD),
and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) type 14. The combination of
IBM, PDB (IBMPFD1) can presented in one individual. However, the association of
IBMPFD1 and ALS in the same family is rare.
METHODS: We reported three individuals from a Brazilian kindred with
intrafamilial phenotype variability. Whole exome sequencing (WES) of the proband
was performed and revealed a novel VCP variant. VCP Sanger sequencing was
performed in the proband and his family members to confirm WES finding and
segregation. We performed a systematic review of the literature regarding the
genotypic-phenotypic VCP correlations.
RESULTS: Each individual presented with either myopathy with rimmed vacuoles,
ALS, or FTD. There was no PDB. WES of the proband identified the heterozygous
variant c.271A>T (p.Asn91Tyr) in the exon 3 of VCP. Sanger sequencing confirmed
the segregation of this variant in an autosomal-dominant pattern.
CONCLUSION: This study expands the genotypic spectrum of the missense mutations
of the VCP gene with a novel p.Asn91Tyr variant found in a Brazilian family
presenting with the unusual intrafamiliar association of myopathy with rimmed
vacuoles, ALS and FTD.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2016.07.048
PMID: 27538664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
