---
reference_id: "PMID:10760551"
title: Lesch-Nyhan disease and the basal ganglia.
authors:
- Visser JE
- Bär PR
- Jinnah HA
journal: Brain Res Brain Res Rev
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s0165-0173(99)00094-6
keywords:
- Animals
- Basal Ganglia/pathology
- "Basal Ganglia Diseases/pathology, psychology"
- Humans
- "Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome/pathology, psychology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lesch-Nyhan disease and the basal ganglia.
**Authors:** Visser JE, Bär PR, Jinnah HA
**Journal:** Brain Res Brain Res Rev (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0165-0173(99)00094-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0165-0173(99)00094-6)

## Content

1. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 2000 Apr;32(2-3):449-75. doi: 
10.1016/s0165-0173(99)00094-6.

Lesch-Nyhan disease and the basal ganglia.

Visser JE(1), Bär PR, Jinnah HA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Neurology, Rudolf Magnus Institute for 
Neurosciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands.

The purpose of this review is to summarize emerging evidence that the 
neurobehavioral features of Lesch-Nyhan disease (LND), a developmental disorder 
caused by congenital deficiency of the purine salvage enzyme 
hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT), may be attributable to 
dysfunction of the basal ganglia. Affected individuals have severe motor 
disability described by prominent extrapyramidal features that are 
characteristic of dysfunction of the motor circuits of the basal ganglia. They 
also display disturbances of ocular motility, cognition, and behavioral control 
that may reflect disruption of other circuits of the basal ganglia. Though 
neuropathologic studies of autopsy specimens have revealed no obvious 
neuroanatomical abnormalities in LND, neurochemical studies have demonstrated 
60-90% reductions in the dopamine content of the basal ganglia. In addition, 
recent PET studies have documented significant reductions in dopamine 
transporters and [18F]fluorodopa uptake in the basal ganglia. These findings 
support the proposal that many of the neurobehavioral features of LND might be 
related to dysfunction of the basal ganglia.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-0173(99)00094-6
PMID: 10760551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]