---
reference_id: "PMID:27383115"
title: Non-Lethal Type VIII Osteogenesis Imperfecta Has Elevated Bone Matrix Mineralization.
authors:
- Fratzl-Zelman N
- Barnes AM
- Weis M
- Carter E
- Hefferan TE
- Perino G
- Chang W
- Smith PA
- Roschger P
- Klaushofer K
- Glorieux FH
- Eyre DR
- Raggio C
- Rauch F
- Marini JC
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-1334
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Bone Density
- "Bone Matrix/metabolism, pathology"
- "Calcification, Physiologic"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen/metabolism
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/physiopathology
- Prognosis
- Prolyl Hydroxylases
- Proteoglycans/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-Lethal Type VIII Osteogenesis Imperfecta Has Elevated Bone Matrix Mineralization.
**Authors:** Fratzl-Zelman N, Barnes AM, Weis M, Carter E, Hefferan TE, Perino G, Chang W, Smith PA, Roschger P, Klaushofer K, Glorieux FH, Eyre DR, Raggio C, Rauch F, Marini JC
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2016-1334](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2016-1334)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Sep;101(9):3516-25. doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-1334. 
Epub 2016 Jul 6.

Non-Lethal Type VIII Osteogenesis Imperfecta Has Elevated Bone Matrix 
Mineralization.

Fratzl-Zelman N(1), Barnes AM(1), Weis M(1), Carter E(1), Hefferan TE(1), Perino 
G(1), Chang W(1), Smith PA(1), Roschger P(1), Klaushofer K(1), Glorieux FH(1), 
Eyre DR(1), Raggio C(1), Rauch F(1), Marini JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at Hanusch Hospital of Wiener 
Gebietskrankenkasse and Allgemeine Unfallversicherungsanstalt Trauma Centre 
Meidling (N.F.-Z., P.R., K.K.), First Medical Department, Hanusch Hospital, 1140 
Vienna, Austria; Section on Heritable Disorders of Bone (A.M.B., W.C., J.C.M.), 
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892; The Orthopaedic 
Research Laboratories (M.W., D.R.E.), University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington 98195; Hospital for Special Surgery (E.C., G.P., C.R.), New York, New 
York 10021; Department of Orthopedics (T.E.H.), Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, Minnesota 55905; Shriners Hospital for Children (P.A.S.), Chicago, 
Illinois 60707; and Shriners Hospital for Children and McGill University 
(F.H.G., F.R.), Montreal, QC H4A 0A9, Canada.

CONTEXT: Type VIII osteogenesis imperfecta (OI; OMIM 601915) is a recessive form 
of lethal or severe OI caused by null mutations in P3H1, which encodes prolyl 
3-hydroxylase 1.
OBJECTIVES: Clinical and bone material description of non-lethal type VIII OI.
DESIGN: Natural history study of type VIII OI.
SETTING: Pediatric academic research centers.
PATIENTS: Five patients with non-lethal type VIII OI, and one patient with 
lethal type VIII OI.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Clinical examinations included bone mineral density, 
radiographs, and serum and urinary metabolites. Bone biopsy samples were 
analyzed for histomorphometry and bone mineral density distribution by 
quantitative backscattered electron imaging microscopy. Collagen biochemistry 
was examined by mass spectrometry, and collagen fibrils were examined by 
transmission electron microscopy.
RESULTS: Type VIII OI patients have extreme growth deficiency, an L1-L4 areal 
bone mineral density Z-score of -5 to -6, and normal bone formation markers. 
Collagen from bone and skin tissue and cultured osteoblasts and fibroblasts have 
nearly absent 3-hydroxylation (1-4%). Collagen fibrils showed abnormal diameters 
and irregular borders. Bone histomorphometry revealed decreased cortical width 
and very thin trabeculae with patches of increased osteoid, although the overall 
osteoid surface was normal. Quantitative backscattered electron imaging showed 
increased matrix mineralization of cortical and trabecular bone, typical of 
other OI types. However, the proportion of bone with low mineralization was 
increased in type VIII OI bone, compared to type VII OI.
CONCLUSIONS: P3H1 is the unique enzyme responsible for collagen 3-hydroxylation 
in skin and bone. Bone from non-lethal type VIII OI children is similar to type 
VII, especially bone matrix hypermineralization, but it has distinctive features 
including extremely thin trabeculae, focal osteoid accumulation, and an 
increased proportion of low mineralized bone.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2016-1334
PMCID: PMC5010570
PMID: 27383115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]