---
reference_id: "PMID:34665687"
title: "Empty Nose Syndrome Pathophysiology: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Kanjanawasee D
- Campbell RG
- Rimmer J
- Alvarado R
- Kanjanaumporn J
- Snidvongs K
- Kalish L
- Harvey RJ
- Sacks R
journal: Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/01945998211052919
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Empty Nose Syndrome Pathophysiology: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Kanjanawasee D, Campbell RG, Rimmer J, Alvarado R, Kanjanaumporn J, Snidvongs K, Kalish L, Harvey RJ, Sacks R
**Journal:** Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/01945998211052919](https://doi.org/10.1177/01945998211052919)

## Content

1. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2022 Sep;167(3):434-451. doi: 
10.1177/01945998211052919. Epub 2021 Oct 19.

Empty Nose Syndrome Pathophysiology: A Systematic Review.

Kanjanawasee D(1)(2)(3), Campbell RG(2)(4)(5), Rimmer J(5)(6)(7), Alvarado R(5), 
Kanjanaumporn J(1), Snidvongs K(1), Kalish L(5)(8)(9), Harvey RJ(2)(5), Sacks 
R(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Health and Human Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Royal Prince Alfred 
Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(5)Rhinology and Skull Base Research Group, Applied Medical Research Centre, 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(6)Woolcock Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, Notre Dame University, Sydney, Australia.
(8)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Concord General Hospital, 
University of Sydney, Australia.
(9)Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: The pathophysiology of empty nose syndrome (ENS) remains unclear 
despite significant research. The pathophysiologic mechanism of ENS was 
systematically reviewed.
DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE and Embase.
REVIEW METHODS: Data were systematically reviewed for studies that provided 
original data on pathophysiology.
RESULTS: A total of 2476 studies were screened, and 19 met the inclusion 
criteria: 13 case-control and 6 cross-sectional. Nine pathophysiologic themes 
were identified.• Demographics: ENS symptoms had no relationship with climatic 
factors.• Symptomatology: ENS patients demonstrated high symptom severity.• 
Mental health: Anxiety and depression including hyperventilation were reported 
in >50% of ENS patients and correlated with ENS symptom severity.• Anatomic 
features: Structural changes in response to turbinate surgery were similar 
between ENS and non-ENS patients.• Airflow analysis: Airflow parameters were 
similar between ENS and non-ENS patients after turbinate surgery. On 
computational fluid dynamic analysis, differences were found on multiple 
outcomes.• Diagnostic testing: The menthol detection test was impaired in ENS, 
and cotton placement in the airway improved ENS symptoms.• Cognitive function: 
Functional magnetic resonance imaging showed activation in emotional processing 
area during breathing.• Olfactory function: Subjective impairment was reported 
in ENS, but quantitative measures were similar to non-ENS patients.• Mucosal 
physiology/innate immunity: Turbinate histopathology in ENS showed a 
tissue-remodeling pattern. Nasal nitric oxide level was lower in ENS patients.
CONCLUSION: There is evidence of high comorbid mental health disorders in ENS 
patients. An abnormal trigeminal-thermoreceptor response may be present in some 
patients. The influence of altered airflow and the evidence of surgery as the 
cause for ENS are unclear.

DOI: 10.1177/01945998211052919
PMID: 34665687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]