---
reference_id: "PMID:20573461"
title: ADHD and genetic syndromes.
authors:
- Lo-Castro A
- D'Agati E
- Curatolo P
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2010.05.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ADHD and genetic syndromes.
**Authors:** Lo-Castro A, D'Agati E, Curatolo P
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2010.05.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2010.05.011)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2011 Jun;33(6):456-61. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2010.05.011. Epub
2010  Jun 22.

ADHD and genetic syndromes.

Lo-Castro A(1), D'Agati E, Curatolo P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Paediatric Neurology Unit, "Tor Vergata" 
University of Rome, Italy. a.locastro@libero.it

Comment in
    Brain Dev. 2011 Jun;33(6):454-5. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2011.04.002.

A high rate of Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)-like 
characteristics has been reported in a wide variety of disorders including 
syndromes with known genetic causes. In this article, we review the genetic and 
the neurobiological links between ADHD symptoms and some genetic syndromes such 
as: Fragile X Syndrome, Neurofibromatosis 1, DiGeorge Syndrome, Tuberous 
Sclerosis Complex, Turner Syndrome, Williams Syndrome and Klinefelter Syndrome. 
Although each syndrome may arise from different genetic abnormalities with 
multiple molecular functions, the effects of these abnormalities may give rise 
to common effects downstream in the biological pathways or neural circuits, 
resulting in the presentation of ADHD symptoms. Early diagnosis of ADHD allows 
for earlier treatment, and has the potential for a better outcome in children 
with genetic syndromes.

Copyright © 2010 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2010.05.011
PMID: 20573461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]