---
reference_id: "PMID:12203210"
title: "Pityriasis lichenoides: a clonal T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder."
authors:
- Magro C
- Crowson AN
- Kovatich A
- Burns F
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1053/hupa.2002.125381
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Biopsy
- CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/pathology
- Child
- Clone Cells/pathology
- Epidermis/pathology
- Female
- "Gene Rearrangement, gamma-Chain T-Cell Antigen Receptor"
- Humans
- Immunophenotyping
- Lymphoproliferative Disorders/pathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/immunology, pathology"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- "T-Lymphocytes/immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pityriasis lichenoides: a clonal T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder.
**Authors:** Magro C, Crowson AN, Kovatich A, Burns F
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1053/hupa.2002.125381](https://doi.org/10.1053/hupa.2002.125381)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2002 Aug;33(8):788-95. doi: 10.1053/hupa.2002.125381.

Pityriasis lichenoides: a clonal T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder.

Magro C(1), Crowson AN, Kovatich A, Burns F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, OH
43210, USA.

Pityriasis lichenoides (PL) is a papulosquamous disorder often considered a form
of reactive dermatosis and classified with small plaque parapsoriasis (digitate
dermatosis). However, some patients with PL have developed large plaque
parapsoriasis (LPP) and mycosis fungoides (MF), and lymphoid atypia and T-cell
clonality have been reported in lesions of PL. We set out to explore the
possibility that PL is a form of T-cell dyscrasia. Cases were selected by
natural language search from an outpatient dermatopathology database; 35 cases
were reviewed and clinicians and patients were contacted. Hematoxylin and
eosin-stained sections were examined and immunophenotyping was carried out on
paraffin-embedded, formalin-fixed tissue using antibodies to CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5,
CD7, CD8, CD20, CD30, and CD56. In paraffin-embedded tissue, T-cell receptor
(TCR)-gamma chain rearrangement was sought through polymerase chain reaction
single stranded conformational polymorphism analysis. There were 14 males and 21
females with a mean age of 40 years held clinically to have PL chronica (PLC)
(28 cases) and/or PL et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) (7 cases). Five patients
developed large atrophic poikilodermatous and/or annular plaques compatible with
MF and/or LPP in a background of typical PLC. All biopsies showed tropism of
lymphocytes to an epidermis manifesting psoriasiform hyperplasia, dyskeratosis,
parakeratosis, and intraepithelial collections of Langerhans' cells and
lymphocytes mimicking Pautrier's microabascesses. Epidermal atrophy, dermal
fibroplasia, poikilodermatous alterations, and a dominance of intraepidermal
cerebriform cells were seen only in patients with chronic persistent disease
(i.e., PLC) and in some cases corresponded with clinical progression to MF. All
cases had a T cell-dominant infiltrate, with a CD7 deletion in 21 of 32 biopsies
examined; the CD7-negative cells were typically the largest and most atypical
forms, often in a cohesive array within the upper layers of the epidermis. In 17
biopsies in which a CD4 stain was satisfactory for evaluation, 50% or more of
the intraepidermal population was CD4 positive in 8 biopsies, whereas in 11
biopsies 50% or more of the dermal infiltrate was CD4 positive. The CD4-positive
cells frequently had a cerebriform nuclear morphology and were CD7 negative.
Most cases had an admixture of CD8-positive lymphocytes in excess of 40% or more
of the intraepidermal and/or dermal infiltrate; it was the dominant
intraepidermal infiltrate in 10 cases. The CD8-positive cells, typically small,
round, and CD7 positive, showed a directed pattern of migration into
acrosyringia and suprapapillary plates, with satellitosis around
CD4-positive/CD8-negative/CD7-negative atypical lymphocytes. CD56 positivity was
seen among the intraepidermal lymphoid cells and roughly paralleled the CD8
profile. In general, CD8-positive lymphocytes dominated in cases of PLEVA,
whereas CD4-positive lymphocytes were very conspicuous and composed the dominant
intraepidermal populace only in those biopsies of progressive PL/PLC. Clonality
was shown in 25 of 27 biopsies in which amplifiable DNA was obtained.
Intraepithelial atypical lymphocytes, phenotypic abnormalities, and TCR-gamma
rearrangements suggest that PLC and PLEVA are a form of T-cell dyscrasia.
Lesions may follow a recalcitrant course characteristic of MF and premycotic
disorders such as LPP. The aberrant phenotype cell is similar to that defining
MF: a CD4-positive T lymphocyte with a CD5 and CD7 deletion. Directed epidermal
migration seen in biopsies procured from incipient lesions along with occasional
temporal association to viral or drug exposure suggests that an abnormal immune
response to an antigenic trigger may be the inciting event.

Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/hupa.2002.125381
PMID: 12203210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
