---
reference_id: "PMID:6103441"
title: "Hydralazine-induced systemic lupus erythematosus: influence of HLA-DR and sex on susceptibility."
authors:
- Batchelor JR
- Welsh KI
- Tinoco RM
- Dollery CT
- Hughes GR
- Bernstein R
- Ryan P
- Naish PF
- Aber GM
- Bing RF
- Russell GI
journal: Lancet
year: '1980'
doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(80)91554-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hydralazine-induced systemic lupus erythematosus: influence of HLA-DR and sex on susceptibility.
**Authors:** Batchelor JR, Welsh KI, Tinoco RM, Dollery CT, Hughes GR, Bernstein R, Ryan P, Naish PF, Aber GM, Bing RF, Russell GI
**Journal:** Lancet (1980)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0140-6736(80)91554-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(80)91554-8)

## Content

1. Lancet. 1980 May 24;1(8178):1107-9. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(80)91554-8.

Hydralazine-induced systemic lupus erythematosus: influence of HLA-DR and sex on 
susceptibility.

Batchelor JR, Welsh KI, Tinoco RM, Dollery CT, Hughes GR, Bernstein R, Ryan P, 
Naish PF, Aber GM, Bing RF, Russell GI.

26 patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) induced by treatment with 
the antihypertensive drug hydralazine were investigated to determine if 
predisposition to the toxic effect was associated with an HLA-DR antigen. 25 of 
the 26 patients were slow acetylators. The group was compared with three others 
(1) 113 healthy subjects, untested for acetylator phenotype, (2) 16 
slow-acetylator hypertensive patients treated with hydralazine for more than a 
year without developing SLE, and (3) 20 patients with idiopathic SLE. The 
frequency of HLA-DR4 (73%) was significantly higher in the group with 
hydralazine-induced SLE than in the other groups (respectively 33%, 25%, and 
25%). The ratio of women to men affected was 4:1. If the slow acetylators 
treated with hydralazine were analysed as one group, it was observed that all 
women with DR4 developed hydralazine-induced SLE; the only men to do so were 
those with DR2 who were receiving 200 mg hydralazine per day. These observations 
have led us to suggest guide lines for hydralazine therapy and point to a 
striking association between an HLA-DR antigen and an adverse reaction to a 
therapeutic agent. It was also noted that the distribution of DR antigens in the 
hydralazine-SLE patients was significantly different from that in the group with 
idiopathic SLE. This supports the view that the syndromes are separate entities.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(80)91554-8
PMID: 6103441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]