---
reference_id: "PMID:33609053"
title: "Pemphigus erythematosus: A case series from a tertiary academic center and literature review."
authors:
- Hobbs LK
- Noland MB
- Raghavan SS
- Gru AA
journal: J Cutan Pathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/cup.13992
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Autoimmune Diseases/pathology
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Erythema/pathology
- "Ethnicity/statistics & numerical data"
- Female
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique/methods
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/diagnosis, immunology, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pemphigus/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology, pathology"
- Prevalence
- "Skin Diseases, Vesiculobullous/immunology, pathology"
- Tertiary Care Centers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pemphigus erythematosus: A case series from a tertiary academic center and literature review.
**Authors:** Hobbs LK, Noland MB, Raghavan SS, Gru AA
**Journal:** J Cutan Pathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cup.13992](https://doi.org/10.1111/cup.13992)

## Content

1. J Cutan Pathol. 2021 Aug;48(8):1038-1050. doi: 10.1111/cup.13992. Epub 2021
Mar  9.

Pemphigus erythematosus: A case series from a tertiary academic center and 
literature review.

Hobbs LK(1), Noland MB(1), Raghavan SS(2), Gru AA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Pemphigus erythematosus (PE) is a rare autoimmune skin condition 
with clinical, histopathological, and serological features that show overlap 
between lupus erythematosus and pemphigus foliaceus. It typically presents with 
erythematous, scaly plaques and has a female predominance.
METHODS: After Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval, we searched the 
internal pathology database for "pemphigus erythematosus" in the diagnostic line 
between 1 January 2000 and 30 July 2020. A comprehensive chart review was 
performed to collect patient demographics, clinical presentation, and treatment 
course. We performed a review of the literature and clinical, histopathological, 
and serological features were collected for comparison to our case series.
RESULTS: Five patients in the case series and 87 patients in the literature were 
diagnosed with PE. Clinical, histopathological, and serological features were 
consistent with what has been reported in the literature, although our cohort 
demonstrated a younger age at presentation, along with a higher proportion (80%) 
of Black patients. Of the 25 patients in the literature whose race was reported, 
only five patients (20%) were reported to be Black.
CONCLUSION: This is the first case series of PE that has shown an increased 
prevalence among middle-aged Black patients. No specific trend in regards to 
race was seen in the review of the literature.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cup.13992
PMID: 33609053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]