---
reference_id: "PMID:37060646"
title: "Acquired resistance mechanisms to osimertinib: The constant battle."
authors:
- Zalaquett Z
- Catherine Rita Hachem M
- Kassis Y
- Hachem S
- Eid R
- Raphael Kourie H
- Planchard D
journal: Cancer Treat Rev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2023.102557
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Mutation
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Acrylamides
- Aniline Compounds
- Indoles
- Pyrimidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acquired resistance mechanisms to osimertinib: The constant battle.
**Authors:** Zalaquett Z, Catherine Rita Hachem M, Kassis Y, Hachem S, Eid R, Raphael Kourie H, Planchard D
**Journal:** Cancer Treat Rev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ctrv.2023.102557](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctrv.2023.102557)

## Content

1. Cancer Treat Rev. 2023 May;116:102557. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2023.102557. Epub
2023 Apr 7.

Acquired resistance mechanisms to osimertinib: The constant battle.

Zalaquett Z(1), Catherine Rita Hachem M(2), Kassis Y(2), Hachem S(2), Eid R(3),
Raphael Kourie H(2), Planchard D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Hôtel-Dieu de France University Hospital,
Saint Joseph University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon. Electronic address:
ziadzalaquett@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Hôtel-Dieu de France University Hospital,
Saint Joseph University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif,
France.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide.
Detectable driver mutations have now changed the course of lung cancer treatment
with the emergence of targeted therapy as a novel strategy that widely improved
lung cancer prognosis, especially in metastatic patients. Osimertinib (AZD9291)
is an irreversible third-generation epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) used to treat stage IV EGFR-mutated non-small-cell
lung cancer. It was initially designed to target both EGFR-activating mutations
and the EGFR T790M mutation as well, which is the most common resistance
mechanism to first- and second-generation EGFR-TKIs. Following the FLAURA trial,
osimertinib is now widely used in the first-line setting. However, resistance to
osimertinib inevitably develops, with numerous mechanisms leading to its
resistance, classified into two main categories: EGFR-dependent and
EGFR-independent mechanisms. While EGFR-dependent mechanisms consist mainly of
the C797S EGFR mutation, EGFR-independent mechanisms include bypass pathways,
oncogenic fusions, and phenotypic transformation, among others. This review
summarizes the molecular resistance mechanisms to osimertinib, with the aim of
identifying novel therapeutic approaches to overcome osimertinib resistance and
improve patient outcome.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2023.102557
PMID: 37060646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
