---
reference_id: "PMID:29427102"
title: "Spinocerebellar [corrected] Ataxia Type 6: Molecular Mechanisms and Calcium Channel Genetics."
authors:
- Du X
- Gomez CM
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-71779-1_7
keywords:
- Animals
- "Calcium Channels/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 19/genetics, metabolism"
- Exons
- Humans
- Internal Ribosome Entry Sites/genetics
- "Purkinje Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar [corrected] Ataxia Type 6: Molecular Mechanisms and Calcium Channel Genetics.
**Authors:** Du X, Gomez CM
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-319-71779-1_7](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71779-1_7)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2018;1049:147-173. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-71779-1_7.

Spinocerebellar [corrected] Ataxia Type 6: Molecular Mechanisms and Calcium
Channel Genetics.

Du X(1), Gomez CM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, 60637, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, 60637, IL, USA.
cgomez@neurology.bsd.uchicago.edu.

Erratum in
    Adv Exp Med Biol. 2018;1049:E1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-71779-1_22.

Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) type 6 is an autosomal dominant disease affecting
cerebellar degeneration. Clinically, it is characterized by pure cerebellar
dysfunction, slowly progressive unsteadiness of gait and stance, slurred speech,
and abnormal eye movements with late onset. Pathological findings of SCA6
include a diffuse loss of Purkinje cells, predominantly in the cerebellar
vermis. Genetically, SCA6 is caused by expansion of a trinucleotide CAG repeat
in the last exon of longest isoform CACNA1A gene on chromosome 19p13.1-p13.2.
Normal alleles have 4-18 repeats, while alleles causing disease contain 19-33
repeats. Due to presence of a novel internal ribosomal entry site (IRES) with
the mRNA, CACNA1A encodes two structurally unrelated proteins with distinct
functions within an overlapping open reading frame (ORF) of the same mRNA: (1)
α1A subunit of P/Q-type voltage gated calcium channel; (2) α1ACT, a newly
recognized transcription factor, with polyglutamine repeat at C-terminal end.
Understanding the function of α1ACT in physiological and pathological conditions
may elucidate the pathogenesis of SCA6. More importantly, the IRES, as the
translational control element of α1ACT, provides a potential therapeutic target
for the treatment of SCA6.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-71779-1_7
PMID: 29427102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
