---
reference_id: "PMID:31644192"
title: Hepatitis C (HCV) Agents.
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis C (HCV) Agents.

## Content

1. Hepatitis C (HCV) Agents.

LiverTox®: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury 
[Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases; 2012–.
2022 Feb 7.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a small RNA virus belonging to the family 
flaviviridae and genus hepacivirus. The virion is approximately 50 nm in 
diameter and has an outer lipid associated envelop (E1 and E2) and inner 
nucleocapsid (Core). Within the nucleocapsid is a single molecule of 
single-stranded RNA of positive polarity approximately 9.5 kilobases in length. 
The RNA is transcribed into a large polyprotein that is subsequently cleaved 
into multiple polypeptides, labeled from the 5’ to 3’ end: core, envelope 1 and 
2, and nonstructural proteins NS2, NS3, NS4 and NS5A and NS5B. The NS3 region 
encodes a viral helicase and protease. The NS5A region encodes a polypeptide 
that is essential for production and maintenance of the replicative complex. The 
NS5B region encodes a viral RNA dependent, RNA polymerase that is essential for 
replication. The NS3, NS5A and NS5B regions have been targeted with direct 
acting antiviral agents. The initial agents used to treat chronic hepatitis C 
were interferon alfa, peginterferon and ribavirin. The antiviral activity of 
interferon and peginterferon is based upon their ability to stimulate interferon 
stimulated genes (ISGs) that have endogenous antiviral activities. Ribavirin is 
a nucleoside analogue that potentiates the effects of interferon against 
hepatitis C by as yet undefined mechanisms. Until 2010, the standard therapy of 
chronic hepatitis C was the combination of peginterferon and ribavirin given for 
24 or 48 weeks. This combination led to sustained clearance of HCV and remission 
in disease in 40% to 50% of patients. Response rates were higher with certain 
HCV genotypes, so that response rates in patients with genotypes 2 and 3 were as 
high as 70% to 80%. Importantly, these remissions in disease have been shown to 
represent cure of the chronic viral infection, in that long term follow up 
demonstrated lack of HCV replication and resolution of disease activity in over 
98% of patients. The shortcomings of peginterferon-ribavirin therapy were 
significant, most importantly the poor tolerance and side effects of this 
regimen. Thus, a high proportion of patients was intolerant or had 
contraindications to treatment. In 2010, three HCV-specific protease inhibitors 
were approved for use and introduced into practice: boceprevir, telaprevir and 
simeprevir. All three of these were specific to genotype 1 HCV and had little or 
no activity against genotypes 2 or 3 or the lesser common genotypes 4, 5 and 6. 
Triple therapy with peginterferon, ribavirin and a HCV-specific protease 
inhibitor (boceprevir, telaprevir or simeprevir) increased the response rate in 
patients with chronic hepatitis C, genotype 1 from 40%-45% to 65%-75%. A 
persistent difficulty, however, was the continued need to combine these agents 
with peginterferon and the considerable side effects which were worsened by 
these protease inhibitors. An important advance in therapy of hepatitis C came 
in 2013 with the approval of an HCV specific RNA polymerase inhibitor, 
sofosbuvir. Sofosbuvir not only increased the response rate when combined with 
peginterferon and ribavirin, but also allowed for interferon-free treatment when 
combined with ribavirin, HCV protease inhibitors or a new class of agents that 
antagonized HCV NS5A activity. In 2014, all-oral HCV specific antiviral regimens 
were approved that yielded response rates in excess of 95% in patients with 
genotype 1. Furthermore, successful therapy required only 8 to 12 weeks of 
treatment in most patients and were extremely well tolerated. These all-oral 
regimens revolutionized therapy of hepatitis C, allowing treatment of virtually 
all patients regardless of severity of illness or co-morbid conditions with few 
side effects and durations of therapy of 8, 12 or 24 weeks. Other all oral 
regimens, including treatments for the less common genotypes of hepatitis C 
began to become available in 2015, 2016 and 2017. The several classes of agents 
that are combined in either a two-, three- or four-drug regimens include HCV RNA 
polymerase inhibitors (nucleoside and nonnucleoside), HCV NS5A antagonists and 
the HCV protease inhibitors. Several of these drug combinations have been 
formulated as single tablet or co-packaged regimens. These combination products 
made therapy easier to apply, but also resulted in the withdrawal of less 
successful agents, including boceprevir, telaprevir, daclatasvir, simeprevir and 
the four-drug combination of ombitasvir, dasabuvir, paritaprevir and ritonavir 
(Viekira Pak). Most currently used regimens are given for 8 to 12 weeks and 
yield response rates of 98% or more (Epclusa, Mavyret and Zepatier). Widespread 
application of these therapies to patients with chronic hepatitis C will likely 
decrease the morbidity and mortality of this disease and make significant 
inroads into decreasing the burden of chronic liver disease, cirrhosis, and 
hepatocellular carcinoma worldwide.

PMID: 31644192