---
reference_id: "PMID:32360825"
title: "Hepatitis B Core-Related Antigen to Indicate High Viral Load: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of 10,397 Individual Participants."
authors:
- Yoshida K
- Desbiolles A
- Feldman SF
- Ahn SH
- Alidjinou EK
- Atsukawa M
- Bocket L
- Brunetto MR
- Buti M
- Carey I
- Caviglia GP
- Chen EQ
- Cornberg M
- Enomoto M
- Honda M
- Zu Siederdissen CH
- Ishigami M
- Janssen HLA
- Maasoumy B
- Matsui T
- Matsumoto A
- Nishiguchi S
- Riveiro-Barciela M
- Takaki A
- Tangkijvanich P
- Toyoda H
- van Campenhout MJH
- Wang B
- Wei L
- Yang HI
- Yano Y
- Yatsuhashi H
- Yuen MF
- Tanaka E
- Lemoine M
- Tanaka Y
- Shimakawa Y
journal: Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2020.04.045
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B Core-Related Antigen to Indicate High Viral Load: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of 10,397 Individual Participants.
**Authors:** Yoshida K, Desbiolles A, Feldman SF, Ahn SH, Alidjinou EK, Atsukawa M, Bocket L, Brunetto MR, Buti M, Carey I, Caviglia GP, Chen EQ, Cornberg M, Enomoto M, Honda M, Zu Siederdissen CH, Ishigami M, Janssen HLA, Maasoumy B, Matsui T, Matsumoto A, Nishiguchi S, Riveiro-Barciela M, Takaki A, Tangkijvanich P, Toyoda H, van Campenhout MJH, Wang B, Wei L, Yang HI, Yano Y, Yatsuhashi H, Yuen MF, Tanaka E, Lemoine M, Tanaka Y, Shimakawa Y
**Journal:** Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cgh.2020.04.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2020.04.045)

## Content

1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021 Jan;19(1):46-60.e8. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2020.04.045. Epub 2020 Apr 29.

Hepatitis B Core-Related Antigen to Indicate High Viral Load: Systematic Review 
and Meta-Analysis of 10,397 Individual Participants.

Yoshida K(1), Desbiolles A(2), Feldman SF(2), Ahn SH(3), Alidjinou EK(4), 
Atsukawa M(5), Bocket L(4), Brunetto MR(6), Buti M(7), Carey I(8), Caviglia 
GP(9), Chen EQ(10), Cornberg M(11), Enomoto M(12), Honda M(13), Zu Siederdissen 
CH(11), Ishigami M(14), Janssen HLA(15), Maasoumy B(11), Matsui T(16), Matsumoto 
A(17), Nishiguchi S(18), Riveiro-Barciela M(7), Takaki A(19), Tangkijvanich 
P(20), Toyoda H(21), van Campenhout MJH(22), Wang B(8), Wei L(23), Yang HI(24), 
Yano Y(25), Yatsuhashi H(26), Yuen MF(27), Tanaka E(28), Lemoine M(1), Tanaka 
Y(29), Shimakawa Y(30).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Liver Unit, Imperial College London, 
Paddington, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Unité d'Épidémiologie des Maladies Émergentes, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(4)Laboratoire de Virologie, Centre de Biologie Pathologie, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Lille, Lille, France.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Nippon Medical 
School Chiba Hokusoh Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(6)Hepatology Unit, Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Pathology of Hepatitis 
Viruses, University Hospital of Pisa, Pisa PI, Italy.
(7)Liver Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Universitari Vall 
d'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Institute of Liver Studies, King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(10)Center of Infectious Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China.
(11)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(12)Department of Hepatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University 
Medical School, Osaka, Japan.
(13)Department of Gastroenterology, Department of Advanced Medical Technology, 
Kanazawa University Graduate School of Health Medicine, Ishikawa, Japan.
(14)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Nagoya University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.
(15)Toronto Centre for Liver Disease, Toronto General Hospital, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(16)Center for Gastroenterology, Teine-Keijinkai Hospital, Hokkaido, Japan.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Matsumoto, Japan.
(18)Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Disease, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Hyogo College of Medicine, Hyogo, Japan.
(19)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(20)Center of Excellence in Hepatitis and Liver Cancer, Faculty of Medicine, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(21)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ogaki Municipal Hospital, 
Gifu, Japan.
(22)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC University Medical 
Center, GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(23)Peking University Hepatology Institute, Beijing Key Laboratory of Hepatitis 
C and Immunotherapy for Liver Diseases, Peking University People's Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(24)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(25)Center for Infectious Diseases, Department of Gastroenterology, Kobe 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
(26)Clinical Research Center, National Hospital Organization, Nagasaki Medical 
Center, Nagasaki, Japan.
(27)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, 
Hong Kong, China.
(28)Department for the Promotion of Regional Medicine, Shinshu University School 
of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan.
(29)Department of Virology and Liver Unit, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.
(30)Unité d'Épidémiologie des Maladies Émergentes, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France. Electronic address: yusuke.shimakawa@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: To eliminate hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, scale-up of 
testing and treatment in resource-limited countries is crucial. However, access 
to nucleic acid testing to quantify HBV DNA, an essential test to examine 
treatment eligibility, remains severely limited. We assessed the performance of 
a novel immunoassay, HBV core-related antigen (HBcrAg), as a low-cost (less than 
US $15/assay) alternative to nucleic acid testing to indicate clinically 
important high viremia in chronic HBV patients infected with different 
genotypes.
METHODS: We searched Medline, Embase, Scopus, and Web of Science databases 
through June 27, 2018. Three reviewers independently selected studies measuring 
HBV DNA and HBcrAg in the same blood samples. We contacted authors to provide 
individual participant data (IPD). We randomly allocated each IPD to a 
derivation or validation cohort. We applied optimal HBcrAg cut-off values 
derived from the derivation set to the validation set to estimate 
sensitivity/specificity.
RESULTS: Of 74 eligible studies, IPD were obtained successfully for 60 studies 
(81%). Meta-analysis included 5591 IPD without antiviral therapy and 4806 
treated with antivirals. In untreated patients, the pooled area under the 
receiver operating characteristic curve and optimal cut-off values were as 
follows: 0.88 (95% CI, 0.83-0.94) and 3.6 log U/mL to diagnose HBV DNA level of 
2000 IU/mL or greater; and 0.96 (95% CI, 0.94-0.98) and 5.3 log U/mL for 200,000 
IU/mL or greater, respectively. In the validation set, the sensitivity and 
specificity were 85.2% and 84.7% to diagnose HBV DNA level of 2000 IU/mL or 
greater, and 91.8% and 90.5% for 200,000 IU/mL or greater, respectively. The 
performance did not vary by HBV genotypes. In patients treated with anti-HBV 
therapy the correlation between HBcrAg and HBV DNA was poor.
CONCLUSIONS: HBcrAg might be a useful serologic marker to indicate clinically 
important high viremia in treatment-naïve, HBV-infected patients.

Copyright © 2021 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2020.04.045
PMID: 32360825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]