---
reference_id: "PMID:20301613"
title: HFE-Related Hemochromatosis.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Barton JC
- Parker CJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HFE-Related Hemochromatosis.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Barton JC, Parker CJ

## Content

1. HFE-Related Hemochromatosis.

Barton JC(1), Parker CJ(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2000 Apr 3 [updated 2024 Apr 11].

Author information:
(1)University of Alabama at Birmingham;, Southern Iron Disorders Center,
Birmingham, Alabama
(2)Division of Hematology and Hematologic Malignancies, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: HFE-related hemochromatosis (HFE HC) is characterized
by increased intestinal iron absorption and increased recycling of iron derived
from senescent red blood cells. The phenotypic spectrum of HFE HC includes
clinical HFE HC (increased serum ferritin and transferrin saturation and
end-organ damage secondary to iron overload), biochemical HFE HC (increased
serum ferritin and transferrin saturation without end-organ damage), and
non-penetrant HFE HC (neither clinical manifestations of HFE HC nor iron
overload are present, although elevated transferrin saturation may occur).
Clinical HFE HC is characterized by excessive iron in the liver, pancreas,
heart, skin, joints, and anterior pituitary gland. In untreated individuals,
early manifestations include weakness, chronic fatigue, abdominal pain, weight
loss, arthralgias, and diabetes mellitus. Individuals with HFE HC have an
increased risk of cirrhosis when their serum ferritin is higher than 1,000 µg/L.
Other findings of severe iron overload include hypogonadism, congestive heart
failure, arrhythmias, and progressive increase in skin pigmentation. Clinical
HFE HC is more common in males than females.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of HFE HC is established in most persons with
characteristic laboratory and/or clinical features by identification of HFE
p.Cys282Tyr homozygosity.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: In individuals with clinical HFE HC, a major
initial treatment goal is to remove excess iron by phlebotomy to achieve serum
ferritin 50-100 µg/L. Erythrocytapheresis is sometimes used to remove excess
iron. Iron chelation therapy may be used to treat individuals intolerant of
phlebotomy or erythrocytapheresis or those with symptomatic anemia. In
individuals with biochemical HFE HC, phlebotomy is indicated when serum ferritin
exceeds 300 µg/L (males) and 200 µg/L (females). Treatment of manifestations:
Management of complications of HFE HC (arthropathy, diabetes mellitus,
cirrhosis, hypogonadism, and cardiomyopathy) do not differ from the management
of these conditions in persons without HFE HC. Treatment of arthropathy includes
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, physiotherapy, and joint replacement.
Standard treatment for diabetes mellitus. Vaccination for hepatitis A and B.
Treatment of hepatitis B or C with standard antiviral agents may reduce liver
injury. In individuals with cirrhosis, evaluation and treatment of complications
is warranted, including endoscopic surveillance of varices; prophylaxis with
nonselective beta-blockers; salt restriction and diuretics for ascites, with
paracentesis and portosystemic shunts as needed; antibiotics to decrease risk of
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis; and low-protein diet for hepatic
encephalopathy with lactulose and rifaximin as indicated. Orthotopic liver
transplant for end-stage liver disease. Hormone replacement therapy for
hypogonadism; gonadotropins for infertility. Standard treatments for heart
failure and arrhythmias in individuals with cardiomyopathy. Surveillance: In
individuals with clinical HFE HC, after serum ferritin is ≤100 µg/L, monitor
serum ferritin concentration every three to four months, and maintain serum
ferritin <300 µg/L (males) and <200 µg/L (females) thereafter; joint radiographs
as needed; in those with diabetes mellitus assess for complications every six to
12 months; liver enzyme tests every six to 12 months; standard evaluations for
primary liver cancer in those with cirrhosis; assessment for hormonal deficiency
in those with hypogonadism; cardiac assessment in those with cardiac siderosis
annually or as needed. In individuals with biochemical HFE HC and non-penetrant
p.Cys282Tyr homozygotes, monitor serum ferritin concentration every six to 12
months, and begin phlebotomy to achieve iron depletion when serum ferritin
exceeds 300 µg/L (males) and 200 µg/L (females). Agents/circumstances to avoid:
Medicinal iron, mineral supplements containing iron, excess alcohol, excess
vitamin C, uncooked seafood, and lifestyle behaviors that increase the risk of
viral hepatitis infection; alcohol consumption should be avoided in those with
hepatic fibrosis or cirrhosis. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Offer molecular
genetic testing to adult sibs of a proband to facilitate early diagnosis and
surveillance.
GENETIC COUNSELING: HFE HC is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and has
low clinical penetrance. (Note: Pseudodominance has been observed in HFE HC and
is attributed to the relatively high prevalence of p.Cys282Tyr heterozygotes in
persons of European ancestry.) Most parents of individuals with HFE HC are
p.Cys282Tyr heterozygotes (i.e., have one copy of HFE p.Cys282Tyr). On occasion,
one parent has p.Cys282Tyr homozygosity and may have clinical, biochemical, or
non-penetrant HFE HC. If both parents are p.Cys282Tyr heterozygotes, each sib of
an affected individual has a 25% chance of being homozygous for p.Cys282Tyr, a
50% chance of being heterozygous for p.Cys282Tyr, and a 25% chance of being
neither homozygous nor heterozygous for p.Cys282Tyr. Sibs who are homozygous for
p.Cys282Tyr are at risk for HFE-related iron overload, although the clinical
penetrance of HFE HC is low.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301613
