---
reference_id: "PMID:39600030"
title: "Complexities of complete androgen insensitivity syndrome: insights from a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Asanidze E
- Kristesashvili J
- Asanidze A
- Jibladze A
- Gaphrindashvili G
- Asanidze B
- Bhatia R
journal: J Int Med Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/03000605241300058
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "46, XX Disorders of Sex Development/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Androgen-Insensitivity Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Congenital Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Mullerian Ducts/abnormalities, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complexities of complete androgen insensitivity syndrome: insights from a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Asanidze E, Kristesashvili J, Asanidze A, Jibladze A, Gaphrindashvili G, Asanidze B, Bhatia R
**Journal:** J Int Med Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/03000605241300058](https://doi.org/10.1177/03000605241300058)

## Content

1. J Int Med Res. 2024 Nov;52(11):3000605241300058. doi:
10.1177/03000605241300058.

Complexities of complete androgen insensitivity syndrome: insights from a case
report and literature review.

Asanidze E(1), Kristesashvili J(2), Asanidze A(3), Jibladze A(2),
Gaphrindashvili G(4), Asanidze B(4), Bhatia R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University Geomedi, Tbilisi,
Georgia.
(2)Department of Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Ivane Javakhishvili Tbilisi
State University, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Tbilisi State Medical
University, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Tbilisi State Medical
University First University Clinic, Tbilisi, Georgia.

Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) presents significant challenges
in the accurate diagnosis and personalized management of individuals with a 46,
XY karyotype who exhibit a female phenotype due to complete insensitivity to
androgens. This retrospective case report analyzes the clinical data, genetic
testing, hormonal profiling, and imaging studies of a patient who was initially
misdiagnosed during hernioplasty and later misidentified as having
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome. The report details the establishment of
the correct diagnosis and implementation of a personalized management strategy
that postponed gonadectomy until post-puberty. This approach included continuous
monitoring and tailored estrogen replacement therapy, which facilitated informed
patient decisions and comprehensive feminization while preventing the long-term
consequences of estrogen deficiency. Supported by a literature review, this case
report emphasizes the necessity of a multidisciplinary approach to managing
CAIS, highlighting the importance of heightened awareness, accurate diagnostics,
and personalized therapeutic plans to ensure holistic, patient-centered care.

DOI: 10.1177/03000605241300058
PMCID: PMC11603565
PMID: 39600030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestThe Authors
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
