---
reference_id: "PMID:34718183"
title: Allele-specific PCR and Next-generation sequencing based genetic screening for Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia in India.
authors:
- Ravichandran L
- Korula S
- Asha HS
- Varghese D
- Parthiban R
- Johnson J
- Ishwarya J
- Shetty S
- Cherian KE
- Jebasingh F
- Kapoor N
- Pachat D
- Mathai S
- Simon A
- Rajaratnam S
- Paul TV
- Thomas N
- Chapla A
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104369
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Allele-specific PCR and Next-generation sequencing based genetic screening for Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia in India.
**Authors:** Ravichandran L, Korula S, Asha HS, Varghese D, Parthiban R, Johnson J, Ishwarya J, Shetty S, Cherian KE, Jebasingh F, Kapoor N, Pachat D, Mathai S, Simon A, Rajaratnam S, Paul TV, Thomas N, Chapla A
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104369](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104369)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2021 Dec;64(12):104369. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104369. Epub
 2021 Oct 27.

Allele-specific PCR and Next-generation sequencing based genetic screening for 
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia in India.

Ravichandran L(1), Korula S(2), Asha HS(1), Varghese D(1), Parthiban R(1), 
Johnson J(1), Ishwarya J(3), Shetty S(1), Cherian KE(1), Jebasingh F(1), Kapoor 
N(1), Pachat D(4), Mathai S(2), Simon A(2), Rajaratnam S(1), Paul TV(1), Thomas 
N(1), Chapla A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Christian Medical 
College, Ida Scudder Road, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Christian Medical College, Ida 
Scudder Road, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Christian Medical College, Ida Scudder Road, 
Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Aster MIMS, Calicut, Kerala, India.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Christian Medical 
College, Ida Scudder Road, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India. Electronic address: 
aaronchapla@cmcvellore.ac.in.

Genetic screening of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) is known to be 
challenging due to the complexities in CYP21A2 genotyping and has not been the 
first-tier diagnostic tool in routine clinical practice. Also, with the advent 
of massive parallel sequencing technology, there is a need for investigating its 
utility in screening extended panel of genes implicated in CAH. In this study, 
we have established and utilized an Allele-Specific Polymerase Chain Reaction 
(ASPCR) based approach for screening eight common mutations in CYP21A2 gene 
followed by targeted Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) of CYP21A2, CYP11B1, 
CYP17A1, POR, and CYP19A1 genes in 72 clinically diagnosed CAH subjects from 
India. Through these investigations, 88.7% of the subjects with 21 hydroxylase 
deficiency were positive for eight CYP21A2 mutations with ASPCR. The targeted 
NGS assay was sensitive to pick up all the mutations identified by ASPCR. 
Utilizing NGS in subjects negative for ASPCR, five study subjects were 
homozygous positive for other CYP21A2 variants: one with a novel c.1274G>T, 
three with c.1451G>C and one with c.143A>G variant. One subject was compound 
heterozygous for c.955C>T and c.1042G>A variants identified using ASPCR and NGS. 
One subject suspected for a Simple Virilizing (SV) 21 hydroxylase deficiency was 
positive for a CYP19A1:c.1142A>T variant. CYP11B1 variants (c.1201-1G>A, 
c.1200+1del, c.412C>T, c.1024C>T, c.1012dup, c.623G>A) were identified in all 
six subjects suspected for 11 beta-hydroxylase deficiency. The overall mutation 
positivity was 97.2%. Our results suggest that ASPCR followed by targeted NGS is 
a cost-effective and comprehensive strategy for screening common CYP21A2 
mutations and the CAH panel of genes in a clinical setting.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104369
PMID: 34718183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]