---
reference_id: "PMID:37047805"
title: Characterizing the Interplay of Lymphocytes in Graves' Disease.
authors:
- Hansen M
- Cheever A
- Weber KS
- O'Neill KL
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24076835
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterizing the Interplay of Lymphocytes in Graves' Disease.
**Authors:** Hansen M, Cheever A, Weber KS, O'Neill KL
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24076835](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24076835)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 6;24(7):6835. doi: 10.3390/ijms24076835.

Characterizing the Interplay of Lymphocytes in Graves' Disease.

Hansen M(1), Cheever A(1), Weber KS(1), O'Neill KL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Brigham Young University, 
Provo, UT 84602, USA.

Graves' disease (GD) is a thyroid-specific autoimmune disease with a high 
prevalence worldwide. The disease is primarily mediated by B cells, which 
produce autoantibodies against the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR), 
chronically stimulating it and leading to high levels of thyroid hormones in the 
body. Interest in characterizing the immune response in GD has motivated many 
phenotyping studies. The immunophenotype of the cells involved and the interplay 
between them and their secreted factors are crucial to understanding disease 
progression and future treatment options. T cell populations are markedly 
distinct, including increased levels of Th17 and follicular helper T cells 
(Tfh), while Treg cells appear to be impaired. Some B cells subsets are 
autoreactive, and anti-TSHR antibodies are the key disease-causing outcome of 
this interplay. Though some consensus across phenotyping studies will be 
discussed here, there are also complexities that are yet to be resolved. A 
better understanding of the immunophenotype of Graves' disease can lead to 
improved treatment strategies and novel drug targets.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24076835
PMCID: PMC10094834
PMID: 37047805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.