---
reference_id: "PMID:15090872"
title: "Ménière's disease."
authors:
- Minor LB
- Schessel DA
- Carey JP
journal: Curr Opin Neurol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1097/00019052-200402000-00004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ménière's disease.
**Authors:** Minor LB, Schessel DA, Carey JP
**Journal:** Curr Opin Neurol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00019052-200402000-00004](https://doi.org/10.1097/00019052-200402000-00004)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Neurol. 2004 Feb;17(1):9-16. doi: 10.1097/00019052-200402000-00004.

Ménière's disease.

Minor LB(1), Schessel DA, Carey JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287-0910, USA. 
lminor@jhmi.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Ménière's disease is characterized by spontaneous attacks of 
vertigo, fluctuating sensorineural hearing loss, aural fullness, and tinnitus. 
The pathologic process involves distortion of the membranous labyrinth with the 
formation of endolymphatic hydrops. This review describes the pathogenesis and 
etiology as well as the diagnosis and treatment of Ménière's disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: Initial management of Ménière's disease can involve a low-salt 
diet and a diuretic. Treatment with intratympanic injection of gentamicin can be 
beneficial when vertigo persists despite optimal medical management. Recent 
studies have shown that gentamicin reduces vestibular function in the treated 
ear, although complete ablation of this vestibular function is not typically 
required in order to achieve control of vertigo.
SUMMARY: Vertigo is often the most debilitating symptom associated with 
Ménière's disease. Many treatment options exist for the management of vertigo. 
Intratympanic injection of gentamicin (low dose) can be used in patients for 
whom vertigo has not been controlled by medical measures. Ongoing research is 
providing a greater understanding of the effects of gentamicin on vestibular 
function and of the mechanisms through which gentamicin leads to control of 
vertigo.

DOI: 10.1097/00019052-200402000-00004
PMID: 15090872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]