---
reference_id: "PMID:33093405"
title: "Liver Transplantation for Propionic Acidemia: Evidence From a Systematic Review and Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhou GP
- Jiang YZ
- Wu SS
- Kong YY
- Sun LY
- Zhu ZJ
journal: Transplantation
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000003501
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver Transplantation for Propionic Acidemia: Evidence From a Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhou GP, Jiang YZ, Wu SS, Kong YY, Sun LY, Zhu ZJ
**Journal:** Transplantation (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/TP.0000000000003501](https://doi.org/10.1097/TP.0000000000003501)

## Content

1. Transplantation. 2021 Oct 1;105(10):2272-2282. doi:
10.1097/TP.0000000000003501.

Liver Transplantation for Propionic Acidemia: Evidence From a Systematic Review 
and Meta-analysis.

Zhou GP(1)(2), Jiang YZ(1)(2), Wu SS(3), Kong YY(3), Sun LY(1)(2)(4), Zhu 
ZJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Liver Transplantation Center, National Clinical Research Center for Digestive 
Diseases, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, Xi-Cheng 
District, Beijing, China.
(2)Clinical Center for Pediatric Liver Transplantation, Capital Medical 
University, Xi-Cheng District, Beijing, China.
(3)Clinical Epidemiology and EBM Unit, National Clinical Research Center for 
Digestive Diseases, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Xi-Cheng District, Beijing, China.
(4)Intensive Care Unit, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Xi-Cheng District, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The worldwide experience of liver transplantation (LT) in the 
treatment of propionic acidemia (PA) remains limited and fragmented. This review 
aims to provide a comprehensive and quantitative understanding of posttransplant 
clinical outcomes in PA patients.
METHODS: MEDLINE, Embase, and the Cochrane Library databases were searched for 
studies focusing on PA patients who underwent LT. The pooled estimate rates and 
95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated using a random-effects model with 
Freeman-Tukey double arcsine transformation.
RESULTS: Twenty-one studies involving 70 individuals were included. The pooled 
estimate rates were 0.95 (95% CI, 0.80-1.00) for patient survival and 0.91 (95% 
CI, 0.72-1.00) for allograft survival. The pooled estimate rates were 0.20 (95% 
CI, 0.05-0.39) for rejection, 0.08 (95% CI, 0.00-0.21) for hepatic artery 
thrombosis, 0.14 (95% CI, 0.00-0.37) for cytomegalovirus/Epstein-Barr virus 
infection, and 0.03 (95% CI, 0.00-0.15) for biliary complications. The pooled 
estimate rates were 0.98 (95% CI, 0.88-1.00) for metabolic stability, 1.00 (95% 
CI, 0.79-1.00) for reversal of preexisting cardiomyopathy, and 0.97 (95% CI, 
0.78-1.00) for improvement of neurodevelopmental delay. A large proportion of 
patients achieved liberalization of protein intake posttransplant (pooled 
estimate rate 0.66 [95% CI, 0.35-0.93]).
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the risk of transplant-related complications, LT is a 
viable therapeutic option in PA patients with satisfactory survival rates and 
clinical outcomes. Given the diversity in neurological assessment methods and 
the inconsistency in the achievement of dietary protein liberalization across 
different studies, consensus on neurological evaluation methods and 
posttransplant protein intake is necessary. Longer-term clinical outcomes of LT 
for PA warrants further investigation.

Copyright © 2020 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/TP.0000000000003501
PMID: 33093405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.