---
reference_id: "PMID:39932790"
title: Comparison of survival outcomes for patients with Lynch vs non-Lynch syndrome and microsatellite unstable colorectal cancer treated with immunotherapy.
authors:
- Eslinger C
- Walden D
- McGary A
- Emiloju O
- Ahn D
- Sonbol MB
- Bekaii-Saab T
- Zhu M
- Hubbard J
- Wu C
journal: Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.35756
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Microsatellite Instability
- "Colorectal Neoplasms, Hereditary Nonpolyposis/genetics, drug therapy, mortality, pathology, immunology"
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy, mortality, immunology"
- Aged
- DNA Mismatch Repair/genetics
- Adult
- Immunotherapy/methods
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of survival outcomes for patients with Lynch vs non-Lynch syndrome and microsatellite unstable colorectal cancer treated with immunotherapy.
**Authors:** Eslinger C, Walden D, McGary A, Emiloju O, Ahn D, Sonbol MB, Bekaii-Saab T, Zhu M, Hubbard J, Wu C
**Journal:** Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.35756](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.35756)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2025 Feb 15;131(4):e35756. doi: 10.1002/cncr.35756.

Comparison of survival outcomes for patients with Lynch vs non-Lynch syndrome
and microsatellite unstable colorectal cancer treated with immunotherapy.

Eslinger C(1), Walden D(1), McGary A(2), Emiloju O(3), Ahn D(1), Sonbol MB(1),
Bekaii-Saab T(1), Zhu M(3), Hubbard J(3), Wu C(1).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Phoenix, Arizona, USA.
(2)Mayo Clinic Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Scottsdale, Arizona,
USA.
(3)Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alterations in mismatch repair (MMR) genes like MLH1, MSH2, MSH6,
and PMS2 can lead to microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) tumors. These
mutations can be inherited, as in Lynch syndrome (LS), or occur de novo.
Although immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI) improves survival in MSI-H
colorectal cancer (CRC) compared to chemotherapy, data comparing outcomes for
patients with germline versus somatic MMR mutations are limited.
METHODS: This retrospective study included patients from Mayo Clinic (Arizona,
Minnesota, Florida) from 2008 to 2023. A total of 81 patient records were
reviewed. Patients with MMR-deficient or MSI-H CRC (N = 18 LS, N = 63 non-LS)
were included for analysis.
RESULTS: Pembrolizumab was used in 65% of patients with LS and 94% of patients
without LS, with median treatment durations of 11.7 and 8.8 months,
respectively. Median overall survival (OS) for all stages was 82 months. There
were no differences observed in OS for LS vs non-LS when patients in Stages II,
III, and IV were analyzed separately. In Stage IV patients, BRAF V600E mutations
were associated with worse OS compared to BRAF wild-type (hazard ratio, 2.69;
95% CI, 1.03-7.01, p = .043), with median OS of 19 vs. 113 months and
progression-free survival of 12 vs. 95 months.
CONCLUSION: Patients with MSI-H CRC treated with ICIs exhibited similar outcomes
regardless of germline or somatic MMR mutations. However, the presence of a BRAF
V600E mutation was associated with a worse prognosis.

© 2025 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.35756
PMID: 39932790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
