---
reference_id: "PMID:31609537"
title: "PTEN Hamartoma tumor syndrome in childhood: A review of the clinical literature."
authors:
- Macken WL
- Tischkowitz M
- Lachlan KL
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31743
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Child
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing
- Genotype
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PTEN Hamartoma tumor syndrome in childhood: A review of the clinical literature.
**Authors:** Macken WL, Tischkowitz M, Lachlan KL
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31743](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31743)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2019 Dec;181(4):591-610. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31743. Epub 2019 Oct 14.

PTEN Hamartoma tumor syndrome in childhood: A review of the clinical literature.

Macken WL(1), Tischkowitz M(2)(3), Lachlan KL(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospitals Southampton NHS Trust,
Southampton, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, East Anglian Medical Genetics Service,
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.

PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) is a highly variable autosomal dominant
condition associated with intellectual disability, overgrowth, and tumor
predisposition phenotypes, which often overlap. PHTS incorporates a number of
historical clinical presentations including Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome,
Cowden syndrome, and a macrocephaly-autism/developmental delay syndrome. Many
reviews in the literature focus on PHTS as an adult hamartoma and malignancy
predisposition condition. Here, we review the current literature with a focus on
pediatric presentations. The review starts with a summary of the main conditions
encompassed within PHTS. We then discuss PHTS diagnostic criteria, and clinical
features. We briefly address rarer PTEN associations, and the possible role of
mTOR inhibitors in treatment. We acknowledge the limited understanding of the
natural history of childhood-onset PHTS as a cancer predisposition syndrome and
present a summary of important management considerations.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31743
PMID: 31609537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
