---
reference_id: "PMID:15129647"
title: HTLV-1 and associated adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.
authors:
- Mahieux R
- Gessain A
journal: Rev Clin Exp Hematol
year: '2003'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HTLV-1 and associated adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.
**Authors:** Mahieux R, Gessain A
**Journal:** Rev Clin Exp Hematol (2003)

## Content

1. Rev Clin Exp Hematol. 2003 Dec;7(4):336-61.

HTLV-1 and associated adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.

Mahieux R(1), Gessain A.

Author information:
(1)Unité d'Epidémiologie et Physiopathologie des Virus Oncogènes, Institut 
Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr Roux, 75724, Paris.

Comment on
    Rev Clin Exp Hematol. 2003 Dec;7(4):327-8.

Human T-cell leukemia/lymphoma virus type 1 (HTLV-1) infects 15-20 millions 
individuals worldwide. This oncoretrovirus can be transmitted through 3 ways: 
horizontally, vertically (mother to child) and via blood transfusion. HTLV-1 
causes 2 major diseases: adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL) and tropical 
spastic paraparesis/HTLV-1-associated myelopathy. Tax is a 40-kDa phosphoprotein 
that is encoded by the pX region of the virus. Several lines of evidence have 
demonstrated a central role for this protein in the immortalization or 
transformation of the HTLV-1 infected cells. Apart from its ability to drive 
transcription from the viral promoter, it also deregulates the cell cycle, 
inhibits apoptosis, has an effect on the maintenance of the genomic stability 
and induces the production of several cytokines. In addition, several arguments 
strongly suggest the existence of host genetic factors, that could be involved 
in the HTLV-1 infection as well as in the development of ATLL among HTLV-1 
infected individuals. ATLL can be classified into 4 major subtypes: a smoldering 
type, a chronic type, a lymphoma type and a leukemic type. The demonstration by 
Southern blot analysis of the clonal integration of an HTLV-1 provirus in the 
tumoral cells represents the gold-standard to define biologically ATLL. The 
survival rate of ATLL patients, especially those who develop the acute leukemic 
or lymphomas forms, is very poor, and such clonal malignant CD4 expansion 
remains one of the most severe lymphoproliferations.

PMID: 15129647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]