---
reference_id: "PMID:20237166"
title: Mutations of the KISS1 gene in disorders of puberty.
authors:
- Silveira LG
- Noel SD
- Silveira-Neto AP
- Abreu AP
- Brito VN
- Santos MG
- Bianco SD
- Kuohung W
- Xu S
- Gryngarten M
- Escobar ME
- Arnhold IJ
- Mendonca BB
- Kaiser UB
- Latronico AC
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2421
keywords:
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone/metabolism
- Humans
- Hypogonadism/genetics
- Infant
- Kisspeptins
- Male
- Mutation
- Penis/abnormalities
- Puberty/genetics
- "Puberty, Precocious/genetics"
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics"
- "Receptors, Kisspeptin-1"
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of the KISS1 gene in disorders of puberty.
**Authors:** Silveira LG, Noel SD, Silveira-Neto AP, Abreu AP, Brito VN, Santos MG, Bianco SD, Kuohung W, Xu S, Gryngarten M, Escobar ME, Arnhold IJ, Mendonca BB, Kaiser UB, Latronico AC
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2009-2421](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2009-2421)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 May;95(5):2276-80. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2421.
Epub  2010 Mar 17.

Mutations of the KISS1 gene in disorders of puberty.

Silveira LG(1), Noel SD, Silveira-Neto AP, Abreu AP, Brito VN, Santos MG, Bianco 
SD, Kuohung W, Xu S, Gryngarten M, Escobar ME, Arnhold IJ, Mendonca BB, Kaiser 
UB, Latronico AC.

Author information:
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Hospital das Clinicas, 
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP 05403-900, 
Brasil. leticia_gontijo@yahoo.com.br

CONTEXT: Kisspeptin, encoded by the KISS1 gene, is a key stimulatory factor of 
GnRH secretion and puberty onset. Inactivating mutations of its receptor 
(KISS1R) cause isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH). A unique 
KISS1R-activating mutation was described in central precocious puberty (CPP).
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to investigate KISS1 mutations in patients with 
idiopathic CPP and normosmic IHH.
PATIENTS: Eighty-three children with CPP (77 girls) and 61 patients with IHH (40 
men) were studied. The control group consisted of 200 individuals with normal 
pubertal development.
METHODS: The promoter region and the three exons of KISS1 were amplified and 
sequenced. Cells expressing KISS1R were stimulated with synthetic human 
wild-type or mutant kisspeptin-54 (kp54), and inositol phosphate accumulation 
was measured. In a second set of experiments, kp54 was preincubated in human 
serum before stimulation of the cells.
RESULTS: Two novel KISS1 missense mutations, p.P74S and p.H90D, were identified 
in three unrelated children with idiopathic CPP. Both mutations were absent in 
400 control alleles. The p.P74S mutation was identified in the heterozygous 
state in a boy who developed CPP at 1 yr of age. The p.H90D mutation was 
identified in the homozygous state in two unrelated girls with CPP. In vitro 
studies revealed that the capacity of the P74S and H90D mutants to stimulate IP 
production was similar to the wild type. After preincubation of wild-type and 
mutant kp54 in human serum, the capacity to stimulate signal transduction was 
significantly greater for P74S compared with the wild type, suggesting that the 
p.P74S variant is more stable. Only polymorphisms were found in the IHH group.
CONCLUSION: Two KISS1 mutations were identified in unrelated patients with 
idiopathic CPP. The p.P74S variant was associated with higher kisspeptin 
resistance to degradation in comparison with the wild type, suggesting a role 
for this mutation in the precocious puberty phenotype.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2009-2421
PMCID: PMC2869552
PMID: 20237166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]