---
reference_id: "PMID:29155805"
title: Epidemiology and outcomes of community-acquired and hospital-acquired acute kidney injury in children and adolescents.
authors:
- Hsu CN
- Chen HL
- Tain YL
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/pr.2017.262
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Adolescent
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- Creatinine/blood
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Hospital Mortality
- Hospitalization
- Humans
- Incidence
- Inpatients
- Length of Stay
- Male
- Outpatients
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Taiwan
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology and outcomes of community-acquired and hospital-acquired acute kidney injury in children and adolescents.
**Authors:** Hsu CN, Chen HL, Tain YL
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/pr.2017.262](https://doi.org/10.1038/pr.2017.262)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2018 Mar;83(3):622-629. doi: 10.1038/pr.2017.262. Epub 2018 Jan
3.

Epidemiology and outcomes of community-acquired and hospital-acquired acute 
kidney injury in children and adolescents.

Hsu CN(1)(2), Chen HL(1), Tain YL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and 
Chang Gung University, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

BackgroundHospital-acquired acute kidney injury (HA-AKI) is associated with an 
increased risk of childhood mortality; however, only a few studies have 
addressed community-acquired AKI (CA-AKI).MethodsAKI network classification was 
used to assess CA- and HA-AKI, 2010-2014. Patients with CA-AKI who were admitted 
to an inpatient setting were categorized as CAA-AKI. CANA-AKI was for CA-AKI not 
admitted to inpatient care. Epidemiology, factors associated with AKI, and 
in-hospital outcomes were assessed for variation.ResultsPrevalence of CANA-AKI 
was 4/1,000 outpatient visits, 17/1,000 hospital admissions for CAA-AKI, and 
9.69/1,000 hospital admissions for HA-AKI. Mortality was higher among AKI 
patients (HA-AKI, 13.64%; CAA-AKI, 3.7%) than in no-AKI patients (0.57%). 
Patients with AKI and those with severe stages of AKI resulted in an increase in 
health-care service utilization (both P<0.001). Prior renal disease and recent 
hospitalization were associated with pediatric AKI in both outpatient and 
inpatient settings. Hematological malignancies, congenital anomalies, 
circulatory disease, and nephrotoxic medication use were associated with AKI, 
although the extent of associations varied slightly by 
setting.ConclusionIncreasing incidence of AKI in the community emphasizes the 
need for an increased awareness of AKI among health professionals to identify 
at-risk children and monitor SCr, so that modifiable risk factors can be 
managed.

DOI: 10.1038/pr.2017.262
PMID: 29155805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]