---
reference_id: "PMID:16088545"
title: "Cor pulmonale: an overview."
authors:
- Budev MM
- Arroliga AC
- Wiedemann HP
- Matthay RA
journal: Semin Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1055/s-2003-41105
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cor pulmonale: an overview.
**Authors:** Budev MM, Arroliga AC, Wiedemann HP, Matthay RA
**Journal:** Semin Respir Crit Care Med (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2003-41105](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2003-41105)

## Content

1. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2003 Jun;24(3):233-44. doi: 10.1055/s-2003-41105.

Cor pulmonale: an overview.

Budev MM(1), Arroliga AC, Wiedemann HP, Matthay RA.

Author information:
(1)The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Chronic cor pulmonale involves the enlargement of the right ventricle as a
result of pulmonary hypertension due to pulmonary disorders involving the lung
parenchyma, bellows function, or ventilatory drive. The right ventricular
hypertrophy that occurs in chronic cor pulmonale is a direct result of chronic
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction and subsequent pulmonary artery hypertension,
leading to increased right ventricular work and stress. We discuss methods by
which hypoxic vasoconstriction and reduction in the pulmonary vascular bed lead
to the development of pulmonary artery hypertension. This article reviews the
interaction of the pulmonary vasculature and right ventricle in the non-diseased
state as well as during disease exacerbations. Ventricular dependence and its
contribution to the pathophysiology of right ventricular failure are also
reviewed. In addition, we provide an overview of specific disease states that
can result in the development of chronic cor pulmonale including chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), interstitial lung disease, sleep apnea,
alveolar hypoventilation disorders, and primary pulmonary hypertension. We also
review the current diagnostic studies used to evaluate and study cor pulmonale.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2003-41105
PMID: 16088545