---
reference_id: "PMID:18796155"
title: Mixed cryoglobulinemia.
authors:
- Ferri C
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-25
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- "Cryoglobulinemia/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Hepatitis C/complications, drug therapy"
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mixed cryoglobulinemia.
**Authors:** Ferri C
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-3-25](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-3-25)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2008 Sep 16;3:25. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-25.

Mixed cryoglobulinemia.

Ferri C(1).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento Medicine e Specialità Mediche, Cattedra ed U,O,C, di 
Reumatologia, Università di Modena & Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. 
clferri@unimo.it

Mixed cryoglobulinemia (MC), type II and type III, refers to the presence of 
circulating cryoprecipitable immune complexes in the serum and manifests 
clinically by a classical triad of purpura, weakness and arthralgias. It is 
considered to be a rare disorder, but its true prevalence remains unknown. The 
disease is more common in Southern Europe than in Northern Europe or Northern 
America. The prevalence of 'essential' MC is reported as approximately 1:100,000 
(with a female-to-male ratio 3:1), but this term is now used to refer to a 
minority of MC patients only. MC is characterized by variable organ involvement 
including skin lesions (orthostatic purpura, ulcers), chronic hepatitis, 
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, peripheral neuropathy, diffuse 
vasculitis, and, less frequently, interstitial lung involvement and endocrine 
disorders. Some patients may develop lymphatic and hepatic malignancies, usually 
as a late complication. MC may be associated with numerous infectious or 
immunological diseases. When isolated, MC may represent a distinct disease, the 
so-called 'essential' MC. The etiopathogenesis of MC is not completely 
understood. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is suggested to play a causative 
role, with the contribution of genetic and/or environmental factors. Moreover, 
MC may be associated with other infectious agents or immunological disorders, 
such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection or primary Sjögren's 
syndrome. Diagnosis is based on clinical and laboratory findings. Circulating 
mixed cryoglobulins, low C4 levels and orthostatic skin purpura are the 
hallmarks of the disease. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis involving medium- and, 
more often, small-sized blood vessels is the typical pathological finding, 
easily detectable by means of skin biopsy of recent vasculitic lesions. 
Differential diagnoses include a wide range of systemic, infectious and 
neoplastic disorders, mainly autoimmune hepatitis, Sjögren's syndrome, 
polyarthritis, and B-cell lymphomas. The first-line treatment of MC should focus 
on eradication of HCV by combined interferon-ribavirin treatment. Pathogenetic 
treatments (immunosuppressors, corticosteroids, and/or plasmapheresis) should be 
tailored to each patient according to the progression and severity of the 
clinical manifestations. Long-term monitoring is recommended in all MC patients 
to assure timely diagnosis and treatment of the life-threatening complications. 
The overall prognosis is poorer in patients with renal disease, liver failure, 
lymphoproliferative disease and malignancies.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-25
PMCID: PMC2569912
PMID: 18796155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]