---
reference_id: "PMID:16764863"
title: BMAA selectively injures motor neurons via AMPA/kainate receptor activation.
authors:
- Rao SD
- Banack SA
- Cox PA
- Weiss JH
journal: Exp Neurol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.04.017
keywords:
- "Amino Acids, Diamino/administration & dosage, toxicity"
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- Cell Survival/drug effects
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cyanobacteria Toxins
- Cycas/chemistry
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- "Excitatory Amino Acid Agonists/administration & dosage, toxicity"
- Excitatory Amino Acid Antagonists/pharmacology
- Humans
- Mice
- "Motor Neurons/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- "Neurotoxins/administration & dosage, toxicity"
- "Plant Extracts/administration & dosage, toxicity"
- "Plant Poisoning/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Quinoxalines/pharmacology
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- "Receptors, AMPA/agonists, antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Kainic Acid Receptors/agonists, antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Seeds/chemistry
- Spinal Cord/cytology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BMAA selectively injures motor neurons via AMPA/kainate receptor activation.
**Authors:** Rao SD, Banack SA, Cox PA, Weiss JH
**Journal:** Exp Neurol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.04.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.04.017)

## Content

1. Exp Neurol. 2006 Sep;201(1):244-52. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.04.017. Epub
 2006 Jun 9.

BMAA selectively injures motor neurons via AMPA/kainate receptor activation.

Rao SD(1), Banack SA, Cox PA, Weiss JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, 2101 Gillespie Building, University 
of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4292, USA.

The toxin beta-methylamino-l-alanine (BMAA) has been proposed to contribute to 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-Parkinsonism Dementia Complex of Guam (ALS/PDC) 
based on its ability to induce a similar disease phenotype in primates and its 
presence in cycad seeds, which constituted a dietary item in afflicted 
populations. Concerns about the apparent low potency of this toxin in relation 
to estimated levels of human ingestion led to a slowing of BMAA research. 
However, recent reports identifying potential new routes of exposure compel a 
re-examination of the BMAA/cycad hypothesis. BMAA was found to induce selective 
motor neuron (MN) loss in dissociated mixed spinal cord cultures at 
concentrations ( approximately 30 muM) significantly lower than those previously 
found to induce widespread neuronal degeneration. The glutamate receptor 
antagonist NBQX prevented BMAA-induced death, implicating excitotoxic activation 
of AMPA/kainate receptors. Using microfluorimetric techniques, we further found 
that BMAA induced preferential [Ca(2+)](i) rises and selective reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) generation in MNs with minimal effect on other spinal neurons. 
Cycad seed extracts also triggered preferential AMPA/kainate-receptor-dependent 
MN injury, consistent with the idea that BMAA is a crucial toxic component in 
this plant. Present findings support the hypothesis that BMAA may contribute to 
the selective MN loss in ALS/PDC.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.04.017
PMID: 16764863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]