---
reference_id: "PMID:25005754"
title: A very low incidence of BRAF mutations in Middle Eastern colorectal carcinoma.
authors:
- Siraj AK
- Bu R
- Prabhakaran S
- Bavi P
- Beg S
- Al Hazmi M
- Al-Rasheed M
- Alobaisi K
- Al-Dayel F
- AlManea H
- Al-Sanea N
- Uddin S
- Al-Kuraya KS
journal: Mol Cancer
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-168
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- "Adenomatous Polyposis Coli/genetics, pathology"
- Aged
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- CpG Islands
- DNA Methylation/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Microsatellite Instability
- Middle Aged
- MutL Protein Homolog 1
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Saudi Arabia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A very low incidence of BRAF mutations in Middle Eastern colorectal carcinoma.
**Authors:** Siraj AK, Bu R, Prabhakaran S, Bavi P, Beg S, Al Hazmi M, Al-Rasheed M, Alobaisi K, Al-Dayel F, AlManea H, Al-Sanea N, Uddin S, Al-Kuraya KS
**Journal:** Mol Cancer (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1476-4598-13-168](https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-4598-13-168)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer. 2014 Jul 8;13:168. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-168.

A very low incidence of BRAF mutations in Middle Eastern colorectal carcinoma.

Siraj AK, Bu R, Prabhakaran S, Bavi P, Beg S, Al Hazmi M, Al-Rasheed M, Alobaisi
K, Al-Dayel F, AlManea H, Al-Sanea N, Uddin S, Al-Kuraya KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Cancer Genomic Research, Research Center, King Faisal Specialist
Hospital and Research Center, MBC#98-16, P,O, Box 3354 Riyadh 11211, Saudi
Arabia. kkuraya@kfshrc.edu.sa.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies emphasize the role of BRAF as a genetic marker for
prediction, prognosis and risk stratification in colorectal cancer. Earlier
studies have reported the incidence of BRAF mutations in the range of 5-20% in
colorectal carcinomas (CRC) and are predominantly seen in the serrated
adenoma-carcinoma pathway characterized by microsatellite instability (MSI-H)
and hypermethylation of the MLH1 gene in the setting of the CpG island
methylator phenotype (CIMP). Due to the lack of data on the true incidence of
BRAF mutations in Saudi Arabia, we sought to analyze the incidence of BRAF
mutations in this ethnic group.
METHODS: 770 CRC cases were analyzed for BRAF and KRAS mutations by direct DNA
sequencing.
RESULTS: BRAF gene mutations were seen in 2.5% (19/757) CRC analyzed and BRAF
V600E somatic mutation constituted 90% (17/19) of all BRAF mutations. BRAF
mutations were significantly associated with right sided tumors (p = 0.0019),
MSI-H status (p = 0.0144), CIMP (p = 0.0017) and a high proliferative index of
Ki67 expression (p = 0.0162). Incidence of KRAS mutations was 28.6% (216/755)
and a mutual exclusivity was noted with BRAF mutations (p = 0.0518; a trend was
seen).
CONCLUSION: Our results highlight the low incidence of BRAF mutations and CIMP
in CRC from Saudi Arabia. This could be attributed to ethnic differences and
warrant further investigation to elucidate the effect of other environmental and
genetic factors. These findings indirectly suggest the possibility of a higher
incidence of familial hereditary colorectal cancers especially Hereditary non
polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome /Lynch Syndrome (LS) in Saudi
Arabia.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-168
PMCID: PMC4109832
PMID: 25005754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
