---
reference_id: "PMID:28742248"
title: Biallelic COL3A1 mutations result in a clinical spectrum of specific structural brain anomalies and connective tissue abnormalities.
authors:
- Horn D
- Siebert E
- Seidel U
- Rost I
- Mayer K
- Abou Jamra R
- Mitter D
- Kornak U
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38345
keywords:
- "Brain/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Collagen Type III/genetics
- "Connective Tissue/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Developmental Disabilities/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic COL3A1 mutations result in a clinical spectrum of specific structural brain anomalies and connective tissue abnormalities.
**Authors:** Horn D, Siebert E, Seidel U, Rost I, Mayer K, Abou Jamra R, Mitter D, Kornak U
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38345](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38345)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 Sep;173(9):2534-2538. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38345. Epub 
2017 Jul 25.

Biallelic COL3A1 mutations result in a clinical spectrum of specific structural 
brain anomalies and connective tissue abnormalities.

Horn D(1), Siebert E(2), Seidel U(3), Rost I(4), Mayer K(4), Abou Jamra R(5), 
Mitter D(5), Kornak U(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Medizinische Genetik und Humangenetik, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Institut für Neuroradiologie, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.
(3)Kinderklinik, SPZ, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Zentrum für Humangenetik und Laboratoriumsdiagnostik, Martinsried, Germany.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (type IV) is an autosomal dominant disorder 
caused by heterozygous variants of COL3A1. We identified biallelic COL3A1 
variants in two unrelated families. In a 3-year-old female with developmental 
delay the nonsense variant c.1282C>T, p.(Arg428*) was detected in combination 
the c.2057delC, p.(Pro686Leufs*105) frame shift variant. Both compound 
heterozygous variants were novel. This patient was born with bilateral clubfoot, 
joint laxity, and dysmorphic facial features. At the age of 2 years she 
developed an aneurysmal brain hemorrhage. Cerebral MRI showed a peculiar pattern 
of profound cerebral abnormalities including bilateral frontoparietal 
polymicrogyria of the cobblestone variant. In the second family, the two 
affected siblings were homozygous for the missense variant c.145C<G, 
p.(Pro49Ala) of COL3A1 and showed cobblestone-like cortical malformation, 
cerebellar cysts, and white matter abnormalities, developmental delay, and 
seizures. To date, three further families have been reported with biallelic 
variants of this gene and specific structural brain anomalies in all, and a 
severe Ehlers-Danlos syndrome phenotype in some. Bilateral frontoparietal 
polymicrogyria of the cobblestone variant, cerebellar microcysts, and 
abnormalities of the white matter characterize this brain phenotype and resemble 
neurological manifestations in individuals with autosomal recessive mutations in 
GPR56, which serves as a ligand of COL3A1. In concordance with the findings in 
knock out mice, the collagen III protein plays a role in the regulation of 
cortical development in addition to its well-known function in connective tissue 
formation.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38345
PMID: 28742248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]