---
reference_id: "PMID:37551875"
title: N-Terminal Pro-Brain Natriuretic Peptide Levels in Kawasaki Disease, Sepsis and Other Febrile Illnesses.
authors:
- Banerjee P
- Pal P
- Chakravarti S
- Basu S
- Ahmed N
journal: Indian Pediatr
year: '2023'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# N-Terminal Pro-Brain Natriuretic Peptide Levels in Kawasaki Disease, Sepsis and Other Febrile Illnesses.
**Authors:** Banerjee P, Pal P, Chakravarti S, Basu S, Ahmed N
**Journal:** Indian Pediatr (2023)

## Content

1. Indian Pediatr. 2023 Oct 15;60(10):826-828. Epub 2023 Jun 21.

N-Terminal Pro-Brain Natriuretic Peptide Levels in Kawasaki Disease, Sepsis and 
Other Febrile Illnesses.

Banerjee P(1), Pal P(2), Chakravarti S(1), Basu S(3), Ahmed N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Medicine, Institute of Child Health, Kolkata, West 
Bengal.
(2)Department of Pediatric Medicine, Institute of Child Health, Kolkata, West 
Bengal. Correspondence to: Dr Priyankar Pal, Professor, Department of 
Pediatrics, Institute of Child Health, 11, Dr Biresh Guha Street, Kolkata 700 
017, West Bengal. mailme.priyankar@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Child Health, Kolkata, West Bengal.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the values of N-Terminal Pro-Brain Natriuretic Peptide 
(NT-proBNP) in acute phase of Kawasaki disease (KD), sepsis and other acute 
febrile illnesses.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study on 40 KD patients and 40 age- and 
sex-matched controls with sepsis and other febrile illnesses between January, 
2019 and June, 2020. Complete blood count, C-reactive protein (CRP), liver and 
renal function tests, serum electrolytes, chest X-ray, NT-proBNP level, Bactec 
blood culture, urine microscopy and culture along with detailed physical 
examination was done for all cases and control.
RESULTS: Mean (SD) values of NT-proBNP levels in acute KD was higher than 
sepsis/other febrile illnesses (914.9 vs 219 pg/mL; P=0.001). Also, the number 
of KD patients whose NT-proBNP was elevated were significantly higher compared 
to controls (70% vs 32.5%; P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: NT-proBNP may be useful as a biomarker in the diagnosis of acute 
phase KD.

PMID: 37551875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]