---
reference_id: "PMID:8332901"
title: "Mutation of unique region of Bruton's tyrosine kinase in immunodeficient XID mice."
authors:
- Rawlings DJ
- Saffran DC
- Tsukada S
- Largaespada DA
- Grimaldi JC
- Cohen L
- Mohr RN
- Bazan JF
- Howard M
- Copeland NG
journal: Science
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1126/science.8332901
keywords:
- Agammaglobulinaemia Tyrosine Kinase
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "B-Lymphocytes/enzymology, immunology"
- Base Sequence
- Cell Line
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Crosses, Genetic"
- Exons
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/enzymology, genetics, immunology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Inbred CBA"
- "Mice, Inbred DBA"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- X Chromosome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of unique region of Bruton's tyrosine kinase in immunodeficient XID mice.
**Authors:** Rawlings DJ, Saffran DC, Tsukada S, Largaespada DA, Grimaldi JC, Cohen L, Mohr RN, Bazan JF, Howard M, Copeland NG
**Journal:** Science (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.8332901](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.8332901)

## Content

1. Science. 1993 Jul 16;261(5119):358-61. doi: 10.1126/science.8332901.

Mutation of unique region of Bruton's tyrosine kinase in immunodeficient XID 
mice.

Rawlings DJ(1), Saffran DC, Tsukada S, Largaespada DA, Grimaldi JC, Cohen L, 
Mohr RN, Bazan JF, Howard M, Copeland NG, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California, 
Los Angeles 90024.

The cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase, Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk, formerly bpk or 
atk), is crucial for B cell development. Loss of kinase activity results in the 
human immunodeficiency, X-linked agammaglobulinemia, characterized by a failure 
to produce B cells. In the murine X-linked immunodeficiency (XID), B cells are 
present but respond abnormally to activating signals. The Btk gene, btk, was 
mapped to the xid region of the mouse X chromosome by interspecific backcross 
analysis. A single conserved residue within the amino terminal unique region of 
Btk was mutated in XID mice. This change in xid probably interferes with normal 
B cell signaling mediated by Btk protein interactions.

DOI: 10.1126/science.8332901
PMID: 8332901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]