---
reference_id: "PMID:40667590"
title: "A Comprehensive Review of Acanthosis Nigricans: Pathogenesis, Clinical manifestation and Management."
authors:
- Shiana
- Parmar S
- Guleria P
- Jindal S
- Ashawat MS
- Kumar P
journal: Recent Adv Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2174/0127722708314530240919054410
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Comprehensive Review of Acanthosis Nigricans: Pathogenesis, Clinical manifestation and Management.
**Authors:** Shiana, Parmar S, Guleria P, Jindal S, Ashawat MS, Kumar P
**Journal:** Recent Adv Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2174/0127722708314530240919054410](https://doi.org/10.2174/0127722708314530240919054410)

## Content

1. Recent Adv Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov. 2025;19(2):135-145. doi: 
10.2174/0127722708314530240919054410.

A Comprehensive Review of Acanthosis Nigricans: Pathogenesis, Clinical 
manifestation and Management.

Shiana(1), Parmar S(1), Guleria P(1), Jindal S(1), Ashawat MS(1), Kumar P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Laureate Institute of Pharmacy, Kathog 
Jawalamukhi, Distt Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, 176031, India.

INTRODUCTION: Acanthosis Nigricans is a dermatological condition characterized 
by hyperpigmented velvet plaques that can be observed in flexural areas such as 
the neck, axilla, and groin. AN is frequently associated with insulin resistance 
and obesity, however, it can also appear in non-obese people and as a 
paraneoplastic disease. Its prevalence varies across different populations, with 
higher rates observed in individuals with obesity, diabetes, and certain genetic 
syndromes. Classification of AN can be based on underlying etiology, 
distinguishing primary and secondary forms. Pathogenesis is the complex 
interplay of genetic, hormonal, and environmental factors, with insulin 
resistance playing a central role. Diagnosis relies on clinical evaluation of 
characteristics of skin changes, often requiring further investigation for 
underlying systemic disease. Topical therapies involve keratolytic agents, 
retinoids, and alpha hydroxyl acids to improve the cosmesis and reduce the 
plaque's thickness. Treatment strategies address underlying conditions by 
emphasizing lifestyle modifications and in some cases, pharmacological 
interventions.
OBJECTIVE: This review aims to comprehensively examine the pathogenesis, 
clinical manifestation, and management of acanthosis nigricans.
DISCUSSION: AN is closely linked to insulin resistance, characterized by 
impaired cellular response to insulin, leading to compensatory hyperinsulinemia. 
Recognizing AN's clinical presentation is paramount for early diagnosis and 
appropriate management.
CONCLUSION: Acanthosis Nigricans is a skin condition characterized by dark, 
thickened patches of skin, typically occurring in skin folds and creases. It can 
be a sign of an underlying health issue such as insulin resistance, obesity, 
hormonal disorders, or certain medications. Proper diagnosis and management of 
the underlying conditions are crucial. Treatment may involve addressing the 
underlying causes, lifestyle changes, and topical medications to improve the 
appearance of the skin. Regular monitoring and follow-up with a health care 
professional are essential for optimal management and to prevent complications.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0127722708314530240919054410
PMID: 40667590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]