---
reference_id: "PMID:36285361"
title: Phenotypic expansion of KCNH1-associated disorders to include isolated epilepsy and its associations with genotypes and molecular sub-regional locations.
authors:
- Tian MQ
- Li RK
- Yang F
- Shu XM
- Li J
- Chen J
- Peng LY
- Yu XH
- Yang CJ
journal: CNS Neurosci Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/cns.14001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic expansion of KCNH1-associated disorders to include isolated epilepsy and its associations with genotypes and molecular sub-regional locations.
**Authors:** Tian MQ, Li RK, Yang F, Shu XM, Li J, Chen J, Peng LY, Yu XH, Yang CJ
**Journal:** CNS Neurosci Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cns.14001](https://doi.org/10.1111/cns.14001)

## Content

1. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2023 Jan;29(1):270-281. doi: 10.1111/cns.14001. Epub 2022
Oct  25.

Phenotypic expansion of KCNH1-associated disorders to include isolated epilepsy 
and its associations with genotypes and molecular sub-regional locations.

Tian MQ(1)(2), Li RK(1)(2), Yang F(3), Shu XM(1)(2), Li J(1)(2), Chen J(1)(2), 
Peng LY(1)(2), Yu XH(1)(2), Yang CJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University, 
Zunyi, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Guizhou Children's Hospital, Zunyi, China.
(3)Cipher Gene LLC, Beijing, China.

PURPOSE: Genotype-phenotypic correlation of KCNH1 variant remains elusive. This 
study aimed to expand the phenotypic spectrum of KCNH1 and explore the 
correlations between epilepsy and molecular sub-regional locations.
METHODS: We performed whole-exome sequencing in a cohort of 98 patients with 
familiar febrile seizure (FS) or epilepsy with unexplained etiologies. The 
damaging effects of variants were predicted by protein modeling and multiple in 
silico tools. All reported patients with KCNH1 pathogenic variants with detailed 
neurological phenotypes were analyzed to evaluate the genotype-phenotype 
correlation.
RESULTS: Two novel KCNH1 variants were identified in three cases, including two 
patients with FS with inherited variant (p.Ile113Thr) and one boy with epilepsy 
with de novo variant (p.Arg357Trp). Variant Ile113Thr was located within the eag 
domain, and variant p.Arg357Trp was located in transmembrane domain 4 of KCNH1, 
respectively. Two patients experienced refractory status epilepticus (SE), of 
which one patient died of acute encephalopathy induced by SE. Further analysis 
of 30 variants in 51 patients demonstrated that de novo variants were associated 
with epileptic encephalopathy, while mosaic/somatic or germline variants cause 
isolated epilepsy/FS. All hotspot variants associated with epileptic 
encephalopathy clustered in transmembrane domain (S4 and S6), while those with 
isolated epilepsy/seizures or TBS/ZLS without epilepsy were scattered in the 
KCNH1.
CONCLUSIONS: We found two novel missense variants of KCNH1 in three individuals 
with isolated FS/epilepsy. Variants in the KCNH1 cause a spectrum of epileptic 
disorders ranging from a benign form of genetic isolated epilepsy/FS to 
intractable form of epileptic encephalopathy. The genotypes and variant 
locations help explaining the phenotypic variation of patients with KCNH1 
variant.

© 2022 The Authors. CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cns.14001
PMCID: PMC9804083
PMID: 36285361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors claim that there are no conflicts of 
interest.