---
reference_id: "PMID:25649364"
title: Familial Mediterranean Fever.
authors:
- Kucuk A
- Gezer IA
- Ucar R
- Karahan AY
journal: Acta Medica (Hradec Kralove)
year: '2014'
doi: 10.14712/18059694.2014.47
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Mediterranean Fever.
**Authors:** Kucuk A, Gezer IA, Ucar R, Karahan AY
**Journal:** Acta Medica (Hradec Kralove) (2014)
**DOI:** [10.14712/18059694.2014.47](https://doi.org/10.14712/18059694.2014.47)

## Content

1. Acta Medica (Hradec Kralove). 2014;57(3):97-104. doi:
10.14712/18059694.2014.47.

Familial Mediterranean Fever.

Kucuk A(1), Gezer IA(2), Ucar R(3), Karahan AY(4).

Author information:
(1)Necmettin Erbakan Üniversitesi Romatoloji Bilim Dalı Konya,Turkey.
(2)Eğitim ve Araştırma Hastanesi Fiziksel Tıp ve Rehabilitasyon Bölümü Konya, 
Turkey.
(3)Konya Eğitim ve Araştırma Hastanesi, Dahiliye Kliniği, Konya, Turkey.
(4)Devlet Hastanesi Fiziksel Tıp ve Rehabilitasyon Bölümü Konya, Turkey.

Familial Mediterranean Fever is an autosomal recessive inherited disease with a 
course of autoinflammation, which is characterized by the episodes of fever and 
serositis. It affects the populations from Mediterranean basin. Genetic mutation 
of the disease is on MEFV gene located on short arm of Chromosome 16. The 
disease is diagnosed based on clinical evaluation. Amyloidosis is the most 
important complication. The only agent that decreases the development of 
amyloidosis and the frequency and severity of the episodes is colchicine, which 
has been used for about 40 years. In this review, we aimed to discuss especially 
the most recent advances about Familial Mediterranean Fever which is commonly 
seen in our population.

DOI: 10.14712/18059694.2014.47
PMID: 25649364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]