---
reference_id: "PMID:26059948"
title: "Long-term follow-up of MCL patients treated with single-agent ibrutinib: updated safety and efficacy results."
authors:
- Wang ML
- Blum KA
- Martin P
- Goy A
- Auer R
- Kahl BS
- Jurczak W
- Advani RH
- Romaguera JE
- Williams ME
- Barrientos JC
- Chmielowska E
- Radford J
- Stilgenbauer S
- Dreyling M
- Jedrzejczak WW
- Johnson P
- Spurgeon SE
- Zhang L
- Baher L
- Cheng M
- Lee D
- Beaupre DM
- Rule S
journal: Blood
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-03-635326
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adult
- Agammaglobulinaemia Tyrosine Kinase
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Diarrhea/chemically induced, physiopathology"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- "Dyspnea/chemically induced, physiopathology"
- "Fatigue/chemically induced, physiopathology"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, Mantle-Cell/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nausea/chemically induced, physiopathology"
- "Neutropenia/chemically induced, physiopathology"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Recurrence
- Survival Analysis
- "Thrombocytopenia/chemically induced, physiopathology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term follow-up of MCL patients treated with single-agent ibrutinib: updated safety and efficacy results.
**Authors:** Wang ML, Blum KA, Martin P, Goy A, Auer R, Kahl BS, Jurczak W, Advani RH, Romaguera JE, Williams ME, Barrientos JC, Chmielowska E, Radford J, Stilgenbauer S, Dreyling M, Jedrzejczak WW, Johnson P, Spurgeon SE, Zhang L, Baher L, Cheng M, Lee D, Beaupre DM, Rule S
**Journal:** Blood (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2015-03-635326](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2015-03-635326)

## Content

1. Blood. 2015 Aug 6;126(6):739-45. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-03-635326. Epub 2015 
Jun 9.

Long-term follow-up of MCL patients treated with single-agent ibrutinib: updated 
safety and efficacy results.

Wang ML(1), Blum KA(2), Martin P(3), Goy A(4), Auer R(5), Kahl BS(6), Jurczak 
W(7), Advani RH(8), Romaguera JE(1), Williams ME(9), Barrientos JC(10), 
Chmielowska E(11), Radford J(12), Stilgenbauer S(13), Dreyling M(14), 
Jedrzejczak WW(15), Johnson P(16), Spurgeon SE(17), Zhang L(1), Baher L(18), 
Cheng M(18), Lee D(18), Beaupre DM(18), Rule S(19).

Author information:
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX;
(2)Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH;
(3)Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY;
(4)John Theurer Cancer Center at Hackensack University Medical Center, 
Hackensack, NJ;
(5)Barts Health National Health Service (NHS) Trust, London, United Kingdom;
(6)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI;
(7)Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland;
(8)Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, CA;
(9)University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA;
(10)Hofstra North Shore-Long Island Jewish School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY;
(11)Oddzial Kliniczny Onkologii, Centrum Onkologii, Bydgoszcz, Poland;
(12)The University of Manchester and the Christie NHS Foundation Trust, 
Manchester, United Kingdom;
(13)Universitatsklinikum Ulm, Klinik fur Innere Medizin II, Ulm, Germany;
(14)University Hospital LMU Munich, Germany;
(15)Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland;
(16)Cancer Research UK Clinical Centre, Southampton General Hospital, 
Southampton, United Kingdom;
(17)Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR;
(18)Pharmacyclics LLC, Sunnyvale, CA; and.
(19)Plymouth University Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth, 
United Kingdom.

Ibrutinib, an oral inhibitor of Bruton tyrosine kinase, is approved for patients 
with mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) who have received one prior therapy. We report 
the updated safety and efficacy results from the multicenter, open-label phase 2 
registration trial of ibrutinib (median 26.7-month follow-up). Patients (N = 
111) received oral ibrutinib 560 mg once daily, and those with stable disease or 
better could enter a long-term extension study. The primary end point was 
overall response rate (ORR). The median patient age was 68 years (range, 40-84), 
with a median of 3 prior therapies (range, 1-5). The median treatment duration 
was 8.3 months; 46% of patients were treated for >12 months, and 22% were 
treated for ≥2 years. The ORR was 67% (23% complete response), with a median 
duration of response of 17.5 months. The 24-month progression-free survival and 
overall survival rates were 31% (95% confidence interval [CI], 22.3-40.4) and 
47% (95% CI, 37.1-56.9), respectively. The most common adverse events (AEs) in 
>30% of patients included diarrhea (54%), fatigue (50%), nausea (33%), and 
dyspnea (32%). The most frequent grade ≥3 infections included pneumonia (8%), 
urinary tract infection (4%), and cellulitis (3%). Grade ≥3 bleeding events in 
≥2% of patients were hematuria (2%) and subdural hematoma (2%). Common all-grade 
hematologic AEs were thrombocytopenia (22%), neutropenia (19%), and anemia 
(18%). The prevalence of infection, diarrhea, and bleeding was highest for the 
first 6 months of therapy and less thereafter. With longer follow-up, ibrutinib 
continues to demonstrate durable responses and favorable safety in 
relapsed/refractory MCL. The trial is registered to www.ClinicalTrials.gov as 
#NCT01236391.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2015-03-635326
PMCID: PMC4528064
PMID: 26059948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]