---
reference_id: "PMID:34788075"
title: "Antisense therapy in a rat model of Alexander disease reverses GFAP pathology, white matter deficits, and motor impairment."
authors:
- Hagemann TL
- Powers B
- Lin NH
- Mohamed AF
- Dague KL
- Hannah SC
- Bachmann G
- Mazur C
- Rigo F
- Olsen AL
- Feany MB
- Perng MD
- Berman RF
- Messing A
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.abg4711
keywords:
- "Alexander Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Astrocytes/metabolism
- "Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Gliosis/pathology
- "Motor Disorders/metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- Rats
- White Matter/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antisense therapy in a rat model of Alexander disease reverses GFAP pathology, white matter deficits, and motor impairment.
**Authors:** Hagemann TL, Powers B, Lin NH, Mohamed AF, Dague KL, Hannah SC, Bachmann G, Mazur C, Rigo F, Olsen AL, Feany MB, Perng MD, Berman RF, Messing A
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.abg4711](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.abg4711)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2021 Nov 17;13(620):eabg4711. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.abg4711.  Epub 2021 Nov 17.

Antisense therapy in a rat model of Alexander disease reverses GFAP pathology, 
white matter deficits, and motor impairment.

Hagemann TL(1), Powers B(2), Lin NH(3), Mohamed AF(1), Dague KL(1), Hannah 
SC(1), Bachmann G(2), Mazur C(2), Rigo F(2), Olsen AL(4), Feany MB(5), Perng 
MD(3), Berman RF(6), Messing A(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA.
(2)Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA 92010, USA.
(3)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Life Sciences, National Tsing Hua 
University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(6)Department of Neurological Surgery and M.I.N.D Institute, University of 
California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(7)Department of Comparative Biosciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

Alexander disease (AxD) is a devastating leukodystrophy caused by 
gain-of-function mutations in GFAP, and the only available treatments are 
supportive. Recent advances in antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) therapy have 
demonstrated that transcript targeting can be a successful strategy for human 
neurodegenerative diseases amenable to this approach. We have previously used 
mouse models of AxD to show that Gfap-targeted ASO suppresses protein 
accumulation and reverses pathology; however, the mice have a mild phenotype 
with no apparent leukodystrophy or overt clinical features and are therefore 
limited for assessing functional outcomes. In this report, we introduce a rat 
model of AxD that exhibits hallmark pathology with GFAP aggregation in the form 
of Rosenthal fibers, widespread astrogliosis, and white matter deficits. These 
animals develop normally during the first postnatal weeks but fail to thrive 
after weaning and develop severe motor deficits as they mature, with about 14% 
dying of unknown cause between 6 and 12 weeks of age. In this model, a single 
treatment with Gfap-targeted ASO provides long-lasting suppression, reverses 
GFAP pathology, and, depending on age of treatment, prevents or mitigates white 
matter deficits and motor impairment. In this report, we characterize an 
improved animal model of AxD with myelin pathology and motor impairment, 
recapitulating prominent features of the human disease, and use this model to 
show that ASO therapy has the potential to not only prevent but also reverse 
many aspects of disease.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.abg4711
PMCID: PMC8730534
PMID: 34788075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: B.P., C.M., G.B., and F.R. 
receive salaries from and are shareholders in Ionis Pharmaceuticals. A.M. was a 
consultant for Symbiotix. T.L.H., N.-H.L., A.F.M., K.L.D., S.C.H., A.L.O., 
M.B.F., M.-D.P, and R.F.B. have no competing interests.