---
reference_id: PMID:15763992
title: Molecular specificity and functional properties of autoreactive T-cell response in human gastric autoimmunity.
authors:
- "D'Elios MM"
- Amedei A
- Azzurri A
- Benagiano M
- Del Prete G
- Bergman MP
- Vandenbroucke-Grauls CM
- Appelmelk BJ
journal: Int Rev Immunol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1080/08830180590884611
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Autoimmune Diseases/immunology
- "Epitopes, T-Lymphocyte/genetics, immunology"
- Gastritis/immunology
- "H(+)-K(+)-Exchanging ATPase/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Helicobacter pylori/pathogenicity
- Humans
- Lymphocyte Activation
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Sequence Alignment
- "Th1 Cells/enzymology, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular specificity and functional properties of autoreactive T-cell response in human gastric autoimmunity.
**Authors:** D'Elios MM, Amedei A, Azzurri A, Benagiano M, Del Prete G, Bergman MP, Vandenbroucke-Grauls CM, Appelmelk BJ
**Journal:** Int Rev Immunol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08830180590884611](https://doi.org/10.1080/08830180590884611)

## Content

1. Int Rev Immunol. 2005 Jan-Apr;24(1-2):111-22. doi: 10.1080/08830180590884611.

Molecular specificity and functional properties of autoreactive T-cell response 
in human gastric autoimmunity.

D'Elios MM(1), Amedei A, Azzurri A, Benagiano M, Del Prete G, Bergman MP, 
Vandenbroucke-Grauls CM, Appelmelk BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. 
delios@unifi.it

Human autoimmune gastritis (AIG) is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the 
gastric corpus. We have defined the antigen repertoire and the functional 
properties of in vivo activated CD4+ T cells derived from the gastric mucosa of 
patients with AIG. A remarkable proportion of the CD4+ T cell clones 
proliferated in response to H+,K+-ATPase. Six epitopes identified in the alpha 
chain, and 5 in the beta chain, of gastric K+,K+-ATPase were recognized by 
autoreactive gastric T cell clones. The majority of the autoreactive T cell 
clones secreted IFN-gamma and showed a T helper 1 (Th1) profile. All clones 
produced TNF-alpha,provided help for B cell immunoglobulin production, expressed 
perforin-mediated cytotoxicity, and most induced Fas-Fas ligand-mediated 
apoptosis. Data suggest that activation of gastric H+,K+-ATPase-specific Th1 T 
cells is crucial in the pathogenesis of human gastric autoimmunity and atrophy.

DOI: 10.1080/08830180590884611
PMID: 15763992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]