---
reference_id: "PMID:40933623"
title: A potential case of refeeding syndrome in a patient with severe mental illness.
authors:
- Douglass AR
- Spey E
- Ehrhard KA
journal: Ment Health Clin
year: '2025'
doi: 10.9740/mhc.2025.08.214
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A potential case of refeeding syndrome in a patient with severe mental illness.
**Authors:** Douglass AR, Spey E, Ehrhard KA
**Journal:** Ment Health Clin (2025)
**DOI:** [10.9740/mhc.2025.08.214](https://doi.org/10.9740/mhc.2025.08.214)

## Content

1. Ment Health Clin. 2025 Aug 1;15(4):214-217. doi: 10.9740/mhc.2025.08.214. 
eCollection 2025 Aug.

A potential case of refeeding syndrome in a patient with severe mental illness.

Douglass AR(1), Spey E(2), Ehrhard KA(3).

Author information:
(1) (Corresponding author) Mental Health Clinical Pharmacist Practitioner, 
Veterans Integrated Service Network 1 Clinical Resource Hub, Veterans Affairs 
Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, Connecticut, amber.douglass@va.gov.
(2) Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine Candidate 2027, Touro College of Osteopathic 
Medicine, Middletown, New York.
(3) Psychiatric Pharmacist, The University of Kansas Health System, Kansas City, 
Kansas.

Refeeding syndrome (RFS) occurs when previously malnourished patients are 
reintroduced to nutritional support, triggering a metabolic response that often 
results in electrolyte abnormalities, vitamin deficiencies, and potential end 
organ disturbance. Whereas RFS has been well documented in patients with eating 
disorders, its presentation in those with severe mental illness (SMI), such as 
schizophrenia, is less commonly reported. This report highlights a case of 
schizophrenia-induced starvation and the potential development of RFS during an 
inpatient psychiatric hospitalization. RFS may not always be identified in 
patients, especially when its presentation deviates from classic signs and 
symptoms. Increased awareness of the signs, symptoms, and at-risk populations, 
including individuals with SMI, may aid in the prevention and management of RFS.

© 2025 AAPP. The Mental Health Clinician is a publication of the American 
Association of Psychiatric Pharmacists.

DOI: 10.9740/mhc.2025.08.214
PMCID: PMC12418769
PMID: 40933623