---
reference_id: "PMID:30289612"
title: "Risk of hepatic neoplasms in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (4p-): Four new cases and review of the literature."
authors:
- Battaglia A
- Calhoun ARUL
- Lortz A
- Carey JC
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.40469
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk of hepatic neoplasms in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (4p-): Four new cases and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Battaglia A, Calhoun ARUL, Lortz A, Carey JC
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.40469](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.40469)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Nov;176(11):2389-2394. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.40469. Epub 
2018 Oct 5.

Risk of hepatic neoplasms in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (4p-): Four new cases and 
review of the literature.

Battaglia A(1), Calhoun ARUL(2), Lortz A(3), Carey JC(4).

Author information:
(1)The Stella Maris Clinical Research Institute for Child and Adolescent 
Neurology and Psychiatry, Pisa, Italy.
(2)Stead Family Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.
(3)4p-Support Group, Delaware, Ohio.
(4)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a rare contiguous gene deletion disorder 
characterized by distinctive craniofacial features, prenatal/postnatal growth 
deficiency, intellectual disability, and seizures. Various malformations of 
internal organs are also seen. Neoplasia has not been documented as a typical 
feature of WHS. We review the three prior reports of hepatic neoplasia in WHS 
and add four previously unreported individuals. We propose that, in the context 
of the rarity of WHS, these seven cases suggest that hepatocellular neoplasia 
may be a feature of WHS.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.40469
PMID: 30289612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]