---
reference_id: "PMID:20025860"
title: Clinical and biochemical characteristics of patients with urea cycle disorders in a developing country.
authors:
- Ibarra-González I
- Fernández-Lainez C
- Vela-Amieva M
journal: Clin Biochem
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.12.004
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- "Child, Preschool"
- Developing Countries
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intellectual Disability/complications
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/diagnosis, mortality, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and biochemical characteristics of patients with urea cycle disorders in a developing country.
**Authors:** Ibarra-González I, Fernández-Lainez C, Vela-Amieva M
**Journal:** Clin Biochem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.12.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.12.004)

## Content

1. Clin Biochem. 2010 Mar;43(4-5):461-6. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.12.004.
Epub 2009 Dec 16.

Clinical and biochemical characteristics of patients with urea cycle disorders
in a developing country.

Ibarra-González I(1), Fernández-Lainez C, Vela-Amieva M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Errores Innatos del Metabolismo y Tamiz, Unidad de Genética de
la Nutrición, Instituto Investigaciones Biomédicas-UNAM-Instituto Nacional de
Pediatría-SS., Ave. Imán #1, Piso 9, Col. Insurgentes-Cuicuilco, Delegación
Coyoacán, CP 04530, México, D.F., México.

OBJECTIVES: To report the clinical and laboratory characteristics of urea cycle
disorder (UCD) patients at a tertiary care center in a developing country.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Retrospective study of clinical and laboratory data of UCD
patients.
RESULTS: Thirty-seven UCD patients were studied, 31 symptomatic (high risk)
patients (15 neonatal onset, 16 late onset) and 6 with positive neonatal
screening. Argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency was the most frequent disease
(17/37, 46%), followed by ornithine transcarbamylase (10/37, 27%), arginase
(7/37, 19%), and argininosuccinate lyase (3/37, 8%) deficiencies. Mortality of
symptomatic patients was 38% (10/26), neonatal onset had the worst outcome, with
50% of survival.
CONCLUSIONS: In Mexico, the mortality of the UCD patients is higher than those
reported in other countries, and neurological sequels are frequent and severe.
It is essential to implement practice guidelines for the professional management
of these patients.

Copyright 2009 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.12.004
PMID: 20025860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
