---
reference_id: "PMID:31910632"
title: "Japanese Kawasaki Disease Scoring Systems: Are they Applicable to the Iranian Population?"
authors:
- Edraki MR
- Mohammadi H
- Mehdizadegan N
- Ghorashi M
- Amoozgar H
- Borzouee M
- Ajami G
- Keshavarz K
- Dehghani E
- Bahrami R
journal: Arch Iran Med
year: '2020'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Japanese Kawasaki Disease Scoring Systems: Are they Applicable to the Iranian Population?
**Authors:** Edraki MR, Mohammadi H, Mehdizadegan N, Ghorashi M, Amoozgar H, Borzouee M, Ajami G, Keshavarz K, Dehghani E, Bahrami R
**Journal:** Arch Iran Med (2020)

## Content

1. Arch Iran Med. 2020 Jan 1;23(1):31-36.

Japanese Kawasaki Disease Scoring Systems: Are they Applicable to the Iranian 
Population?

Edraki MR(1), Mohammadi H(1), Mehdizadegan N(1), Ghorashi M(1), Amoozgar H(1), 
Borzouee M(1), Ajami G(1), Keshavarz K(1), Dehghani E(1), Bahrami R(1).

Author information:
(1)Neonatology and Cardiac Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Kawasaki disease (KD) is the most frequent cause of coronary artery 
aneurysm (CAA) in children. This study tried to evaluate the accuracy of 
different KD scores developed for prediction of CAA, in an Iranian population.
METHODS: This is a cross-sectional retrospective investigation on pediatric 
patients with a diagnosis of KD. Clinical manifestations, laboratory, and 
echocardiographic data were recorded. Five Kawasaki scores, including Kobayashi, 
Egami, Sano, Nakano, and Harada, were assessed and analyzed in relation to CAA 
and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) resistance.
RESULTS: During five years, we recruited 121 cases of KD under 13 years of age. 
The rates of CAA and IVIG resistance were 16.5%, and 13.2% respectively. The 
IVIG resistance group was significantly younger than responder patients. All 
five scores had low sensitivity in predicting CAA or IVIG resistant cases; the 
highest sensitivity pertained to the Harada score with 50% sensitivity and 59% 
specificity (the area under the curve: 0.545, with a 95% confidence interval: 
0.423 to 0.667) in predicting CAA, which is lower than the usual acceptable 
criteria for a screening test. The specificity of all other scores were more 
than 85% in predicting CAA or IVIG resistance. Gender, fever before therapy and 
laboratory data showed no significant difference between the groups.
CONCLUSION: The Kobayashi, Egami, Sano, Nakano and Harada scores have limited 
usefulness in the Iranian population to predict high risk patients for coronary 
artery involvement or IVIG resistance; in our study, age under one year was a 
risk factor for IVIG resistance.

© 2020 The Author(s). This is an open-access article distributed under the terms 
of the Creative Commons Attribution License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is 
properly cited.

PMID: 31910632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]