---
reference_id: "PMID:20301588"
title: Muenke Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Kruszka P
- Rolle M
- Kahle KT
- Muenke M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Muenke Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Kruszka P, Rolle M, Kahle KT, Muenke M

## Content

1. Muenke Syndrome.

Kruszka P(1), Rolle M(2), Kahle KT(2), Muenke M(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2006 May 10 [updated 2023 Mar 30].

Author information:
(1)GeneDx, LLC, Gaithersburg, Maryland
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts
(3)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Muenke syndrome is characterized by considerable 
phenotypic variability; features may include coronal synostosis (more often 
bilateral than unilateral); synostosis of other sutures, all sutures (pan 
synostosis), or no sutures; or macrocephaly. Bilateral coronal synostosis 
typically results in brachycephaly, although turribrachycephaly (a 
"tower-shaped" skull) or a cloverleaf skull can be observed. Unilateral coronal 
synostosis results in anterior plagiocephaly. Other craniofacial findings 
typically include temporal bossing, widely spaced eyes, ptosis or mild 
proptosis, mild midface retrusion, and highly arched palate or cleft lip and 
palate. Strabismus is common. Other findings can include hearing loss, 
developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral issues, intracranial 
anomalies, epilepsy, ocular anomalies, brachydactyly, carpal and/or tarsal bone 
fusions, broad thumbs and great toes, clinodactyly, and radiographic findings of 
short and broad middle phalanges and/or cone-shaped epiphyses. Of note, some 
individuals who have the p.Pro250Arg pathogenic variant may have no signs of 
Muenke syndrome on physical or radiographic examination.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Muenke syndrome is established by the 
identification of the FGFR3 pathogenic variant c.749C>G (p.Pro250Arg) by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Children with Muenke syndrome and 
craniosynostosis are best managed by a pediatric craniofacial clinic, which 
typically includes a craniofacial surgeon and neurosurgeon, clinical geneticist, 
ophthalmologist, otolaryngologist, pediatrician, radiologist, psychologist, 
dentist, audiologist, speech therapist, and social worker. Depending on 
severity, the first craniosynostosis repair (fronto-orbital advancement and 
cranial vault remodeling) is typically performed between ages three and six 
months. An alternative approach is endoscopic strip craniectomy, which is a less 
invasive procedure and is typically performed prior to age three months. 
Postoperative increased intracranial pressure and/or the need for secondary or 
tertiary extracranial contouring may occur. Standard treatments for hearing 
loss; early speech therapy and intervention programs for those with 
developmental delay, intellectual impairment, behavioral issues, and/or hearing 
loss; surgical correction for strabismus; lubrication for exposure keratopathy. 
Surveillance: Affected individuals benefit from integrated multidisciplinary 
care and protocol-driven management from birth to maturity that includes 
audiograms to screen for acquired or progressive hearing loss; developmental and 
behavioral assessments; neurologic assessment for seizures; ophthalmology 
assessment for strabismus; and social work assessment. Evaluation of relatives 
at risk: It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as 
early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and 
preventive measures.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Muenke syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant 
manner. Each child of an individual with Muenke syndrome has a 50% chance of 
inheriting the pathogenic variant. Because penetrance is reduced and the 
phenotype is variable within families, the manifestations in a child who 
inherits the pathogenic variant cannot be predicted based on the phenotypes of 
other heterozygous family members. Once the FGFR3 p.Pro250Arg pathogenic variant 
has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation 
genetic testing for Muenke syndrome are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301588