---
reference_id: "PMID:20301515"
title: Usher Syndrome Type II.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Koenekoop R
- Arriaga M
- Trzupek KM
- Lentz J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Usher Syndrome Type II.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Koenekoop R, Arriaga M, Trzupek KM, Lentz J

## Content

1. Usher Syndrome Type II.

Koenekoop R(1), Arriaga M(2), Trzupek KM(3), Lentz J(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1999 Dec 10 [updated 2023 Mar 23].

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Surgery, Human Genetics and Adult Ophthalmology, McGill University 
Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
(2)Otolaryngology and Neurosurgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences 
Center, New Orleans, Louisiana
(3)Ocular & Rare Disease Genetics Services, Informed DNA, St Petersburg, Florida
(4)Neuroscience Center of Excellence, Louisiana State University Health, 
Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Usher syndrome type II (USH2) is characterized by the 
following: Congenital, bilateral sensorineural hearing loss that is mild to 
moderate in the low frequencies and severe to profound in the higher 
frequencies. Intact or variable vestibular responses. Retinitis pigmentosa (RP); 
progressive, bilateral, symmetric retinal degeneration that begins with night 
blindness and constricted visual fields (tunnel vision) and eventually includes 
decreased central visual acuity; the rate and degree of vision loss vary within 
and among families.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of USH2 is established in a proband using 
electrophysiologic and subjective tests of hearing and retinal function. 
Identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in one of three genes – ADGRV1, 
USH2A, or WHRN – establishes the diagnosis if clinical features are 
inconclusive.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Early fitting of hearing aids and 
speech training. Children with incomplete speech and sentence rehabilitation 
with hearing aids and older individuals with severe-to-profound hearing loss 
should be considered for cochlear implantation. Standard treatments for 
retinitis pigmentosa; vestibular rehabilitation. Surveillance: Annual audiometry 
and tympanometry with hearing aids or cochlear implant to assure adequate 
auditory stimulation. Annual ophthalmologic evaluation from age 20 years to 
detect potentially treatable complications such as cataracts, refractive errors, 
and cystoid macular edema. Annual fundus photography, visual acuity, visual 
field, electroretinography, optical coherence tomography, and fundus 
autofluorescence from age ten years. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Tunnel 
vision and night blindness can increase the likelihood of accidental injury. 
Competition in sports requiring a full range of vision may be difficult and 
possibly dangerous. Progressive loss of peripheral vision impairs the ability to 
safely drive a car. Evaluation of relatives at risk: The hearing of at-risk sibs 
should be assessed as soon after birth as possible to allow early diagnosis and 
treatment of hearing loss.
GENETIC COUNSELING: USH2 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Each 
subsequent pregnancy of a couple who have had a child with Usher syndrome type 
II has a 25% chance of resulting in an affected child, a 50% chance of resulting 
in an unaffected child who is a carrier, and a 25% chance of resulting in an 
unaffected child who is not a carrier. Prenatal testing and preimplantation 
genetic testing are possible for pregnancies at increased risk if the pathogenic 
variants have been identified in the family.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301515