---
reference_id: "PMID:38927538"
title: Recent Insights into Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Defective Angiogenesis in Systemic Sclerosis.
authors:
- Romano E
- Rosa I
- Fioretto BS
- Manetti M
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12061331
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent Insights into Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Defective Angiogenesis in Systemic Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Romano E, Rosa I, Fioretto BS, Manetti M
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines12061331](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines12061331)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2024 Jun 14;12(6):1331. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12061331.

Recent Insights into Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Defective Angiogenesis 
in Systemic Sclerosis.

Romano E(1), Rosa I(2), Fioretto BS(2), Manetti M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Section of Internal Medicine, Department of Experimental and Clinical 
Medicine, University of Florence, Largo Brambilla 3, 50134 Florence, Italy.
(2)Section of Anatomy and Histology, Department of Experimental and Clinical 
Medicine, University of Florence, Largo Brambilla 3, 50134 Florence, Italy.
(3)Imaging Platform, Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, 
University of Florence, Largo Brambilla 3, 50134 Florence, Italy.

In systemic sclerosis (SSc, or scleroderma), defective angiogenesis, clinically 
manifesting with abnormal capillary architecture and severe capillary reduction, 
represents a hallmark of early-stage disease, usually preceding the onset of 
tissue fibrosis, and is caused by several cellular and molecular mechanisms 
affecting microvascular endothelial cells with different outcomes. Indeed, once 
damaged, endothelial cells can be dysfunctionally activated, thus becoming 
unable to undergo angiogenesis and promoting perivascular inflammation. They can 
also undergo apoptosis, transdifferentiate into profibrotic myofibroblasts, or 
acquire a senescence-associated secretory phenotype characterized by the release 
of exosomes and several profibrotic and proinflammatory mediators. In this 
narrative review, we aimed to give a comprehensive overview of recent studies 
dealing with the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying SSc defective 
angiogenesis and the related endothelial cell dysfunctions, mainly the 
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition process. We also discussed potential novel 
vascular treatment strategies able to restore the angiogenic process and reduce 
the endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition in this complex disease.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12061331
PMCID: PMC11201654
PMID: 38927538

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.