---
reference_id: "PMID:38231719"
title: Clinico-biochemical Profile of Biopsy-proven Minimal Change Disease in Adults from a Tertiary Care Center in South India.
authors:
- Udupa KRN
- Eshwarappa M
- Gurudev KC
- Gireesh MS
- Reddy R
- Yousuff M
journal: Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4103/1319-2442.393997
keywords:
- Child
- Adult
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Rituximab/therapeutic use
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Prospective Studies
- Tertiary Care Centers
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Calcineurin Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Biopsy
- Renal Insufficiency/complications
- Steroids/therapeutic use
- Recurrence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinico-biochemical Profile of Biopsy-proven Minimal Change Disease in Adults from a Tertiary Care Center in South India.
**Authors:** Udupa KRN, Eshwarappa M, Gurudev KC, Gireesh MS, Reddy R, Yousuff M
**Journal:** Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4103/1319-2442.393997](https://doi.org/10.4103/1319-2442.393997)

## Content

1. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2023 May 1;34(3):242-249. doi: 
10.4103/1319-2442.393997. Epub 2024 Jan 17.

Clinico-biochemical Profile of Biopsy-proven Minimal Change Disease in Adults 
from a Tertiary Care Center in South India.

Udupa KRN(1), Eshwarappa M, Gurudev KC, Gireesh MS, Reddy R, Yousuff M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Ramaiah Memorial Hospital, Bengaluru, Karnataka, 
India.

Minimal change disease (MCD) is the most common cause of nephrotic syndrome (NS) 
in children, and in adults, it contributes to 10%-25% of NS. MCD in adults 
follows a slightly different course associated with increased incidence of 
steroid resistance, hematuria, and HTN. This is a prospective-record analysis 
study aimed to analyze the profile of MCD in adults, response to treatment, and 
relapse rates. A retrospective observational study was carried out and data were 
collected retrospectively from all biopsy-proven MCD patients between 2012 and 
2018. A total of 86 adults were diagnosed to have biopsy-proven MCD. Of these, 
32 were excluded due to insufficient data/lost for follow-up. The IBM SPSS 
Statistics version 22.0 was used for the statistical analysis. Descriptive 
analysis includes expression of all the explanatory and outcome variables in 
terms of frequency and proportions for categorical variables whereas in terms of 
mean ± standard deviation for continuous variables. Chi-square test was used to 
compare the age, gender, remission, renal failure and response of different 
drugs, treatment durations, comorbidity conditions, relapse episodes, and 
different types of infections based on the degree of proteinuria among study 
patients. A total of 54 biopsy-proven adult MCD patients were analyzed. The mean 
age of the patients studied was 36.67 years, with the oldest patient being 76 
years. In the study group, 37 (68.5%) patients were male and 14 (31.5%) were 
female. In the study population, 20 (37%) were hypertensive, 3 (5.6%) were 
diabetic, and 10 (18.5%) had renal failure at presentation. On treatment, 52 out 
of 54 patients received steroids, of which 41 (75.9%) were steroid responsive, 6 
(11.1%) steroid dependent, and 7 (13%) steroid resistant. The mean time for 
remission in steroidsensitive patients was 8.8 weeks. Among the 
steroid-dependent and steroid-resistant patients, 11 patients received 
calcineurin inhibitors (CNIs), of which 3 were CNI resistant. In the study Group 
1 patient received cyclophosphamide and two received rituximab. In the study 
population, two patients failed to achieve remission and one patient was 
initiated on hemodialysis and later lost for follow-up. Minimal change NS is a 
type of NS which is highly responsive to steroids with good prognosis in 
children. Adult MCD patients require a higher and prolonged course of steroid 
when compared to children. CNIs and rituximab form a promising second-line drug 
in patients who are steroid resistant/dependent. However, CNI dependency or 
relapse after stopping steroids is a concern.

Copyright © 2024 Copyright: © 2024 Saudi Journal of Kidney Diseases and 
Transplantation.

DOI: 10.4103/1319-2442.393997
PMID: 38231719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]