---
reference_id: "PMID:33475609"
title: Frequency of Dengue Virus Serotype 1 in Lahore by In-house assay.
authors:
- Farooq H
- Tariq WUZ
- Bano S
- Raza A
- Chughtai OR
- Iqbal MZ
journal: J Pak Med Assoc
year: '2020'
doi: 10.47391/JPMA.1038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of Dengue Virus Serotype 1 in Lahore by In-house assay.
**Authors:** Farooq H, Tariq WUZ, Bano S, Raza A, Chughtai OR, Iqbal MZ
**Journal:** J Pak Med Assoc (2020)
**DOI:** [10.47391/JPMA.1038](https://doi.org/10.47391/JPMA.1038)

## Content

1. J Pak Med Assoc. 2020 Dec;70(12(A)):2263-2265. doi: 10.47391/JPMA.1038.

Frequency of Dengue Virus Serotype 1 in Lahore by In-house assay.

Farooq H(1), Tariq WUZ(1), Bano S(1), Raza A(1), Chughtai OR(1), Iqbal MZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology and Molecular Biology, Chughtai Lab, Lahore, Pakistan.

Dengue is an important systemic viral infection that is caused by the dengue 
virus. Ribonucleic acid (RNA) from dengue NS1 positive samples, collected 
randomly during dengue epidemic from October 2016 to October 2017 at Chugtai 
Lab, was extracted for nucleic acid. Both the detection and serotyping of dengue 
samples were performed using real-time PCR on Rotor Gene Q. From the 70 NS1 
positive samples, 57 (81.4%) samples were confirmed to be positive for dengue 
virus RNA, while the remaining 13 (18.6%) were negative. Serotype 1 (DEN-1) was 
verified among all samples by in-house assay and using commercial kit FTD (Fast 
Track Diagnostics) dengue differentiation; it was concluded that our in-house 
assay is in 100% concordance with commercial kit. Serotype 2 (DEN-2) and 
serotype 3 (DEN-3) have been documented in Pakistan since 1994. But recent 
detection of serotype 1 in Pakistan is indicative of more severe dengue 
haemorrhagic fever in future due to reinfection.

DOI: 10.47391/JPMA.1038
PMID: 33475609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]