---
reference_id: "PMID:3333141"
title: Pathological features of Kawasaki disease (mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome).
authors:
- Landing BH
- Larson EJ
journal: Am J Cardiovasc Pathol
year: '1987'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathological features of Kawasaki disease (mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome).
**Authors:** Landing BH, Larson EJ
**Journal:** Am J Cardiovasc Pathol (1987)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiovasc Pathol. 1987;1(2):218-29.

Pathological features of Kawasaki disease (mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome).

Landing BH(1), Larson EJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Childrens Hospital of Los Angeles, California.

Kawasaki disease (mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome) (MCLS) is an apparently 
infectious disease, an etiological agent of which has not been established, with 
peak age incidence at about 1 year, but with progressively fewer cases occurring 
into the fourth decade. Early clinical features include fever, rash, 
conjunctival injection, dry reddened lips, oropharyngeal reddening, enlarged 
cervical nodes, and swelling and redness of hands and feet. Peeling of skin of 
fingers and toes, arthralgia, and marked thrombocytosis are frequent 1-2 weeks 
after onset. Myocarditis, cardiac valvulitis, and lymphocytic or mixed 
interstitial infiltration of pancreas, renal, splenic, and hepatic hilar regions 
are seen in the early phase, but arteritis, typically of extraparenchymal 
arteries, is the most important aspect of MCLS, hence the term infantile 
periarteritis nodosa, formerly applied to fatal cases of MCLS. Thrombosis of 
coronary artery aneurysms is the most common cause of death (rate about 0.5%). 
The peak time of death is 3-4 weeks from onset, but death from coronary 
occlusion has been seen as late as 14 years after the acute phase. Aneurysmal 
rupture with hemopericardium or retroperitoneal hemorrhage is rare, as are late 
brachial, iliac, or other arterial aneurysms. Pathological features of MCLS in 
the early and later stages are described and illustrated, and the epidemiologic, 
etiologic, forensic, and other aspects of the disease are discussed.

PMID: 3333141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]