---
reference_id: "PMID:37224128"
title: Defects in immune response to Toxoplasma gondii are associated with enhanced HIV-1-related neurocognitive impairment in co-infected patients.
authors:
- Escobar-Guevara EE
- de Quesada-Martínez ME
- Roldán-Dávila YB
- Alarcón de Noya B
- Alfonzo-Díaz MA
journal: PLoS One
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0285976
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defects in immune response to Toxoplasma gondii are associated with enhanced HIV-1-related neurocognitive impairment in co-infected patients.
**Authors:** Escobar-Guevara EE, de Quesada-Martínez ME, Roldán-Dávila YB, Alarcón de Noya B, Alfonzo-Díaz MA
**Journal:** PLoS One (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0285976](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0285976)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2023 May 24;18(5):e0285976. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0285976. 
eCollection 2023.

Defects in immune response to Toxoplasma gondii are associated with enhanced 
HIV-1-related neurocognitive impairment in co-infected patients.

Escobar-Guevara EE(1)(2)(3), de Quesada-Martínez ME(4), Roldán-Dávila YB(5)(6), 
Alarcón de Noya B(7), Alfonzo-Díaz MA(1)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Immunophysiology, José Maria Vargas School of 
Medicine, Central University of Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
(2)Department of Immunology, José Maria Vargas School of Medicine, Central 
University of Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
(3)Laboratory of Physiopathology, Venezuelan Institute for Scientific Research, 
Caracas, Venezuela.
(4)Department of Physiopathology, José Maria Vargas School of Medicine, Central 
University of Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
(5)Service of Infectology, José Ignacio Baldó Hospital, Caracas, Venezuela.
(6)Department of Microbiology, José Maria Vargas School of Medicine, Central 
University of Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
(7)Tropical Medicine Institute, Section of Immunology, Central University of 
Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
(8)Department of Physiology, José Maria Vargas School of Medicine, Central 
University of Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
(9)Academic Department, Salvador Allende Latin-American School of Medicine, San 
Antonio de Los Altos, Miranda State, Venezuela.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) and Toxoplasma gondii can invade the 
central nervous system and affect its functionality. Advanced HIV-1 infection 
has been associated with defects in immune response to T. gondii, leading to 
reactivation of latent infections and development of toxoplasmic encephalitis. 
This study evaluates relationship between changes in immune response to T. 
gondii and neurocognitive impairment in HIV-1/T. gondii co-infected patients, 
across different stages of HIV-1 infection. The study assessed the immune 
response to T. gondii by measuring cytokine production in response to parasite 
antigens, and also neurocognitive functions by performing auditory and visual 
P300 cognitive evoked potentials, short term memory (Sternberg) and executive 
function tasks (Wisconsin Card Sorting Test-WCST) in 4 groups of individuals: 
HIV-1/T. gondii co-infected (P2), HIV-1-infected/T. gondii-non-infected (P1), 
HIV-1-non-infected/T. gondii-infected (C2) and HIV-1-non-infected/T. 
gondii-non-infected (C1). Patients (P1 and P2) were grouped in 
early/asymptomatic (P1A and P2A) or late/symptomatic (P1B/C and P2B/C) according 
to peripheral blood CD4+ T lymphocyte counts (>350 or <350/μL, respectively). 
Groups were compared using T-student or U-Mann-Whitney tests as appropriate, 
p<0.05 was considered as significantly. For P300 waves, HIV-1-infected patients 
(P1) had significantly longer latencies and significantly smaller amplitudes 
than uninfected controls, but HIV-1/T. gondii co-infected patients (P2) had 
significantly longer latencies and smaller amplitude than P1. P1 patients had 
significantly poorer results than uninfected controls in Sternberg and WCST, but 
P2 had significantly worse results than P1. HIV-1 infection was associated with 
significantly lower production of IL-2, TNF-α and IFN-γ in response to T. gondii 
from early/asymptomatic stages, when comparing P2 patients to C2 controls. These 
findings may indicate impairment in anti-parasitic response in co-infected 
patients, facilitating early limited reactivation of the parasitic latent 
infection, therefore creating cumulative damage in the brain and affecting 
neurocognitive functions from asymptomatic stages of HIV-1 infection, as 
suggested by defects in co-infected patients in this study.

Copyright: © 2023 Escobar-Guevara et al. This is an open access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided 
the original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0285976
PMCID: PMC10208516
PMID: 37224128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.