---
reference_id: "PMID:29550852"
title: Differentiated thyroid cancer and selenium supplements for protection of salivary glands from (131)I treatment.
authors:
- Mazokopakis E
journal: Hell J Nucl Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1967/s002449910712
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differentiated thyroid cancer and selenium supplements for protection of salivary glands from (131)I treatment.
**Authors:** Mazokopakis E
**Journal:** Hell J Nucl Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1967/s002449910712](https://doi.org/10.1967/s002449910712)

## Content

1. Hell J Nucl Med. 2018 Jan-Apr;21(1):83-84. doi: 10.1967/s002449910712. Epub
2018  Mar 20.

Differentiated thyroid cancer and selenium supplements for protection of 
salivary glands from (131)I treatment.

Mazokopakis E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Naval Hospital of Crete, Souda 73 200, 
Chania, Crete, Greece. emazokopakis@yahoo.gr.

Dear Editor, I read with great interest the article by Son et al about the 
radioprotective effect of selenium (Se) supplementation for the salivary glands 
from 131I treatment in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC). In 
this study, 8 patients received 300μg of Se (as inorganic sodium selenite; 
selenase®) orally for 10 days, 3 days before to 6 days after 131I treatment. On 
the occasion of the use of Se among these patients, I want with this letter to 
remind the differences among the prescribed Se supplements in clinical practice, 
such as the possible health consequences of Brazil nut consumption as another 
choice for the preparation of DTC patients for radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy. 
Selenium is an essential element with many pleiotropic effects that can be found 
in foods and supplements in organic form (as selenomethionine, selenocysteine, 
γ-glutamyl-Se-methylselenocysteine) or/and in inorganic form (as sodium selenate 
and sodium selenite). Selenium in multivitamin/multimineral supplements or in a 
stand-alone supplement is often available in the forms of L-selenomethionine, 
Se-enriched yeast (grown in a high-Se medium), mustard seed-derived Se, or as 
sodium selenite or sodium selenate. Because these two (organic and inorganic) 
forms of Se are absorbed and metabolized differently, it is very important for 
the physicians, when prescribe a Se supplement, to know the contained form of 
Se. Inorganic forms of Se are easily absorbed through the intestine but poorly 
retained. Once they reach the blood, inorganic Se is quickly filtered out by the 
kidneys and excreted in the urine. So, the consumption of supplements with 
inorganic forms of Se does not offer the maximum health benefits of the element. 
Conversely, Se-containing amino acids, such as selenomethionine and 
selenocysteine, are introduced directly into proteins, including muscle 
proteins. These organic proteins-bound Se (selenoproteins) are better retained, 
utilized, and incorporated by the human body. About 90% of the received 
selenomethionine is actually absorbed in the intestinal tract, and about half of 
that remains in the body. The higher degree of absorption of selenomethionine 
against selenite was described in a recently published systematic review and 
meta-analysis by Wichman et al. In this review, a significant decrease in serum 
thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPO-Ab) levels was found among patients receiving 
200μg selenomethionine, but not among those receiving 200μg sodium selenite. In 
another investigation, 10 groups of Se-replete subjects were randomly assigned 
to receive a placebo or either 200 or 400 or 600μg/day Se as selenomethionine, 
sodium selenite, or high-selenium yeast (in which an estimated 75% of Se was in 
the form of selenomethionine) for 16 weeks. Selenium bioavailability, based on 
urinary excretion, was greatest for selenomethionine and lowest for selenite. 
However, supplementation with any of these forms only affected plasma Se levels 
and not glutathione peroxidase activity or selenoprotein P concentration, 
suggesting that study participants were selenium replete before they began 
taking Se supplements. Because the absorption of selenite was approximately 
two-thirds of the absorption of selenomethionine in this study, we can assume 
that the daily dose of 300μg of sodium selenite in the study of Son et al 
corresponded to 200μg of selenomethionine which is the most frequently used dose 
in intervention trials. However, in our opinion, the prescription of supplements 
with organic forms of Se must be preferred, when required. It is also worth 
mentioning that the prescribed Se supplements should not contain iodine 
considering that for a successful RAI therapy after thyroidectomy, DTC patients 
must, not only increase their thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels, but also 
deplete the whole body iodine pool through a low-iodine diet (low-quality 
evidence). One of the richest known food sources of bioavailable Se, in the 
organic form of selenomethionine, are the Brazil nuts. Brazil nuts grow on 
massive tropical trees, the Bertholletia excelsa of the Lecythidaceae family, 
some reaching heights over 45m. The average Se content of each Brazil nut in 
most elemental analyses varies ranging from 2.7 to 11μg Se/g, and the average 
weight of each nut varies between 3 and 4 g. Their consumption can increase the 
likelihood of Se toxicity, regardless of the quantity of the nuts consumed, and 
thus is not be a safe dietary choice. Moreover, Brazil nuts may be infected 
externally by aflatoxins or can trigger allergic reactions in sensitive people. 
However, raw Brazil nuts don't contain iodine and thus their consumption would 
not undermine the dietary efforts of DTC patient in the framework of the 
required low-iodine diet. The consumption of 2-3 unshelled and raw (unsalted) 
Brazil nuts daily could be another choice for the post-thyroidectomy period up 
to 10 days after RAI therapy among DTC patients who do not want to receive 
supplements as source of Se. We must emphasize that some patients having DTC and 
also Hashimoto's thyroiditis may had previously received Se supplements or 
Brazil nuts for a long period of time before DTC was diagnosed and thyroidectomy 
had followed. In conclusion, the prescription of supplements with organic forms 
of Se must be preferred against of supplements with inorganic forms of Se among 
DTC patients for the protection of their salivary glands from 131I treatment and 
Brazil nuts could be another choice.

DOI: 10.1967/s002449910712
PMID: 29550852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]