---
reference_id: "PMID:37489386"
title: Open and Closed Triple Inhaler Therapy in Patients with Uncontrolled Asthma.
authors:
- Kotoulas SC
- Tsiouprou I
- Domvri K
- Ntontsi P
- Pataka A
- Porpodis K
journal: Adv Respir Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/arm91040023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Open and Closed Triple Inhaler Therapy in Patients with Uncontrolled Asthma.
**Authors:** Kotoulas SC, Tsiouprou I, Domvri K, Ntontsi P, Pataka A, Porpodis K
**Journal:** Adv Respir Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/arm91040023](https://doi.org/10.3390/arm91040023)

## Content

1. Adv Respir Med. 2023 Jul 4;91(4):288-300. doi: 10.3390/arm91040023.

Open and Closed Triple Inhaler Therapy in Patients with Uncontrolled Asthma.

Kotoulas SC(1), Tsiouprou I(2), Domvri K(3), Ntontsi P(4), Pataka A(5), Porpodis 
K(2).

Author information:
(1)ICU, General Hospital of Thessaloniki "Hippokration", 49th Kostantinoupoleos 
Street, 57642 Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Pulmonary Clinic of Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, General Hospital of 
Thessaloniki "Georgios Papanikolaou", Leoforos Papanikolaou, Exohi, 57010 
Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Laboratory of Histology-Embryology, Medical School, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, Leoforos Agiou Dimitriou, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)2nd University Department of Respiratory Medicine, Attikon Hospital, 1st 
Rimini Street, Haidari,12462 Athens, Greece.
(5)Respiratory Failure Clinic of Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, General 
Hospital of Thessaloniki "Georgios Papanikolaou", Leoforos Papanikolaou, Exohi, 
57010 Thessaloniki, Greece.

Long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) are a class of inhalers that has 
recently been included as add-on therapy in the GINA guidelines, either in a 
single inhaler device with inhaled corticosteroids plus long-acting β2-agonists 
(ICS + LABA) (closed triple inhaler therapy) or in a separate one (open triple 
inhaler therapy). This review summarizes the existing evidence on the addition 
of LAMAs in patients with persistently uncontrolled asthma despite ICS + LABA 
treatment based on clinical efficacy in the reduction of asthma symptoms and 
exacerbations, the improvement in lung function, and its safety profile.

DOI: 10.3390/arm91040023
PMCID: PMC10366885
PMID: 37489386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.