---
reference_id: "PMID:33382560"
title: "Eating Disorders in Primary Care: Diagnosis and Management."
authors:
- Klein DA
- Sylvester JE
- Schvey NA
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2021'
keywords:
- "Anorexia Nervosa/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Binge-Eating Disorder/diagnosis, therapy"
- Body Image
- "Bulimia Nervosa/diagnosis, therapy"
- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy/methods
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/diagnosis, therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Medical History Taking
- "Primary Health Care/organization & administration"
- "Referral and Consultation/organization & administration"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eating Disorders in Primary Care: Diagnosis and Management.
**Authors:** Klein DA, Sylvester JE, Schvey NA
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2021)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2021 Jan 1;103(1):22-32.

Eating Disorders in Primary Care: Diagnosis and Management.

Klein DA(1), Sylvester JE(1), Schvey NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Erratum in
    Am Fam Physician. 2021 Mar 1;103(5):263.

Comment in
    Am Fam Physician. 2021 Jul 1;104(1):7-9.

Eating disorders are potentially life-threatening conditions characterized by
disordered eating and weight-control behaviors that impair physical health and
psychosocial functioning. Early intervention may decrease the risk of long-term
pathology and disability. Clinicians should interpret disordered eating and body
image concerns and carefully monitor patients' height, weight, and body mass
index trends for subtle changes. After diagnosis, visits should include the
sensitive review of psychosocial and clinical factors, physical examination,
orthostatic vital signs, and testing (e.g., a metabolic panel with magnesium and
phosphate levels, electrocardiography) when indicated. Additional care team
members (i.e., dietitian, therapist, and caregivers) should provide a unified,
evidence-based therapeutic approach. The escalation of care should be based on
health status (e.g., acute food refusal, uncontrollable binge eating or purging,
co-occurring conditions, suicidality, test abnormalities), weight patterns,
outpatient options, and social support. A healthy weight range is determined by
the degree of malnutrition and pre-illness trajectories. Weight gain of 2.2 to
4.4 lb per week stabilizes cardiovascular health. Treatment options may include
cognitive behavior interventions that address body image and dietary and
physical activity behaviors; family-based therapy, which is a first-line
treatment for youths; and pharmacotherapy, which may treat co-occurring
conditions, but should not be pursued alone. Evidence supports select
antidepressants or topiramate for bulimia nervosa and lisdexamfetamine for
binge-eating disorder. Remission is suggested by healthy biopsychosocial
functioning, cognitive flexibility with eating, resolution of disordered
behaviors and decision-making, and if applicable, restoration of weight and
menses. Prevention should emphasize a positive focus on body image instead of a
focus on weight or dieting.

PMID: 33382560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
