---
reference_id: "PMID:23390178"
title: "The challenge of juvenile Huntington disease: to test or not to test."
authors:
- Koutsis G
- Karadima G
- Kladi A
- Panas M
journal: Neurology
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31828727fa
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The challenge of juvenile Huntington disease: to test or not to test.
**Authors:** Koutsis G, Karadima G, Kladi A, Panas M
**Journal:** Neurology (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e31828727fa](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e31828727fa)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2013 Mar 12;80(11):990-6. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31828727fa. Epub 
2013 Feb 6.

The challenge of juvenile Huntington disease: to test or not to test.

Koutsis G(1), Karadima G, Kladi A, Panas M.

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Unit, 1st Department of Neurology, University of Athens Medical 
School, Eginition Hospital, Athens, Greece. gkoutsi2@otenet.gr

Comment in
    Neurology. 2013 Mar 12;80(11):976-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31828728ce.

OBJECTIVE: In a cohort of patients with suspected juvenile-onset Huntington 
disease (HD), we compared HD expansion-positive and -negative cases in order to 
identify parameters that may allow differentiating between them and may act as a 
guide to clinicians contemplating genetic testing.
METHODS: We analyzed the clinical and genetic characteristics of 76 
juvenile-onset patients referred consecutively for HD genetic testing over a 
16-year period.
RESULTS: In total, 24 patients were positive for the HD expansion (7.8% of our 
HD cohort). Mean age at onset of expanded cases was similar to unexpanded cases. 
All expanded cases had a family history of genetically confirmed HD compared to 
only 13.5% of unexpanded cases (p = 0.000). Clinical symptoms at onset or at 
presentation could not differentiate between expanded and unexpanded patients. 
Although criteria suggested by previous reports allowed statistical 
differentiation between the 2 groups, they were not sufficiently sensitive and 
specific to be used in clinical context and performed less satisfactorily than 
presence of a family history of HD alone.
CONCLUSIONS: A diagnosis of juvenile HD should be primarily contemplated in 
symptomatic children with a family history of HD, although a proportion of these 
will test negative. With no family history of HD, juvenile HD is very unlikely 
and genetic testing should never delay searching for other causes. The specific 
nature of symptoms at onset or at presentation is of limited value in guiding 
the decision to test or not to test.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31828727fa
PMID: 23390178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]