---
reference_id: "PMID:35144512"
title: "Amyloidosis from the patient perspective: the French daily impact of amyloidosis study."
authors:
- Damy T
- Adams D
- Bridoux F
- Grateau G
- Planté-Bordeneuve V
- Ghiron Y
- Farrugia A
- Pelcot F
- Taieb C
- Labeyrie C
- Jaccard A
- Georgin-Lavialle S
journal: Amyloid
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/13506129.2022.2035354
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyloidosis from the patient perspective: the French daily impact of amyloidosis study.
**Authors:** Damy T, Adams D, Bridoux F, Grateau G, Planté-Bordeneuve V, Ghiron Y, Farrugia A, Pelcot F, Taieb C, Labeyrie C, Jaccard A, Georgin-Lavialle S
**Journal:** Amyloid (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13506129.2022.2035354](https://doi.org/10.1080/13506129.2022.2035354)

## Content

1. Amyloid. 2022 Sep;29(3):165-174. doi: 10.1080/13506129.2022.2035354. Epub 2022
 Feb 11.

Amyloidosis from the patient perspective: the French daily impact of amyloidosis 
study.

Damy T(1)(2)(3), Adams D(4)(5)(6), Bridoux F(7)(8)(9), Grateau G(10)(11), 
Planté-Bordeneuve V(1)(12), Ghiron Y(3), Farrugia A(13), Pelcot F(13), Taieb 
C(14), Labeyrie C(4)(5)(6), Jaccard A(7)(8)(15), Georgin-Lavialle S(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Referral Centre for Cardiac Amyloidosis, GRC Amyloid Research Institute, 
Reseau amylase, Créteil, France.
(2)Filière CARDIOGEN.
(3)Department of Cardiology, DHU A-TVB, CHU Henri Mondor, AP-HP, INSERM U955 and 
UPEC, Créteil, France.
(4)Filière FILNEMUS.
(5)Referral Center for Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy (NNERF), Le Kremlin 
Bicêtre, France.
(6)Departement of Neurology, CHU Bicêtre, AP-HP, INSERM U 1195 and University of 
Paris-Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(7)Referral Center for AL amyloidosis, Limoges, France.
(8)Filière MARIH, Paris, France.
(9)Department of Nephrology, CHRU Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(10)Filière FAI2R.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine, Sorbonne University, GRC AA SU, CHU Tenon, 
AP-HP, National Reference Center for Autoinflammatory Diseases and AA 
Amyloidosis (CEREMAIA), Paris, France.
(12)Department of Neurology, CHU Henri Mondor, AP-HP, INSERM U955 and UPEC, 
Créteil, France.
(13)Association Française Contre l'Amylose, Marseille, France.
(14)Emma-Clinic, Vincennes, France.
(15)Department of Hematology, CHRU Limoges, Limoges, France.

BACKGROUND: Amyloidosis is a complex group of rare conditions. For patients, 
amyloidosis is severely debilitating: physically and psychologically. Currently, 
data are lacking to evaluate the medical, economic, and social burden of 
systemic amyloidosis.
OBJECTIVE: To analyse the patient burden according to the main types of systemic 
amyloidosis.
METHODS: The French Daily Impact of Amyloidosis study was an observational, 
cross-sectional and non-interventional study. Adults diagnosed with light chain 
(AL), transthyretin (ATTR), amyloid A (AA) and other rare forms of amyloidosis 
were eligible. Data regarding amyloidosis prevalence, diagnosis, management, and 
impact on everyday life were collected using a study-specific survey built by 
the Association Française Contre l'Amylose (AFCA) and the four French National 
Referral Centres for Amyloidosis.
RESULTS: A total of 603 patients, predominantly male (65%) with an average age 
of 66.8 years, including 170 AL, 224 ATTRv, 109 ATTRwt and 25 AA amyloidosis 
patients, completed the study-specific survey. The median delay from 
presentation to confirmed diagnosis was 27.4 months but varied according to 
amyloidosis type. Patients before diagnosis had breathlessness (49%), tingling 
sensation (33%), pain (28%), difficulty in walking (28%) and weight loss (22%). 
Amyloidosis was most frequently suspected (49%) and confirmed (57%) in local 
hospitals but managed in French amyloidosis referral centres (58%). Patients 
often reported problems with mobility, usual activities, pain/discomfort and 
anxiety/depression, but not with self-care.
CONCLUSIONS: Systemic amyloidosis severely impacts daily life. The delay to 
confirmed amyloidosis diagnosis needs to be reduced. Early, effective treatment 
is required to optimise patient benefits.

DOI: 10.1080/13506129.2022.2035354
PMID: 35144512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]