---
reference_id: "PMID:36116832"
title: Early Lyme Disease (Erythema Migrans) and Its Mimics (Southern Tick-Associated Rash Illness and Tick-Associated Rash Illness).
authors:
- Strle F
- Wormser GP
journal: Infect Dis Clin North Am
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.idc.2022.03.005
keywords:
- Animals
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Erythema
- "Exanthema/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- Humans
- "Lyme Disease/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Tick Bites/complications, drug therapy"
- Ticks
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early Lyme Disease (Erythema Migrans) and Its Mimics (Southern Tick-Associated Rash Illness and Tick-Associated Rash Illness).
**Authors:** Strle F, Wormser GP
**Journal:** Infect Dis Clin North Am (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.idc.2022.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idc.2022.03.005)

## Content

1. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2022 Sep;36(3):523-539. doi: 
10.1016/j.idc.2022.03.005.

Early Lyme Disease (Erythema Migrans) and Its Mimics (Southern Tick-Associated 
Rash Illness and Tick-Associated Rash Illness).

Strle F(1), Wormser GP(2).

Author information:
(1)University Medical Center Ljubljana, Japljeva 2, Ljubljana 1525, Slovenia. 
Electronic address: franc.strle@kclj.si.
(2)New York Medical College, 40 Sunshine Cottage Road, Skyline Office, Valhalla, 
NY 10595, USA.

Erythema migrans, an expanding erythematous skin lesion that develops days to 
weeks following an Ixodes species tick bite, is the most common clinical 
manifestation of Lyme disease. Presentations in the United States differ 
somewhat from that in Europe, presumably because of the different etiologic 
agents. Diagnosis is based on the appearance of the skin lesion, rather than on 
laboratory testing. After treatment with an appropriate oral antibiotic for 10 
to 14 days, the prognosis is excellent. Two conditions that cause a similar skin 
lesion following a tick bite, but are of unknown cause, are Southern 
tick-associated rash illness in the United States and tick-associated rash 
illness in Japan.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idc.2022.03.005
PMID: 36116832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure G.P. Wormser reports receiving 
research grants from the Institute for Systems Biology and Pfizer, Inc. He has 
been an expert witness in malpractice cases involving Lyme disease and is an 
unpaid board member of the American Lyme Disease Foundation. He is coowner of US 
Patent No. 11230728 entitled: Differentiation of Lyme disease and Southern 
Tick-associated rash illness; issue Date: 1/25/22. F. Strle served on the 
scientific advisory board for Roche on Lyme disease serologic diagnostics, on 
the scientific advisory board for Pfizer on Lyme disease vaccine, received 
research support from the Slovenian Research Agency [grant numbers P3-0296, 
J3-1744, and J3-8195] and is an unpaid member of the steering committee of the 
ESCMID Study Group on Lyme Borreliosis/ESGBOR.