---
reference_id: "PMID:31276579"
title: Deregulating mitochondrial metabolite and ion transport has beneficial effects in yeast and human cellular models for NARP syndrome.
authors:
- Su X
- Rak M
- Tetaud E
- Godard F
- Sardin E
- Bouhier M
- Gombeau K
- Caetano-Anollés D
- Salin B
- Chen H
- di Rago JP
- Tribouillard-Tanvier D
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz160
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphate/metabolism
- Ataxia/genetics
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- "Dicarboxylic Acid Transporters/genetics, metabolism"
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Ion Transport
- Leigh Disease
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Mitochondrial Myopathies/metabolism
- "Mitochondrial Proton-Translocating ATPases/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics, metabolism"
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics, metabolism"
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deregulating mitochondrial metabolite and ion transport has beneficial effects in yeast and human cellular models for NARP syndrome.
**Authors:** Su X, Rak M, Tetaud E, Godard F, Sardin E, Bouhier M, Gombeau K, Caetano-Anollés D, Salin B, Chen H, di Rago JP, Tribouillard-Tanvier D
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddz160](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddz160)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2019 Nov 15;28(22):3792-3804. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz160.

Deregulating mitochondrial metabolite and ion transport has beneficial effects
in yeast and human cellular models for NARP syndrome.

Su X(1), Rak M(1), Tetaud E(1), Godard F(1), Sardin E(1), Bouhier M(1), Gombeau
K(1), Caetano-Anollés D(2), Salin B(1), Chen H(3), di Rago JP(1),
Tribouillard-Tanvier D(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biochimie et Génétique Cellulaires, Université Victor Segalen, 1
Rue Camille Saint-Saëns, CEDEX 33077 Bordeaux, France.
(2)Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), 69117
Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)National Clinical Research Center of Kidney Diseases, Jinling Hospital,
Nanjing University School of Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(4)INSERM, Paris, France.

The m.8993T>G mutation of the mitochondrial MT-ATP6 gene has been associated
with numerous cases of neuropathy, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa and
maternally inherited Leigh syndrome, which are diseases known to result from
abnormalities affecting mitochondrial energy transduction. We previously
reported that an equivalent point mutation severely compromised proton transport
through the ATP synthase membrane domain (FO) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
reduced the content of cytochrome c oxidase (Complex IV or COX) by 80%. Herein,
we report that overexpression of the mitochondrial oxodicarboxylate carrier
(Odc1p) considerably increases Complex IV abundance and tricarboxylic
acid-mediated substrate-level phosphorylation of ADP coupled to conversion of
α-ketoglutarate into succinate in m.8993T>G yeast. Consistently in m.8993T>G
yeast cells, the retrograde signaling pathway was found to be strongly induced
in order to preserve α-ketoglutarate production; when Odc1p was overexpressed,
this stress pathway returned to an almost basal activity. Similar beneficial
effects were induced by a partial uncoupling of the mitochondrial membrane with
the proton ionophore, cyanide m-chlorophenyl hydrazone. This chemical
considerably improved the glutamine-based, respiration-dependent growth of human
cytoplasmic hybrid cells that are homoplasmic for the m.8993T>G mutation. These
findings shed light on the interdependence between ATP synthase and Complex IV
biogenesis, which could lay the groundwork for the creation of nutritional or
metabolic interventions for attenuating the effects of mtDNA mutations.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddz160
PMID: 31276579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
