---
reference_id: "PMID:31406627"
title: "The Lebanese Allele in the PET100 Gene: Report on Two New Families with Cytochrome c Oxidase Deficiency."
authors:
- Mansour H
- Sabbagh S
- Bizzari S
- El-Hayek S
- Chouery E
- Gambarini A
- Gencik M
- Mégarbané A
journal: J Pediatr Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1685172
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Lebanese Allele in the PET100 Gene: Report on Two New Families with Cytochrome c Oxidase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Mansour H, Sabbagh S, Bizzari S, El-Hayek S, Chouery E, Gambarini A, Gencik M, Mégarbané A
**Journal:** J Pediatr Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0039-1685172](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0039-1685172)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Genet. 2019 Sep;8(3):172-178. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1685172. Epub 2019
 Apr 16.

The Lebanese Allele in the PET100 Gene: Report on Two New Families with 
Cytochrome c Oxidase Deficiency.

Mansour H(1), Sabbagh S(2), Bizzari S(3), El-Hayek S(3), Chouery E(4), Gambarini 
A(5), Gencik M(6), Mégarbané A(7)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Saint George Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon.
(2)Department Pediatrics, Hotel-Dieu de France, Beirut, Lebanon.
(3)Centre for Arab Genomic Studies, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
(4)Unité de Génétique Médicale, Université Saint Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon.
(5)Institut Jérôme Lejeune, CRB BioJeL, Paris, France.
(6)Praxis Fur Humangenetik, Vienna, Austria.
(7)INOVIE-MENA, Beirut, Lebanon.

Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency is caused by mutations in any of at least 30 
mitochondrial and nuclear genes involved in mitochondrial complex IV biogenesis 
and structure, including the recently identified PET100 gene. Here, we report 
two families, of which one is consanguineous, with two affected siblings each. 
In one family, the siblings presented with developmental delay, seizures, lactic 
acidosis, abnormal brain magnetic resonance imaging, and low muscle 
mitochondrial complex IV activity at 30%. In the other family, the two siblings, 
now deceased, had a history of global developmental delay, failure to thrive, 
muscular hypotonia, seizures, developmental regression, respiratory 
insufficiency, and lactic acidosis. By whole exome sequencing, a missense 
mutation in exon 1 of the PET100 gene (c.3G > C; [p.Met1?]) was identified in 
both families. A review of the clinical description and literature is discussed, 
highlighting the importance of this variant in the Lebanese population.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1685172
PMCID: PMC6688892
PMID: 31406627

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.