---
reference_id: "PMID:36781627"
title: "Traumatic brain injury and risk of Parkinson's disease: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Balabandian M
- Noori M
- Lak B
- Karimizadeh Z
- Nabizadeh F
journal: Acta Neurol Belg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s13760-023-02209-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Traumatic brain injury and risk of Parkinson's disease: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Balabandian M, Noori M, Lak B, Karimizadeh Z, Nabizadeh F
**Journal:** Acta Neurol Belg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13760-023-02209-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13760-023-02209-x)

## Content

1. Acta Neurol Belg. 2023 Aug;123(4):1225-1239. doi: 10.1007/s13760-023-02209-x. 
Epub 2023 Feb 13.

Traumatic brain injury and risk of Parkinson's disease: a meta-analysis.

Balabandian M(1)(2), Noori M(3)(4), Lak B(5), Karimizadeh Z(5), Nabizadeh 
F(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Group (NRG), Universal Scientific Education and 
Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran.
(2)School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Student Research Committee, School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Urology Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Iran.
(5)School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Neuroscience Research Group (NRG), Universal Scientific Education and 
Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran. fardinnabizade1378@gmail.com.
(7)School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 
fardinnabizade1378@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Association between traumatic brain injury (TBI) and Parkinson's 
disease (PD) has been a hot topic of discussion for a long time. Previous 
studies reported that the incidence of PD is significantly higher among elderly 
adults with a history of TBI. Due to contradictory results of previous 
investigations, we aimed to perform a systematic review and meta-analysis to 
investigate the role of TBI as a risk factor for PD.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic literature search in the electronic databases 
PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus. In this study, we included published papers 
on the risk of PD in patients with previous TBI compared to the healthy control 
group.
RESULTS: After the screening, 15 studies entered our systematic review and 
meta-analysis. The risk ratio of TBI among PD and controls by a combination of 
15 studies using a random-effect model was 1.48 (95% CI 1.22-1.74). The 
prevalence of TBI by a combination of 14 studies was 18% (95% CI 12-24%).
CONCLUSION: Our result suggests that TBI is a major risk factor for developing 
PD later in life. At this time, there is a lack of populous prospective cohort 
studies with sufficient follow-up period to provide a well-documented 
association between the onset of PD and severity, frequency, and location of 
prior TBI, which warrants special efforts and consideration for years to come.

© 2023. The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Belgian Neurological Society.

DOI: 10.1007/s13760-023-02209-x
PMID: 36781627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]