---
reference_id: "PMID:15078881"
title: Accumulation of glycosphingolipids in Niemann-Pick C disease disrupts endosomal transport.
authors:
- te Vruchte D
- Lloyd-Evans E
- Veldman RJ
- Neville DC
- Dwek RA
- Platt FM
- van Blitterswijk WJ
- Sillence DJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311591200
keywords:
- "1-Deoxynojirimycin/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Androstenes/pharmacology
- Animals
- "Antigens, CD/metabolism"
- Biological Transport
- Boron Compounds/pharmacology
- Brain/metabolism
- CHO Cells
- Cell Line
- "Centrifugation, Density Gradient"
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- Cricetinae
- Detergents/pharmacology
- Endosomes/metabolism
- Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Glucosyltransferases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Glycosphingolipids/chemistry
- Golgi Apparatus/metabolism
- Lactosylceramides/metabolism
- Mass Spectrometry
- Membrane Microdomains/chemistry
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Models, Biological"
- Niemann-Pick Diseases/metabolism
- Octoxynol/pharmacology
- Phenotype
- Progesterone/pharmacology
- Sucrose/pharmacology
- Ultracentrifugation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Accumulation of glycosphingolipids in Niemann-Pick C disease disrupts endosomal transport.
**Authors:** te Vruchte D, Lloyd-Evans E, Veldman RJ, Neville DC, Dwek RA, Platt FM, van Blitterswijk WJ, Sillence DJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M311591200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M311591200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 18;279(25):26167-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311591200. Epub 
2004 Apr 12.

Accumulation of glycosphingolipids in Niemann-Pick C disease disrupts endosomal 
transport.

te Vruchte D(1), Lloyd-Evans E, Veldman RJ, Neville DC, Dwek RA, Platt FM, van 
Blitterswijk WJ, Sillence DJ.

Author information:
(1)Glycobiology Institute, Department of Biochemistry, South Parks Road, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QU, United Kingdom.

Glycosphingolipids are endocytosed and targeted to the Golgi apparatus but are 
mistargeted to lysosomes in sphingolipid storage disorders. Substrate reduction 
therapy utilizes imino sugars to inhibit glucosylceramide synthase and 
potentially abrogate the effects of storage. Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease 
is a disorder of intracellular transport where glycosphingolipids (GSLs) and 
cholesterol accumulate in endosomal compartments. The mechanisms of altered 
intracellular trafficking are not known but may involve the mistargeting and 
disrupted function of proteins associated with GSL membrane microdomains. 
Membrane microdomains were isolated by Triton X-100 and sucrose density gradient 
ultracentrifugation. High pressure liquid chromatography and mass spectrometric 
analysis of NPC1(-/-) mouse brain revealed large increases in GSL. Sphingosine 
was also found to be a component of membrane microdomains, and in NPC liver and 
spleen, large increases in cholesterol and sphingosine were found. GSL and 
cholesterol levels were increased in mutant NPC1-null Chinese hamster ovary 
cells as well as U18666A and progesterone induced NPC cell culture models. 
However, inhibition of GSL synthesis in NPC cells with 
N-butyldeoxygalactonojirimycin led to marked decreases in GSL but only small 
decreases in cholesterol levels. Both annexin 2 and 6, membrane-associated 
proteins that are important in endocytic trafficking, show distorted 
distributions in NPC cells. Altered BODIPY lactosylceramide targeting, decreased 
endocytic uptake of a fluid phase marker, and mistargeting of annexin 2 
(phenotypes associated with NPC) are reversed by inhibition of GSL synthesis. It 
is suggested that accumulating GSL is part of a mislocalized membrane 
microdomain and is responsible for the deficit in endocytic trafficking found in 
NPC disease.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M311591200
PMID: 15078881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]