---
reference_id: "PMID:36564622"
title: KIF26A is mutated in the syndrome of congenital hydrocephalus with megacolon.
authors:
- Almannai M
- AlAbdi L
- Maddirevula S
- Alotaibi M
- Alsaleem BM
- Aljadhai YI
- Alsaif HS
- Abukhalid M
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-022-02513-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KIF26A is mutated in the syndrome of congenital hydrocephalus with megacolon.
**Authors:** Almannai M, AlAbdi L, Maddirevula S, Alotaibi M, Alsaleem BM, Aljadhai YI, Alsaif HS, Abukhalid M, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-022-02513-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-022-02513-1)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2023 Mar;142(3):399-405. doi: 10.1007/s00439-022-02513-1. Epub 2022
 Dec 23.

KIF26A is mutated in the syndrome of congenital hydrocephalus with megacolon.

Almannai M(#)(1)(2)(3), AlAbdi L(#)(4)(5), Maddirevula S(#)(4), Alotaibi M(6), 
Alsaleem BM(7), Aljadhai YI(8), Alsaif HS(4)(9), Abukhalid M(10), Alkuraya 
FS(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Precision Medicine Department, King Abdullah Specialized 
Children Hospital, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of National Guard 
Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. almannaimo@mngha.med.sa.
(2)Medical Genomics Research Department, King Abdullah International Medical 
Research Center, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, King Saud Bin 
Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Ministry of National Guard Health 
Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. almannaimo@mngha.med.sa.
(3)College of Medicine, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. almannaimo@mngha.med.sa.
(4)Department of Translational Genomics, Center for Genomic Medicine, King 
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Zoology, Collage of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Genetics, King Saud Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Gastroenterology Division, Intestinal Failure Rehabilitation Program, 
Children's Hospital, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Department of Neuroimaging and Intervention, Medical Imaging Administration, 
King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(9)Centre of Excellence for Biomedicine, Joint Centers of Excellence Program, 
King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(10)Department of Neuroscience, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(11)Department of Translational Genomics, Center for Genomic Medicine, King 
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. 
falkuraya@kfshrc.edu.sa.
(12)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. falkuraya@kfshrc.edu.sa.
(#)Contributed equally

Human disorders of the enteric nervous system (ENS), e.g., Hirschsprung's 
disease, are rarely associated with major central nervous system involvement. We 
describe two families each segregating a different homozygous truncating variant 
in KIF26A with a unique constellation of severe megacolon that resembles 
Hirschsprung's disease but lacks aganglionosis as well as brain malformations 
that range from severe to mild. The intestinal phenotype bears a striking 
resemblance to that observed in Kif26a-/- mice where KIF26A deficiency was found 
to cause abnormal GDNF-Ret signaling resulting in failure to establish normal 
neuronal networks despite myenteric neuronal hyperplasia. Very recently, a range 
of brain developmental phenotypes were described in patients and mice with 
KIF26A deficiency and were found to result from abnormal radial migration and 
increased apoptosis. Our report, therefore, reveals a recognizable 
autosomal-recessive human KIF26A deficiency phenotype characterized by severe 
ENS dysfunction and a range of brain malformations.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-022-02513-1
PMID: 36564622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]