---
reference_id: "PMID:29310925"
title: "Th17-lineage cells in pulmonary sarcoidosis and Löfgren's syndrome: Friend or foe?"
authors:
- Miedema JR
- Kaiser Y
- Broos CE
- Wijsenbeek MS
- Grunewald J
- Kool M
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2017.12.012
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Lineage
- Cell Plasticity
- Cell Self Renewal/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Granuloma/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- Lymphocyte Activation/genetics
- Mice
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/immunology"
- Syndrome
- T-Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology
- Th17 Cells/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Th17-lineage cells in pulmonary sarcoidosis and Löfgren's syndrome: Friend or foe?
**Authors:** Miedema JR, Kaiser Y, Broos CE, Wijsenbeek MS, Grunewald J, Kool M
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2017.12.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2017.12.012)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2018 Feb;87:82-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2017.12.012. Epub 2018 Jan
 5.

Th17-lineage cells in pulmonary sarcoidosis and Löfgren's syndrome: Friend or 
foe?

Miedema JR(1), Kaiser Y(2), Broos CE(1), Wijsenbeek MS(1), Grunewald J(2), Kool 
M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medicine, Solna and Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
Electronic address: m.kool@erasmusmc.nl.

Sarcoidosis, a multisystem granulomatous disorder, has historically been 
classified as Th1-driven disease. However, increasing data demonstrate a key 
role of Th17-cell plasticity in granuloma formation and maintenance. In 
Löfgren's syndrome (LS), an acute and distinct phenotype of sarcoidosis with a 
favorable outcome, differences in Th17-lineage cell subsets, cytokine expression 
and T-cell suppressive mechanisms may account for differences in clinical 
presentation as well as prognosis compared to non-LS sarcoidosis. In contrast 
with LS, up to 20% of non-LS sarcoidosis patients may progress to irreversible 
pulmonary fibrosis. In non-LS sarcoidosis patients, IFN-γ-producing Th17.1-cells 
appear to be more pathogenic and possibly linked to disease progression, while a 
broader range of cytokines is found in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) in LS 
patients. Differences in Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) expression on 
Th17-cells and regulatory T-cells (Treg) could contribute to Th17-cell 
pathogenicity and consequently to either disease resolution or ongoing 
inflammation in sarcoidosis. Furthermore, several genes and SNPs are associated 
with disease susceptibility and outcome in sarcoidosis, the majority of which 
are involved in antigen presentation, T-cell activation or regulation of T-cell 
survival. Novel insights into the role of Th17-cells in the pathogenesis of both 
LS and non-LS sarcoidosis will unravel pathogenic and benign Th17-lineage cell 
function and drivers of Th17-cell plasticity. This will also help identify new 
treatment strategies for LS and non-LS sarcoidosis patients by altering 
Th17-cell activation, suppress conversion into more pathogenic subtypes, or 
influence cytokine signaling towards a beneficial signature of Th17-lineage 
cells. In this review, we summarize new insights into Th17-cell plasticity in 
the complex pathogenesis of sarcoidosis and connect these cells to the different 
disease phenotypes, discuss the role of genetic susceptibility and autoimmunity 
and focus on possible treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2017.12.012
PMID: 29310925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]