---
reference_id: "PMID:36310086"
title: "Reference range for cerebrospinal fluid values in neonates: 5-year retrospective study."
authors:
- Gunti S
- Nair V
- Kannan Loganathan P
journal: J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/14767058.2022.2139172
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reference range for cerebrospinal fluid values in neonates: 5-year retrospective study.
**Authors:** Gunti S, Nair V, Kannan Loganathan P
**Journal:** J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14767058.2022.2139172](https://doi.org/10.1080/14767058.2022.2139172)

## Content

1. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2022 Dec;35(26):10584-10590. doi: 
10.1080/14767058.2022.2139172. Epub 2022 Oct 30.

Reference range for cerebrospinal fluid values in neonates: 5-year retrospective 
study.

Gunti S(1), Nair V(1)(2), Kannan Loganathan P(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Neonatal Unit, James Cook University Hospital, Middlesbrough, United Kingdom.
(2)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(3)Clinical Academic office, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Physics, University of Durham, Durham, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2023 Dec;36(1):2194480. doi: 
10.1080/14767058.2023.2194480.

BACKGROUND: Cerebro spinal fluid (CSF) parameters (white blood cell count, 
protein, glucose) in the diagnosis of neonatal bacterial meningitis.
OBJECTIVES: To report the reference range of CSF parameters (white blood cell 
count, protein, glucose) in both term and preterm infants.
METHODS: This was a single center retrospective study over a period of 5 years 
(2015-2020). We included infants aged 0-3 months admitted to the neonatal unit 
and infants ≤28 days attending pediatric acute care and who underwent Lumbar 
Puncture. We excluded infants with evidence of CSF bacteremia, viral infection 
and traumatic lumbar puncture defined as CSF Red Blood Cell >500 cells/µL. 
Clinical, demographic, and microbiological data were collected from the hospital 
database. The study was approved by ethics committee.
RESULTS: We identified a total of 518 CSF samples, with 232 CSF samples 
available for final analysis. 54% of excluded samples were traumatic. Median 
birth gestation and birth weight of the study cohort were 38 (IQR 35-40) weeks 
and 3030 (IQR 1965-3565) grams respectively. Median RBC, WBC count, protein and 
glucose were 15 (IQR 3-85)/µL, 3(IQR 0-8.5)/µL, 0.72 (0.53-1.06) g/L and 2.8 
(2.4-3.3) mmol/L respectively. There was no difference in CSF WBC cell count 
between preterm and term infants. Higher CSF protein content was noted in 
preterm infants and infants in the first 7 days of life. Use of antibiotics 
prior to LP was associated with higher CSF protein. Presence of any CSF RBC 
(including <500 cells/µL) influenced the CSF WBC count and protein content.
CONCLUSION: We have provided a reference range of CSF parameters in neonates 
without meningitis. CSF WBC count between preterm and term infants were similar 
with higher CSF protein content in preterm infants and for infants in the first 
seven days of life. Presence of any CSF RBC influenced CSF parameters.

DOI: 10.1080/14767058.2022.2139172
PMID: 36310086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]