---
reference_id: "PMID:34155062"
title: TWEAK Signaling Pathway Blockade Slows Cyst Growth and Disease Progression in Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease.
authors:
- Cordido A
- Nuñez-Gonzalez L
- Martinez-Moreno JM
- Lamas-Gonzalez O
- Rodriguez-Osorio L
- Perez-Gomez MV
- Martin-Sanchez D
- Outeda P
- Chiaravalli M
- Watnick T
- Boletta A
- Diaz C
- Carracedo A
- Sanz AB
- Ortiz A
- Garcia-Gonzalez MA
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2020071094
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Neutralizing/pharmacology"
- Apoptosis
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Cysts/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cytokine TWEAK/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism, pharmacology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Fibrosis
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Macrophage Activation/drug effects
- Macrophages
- Male
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- "Polycystic Kidney, Autosomal Dominant/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Signal Transduction
- "TWEAK Receptor/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TWEAK Signaling Pathway Blockade Slows Cyst Growth and Disease Progression in Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease.
**Authors:** Cordido A, Nuñez-Gonzalez L, Martinez-Moreno JM, Lamas-Gonzalez O, Rodriguez-Osorio L, Perez-Gomez MV, Martin-Sanchez D, Outeda P, Chiaravalli M, Watnick T, Boletta A, Diaz C, Carracedo A, Sanz AB, Ortiz A, Garcia-Gonzalez MA
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2020071094](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2020071094)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2021 Aug;32(8):1913-1932. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2020071094. Epub 
2021 Jun 21.

TWEAK Signaling Pathway Blockade Slows Cyst Growth and Disease Progression in 
Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease.

Cordido A(1)(2)(3), Nuñez-Gonzalez L(1)(2), Martinez-Moreno JM(4), 
Lamas-Gonzalez O(1), Rodriguez-Osorio L(3)(4), Perez-Gomez MV(3)(4), 
Martin-Sanchez D(3)(4), Outeda P(5), Chiaravalli M(6), Watnick T(5), Boletta 
A(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9), Diaz C(1)(7), Carracedo A(2)(8)(9), Sanz AB(3)(4), 
Ortiz A(3)(4), Garcia-Gonzalez MA(1)(2)(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Group of Genetics and Developmental Biology of Renal Diseases, Nephrology 
Laboratory (N°11), Health Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela (IDIS), 
Santiago de Compostela Clinical Hospital Complex (CHUS), Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain.
(2)Genomic Medicine Group, Santiago de Compostela Clinical Hospital Complex 
(CHUS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(3)RedInRen RETIC, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Jiménez Díaz Foundation (Health 
Research Institute and Autonomous University of Madrid), Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland.
(6)Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, Molecular Basis of Cystic Kidney 
Disorders Unit, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS)-San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(7)Nephrology Service, Santiago de Compostela Clinical Hospital Complex (CHUS), 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(8)Galician Public Foundation of Genomic Medicine, Santiago de Compostela 
Clinical Hospital Complex (CHUS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(9)Center in Network of Rare Diseases (CIBERER), University of Santiago de 
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

BACKGROUND: In autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), cyst 
development and enlargement lead to ESKD. Macrophage recruitment and 
interstitial inflammation promote cyst growth. TWEAK is a TNF superfamily 
(TNFSF) cytokine that regulates inflammatory responses, cell proliferation, and 
cell death, and its receptor Fn14 (TNFRSF12a) is expressed in macrophage and 
nephron epithelia.
METHODS: To evaluate the role of the TWEAK signaling pathway in cystic disease, 
we evaluated Fn14 expression in human and in an orthologous murine model of 
ADPKD. We also explored the cystic response to TWEAK signaling pathway 
activation and inhibition by peritoneal injection.
RESULTS: Meta-analysis of published animal-model data of cystic disease reveals 
mRNA upregulation of several components of the TWEAK signaling pathway. We also 
observed that TWEAK and Fn14 were overexpressed in mouse ADPKD kidney cysts, and 
TWEAK was significantly high in urine and cystic fluid from patients with ADPKD. 
TWEAK administration induced cystogenesis and increased cystic growth, worsening 
the phenotype in a murine ADPKD model. Anti-TWEAK antibodies significantly 
slowed the progression of ADPKD, preserved renal function, and improved 
survival. Furthermore, the anti-TWEAK cystogenesis reduction is related to 
decreased cell proliferation-related MAPK signaling, decreased NF-κB pathway 
activation, a slight reduction of fibrosis and apoptosis, and an indirect 
decrease in macrophage recruitment.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies the TWEAK signaling pathway as a new disease 
mechanism involved in cystogenesis and cystic growth and may lead to a new 
therapeutic approach in ADPKD.

Copyright © 2021 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2020071094
PMCID: PMC8455272
PMID: 34155062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]