---
reference_id: "PMID:40231584"
title: "A Case of Prader-Willi Syndrome With a Deletion Including MAGEL2 , NDN , and MKRN3 , but Excluding SNRPN and SNORD116."
authors:
- Buecking J
- An Y
- Bi W
- Hinderhofer K
- Theiß S
- Slavotinek A
- Schaaf CP
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64070
keywords:
- Humans
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
- Gene Deletion
- Genetic Association Studies
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis"
- Proteins/genetics
- Ribonucleoproteins/genetics
- "RNA, Small Nucleolar/genetics"
- snRNP Core Proteins/genetics
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Intrinsically Disordered Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case of Prader-Willi Syndrome With a Deletion Including MAGEL2 , NDN , and MKRN3 , but Excluding SNRPN and SNORD116.
**Authors:** Buecking J, An Y, Bi W, Hinderhofer K, Theiß S, Slavotinek A, Schaaf CP
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.64070](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.64070)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2025 Aug;197(8):e64070. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64070. Epub 2025
 Apr 15.

A Case of Prader-Willi Syndrome With a Deletion Including MAGEL2 , NDN , and 
MKRN3 , but Excluding SNRPN and SNORD116.

Buecking J(1), An Y(2), Bi W(3), Hinderhofer K(1), Theiß S(1), Slavotinek 
A(2)(4), Schaaf CP(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, University of 
California, San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder typically caused by 
large deletions or imprinting defects on chromosome 15q11.2, encompassing 
multiple genes. While the contribution of individual genes to the PWS phenotype 
remains unclear, previous studies suggested that isolated deletions of MAGEL2, 
NDN, and MKRN3, excluding the SNRPN/SNORD116 locus, were insufficient to cause 
PWS. Here, we present a case report of a patient with an isolated deletion of 
MAGEL2, NDN, and MKRN3 who exhibits the full PWS phenotype, including neonatal 
hypotonia, developmental delay, hyperphagia, obesity, and behavioral issues. We 
explore the potential mechanisms underlying this case and investigate the 
potential contribution of the deleted genes to the observed phenotype. This case 
challenges previous findings and highlights the complexity of genotype-phenotype 
correlations in PWS. We compare the clinical data of our patient with previous 
reports and discuss the discrepancy with earlier findings. Our findings 
underscore the need for further research to fully elucidate the roles of 
individual genes within the PWS locus and the mechanisms underlying the 
phenotypic spectrum of this complex disorder.

© 2025 The Author(s). American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64070
PMID: 40231584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]