---
reference_id: "PMID:25965702"
title: Atypical exanthems associated with Parvovirus B19 (B19V) infection in children and adults.
authors:
- Drago F
- Ciccarese G
- Broccolo F
- Javor S
- Parodi A
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.24246
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical exanthems associated with Parvovirus B19 (B19V) infection in children and adults.
**Authors:** Drago F, Ciccarese G, Broccolo F, Javor S, Parodi A
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.24246](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.24246)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2015 Nov;87(11):1981-4. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24246. Epub 2015 May 12.

Atypical exanthems associated with Parvovirus B19 (B19V) infection in children 
and adults.

Drago F(1), Ciccarese G(1), Broccolo F(2), Javor S(1), Parodi A(1).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS A.O.U. San Martino-IST DISSAL, Department of Dermatology, Genoa, Italy.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy.

Parvovirus B19 (B19V) infection may differently manifest in various age groups. 
Erythema infectiosum ('fifth disease') is the most common B19V manifestations in 
children. Arthralgias and arthritis, with or without rash, are common 
manifestations of B19V infection in adults. Pruritus is usually present in 
adults and children. However, other cutaneous manifestations and atypical 
exanthems have been occasionally reported during B19V infection. To investigate 
the putative role of B19V infection in atypical exanthems, a total of 390 
consecutive patients with atypical exanthems were analysed for B19V infection by 
determining B19V IgG and IgM antibodies titres in acute and convalescent phase 
as well as B19V DNA detection in serum by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 
Atypical exanthems resulted related to B19V infection in 6 of the 120 pediatric 
(5%) and 14 of the 270 adult patients (5.2%). In conclusion this study reveals 
that atypical exanthems related to B19V infection are possible both in children 
and in adults, with a similar prevalence.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24246
PMID: 25965702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]