---
reference_id: "PMID:33449170"
title: Making sense of missense variants in TTN-related congenital myopathies.
authors:
- Rees M
- Nikoopour R
- Fukuzawa A
- Kho AL
- Fernandez-Garcia MA
- Wraige E
- Bodi I
- Deshpande C
- Özdemir Ö
- Daimagüler HS
- Pfuhl M
- Holt M
- Brandmeier B
- Grover S
- Fluss J
- Longman C
- Farrugia ME
- Matthews E
- Hanna M
- Muntoni F
- Sarkozy A
- Phadke R
- Quinlivan R
- Oates EC
- Schröder R
- Thiel C
- Reimann J
- Voermans N
- Erasmus C
- Kamsteeg EJ
- Konersman C
- Grosmann C
- McKee S
- Tirupathi S
- Moore SA
- Wilichowski E
- Hobbiebrunken E
- Dekomien G
- Richard I
- Van den Bergh P
- Domínguez-González C
- Cirak S
- Ferreiro A
- Jungbluth H
- Gautel M
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-020-02257-0
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Connectin/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Myotonia Congenita/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Making sense of missense variants in TTN-related congenital myopathies.
**Authors:** Rees M, Nikoopour R, Fukuzawa A, Kho AL, Fernandez-Garcia MA, Wraige E, Bodi I, Deshpande C, Özdemir Ö, Daimagüler HS, Pfuhl M, Holt M, Brandmeier B, Grover S, Fluss J, Longman C, Farrugia ME, Matthews E, Hanna M, Muntoni F, Sarkozy A, Phadke R, Quinlivan R, Oates EC, Schröder R, Thiel C, Reimann J, Voermans N, Erasmus C, Kamsteeg EJ, Konersman C, Grosmann C, McKee S, Tirupathi S, Moore SA, Wilichowski E, Hobbiebrunken E, Dekomien G, Richard I, Van den Bergh P, Domínguez-González C, Cirak S, Ferreiro A, Jungbluth H, Gautel M
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-020-02257-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-020-02257-0)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2021 Mar;141(3):431-453. doi: 10.1007/s00401-020-02257-0.
Epub  2021 Jan 15.

Making sense of missense variants in TTN-related congenital myopathies.

Rees M(1), Nikoopour R(1), Fukuzawa A(1), Kho AL(1), Fernandez-Garcia MA(2),
Wraige E(2), Bodi I(3), Deshpande C(4), Özdemir Ö(5)(6), Daimagüler HS(5)(6),
Pfuhl M(1)(7), Holt M(1)(7), Brandmeier B(1), Grover S(1), Fluss J(8), Longman
C(9), Farrugia ME(10), Matthews E(11), Hanna M(11), Muntoni F(12)(13), Sarkozy
A(12), Phadke R(12), Quinlivan R(12), Oates EC(12)(14)(15), Schröder R(16),
Thiel C(17), Reimann J(18), Voermans N(19), Erasmus C(20), Kamsteeg EJ(21),
Konersman C(22), Grosmann C(23), McKee S(24), Tirupathi S(25), Moore SA(26),
Wilichowski E(27), Hobbiebrunken E(27), Dekomien G(28), Richard I(29), Van den
Bergh P(30), Domínguez-González C(31), Cirak S(5)(6)(32), Ferreiro A(33)(34),
Jungbluth H(#)(1)(2)(35), Gautel M(#)(36).

Author information:
(1)Randall Centre for Cell and Molecular Biophysics, Muscle Biophysics, King's
College London BHF Centre of Research Excellence, London, UK.
(2)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Evelina Children's Hospital, Guy's & St
Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Department of Clinical Neuropathology, King's College Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.
(5)Centre for Molecular Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Cologne and Faculty of
Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(7)School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, King's College London BHF
Centre of Research Excellence, London, UK.
(8)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Paediatrics Subspecialties Service, Geneva
Children's Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland.
(9)West of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Laboratory Medicine Building,
Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, UK.
(10)Department of Neurology, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, UK.
(11)MRC Neuromuscular Centre, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery,
Queen's Square, London, UK.
(12)Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children,
London, UK.
(13)NIHR Great Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, Great Ormond
Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, Great Ormond Street
Hospital Trust, London, UK.
(14)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The University of New
South Wales, Sidney, Australia.
(15)Kids Neuroscience Centre, Kids Research, The Children's Hospital at
Westmead, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(16)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(17)Department of Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(18)Muscle Laboratory, Department of Neurology, University of Bonn Medical
Centre, Bonn, Germany.
(19)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(20)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(21)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.
(22)UCSD, Rady Children's Hospital, and VA San Diego Healthcare System, San
Diego, USA.
(23)Gillette Children's Specialty Care, St Paul, MN, USA.
(24)Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Service, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast,
UK.
(25)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Royal Belfast Hospital for Sick
Children, Belfast, UK.
(26)Department of Pathology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(27)Department of Paediatric Neurology, University of Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany.
(28)Institut Für Humangenetik, Ruhruniversität Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(29)Genethon and UMR_S951, INSERM, Université Evry, Université Paris Saclay,
Evry, 91002, Evry, France.
(30)Neuromuscular Reference Centre, Department of Neurology, University Hospital
Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium.
(31)Reference Center for Neuromuscular Disorders, Hospital Universitario 12 de
Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(32)Centre for Rare Diseases (ZSEK), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(33)Basic and Translational Myology Laboratory, Université de Paris, Paris,
France.
(34)Centre de Référence Des Maladies Neuromusculaires, APHP, Institut of
Myology, GHU Pitié Salpêtrière- Charles Foix, Paris, France.
(35)Department of Clinical and Basic Neuroscience, IoPPN, King's College London,
London, UK.
(36)Randall Centre for Cell and Molecular Biophysics, Muscle Biophysics, King's
College London BHF Centre of Research Excellence, London, UK.
mathias.gautel@kcl.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Mutations in the sarcomeric protein titin, encoded by TTN, are emerging as a
common cause of myopathies. The diagnosis of a TTN-related myopathy is, however,
often not straightforward due to clinico-pathological overlap with other
myopathies and the prevalence of TTN variants in control populations. Here, we
present a combined clinico-pathological, genetic and biophysical approach to the
diagnosis of TTN-related myopathies and the pathogenicity ascertainment of TTN
missense variants. We identified 30 patients with a primary TTN-related
congenital myopathy (CM) and two truncating variants, or one truncating and one
missense TTN variant, or homozygous for one TTN missense variant. We found
that TTN-related myopathies show considerable overlap with other myopathies but
are strongly suggested by a combination of certain clinico-pathological
features. Presentation was typically at birth with the clinical course
characterized by variable progression of weakness, contractures, scoliosis and
respiratory symptoms but sparing of extraocular muscles. Cardiac involvement
depended on the variant position. Our biophysical analyses demonstrated that
missense mutations associated with CMs are strongly destabilizing and exert
their effect when expressed on a truncating background or in homozygosity. We
hypothesise that destabilizing TTN missense mutations phenocopy truncating
variants and are a key pathogenic feature of recessive titinopathies that might
be amenable to therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-020-02257-0
PMCID: PMC7882473
PMID: 33449170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
