---
reference_id: "PMID:28575132"
title: Abnormal differentiation of Sandhoff disease model mouse-derived multipotent stem cells toward a neural lineage.
authors:
- Ogawa Y
- Kaizu K
- Yanagi Y
- Takada S
- Sakuraba H
- Oishi K
journal: PLoS One
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178978
keywords:
- Animals
- Astrocytes/pathology
- Brain/pathology
- Cell Count
- Cell Proliferation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/pathology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Neural Stem Cells/pathology
- Neurogenesis
- Neurons/pathology
- Sandhoff Disease/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal differentiation of Sandhoff disease model mouse-derived multipotent stem cells toward a neural lineage.
**Authors:** Ogawa Y, Kaizu K, Yanagi Y, Takada S, Sakuraba H, Oishi K
**Journal:** PLoS One (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0178978](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0178978)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2017 Jun 2;12(6):e0178978. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178978.
eCollection 2017.

Abnormal differentiation of Sandhoff disease model mouse-derived multipotent
stem cells toward a neural lineage.

Ogawa Y(1), Kaizu K(1), Yanagi Y(1), Takada S(1), Sakuraba H(2), Oishi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Meiji Pharmaceutical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Meiji Pharmaceutical University, Tokyo,
Japan.

In Sandhoff disease (SD), the activity of the lysosomal hydrolytic enzyme,
β-hexosaminidase (Hex), is lost due to a Hexb gene defect, which results in the
abnormal accumulation of the substrate, GM2 ganglioside (GM2), in neuronal
cells, causing neuronal loss, microglial activation, and astrogliosis. We
established induced pluripotent stem cells from the cells of SD mice (SD-iPSCs).
In the present study, we investigated the occurrence of abnormal differentiation
and development of a neural lineage in the asymptomatic phase of SD in vitro
using SD mouse fetus-derived neural stem cells (NSCs) and SD-iPSCs. It was
assumed that the number of SD mouse fetal brain-derived NSCs was reduced and
differentiation was promoted, resulting in the inhibition of differentiation
into neurons and enhancement of differentiation into astrocytes. The number of
SD-iPSC-derived NSCs was also reduced, suggesting that the differentiation of
NSCs was promoted, resulting in the inhibition of differentiation into neurons
and enhancement of that into astrocytes. This abnormal differentiation of
SD-iPSCs toward a neural lineage was reduced by the glucosylceramide synthase
inhibitor, miglustat. Furthermore, abnormal differentiation toward a neural
lineage was reduced in SD-iPSCs with Hexb gene transfection. Therefore,
differentiation ability along the time axis appears to be altered in SD mice in
which the differentiation ability of NSCs is promoted and differentiation into
neurons is completed earlier, while the timing of differentiation into
astrocytes is accelerated. These results clarified that the abnormal
differentiation of SD-iPSCs toward a neural lineage in vitro was shown to
reflect the pathology of SD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178978
PMCID: PMC5456357
PMID: 28575132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
