---
reference_id: "PMID:26617830"
title: "Angiosarcoma (Stewart-Treves syndrome) in postmastectomy patients: report of 10 cases and review of literature."
authors:
- Cui L
- Zhang J
- Zhang X
- Chang H
- Qu C
- Zhang J
- Zhong D
journal: Int J Clin Exp Pathol
year: '2015'
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Biopsy
- "Breast Neoplasms/radiotherapy, surgery"
- Early Detection of Cancer
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- "Hemangiosarcoma/chemistry, diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Lymphangiosarcoma/chemistry, diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Mastectomy/adverse effects
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms, Radiation-Induced/chemistry, diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Predictive Value of Tests
- "Radiotherapy, Adjuvant/adverse effects"
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angiosarcoma (Stewart-Treves syndrome) in postmastectomy patients: report of 10 cases and review of literature.
**Authors:** Cui L, Zhang J, Zhang X, Chang H, Qu C, Zhang J, Zhong D
**Journal:** Int J Clin Exp Pathol (2015)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Sep 1;8(9):11108-15. eCollection 2015.

Angiosarcoma (Stewart-Treves syndrome) in postmastectomy patients: report of 10
cases and review of literature.

Cui L(1), Zhang J(2), Zhang X(3), Chang H(1), Qu C(1), Zhang J(1), Zhong D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Capital Medical
University China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Peking University First Hospital Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University Hospital
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College Beijing 100730,
China.

AIMS: To study the clinicopathologic features of Stewart-Treves syndrome (STS)
in postmastectomy patients including the epidemiology, presentation, morphology,
differentiation, pathogenesis and therapeutic options.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Ten cases of STS in postmastectomy patients were
retrospectively identified in our archives, and immunohistochemistry for CD34,
CD31, D2-40, HHV-8, CK, EMA and Ki-67 was performed. All ten patients presented
with lymphedema after mastectomy as the first sign. Physical examination
revealed multiple raised, pinkish-red papulo-vesicular lesions or ulceration as
the early evidence of tumor in the field where radiation therapy was introduced.
Microscopic examination revealed infiltrative proliferation of vessels and the
heteromorphic tumor cells expressed CD34, CD31 and D2-40. Despite the various
treatment modalities, 5 patients died in an average of 19 months, 4 patients
survived to the last follow-up (9-31 months), and 1 patient got lost.
CONCLUSIONS: STS is a fatal complication of postmastectomy lymphedema. Patients
with STS have very poor prognosis. The key to improve patient's survival is the
early diagnosis through a high alert of this disease by primary care physicians
and comprehensive physical examination of patients with pertinent history and
suspicious clinical presentations followed by prompt biopsy for definitive
diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC4637645
PMID: 26617830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
