---
reference_id: "PMID:40389219"
title: "European Paediatric Surgeons' Association Consensus Statement on the Management of Giant Omphalocele."
authors:
- Saxena AK
- Hayward RK
- Mutanen A
- Goneidy A
- Ghattaura H
- Gorter R
- Weijnen R
- Keijzer R
- Soyer T
- "European Pediatric Surgeons' Association"
journal: Eur J Pediatr Surg
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1055/a-2590-5592
keywords:
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Conservative Treatment/methods
- Europe
- "Hernia, Umbilical/therapy, surgery, pathology"
- Review Literature as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# European Paediatric Surgeons' Association Consensus Statement on the Management of Giant Omphalocele.
**Authors:** Saxena AK, Hayward RK, Mutanen A, Goneidy A, Ghattaura H, Gorter R, Weijnen R, Keijzer R, Soyer T, European Pediatric Surgeons' Association
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr Surg (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-2590-5592](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2590-5592)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2025 Oct;35(5):407-416. doi: 10.1055/a-2590-5592. Epub
2025  May 19.

European Paediatric Surgeons' Association Consensus Statement on the Management 
of Giant Omphalocele.

Saxena AK(1)(2), Hayward RK(2), Mutanen A(3), Goneidy A(1), Ghattaura H(4), 
Gorter R(5), Weijnen R(6), Keijzer R(7), Soyer T(8); European Pediatric 
Surgeons' Association.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, the New Children's Hospital, Helsinki 
University Hospital and University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Hospitals Bristol and Weston NHS 
Foundation Trust, Bristol, England, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland.
(5)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Emma Children's Hospital UMC, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC Sophia Children's Hospital, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Departments of Surgery and Pediatrics & Child 
Health, Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Heath Sciences, University 
of Manitoba, Children's Hospital Research Institute of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada.
(8)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hacettepe Universitesi Tip Fakultesi, 
Ankara, Turkey.

Giant omphalocele management had not reached a consensus from the pediatric 
surgical perspective regarding conservative treatments, surgical approaches, and 
clinical outcomes. This topic was therefore selected for the 2023 Consensus 
Session of the European Paediatric Surgeons' Association (EUPSA).Literature 
review was conducted by seven EUPSA members, guided by a set of predefined areas 
relating to the management of giant omphalocele: (1) conservative management, 
(2) surgical management, and (3) outcomes. Members were assigned to specific 
topics, with discrepancies resolved through structured group discussion and 
further literature review. Consensus was reached through unanimous agreement 
among the contributing members. Each topic was presented with available evidence 
to congress participants. Comments from participants were accounted to formulate 
the final consensus statement.Giant omphalocele is appropriately defined as 
viscero-abdominal disproportion preventing primary closure. Regarding (1) 
conservative management, the "paint and wait" approach is recommended when 
anatomical constraints or high surgical risk preclude primary closure. Common 
painting agents include povidone-iodine and silver sulfadiazine, with Manuka 
honey gaining interest, though consensus on dosing, duration, and complications 
remains unclear. With regards to (2) surgical management, early closure favors 
biological meshes, while delayed closure appears most effective using native 
tissues. High mortality in delayed patch closure likely reflects a population 
with the most severe defects. Finally, (3) outcomes highlights key prognostic 
factors including chromosomal abnormalities, cardiac defects, and low birth 
weight, which may guide counseling, screening, and treatment. Limited data on 
ruptured omphalocele indicates towards increased mortality, necessitating prompt 
intervention. Complications following management are relatively rare and 
typically intervention-related, underscoring the need for long-term, 
multidisciplinary follow-up.A consensus statement on the management of giant 
omphalocele was developed based on current evidence and peer practice, though 
imitations relating to a scarcity of high-level evidence and significant 
heterogeneity across studies should be acknowledged. Despite these constraints, 
this consensus statement provides evidence-based guidance to support pediatric 
surgeons in informed decision-making for this pathology.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-2590-5592
PMID: 40389219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.