---
reference_id: "PMID:36243009"
title: "Multi-omics approach dissects cis-regulatory mechanisms underlying North Carolina macular dystrophy, a retinal enhanceropathy."
authors:
- Van de Sompele S
- Small KW
- Cicekdal MB
- Soriano VL
- "D'haene E"
- Shaya FS
- Agemy S
- Van der Snickt T
- Rey AD
- Rosseel T
- Van Heetvelde M
- Vergult S
- Balikova I
- Bergen AA
- Boon CJF
- De Zaeytijd J
- Inglehearn CF
- Kousal B
- Leroy BP
- Rivolta C
- Vaclavik V
- van den Ende J
- van Schooneveld MJ
- Gómez-Skarmeta JL
- Tena JJ
- Martinez-Morales JR
- Liskova P
- Vleminckx K
- De Baere E
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.09.013
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Humans
- Pedigree
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary"
- Retina/metabolism
- Xenopus laevis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multi-omics approach dissects cis-regulatory mechanisms underlying North Carolina macular dystrophy, a retinal enhanceropathy.
**Authors:** Van de Sompele S, Small KW, Cicekdal MB, Soriano VL, D'haene E, Shaya FS, Agemy S, Van der Snickt T, Rey AD, Rosseel T, Van Heetvelde M, Vergult S, Balikova I, Bergen AA, Boon CJF, De Zaeytijd J, Inglehearn CF, Kousal B, Leroy BP, Rivolta C, Vaclavik V, van den Ende J, van Schooneveld MJ, Gómez-Skarmeta JL, Tena JJ, Martinez-Morales JR, Liskova P, Vleminckx K, De Baere E
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.09.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.09.013)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2022 Nov 3;109(11):2029-2048. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.09.013.
 Epub 2022 Oct 14.

Multi-omics approach dissects cis-regulatory mechanisms underlying North 
Carolina macular dystrophy, a retinal enhanceropathy.

Van de Sompele S(1), Small KW(2), Cicekdal MB(3), Soriano VL(1), D'haene E(1), 
Shaya FS(2), Agemy S(4), Van der Snickt T(1), Rey AD(1), Rosseel T(1), Van 
Heetvelde M(1), Vergult S(1), Balikova I(5), Bergen AA(6), Boon CJF(7), De 
Zaeytijd J(8), Inglehearn CF(9), Kousal B(10), Leroy BP(11), Rivolta C(12), 
Vaclavik V(13), van den Ende J(14), van Schooneveld MJ(15), Gómez-Skarmeta 
JL(16), Tena JJ(16), Martinez-Morales JR(16), Liskova P(17), Vleminckx K(18), De 
Baere E(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; Center 
for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Macula and Retina Institute, Los Angeles and Glendale, California, USA.
(3)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; Center 
for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; Department of 
Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, SUNY Downstate Medical Center University, 
Brooklyn, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Academic Medical Center, 1105 AZ 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Queen Emma Centre of Precision Medicine, Amsterdam 
University Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(9)Division of Molecular Medicine, Leeds Institute of Medical Research, 
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University 
and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(11)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Department of Head & Skin, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; Division of 
Ophthalmology & Center for Cellular & Molecular Therapeutics, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(12)Institute of Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology Basel (IOB), Basel, 
Switzerland; Department of Ophthalmology, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland; Department of Genetics and Genome Biology, University of Leicester, 
Leicester, UK.
(13)University of Lausanne, Jules-Gonin Eye Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(14)Center for Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(15)Department of Ophthalmology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Bartiméus, Diagnostic 
Center for Complex Visual Disorders, Zeist, The Netherlands.
(16)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Sevilla, Spain.
(17)Department of Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University 
and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic; Department of 
Paediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(18)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(19)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; 
Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. 
Electronic address: elfride.debaere@ugent.be.

North Carolina macular dystrophy (NCMD) is a rare autosomal-dominant disease 
affecting macular development. The disease is caused by non-coding 
single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in two hotspot regions near PRDM13 and by 
duplications in two distinct chromosomal loci, overlapping DNase I 
hypersensitive sites near either PRDM13 or IRX1. To unravel the mechanisms by 
which these variants cause disease, we first established a genome-wide 
multi-omics retinal database, RegRet. Integration of UMI-4C profiles we 
generated on adult human retina then allowed fine-mapping of the interactions of 
the PRDM13 and IRX1 promoters and the identification of eighteen candidate 
cis-regulatory elements (cCREs), the activity of which was investigated by 
luciferase and Xenopus enhancer assays. Next, luciferase assays showed that the 
non-coding SNVs located in the two hotspot regions of PRDM13 affect cCRE 
activity, including two NCMD-associated non-coding SNVs that we identified 
herein. Interestingly, the cCRE containing one of these SNVs was shown to 
interact with the PRDM13 promoter, demonstrated in vivo activity in Xenopus, and 
is active at the developmental stage when progenitor cells of the central retina 
exit mitosis, suggesting that this region is a PRDM13 enhancer. Finally, mining 
of single-cell transcriptional data of embryonic and adult retina revealed the 
highest expression of PRDM13 and IRX1 when amacrine cells start to synapse with 
retinal ganglion cells, supporting the hypothesis that altered PRDM13 or IRX1 
expression impairs interactions between these cells during retinogenesis. 
Overall, this study provides insight into the cis-regulatory mechanisms of NCMD 
and supports that this condition is a retinal enhanceropathy.

Crown Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.09.013
PMCID: PMC9674966
PMID: 36243009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.