---
reference_id: "PMID:33407896"
title: Frequent SLC35A2 brain mosaicism in mild malformation of cortical development with oligodendroglial hyperplasia in epilepsy (MOGHE).
authors:
- Bonduelle T
- Hartlieb T
- Baldassari S
- Sim NS
- Kim SH
- Kang HC
- Kobow K
- Coras R
- Chipaux M
- Dorfmüller G
- Adle-Biassette H
- Aronica E
- Lee JH
- Blumcke I
- Baulac S
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-020-01085-3
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology, surgery"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Drug Resistant Epilepsy/etiology, genetics, pathology, surgery"
- "Epilepsies, Partial/etiology, genetics, pathology, surgery"
- Female
- Humans
- Hyperplasia
- Infant
- Male
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/complications, genetics, pathology, surgery"
- Monosaccharide Transport Proteins
- Mosaicism
- Neurosurgical Procedures
- Oligodendroglia/pathology
- Young Adult
- UDP-Galactose Translocators
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequent SLC35A2 brain mosaicism in mild malformation of cortical development with oligodendroglial hyperplasia in epilepsy (MOGHE).
**Authors:** Bonduelle T, Hartlieb T, Baldassari S, Sim NS, Kim SH, Kang HC, Kobow K, Coras R, Chipaux M, Dorfmüller G, Adle-Biassette H, Aronica E, Lee JH, Blumcke I, Baulac S
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-020-01085-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-020-01085-3)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2021 Jan 6;9(1):3. doi: 10.1186/s40478-020-01085-3.

Frequent SLC35A2 brain mosaicism in mild malformation of cortical development 
with oligodendroglial hyperplasia in epilepsy (MOGHE).

Bonduelle T(1), Hartlieb T(2)(3), Baldassari S(1), Sim NS(4), Kim SH(5), Kang 
HC(6), Kobow K(7), Coras R(7), Chipaux M(8), Dorfmüller G(8), Adle-Biassette 
H(9), Aronica E(10)(11), Lee JH(4)(12), Blumcke I(7), Baulac S(13).

Author information:
(1)Institut du Cerveau - Paris Brain Institute - ICM, Inserm, CNRS, Sorbonne 
Université, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière - 47, bd de l'hôpital, 75013, Paris, 
France.
(2)Center for Pediatric Neurology, Neurorehabilitation and Epileptology, Schoen 
Klinik, Vogtareuth, Germany.
(3)Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria.
(4)Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.
(5)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Epilepsy 
Clinics, Severance Children's Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(7)Department of Neuropathology, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander University (FAU) Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(8)Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Rothschild Foundation Hospital, 75019, 
Paris, France.
(9)Université de Paris, service d'Anatomie Pathologique, AP-HP, Hôpital 
Lariboisière, DMU DREAM, UMR 1141, INSERM, Paris, France.
(10)Department of (Neuro)Pathology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam UMC, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(11)Stichting Epilepsie Instellingen Nederland (SEIN), Heemstede, The 
Netherlands.
(12)SoVarGen, Inc., Daejeon, 34051, Republic of Korea.
(13)Institut du Cerveau - Paris Brain Institute - ICM, Inserm, CNRS, Sorbonne 
Université, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière - 47, bd de l'hôpital, 75013, Paris, 
France. stephanie.baulac@icm-institute.org.

Focal malformations of cortical development (MCD) are linked to somatic brain 
mutations occurring during neurodevelopment. Mild malformation of cortical 
development with oligodendroglial hyperplasia in epilepsy (MOGHE) is a newly 
recognized clinico-pathological entity associated with pediatric drug-resistant 
focal epilepsy, and amenable to neurosurgical treatment. MOGHE is 
histopathologically characterized by clusters of increased oligodendroglial cell 
densities, patchy zones of hypomyelination, and heterotopic neurons in the white 
matter. The molecular etiology of MOGHE remained unknown so far. We hypothesized 
a contribution of mosaic brain variants and performed deep targeted gene 
sequencing on 20 surgical MOGHE brain samples from a single-center cohort of 
pediatric patients. We identified somatic pathogenic SLC35A2 variants in 9/20 
(45%) patients with mosaic rates ranging from 7 to 52%. SLC35A2 encodes a 
UDP-galactose transporter, previously implicated in other malformations of 
cortical development (MCD) and a rare type of congenital disorder of 
glycosylation. To further clarify the histological features of SLC35A2-brain 
tissues, we then collected 17 samples with pathogenic SLC35A2 variants from a 
multicenter cohort of MCD cases. Histopathological reassessment including 
anti-Olig2 staining confirmed a MOGHE diagnosis in all cases. Analysis by 
droplet digital PCR of pools of microdissected cells from one MOGHE tissue 
revealed a variant enrichment in clustered oligodendroglial cells and 
heterotopic neurons. Through an international consortium, we assembled an 
unprecedented series of 26 SLC35A2-MOGHE cases providing evidence that mosaic 
SLC35A2 variants, likely occurred in a neuroglial progenitor cell during brain 
development, are a genetic marker for MOGHE.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-020-01085-3
PMCID: PMC7788938
PMID: 33407896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JH.L is a co-founder and CTO of SoVarGen, Inc., 
which seeks to develop new diagnostics and therapeutics for brain disorders.