---
reference_id: "PMID:33313989"
title: Aspirin Therapy in Cardiovascular Disease with Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency, Safe or Not?
authors:
- Li J
- Chen Y
- Ou Z
- Ouyang F
- Liang J
- Jiang Z
- Chen C
- Li P
- Chen J
- Wei J
- Zeng J
journal: Am J Cardiovasc Drugs
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s40256-020-00460-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspirin Therapy in Cardiovascular Disease with Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency, Safe or Not?
**Authors:** Li J, Chen Y, Ou Z, Ouyang F, Liang J, Jiang Z, Chen C, Li P, Chen J, Wei J, Zeng J
**Journal:** Am J Cardiovasc Drugs (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40256-020-00460-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40256-020-00460-8)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2021 Jul;21(4):377-382. doi:
10.1007/s40256-020-00460-8.  Epub 2020 Dec 14.

Aspirin Therapy in Cardiovascular Disease with Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase 
Deficiency, Safe or Not?

Li J(#)(1), Chen Y(#)(1), Ou Z(1), Ouyang F(1), Liang J(1), Jiang Z(1), Chen 
C(1), Li P(1), Chen J(1), Wei J(1), Zeng J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University; Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of 
Major Neurological Diseases, National Key Clinical Department and Key Discipline 
of Neurology, Southern China International Cooperation Base for Early 
Intervention and Functional Rehabilitation of Neurological Diseases, No. 58 
Zhongshan Road 2, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University; Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of 
Major Neurological Diseases, National Key Clinical Department and Key Discipline 
of Neurology, Southern China International Cooperation Base for Early 
Intervention and Functional Rehabilitation of Neurological Diseases, No. 58 
Zhongshan Road 2, Guangzhou, 510080, China. zengjs@pub.guangzhou.gd.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is the most common human 
enzyme defect, which may present as acute hemolysis, neonatal jaundice, or 
chronic hemolysis. Ingestion of fava beans, as well as infection and certain 
drugs, are the most typical causes of acute hemolysis in people with G6PD 
deficiency. Aspirin, the cornerstone in current therapies for the prevention of 
cardiovascular disease (CVD), is occasionally reported to induce acute hemolysis 
in G6PD-deficient individuals. G6PD deficiency is typically asymptomatic and 
many CVD patients with this enzyme defect start to take long-term aspirin 
therapy without G6PD activity examination; however, no consensus on the safety 
of aspirin in this population has been reached. A few studies have reported on 
this issue and produced contradictory results. In this review, we discuss the 
possible mechanisms of aspirin-induced hemolysis, and summarize clinical 
evidence regarding the safety of aspirin in subjects with G6PD deficiency.

DOI: 10.1007/s40256-020-00460-8
PMID: 33313989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]