---
reference_id: "PMID:32207823"
title: A minimum estimate of the prevalence of 22q11 deletion syndrome and other chromosome abnormalities in a combined prenatal and postnatal cohort.
authors:
- Hui L
- Poulton A
- Kluckow E
- Lindquist A
- Hutchinson B
- Pertile MD
- Bonacquisto L
- Gugasyan L
- Kulkarni A
- Harraway J
- Howden A
- McCoy R
- Costa FDS
- Menezes M
- Palma-Dias R
- Nisbet D
- Martin N
- Bethune M
- Poulakis Z
- Halliday J
journal: Hum Reprod
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/humrep/dez286
keywords:
- 22q11 Deletion Syndrome
- Adult
- Australia/epidemiology
- Child
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Pregnancy
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A minimum estimate of the prevalence of 22q11 deletion syndrome and other chromosome abnormalities in a combined prenatal and postnatal cohort.
**Authors:** Hui L, Poulton A, Kluckow E, Lindquist A, Hutchinson B, Pertile MD, Bonacquisto L, Gugasyan L, Kulkarni A, Harraway J, Howden A, McCoy R, Costa FDS, Menezes M, Palma-Dias R, Nisbet D, Martin N, Bethune M, Poulakis Z, Halliday J
**Journal:** Hum Reprod (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/humrep/dez286](https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/dez286)

## Content

1. Hum Reprod. 2020 Mar 27;35(3):694-704. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dez286.

A minimum estimate of the prevalence of 22q11 deletion syndrome and other 
chromosome abnormalities in a combined prenatal and postnatal cohort.

Hui L(1)(2)(3), Poulton A(1), Kluckow E(1), Lindquist A(1)(3), Hutchinson B(3), 
Pertile MD(4)(5), Bonacquisto L(4), Gugasyan L(6), Kulkarni A(6), Harraway J(7), 
Howden A(8), McCoy R(9), Costa FDS(10)(11), Menezes M(12), Palma-Dias 
R(2)(13)(14), Nisbet D(13)(14)(15), Martin N(16), Bethune M(17), Poulakis 
Z(5)(18)(19), Halliday J(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Epidemiology Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Parkville 3052, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Melbourne, Parkville 
3052, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Mercy Perinatal, Mercy Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, 3084, Victoria, 
Australia.
(4)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Parkville 3052, Victoria, Australia.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville 3052, Victoria, 
Australia.
(6)Cytogenetics, Monash Pathology, Monash Medical Centre, Clayton 3168, 
Victoria, Australia.
(7)Department of Cytogenetics/Molecular Pathology, Sullivan Nicolaides 
Pathology, Bowen Hills, Queensland 4006, Australia.
(8)Cytogenetics, Melbourne Pathology, Collingwood 3066, Victoria, Australia.
(9)Molecular Genetics, Australian Clinical Labs, Clayton 3168, Victoria, 
Australia.
(10)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, 
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto 14049-900, São Paulo, Brazil.
(11)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Monash University, Clayton 3168, 
Victoria, Australia.
(12)Monash Ultrasound for Women, Richmond 3121, Victoria, Australia.
(13)Women's Ultrasound Melbourne, East Melbourne 3002, Victoria, Australia.
(14)Ultrasound Services, Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville 3052, Victoria, 
Australia.
(15)Department of Medicine and Radiology, University of Melbourne, Parkville 
3052, Victoria, Australia.
(16)Virtus Diagnostics and Pathology Services, Spring Hill 4000, Queensland, 
Australia.
(17)Specialist Women's Ultrasound, Box Hill 3128, Victoria, Australia.
(18)Victorian Infant Hearing Screening Program, Centre for Community Child 
Health, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville 3052, Victoria, Australia.
(19)Prevention Innovation Group, Population Health, Murdoch Children's Research 
Institute, Parkville 3052, Victoria, Australia.

STUDY QUESTION: What is the frequency of major chromosome abnormalities in a 
population-based diagnostic data set of genomic tests performed on miscarriage, 
fetal and infant samples in a state with >73 000 annual births?
SUMMARY ANSWER: The overall frequency of major chromosome abnormalities in the 
entire cohort was 28.2% (2493/8826), with a significant decrease in the 
detection of major chromosome abnormalities with later developmental stage, from 
50.9% to 21.3% to 15.6% of tests in the miscarriage, prenatal and postnatal 
cohorts, respectively.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Over the past decade, technological advances have 
revolutionized genomic testing at every stage of reproduction. Chromosomal 
microarrays (CMAs) are now the gold standard of chromosome assessment in 
prenatal diagnosis and pediatrics.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: A population-based cohort study including all 
chromosome analysis was performed in the Australian state of Victoria during a 
24-month period from January 2015 to December 2016. All samples obtained via 
invasive prenatal diagnosis and postnatal samples from pregnancy tissue and 
infants ≤12 months of age were included.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: A research collaboration of screening 
and diagnostic units in the Australian state of Victoria was formed (the 
Perinatal Record Linkage collaboration), capturing all instances of prenatal and 
postnatal chromosome testing performed in the state. Victoria has over 73 000 
births per annum and a median maternal age of 31.5 years. We analyzed our 
population-based diagnostic data set for (i) chromosome assessment of 
miscarriage, prenatal diagnosis and postnatal samples; (ii) testing indications 
and diagnostic yields for each of these cohorts; (iii) and the combined 
prenatal/infant prevalence of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (DS) as a proportion of 
all births ≥20 weeks gestation.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: During the 24-month study period, a total 
of 8826 chromosomal analyses were performed on prenatal and postnatal specimens 
in Victoria. The vast majority (91.2%) of all chromosome analyses were performed 
with CMA.The overall frequency of major chromosome abnormalities in the entire 
cohort was 28.2% (2493/8826). There was a significant decreasing trend in the 
percentage of chromosome abnormalities with later developmental stage from 50.9% 
to 21.3% to 15.6% in the miscarriage, prenatal and postnatal cohorts, 
respectively (χ2 trend = 790.0, P < 0.0001). The total frequency of 
abnormalities in the live infant subgroup was 13.4% (244/1816). The frequencies 
of pathogenic copy number variants (CNVs) detected via CMA for the miscarriage, 
prenatal and postnatal cohorts were 1.9% (50/2573), 2.2% (82/3661) and 4.9% 
(127/2592), respectively. There was a significant increasing trend in the 
frequency of pathogenic CNVs with later developmental stage (χ2 trend = 39.72, 
P < 0.0001). For the subgroup of live infants, the pathogenic CNV frequency on 
CMA analysis was 6.0% (109/1816). There were 38 diagnoses of 22q11.2 DS, 
including 1 miscarriage, 15 prenatal and 22 postnatal cases. After excluding the 
miscarriage case and accounting for duplicate testing, the estimated prevalence 
of 22q11 DS was 1 in 4558 Victorian births.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Clinical information was missing on 11.6% of 
postnatal samples, and gestational age was rarely provided on the miscarriage 
specimens. We were unable to obtain rates of termination of pregnancy and 
stillbirth in our cohort due to incomplete data provided by clinical referrers. 
We therefore cannot make conclusions on pregnancy or infant outcome following 
diagnostic testing. Childhood and adult diagnoses of 22q11 DS were not 
collected.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Our study marks a complete transition in 
genomic testing from the G-banded karyotype era, with CMA now established as the 
first line investigation for pregnancy losses, fetal diagnosis and 
newborn/infant assessment in a high-income setting. Integration of prenatal and 
postnatal diagnostic data sets provides important opportunities for estimating 
the prevalence of clinically important congenital syndromes, such as 22q11 DS.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): L.H. is funded by a National Health and 
Medical Research Council Early Career Fellowship (1105603); A.L. was funded by a 
Mercy Perinatal Research Fellowship; J.H. was funded by a National Health and 
Medical Research Council Senior Research Fellowship (10121252). The funding 
bodies had no role in the conduct of the research or the manuscript. 
Discretionary funding from the Murdoch Children's Research Institute has 
supported the prenatal diagnosis data collection and reporting over the years.Dr 
Ricardo Palma-Dias reports a commercial relationship with Roche Diagnostics, 
personal fees from Philips Ultrasound, outside the submitted work. Debbie Nisbet 
reports a commercial relationship with Roche Diagnostics, outside the submitted 
work.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NA.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/dez286
PMID: 32207823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]