---
reference_id: "PMID:31116117"
title: "X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism: recent advances."
authors:
- Bragg DC
- Sharma N
- Ozelius LJ
journal: Curr Opin Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000708
keywords:
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- DNA Repeat Expansion
- Deep Brain Stimulation/methods
- "Dystonic Disorders/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism: recent advances.
**Authors:** Bragg DC, Sharma N, Ozelius LJ
**Journal:** Curr Opin Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WCO.0000000000000708](https://doi.org/10.1097/WCO.0000000000000708)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Neurol. 2019 Aug;32(4):604-609. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000708.

X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism: recent advances.

Bragg DC(1), Sharma N, Ozelius LJ.

Author information:
(1)The Collaborative Center for X-linked Dystonia Parkinsonism, Department of 
Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Our understanding of X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism (XDP) has 
advanced considerably in recent years because of a wealth of new data describing 
its genetic basis, cellular phenotypes, neuroimaging features, and response to 
deep brain stimulation (DBS). This review provides a concise summary of these 
studies.
RECENT FINDINGS: XDP is associated with a SINE-VNTR-Alu (SVA)-type 
retrotransposon insertion within the TAF1 gene. This element includes a 
hexameric DNA repeat expansion, (CCCTCT)n, the length of which varies among 
patients and is inversely correlated to age of disease onset. In cell models, 
the SVA alters TAF1 splicing and reduces levels of full-length transcript. 
Neuroimaging data have confirmed previous neuropathology studies that XDP 
involves a progressive striatal atrophy, while further detecting functional 
alterations in additional brain regions. In patients exhibiting features of both 
dystonia and parkinsonism, pallidal DBS has resulted in rapid improvement of 
hyperkinetic movements, but effects on hypokinetic features have been 
inconsistent.
SUMMARY: The discovery that XDP is linked to a polymorphic hexameric sequence 
suggests that it could share mechanisms with other DNA repeat disorders, whereas 
the transcriptional defect in cell models raises the possibility that strategies 
to correct TAF1 splicing could provide therapeutic benefit.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000708
PMCID: PMC7243267
PMID: 31116117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None