---
reference_id: "PMID:30188361"
title: Diagnostic and Predictive Immunohistochemistry for Non-Small Cell Lung Carcinomas.
authors:
- Hung YP
- Sholl LM
journal: Adv Anat Pathol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/PAP.0000000000000206
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/diagnosis, metabolism, pathology"
- DNA Helicases/metabolism
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, metabolism, pathology"
- Neoplasm Proteins
- Nuclear Proteins/metabolism
- Oncogene Proteins/metabolism
- Prognosis
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic and Predictive Immunohistochemistry for Non-Small Cell Lung Carcinomas.
**Authors:** Hung YP, Sholl LM
**Journal:** Adv Anat Pathol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAP.0000000000000206](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAP.0000000000000206)

## Content

1. Adv Anat Pathol. 2018 Nov;25(6):374-386. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0000000000000206.

Diagnostic and Predictive Immunohistochemistry for Non-Small Cell Lung
Carcinomas.

Hung YP(1), Sholl LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA.

Non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) accounts for significant morbidity and
mortality worldwide, with most patients diagnosed at advanced stages and managed
increasingly with targeted therapies and immunotherapy. In this review, we
discuss diagnostic and predictive immunohistochemical markers in NSCLC, one of
the most common tumors encountered in surgical pathology. We highlight 2
emerging diagnostic markers: nuclear protein in testis (NUT) for NUT carcinoma;
SMARCA4 for SMARCA4-deficient thoracic tumors. Given their highly aggressive
behavior, proper recognition facilitates optimal management. For patients with
advanced NSCLCs, we discuss the utility and limitations of immunohistochemistry
(IHC) for the "must-test" predictive biomarkers: anaplastic lymphoma kinase,
ROS1, programmed cell death protein 1, and epidermal growth factor receptor. IHC
using mutant-specific BRAF V600E, RET, pan-TRK, and LKB1 antibodies can be
orthogonal tools for screening or confirmation of molecular events. ERBB2 and
MET alterations include both activating mutations and gene amplifications,
detection of which relies on molecular methods with a minimal role for IHC in
NSCLC. IHC sits at the intersection of an integrated surgical pathology and
molecular diagnostic practice, serves as a powerful functional surrogate for
molecular testing, and is an indispensable tool of precision medicine in the
care of lung cancer patients.

DOI: 10.1097/PAP.0000000000000206
PMID: 30188361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
