---
reference_id: "PMID:26051272"
title: Identification of Immune-Relevant Factors Conferring Sarcoidosis Genetic Risk.
authors:
- Fischer A
- Ellinghaus D
- Nutsua M
- Hofmann S
- Montgomery CG
- Iannuzzi MC
- Rybicki BA
- Petrek M
- Mrazek F
- Pabst S
- Grohé C
- Grunewald J
- Ronninger M
- Eklund A
- Padyukov L
- Mihailovic-Vucinic V
- Jovanovic D
- Sterclova M
- Homolka J
- Nöthen MM
- Herms S
- Gieger C
- Strauch K
- Winkelmann J
- Boehm BO
- Brand S
- Büning C
- Schürmann M
- Ellinghaus E
- Baurecht H
- Lieb W
- Nebel A
- Müller-Quernheim J
- Franke A
- Schreiber S
- GenPhenReSa Consortium
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.201503-0418OC
keywords:
- Adult
- Black or African American/genetics
- Aged
- Case-Control Studies
- Europe
- Female
- Genetic Markers
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Sarcoidosis/ethnology, genetics, immunology"
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Immune-Relevant Factors Conferring Sarcoidosis Genetic Risk.
**Authors:** Fischer A, Ellinghaus D, Nutsua M, Hofmann S, Montgomery CG, Iannuzzi MC, Rybicki BA, Petrek M, Mrazek F, Pabst S, Grohé C, Grunewald J, Ronninger M, Eklund A, Padyukov L, Mihailovic-Vucinic V, Jovanovic D, Sterclova M, Homolka J, Nöthen MM, Herms S, Gieger C, Strauch K, Winkelmann J, Boehm BO, Brand S, Büning C, Schürmann M, Ellinghaus E, Baurecht H, Lieb W, Nebel A, Müller-Quernheim J, Franke A, Schreiber S, GenPhenReSa Consortium
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.201503-0418OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201503-0418OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Sep 15;192(6):727-36. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201503-0418OC.

Identification of Immune-Relevant Factors Conferring Sarcoidosis Genetic Risk.

Fischer A(1), Ellinghaus D(1), Nutsua M(1), Hofmann S(1), Montgomery CG(2),
Iannuzzi MC(3), Rybicki BA(4), Petrek M(5), Mrazek F(5), Pabst S(6), Grohé C(7),
Grunewald J(8), Ronninger M(8), Eklund A(8), Padyukov L(9), Mihailovic-Vucinic
V(10), Jovanovic D(11), Sterclova M(12), Homolka J(13), Nöthen MM(14)(15), Herms
S(14)(15)(16), Gieger C(17)(18), Strauch K(19)(20), Winkelmann J(21)(22)(23),
Boehm BO(24)(25)(26), Brand S(27), Büning C(28), Schürmann M(29), Ellinghaus
E(1), Baurecht H(30)(31), Lieb W(32), Nebel A(1), Müller-Quernheim J(33), Franke
A(1), Schreiber S(1)(34); GenPhenReSa Consortium.

Author information:
(1)1 Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel University and University
Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(2)2 Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical
Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
(3)3 Department of Medicine, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York.
(4)4 Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit,
Michigan.
(5)5 Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech
Republic.
(6)6 Pneumologische Praxis, Bonn, Germany.
(7)7 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Evangelische Lungenklinik Berlin-Buch,
Berlin, Germany.
(8)8 Respiratory Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine and CMM, Karolinska
Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)9 Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(10)10 Department of Sarcoidosis and Other Granulomatous Diseases and.
(11)11 Thoracic Oncology and ILD Department, University Hospital of Pulmonology,
Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(12)12 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Thomayer Hospital and 1 Medical
Faculty and.
(13)13 1st Lung Department, Prague General Hospital, Charles University, Prague,
Czech Republic.
(14)14 Institute of Human Genetics and.
(15)15 Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany.
(16)16 Genomics Group, Medical Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University
of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(17)17 Institute of Epidemiology II and.
(18)18 Research Unit of Molecular Epidemiology, Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich,
Germany.
(19)19 Institute of Genetic Epidemiology and.
(20)20 Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology and.
(21)21 Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research
Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.
(22)22 Institute of Human Genetics, MRI.
(23)23 Department of Neurology, MRI, and.
(24)24 Department of Internal Medicine I, Ulm University Medical Centre, Ulm,
Germany.
(25)25 LKCMedicine, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
(26)26 Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(27)27 Department of Medicine II-Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany.
(28)28 Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Charité,
Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany.
(29)29 Institute of Human Genetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(30)31 Graduate School of Information Science in Health, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany.
(31)30 Department of Dermatology, Allergology, and Venerology, and.
(32)32 Institute of Epidemiology and Popgen Biobank, Kiel University, Kiel,
Germany; and.
(33)33 Department of Pneumology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(34)34 Clinic of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein,
Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Sep 15;192(6):652-4. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201506-1235ED.

RATIONALE: Genetic variation plays a significant role in the etiology of
sarcoidosis. However, only a small fraction of its heritability has been
explained so far.
OBJECTIVES: To define further genetic risk loci for sarcoidosis, we used the
Immunochip for a candidate gene association study of immune-associated loci.
METHODS: Altogether the study population comprised over 19,000 individuals. In a
two-stage design, 1,726 German sarcoidosis cases and 5,482 control subjects were
genotyped for 128,705 single-nucleotide polymorphisms using the Illumina
Immunochip for the screening step. The remaining 3,955 cases, 7,514 control
subjects, and 684 parents of affected offspring were used for validation and
replication of 44 candidate and two established risk single-nucleotide
polymorphisms.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Four novel susceptibility loci were identified
with genome-wide significance in the European case-control populations, located
on chromosomes 12q24.12 (rs653178; ATXN2/SH2B3), 5q33.3 (rs4921492; IL12B), 4q24
(rs223498; MANBA/NFKB1), and 2q33.2 (rs6748088; FAM117B). We further defined
three independent association signals in the HLA region with genome-wide
significance, peaking in the BTNL2 promoter region (rs5007259), at HLA-B
(rs4143332/HLA-B*0801) and at HLA-DPB1 (rs9277542), and found another novel
independent signal near IL23R (rs12069782) on chromosome 1p31.3.
CONCLUSIONS: Functional predictions and protein network analyses suggest a
prominent role of the drug-targetable IL23/Th17 signaling pathway in the genetic
etiology of sarcoidosis. Our findings reveal a substantial genetic overlap of
sarcoidosis with diverse immune-mediated inflammatory disorders, which could be
of relevance for the clinical application of modern therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201503-0418OC
PMCID: PMC4595678
PMID: 26051272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
