---
reference_id: "PMID:34534157"
title: A Retrospective Study of Hearing Loss in Patients Diagnosed with Peroxisome Biogenesis Disorders in the Zellweger Spectrum.
authors:
- Lee J
- Yergeau C
- Kawai K
- Braverman N
- Géléoc GSG
journal: Ear Hear
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/AUD.0000000000001126
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Retrospective Study of Hearing Loss in Patients Diagnosed with Peroxisome Biogenesis Disorders in the Zellweger Spectrum.
**Authors:** Lee J, Yergeau C, Kawai K, Braverman N, Géléoc GSG
**Journal:** Ear Hear (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/AUD.0000000000001126](https://doi.org/10.1097/AUD.0000000000001126)

## Content

1. Ear Hear. 2022 Mar/Apr;43(2):582-591. doi: 10.1097/AUD.0000000000001126.

A Retrospective Study of Hearing Loss in Patients Diagnosed with Peroxisome 
Biogenesis Disorders in the Zellweger Spectrum.

Lee J(1), Yergeau C(2), Kawai K(1), Braverman N(2), Géléoc GSG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Boston Children's Hospital, Center for Life 
Sciences, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Human Genetics/Department of Pediatrics, McGill University, 
Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.

OBJECTIVES: Peroxisome Biogenesis Disorders in the Zellweger Spectrum (PBD-ZSD) 
are autosomal recessive disorders characterized by defects in peroxisome 
function, biosynthesis, and/or assembly. Despite its frequent documentation, 
hearing loss associated with PBD-ZSD has not been extensively characterized. The 
purpose of this retrospective natural history study was to better characterize 
the hearing loss associated with PBD-ZSD and to provide additional insight into 
the evaluation and management of PBD-ZSD patients with hearing loss.
DESIGN: Audiological data from medical records of 42 patients with PBD-ZSD or 
D-bifunctional protein deficiency were collected from an ongoing longitudinal 
retrospective natural history study. An initial dataset of 300 audiograms and/or 
audiometric test results from the 42 patients were used to characterize the 
degree of hearing loss, type of hearing loss, relationships between air and bone 
conduction thresholds, age-related changes in hearing loss, and benefit with 
amplification.
RESULTS: The majority of PBD-ZSD patients in this study presented with 
moderately-severe to severe hearing loss and relatively slow rates of 
longitudinal changes in hearing sensitivity. Improvements in hearing thresholds 
were observed with use of hearing aid amplification. Though bone conduction data 
were limited, air-bone gaps and air conduction threshold fluctuations observed 
in several patients suggest there may be an increased occurrence of mixed 
hearing losses in PBD-ZSD populations.
CONCLUSION: The results of this retrospective study provide insight into the 
hearing loss associated with PBD-ZSD, but also emphasize the need for more 
complete assessments of hearing loss type and middle ear function in these 
patients. The addition of more comprehensive datasets to the ongoing natural 
history study will enhance our understanding of the pathophysiology underlying 
PBD-ZSD and guide the development of targeted evaluation and management 
recommendations for patients with PBD-ZSD.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/AUD.0000000000001126
PMCID: PMC8881323
PMID: 34534157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.