---
reference_id: "PMID:6507479"
title: "Fibrochondrogenesis: radiologic and histologic studies."
authors:
- Eteson DJ
- Adomian GE
- Ornoy A
- Koide T
- Sugiura Y
- Calabro A
- Lungarotti S
- Mastroiacovo P
- Lachman RS
- Rimoin DL
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1984'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320190210
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/pathology"
- Female
- Growth Plate/pathology
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Radiography
- Ribs/abnormalities
- Spine/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibrochondrogenesis: radiologic and histologic studies.
**Authors:** Eteson DJ, Adomian GE, Ornoy A, Koide T, Sugiura Y, Calabro A, Lungarotti S, Mastroiacovo P, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320190210](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320190210)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1984 Oct;19(2):277-90. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320190210.

Fibrochondrogenesis: radiologic and histologic studies.

Eteson DJ, Adomian GE, Ornoy A, Koide T, Sugiura Y, Calabro A, Lungarotti S, 
Mastroiacovo P, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL.

Fibrochondrogenesis is a distinct, neonatally lethal, short-limb skeletal 
dysplasia which was first described in a single patient in 1978. We report the 
radiographic and morphologic studies of 2 additional unrelated stillborn infants 
with fibrochondrogenesis. This syndrome has distinct radiographic and 
chondro-osseous morphologic defects different from those seen in the other known 
skeletal dysplasias. The long bones are short and dumbbell-shaped with 
metaphyseal flare. The spine is platyspondylic with superior-inferior clefting 
defects, and the ribs are short and distally cupped. The growth-plate cartilage 
is grossly disorganized and has a densely fibrous collagenous matrix when 
examined by light and electron microscopy. Light, transmission, and scanning 
electron microscopy shows diaphyseal and metaphyseal trabecular bone to be 
normal.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320190210
PMID: 6507479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]