---
reference_id: "PMID:33263756"
title: Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) Antibody Responses in Children With Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) and Mild and Severe Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
authors:
- Anderson EM
- Diorio C
- Goodwin EC
- McNerney KO
- Weirick ME
- Gouma S
- Bolton MJ
- Arevalo CP
- Chase J
- Hicks P
- Manzoni TB
- Baxter AE
- Andrea KP
- Burudpakdee C
- Lee JH
- Vella LA
- Henrickson SE
- Harris RM
- Wherry EJ
- Bates P
- Bassiri H
- Behrens EM
- Teachey DT
- Hensley SE
journal: J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/jpids/piaa161
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) Antibody Responses in Children With Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) and Mild and Severe Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
**Authors:** Anderson EM, Diorio C, Goodwin EC, McNerney KO, Weirick ME, Gouma S, Bolton MJ, Arevalo CP, Chase J, Hicks P, Manzoni TB, Baxter AE, Andrea KP, Burudpakdee C, Lee JH, Vella LA, Henrickson SE, Harris RM, Wherry EJ, Bates P, Bassiri H, Behrens EM, Teachey DT, Hensley SE
**Journal:** J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jpids/piaa161](https://doi.org/10.1093/jpids/piaa161)

## Content

1. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc. 2021 May 28;10(5):669-673. doi: 
10.1093/jpids/piaa161.

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) Antibody Responses 
in Children With Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) and Mild 
and Severe Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).

Anderson EM(1), Diorio C(2)(3), Goodwin EC(1), McNerney KO(2)(3), Weirick ME(1), 
Gouma S(1), Bolton MJ(1), Arevalo CP(1), Chase J(2)(4), Hicks P(1)(5), Manzoni 
TB(1), Baxter AE(6)(7), Andrea KP(6)(7), Burudpakdee C(2), Lee JH(2), Vella 
LA(6)(7)(8), Henrickson SE(9), Harris RM(10), Wherry EJ(6)(7), Bates P(1)(11), 
Bassiri H(2)(8), Behrens EM(2)(4), Teachey DT(2)(3), Hensley SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Immune Dysregulation Frontier Program, Department of Pediatrics, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Institute for Immunology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(7)Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy and Immunology, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(11)Penn Center for Research on Coronavirus and Other Emerging Pathogens, 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2020 Aug 18:2020.08.17.20176552. doi: 10.1101/2020.08.17.20176552.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) antibody responses 
in children remain poorly characterized. Here, we show that pediatric patients 
with multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) possess higher 
SARS-CoV-2 spike immunoglobulin G (IgG) titers compared with those with severe 
coronavirus disease 2019, likely reflecting a longer time since the onset of 
infection in MIS-C patients.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Journal of the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jpids/piaa161
PMCID: PMC7799010
PMID: 33263756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]