---
reference_id: "PMID:957376"
title: "Pfeiffer syndrome: report of a family and review of the literature."
authors:
- Naveh Y
- Friedman A
journal: J Med Genet
year: '1976'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.13.4.277
keywords:
- Acrocephalosyndactylia/genetics
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Foot/diagnostic imaging
- Humans
- Male
- Pedigree
- Radiography
- Skull/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pfeiffer syndrome: report of a family and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Naveh Y, Friedman A
**Journal:** J Med Genet (1976)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.13.4.277](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.13.4.277)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 1976 Aug;13(4):277-80. doi: 10.1136/jmg.13.4.277.

Pfeiffer syndrome: report of a family and review of the literature.

Naveh Y, Friedman A.

A 5-year-old boy and his father with Pfeiffer syndrome are described. They had
acrocephaly, hypertelorism, antimongoloid slant of the palpebral fissures,
protrusion of the eyes, large and broad nose, small mandible, irregularly placed
teeth, additional upper canine, high-arched palate, partial syndactyly of
fingers and toes, brachydactyly of toes, valgus deformity of hypertrophied
triangular great toes, broad phalanges of the great toes and broad first
metatarsals, accessory epiphyses lateral to the interphalangeal joint of the
great toes, and normal intelligence. To our knowledge, this is the first family
in which the syndrome is almost totally confined to the head and feet--it spares
the upper limbs except for partial skin syndactyly between the fingers--and the
third family showing inheritance through three successive generations suggesting
an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. The published papers are reviewed and
the clinical and x-ray signs are tabulated.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.13.4.277
PMCID: PMC1013415
PMID: 957376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
