---
reference_id: "PMID:16525806"
title: "NARP-MILS syndrome caused by 8993 T>G mitochondrial DNA mutation: a clinical, genetic and neuropathological study."
authors:
- Rojo A
- Campos Y
- Sánchez JM
- Bonaventura I
- Aguilar M
- García A
- González L
- Rey MJ
- Arenas J
- Olivé M
- Ferrer I
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-006-0040-5
keywords:
- "Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ataxia/genetics, pathology"
- Atrophy
- Brain/pathology
- "Cerebellar Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- Humans
- "Leigh Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- "Mutation/genetics, physiology"
- Neurons/pathology
- Pedigree
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics, pathology"
- Syndrome
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NARP-MILS syndrome caused by 8993 T>G mitochondrial DNA mutation: a clinical, genetic and neuropathological study.
**Authors:** Rojo A, Campos Y, Sánchez JM, Bonaventura I, Aguilar M, García A, González L, Rey MJ, Arenas J, Olivé M, Ferrer I
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-006-0040-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-006-0040-5)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2006 Jun;111(6):610-6. doi: 10.1007/s00401-006-0040-5. Epub
2006 Mar 9.

NARP-MILS syndrome caused by 8993 T>G mitochondrial DNA mutation: a clinical,
genetic and neuropathological study.

Rojo A(1), Campos Y, Sánchez JM, Bonaventura I, Aguilar M, García A, González L,
Rey MJ, Arenas J, Olivé M, Ferrer I.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Services, Hospital Mútua de Terrassa, and University of Barcelona,
Spain.

The 8993 T>G mutation in mitochondrial DNA has been associated with variable
syndromes of differing severity ranging from maternally inherited Leigh's
syndrome (MILS) to neuropathy, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa (NARP), depending on
the mutation loads in affected patients. We report a kindred with several
members in the same generation suffering NARP or Leigh's syndrome due to a 8993
T>G mutation. Post-mortem studies of the brain in one affected member clinically
presenting with a neurological disorder intermediate between adult Leigh's
syndrome and NARP showed symmetrical lesions of the basal ganglia and brainstem
closely resembling those usually described in typical Leigh's syndrome. Analysis
of mtDNA in different tissues showed a high proportion of mutant genome in
brainstem, cerebral cortex, putamen, cerebellum and thalamus. These observations
illustrate the continuum of clinical and neuropathological manifestations
associated with the 8993 T>G mutation of the mtDNA.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-006-0040-5
PMID: 16525806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
