---
reference_id: "PMID:35621045"
title: "The unfolded protein response to PI*Z alpha-1 antitrypsin in human hepatocellular and murine models."
authors:
- Lu Y
- Wang LR
- Lee J
- Mohammad NS
- Aranyos AM
- Gould C
- Khodayari N
- Oshins RA
- Moneypenny CG
- Brantly ML
journal: Hepatol Commun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/hep4.1997
keywords:
- Animals
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Liver Neoplasms
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Unfolded Protein Response/genetics
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The unfolded protein response to PI*Z alpha-1 antitrypsin in human hepatocellular and murine models.
**Authors:** Lu Y, Wang LR, Lee J, Mohammad NS, Aranyos AM, Gould C, Khodayari N, Oshins RA, Moneypenny CG, Brantly ML
**Journal:** Hepatol Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep4.1997](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep4.1997)

## Content

1. Hepatol Commun. 2022 Sep;6(9):2354-2367. doi: 10.1002/hep4.1997. Epub 2022 May
 27.

The unfolded protein response to PI*Z alpha-1 antitrypsin in human
hepatocellular and murine models.

Lu Y(1), Wang LR(1), Lee J(1), Mohammad NS(1), Aranyos AM(1), Gould C(1),
Khodayari N(1), Oshins RA(1), Moneypenny CG(1), Brantly ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Florida, Florida, USA.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency (AATD) is an inherited disease caused by
mutations in the serpin family A member 1 (SERPINA1, also known as AAT) gene.
The most common variant, PI*Z (Glu342Lys), causes accumulation of aberrantly
folded AAT in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of hepatocytes that is associated
with a toxic gain of function, hepatocellular injury, liver fibrosis, and
hepatocellular carcinoma. The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cellular
response to improperly folded proteins meant to alleviate ER stress. It has been
unclear whether PI*Z AAT elicits liver cell UPR, due in part to limitations of
current cellular and animal models. This study investigates whether UPR is
activated in a novel human PI*Z AAT cell line and a new PI*Z human AAT (hAAT)
mouse model. A PI*Z AAT hepatocyte cell line (Huh7.5Z) was established using
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas9 gene
editing of the normal ATT (PI*MM) gene in the Huh7.5 cell line. Additionally,
novel full-length genomic DNA PI*Z hAAT and PI*M hAAT transgenic mouse models
were established. Using these new models, UPR in Huh7.5Z cells and PI*Z mice
were comprehensively determined. Robust activation of UPR was observed in
Huh7.5Z cells compared to Huh7.5 cells. Activated caspase cascade and apoptosis
markers, increased chaperones, and autophagy markers were also detected in Z
hepatocytes. Selective attenuation of UPR signaling branches was observed in
PI*Z hAAT mice in which the protein kinase R-like ER kinase and
inositol-requiring enzyme1α branches were suppressed while the activating
transcription factor 6α branch remained active. This study provides direct
evidence that PI*Z AAT triggers canonical UPR and that hepatocytes survive
pro-apoptotic UPR by selective suppression of UPR branches. Our data improve
understanding of underlying pathological molecular mechanisms of PI*Z AATD liver
disease.

© 2022 The Authors. Hepatology Communications published by Wiley Periodicals LLC
on behalf of American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep4.1997
PMCID: PMC9426387
PMID: 35621045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest that
pertain to this work.
