---
reference_id: "PMID:38026955"
title: "Strategies targeting endoplasmic reticulum stress to improve Parkinson's disease."
authors:
- Wang D
- Qu S
- Zhang Z
- Tan L
- Chen X
- Zhong HJ
- Chong CM
journal: Front Pharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1288894
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Strategies targeting endoplasmic reticulum stress to improve Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Wang D, Qu S, Zhang Z, Tan L, Chen X, Zhong HJ, Chong CM
**Journal:** Front Pharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphar.2023.1288894](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2023.1288894)

## Content

1. Front Pharmacol. 2023 Nov 10;14:1288894. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1288894. 
eCollection 2023.

Strategies targeting endoplasmic reticulum stress to improve Parkinson's 
disease.

Wang D(#)(1), Qu S(#)(1), Zhang Z(2), Tan L(3), Chen X(1), Zhong HJ(2), Chong 
CM(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Institute of 
Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macao, China.
(2)International Cooperative Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine 
Modernization and Innovative Drug Development of Chinese Ministry of Education 
(MOE), College of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Southwest Hospital, The Third Military Medical 
University (Army Military Medical University), Chongqing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder with motor 
symptoms, which is caused by the progressive death of dopaminergic (DA) neurons 
in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc). Accumulating evidence shows that 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress occurring in the SNpc DA neurons is an early 
event in the development of PD. ER stress triggers the activation of unfolded 
protein response (UPR) to reduce stress and restore ER function. However, 
excessive and continuous ER stress and UPR exacerbate the risk of DA neuron 
death through crosstalk with other PD events. Thus, ER stress is considered a 
promising therapeutic target for the treatment of PD. Various strategies 
targeting ER stress through the modulation of UPR signaling, the increase of 
ER's protein folding ability, and the enhancement of protein degradation are 
developed to alleviate neuronal death in PD models. In this review, we summarize 
the pathological role of ER stress in PD and update the strategies targeting ER 
stress to improve ER protein homeostasis and PD-related events.

Copyright © 2023 Wang, Qu, Zhang, Tan, Chen, Zhong and Chong.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1288894
PMCID: PMC10667558
PMID: 38026955

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.