---
reference_id: "PMID:31135245"
title: Detailed retinal phenotype of Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome associated with mutations in PNPLA6 mimicking choroideremia.
authors:
- "O'Neil E"
- Serrano L
- Scoles D
- Cunningham KE
- Han G
- Chiang J
- Bennett J
- Aleman TS
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/13816810.2019.1605392
keywords:
- Adult
- "Choroideremia/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Hypogonadism/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Phospholipases/genetics
- Prognosis
- "Retinal Dystrophies/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/diagnosis, genetics"
- Visual Acuity
- Acyltransferases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detailed retinal phenotype of Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome associated with mutations in PNPLA6 mimicking choroideremia.
**Authors:** O'Neil E, Serrano L, Scoles D, Cunningham KE, Han G, Chiang J, Bennett J, Aleman TS
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13816810.2019.1605392](https://doi.org/10.1080/13816810.2019.1605392)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2019 Jun;40(3):267-275. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2019.1605392. 
Epub 2019 May 28.

Detailed retinal phenotype of Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome associated with 
mutations in PNPLA6 mimicking choroideremia.

O'Neil E(1), Serrano L(1)(2), Scoles D(1), Cunningham KE(3), Han G(1), Chiang 
J(4), Bennett J(1)(2), Aleman TS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Scheie Eye Institute and the Perelman Center for Advanced Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)b The Center for Advanced Retinal and Ocular Therapeutics, Department of 
Ophthalmology , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , USA.
(3)c Endocrine Associates of Connecticut , Branford , CT , USA.
(4)d Molecular Vision Laboratory , Hillsboro , OR , USA.

Purpose: To confirm the pathogenic role of a novel mutation in PNPLA6 and detail 
the phenotype of a patient presenting with choroideremia-like chorioretinal 
degeneration. Methods: A 40-year-old man with presumed choroideremia underwent a 
complete ophthalmic examination, full-field electroretinography (ERG), kinetic 
fields and two-color automated static perimetry and retinal imaging with 
spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) and near-infrared (NIR) 
and short wavelength (SW) fundus autofluorescence (FAF). Results: Visual acuity 
was 20/200 and 20/40 for the right and left eye, respectively, with a ~ 5D 
myopic correction. Small cone-mediated ERG responses were detectable. The visual 
field by kinetic perimetry (V-4e stimulus) was limited to small (<5°) central 
islands separated from large peripheral islands of vision by an absolute 
midperipheral scotoma. There were minute islands of apparently spared retina 
near the foveal center separated from large peripheral islands of better 
appearing retina by severe pericentral and midperipheral chorioretinal atrophy. 
SD-OCT confirmed detectable photoreceptors near the center and in nasal 
midperipheral retina despite severe outer segment loss. Central photoreceptor 
loss was associated with disproportionately severe retinal pigment epithelium 
(RPE) depigmentation and choroidal atrophy. NIR- and SW-autofluorescence was 
widely hypoautofluorescent with the exception of residual autofluorescence along 
peripheral regions of relative RPE preservation. Gene screening revealed 
biallelic mutations (p.Arg1031GlnfsTer38/p.Arg1183Gln) in PNPLA6. 
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and cerebellar vermis hypoplasia by MRI confirmed 
a diagnosis of Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome. Conclusions: PNPLA6-associated 
retinal degenerations can present with predominantly retinal findings and subtle 
systemic abnormalities and should be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
diffuse chorioretinal atrophies.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2019.1605392
PMID: 31135245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]