---
reference_id: "PMID:28579714"
title: "Neumann's Tumor: A Case Report."
authors:
- Vinay KN
- Anjulo LA
- Nitin P
- Neha KV
- Dhara D
journal: Ethiop J Health Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.4314/ejhs.v27i2.11
keywords:
- Female
- "Gingival Neoplasms/congenital, pathology, surgery"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Maxillary Neoplasms/congenital, pathology, surgery"
- "Rare Diseases/congenital, pathology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neumann's Tumor: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Vinay KN, Anjulo LA, Nitin P, Neha KV, Dhara D
**Journal:** Ethiop J Health Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.4314/ejhs.v27i2.11](https://doi.org/10.4314/ejhs.v27i2.11)

## Content

1. Ethiop J Health Sci. 2017 Mar;27(2):189-192. doi: 10.4314/ejhs.v27i2.11.

Neumann's Tumor: A Case Report.

Vinay KN(1), Anjulo LA(2), Nitin P(3), Neha KV(3), Dhara D(3).

Author information:
(1)OMFS Unit Head, OMFS Unit, College of Health Sciences, Mekelle University, 
Ethiopia.
(2)School of Medicine, Wolaita Sodo University, Ethiopia.
(3)College of Health Sciences, Mekelle University, Ethiopia.

BACKGROUND: The congenital granular cell tumour of the newborn, also known as 
congenital epulis or Neumann's tumor, is rare. It occurs on the gingiva of the 
anterior alveolar ridge of the jaws. This lesion behaves in a benign manner and 
no recurrent or metastatic lesions have been reported.
CASE REPORT: We are reporting a 2-day-old female neonate, who came to our unit 
with a well defined, solitary, firm mass arising from the maxillary anterior 
region measuring about 3.5 cms in diameter and causing difficulty in breast 
feeding but no hindrance to the airway. The mass was surgically excised under 
general anesthesia. Postoperative wound healing was uneventful.
CONCLUSION: We have shared our experience in handling this rare type of tumor. 
We have presented the clinical features and the different modalities of its 
treatment to spread awareness among clinicians for better management of similar 
tumors.

DOI: 10.4314/ejhs.v27i2.11
PMCID: PMC5440833
PMID: 28579714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]