---
reference_id: "PMID:31317233"
title: "Renal Tubular Function, Bone Health and Body Composition in Wilson's Disease: A Cross-Sectional Study from India."
authors:
- Kapoor N
- Cherian KE
- Sajith KG
- Thomas M
- Eapen CE
- Thomas N
- Paul TV
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00223-019-00588-z
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Renal Tubular/epidemiology, etiology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Body Composition/physiology
- Bone Density/physiology
- "Bone Diseases, Metabolic/epidemiology, etiology"
- Bone and Bones/physiopathology
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/epidemiology, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Humans
- India/epidemiology
- Kidney Function Tests
- Kidney Tubules/physiology
- Male
- Prevalence
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal Tubular Function, Bone Health and Body Composition in Wilson's Disease: A Cross-Sectional Study from India.
**Authors:** Kapoor N, Cherian KE, Sajith KG, Thomas M, Eapen CE, Thomas N, Paul TV
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00223-019-00588-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-019-00588-z)

## Content

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2019 Nov;105(5):459-465. doi: 10.1007/s00223-019-00588-z.
Epub 2019 Jul 17.

Renal Tubular Function, Bone Health and Body Composition in Wilson's Disease: A
Cross-Sectional Study from India.

Kapoor N(1), Cherian KE(1), Sajith KG(2), Thomas M(3), Eapen CE(2), Thomas N(1),
Paul TV(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Christian Medical
College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, 632004, India.
(2)Department of Hepatology, Christian Medical College, Vellore, India.
(3)Department of Neurology, Christian Medical College, Vellore, India.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Christian Medical
College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, 632004, India. thomasvpaul@yahoo.com.

There is limited literature from India with regard to the prevalence and
magnitude of renal tubular and bone manifestations in Wilson's disease (WD).
Thus, we studied the prevalence of renal tubular acidosis among Indian patients
with WD and also evaluated bone health and body composition in them. It was a
cross-sectional study conducted at a south Indian tertiary care center.
Twenty-five consecutive patients with WD aged more than 12 years attending the
hepatology and neurology departments and 50 age, sex and BMI-matched controls
were recruited. After clinical assessment, they underwent biochemical testing to
assess renal tubular dysfunction. Bone mineral density (BMD) and body
composition were assessed using a dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA)
scanner. Fifty-six percent (14/25) of patients with WD had renal tubular
acidosis (RTA). Of them, 24% were diagnosed to have distal RTA. RTA was more
common in hepatic WD patients who had prolonged duration of illness. Patients
with WD had significantly lower BMD as compared to control subjects (p < 0.05).
Low BMI, low IGF-1 and a shorter duration of therapy were key determinants of
low bone mass in them (p < 0.05). Patients with WD had significantly more body
fat (p = 0.01) and lower lean muscle mass (p = 0.03) when compared to age, sex
and BMI-matched controls. In conclusion, renal tubular acidosis was common in
patients with Wilson's disease. These patients had a lower bone mineral density,
higher body fat percentage and lower lean muscle mass as compared to controls.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-019-00588-z
PMID: 31317233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
