---
reference_id: "PMID:25432812"
title: "Lucio's leprosy: a clinical and therapeutic challenge."
authors:
- Jurado F
- Rodriguez O
- Novales J
- Navarrete G
- Rodriguez M
journal: Clin Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2014.07.004
keywords:
- "Biopsy, Needle"
- Disease Progression
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Leprostatic Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Leprosy, Lepromatous/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
- Male
- Mycobacterium leprae/drug effects
- Risk Assessment
- Severity of Illness Index
- Skin Physiological Phenomena/drug effects
- "Skin Ulcer/drug therapy, etiology, pathology"
- "Thalidomide/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lucio's leprosy: a clinical and therapeutic challenge.
**Authors:** Jurado F, Rodriguez O, Novales J, Navarrete G, Rodriguez M
**Journal:** Clin Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clindermatol.2014.07.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clindermatol.2014.07.004)

## Content

1. Clin Dermatol. 2015 Jan-Feb;33(1):66-78. doi: 
10.1016/j.clindermatol.2014.07.004.

Lucio's leprosy: a clinical and therapeutic challenge.

Jurado F(1), Rodriguez O(2), Novales J(3), Navarrete G(3), Rodriguez M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Centro Dermatologico "Dr. Ladislao de la Pascua," 
Ministry of Health of the Government of The Federal District of Mexico City, 
Mexico. Electronic address: fermin_santac@yahoo.com.mx.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Centro Dermatologico "Dr. Ladislao de la Pascua," 
Ministry of Health of the Government of The Federal District of Mexico City, 
Mexico.
(3)Department Dermatopathology, Centro Dermatologico "Dr. Ladislao de la 
Pascua," Ministry of Health of the Government of The Federal District of Mexico 
City, Mexico.

Leprosy has been a challenge in different areas of medicine; in underdeveloped 
countries it remains a public health problem, in which the social and economic 
problems facilitate the disease persistence. The diagnosis and consequently the 
treatment are delayed due to the clinical polymorphism of leprosy, which 
especially at the beginning the manifestations are not as evident, as is the 
case of diffuse lepromatous leprosy. This favors the disabilities and the 
development of the reaction episodes. Fortunately, reaction episodes have 
decreased with the use of multidrug therapy, and better control of the type 2 
reactions has been managed with the use of thalidomide, as in Lucio's 
phenomenon.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2014.07.004
PMID: 25432812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]