---
reference_id: "PMID:39741769"
title: Pyridostigmine as a therapeutic option for pediatric gastrointestinal dysmotilities in ATR-X syndrome. Case report and literature review.
authors:
- Comisi FF
- Soddu C
- Corpino M
- Marica M
- Cacace R
- Foiadelli T
- Savasta S
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1460658
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pyridostigmine as a therapeutic option for pediatric gastrointestinal dysmotilities in ATR-X syndrome. Case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Comisi FF, Soddu C, Corpino M, Marica M, Cacace R, Foiadelli T, Savasta S
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2024.1460658](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2024.1460658)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2024 Dec 17;12:1460658. doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1460658. 
eCollection 2024.

Pyridostigmine as a therapeutic option for pediatric gastrointestinal 
dysmotilities in ATR-X syndrome. Case report and literature review.

Comisi FF(1), Soddu C(2), Corpino M(2), Marica M(2), Cacace R(1), Foiadelli 
T(3), Savasta S(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Clinic and Rare Diseases, Microcitemico Hospital "A. Cao", 
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Clinic and Rare Diseases, Microcitemico Hospital "A. Cao", 
Cagliari, Italy.
(3)Pediatric Clinic, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Alpha-thalassemia X-linked intellectual disability (ATR-X) syndrome, 
is a rare genetic disorder, caused by mutations in the ATRX gene. Clinical 
manifestations include typical facial dysmorphisms, mild-to-severe intellectual 
disability, hypotonia, genital anomalies, significant gastrointestinal (GI) 
complications, such as abdominal distension, chronic constipation, feeding 
difficulties, gastroesophageal reflux, and mild-to-moderate anemia secondary to 
alpha-thalassemia.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a patient with ATR-X syndrome suffering from 
gastrointestinal dysmotility and highlight the beneficial effects of 
pyridostigmine. Knowledge about the role and appropriate dosage of 
pyridostigmine in GI motility disorders is limited. To date, only nine pediatric 
cases involving pyridostigmine for GI dysmotility have been reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Considering current understanding about the treatment of 
gastrointestinal complications in patients with genetic syndromes, this case 
provides new insights into management of these complex clinical presentations.

© 2024 Comisi, Soddu, Corpino, Marica, Cacace, Foiadelli and Savasta.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2024.1460658
PMCID: PMC11685138
PMID: 39741769

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.