---
reference_id: "PMID:36483739"
title: "New insight into the management of renal excretion and hyperuricemia: Potential therapeutic strategies with natural bioactive compounds."
authors:
- Yang B
- Xin M
- Liang S
- Xu X
- Cai T
- Dong L
- Wang C
- Wang M
- Cui Y
- Song X
- Sun J
- Sun W
journal: Front Pharmacol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1026246
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insight into the management of renal excretion and hyperuricemia: Potential therapeutic strategies with natural bioactive compounds.
**Authors:** Yang B, Xin M, Liang S, Xu X, Cai T, Dong L, Wang C, Wang M, Cui Y, Song X, Sun J, Sun W
**Journal:** Front Pharmacol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphar.2022.1026246](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2022.1026246)

## Content

1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Nov 22;13:1026246. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1026246. 
eCollection 2022.

New insight into the management of renal excretion and hyperuricemia: Potential 
therapeutic strategies with natural bioactive compounds.

Yang B(1), Xin M(1), Liang S(1), Xu X(1), Cai T(1), Dong L(1), Wang C(1), Wang 
M(1), Cui Y(1), Song X(1)(2), Sun J(3), Sun W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences and Medicine, Shandong University of Technology, 
Zibo, China.
(2)Shandong Qingyujiangxing Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Zibo, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Novel Food Resources Processing, Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Affairs/Key Laboratory of Agro-Products Processing Technology of 
Shandong Province/Institute of Agro-Food Science and Technology, Shandong 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Jinan, China.

Hyperuricemia is the result of increased production and/or underexcretion of 
uric acid. Hyperuricemia has been epidemiologically associated with multiple 
comorbidities, including metabolic syndrome, gout with long-term systemic 
inflammation, chronic kidney disease, urolithiasis, cardiovascular disease, 
hypertension, rheumatoid arthritis, dyslipidemia, diabetes/insulin resistance 
and increased oxidative stress. Dysregulation of xanthine oxidoreductase (XOD), 
the enzyme that catalyzes uric acid biosynthesis primarily in the liver, and 
urate transporters that reabsorb urate in the renal proximal tubules (URAT1, 
GLUT9, OAT4 and OAT10) and secrete urate (ABCG2, OAT1, OAT3, NPT1, and NPT4) in 
the renal tubules and intestine, is a major cause of hyperuricemia, along with 
variations in the genes encoding these proteins. The first-line therapeutic 
drugs used to lower serum uric acid levels include XOD inhibitors that limit 
uric acid biosynthesis and uricosurics that decrease urate reabsorption in the 
renal proximal tubules and increase urate excretion into the urine and intestine 
via urate transporters. However, long-term use of high doses of these drugs 
induces acute kidney disease, chronic kidney disease and liver toxicity. 
Therefore, there is an urgent need for new nephroprotective drugs with improved 
safety profiles and tolerance. The current systematic review summarizes the 
characteristics of major urate transporters, the mechanisms underlying the 
pathogenesis of hyperuricemia, and the regulation of uric acid biosynthesis and 
transport. Most importantly, this review highlights the potential mechanisms of 
action of some naturally occurring bioactive compounds with antihyperuricemic 
and nephroprotective potential isolated from various medicinal plants.

Copyright © 2022 Yang, Xin, Liang, Xu, Cai, Dong, Wang, Wang, Cui, Song, Sun and 
Sun.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1026246
PMCID: PMC9723165
PMID: 36483739

Conflict of interest statement: SX and SW were employed by the Shandong 
Qingyujiangxing Biotechnology Co., Ltd. The authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.