---
reference_id: "PMID:31273209"
title: Sarcoidosis.
authors:
- Grunewald J
- Grutters JC
- Arkema EV
- Saketkoo LA
- Moller DR
- Müller-Quernheim J
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0096-x
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- "Granuloma/complications, etiology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Lung/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Positron-Emission Tomography/methods, trends"
- Risk Factors
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Grunewald J, Grutters JC, Arkema EV, Saketkoo LA, Moller DR, Müller-Quernheim J
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-019-0096-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-019-0096-x)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2019 Jul 4;5(1):45. doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0096-x.

Sarcoidosis.

Grunewald J(1), Grutters JC(2), Arkema EV(3), Saketkoo LA(4), Moller DR(5), 
Müller-Quernheim J(6).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Medicine Division, Department of Medicine Solna, and Center for 
Molecular Medicine (CMM), Karolinska Institutet; and Respiratory Medicine, Theme 
Inflammation and Infection, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Johan.Grunewald@ki.se.
(2)Interstitial Lung Diseases Center of Excellence, Department of Pulmonology, 
St Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, Netherlands; and Division of Heart and Lungs, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(3)Clinical Epidemiology Division, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Scleroderma and Sarcoidosis Patient Care and Research Center, University 
Medical Center Comprehensive Pulmonary Hypertension Center, Tulane University 
School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(5)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)Department of Pneumology, Medical Center University of Freiburg, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2019 Jul 16;5(1):49. doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0107-y.

Sarcoidosis is an inflammatory disorder of unknown cause that is characterized 
by granuloma formation in affected organs, most often in the lungs. Patients 
frequently suffer from cough, shortness of breath, chest pain and pronounced 
fatigue and are at risk of developing lung fibrosis or irreversible damage to 
other organs. The disease develops in genetically predisposed individuals with 
exposure to an as-yet unknown antigen. Genetic factors affect not only the risk 
of developing sarcoidosis but also the disease course, which is highly variable 
and difficult to predict. The typical T cell accumulation, local T cell immune 
response and granuloma formation in the lungs indicate that the inflammatory 
response in sarcoidosis is induced by specific antigens, possibly including 
self-antigens, which is consistent with an autoimmune involvement. Diagnosis can 
be challenging for clinicians because of the potential for almost any organ to 
be affected. As the aetiology of sarcoidosis is unknown, no specific treatment 
and no pathognomic markers exist. Thus, improved biomarkers to determine disease 
activity and to identify patients at risk of developing fibrosis are needed. 
Corticosteroids still constitute the first-line treatment, but new treatment 
strategies, including those targeting quality-of-life issues, are being 
evaluated and should yield appropriate, personalized and more effective 
treatments.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-019-0096-x
PMID: 31273209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]