---
reference_id: "PMID:37788820"
title: "Skin Cancer in Non-White Solid Organ Transplant Recipients: Mayo Clinic Experience."
authors:
- Zieman D
- Heckman M
- Brushaber D
- Degesys C
- Tolaymat L
journal: South Med J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.14423/SMJ.0000000000001605
keywords:
- Humans
- Retrospective Studies
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/epidemiology, etiology"
- Organ Transplantation/adverse effects
- Melanoma
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skin Cancer in Non-White Solid Organ Transplant Recipients: Mayo Clinic Experience.
**Authors:** Zieman D, Heckman M, Brushaber D, Degesys C, Tolaymat L
**Journal:** South Med J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.14423/SMJ.0000000000001605](https://doi.org/10.14423/SMJ.0000000000001605)

## Content

1. South Med J. 2023 Oct;116(10):839-844. doi: 10.14423/SMJ.0000000000001605.

Skin Cancer in Non-White Solid Organ Transplant Recipients: Mayo Clinic
Experience.

Zieman D(1), Heckman M(1), Brushaber D(1), Degesys C(1), Tolaymat L(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic in Florida, Jacksonville.

OBJECTIVE: Solid organ transplant recipients (SOTRs) have an increased risk of
skin cancer development, but limited data exist on the development pattern of
cutaneous malignancies in non-White SOTRs. The aim of this study was to describe
the characteristics and outcomes of non-White patients who developed skin cancer
following solid organ transplantation.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective chart review of non-White SOTRs at the
Mayo Clinic who underwent transplantation between November 1987 and April 2020
and subsequently developed skin cancer.
RESULTS: We identified 32 non-White SOTRs who developed skin cancer in the
posttransplant period. Among these, 46.9% were Hispanic/Latinx, 25% were
American Indian/Alaskan Native, 21.9% were Asian, and 6.3% were Black/African
American. Four patients had a history of nonmelanoma skin cancer pretransplant.
In regard to skin cancer type, 21 (65.6%) patients developed squamous cell
carcinoma, 15 (46.9%) developed basal cell carcinoma, 5 (15.6%) developed
melanoma, and 2 (6.3%) developed sebaceous carcinoma. The median time from
transplant to first posttransplant skin cancer was 7.8 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides further characterization of the development of
skin cancer in non-White SOTRs following transplant and identifies a variety of
relevant pre- and posttransplant factors. Despite a long follow-up period, the
number of patients identified remained low, which is consistent with the
literature, indicating a low incidence of skin cancer development in non-White
SOTRs. Continued investigation may allow for a more precise identification of
risk factors and their degree of significance.

DOI: 10.14423/SMJ.0000000000001605
PMID: 37788820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
