---
reference_id: "PMID:25663221"
title: Long-term efficacy and safety of thalamic stimulation for drug-resistant partial epilepsy.
authors:
- Salanova V
- Witt T
- Worth R
- Henry TR
- Gross RE
- Nazzaro JM
- Labar D
- Sperling MR
- Sharan A
- Sandok E
- Handforth A
- Stern JM
- Chung S
- Henderson JM
- French J
- Baltuch G
- Rosenfeld WE
- Garcia P
- Barbaro NM
- Fountain NB
- Elias WJ
- Goodman RR
- Pollard JR
- Tröster AI
- Irwin CP
- Lambrecht K
- Graves N
- Fisher R
- SANTE Study Group
journal: Neurology
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001334
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Anterior Thalamic Nuclei/physiopathology, surgery"
- "Deep Brain Stimulation/adverse effects, methods"
- "Epilepsies, Partial/physiopathology, therapy"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Quality of Life
- Severity of Illness Index
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term efficacy and safety of thalamic stimulation for drug-resistant partial epilepsy.
**Authors:** Salanova V, Witt T, Worth R, Henry TR, Gross RE, Nazzaro JM, Labar D, Sperling MR, Sharan A, Sandok E, Handforth A, Stern JM, Chung S, Henderson JM, French J, Baltuch G, Rosenfeld WE, Garcia P, Barbaro NM, Fountain NB, Elias WJ, Goodman RR, Pollard JR, Tröster AI, Irwin CP, Lambrecht K, Graves N, Fisher R, SANTE Study Group
**Journal:** Neurology (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000001334](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000001334)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2015 Mar 10;84(10):1017-25. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001334. Epub
 2015 Feb 6.

Long-term efficacy and safety of thalamic stimulation for drug-resistant partial 
epilepsy.

Salanova V(1), Witt T(2), Worth R(2), Henry TR(2), Gross RE(2), Nazzaro JM(2), 
Labar D(2), Sperling MR(2), Sharan A(2), Sandok E(2), Handforth A(2), Stern 
JM(2), Chung S(2), Henderson JM(2), French J(2), Baltuch G(2), Rosenfeld WE(2), 
Garcia P(2), Barbaro NM(2), Fountain NB(2), Elias WJ(2), Goodman RR(2), Pollard 
JR(2), Tröster AI(2), Irwin CP(2), Lambrecht K(2), Graves N(2), Fisher R(2); 
SANTE Study Group.

Collaborators: Epstein C, King J, Osorio I, Bakay R, Bergen D.

Author information:
(1)From Indiana University (V.S., T.W., R.W., N.M.B.), Indianapolis; University 
of Minnesota (T.R.H.), Minneapolis; Emory University (R.E.G.), Atlanta, GA; 
University of Kansas (J.M.N.), Kansas City; Weill Cornell (D.L.), New York, NY; 
Thomas Jefferson University (M.R.S., A.S.), Philadelphia, PA; Marshfield Clinic 
(E.S.), WI; Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System (A.H.); 
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA (J.M.S.), Los Angeles, CA; Barrow Neurological 
Institute (S.C., A.I.T.), Phoenix, AZ; Stanford University (J.M.H., R.F.), CA; 
NYU Comprehensive Epilepsy Center (J.F.), New York, NY; University of 
Pennsylvania (G.B., J.R.P.), PA; St. Luke's (W.E.R.), St. Louis, MO; University 
of California San Francisco (P.G.); University of Virginia School of Medicine 
(N.B.F., W.J.E.), Charlottesville; Mount Sinai (R.R.G.), New York, NY; and 
Medtronic, Inc. (C.P.I., K.L., N.G.), Minneapolis, MN. vsalanov@iupui.edu.
(2)From Indiana University (V.S., T.W., R.W., N.M.B.), Indianapolis; University 
of Minnesota (T.R.H.), Minneapolis; Emory University (R.E.G.), Atlanta, GA; 
University of Kansas (J.M.N.), Kansas City; Weill Cornell (D.L.), New York, NY; 
Thomas Jefferson University (M.R.S., A.S.), Philadelphia, PA; Marshfield Clinic 
(E.S.), WI; Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System (A.H.); 
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA (J.M.S.), Los Angeles, CA; Barrow Neurological 
Institute (S.C., A.I.T.), Phoenix, AZ; Stanford University (J.M.H., R.F.), CA; 
NYU Comprehensive Epilepsy Center (J.F.), New York, NY; University of 
Pennsylvania (G.B., J.R.P.), PA; St. Luke's (W.E.R.), St. Louis, MO; University 
of California San Francisco (P.G.); University of Virginia School of Medicine 
(N.B.F., W.J.E.), Charlottesville; Mount Sinai (R.R.G.), New York, NY; and 
Medtronic, Inc. (C.P.I., K.L., N.G.), Minneapolis, MN.

OBJECTIVE: To report long-term efficacy and safety results of the SANTE trial 
investigating deep brain stimulation of the anterior nucleus of the thalamus 
(ANT) for treatment of localization-related epilepsy.
METHODS: This long-term follow-up is a continuation of a previously reported 
trial of 5- vs 0-V ANT stimulation. Long-term follow-up began 13 months after 
device implantation with stimulation parameters adjusted at the investigators' 
discretion. Seizure frequency was determined using daily seizure diaries.
RESULTS: The median percent seizure reduction from baseline at 1 year was 41%, 
and 69% at 5 years. The responder rate (≥50% reduction in seizure frequency) at 
1 year was 43%, and 68% at 5 years. In the 5 years of follow-up, 16% of subjects 
were seizure-free for at least 6 months. There were no reported unanticipated 
adverse device effects or symptomatic intracranial hemorrhages. The Liverpool 
Seizure Severity Scale and 31-item Quality of Life in Epilepsy measure showed 
statistically significant improvement over baseline by 1 year and at 5 years (p 
< 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Long-term follow-up of ANT deep brain stimulation showed sustained 
efficacy and safety in a treatment-resistant population.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This long-term follow-up provides Class IV evidence 
that for patients with drug-resistant partial epilepsy, anterior thalamic 
stimulation is associated with a 69% reduction in seizure frequency and a 34% 
serious device-related adverse event rate at 5 years.

© 2015 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001334
PMCID: PMC4352097
PMID: 25663221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]