---
reference_id: "PMID:18481154"
title: Association of anti-ribosomal P protein antibodies with neuropsychiatric and other manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Abdel-Nasser AM
- Ghaleb RM
- Mahmoud JA
- Khairy W
- Mahmoud RM
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1007/s10067-008-0921-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Antinuclear"
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/blood, immunology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mood Disorders/immunology
- Ribosomal Proteins/immunology
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Severity of Illness Index
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of anti-ribosomal P protein antibodies with neuropsychiatric and other manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Abdel-Nasser AM, Ghaleb RM, Mahmoud JA, Khairy W, Mahmoud RM
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10067-008-0921-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-008-0921-1)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 2008 Nov;27(11):1377-85. doi: 10.1007/s10067-008-0921-1. Epub
2008 May 15.

Association of anti-ribosomal P protein antibodies with neuropsychiatric and
other manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus.

Abdel-Nasser AM(1), Ghaleb RM, Mahmoud JA, Khairy W, Mahmoud RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Rehabilitation, Minia University, Minia,
Egypt. ahmedabdelnasser@yahoo.com

The objective of our study was to determine the prevalence of neuropsychiatric
manifestations and anti-ribosomal P antibodies (aRP) in SLE and to examine the
diagnostic utility and associations of aRP with neuropsychiatric and other
disease manifestations. Thirty two consecutive SLE patients, diagnosed according
to the updated 1997 ACR criteria, were studied. A full medical history,
rheumatological, neurological, psychiatric examination, and psychometric
evaluation, including a battery of tests for cognitive dysfunction and the
Symptom Checklist-90-Revised depression and anxiety scales were administered to
all patients. Disease activity was scored using the SLEDAI. Neuropsychiatric
manifestations were diagnosed and categorized according to the 1999 ACR case
definitions for 19 NPSLE syndromes. Laboratory and serologic tests including
ANA, anti-ds DNA, anti-cardiolipin antibodies (aCL) and aRP (ELISA) were also
carried out. Twenty six (81.2%) patients had one or more NP manifestations.
Depression (59.4%), headache (46.9%) and cognitive dysfunction (37.5%) were the
commonest NPSLE syndromes. Other less commonly detected manifestations included
seizures, anxiety, acute confusional state, stroke, and psychosis. aRP was
positive in seven (21.9%) patients, all of whom had one or more NPSLE syndromes.
Patients with psychiatric manifestations in general and mood disorders in
particular had significantly higher mean titers of aRP than patients without
these disorders (p < 0.05). aRP were found to be significantly associated with a
younger age at the onset of SLE, with more severe articular manifestations and
with the presence but not the severity of depression. aRP were highly specific
for NPSLE and depression, and they were highly sensitive for psychosis.
Neuropsychiatric manifestations are found in 81.2% of unselected Egyptian SLE
patients. The presence of aRP antibodies positively predicts patients with
psychiatric manifestations in general and mood disorders in particular, for
which aRP is specific, but not sensitive. However, aRP is sensitive for
psychosis, so that its absence in patients with SLE may help exclude Lupus
psychosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-008-0921-1
PMID: 18481154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
