---
reference_id: "PMID:33252652"
title: "Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA): 2020 Guideline on Diagnosis and Management of Babesiosis."
authors:
- Krause PJ
- Auwaerter PG
- Bannuru RR
- Branda JA
- Falck-Ytter YT
- Lantos PM
- Lavergne V
- Meissner HC
- Osani MC
- Rips JG
- Sood SK
- Vannier E
- Vaysbrot EE
- Wormser GP
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa1216
keywords:
- Animals
- "Babesiosis/diagnosis, therapy"
- Communicable Diseases
- Humans
- Lyme Disease
- Societies
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA): 2020 Guideline on Diagnosis and Management of Babesiosis.
**Authors:** Krause PJ, Auwaerter PG, Bannuru RR, Branda JA, Falck-Ytter YT, Lantos PM, Lavergne V, Meissner HC, Osani MC, Rips JG, Sood SK, Vannier E, Vaysbrot EE, Wormser GP
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciaa1216](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa1216)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2021 Jan 27;72(2):e49-e64. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa1216.

Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America
(IDSA): 2020 Guideline on Diagnosis and Management of Babesiosis.

Krause PJ(1), Auwaerter PG(2), Bannuru RR(3), Branda JA(4), Falck-Ytter YT(5),
Lantos PM(6), Lavergne V(7), Meissner HC(8), Osani MC(3), Rips JG(9), Sood
SK(10), Vannier E(8), Vaysbrot EE(3), Wormser GP(11).

Author information:
(1)Yale School of Public Health and Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.
(2)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Center for Treatment Comparison and Integrative Analysis (CTCIA), Division of
Rheumatology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Case Western Reserve University and VA Northeast Ohio Healthcare System,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(6)Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(7)Research Center CIUSSS NIM, University of Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(8)Tufts Medical Center and Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(9)Healthcare Consumer Representative.
(10)Zucker School of Medicine and Cohen Children's Medical Center, Northwell
Health, New York, USA.
(11)New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA.

Erratum in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2021 Jul 1;73(1):172-173. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciab275.

The purpose of this guideline is to provide evidence-based guidance for the most
effective strategies for the diagnosis and management of babesiosis. The
diagnosis and treatment of co-infection with babesiosis and Lyme disease will be
addressed in a separate Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA), American
Academy of Neurology (AAN), and American College of Rheumatology (ACR) guideline
[1]. Recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of human granulocytic
anaplasmosis can be found in the recent rickettsial disease guideline developed
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [2]. The target audience for
the babesiosis guideline includes primary care physicians and specialists caring
for this condition, such as infectious diseases specialists, emergency
physicians, intensivists, internists, pediatricians, hematologists, and
transfusion medicine specialists.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciaa1216
PMID: 33252652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
