---
reference_id: "PMID:39117827"
title: Kawasaki Disease-Associated Cytokine Storm Syndrome.
authors:
- Tsoukas P
- Yeung RSM
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-59815-9_25
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki Disease-Associated Cytokine Storm Syndrome.
**Authors:** Tsoukas P, Yeung RSM
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-031-59815-9_25](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59815-9_25)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2024;1448:365-383. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-59815-9_25.

Kawasaki Disease-Associated Cytokine Storm Syndrome.

Tsoukas P(1)(2), Yeung RSM(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Institute of Medical Science, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada. rae.yeung@sickkids.ca.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, Institute of Medical Science, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. rae.yeung@sickkids.ca.
(5)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
rae.yeung@sickkids.ca.

Kawasaki disease (KD) is a hyperinflammatory syndrome manifesting as an acute 
systemic vasculitis characterized by fever, nonsuppurative conjunctival 
injection, rash, oral mucositis, extremity changes, and cervical 
lymphadenopathy. KD predominantly affects young children and shares clinical 
features and immunobiology with other hyperinflammation syndromes including 
systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA) and multisystem inflammatory 
syndrome in children (MIS-C). Cytokine storm syndrome (CSS) is an acute 
complication in ~2% of KD patients; however, the incidence is likely 
underestimated as many clinical and laboratory features of both diseases 
overlap. CSS should be entertained when a child with KD is unresponsive to IVIG 
therapy with recalcitrant fever. Early recognition and prompt institution of 
immunomodulatory treatment can substantially reduce the mortality and morbidity 
of CSS in KD. Given the known pathogenetic role of IL-1β in both syndromes, the 
early use of IL-1 blockers in refractory KD with CSS deserves consideration.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-59815-9_25
PMID: 39117827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]