---
reference_id: "PMID:32995707"
title: "Usher syndrome: clinical features, molecular genetics and advancing therapeutics."
authors:
- Toms M
- Pagarkar W
- Moosajee M
journal: Ther Adv Ophthalmol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1177/2515841420952194
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Usher syndrome: clinical features, molecular genetics and advancing therapeutics.
**Authors:** Toms M, Pagarkar W, Moosajee M
**Journal:** Ther Adv Ophthalmol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1177/2515841420952194](https://doi.org/10.1177/2515841420952194)

## Content

1. Ther Adv Ophthalmol. 2020 Sep 17;12:2515841420952194. doi: 
10.1177/2515841420952194. eCollection 2020 Jan-Dec.

Usher syndrome: clinical features, molecular genetics and advancing 
therapeutics.

Toms M(1), Pagarkar W(2), Moosajee M(3).

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK; The Francis Crick Institute, 
London, UK.
(2)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; 
University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Development, Ageing and Disease, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, 11-43 Bath 
Street, London EC1V 9EL, UK.

Usher syndrome has three subtypes, each being clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous characterised by sensorineural hearing loss and retinitis 
pigmentosa (RP), with or without vestibular dysfunction. It is the most common 
cause of deaf-blindness worldwide with a prevalence of between 4 and 17 in 
100 000. To date, 10 causative genes have been identified for Usher syndrome, 
with MYO7A accounting for >50% of type 1 and USH2A contributing to approximately 
80% of type 2 Usher syndrome. Variants in these genes can also cause 
non-syndromic RP and deafness. Genotype-phenotype correlations have been 
described for several of the Usher genes. Hearing loss is managed with hearing 
aids and cochlear implants, which has made a significant improvement in quality 
of life for patients. While there is currently no available approved treatment 
for the RP, various therapeutic strategies are in development or in clinical 
trials for Usher syndrome, including gene replacement, gene editing, antisense 
oligonucleotides and small molecule drugs.

© The Author(s), 2020.

DOI: 10.1177/2515841420952194
PMCID: PMC7502997
PMID: 32995707

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.