---
reference_id: "PMID:38981480"
title: "Intestinal Blastocystis is linked to healthier diets and more favorable cardiometabolic outcomes in 56,989 individuals from 32 countries."
authors:
- Piperni E
- Nguyen LH
- Manghi P
- Kim H
- Pasolli E
- Andreu-Sánchez S
- Arrè A
- Bermingham KM
- Blanco-Míguez A
- Manara S
- Valles-Colomer M
- Bakker E
- Busonero F
- Davies R
- Fiorillo E
- Giordano F
- Hadjigeorgiou G
- Leeming ER
- Lobina M
- Masala M
- Maschio A
- McIver LJ
- Pala M
- Pitzalis M
- Wolf J
- Fu J
- Zhernakova A
- Cacciò SM
- Cucca F
- Berry SE
- Ercolini D
- Chan AT
- Huttenhower C
- Spector TD
- Segata N
- Asnicar F
journal: Cell
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.06.018
keywords:
- Humans
- Blastocystis/metabolism
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Diet
- Male
- Obesity
- Female
- Blastocystis Infections
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- "Intestines/parasitology, microbiology"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/prevention & control"
- Metagenome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intestinal Blastocystis is linked to healthier diets and more favorable cardiometabolic outcomes in 56,989 individuals from 32 countries.
**Authors:** Piperni E, Nguyen LH, Manghi P, Kim H, Pasolli E, Andreu-Sánchez S, Arrè A, Bermingham KM, Blanco-Míguez A, Manara S, Valles-Colomer M, Bakker E, Busonero F, Davies R, Fiorillo E, Giordano F, Hadjigeorgiou G, Leeming ER, Lobina M, Masala M, Maschio A, McIver LJ, Pala M, Pitzalis M, Wolf J, Fu J, Zhernakova A, Cacciò SM, Cucca F, Berry SE, Ercolini D, Chan AT, Huttenhower C, Spector TD, Segata N, Asnicar F
**Journal:** Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2024.06.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.06.018)

## Content

1. Cell. 2024 Aug 22;187(17):4554-4570.e18. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.06.018. Epub
 2024 Jul 8.

Intestinal Blastocystis is linked to healthier diets and more favorable 
cardiometabolic outcomes in 56,989 individuals from 32 countries.

Piperni E(1), Nguyen LH(2), Manghi P(3), Kim H(4), Pasolli E(5), Andreu-Sánchez 
S(6), Arrè A(7), Bermingham KM(8), Blanco-Míguez A(3), Manara S(3), 
Valles-Colomer M(3), Bakker E(9), Busonero F(10), Davies R(9), Fiorillo E(10), 
Giordano F(9), Hadjigeorgiou G(9), Leeming ER(11), Lobina M(10), Masala M(10), 
Maschio A(10), McIver LJ(12), Pala M(10), Pitzalis M(10), Wolf J(9), Fu J(6), 
Zhernakova A(13), Cacciò SM(14), Cucca F(15), Berry SE(16), Ercolini D(5), Chan 
AT(2), Huttenhower C(17), Spector TD(11), Segata N(18), Asnicar F(19).

Author information:
(1)Department CIBIO, University of Trento, Trento, Italy; IEO, Istituto Europeo 
di Oncologia IRCSS, Milan, Italy.
(2)Clinical and Translational Epidemiology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA; Harvard Chan Microbiome in Public Health Center, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(3)Department CIBIO, University of Trento, Trento, Italy.
(4)Clinical and Translational Epidemiology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Agricultural Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, 
Portici, Italy.
(6)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(7)Department CIBIO, University of Trento, Trento, Italy; Zoe Ltd, London, UK.
(8)Zoe Ltd, London, UK; Department of Nutritional Sciences, King's College 
London, London, UK.
(9)Zoe Ltd, London, UK.
(10)Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche 
(CNR), Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy.
(11)Department of Twins Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King's College 
London, London, UK.
(12)Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(13)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(14)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore Di Sanità, Rome, 
Italy.
(15)Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche 
(CNR), Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy; Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, 
Università degli Studi di Sassari, Sassari, Italy.
(16)Department of Nutritional Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.
(17)Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA; The Broad 
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(18)Department CIBIO, University of Trento, Trento, Italy; IEO, Istituto Europeo 
di Oncologia IRCSS, Milan, Italy; Department of Twins Research and Genetic 
Epidemiology, King's College London, London, UK. Electronic address: 
nicola.segata@unitn.it.
(19)Department CIBIO, University of Trento, Trento, Italy. Electronic address: 
f.asnicar@unitn.it.

Diet impacts human health, influencing body adiposity and the risk of developing 
cardiometabolic diseases. The gut microbiome is a key player in the diet-health 
axis, but while its bacterial fraction is widely studied, the role of 
micro-eukaryotes, including Blastocystis, is underexplored. We performed a 
global-scale analysis on 56,989 metagenomes and showed that human Blastocystis 
exhibits distinct prevalence patterns linked to geography, lifestyle, and 
dietary habits. Blastocystis presence defined a specific bacterial signature and 
was positively associated with more favorable cardiometabolic profiles and 
negatively with obesity (p < 1e-16) and disorders linked to altered gut ecology 
(p < 1e-8). In a diet intervention study involving 1,124 individuals, 
improvements in dietary quality were linked to weight loss and increases in 
Blastocystis prevalence (p = 0.003) and abundance (p < 1e-7). Our findings 
suggest a potentially beneficial role for Blastocystis, which may help explain 
personalized host responses to diet and downstream disease etiopathogenesis.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.06.018
PMID: 38981480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests G.H., J.W., and T.D.S. 
are co-founders of ZOE Ltd. G.H., J.W., R.D., F.G., K.M.B., A.A., and E.R.L. are 
or have been employees of Zoe Ltd. N.S., F.A., S.E.B., and T.D.S. are 
consultants to ZOE Ltd. T.D.S., R.D., J.W., G.H., N.S., and S.E.B. receive 
options with ZOE Ltd. All other authors declare no competing interests. Zoe Ltd. 
holds the following patent applications on Blastocystis: US patent pending 
application 17/203,678; Europe patent pending application 21713392.5 and 
24386003.8; and PCT (World) patent pending application PCT/EP2022/076241.