---
reference_id: "PMID:35019224"
title: The recurrent homozygous translation start site variant in CCDC134 in an individual with severe osteogenesis imperfecta of non-Morrocan ancestry.
authors:
- Ali TM
- Linnenkamp BDW
- Yamamoto GL
- Honjo RS
- Cabral de Menezes Filho H
- Kim CA
- Bertola DR
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62651
keywords:
- Bone and Bones
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- "Fractures, Bone/complications"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The recurrent homozygous translation start site variant in CCDC134 in an individual with severe osteogenesis imperfecta of non-Morrocan ancestry.
**Authors:** Ali TM, Linnenkamp BDW, Yamamoto GL, Honjo RS, Cabral de Menezes Filho H, Kim CA, Bertola DR
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62651](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62651)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2022 May;188(5):1545-1549. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62651. Epub 
2022 Jan 12.

The recurrent homozygous translation start site variant in CCDC134 in an 
individual with severe osteogenesis imperfecta of non-Morrocan ancestry.

Ali TM(1), Linnenkamp BDW(2), Yamamoto GL(1)(2)(3), Honjo RS(2), Cabral de 
Menezes Filho H(4), Kim CA(2), Bertola DR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Unidade de Genética, Instituto da Criança do Hospital das Clinicas da 
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Diagnóstico das Américas SA, DASA, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Unidade de Endocrinologia Pediátrica, Instituto da Criança do Hospital das 
Clinicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, 
Brazil.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare low-bone mass skeletal Mendelian disorder 
characterized by bone fragility leading to bone fractures, with deformities and 
stunted growth in the more severe phenotypes. Other common, nonskeletal findings 
include blue sclerae and dentinogenesis imperfecta. It is caused mainly by 
quantitative or structural defects in type I collagen, although dysregulation of 
different signaling pathways that play a role in bone morphogenesis has been 
described to be associated with a small fraction of individuals with OI. 
Recently, a homozygous variant in the translation start site of CCDC134, showing 
increased activation of the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway, has been reported in 
three families of Moroccan origin with a severe, deforming form of OI. We report 
on a 9-year-old Brazilian boy, harboring the same homozygous variant in CCDC134, 
also presenting severe bone involvement. This report contributes to the 
phenotypic delineation of this novel autosomal recessive form of OI, which 
presents with high prevalence of nonunion fractures considered rare events in OI 
in general. In addition, it expands the phenotype to include base skull 
anomalies, potentially leading to serious complications, as seen in severe forms 
of OI. A poor response to bisphosphonate therapy was observed in these 
individuals. As the variant in CCDC134 leads to dysregulation of the RAS/MAPK 
signaling pathway, drugs targeted to this pathway could be an alternative to 
achieve a better management of these individuals.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62651
PMID: 35019224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]