---
reference_id: "PMID:21870048"
title: "Bird fancier's lung: a state-of-the-art review."
authors:
- Chan AL
- Juarez MM
- Leslie KO
- Ismail HA
- Albertson TE
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-011-8282-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bird fancier's lung: a state-of-the-art review.
**Authors:** Chan AL, Juarez MM, Leslie KO, Ismail HA, Albertson TE
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-011-8282-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-011-8282-y)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2012 Aug;43(1-2):69-83. doi: 
10.1007/s12016-011-8282-y.

Bird fancier's lung: a state-of-the-art review.

Chan AL(1), Juarez MM, Leslie KO, Ismail HA, Albertson TE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of 
California at Davis, School of Medicine and VA Northern California Health Care 
System, 4150 V Street, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. andrew.chan@ucdmc.ucdavis.edu

Bird fancier's lung (BFL) resulting from avian antigen exposure is a very common 
form of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Its pathogenesis is modified by genetic 
polymorphisms located within the major histocompatibility complex, and also by 
smoking, which may decrease serum antibody response to inhaled antigen. Acute, 
subacute, and chronic presentations of BFL are recognized, but often overlap 
clinically. Continued antigen exposure in the chronic phase portends a worse 
prognosis. Chronic bronchitis symptoms may be part of the BFL clinical spectrum, 
and rhinitis may suggest an allergic component. The diagnosis of BFL is enhanced 
by a high index of suspicion of exposure to avian antigen, recurrent symptomatic 
episodes occurring 4-8 h after exposure, inspiratory "velcro" crackles on 
auscultation, weight loss, and positive IgG precipitins to the antigen. 
Characteristic findings on high-resolution computed tomography of the chest 
include centrilobular nodules, ground-glass opacification, and mosaicism due to 
air trapping. Bronchoalveolar lavage will classically show >25% lymphocytosis, a 
CD4/CD8 ratio of <1.0 and >1% mast cells in the acute phase. Lung biopsies, if 
obtained in the subacute phase of the disease, typically show loosely formed 
granulomas, giant cells, a lymphoplasmacytic interstitial infiltrate, and 
possibly some degree of fibrosis. In some patients, usual interstitial pneumonia 
or fibrotic non-specific interstitial pneumonia patterns may be seen on surgical 
biopsy. Skin testing, serological testing, and bronchial provocation tests for 
BFL frequently suffer from a lack of standardization. Effective treatment for 
BFL consists mainly of antigen avoidance, as corticosteroids likely do not alter 
long-term prognosis. Lung transplantation can be considered for progressive 
chronic disease refractory to medical measures.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-011-8282-y
PMID: 21870048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]