---
reference_id: "PMID:18267077"
title: Neuroepithelial stem cell proliferation requires LIS1 for precise spindle orientation and symmetric division.
authors:
- Yingling J
- Youn YH
- Darling D
- Toyo-Oka K
- Pramparo T
- Hirotsune S
- Wynshaw-Boris A
journal: Cell
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.026
keywords:
- "1-Alkyl-2-acetylglycerophosphocholine Esterase/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Brain/cytology, embryology"
- Cell Cycle
- Cell Movement
- Cell Proliferation
- Dyneins/metabolism
- "Embryo, Mammalian/cytology, metabolism"
- Fibroblasts/cytology
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Microtubules/metabolism
- "Models, Biological"
- Neuroepithelial Cells/cytology
- Neurons/cytology
- Spindle Apparatus/metabolism
- Stem Cells/cytology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroepithelial stem cell proliferation requires LIS1 for precise spindle orientation and symmetric division.
**Authors:** Yingling J, Youn YH, Darling D, Toyo-Oka K, Pramparo T, Hirotsune S, Wynshaw-Boris A
**Journal:** Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.026)

## Content

1. Cell. 2008 Feb 8;132(3):474-86. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.026.

Neuroepithelial stem cell proliferation requires LIS1 for precise spindle
orientation and symmetric division.

Yingling J(1), Youn YH, Darling D, Toyo-Oka K, Pramparo T, Hirotsune S,
Wynshaw-Boris A.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Center for Human Genetics and
Genomics, UCSD School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92098-0627,
USA.

Mitotic spindle orientation and plane of cleavage in mammals is a determinant of
whether division yields progenitor expansion and/or birth of new neurons during
radial glial progenitor cell (RGPC) neurogenesis, but its role earlier in
neuroepithelial stem cells is poorly understood. Here we report that Lis1 is
essential for precise control of mitotic spindle orientation in both
neuroepithelial stem cells and radial glial progenitor cells. Controlled gene
deletion of Lis1 in vivo in neuroepithelial stem cells, where cleavage is
uniformly vertical and symmetrical, provokes rapid apoptosis of those cells,
while radial glial progenitors are less affected. Impaired cortical microtubule
capture via loss of cortical dynein causes astral and cortical microtubules to
be greatly reduced in Lis1-deficient cells. Increased expression of the
LIS/dynein binding partner NDEL1 restores cortical microtubule and dynein
localization in Lis1-deficient cells. Thus, control of symmetric division,
essential for neuroepithelial stem cell proliferation, is mediated through
spindle orientation determined via LIS1/NDEL1/dynein-mediated cortical
microtubule capture.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.026
PMCID: PMC2265303
PMID: 18267077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
