---
reference_id: "PMID:40065852"
title: "Acute Ethanol-Disulfiram Reaction Presenting With Hemodynamic Instability: A Case Report."
authors:
- Estrela Santos M
- Carmo F
- Miranda J
- Moura R
- Resende J
journal: Cureus
year: '2025'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.78735
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Ethanol-Disulfiram Reaction Presenting With Hemodynamic Instability: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Estrela Santos M, Carmo F, Miranda J, Moura R, Resende J
**Journal:** Cureus (2025)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.78735](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.78735)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2025 Feb 8;17(2):e78735. doi: 10.7759/cureus.78735. eCollection 2025
Feb.

Acute Ethanol-Disulfiram Reaction Presenting With Hemodynamic Instability: A
Case Report.

Estrela Santos M(1), Carmo F(1), Miranda J(1), Moura R(1), Resende J(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Unidade Local de Saúde Gaia Espinho, Vila Nova de Gaia,
PRT.

Ethanol-disulfiram reaction (EDR) is a rare but potentially life-threatening
condition characterized by a constellation of symptoms, including flushing,
hypotension, tachycardia, nausea, and vomiting. We report the case of a
52-year-old male patient who presented with acute hemodynamic instability after
inadvertent alcohol consumption while on disulfiram therapy for alcohol
dependence. The patient exhibited signs of shock, including hypotension and
hyperlactatemia, but responded promptly to fluid resuscitation and transient
vasopressor support. A detailed history confirmed the diagnosis of EDR. This
case highlights the importance of recognizing EDR as a differential diagnosis in
patients with acute hemodynamic instability and a relevant clinical history.
Early identification and supportive management are crucial for favorable
outcomes.

Copyright © 2025, Estrela Santos et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.78735
PMCID: PMC11892704
PMID: 40065852

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study.
Unidade Local de Saúde Gaia Espinho issued approval 111. Conflicts of interest:
In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the
following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial
support was received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial
relationships: All authors have declared that they have no financial
relationships at present or within the previous three years with any
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.
