---
reference_id: "PMID:36972944"
title: "[Genetic analysis of a child patient with rare fibrochondrogenesis due to COL11A1 gene variant]."
authors:
- Li D
- Zhang C
- Zhou B
- Chen X
- Wang Y
- Hui L
journal: Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20221010-00676
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Infant
- Genetic Counseling
- Collagen Type XI/genetics
- Female
- Mutation
- Dwarfism
- Facies
- Humans
- Genomics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Genetic analysis of a child patient with rare fibrochondrogenesis due to COL11A1 gene variant].
**Authors:** Li D, Zhang C, Zhou B, Chen X, Wang Y, Hui L
**Journal:** Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20221010-00676](https://doi.org/10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20221010-00676)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2023 Apr 10;40(4):468-472. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20221010-00676.

[Genetic analysis of a child patient with rare fibrochondrogenesis due to 
COL11A1 gene variant].

[Article in Chinese]

Li D(1), Zhang C, Zhou B, Chen X, Wang Y, Hui L.

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Gansu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Lanzhou, Gansu 730050, China. 1065753301@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the clinical data and genetic characteristics of a child 
with fibrocartilage hyperplasia type 1 (FBCG1).
METHODS: A child who was admitted to Gansu Provincial Maternity and Child Health 
Care Hospital on January 21, 2021 due to severe pneumonia and suspected 
congenital genetic metabolic disorder was selected as the study subject. 
Clinical data of the child was collected, and genomic DNA was extracted from 
peripheral blood samples from the child and her parents. Whole exome sequencing 
(WES) was carried out, and candidate variants were verified by Sanger 
sequencing.
RESULTS: The patient, a 1-month-old girl, had presented with facial dysmorphism, 
abnormal skeletal development, and clubbing of upper and lower limbs. WES 
revealed that she has harbored compound heterozygous variants 
c.3358G>A/c.2295+1G>A of the COL11A1 gene, which has been associated with 
fibrochondrogenesis. Sanger sequencing has verified that the variants have been 
respectively inherited from her father and mother, both of whom were 
phenotypically normal. Based on the guidelines from the American College of 
Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), the c.3358G>A variant was graded as likely 
pathogenic (PM1+PM2_Supporting+PM3+PP3), and so was the c.2295+1G>A variant 
(PVS1＋PM2_Supporting).
CONCLUSION: The compound heterozygous variants c.3358G>A/c.2295+1G>A probably 
underlay the disease in this child. Above finding has facilitated definite 
diagnosis, genetic counseling for her family.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20221010-00676
PMID: 36972944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]