---
reference_id: "PMID:37953517"
title: "Pharmacological Treatment of Acute Unilateral Vestibulopathy: A Review."
authors:
- Sousa FA
- Alves CS
- Pinto AN
- Meireles L
- Rego ÂR
journal: J Audiol Otol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7874/jao.2023.00066
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacological Treatment of Acute Unilateral Vestibulopathy: A Review.
**Authors:** Sousa FA, Alves CS, Pinto AN, Meireles L, Rego ÂR
**Journal:** J Audiol Otol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7874/jao.2023.00066](https://doi.org/10.7874/jao.2023.00066)

## Content

1. J Audiol Otol. 2024 Jan;28(1):18-28. doi: 10.7874/jao.2023.00066. Epub 2023
Nov  13.

Pharmacological Treatment of Acute Unilateral Vestibulopathy: A Review.

Sousa FA(1), Alves CS(1), Pinto AN(1), Meireles L(1), Rego ÂR(1).

Author information:
(1)Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery Department, Centro Hospitalar 
Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal.

There have been few investigations on the epidemiology, etiology, and medical 
management of acute unilateral vestibulopathy (AUV). Short-term pharmaceutical 
resolutions include vestibular symptomatic suppressants, anti-emetics, and some 
cause-based therapies. Anticholinergics, phenothiazines, antihistamines, 
antidopaminergics, benzodiazepines, and calcium channel antagonists are examples 
of vestibular suppressants. Some of these medications may show their effects 
through multiple mechanisms. In contrast, N-acetyl-L-leucine, Ginkgo biloba, and 
betahistine improve central vestibular compensation. Currently, AUV 
pathophysiology is poorly understood. Diverse hypotheses have previously been 
identified which have brought about some causal treatments presently used. 
According to some publications, acute administration of anti-inflammatory 
medications may have a deleterious impact on both post-lesional functional 
recovery and endogenous adaptive plasticity processes. Thus, some authors do not 
recommend the use of corticosteroids in AUV. Antivirals are even more 
contentious in the context of AUV treatment. Although vascular theories have 
been presented, no verified investigations employing anti-clotting or 
vasodilator medications have been conducted. There are no standardized treatment 
protocols for AUV to date, and the pharmacological treatment of AUV is still 
questionable. This review addresses the most current developments and 
controversies in AUV medical treatment.

DOI: 10.7874/jao.2023.00066
PMCID: PMC10808386
PMID: 37953517

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors have no 
financial conflicts of interest.