---
reference_id: "PMID:39499628"
title: "Infantile Krabbe disease (0-12 months), progression, and recommended endpoints for clinical trials."
authors:
- Greco MR
- Lopez MA
- Beltran-Quintero ML
- Tuc Bengur E
- Poe MD
- Escolar ML
journal: Ann Clin Transl Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/acn3.52114
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/therapy, diagnosis, physiopathology, pathology"
- Female
- Male
- Disease Progression
- Infant
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Clinical Trials as Topic/standards
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infantile Krabbe disease (0-12 months), progression, and recommended endpoints for clinical trials.
**Authors:** Greco MR, Lopez MA, Beltran-Quintero ML, Tuc Bengur E, Poe MD, Escolar ML
**Journal:** Ann Clin Transl Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acn3.52114](https://doi.org/10.1002/acn3.52114)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2024 Dec;11(12):3064-3080. doi: 10.1002/acn3.52114.
Epub  2024 Nov 5.

Infantile Krabbe disease (0-12 months), progression, and recommended endpoints 
for clinical trials.

Greco MR(1), Lopez MA(2), Beltran-Quintero ML(2), Tuc Bengur E(2), Poe MD(2)(3), 
Escolar ML(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.
(3)Forge Biologics, Grove City, Ohio, USA.

Erratum in
    Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2025 Feb;12(2):455. doi: 10.1002/acn3.52275.

OBJECTIVE: Krabbe disease is due to deficiency of galactocerebrosidase, 
resulting in progressive neurodegeneration due to demyelination. The purpose of 
this study is to document disease progression in the newly classified 
infantile-onset (0-12 months). We evaluated the outcomes of hematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation (HSCT) and described meaningful clinical endpoints.
METHODS: Patients with infantile Krabbe disease were prospectively evaluated 
between 2000 and 2022. All patients underwent comprehensive and standardized 
protocols. Descriptive statistics and Kaplan-Meier survival curves were used for 
analysis.
RESULTS: One hundred and thirty-seven children with infantile Krabbe disease 
were included (68 males and 69 females). Of the 137, 96 were not treated and 41 
underwent hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Twenty-three were 
asymptomatic and 18 symptomatic. Initial symptoms included irritability, 
developmental delay or loss of milestones, feeding difficulties, spasticity, and 
reflux with an average survival of 2.2. Abnormalities in nerve conduction 
studies, auditory brainstem responses, and brain MRIs were evident in both 
groups of patients. Age at transplantation and signs and symptoms determined 
functional outcomes. Symptomatic and asymptomatic transplanted patients showed 
an increase in galactocerebrosidase and a decrease in psychosine, but did not 
reach the normal range. The median survival for transplanted symptomatic 
patients was 5 years while asymptomatic was extended to 15.5 years.
INTERPRETATION: Infantile Krabbe disease with onset before 12 months is rapidly 
progressive. Irreversible brain damage occurs unless timely HSCT is performed. 
HSCT does not prevent the progression of peripheral nerve disease. This study 
can be used to monitor patients and evaluate the effects of future therapies.

© 2024 The Authors. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.52114
PMCID: PMC11651195
PMID: 39499628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MLE is the Chief Medical Officer at Forge 
Biologics with an ownership interest greater than 5% and maintains full time 
employment since February of 2022. MDP maintains full time employment with Forge 
Biologics since October of 2022. The other authors have no conflicts to 
disclose.