---
reference_id: PMID:26902011
title: "Anti-TNF-A Therapy about Infliximab and Adalimamab for the Effectiveness in Ulcerative Colitis Compared with Conventional Therapy: A Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Zhou Z
- Dai C
- Liu WX
journal: Hepatogastroenterology
year: '2015'
keywords:
- Adalimumab/therapeutic use
- Aminosalicylic Acids/therapeutic use
- Azathioprine/therapeutic use
- "Colectomy/statistics & numerical data"
- "Colitis, Ulcerative/drug therapy, surgery"
- Gastrointestinal Agents/therapeutic use
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Infliximab/therapeutic use
- Mercaptopurine/therapeutic use
- Remission Induction
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/antagonists & inhibitors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-TNF-A Therapy about Infliximab and Adalimamab for the Effectiveness in Ulcerative Colitis Compared with Conventional Therapy: A Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Zhou Z, Dai C, Liu WX
**Journal:** Hepatogastroenterology (2015)

## Content

1. Hepatogastroenterology. 2015 Jun;62(140):829-37.

Anti-TNF-A Therapy about Infliximab and Adalimamab for the Effectiveness in
Ulcerative Colitis Compared with Conventional Therapy: A Meta-Analysis.

Zhou Z, Dai C, Liu WX.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: TNF-α has an important role in the pathogenesis of ulcerative
colitis (UC). It seems that anti-TNF-α therapy is beneficial in the treatment of
UC. The aim was to assess the effectiveness of Infliximab and Adalimamab with UC
compared with con- ventional therapy.
METHODOLOGY: The Pubmed and Embase databases were searched for studies
investigating the efficacy of infliximab and adalimumab on UC.
RESULTS: Infliximab had a statistically significant effects in induction of
clinical response (RR = 1.67; 95% CI 1.12 to 2.50) of UC compared with
conventional therapy, but those had not a statistically significant effects in
clinical remission (RR = 1.63; 95% CI 0.84 to 3.18) and reduction of colectomy
rate (RR = 0.54; 95% CI 0.26 to 1.12) of UC. And adalimumab had a statistically
significant effects in induction of clinical remission (RR =1.82; 95% CI 1.24 to
2.67) and clinical response (RR =1.36; 95% CI 1.13 to 1.64) of UC compared with
conventional therapy.
CONCLUSION: Our meta-analyses suggested that Infliximab had a statistically
significant effects in induction of clinical response of UC compared with
conventional therapy and adalimumab had a statistically significant effects in
induction of clinical remission and clinical response of UC compared with
conventional therapy.

PMID: 26902011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
