---
reference_id: "PMID:25542771"
title: Case of mild Schmid-type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia with novel sequence variation involving an unusual mutational site of the COL10A1 gene.
authors:
- Park H
- Hong S
- Cho SI
- Cho TJ
- Choi IH
- Jin DK
- Sohn YB
- Park SW
- Cho HH
- Cheon JE
- Kim SY
- Kim JY
- Park SS
- Seong MW
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.12.011
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Asian People/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen Type XI/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Genetic Variation
- Growth Disorders/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case of mild Schmid-type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia with novel sequence variation involving an unusual mutational site of the COL10A1 gene.
**Authors:** Park H, Hong S, Cho SI, Cho TJ, Choi IH, Jin DK, Sohn YB, Park SW, Cho HH, Cheon JE, Kim SY, Kim JY, Park SS, Seong MW
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.12.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.12.011)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 Mar;58(3):175-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.12.011. Epub
2014 Dec 24.

Case of mild Schmid-type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia with novel sequence
variation involving an unusual mutational site of the COL10A1 gene.

Park H(1), Hong S(1), Cho SI(1), Cho TJ(2), Choi IH(2), Jin DK(3), Sohn YB(4),
Park SW(3), Cho HH(5), Cheon JE(5), Kim SY(6), Kim JY(7), Park SS(8), Seong
MW(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon,
South Korea.
(5)Department of Radiology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South
Korea.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Medical Center, Seoul, South
Korea.
(7)Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea; Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital,
Seoul, South Korea.
(9)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea. Electronic address: mwseong@snu.ac.kr.

Schmid-type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (MCDS) is characterized by short
stature with short legs, bowing of the long bones, coxa vara, and waddling gait.
MCDS is a relatively common form of MCD. Most mutations that cause MCDS occur
within the carboxyl-terminal non-collagenous domain (NC1) of the COL10A1 gene.
We performed mutational analysis of the COL10A1 genes in 4 unrelated Korean
patients with diagnosed MCDS. Mutational analysis of COL10A1 identified
c.1904_1915delinsT (p.Gln635LeufsX10) and c.1969dupG (p.Ala657GlyfsX10), 2 novel
frameshift mutations, and c.2030T>A (p.Val677Glu) and c.862G>C (p.Gly288Arg) at
unusual mutational sites, which could be pathogenic. We present the first report
of the molecular characteristics of MCDS in 4 Korean patients. Our findings
suggest that a novel sequence variation involving an unusual mutational site of
the COL10A1 gene can cause mild MCDS.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.12.011
PMID: 25542771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
