---
reference_id: "PMID:39247715"
title: "Behaviours and psychological symptoms of childhood dementia: two cases of psychosocial interventions."
authors:
- Atee M
- Whiteman I
- Lloyd R
- Morris T
journal: Palliat Care Soc Pract
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/26323524241273492
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Behaviours and psychological symptoms of childhood dementia: two cases of psychosocial interventions.
**Authors:** Atee M, Whiteman I, Lloyd R, Morris T
**Journal:** Palliat Care Soc Pract (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/26323524241273492](https://doi.org/10.1177/26323524241273492)

## Content

1. Palliat Care Soc Pract. 2024 Sep 6;18:26323524241273492. doi: 
10.1177/26323524241273492. eCollection 2024.

Behaviours and psychological symptoms of childhood dementia: two cases of 
psychosocial interventions.

Atee M(1)(2)(3)(4), Whiteman I(5)(6)(7), Lloyd R(8), Morris T(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)The Dementia Centre, HammondCare, Level 2, 302 Selby Street Nth, Osborne 
Park, WA 6017, Australia.
(2)Sydney Pharmacy School, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of 
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Curtin Medical School, Faculty of Health Sciences, Curtin University, 
Bentley, WA, Australia.
(4)Centre for Research in Aged Care, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Edith 
Cowan University, Joondalup, WA, Australia.
(5)Batten Disease Support & Research Association (BDSRA) Australia, Brisbane, 
QLD, Australia.
(6)BDSRA Foundation, Columbus, OH, USA.
(7)Beyond Batten Disease Foundation, Austin, TX, USA.
(8)The Dementia Centre, HammondCare, Osborne Park, WA, Australia.
(9)The Dementia Centre, HammondCare, St Leonards, NSW, Australia.
(10)Sydney School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The 
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(11)Thomas Morris is also affiliated with Faculty of Health, University of 
Canberra, Bruce, ACT, Australia.

Erratum in
    Palliat Care Soc Pract. 2025 Jul 22;19:26323524251361081. doi: 
10.1177/26323524251361081.

Childhood dementias are a group of rare, fatal neurodegenerative disorders, 
characterised by global cognitive decline, loss of previously acquired 
developmental skills and behaviours and psychological symptoms of dementia 
(BPSD). Batten disease, or neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, and Sanfilippo 
syndrome, or mucopolysaccharidosis type III, are two of the more common forms of 
childhood dementia disorders worldwide. While psychosocial interventions are the 
best available therapeutic approach for BPSD management in adult-onset dementia, 
there is very limited literature or clinical experience in the context of 
childhood dementia. To address this gap, we conducted a descriptive case 
analysis of BPSD profiles, associated contributing factors and targeted 
psychosocial interventions in two cases with childhood dementia disorders 
(Sanfilippo syndrome and CLN3 (juvenile onset) Batten disease) who were referred 
to Dementia Support Australia, a national dementia behaviour support service in 
Australia. Primary BPSD identified in these disorders included physical and 
verbal aggression and irritability/lability. In these cases, contributing 
factors to the development of BPSD were not monolithic, encompassing pain, 
caregiver's approach and over or under-stimulation. Improvement in BPSD were 
observed using the Neuropsychiatric Inventory-Quesionnaire and globally noted as 
per the qualitative feedback reported by family and caregivers. Person-centred, 
multimodal psychosocial interventions were recognised as effective therapies in 
resolving BPSD in these cases. In conclusion, the case studies described the 
nature and presentation of BPSD in two common forms of childhood dementia and 
demonstrated the potential benefits of person-centred psychosocial interventions 
(delivered through national dementia-specific support programs) in alleviating 
BPSD such as irritability and aggression in these disorders.

© The Author(s), 2024.

DOI: 10.1177/26323524241273492
PMCID: PMC11378187
PMID: 39247715