---
reference_id: "PMID:19210912"
title: "Stiff person syndrome: advances in pathogenesis and therapeutic interventions."
authors:
- Dalakas MC
journal: Curr Treat Options Neurol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s11940-009-0013-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stiff person syndrome: advances in pathogenesis and therapeutic interventions.
**Authors:** Dalakas MC
**Journal:** Curr Treat Options Neurol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11940-009-0013-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11940-009-0013-9)

## Content

1. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2009 Mar;11(2):102-10. doi: 
10.1007/s11940-009-0013-9.

Stiff person syndrome: advances in pathogenesis and therapeutic interventions.

Dalakas MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Marinos C. Dalakas, MD Imperial College, London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, 
Burlington Danes Building, Office E412, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, United 
Kingdom. m.dalakas@imperial.ac.uk.

Stiff person syndrome (SPS) varies from mild to severe, but if untreated it can 
be progressive and disabling. Although progress has been made in understanding 
and treating SPS, the disease remains underdiagnosed, delaying treatment. 
Antibodies against glutamic acid decarboxylase provide an excellent diagnostic 
marker, but their role in disease pathogenesis is uncertain. Research focused on 
identifying new autoantigens has provided evidence that gamma-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA)(A) receptor-associated protein (GABARAP), a 14-kD protein localized at 
the postsynaptic regions of GABAergic synapses, is an antigenic target. 
Circulating anti-GABARAP antibodies that inhibit GABA(A) receptor expression on 
GABAergic neurons have been found in up to 65% of SPS patients. The impairment 
of GABAergic pathways and reduction of brain GABA results in clinical 
manifestations of stiffness, spasms, and phobias. Increased awareness of SPS 
among practicing physicians is necessary to recognize the disease early and 
prevent permanent disability. Most patients with SPS respond to GABA-enhancing 
drugs, but the high doses required cause unacceptable adverse effects. The 
disease clearly responds to intravenous immunoglobulin, but repeated infusions 
are needed to maintain response. New immunomodulating agents are being explored 
to treat difficult cases and to induce long-lasting remissions.

DOI: 10.1007/s11940-009-0013-9
PMID: 19210912