---
reference_id: "PMID:35633239"
title: "Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome: A Case Report."
authors:
- Sapkota P
- Gurung RB
- Shrestha A
- Paudel I
- Shrestha P
journal: JNMA J Nepal Med Assoc
year: '2022'
doi: 10.31729/jnma.7407
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Sapkota P, Gurung RB, Shrestha A, Paudel I, Shrestha P
**Journal:** JNMA J Nepal Med Assoc (2022)
**DOI:** [10.31729/jnma.7407](https://doi.org/10.31729/jnma.7407)

## Content

1. JNMA J Nepal Med Assoc. 2022 May 5;60(249):473-477. doi: 10.31729/jnma.7407.

Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome: A Case Report.

Sapkota P(1), Gurung RB(1), Shrestha A(1), Paudel I(1), Shrestha P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Dhulikhel Hospital, Kathmandu University 
School of Medical Sciences, Dhulikhel, Kavre, Nepal.
(2)Department of Public Health and Community Programs, Dhulikhel Hospital, 
Kathmandu University School of Medical Sciences, Dhulikhel, Kavre, Nepal.

Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome is a rare disease characterised by diffuse 
gastrointestinal polyposis, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, cutaneous and mucosal 
hyperpigmentation, alopecia, and onychodystrophy. Here we report a case of a 
40-year-old female with Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome, who presented with the 
complaints of diffuse abdominal pain, blood mixed stools, and diarrhoea 
associated with tenesmus. She had nausea and reduced appetite and lost 10 kgs in 
3 months. She had hair fall (alopecia), atrophic changes of nails 
(onychodystrophy), and hyperpigmentation of the skin in fingers, tongues, and 
lips. Histopathological biopsy of the gastric and colonic biopsy revealed 
polypoid edematous mucosa and the colonic biopsies showed scattered dilated 
glands with inflammatory exudate and mucin. She got Entamoeba histolytica and 
COVID-19. She received respective antibiotics and protein diets that helped 
relieve the symptoms. After 4 weeks of steroids, her symptoms improved 
drastically. Corticosteroids, treating co-infection along with nutritional 
counselling can be helpful to relieve the symptoms.
KEYWORDS: alopecia; case reports; cronkhite-canada syndrome; hyperpigmentation.

DOI: 10.31729/jnma.7407
PMCID: PMC9252220
PMID: 35633239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.