---
reference_id: "PMID:21242295"
title: "The human syndrome of dendritic cell, monocyte, B and NK lymphoid deficiency."
authors:
- Bigley V
- Haniffa M
- Doulatov S
- Wang XN
- Dickinson R
- McGovern N
- Jardine L
- Pagan S
- Dimmick I
- Chua I
- Wallis J
- Lordan J
- Morgan C
- Kumararatne DS
- Doffinger R
- van der Burg M
- van Dongen J
- Cant A
- Dick JE
- Hambleton S
- Collin M
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1084/jem.20101459
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antigens, CD/metabolism"
- Bone Marrow Cells/cytology
- Child
- "Dendritic Cells/cytology, pathology"
- "Disease Susceptibility/etiology, microbiology, virology"
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Flow Cytometry
- HLA-DR Antigens/blood
- Humans
- Interferon-gamma/blood
- "Leukopenia/blood, complications, genetics"
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- "Monocytes/cytology, pathology"
- Mycobacterium Infections/immunology
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The human syndrome of dendritic cell, monocyte, B and NK lymphoid deficiency.
**Authors:** Bigley V, Haniffa M, Doulatov S, Wang XN, Dickinson R, McGovern N, Jardine L, Pagan S, Dimmick I, Chua I, Wallis J, Lordan J, Morgan C, Kumararatne DS, Doffinger R, van der Burg M, van Dongen J, Cant A, Dick JE, Hambleton S, Collin M
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.20101459](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20101459)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2011 Feb 14;208(2):227-34. doi: 10.1084/jem.20101459. Epub 2011 Jan
 17.

The human syndrome of dendritic cell, monocyte, B and NK lymphoid deficiency.

Bigley V(1), Haniffa M, Doulatov S, Wang XN, Dickinson R, McGovern N, Jardine L,
Pagan S, Dimmick I, Chua I, Wallis J, Lordan J, Morgan C, Kumararatne DS,
Doffinger R, van der Burg M, van Dongen J, Cant A, Dick JE, Hambleton S, Collin
M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Framlington Place,
Newcastle upon Tyne, England, UK.

Congenital or acquired cellular deficiencies in humans have the potential to
reveal much about normal hematopoiesis and immune function. We show that a
recently described syndrome of monocytopenia, B and NK lymphoid deficiency
additionally includes the near absence of dendritic cells. Four subjects showed
severe depletion of the peripheral blood HLA-DR(+) lineage(-) compartment, with
virtually no CD123(+) or CD11c(+) dendritic cells (DCs) and very few CD14(+) or
CD16(+) monocytes. The only remaining HLA-DR(+) lineage(-) cells were
circulating CD34(+) progenitor cells. Dermal CD14(+) and CD1a(+) DC were also
absent, consistent with their dependence on blood-derived precursors. In
contrast, epidermal Langerhans cells and tissue macrophages were largely
preserved. Combined loss of peripheral DCs, monocytes, and B and NK lymphocytes
was mirrored in the bone marrow by complete absence of multilymphoid progenitors
and depletion of granulocyte-macrophage progenitors. Depletion of the HLA-DR(+)
peripheral blood compartment was associated with elevated serum fms-like
tyrosine kinase ligand and reduced circulating CD4(+)CD25(hi)FoxP3(+) T cells,
supporting a role for DC in T reg cell homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20101459
PMCID: PMC3039861
PMID: 21242295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
