---
reference_id: "PMID:34731266"
title: Clinical indications for Kawasaki disease in febrile infants aged less than three months.
authors:
- Lee DW
- Choi HJ
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-021-05019-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical indications for Kawasaki disease in febrile infants aged less than three months.
**Authors:** Lee DW, Choi HJ
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-021-05019-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-021-05019-7)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2022 May;42(5):891-897. doi: 10.1007/s00296-021-05019-7. Epub 
2021 Nov 3.

Clinical indications for Kawasaki disease in febrile infants aged less than 
three months.

Lee DW(1), Choi HJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keimyung University School of Medicine, Keimyung 
University Dongsan Hospital, 1095 Dalgubeol-daero, Dalseo-gu, Daegu, 42601, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Keimyung University School of Medicine, Keimyung 
University Dongsan Hospital, 1095 Dalgubeol-daero, Dalseo-gu, Daegu, 42601, 
Republic of Korea. joung756@dsmc.or.kr.

The purpose of this study was to determine the clinical and laboratory 
indicators of KD in febrile infants aged less than three months. Febrile infants 
aged less than three months were enrolled and divided into three groups: KD, 
bacterial infection (BI), and non-bacterial infection (NBI). Laboratory data 
were analyzed at two time points: initially upon admission and at follow-up 
after 48-72 h of admission. A total of 491 patients (280 males and 211 females) 
were enrolled. According to the final diagnosis, 29 patients had KD, 120 had BI, 
and 342 had NBI. The infants in the KD group were older (p < 0.001), had 
prolonged pre-admission and total fever duration (p < 0.001), and had a lower 
rate of decreased activity (p < 0.05) compared to the infants in the BI and NBI 
groups. The KD group had a significantly higher level of initial c-reactive 
protein (CRP) compared to the BI and NBI groups, with a cutoff value of 
4.85 mg/dL in comparison with the BI group and 3.32 mg/dL in comparison with the 
NBI group. Moreover, the KD group had a significantly higher follow-up platelet 
count compared to the BI and NBI groups, with a cutoff value of 533 × 109/L in 
comparison with the BI group and 541 × 109/L in comparison with the NBI group. 
When febrile infants aged less than three months have prolonged fever, less 
decreased activity, and a higher initial CRP level and follow-up platelet count, 
we must consider the possibility of KD.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-021-05019-7
PMID: 34731266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]