---
reference_id: "PMID:38567169"
title: "Osteogenesis Imperfecta and Split Foot Malformation due to 7q21.2q21.3 Deletion Including COL1A2, DLX5/6 Genes: Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Öztürk Ö
- Bagis H
- Bolu S
journal: J Pediatr Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1736613
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis Imperfecta and Split Foot Malformation due to 7q21.2q21.3 Deletion Including COL1A2, DLX5/6 Genes: Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Öztürk Ö, Bagis H, Bolu S
**Journal:** J Pediatr Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0041-1736613](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0041-1736613)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Genet. 2021 Nov 2;13(1):69-79. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1736613. 
eCollection 2024 Mar.

Osteogenesis Imperfecta and Split Foot Malformation due to 7q21.2q21.3 Deletion 
Including COL1A2, DLX5/6 Genes: Review of the Literature.

Öztürk Ö(1), Bagis H(1), Bolu S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School of Adiyaman University, 
Adiyaman, Türkiye.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Medical School 
of Adiyaman University, Adiyaman, Türkiye.

Copy number variation in loss of 7q21 is a genetic disorder characterized by 
split hand/foot malformation, hearing loss, developmental delay, myoclonus, 
dystonia, joint laxity, and psychiatric disorders. Osteogenesis imperfecta 
caused by whole gene deletions of COL1A2 is a very rare condition. We report a 
Turkish girl with ectrodactyly, joint laxity, multiple bone fractures, blue 
sclera, early teeth decay, mild learning disability, and depression. A copy 
number variant in loss of 4.8 Mb at chromosome 7 (q21.2q21.3) included the 58 
genes including DLX5, DLX6, DYNC1I1, SLC25A13, SGCE, and COL1A2 . They were 
identified by chromosomal microarray analysis. We compared the findings in our 
patients with those previously reported. This case report highlights the 
importance of using microarray to identify the genetic etiology in patients with 
ectrodactyly and osteogenesis imperfecta.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1736613
PMCID: PMC10984717
PMID: 38567169

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.