---
reference_id: "PMID:34389248"
title: Prospective identification by neonatal screening of patients with guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency.
authors:
- Hart K
- Rohrwasser A
- Wallis H
- Golsan H
- Shao J
- Anderson T
- Wang X
- Szabo-Fresnais N
- Morrissey M
- Kay DM
- Wojcik M
- Galvin-Parton PA
- Longo N
- Caggana M
- Pasquali M
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.07.012
keywords:
- "Chromatography, Liquid"
- Creatine/metabolism
- Dried Blood Spot Testing/methods
- Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase/deficiency
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Language Development Disorders/complications, diagnosis"
- "Movement Disorders/complications, congenital, diagnosis"
- "Neonatal Screening/methods, standards"
- New York
- Prospective Studies
- Utah
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prospective identification by neonatal screening of patients with guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency.
**Authors:** Hart K, Rohrwasser A, Wallis H, Golsan H, Shao J, Anderson T, Wang X, Szabo-Fresnais N, Morrissey M, Kay DM, Wojcik M, Galvin-Parton PA, Longo N, Caggana M, Pasquali M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.07.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.07.012)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2021 Sep-Oct;134(1-2):60-64. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.07.012.  Epub 2021 Jul 29.

Prospective identification by neonatal screening of patients with
guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency.

Hart K(1), Rohrwasser A(2), Wallis H(3), Golsan H(2), Shao J(2), Anderson T(2),
Wang X(2), Szabo-Fresnais N(2), Morrissey M(4), Kay DM(4), Wojcik M(4),
Galvin-Parton PA(5), Longo N(6), Caggana M(4), Pasquali M(7).

Author information:
(1)Utah Department of Health, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. Electronic address:
kimhart@utah.gov.
(2)Utah Department of Health, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(3)Utah Department of Health, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; Association for Creatine
Deficiencies, Carlsbad, CA, USA.
(4)Newborn Screening Program, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health, Albany, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, SUNY at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA; Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA; Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. Electronic address:
pasquam@aruplab.com.

INTRODUCTION: Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT) deficiency is an
inherited metabolic disorder that impairs the synthesis of creatine (CRE). Lack
of CRE in the brain can cause intellectual disability, autistic-like behavior,
seizures, and movement disorders. Identification at birth and immediate therapy
can prevent intellectual disability and seizures. Here we report the first two
cases of GAMT deficiency identified at birth by newborn screening (NBS) in Utah
and New York.
METHODS: NBS dried blood spots were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS)
using either derivatized or non-derivatized assays to detect guanidinoacetate
(GUAC) and CRE. For any positive samples, a second-tier test using a more
selective method, ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) combined with
MS/MS, was performed to separate GUAC from potential isobaric interferences.
RESULTS: NBS for GAMT deficiency began in Utah on June 1, 2015 using a
derivatized method for the detection of GUAC and CRE. In May 2019, the
laboratory and method transitioned to a non-derivatized method. GAMT screening
was added to the New York State NBS panel on October 1, 2018 using a derivatized
method. In New York, a total of 537,408 babies were screened, 23 infants were
referred and one newborn was identified with GAMT deficiency. In Utah, a total
of 273,902 infants were screened (195,425 with the derivatized method, 78,477
with the non-derivatized method), three infants referred and one was identified
with GAMT deficiency. Mean levels of GUAC and CRE were similar between methods
(Utah derivatized: GUAC = 1.20 ± 0.43 μmol/L, CRE = 238 ± 96 μmol/L; Utah
non-derivatized: GUAC = 1.23 ± 0.61 μmol/L, CRE = 344 ± 150 μmol/L, New York
derivatized: GUAC = 1.34 ± 0.57 μmol/L, CRE = 569 ± 155 μmol/L). With either
Utah method, similar concentrations of GUAC are observed in first (collected
around 1 day of age) and the second NBS specimens (routinely collected at 7-16
days of age), while CRE concentrations decreased in the second NBS specimens.
Both infants identified with GAMT deficiency started therapy by 2 weeks of age
and are growing and developing normally at 7 (Utah) and 4 (New York) months of
age.
CONCLUSIONS: Newborn screening allows for the prospective identification of GAMT
deficiency utilizing elevated GUAC concentration as a marker. First-tier
screening may be incorporated into existing methods for amino acids and
acylcarnitines without the need for new equipment or staff. Newborn screening
performed by either derivatized or non-derivatized methods and coupled with
second-tier testing, has a very low false positive rate and can prospectively
identify affected children. SummaryCerebral creatine deficiency syndromes caused
by defects in creatine synthesis can result in intellectual disability, and are
preventable if therapy is initiated early in life. This manuscript reports the
identification of two infants with GAMT deficiency (one of the cerebral creatine
deficiency syndromes) by newborn screening and demonstrates NBS feasibility
using a variety of methods.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.07.012
PMID: 34389248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
