---
reference_id: "PMID:31900434"
title: Significantly greater prevalence of DICER1 alterations in uterine embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma compared to adenosarcoma.
authors:
- de Kock L
- Yoon JY
- Apellaniz-Ruiz M
- Pelletier D
- McCluggage WG
- Stewart CJR
- Dickson BC
- Rouzbahman M
- Clarke BA
- Foulkes WD
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41379-019-0436-0
keywords:
- "Adenosarcoma/genetics, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DEAD-box RNA Helicases/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/genetics, pathology"
- Ribonuclease III/genetics
- "Uterine Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Significantly greater prevalence of DICER1 alterations in uterine embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma compared to adenosarcoma.
**Authors:** de Kock L, Yoon JY, Apellaniz-Ruiz M, Pelletier D, McCluggage WG, Stewart CJR, Dickson BC, Rouzbahman M, Clarke BA, Foulkes WD
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41379-019-0436-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41379-019-0436-0)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2020 Jun;33(6):1207-1219. doi: 10.1038/s41379-019-0436-0. Epub
2020  Jan 3.

Significantly greater prevalence of DICER1 alterations in uterine embryonal 
rhabdomyosarcoma compared to adenosarcoma.

de Kock L(#)(1)(2), Yoon JY(#)(3)(4), Apellaniz-Ruiz M(1)(2), Pelletier D(1), 
McCluggage WG(5), Stewart CJR(6), Dickson BC(7), Rouzbahman M(3)(8), Clarke 
BA(#)(3), Foulkes WD(#)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(2)Lady Davis Institute, Segal Cancer Centre, Jewish General Hospital, Montréal, 
QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, UK.
(6)School for Women's and Infants' Health, University of Western Australia, 
Perth, WA, Australia.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)Department of Pathology, Toronto General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada. 
william.foulkes@mcgill.ca.
(10)Lady Davis Institute, Segal Cancer Centre, Jewish General Hospital, 
Montréal, QC, Canada. william.foulkes@mcgill.ca.
(11)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, QC, 
Canada. william.foulkes@mcgill.ca.
(#)Contributed equally

Embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas (ERMS) account for 2-3% of cancers in pediatric and 
adolescent populations. They are rarer in adults. We and others have reported 
that ERMS arising in the uterine cervix may harbor mutations in the gene 
encoding the microRNA biogenesis enzyme, DICER1, but a large series of cases has 
not been published. In the uterus, distinguishing ERMS from adenosarcoma can be 
very challenging, even for expert pathologists, and DICER1 alterations have been 
identified in a variable subset of uterine adenosarcomas. We hypothesized that 
DICER1 genetic testing may be useful in distinguishing between ERMS and 
adenosarcoma. We conducted a central pathology review-based study of 64 tumors 
initially thought to be uterine ERMS or adenosarcoma; 19 neoplasms had a 
consensus diagnosis of ERMS, 27 of adenosarcoma and for 18, no consensus 
diagnosis was reached. The median age at diagnosis was 30 years (range 2.5-69) 
for ERMS, 57.5 years (range 27-82) for adenosarcoma, and 65.5 years (range 
32-86) for no consensus cases. In our series, the DICER1 mutation prevalence 
differed between the three groups: DICER1 alterations were present in 18/19 
(95%) ERMS, 7/27 (26%) adenosarcomas (p < 0.001), and 4/18 (22%) no consensus 
cases. A germline alteration was present in 6/12 ERMS patients tested versus 0/6 
adenosarcoma patients. Thus, although DICER1 mutations are near ubiquitous in 
uterine ERMS and are significantly less common in uterine adenosarcoma, DICER1 
testing is only of value in distinguishing between the two neoplasms when a 
DICER1 mutation is absent, as this is helpful in excluding ERMS. On review of 
the clinical and radiological features of the single DICER1 wild-type cervical 
ERMS, this was thought most likely to be of vaginal origin. Given the 
significant prevalence of DICER1 germline pathogenic variants in uterine ERMS, 
all patients with this diagnosis should be referred to a genetics service.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-019-0436-0
PMID: 31900434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]