---
reference_id: "PMID:31260111"
title: Chronic liver involvement in urea cycle disorders.
authors:
- Ranucci G
- Rigoldi M
- Cotugno G
- Bernabei SM
- Liguori A
- Gasperini S
- Goffredo BM
- Martinelli D
- Monti L
- Francalanci P
- Candusso M
- Parini R
- Dionisi-Vici C
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12144
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chronic Disease
- Cohort Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- Italy
- "Liver/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Liver Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, surgery"
- Liver Function Tests
- Liver Transplantation
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/complications, diagnosis, pathology, surgery"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic liver involvement in urea cycle disorders.
**Authors:** Ranucci G, Rigoldi M, Cotugno G, Bernabei SM, Liguori A, Gasperini S, Goffredo BM, Martinelli D, Monti L, Francalanci P, Candusso M, Parini R, Dionisi-Vici C
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12144](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12144)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2019 Nov;42(6):1118-1127. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12144. Epub
2019 Aug 25.

Chronic liver involvement in urea cycle disorders.

Ranucci G(1), Rigoldi M(2), Cotugno G(1), Bernabei SM(3), Liguori A(1),
Gasperini S(4), Goffredo BM(1), Martinelli D(1), Monti L(5), Francalanci P(6),
Candusso M(7), Parini R(4), Dionisi-Vici C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Medical Genetics Unit, Rare Diseases Center, ASST San Gerardo Hospital,
Monza, Italy.
(3)Division of Artificial Nutrition, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS,
Rome, Italy.
(4)Pediatric Rare Diseases Unit, Department of Pediatrics, MBBM Foundation, ATS
Monza e Brianza, Monza, Italy.
(5)Department of Radiology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome,
Italy.
(6)Department of Pathology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome,
Italy.
(7)Division of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

The increased survival of urea cycle disorders (UCDs) patients has led the
attention to clinical manifestations that characterize the long-term disease
course. Acute and chronic liver disease have been anecdotally reported since the
very first description of UCDs. However, a detailed analysis of long-term liver
involvement in large patient cohorts is still needed. Chronic liver damage in
UCDs has probably a multifactorial origin, but the specific underlying
mechanisms of liver disease have not yet been well elucidated. In this study, we
report on chronic liver involvement and on associated metabolic abnormalities in
a large cohort of 102 UCD patients, followed by two reference centers in Italy.
Chronic liver involvement was observed in over 60% of UCDs patients, and
comparison between individual diseases showed a significant higher frequency in
argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD) and in
hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinemia (HHH) syndrome with elevation
of transaminases and of gamma-GT in ASLD, and of alpha-fetoprotein in HHH
syndrome. Also, consistent with a chronic hepatic dysfunction, ultrasound
examination revealed more pronounced abnormalities in ASLD and in HHH syndrome,
when compared to other UCDs. Our study highlights in a large UCDs patients'
cohort that chronic liver disease is a common finding in UCDs, often with a
distinct phenotype between different diseases. Furthers studies are needed to
elucidate the specific involvement of different metabolic pathways in the
pathogenesis of liver dysfunction in UCDs.

© 2019 SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12144
PMID: 31260111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
