---
reference_id: "PMID:35402458"
title: "Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome Associated With Superficial Esophageal Carcinoma: A Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Zhao Y
- Lv F
- Yang X
- Wang Y
- Zhang S
- Li P
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.855336
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome Associated With Superficial Esophageal Carcinoma: A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Zhao Y, Lv F, Yang X, Wang Y, Zhang S, Li P
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2022.855336](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2022.855336)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 Mar 25;9:855336. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.855336. 
eCollection 2022.

Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome Associated With Superficial Esophageal Carcinoma: A 
Case Report and Literature Review.

Zhao Y(1), Lv F(1), Yang X(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang S(1), Li P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, National Clinical Research Center for Digestive Diseases, Beijing 
Digestive Disease Center, Beijing, China.

INTRODUCTION: Cronkhite-Canada syndrome is a rare disease characterized by 
generalized gastrointestinal polyposis, alopecia, skin pigmentation, and 
onychotrophia with no generally recognized mechanism of pathogenesis. There is a 
tendency of malignant transformation or coexistence of gastrointestinal 
malignancies in patients with Cronkhite-Canada syndrome.
CASE DESCRIPTION: The patient was a 67-year-old man who complained of dyspepsia, 
hair loss, skin hyperpigmentation, and pedal edema. Lab tests showed 
hypoalbuminemia. Endoscopic findings included superficial esophageal carcinoma 
and numerous polyps in the stomach, duodenum, and colon. The patient was treated 
with endoscopic submucosal dissection for the esophagus lesion, endoscopic 
mucosal resection for colon polyps, and glucocorticoids for Cronkhite-Canada 
syndrome.
CONCLUSION: Esophagus cancer is a rare comorbidity of Cronkhite-Canada syndrome. 
Endoscopic examination and surveillance are critical for patients with 
Cronkhite-Canada syndrome for malignant gastrointestinal tumors.

Copyright © 2022 Zhao, Lv, Yang, Wang, Zhang and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.855336
PMCID: PMC8990872
PMID: 35402458

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.