---
reference_id: "PMID:38087855"
title: "Clinicopathologic and trichoscopic features of keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans: A case series study."
authors:
- Lan X
- Qiao R
- Sun J
- Song H
- Gao M
- Mo R
- Song Z
- Yang Y
- Jiang Y
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.17026
keywords:
- Adult
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- "Darier Disease/diagnosis, pathology"
- Inflammation/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked"
- Male
- Young Adult
- Retrospective Studies
- Ichthyosis
- "Eyebrows/pathology, abnormalities"
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic"
- Photophobia/pathology
- Alopecia/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathologic and trichoscopic features of keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans: A case series study.
**Authors:** Lan X, Qiao R, Sun J, Song H, Gao M, Mo R, Song Z, Yang Y, Jiang Y
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1346-8138.17026](https://doi.org/10.1111/1346-8138.17026)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2024 Feb;51(2):253-260. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.17026. Epub 2023
Dec  12.

Clinicopathologic and trichoscopic features of keratosis follicularis spinulosa
decalvans: A case series study.

Lan X(1), Qiao R(1), Sun J(1), Song H(1), Gao M(1)(2), Mo R(2), Song Z(2), Yang
Y(2), Jiang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatopathology, Hospital for Skin Diseases and Institute of
Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Genetic Skin Disease Center, Hospital for Skin Diseases and Institute of
Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans (KFSD) is a rare X-linked hereditary
disorder characterized by the triad of follicular
hyperkeratosis-photophobia-alopecia. The clinical heterogeneity makes the
diagnosis difficult. To investigate the clinicopathologic and trichoscopic
features of KFSD and to further clarify the essential requisites for the
diagnosis, we conducted a retrospective study of patients with KFSD. The
clinical information, histologic features, and trichoscopic findings were
evaluated. Eight patients were from seven separate families. Two females were
mother and daughter from the same family and the other six patients were male
and represented sporadic cases. The average age of onset of alopecia was
21.25 years. Involvement of the scalp hairs leading to progressive scarring
alopecia on the midline of the scalp with variable degrees of inflammation was
the pathognomonic feature. It typically began after puberty. Vellus
hair-associated follicular hyperkeratosis affected all of the patients. However,
photophobia was not a constant feature. Histopathologic examination revealed
disorders of the hair follicle with an acute-chronic inflammatory response.
Follicular changes including fused infundibulum, the protrusion of the outer
root sheath into the follicular canal, and a dilatation of the follicles at the
isthmus level caused by the occlusion of keratin were observed. The trichoscopic
features included perifollicular scaling, tufted hairs, and loss of follicular
openings. In conclusion, terminal hair involvement, either scalp hairs,
eyebrows, or eyelashes, and the hyperkeratosis of the follicle of vellus hairs
is the diagnostic basis of KFSD. We hypothesize that follicular changes in
histopathology are the primary event that trigger variable inflammation and
further follicular destruction.

© 2023 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.17026
PMID: 38087855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
