---
reference_id: "PMID:35105861"
title: PPM1D mutations are oncogenic drivers of de novo diffuse midline glioma formation.
authors:
- Khadka P
- Reitman ZJ
- Lu S
- Buchan G
- Gionet G
- Dubois F
- Carvalho DM
- Shih J
- Zhang S
- Greenwald NF
- Zack T
- Shapira O
- Pelton K
- Hartley R
- Bear H
- Georgis Y
- Jarmale S
- Melanson R
- Bonanno K
- Schoolcraft K
- Miller PG
- Condurat AL
- Gonzalez EM
- Qian K
- Morin E
- Langhnoja J
- Lupien LE
- Rendo V
- Digiacomo J
- Wang D
- Zhou K
- Kumbhani R
- Guerra Garcia ME
- Sinai CE
- Becker S
- Schneider R
- Vogelzang J
- Krug K
- Goodale A
- Abid T
- Kalani Z
- Piccioni F
- Beroukhim R
- Persky NS
- Root DE
- Carcaboso AM
- Ebert BL
- Fuller C
- Babur O
- Kieran MW
- Jones C
- Keshishian H
- Ligon KL
- Carr SA
- Phoenix TN
- Bandopadhayay P
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-28198-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- Brain Stem Neoplasms/genetics
- Carcinogenesis/genetics
- Cell Cycle
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Damage
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Glioma/genetics
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation
- Oncogenes/genetics
- Protein Phosphatase 2C/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-mdm2
- Transcriptome
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PPM1D mutations are oncogenic drivers of de novo diffuse midline glioma formation.
**Authors:** Khadka P, Reitman ZJ, Lu S, Buchan G, Gionet G, Dubois F, Carvalho DM, Shih J, Zhang S, Greenwald NF, Zack T, Shapira O, Pelton K, Hartley R, Bear H, Georgis Y, Jarmale S, Melanson R, Bonanno K, Schoolcraft K, Miller PG, Condurat AL, Gonzalez EM, Qian K, Morin E, Langhnoja J, Lupien LE, Rendo V, Digiacomo J, Wang D, Zhou K, Kumbhani R, Guerra Garcia ME, Sinai CE, Becker S, Schneider R, Vogelzang J, Krug K, Goodale A, Abid T, Kalani Z, Piccioni F, Beroukhim R, Persky NS, Root DE, Carcaboso AM, Ebert BL, Fuller C, Babur O, Kieran MW, Jones C, Keshishian H, Ligon KL, Carr SA, Phoenix TN, Bandopadhayay P
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-022-28198-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-28198-8)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2022 Feb 1;13(1):604. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-28198-8.

PPM1D mutations are oncogenic drivers of de novo diffuse midline glioma
formation.

Khadka P(#)(1)(2)(3), Reitman ZJ(#)(4)(5)(6), Lu S(7), Buchan G(7), Gionet G(7),
Dubois F(1)(2), Carvalho DM(8), Shih J(2), Zhang S(2), Greenwald NF(1), Zack
T(1), Shapira O(1), Pelton K(9), Hartley R(10), Bear H(11), Georgis Y(7),
Jarmale S(7), Melanson R(2), Bonanno K(2), Schoolcraft K(9), Miller PG(2)(12),
Condurat AL(7), Gonzalez EM(2)(7), Qian K(7), Morin E(7), Langhnoja J(10),
Lupien LE(7), Rendo V(1), Digiacomo J(7), Wang D(7), Zhou K(7), Kumbhani R(7),
Guerra Garcia ME(5), Sinai CE(9), Becker S(9), Schneider R(9), Vogelzang J(9),
Krug K(2), Goodale A(2), Abid T(2), Kalani Z(2), Piccioni F(2), Beroukhim
R(1)(2), Persky NS(2), Root DE(2), Carcaboso AM(13), Ebert BL(2)(12)(14), Fuller
C(15), Babur O(16), Kieran MW(7)(17), Jones C(8), Keshishian H(2), Ligon KL(9),
Carr SA(2), Phoenix TN(18)(19), Bandopadhayay P(20)(21)(22).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
02215, USA.
(2)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA.
(3)Harvard Biological and Biomedical Sciences PhD Program, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University, Durham, NC, 27710, USA.
(5)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC, 27710, USA.
(6)The Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center at Duke, Duke University, Durham,
NC, 27710, USA.
(7)Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston, MA,
02215, USA.
(8)Division of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.
(9)Department of Oncologic Pathology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
02215, USA.
(10)Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, James L. Winkle College of Pharmacy,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, 45267, USA.
(11)Research in Patient Services, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, 45267, USA.
(12)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
02215, USA.
(13)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hospital Sant Joan de Deu,
Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, 08950, Spain.
(14)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, 20815, USA.
(15)Department of Pathology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, 45267, USA.
(16)College of Science and Mathematics, University of Massachusetts Boston,
Boston, MA, 02125, USA.
(17)Bristol Myers Squibb, Boston, Devens, MA, 01434, USA.
(18)Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, James L. Winkle College of Pharmacy,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, 45267, USA. phoenity@ucmail.uc.edu.
(19)Research in Patient Services, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, 45267, USA. phoenity@ucmail.uc.edu.
(20)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA.
Pratiti_bandopadhayay@dfci.harvard.edu.
(21)Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston, MA,
02215, USA. Pratiti_bandopadhayay@dfci.harvard.edu.
(22)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02215, USA.
Pratiti_bandopadhayay@dfci.harvard.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

The role of PPM1D mutations in de novo gliomagenesis has not been systematically
explored. Here we analyze whole genome sequences of 170 pediatric high-grade
gliomas and find that truncating mutations in PPM1D that increase the stability
of its phosphatase are clonal driver events in 11% of Diffuse Midline Gliomas
(DMGs) and are enriched in primary pontine tumors. Through the development of
DMG mouse models, we show that PPM1D mutations potentiate gliomagenesis and that
PPM1D phosphatase activity is required for in vivo oncogenesis. Finally, we
apply integrative phosphoproteomic and functional genomics assays and find that
oncogenic effects of PPM1D truncation converge on regulators of cell cycle, DNA
damage response, and p53 pathways, revealing therapeutic vulnerabilities
including MDM2 inhibition.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-28198-8
PMCID: PMC8807747
PMID: 35105861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R.B. and P.B. receive grant funding from the
Novartis Institute of Biomedical Research for an unrelated project. P.B. has
received grant funding from Deerfield and reports a consulting role for QED
Therapeutics, R.B. reports consulting or advisory role for Novartis, Merck (I),
Gilead Sciences (I), ViiV Healthcare (I); research funding from Novartis;
patents, royalties, other intellectual property—Prognostic Marker for
Endometrial Carcinoma (US patent application 13/911456, filed June 6, 2013),
SF3B1 Suppression as a Therapy for Tumors Harboring SF3B1 Copy Loss
(international application No. WO/2017/177191, PCT/US2017/026693, filed July 4,
2017), Compositions and Methods for Screening Pediatric Gliomas and Methods of
Treatment Thereof (international application No. WO/2017/132574,
PCT/US2017/015448, filed 1/27/2017). M.W.K. is now an employee of Bristol-Myers
Squibb. F.P. is now an employee of Merck Research Laboratories. S.A.C. is a
member of the scientific advisory boards of Kymera, PTM BioLabs and Seer and a
scientific advisor to Pfizer and Biogen. D.E.R. receives research funding from
Abbvie, Jannsen, Merck, and Vir through the Functional Genomics Consortium and
serves on the board of directors of Addgene. B.L.E. has received research
funding from Celgene and Deerfield. He has also received consulting fees from
GRAIL, and he serves on the scientific advisory boards for and holds equity in
Skyhawk Therapeutics and Exo Therapeutics. (I) denotes a competing interest
involving a first degree relative of the author. All the remaining authors
declare no competing interests.
