---
reference_id: "PMID:38889004"
title: "Insights on epidemiology, morbidity and mortality of Cushing's disease in Northern Ireland."
authors:
- Loughrey PB
- Herron B
- Cooke S
- Weir P
- Smyth JE
- Mullan KR
- Healy EG
- Evanson J
- Craig SG
- James JA
- Korbonits M
- Hunter SJ
journal: Endocr Relat Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1530/ERC-24-0028
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pituitary ACTH Hypersecretion/mortality, epidemiology, surgery"
- Female
- Male
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Northern Ireland/epidemiology
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
- Aged
- Incidence
- Adolescent
- Morbidity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights on epidemiology, morbidity and mortality of Cushing's disease in Northern Ireland.
**Authors:** Loughrey PB, Herron B, Cooke S, Weir P, Smyth JE, Mullan KR, Healy EG, Evanson J, Craig SG, James JA, Korbonits M, Hunter SJ
**Journal:** Endocr Relat Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1530/ERC-24-0028](https://doi.org/10.1530/ERC-24-0028)

## Content

1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2024 Jul 8;31(9):e240028. doi: 10.1530/ERC-24-0028. Print
 2024 Sep 1.

Insights on epidemiology, morbidity and mortality of Cushing's disease in 
Northern Ireland.

Loughrey PB(1)(2), Herron B(3), Cooke S(4), Weir P(4), Smyth JE(2), Mullan 
KR(2), Healy EG(3), Evanson J(5), Craig SG(1), James JA(1)(3)(6), Korbonits 
M(7), Hunter SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Patrick G Johnston Centre for Cancer Research, Queen's University Belfast, 
Belfast, UK.
(2)Regional Centre for Endocrinology and Diabetes, Belfast Health and Social 
Care Trust, Belfast, UK.
(3)Department of Cellular Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, 
Belfast, UK.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, 
UK.
(5)Department of Radiology, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, UK.
(6)Northern Ireland Biobank, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, UK.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK.

Cushing's disease is a rare condition that occurs due to an 
adrenocorticotrophin-producing corticotrophinoma arising from the pituitary 
gland. The consequent hypercortisolaemia results in multisystem morbidity and 
mortality. This study aims to report incidence, clinicopathological 
characteristics, remission outcomes and mortality in a regional pituitary 
neurosurgical cohort of patients diagnosed with Cushing's disease in Northern 
Ireland (NI) from 2000 to 2019. Clinical, biochemical and radiological data from 
a cohort of patients operated for Cushing's disease were retrospectively 
collected and analysed. Fifty-three patients were identified, resulting in an 
estimated annual incidence of Cushing's disease of 1.39-1.57 per million 
population per year. Females accounted for 72% (38/53) of the cohort. The 
majority (74%, 39/53) of corticotrophinomas were microadenomas and in 44% 
(17/39) of these no tumour was identified on preoperative magnetic resonance 
imaging. Histopathological characterisation was similarly difficult, with no 
tumour being identified in the histopathological specimen in 40% (21/53) of 
cases. Immediate postoperative remission rates were 53% and 66% when considering 
serum morning cortisol cut-offs of ≤ 50 nmol/L (1.8 µg/dL) and ≤ 138 nmol/L (5 
µg/dL), respectively, in the week following pituitary surgery. Approximately 70% 
(37/53) of patients achieved longer-term remission with a single pituitary 
surgery. Three patients had recurrent disease. Patients with Cushing's disease 
had a significantly higher mortality rate compared to the NI general population 
(standardised mortality ratio 8.10, 95% CI 3.3-16.7, P < 0.001). Annual 
incidence of Cushing's disease in NI is consistent with other Northern European 
cohorts. Functioning corticotrophinomas are a clinically, radiologically and 
histopathologically elusive disease with increased mortality compared to the 
general population.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-24-0028
PMCID: PMC11301418
PMID: 38889004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MK is a Deputy Editor of Endocrine-Related 
Cancer. MK was not involved in the review or editorial process of this paper, on 
which she is listed as an author. The other authors declare that there is no 
conflict of interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of 
the study reported.