---
reference_id: "PMID:25942451"
title: The NSD family of protein methyltransferases in human cancer.
authors:
- Vougiouklakis T
- Hamamoto R
- Nakamura Y
- Saloura V
journal: Epigenomics
year: '2015'
doi: 10.2217/epi.15.32
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Histone Methyltransferases
- "Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- "Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Methylation/drug effects
- Molecular Targeted Therapy/methods
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Nuclear Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Repressor Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The NSD family of protein methyltransferases in human cancer.
**Authors:** Vougiouklakis T, Hamamoto R, Nakamura Y, Saloura V
**Journal:** Epigenomics (2015)
**DOI:** [10.2217/epi.15.32](https://doi.org/10.2217/epi.15.32)

## Content

1. Epigenomics. 2015 Aug;7(5):863-74. doi: 10.2217/epi.15.32. Epub 2015 May 5.

The NSD family of protein methyltransferases in human cancer.

Vougiouklakis T(1), Hamamoto R(1), Nakamura Y(1), Saloura V(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, The University of 
Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland Ave, MC2115 Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The NSD family of protein lysine methyltransferases consists of NSD1, 
NSD2/WHSC1/MMSET and NSD3/WHSC1L1. NSD2 haploinsufficiency causes 
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome, while NSD1 mutations lead to the Sotos syndrome. 
Recently, a number of studies showed that the NSD methyltransferases were 
overexpressed, amplified or somatically mutated in multiple types of cancer, 
suggesting their critical role in cancer. These enzymes methylate specific 
lysine residues on histone tails and their dysfunction results in epigenomic 
aberrations which play a fundamental role in oncogenesis. Furthermore, NSD1 was 
also reported to methylate a nonhistone protein substrate, RELA/p65 subunit of 
NF-κB, implying its regulatory function through nonhistone methylation pathways. 
In this review, we summarize the current research regarding the role of the NSD 
family proteins in cancer and underline their potential as targets for novel 
cancer therapeutics.

DOI: 10.2217/epi.15.32
PMID: 25942451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]