---
reference_id: "PMID:10997535"
title: "Cushing's disease: clinical manifestations and diagnostic evaluation."
authors:
- Kirk LF Jr
- Hash RB
- Katner HP
- Jones T
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2000'
keywords:
- Adenoma/diagnosis
- Adrenocorticotropic Hormone/blood
- Algorithms
- "Cushing Syndrome/blood, diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology, urine"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Hydrocortisone/urine
- Hypothalamo-Hypophyseal System/physiopathology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Patient Education as Topic
- Pituitary Neoplasms/diagnosis
- Pituitary-Adrenal System/physiopathology
- Teaching Materials
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cushing's disease: clinical manifestations and diagnostic evaluation.
**Authors:** Kirk LF Jr, Hash RB, Katner HP, Jones T
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2000)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2000 Sep 1;62(5):1119-27, 1133-4.

Cushing's disease: clinical manifestations and diagnostic evaluation.

Kirk LF Jr(1), Hash RB, Katner HP, Jones T.

Author information:
(1)Lamar Family Medicine and Occupational Health Center, Barnsville, Georgia,
USA.

Erratum in
    Am Fam Physician 2002 Feb 1;65(3):386.

The most common endogenous cause of Cushing's syndrome is Cushing's disease.
Frequent clinical findings include weight gain, truncal obesity, striae,
hypertension, glucose intolerance and infections. Cranial nerve II may be
affected by enlarging pituitary adenomas in Cushing's disease; cranial nerves
III, IV and VI may also be affected. The evaluation of patients with suspected
Cushing's disease and syndrome requires an understanding of the proper use and
limitations of the tests commonly included in the diagnostic work-up. The best
screening test for Cushing's syndrome is a 24-hour urine collection with
analysis for urinary free cortisol excretion. Low-dose and high-dose
dexamethasone suppression tests, corticotropin assays, a corticotropin-releasing
hormone stimulation test and inferior petrosal sinus catheterization may be
required for a definitive diagnosis. Magnetic resonance imaging is useful in
localizing the lesion. Surgical removal of the lesion by a transphenoidal
approach is usually successful, but long-term follow-up is required. Some
patients require lifetime glucocorticoid replacement therapy.

PMID: 10997535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
