---
reference_id: "PMID:32353060"
title: Management of biliary stricture in patients with IgG4-related sclerosing cholangitis.
authors:
- Miyazawa M
- Takatori H
- Kawaguchi K
- Kitamura K
- Arai K
- Matsuda K
- Urabe T
- Inamura K
- Komura T
- Mizuno H
- Fuchizaki U
- Yamashita T
- Sakai Y
- Yamashita T
- Mizukoshi E
- Honda M
- Kaneko S
journal: PLoS One
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0232089
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Aged
- Bile Ducts/surgery
- Biliary Tract Surgical Procedures/methods
- Cholangitis/etiology
- "Cholangitis, Sclerosing/complications, surgery, therapy"
- Cholestasis/complications
- "Constriction, Pathologic/complications, surgery"
- Device Removal/adverse effects
- Drainage/adverse effects
- Female
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G
- "Jaundice, Obstructive/drug therapy, etiology, therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Sphincterotomy, Endoscopic/adverse effects"
- Stents/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of biliary stricture in patients with IgG4-related sclerosing cholangitis.
**Authors:** Miyazawa M, Takatori H, Kawaguchi K, Kitamura K, Arai K, Matsuda K, Urabe T, Inamura K, Komura T, Mizuno H, Fuchizaki U, Yamashita T, Sakai Y, Yamashita T, Mizukoshi E, Honda M, Kaneko S
**Journal:** PLoS One (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0232089](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0232089)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2020 Apr 30;15(4):e0232089. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0232089. 
eCollection 2020.

Management of biliary stricture in patients with IgG4-related sclerosing 
cholangitis.

Miyazawa M(1), Takatori H(1), Kawaguchi K(1), Kitamura K(1), Arai K(1), Matsuda 
K(2), Urabe T(3), Inamura K(4), Komura T(5), Mizuno H(6), Fuchizaki U(7), 
Yamashita T(1), Sakai Y(1), Yamashita T(1), Mizukoshi E(1), Honda M(1), Kaneko 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of gastroenterology, Kanazawa University Hospital, Kanazawa, 
Japan.
(2)Department of internal medicine, Toyama Prefectural Central Hospital, Toyama, 
Japan.
(3)Department of gastroenterology, Public Central Hospital of Matto Ishikawa, 
Hakusan, Japan.
(4)Department of internal medicine, Tonami General Hospital, Tonami, Japan.
(5)Department of gastroenterology, National Hospital Organization Kanazawa 
Medical Center, Kanazawa, Japan.
(6)Department of gastroenterology, Toyama City Hospital, Toyama, Japan.
(7)Department of gastroenterology, Keiju Medical Center, Nanao, Japan.

BACKGROUND: We aimed to determine the optimal approach with endoscopic biliary 
drainage (EBD) and corticosteroid (CS) for the treatment of IgG4-related 
sclerosing cholangitis (ISC).
METHODS: To evaluate the safety of EBD for treatment of biliary stricture caused 
by ISC, we assessed the risk of stent dislodgement and sought to determine the 
most appropriate time for stent removal. We also assessed the safety of 
treatment with CS alone for patients with obstructive jaundice, and the rate of 
and risk factors for biliary tract complications.
RESULTS: Sixty-nine patients with ISC treated with CS were enrolled. 
Twenty-eight patients (40.6%) were treated with EBD for biliary stricture before 
CS initiation. Intentional stent removal was performed in thirteen (46.4%) after 
confirming CS-induced improvement. Eleven of thirteen patients (84.6%) underwent 
stent removal within 1 month after CS initiation and all their stent removals 
were safely carried out without early (within two weeks) recurrence of 
obstructive jaundice. Ten of twenty-eight patients (35.7%) experienced 
spontaneous stent dislodgement after CS initiation, and seven (70%) of them 
developed stent dislodgement two weeks to two months after CS initiation. Among 
forty-one patients treated with CS alone without EBD, 10 patients had 
obstructive jaundice at the time of CS initiation and all of them achieved 
clinical improvement without biliary tract infection. During the follow-up, 
three patients (4.3%), all of whom had undergone EBD, developed bile-duct 
stones, while none of those treated with CS alone developed bile-duct stones (p 
= 0.032). Long-term biliary stenting was a risk factor for bile-duct stones.
CONCLUSIONS: Biliary stent removal should be carried out within 2 weeks after CS 
initiation if biliary stricture improves to prevent stent dislodgement. 
Obstructive jaundice can be treated safely with CS alone in patients without 
infection. Clinicians should be aware of the possibility of bile-duct stones in 
patients treated with EBD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0232089
PMCID: PMC7192452
PMID: 32353060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.