---
reference_id: "PMID:21062482"
title: Gene expression profiling identifies inflammation and angiogenesis as distinguishing features of canine hemangiosarcoma.
authors:
- Tamburini BA
- Phang TL
- Fosmire SP
- Scott MC
- Trapp SC
- Duckett MM
- Robinson SR
- Slansky JE
- Sharkey LC
- Cutter GR
- Wojcieszyn JW
- Bellgrau D
- Gemmill RM
- Hunter LE
- Modiano JF
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-619
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Dogs
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/metabolism, veterinary"
- Humans
- Inflammation
- Male
- Mutation
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic"
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Von Hippel-Lindau Tumor Suppressor Protein/genetics
- ras Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene expression profiling identifies inflammation and angiogenesis as distinguishing features of canine hemangiosarcoma.
**Authors:** Tamburini BA, Phang TL, Fosmire SP, Scott MC, Trapp SC, Duckett MM, Robinson SR, Slansky JE, Sharkey LC, Cutter GR, Wojcieszyn JW, Bellgrau D, Gemmill RM, Hunter LE, Modiano JF
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2407-10-619](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2407-10-619)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2010 Nov 9;10:619. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-619.

Gene expression profiling identifies inflammation and angiogenesis as
distinguishing features of canine hemangiosarcoma.

Tamburini BA(1), Phang TL, Fosmire SP, Scott MC, Trapp SC, Duckett MM, Robinson
SR, Slansky JE, Sharkey LC, Cutter GR, Wojcieszyn JW, Bellgrau D, Gemmill RM,
Hunter LE, Modiano JF.

Author information:
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, University of Colorado, Denver, School
of Medicine, Denver, CO, USA.

BACKGROUND: The etiology of hemangiosarcoma remains incompletely understood. Its
common occurrence in dogs suggests predisposing factors favor its development in
this species. These factors could represent a constellation of heritable
characteristics that promote transformation events and/or facilitate the
establishment of a microenvironment that is conducive for survival of malignant
blood vessel-forming cells. The hypothesis for this study was that
characteristic molecular features distinguish hemangiosarcoma from non-malignant
endothelial cells, and that such features are informative for the etiology of
this disease.
METHODS: We first investigated mutations of VHL and Ras family genes that might
drive hemangiosarcoma by sequencing tumor DNA and mRNA (cDNA). Protein
expression was examined using immunostaining. Next, we evaluated genome-wide
gene expression profiling using the Affymetrix Canine 2.0 platform as a global
approach to test the hypothesis. Data were evaluated using routine
bioinformatics and validation was done using quantitative real time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Each of 10 tumor and four non-tumor samples analyzed had wild type
sequences for these genes. At the genome wide level, hemangiosarcoma cells
clustered separately from non-malignant endothelial cells based on a robust
signature that included genes involved in inflammation, angiogenesis, adhesion,
invasion, metabolism, cell cycle, signaling, and patterning. This signature did
not simply reflect a cancer-associated angiogenic phenotype, as it also
distinguished hemangiosarcoma from non-endothelial, moderately to highly
angiogenic bone marrow-derived tumors (lymphoma, leukemia, osteosarcoma).
CONCLUSIONS: The data show that inflammation and angiogenesis are important
processes in the pathogenesis of vascular tumors, but a definitive ontogeny of
the cells that give rise to these tumors remains to be established. The data do
not yet distinguish whether functional or ontogenetic plasticity creates this
phenotype, although they suggest that cells which give rise to hemangiosarcoma
modulate their microenvironment to promote tumor growth and survival. We propose
that the frequent occurrence of canine hemangiosarcoma in defined dog breeds, as
well as its similarity to homologous tumors in humans, offers unique models to
solve the dilemma of stem cell plasticity and whether angiogenic endothelial
cells and hematopoietic cells originate from a single cell or from distinct
progenitor cells.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-619
PMCID: PMC2994824
PMID: 21062482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
