---
reference_id: "PMID:25762570"
title: Adamtsl2 deletion results in bronchial fibrillin microfibril accumulation and bronchial epithelial dysplasia--a novel mouse model providing insights into geleophysic dysplasia.
authors:
- Hubmacher D
- Wang LW
- Mecham RP
- Reinhardt DP
- Apte SS
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.017046
keywords:
- ADAMTS Proteins
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/metabolism, pathology"
- "Bronchi/pathology, ultrastructure"
- Cellular Microenvironment
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Epithelium/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Fibrillin-1
- Fibrillin-2
- Fibrillins
- Gene Deletion
- Glycogen/metabolism
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/metabolism, pathology"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Microfibrils/metabolism
- Microfilament Proteins/metabolism
- Protein Binding
- Signal Transduction
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
- Adipokines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adamtsl2 deletion results in bronchial fibrillin microfibril accumulation and bronchial epithelial dysplasia--a novel mouse model providing insights into geleophysic dysplasia.
**Authors:** Hubmacher D, Wang LW, Mecham RP, Reinhardt DP, Apte SS
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.017046](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.017046)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2015 May;8(5):487-99. doi: 10.1242/dmm.017046. Epub 2015 Mar
11.

Adamtsl2 deletion results in bronchial fibrillin microfibril accumulation and
bronchial epithelial dysplasia--a novel mouse model providing insights into
geleophysic dysplasia.

Hubmacher D(1), Wang LW(2), Mecham RP(3), Reinhardt DP(4), Apte SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA hubmacd@ccf.org aptes@ccf.org.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and Faculty of Dentistry, McGill
University, 3640 University Street, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 0C7.

Mutations in the secreted glycoprotein ADAMTSL2 cause recessive geleophysic
dysplasia (GD) in humans and Musladin-Lueke syndrome (MLS) in dogs. GD is a
severe, often lethal, condition presenting with short stature, brachydactyly,
stiff skin, joint contractures, tracheal-bronchial stenosis and cardiac valve
anomalies, whereas MLS is non-lethal and characterized by short stature and
severe skin fibrosis. Although most mutations in fibrillin-1 (FBN1) cause Marfan
syndrome (MFS), a microfibril disorder leading to transforming growth factor-β
(TGFβ) dysregulation, domain-specific FBN1 mutations result in dominant GD.
ADAMTSL2 has been previously shown to bind FBN1 and latent TGFβ-binding
protein-1 (LTBP1). Here, we investigated mice with targeted Adamtsl2
inactivation as a new model for GD (Adamtsl2(-/-) mice). An intragenic lacZ
reporter in these mice showed that ADAMTSL2 was produced exclusively by
bronchial smooth muscle cells during embryonic lung development. Adamtsl2(-/-)
mice, which died at birth, had severe bronchial epithelial dysplasia with
abnormal glycogen-rich inclusions in bronchial epithelium resembling the
cellular anomalies described previously in GD. An increase in microfibrils in
the bronchial wall was associated with increased FBN2 and microfibril-associated
glycoprotein-1 (MAGP1) staining, whereas LTBP1 staining was increased in
bronchial epithelium. ADAMTSL2 was shown to bind directly to FBN2 with an
affinity comparable to FBN1. The observed extracellular matrix (ECM) alterations
were associated with increased bronchial epithelial TGFβ signaling at 17.5 days
of gestation; however, treatment with TGFβ-neutralizing antibody did not correct
the epithelial dysplasia. These investigations reveal a new function of ADAMTSL2
in modulating microfibril formation, and a previously unsuspected association
with FBN2. Our studies suggest that the bronchial epithelial dysplasia
accompanying microfibril dysregulation in Adamtsl2(-/-) mice cannot be reversed
by TGFβ neutralization, and thus might be mediated by other mechanisms.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.017046
PMCID: PMC4415891
PMID: 25762570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no
competing or financial interests.
