---
reference_id: PMID:17101685
title: Growth phase-dependent effect of clindamycin on production of exoproteins by Streptococcus pyogenes.
authors:
- Sawai J
- Hasegawa T
- Kamimura T
- Okamoto A
- Ohmori D
- Nosaka N
- Yamada K
- Torii K
- Ohta M
journal: Antimicrob Agents Chemother
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1128/AAC.00539-06
keywords:
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/pharmacology
- Bacterial Proteins/biosynthesis
- Clindamycin/pharmacology
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Bacterial/drug effects"
- Humans
- NAD+ Nucleosidase/biosynthesis
- "Streptococcal Infections/drug therapy, microbiology"
- "Streptococcus pyogenes/drug effects, growth & development, metabolism"
- Streptolysins/biosynthesis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth phase-dependent effect of clindamycin on production of exoproteins by Streptococcus pyogenes.
**Authors:** Sawai J, Hasegawa T, Kamimura T, Okamoto A, Ohmori D, Nosaka N, Yamada K, Torii K, Ohta M
**Journal:** Antimicrob Agents Chemother (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/AAC.00539-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.00539-06)

## Content

1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2007 Feb;51(2):461-7. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00539-06. 
Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Growth phase-dependent effect of clindamycin on production of exoproteins by 
Streptococcus pyogenes.

Sawai J(1), Hasegawa T, Kamimura T, Okamoto A, Ohmori D, Nosaka N, Yamada K, 
Torii K, Ohta M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Bacteriology, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Japan.

The administration of high-dose clindamycin plus benzylpenicillin has been 
recommended for the treatment of streptococcal toxic shock-like syndrome caused 
by Streptococcus pyogenes, and clindamycin has been found to be more effective 
than beta-lactams in retrospective analyses of human cases. Although therapeutic 
doses of clindamycin have also been shown to be effective against experimental 
infections and clindamycin has great efficacy against the production of 
bacterial exoproteins, we recently reported that the level of production of some 
exoproteins was unchanged or even increased by a subinhibitory dose of 
clindamycin when it is added upon the initiation of bacterial culture and the 
treated cultures were analyzed by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. In this 
study we further examined the effect of clindamycin on the production of 
exoproteins by adding it to Streptococcus pyogenes cultures during various 
growth phases. We found that the levels of production of some proteins, NAD+ 
glycohydrolase, streptolysin O, and streptococcal inhibitor of complement, were 
increased when clindamycin was added at early-log-phase growth, which was the 
result that was seen when clindamycin was added at the beginning of culture. 
However, clindamycin inhibited the production of most types of proteins when it 
was administered to Streptococcus pyogenes cultures at mid-log-phase growth. In 
csrS- or mga-knockout bacterial strains, the increase in exoproteins seen in 
parental strains was considerably inhibited. Our study indicates that the in 
vitro effect of clindamycin on the production of exoproteins greatly depends on 
the growth phase of bacteria and some regulatory factors of Streptococcus 
pyogenes that are involved in this phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00539-06
PMCID: PMC1797754
PMID: 17101685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]