---
reference_id: "PMID:35617449"
title: Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Sheppard SE
- Quintero-Rivera F
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Sheppard SE, Quintero-Rivera F

## Content

1. Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome.

Sheppard SE(1), Quintero-Rivera F(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2022 May 26.

Author information:
(1)Unit on Vascular Malformations, Division of Intramural Research, Eunice 
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
Bethesda, Maryland
(2)Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Departments of Pathology, 
Laboratory Medicine, and Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of 
California, Irvine;, UC Irvine Health, Orange, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome (WSS) is characterized by 
developmental delay, intellectual disability, and characteristic facial 
features, with or without additional congenital anomalies. The facial features 
include thick eyebrows with lateral flare, vertically narrow and downslanted 
palpebral fissures, widely spaced eyes, long eyelashes, wide nasal bridge, broad 
nasal tip, thin vermilion of the upper lip, and thick scalp hair. About 60% of 
affected individuals have hypertrichosis cubiti ("hairy elbows"), which was once 
thought to be pathognomic for the syndrome, with a majority having 
hypertrichosis of other body parts. Other clinical features include feeding 
difficulties, prenatal and postnatal growth restriction, epilepsy, 
ophthalmologic anomalies, congenital heart defects, hand anomalies (such as 
brachydactyly and clinodactyly), hypotonia, vertebral anomalies (especially 
fusion anomalies of the cervical spine), renal and uterine anomalies, immune 
dysfunction, brain malformations, and dental anomalies.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of WSS is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in KMT2A identified by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Feeding therapy with possible 
supplemental tube feeding for those with poor weight gain / failure to thrive; 
growth hormone therapy for those with growth hormone deficiency; thyroid 
replacement therapy for hypothyroidism; consideration of IVIG therapy in those 
with low antibody levels; consideration of prophylactic antibiotics in those 
with frequent infections; stool softeners or osmotic agents for bowel 
dysfunction; oculoplasty for blepharoptosis; CPAP, BiPAP, or surgical removal of 
the tonsils and adenoids for those with obstructive sleep apnea; behavioral 
therapy; standard treatment for epilepsy, developmental delay / intellectual 
disability, congenital hip dysplasia, cervical vertebral fusion, eye anomalies, 
congenital heart defects, renal anomalies, uterine anomalies, and metabolic bone 
disease (which may include vitamin D supplementation). Surveillance: At each 
visit: measurement of growth parameters; evaluation of nutritional status; 
assessment for constipation; evaluation for new neurologic features and seizure 
activity with EEG follow up as indicated; assessment of clinical signs of 
medullar compression; monitoring for signs/symptoms of arrhythmia; assessment of 
developmental progress, behavior, and physical skills; monitoring for frequent 
infections. Dental evaluation every six months after the eruption of primary 
teeth. Assessment for premature thelarche or primary amenorrhea in childhood 
until growth/menarche is complete. Ophthalmologic evaluation annually, or as 
clinically indicated. Agents/circumstances to avoid: The authors are aware of 
one individual with WSS who developed hyperammonemia with the use of the 
anti-seizure medication valproate. While this is not specific to individuals 
with WSS, valproate should be used with caution. Pregnancy management: In 
affected pregnant women who have a seizure disorder, discussion of the most 
appropriate anti-seizure medication regimen during pregnancy is recommended. 
Cervical spine anomalies may lead to immobility or instability, which may 
complicate airway management. Vertebral anomalies or scoliosis in the thoracic 
or lumbar spine may complicate spinal or epidural anesthesia.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Most individuals diagnosed with WSS whose parents have 
undergone molecular genetic testing have the disorder as the result of a de novo 
pathogenic variant. Rarely, individuals diagnosed with WSS have an affected 
parent. In this situation, WSS can be inherited in an autosomal dominant 
fashion. Each offspring of an individual with WSS is at a 50% risk of being 
affected. Once the KMT2A pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 35617449