---
reference_id: "PMID:17363907"
title: Treatment decision-making for patients with the Herlitz subtype of junctional epidermolysis bullosa.
authors:
- Yan EG
- Paris JJ
- Ahluwalia J
- Lane AT
- Bruckner AL
journal: J Perinatol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/sj.jp.7211694
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Decision Support Techniques
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa, Junctional/mortality, therapy"
- Ethics Committees
- "Ethics, Medical"
- "Euthanasia, Passive/ethics"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Palliative Care/ethics
- Professional-Family Relations
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment decision-making for patients with the Herlitz subtype of junctional epidermolysis bullosa.
**Authors:** Yan EG, Paris JJ, Ahluwalia J, Lane AT, Bruckner AL
**Journal:** J Perinatol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.jp.7211694](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jp.7211694)

## Content

1. J Perinatol. 2007 May;27(5):307-11. doi: 10.1038/sj.jp.7211694. Epub 2007 Mar 
15.

Treatment decision-making for patients with the Herlitz subtype of junctional 
epidermolysis bullosa.

Yan EG(1), Paris JJ, Ahluwalia J, Lane AT, Bruckner AL.

Author information:
(1)University of California San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, CA, 
USA.

The Herlitz subtype of junctional epidermolysis bullosa (JEB-H) is a lethal 
genetic disorder characterized by recurrent and persistent erosions of the 
epithelial surfaces that heal with exuberant granulation tissue. In addition, 
respiratory distress, refractory anemia and failure to thrive are often seen. 
Mortality in the first year of life approaches 90%. JEB-H is caused by mutations 
in the genes that encode the protein laminin 5, a structural molecule involved 
in the adhesion of epidermis to dermis. There is currently no cure for JEB-H. 
Medical interventions treat complications but do not ultimately limit mortality. 
Ethical principles contend that offering comfort and company to the patient and 
family, not aggressive therapies, should comprise the mainstay of care for 
affected infants.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.jp.7211694
PMID: 17363907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]