---
reference_id: "PMID:39125597"
title: "Vitamin B(12) Metabolism: A Network of Multi-Protein Mediated Processes."
authors:
- Mucha P
- Kus F
- Cysewski D
- Smolenski RT
- Tomczyk M
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25158021
keywords:
- Humans
- Vitamin B 12/metabolism
- Vitamin B 12 Deficiency/metabolism
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitamin B(12) Metabolism: A Network of Multi-Protein Mediated Processes.
**Authors:** Mucha P, Kus F, Cysewski D, Smolenski RT, Tomczyk M
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25158021](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25158021)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jul 23;25(15):8021. doi: 10.3390/ijms25158021.

Vitamin B(12) Metabolism: A Network of Multi-Protein Mediated Processes.

Mucha P(1), Kus F(1)(2), Cysewski D(3), Smolenski RT(1), Tomczyk M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical University of Gdansk, 80-210 Gdansk, 
Poland.
(2)Laboratory of Protein Biochemistry, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology 
of University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk, 80-307 Gdansk, Poland.
(3)Clinical Research Centre, Medical University of Bialystok, 15-276 Bialystok, 
Poland.

The water-soluble vitamin, vitamin B12, also known as cobalamin, plays a crucial 
role in cellular metabolism, particularly in DNA synthesis, methylation, and 
mitochondrial functionality. Its deficiency can lead to hematological and 
neurological disorders; however, the manifestation of these clinical outcomes is 
relatively late. It leads to difficulties in the early diagnosis of vitamin B12 
deficiency. A prolonged lack of vitamin B12 may have severe consequences 
including increased morbidity to neurological and cardiovascular diseases. 
Beyond inadequate dietary intake, vitamin B12 deficiency might be caused by 
insufficient bioavailability, blood transport disruptions, or impaired cellular 
uptake and metabolism. Despite nearly 70 years of knowledge since the isolation 
and characterization of this vitamin, there are still gaps in understanding its 
metabolic pathways. Thus, this review aims to compile current knowledge about 
the crucial proteins necessary to efficiently accumulate and process vitamin B12 
in humans, presenting these systems as a multi-protein network. The 
epidemiological consequences, diagnosis, and treatment of vitamin B12 deficiency 
are also highlighted. We also discuss clinical warnings of vitamin B12 
deficiency based on the ongoing test of specific moonlighting proteins engaged 
in vitamin B12 metabolic pathways.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25158021
PMCID: PMC11311337
PMID: 39125597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.