---
reference_id: "PMID:22134259"
title: Acute cranial decompression in Meckel-Gruber syndrome and slit-ventricle syndrome with craniocephalic disproportion.
authors:
- Moses M
- Ranger A
- Yazdani A
journal: J Craniofac Surg
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e318232a5d0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute cranial decompression in Meckel-Gruber syndrome and slit-ventricle syndrome with craniocephalic disproportion.
**Authors:** Moses M, Ranger A, Yazdani A
**Journal:** J Craniofac Surg (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SCS.0b013e318232a5d0](https://doi.org/10.1097/SCS.0b013e318232a5d0)

## Content

1. J Craniofac Surg. 2011 Nov;22(6):2288-91. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e318232a5d0.

Acute cranial decompression in Meckel-Gruber syndrome and slit-ventricle 
syndrome with craniocephalic disproportion.

Moses M(1), Ranger A, Yazdani A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Plastic Surgery, University of Western Ontario, London Health 
Science Center, Victoria Hospital, London, Ontario, Canada.

Slit-ventricle syndrome (SVS) is characterized by headaches associated with 
subnormal ventricular size in patients with shunt-treated hydrocephalus. It 
commonly occurs in children who have had shunts placed at an early age and is 
diagnosed when computed tomography scans are carried out to investigate 
suspected shunt obstruction with an accompanying rise in intracranial pressure 
(ICP). Overdrainage of cerebrospinal fluid may additionally result in 
craniocephalic disproportion, potentially by dampening the normal expansile 
pulsations of the dura against the skull, which leads to craniostenosis. 
Management is controversial because many strategies have only short-term 
benefit, and surgical intervention is understandably often seen as a last 
resort.We present a case of a child with SVS and craniocephalic disproportion 
who was treated with urgent cranial expansion due to rising ICP. Intraoperative 
ICP monitoring demonstrates a rapid and sustained drop in ICP, and the patient 
made an uneventful return to his premorbid condition. We conclude that cranial 
vault expansion should be considered as an effective treatment for postshunt 
craniocephalic disproportion in patients with SVS.

DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e318232a5d0
PMID: 22134259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]