---
reference_id: "PMID:41333400"
title: "Timothy Syndrome and CACNA1C-Related Disorder: First International Language and Management Guidelines Consensus Statement."
authors:
- Underwood JFG
- Timothy KW
- Tyroll H
- Levy RJ
- Dick IE
- Pitt GS
- Tunbridge EM
- Baban A
- Wilkinson G
- Hall NAL
- Brugada GS
- Bauer R
- Abrams D
- Hall J
- Timothy Syndrome Foundation
- Timothy Syndrome Alliance (TSA)
journal: Res Sq
year: '2025'
doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-8058536/v1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Timothy Syndrome and CACNA1C-Related Disorder: First International Language and Management Guidelines Consensus Statement.
**Authors:** Underwood JFG, Timothy KW, Tyroll H, Levy RJ, Dick IE, Pitt GS, Tunbridge EM, Baban A, Wilkinson G, Hall NAL, Brugada GS, Bauer R, Abrams D, Hall J, Timothy Syndrome Foundation, Timothy Syndrome Alliance (TSA)
**Journal:** Res Sq (2025)
**DOI:** [10.21203/rs.3.rs-8058536/v1](https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-8058536/v1)

## Content

1. Res Sq [Preprint]. 2025 Nov 17:rs.3.rs-8058536. doi:
10.21203/rs.3.rs-8058536/v1.

Timothy Syndrome and CACNA1C-Related Disorder: First International Language and
Management Guidelines Consensus Statement.

Underwood JFG(1), Timothy KW(2), Tyroll H(1), Levy RJ(3), Dick IE(4), Pitt
GS(5), Tunbridge EM(6), Baban A(7), Wilkinson G(1), Hall NAL(6), Brugada GS(7),
Bauer R(2), Abrams D(8), Hall J(1); Timothy Syndrome Foundation; Timothy
Syndrome Alliance (TSA).

Author information:
(1)Cardiff University.
(2)The Timothy Syndrome Foundation.
(3)Stanford University.
(4)University of Maryland, Baltimore.
(5)Cornell University.
(6)University of Oxford.
(7)ERN GUARD-Heart.
(8)Boston Children's Hospital.

Timothy Syndrome is a multisystemic genetic disorder, classically characterised
by prolonged QT interval and subsequent cardiac arrhythmias, neurodevelopmental
disorders including developmental delay and autism, and syndactyly or hip
dysplasia. It is caused by variants in the CACNA1C gene, which encodes the
widely expressed Cav1.2 voltage-gated calcium channel. Since it's
characterisation in 2004, the spread of variants in CACNA1C associated with
Timothy Syndrome has expanded. With advances in sequencing and the inclusion of
CACNA1C in genomic screening, further variants have been identified presenting
with incomplete features of Timothy Syndrome or further aligned phenotypes which
are inconsistent with the original description. In the absence of a formal
nomenclature, these presentations have been reported in a proliferation of
ill-defined terms, e.g. Atypical Timothy Syndrome. At the same time, advances in
knowledge and therapeutics have improved morbidity and life expectancy for these
individuals when appropriately identified and managed. Here, we present
guidelines for the diagnosis of individuals presenting with variants in CACNA1C,
developed by an international panel of experts through Delphi consensus with the
involvement of the CACNA1C community. We formalise the language around syndromic
presentations linked to CACNA1C variants, reassert and demarcate the classical
Timothy Syndrome phenotype, and define a new syndrome, CACNA1C-Related Disorder.
Finally, we present minimum expected standards of clinical care for individuals
with CACNA1C-Related Disorder or Timothy Syndrome, with implications for
long-term management and improved outcomes for affected individuals.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-8058536/v1
PMCID: PMC12668126
PMID: 41333400
