---
reference_id: "PMID:34468934"
title: The Pathogenesis and Management of Acne-Induced Post-inflammatory Hyperpigmentation.
authors:
- Elbuluk N
- Grimes P
- Chien A
- Hamzavi I
- Alexis A
- Taylor S
- Gonzalez N
- Weiss J
- Desai SR
- Kang S
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s40257-021-00633-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Pathogenesis and Management of Acne-Induced Post-inflammatory Hyperpigmentation.
**Authors:** Elbuluk N, Grimes P, Chien A, Hamzavi I, Alexis A, Taylor S, Gonzalez N, Weiss J, Desai SR, Kang S
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40257-021-00633-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40257-021-00633-4)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2021 Nov;22(6):829-836. doi: 10.1007/s40257-021-00633-4. 
Epub 2021 Sep 1.

The Pathogenesis and Management of Acne-Induced Post-inflammatory 
Hyperpigmentation.

Elbuluk N(1), Grimes P(2), Chien A(3), Hamzavi I(4), Alexis A(5), Taylor S(6), 
Gonzalez N(7), Weiss J(8)(9), Desai SR(10)(11), Kang S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, 830 S Flower Street, Suite 100, Los Angeles, CA, 90017, USA. 
nada.elbuluk@med.usc.edu.
(2)Department of Dermatology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California - Los Angeles, CA, Los Angeles, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.
(9)Georgia Dermatology Partners and Gwinnett Clinical Research Center, 
Snellville, GA, USA.
(10)Department of Dermatology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(11)Innovative Dermatology, Plano, TX, USA.

Acne vulgaris is a common inflammatory disease. Among patients with darker skin 
phototypes (Fitzpatrick III-VI), the inflammatory processes of acne stimulate 
excess melanogenesis and abnormal melanin deposition, leading to pigmentary 
sequelae known as post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation and post-inflammatory 
erythema in all skin tones, although post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation is more 
common in darker skin and post-inflammatory erythema in lighter skin. These 
pigmentary alterations can be long lasting and are often more distressing to 
patients than the active acne lesions. This article discusses what is known 
about acne-related pigmentation, much of which is extrapolated from general 
study of nonspecific pigment deposition. Because dyspigmentation poses both a 
significant clinical concern to patients and a therapeutic challenge to 
clinicians, we formed a working group consisting of pigmentary experts with the 
aim of increasing awareness and education of acne-related pigmentary sequelae.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40257-021-00633-4
PMID: 34468934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]