---
reference_id: "PMID:35872103"
title: "Autoantibodies in systemic lupus erythematosus: From immunopathology to therapeutic target."
authors:
- Lou H
- Ling GS
- Cao X
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2022.102861
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoantibodies in systemic lupus erythematosus: From immunopathology to therapeutic target.
**Authors:** Lou H, Ling GS, Cao X
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2022.102861](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2022.102861)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2022 Oct;132:102861. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2022.102861. Epub 2022
Jul  21.

Autoantibodies in systemic lupus erythematosus: From immunopathology to 
therapeutic target.

Lou H(1), Ling GS(2), Cao X(3).

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute of Cancer Research, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7DR, 
UK; Chinese Academy for Medical Sciences Oxford Institute, Nuffield Department 
of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7FZ, UK. Electronic address: 
hantao.lou@ludwig.ox.ac.uk.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Chinese Academy for Medical Sciences Oxford Institute, Nuffield Department of 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7FZ, UK; Nankai-Oxford International 
Advanced Institute, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, 
300071, China. Electronic address: caoxt@immunol.org.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease characterized by 
multiple organ inflammatory damage and wide spectrum of autoantibodies. The 
autoantibodies, especially anti-dsDNA and anti-Sm autoantibodies are highly 
specific to SLE, and participate in the immune complex formation and 
inflammatory damage on multiple end-organs such as kidney, skin, and central 
nervous system (CNS). However, the underlying mechanisms of autoantibody-induced 
tissue damage and systemic inflammation are still not fully understood. Single 
cell analysis of autoreactive B cells and monoclonal antibody screening from 
patients with active SLE has improved our understanding on the origin of 
autoreactive B cells and the antigen targets of the pathogenic autoantibodies. B 
cell depletion therapies have been widely studied in the clinics, but the 
development of more specific therapies against the pathogenic B cell subset and 
autoantibodies with improved efficacy and safety still remain a big challenge. A 
more comprehensive autoantibody profiling combined with functional 
characterization of autoantibodies in diseases development will shed new 
insights on the etiology and pathogenesis of SLE and guide a specific treatment 
to individual SLE patients.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2022.102861
PMID: 35872103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no competing interests.