---
reference_id: "PMID:31159867"
title: IFITM5 pathogenic variant causes osteogenesis imperfecta V with various phenotype severity in Ukrainian and Vietnamese patients.
authors:
- Zhytnik L
- Maasalu K
- Duy BH
- Pashenko A
- Khmyzov S
- Reimann E
- Prans E
- Kõks S
- Märtson A
journal: Hum Genomics
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s40246-019-0209-3
keywords:
- "5' Untranslated Regions/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- "Collagen Type I, alpha 1 Chain"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Ukraine/epidemiology
- Vietnam/epidemiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IFITM5 pathogenic variant causes osteogenesis imperfecta V with various phenotype severity in Ukrainian and Vietnamese patients.
**Authors:** Zhytnik L, Maasalu K, Duy BH, Pashenko A, Khmyzov S, Reimann E, Prans E, Kõks S, Märtson A
**Journal:** Hum Genomics (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40246-019-0209-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40246-019-0209-3)

## Content

1. Hum Genomics. 2019 Jun 3;13(1):25. doi: 10.1186/s40246-019-0209-3.

IFITM5 pathogenic variant causes osteogenesis imperfecta V with various 
phenotype severity in Ukrainian and Vietnamese patients.

Zhytnik L(1), Maasalu K(2)(3), Duy BH(4), Pashenko A(5), Khmyzov S(5), Reimann 
E(6)(7), Prans E(7), Kõks S(8), Märtson A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Traumatology and Orthopeadics, University of Tartu, Puusepa 8, 
51014, Tartu, Estonia. Lidiia.Zhytnik@ut.ee.
(2)Department of Traumatology and Orthopeadics, University of Tartu, Puusepa 8, 
51014, Tartu, Estonia.
(3)Clinic of Traumatology and Orthopeadics, Tartu University Hospital, Puusepa 
8, 51014, Tartu, Estonia.
(4)Hue University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Hue University, Hue, Vietnam.
(5)Department of Pediatric Orthopedics, Sytenko Institute of Spine and Joint 
Pathology, AMS Ukraine, Pushkinska 80, Kharkiv, 61024, Ukraine.
(6)Centre of Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Ravila 14a, 50411, 
Tartu, Estonia.
(7)Department of Pathophysiology, University of Tartu, Ravila 19, 50411, Tartu, 
Estonia.
(8)Perron Institute for Neurological and Translational Science, QEII Medical 
Centre, Nedlands, WA, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) covers a spectrum of bone fragility 
disorders. OI is classified into five types; however, the genetic causes of OI 
might hide in pathogenic variants of 20 different genes. Often clinical OI types 
mimic each other. This sometimes makes it impossible to identify the OI type 
clinically, which can be a risk for patients. Up to 90% of OI types I-IV are 
caused by pathogenic variants in the COL1A1/2 genes. OI type V is caused by the 
c.-14C > T pathogenic variant in the 5'UTR of the IFITM5 gene and is 
characterized by hyperplastic callus formation and the ossification of 
interosseous membranes.
RESULTS: In the current study, we performed IFITM5 5'UTR region mutational 
analysis using Sanger sequencing on 90 patients who were negative for COL1A1/2 
pathogenic variants. We also investigated the phenotypes of five patients with 
genetically confirmed OI type V. The proportion of OI type V patients in our 
cohort of all OI patients was 1.48%. In one family, there was a history of OI in 
at least three generations. Phenotype severity differed from mild to extremely 
severe among patients, but all patients harbored the same typical pathogenic 
variant. One patient had no visible symptoms of OI type V and was suspected to 
have had OI type IV previously. We also identified a case of extremely severe 
hyperplastic callus in a 15-year-old male, who has hearing loss and brittleness 
of teeth.
CONCLUSIONS: OI type V is underlined with some unique clinical features; 
however, not all patients develop them. The phenotype spectrum might be even 
broader than previously suspected, including typical OI features: teeth 
brittleness, bluish sclera, hearing loss, long bones deformities, and joint 
laxity. We suggest that all patients negative for COL1A1/2 pathogenic variants 
be tested for the presence of an IFITM5 pathogenic variant, even if they are not 
expressing typical OI type V symptoms. Further studies on the pathological 
nature and hyperplastic callus formation mechanisms of OI type V are necessary.

DOI: 10.1186/s40246-019-0209-3
PMCID: PMC6547447
PMID: 31159867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.