---
reference_id: "PMID:19434632"
title: Oral rapamycin reduces tumour burden and vascularization in Lkb1(+/-) mice.
authors:
- Robinson J
- Lai C
- Martin A
- Nye E
- Tomlinson I
- Silver A
journal: J Pathol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/path.2562
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral rapamycin reduces tumour burden and vascularization in Lkb1(+/-) mice.
**Authors:** Robinson J, Lai C, Martin A, Nye E, Tomlinson I, Silver A
**Journal:** J Pathol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/path.2562](https://doi.org/10.1002/path.2562)

## Content

1. J Pathol. 2009 Sep;219(1):35-40. doi: 10.1002/path.2562.

Oral rapamycin reduces tumour burden and vascularization in Lkb1(+/-) mice.

Robinson J(1), Lai C, Martin A, Nye E, Tomlinson I, Silver A.

Author information:
(1)Colorectal Cancer Genetics, Institute of Cell and Molecular Sciences, Barts 
and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of 
London, London, UK.

Patients with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) are affected by hamartomatous 
intestinal polyposis and increased risk of cancers in multiple organs caused by 
germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene LKB1. Murine models that 
recapitulate aspects of PJS have been created. Here we examine the therapeutic 
effect of rapamycin, a macrolide with anti-tumourigenic and anti-angiogenic 
properties, in reducing tumour incidence in a large cohort of Lkb1(+/-) mice. To 
study the influence of early intervention, the animals were dosed with rapamycin 
from the age of 8 weeks, well before the onset of polyposis. These mice 
continued to receive the drug, which was well tolerated, throughout their lives. 
At sacrifice, we observed a reduction in gastric tumour burden in the 
rapamycin-treated mice (p = 0.0001) compared with age- and sex-matched controls. 
Treated animals also have a lower number of polyps per mouse than controls. In 
the polyps from the treated mice, phosphorylation of ribosomal p70 S6 kinase was 
maintained, while the phosphorylation of AKT at serine-473 was elevated, 
suggesting that mTORC1 function is maintained at this dosage. Despite this, a 
significant reduction in microvessel density was seen in polyps from the 
rapamycin-treated mice compared to those from the control mice (p = 5 x 10(-5)), 
suggesting that the anti-angiogenic effect of rapamycin played a role in polyp 
reduction. Overall, we demonstrated that prolonged oral administration of 
rapamycin from an early age is effective in lowering tumour burden in the 
Lkb1(+/-) mice without evident side effects.

DOI: 10.1002/path.2562
PMID: 19434632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]