---
reference_id: PMID:15858184
title: Respiratory syncytial virus infection in elderly and high-risk adults.
authors:
- Falsey AR
- Hennessey PA
- Formica MA
- Cox C
- Walsh EE
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa043951
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Chronic Disease
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- "Health Services/statistics & numerical data"
- Heart Diseases/complications
- Heart Failure/complications
- "Hospitalization/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Influenza A virus
- "Influenza, Human/epidemiology"
- Lung Diseases/complications
- Male
- Middle Aged
- New York/epidemiology
- "Pneumonia, Viral/epidemiology, virology"
- Prospective Studies
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/complications"
- "Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections/complications, epidemiology"
- "Respiratory Syncytial Viruses/isolation & purification"
- "Respiratory Tract Infections/complications, epidemiology, virology"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory syncytial virus infection in elderly and high-risk adults.
**Authors:** Falsey AR, Hennessey PA, Formica MA, Cox C, Walsh EE
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa043951](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa043951)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2005 Apr 28;352(17):1749-59. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa043951.

Respiratory syncytial virus infection in elderly and high-risk adults.

Falsey AR(1), Hennessey PA, Formica MA, Cox C, Walsh EE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Rochester General Hospital, Rochester, NY 14621, USA. 
ann.falsey@viahealth.org

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Apr 28;352(17):1810-2. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe058036.
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Jul 28;353(4):422-3; author reply 422-3. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM200507283530422.
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Jul 28;353(4):422-3; author reply 422-3.

BACKGROUND: Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is an increasingly recognized 
cause of illness in adults. Data on the epidemiology and clinical effects in 
community-dwelling elderly persons and high-risk adults can help in assessing 
the need for vaccine development.
METHODS: During four consecutive winters, we evaluated all respiratory illnesses 
in prospective cohorts of healthy elderly patients (> or =65 years of age) and 
high-risk adults (those with chronic heart or lung disease) and in patients 
hospitalized with acute cardiopulmonary conditions. RSV infection and influenza 
A were diagnosed on the basis of culture, reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain 
reaction, and serologic studies.
RESULTS: A total of 608 healthy elderly patients and 540 high-risk adults were 
enrolled in prospective surveillance, and 1388 hospitalized patients were 
enrolled. A total of 2514 illnesses were evaluated. RSV infection was identified 
in 102 patients in the prospective cohorts and 142 hospitalized patients, and 
influenza A was diagnosed in 44 patients in the prospective cohorts and 154 
hospitalized patients. RSV infection developed annually in 3 to 7 percent of 
healthy elderly patients and in 4 to 10 percent of high-risk adults. Among 
healthy elderly patients, RSV infection generated fewer office visits than 
influenza; however, the use of health care services by high-risk adults was 
similar in the two groups. In the hospitalized cohort, RSV infection and 
influenza A resulted in similar lengths of stay, rates of use of intensive care 
(15 percent and 12 percent, respectively), and mortality (8 percent and 7 
percent, respectively). On the basis of the diagnostic codes of the 
International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification at 
discharge, RSV infection accounted for 10.6 percent of hospitalizations for 
pneumonia, 11.4 percent for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 5.4 percent 
for congestive heart failure, and 7.2 percent for asthma.
CONCLUSIONS: RSV infection is an important illness in elderly and high-risk 
adults, with a disease burden similar to that of nonpandemic influenza A in a 
population in which the prevalence of vaccination for influenza is high. An 
effective RSV vaccine may offer benefits for these adults.

Copyright 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa043951
PMID: 15858184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]