---
reference_id: "PMID:10337369"
title: "Rhabdomyosarcoma: an overview."
authors:
- Dagher R
- Helman L
journal: Oncologist
year: '1999'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rhabdomyosarcoma: an overview.
**Authors:** Dagher R, Helman L
**Journal:** Oncologist (1999)

## Content

1. Oncologist. 1999;4(1):34-44.

Rhabdomyosarcoma: an overview.

Dagher R(1), Helman L.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a malignant tumor of mesenchymal origin thought to 
arise from cells committed to a skeletal muscle lineage. With approximately 250 
cases diagnosed yearly in the United States, it is the third most common 
extracranial solid tumor of childhood after Wilms' tumor and neuroblastoma. 
Important epidemiologic, biologic, and therapeutic differences have been 
elucidated within the RMS family. Common sites of primary disease include the 
head and neck region, genitourinary tract, and extremities. A site-based 
tumor-nodes-metastasis staging system is being incorporated into use for 
assessing prognosis and assigning therapy in conjunction with the traditional 
surgicopathologic clinical grouping system. The development of intensive 
multimodality treatment protocols tested in large-scale international trials has 
resulted in significant improvements in outcome, especially for patients with 
local or locally extensive disease for whom a 60%-70% disease-free survival can 
be expected. Despite aggressive approaches incorporating surgery, dose-intensive 
combination chemotherapy, and radiation therapy, the outcome for patients with 
metastatic disease remains poor. Future challenges include the development of 
less toxic therapy for patients with localized disease and new approaches for 
patients with metastatic disease.

PMID: 10337369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]