---
reference_id: "PMID:17242276"
title: "Defining the cellular phenotype of \"ankyrin-B syndrome\" variants: human ANK2 variants associated with clinical phenotypes display a spectrum of activities in cardiomyocytes."
authors:
- Mohler PJ
- Le Scouarnec S
- Denjoy I
- Lowe JS
- Guicheney P
- Caron L
- Driskell IM
- Schott JJ
- Norris K
- Leenhardt A
- Kim RB
- Escande D
- Roden DM
journal: Circulation
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.656512
keywords:
- Aged
- Animals
- Ankyrins/genetics
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/chemically induced, ethnology, genetics"
- Asian People/genetics
- Black People/genetics
- Cytoskeleton/physiology
- Female
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- Humans
- Ion Channels/physiology
- "Long QT Syndrome/chemically induced, ethnology, genetics"
- Male
- Mexican Americans/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Middle Aged
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/cytology, physiology"
- Phenotype
- "Tachycardia, Ventricular/chemically induced, ethnology, genetics"
- "Torsades de Pointes/chemically induced, ethnology, genetics"
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defining the cellular phenotype of "ankyrin-B syndrome" variants: human ANK2 variants associated with clinical phenotypes display a spectrum of activities in cardiomyocytes.
**Authors:** Mohler PJ, Le Scouarnec S, Denjoy I, Lowe JS, Guicheney P, Caron L, Driskell IM, Schott JJ, Norris K, Leenhardt A, Kim RB, Escande D, Roden DM
**Journal:** Circulation (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.656512](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.656512)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2007 Jan 30;115(4):432-41. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.656512.  Epub 2007 Jan 22.

Defining the cellular phenotype of "ankyrin-B syndrome" variants: human ANK2
variants associated with clinical phenotypes display a spectrum of activities in
cardiomyocytes.

Mohler PJ(1), Le Scouarnec S, Denjoy I, Lowe JS, Guicheney P, Caron L, Driskell
IM, Schott JJ, Norris K, Leenhardt A, Kim RB, Escande D, Roden DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa
City, USA. peter-mohler@uiowa.edu

Comment in
    Circulation. 2007 Jan 30;115(4):428-9. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.675389.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the ankyrin-B gene (ANK2) cause type 4 long-QT syndrome
and have been described in kindreds with other arrhythmias. The frequency of
ANK2 variants in large populations and molecular mechanisms underlying the
variability in the clinical phenotypes are not established. More importantly,
there is no cellular explanation for the range of severity of cardiac phenotypes
associated with specific ANK2 variants.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed a comprehensive screen of ANK2 in populations
(control, congenital arrhythmia, drug-induced long-QT syndrome) of different
ethnicities to discover unidentified ANK2 variants. We identified 7 novel
nonsynonymous ANK2 variants; 4 displayed abnormal activity in cardiomyocytes.
Including the 4 new variants, 9 human ANK2 loss-of-function variants have been
identified. However, the clinical phenotypes associated with these variants vary
strikingly, from no obvious phenotype to manifest long-QT syndrome and sudden
death, suggesting that mutants confer a spectrum of cellular phenotypes. We then
characterized the relative severity of loss-of-function properties of all 9
nonsynonymous ANK2 variants identified to date in primary cardiomyocytes and
identified a range of in vitro phenotypes, including wild-type, simple
loss-of-function, and severe loss-of-function activity, seen with the variants
causing severe human phenotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: We present the first description of differences in cellular
phenotypes conferred by specific ANK2 variants. We propose that the various
degrees of ankyrin-B loss of function contribute to the range of severity of
cardiac dysfunction. These data identify ANK2 variants as modulators of human
arrhythmias, provide the first insight into the clinical spectrum of "ankyrin-B
syndrome," and reinforce the role of ankyrin-B-dependent protein interactions in
regulating cardiac electrogenesis.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.656512
PMID: 17242276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
