---
reference_id: "PMID:39700658"
title: "European consensus-based interdisciplinary guideline for melanoma. Part 1: Diagnostics - Update 2024."
authors:
- Garbe C
- Amaral T
- Peris K
- Hauschild A
- Arenberger P
- Basset-Seguin N
- Bastholt L
- Bataille V
- Brochez L
- Del Marmol V
- Dréno B
- Eggermont AMM
- Fargnoli MC
- Forsea AM
- Höller C
- Kaufmann R
- Kelleners-Smeets N
- Lallas A
- Lebbé C
- Leiter U
- Longo C
- Malvehy J
- Moreno-Ramirez D
- Nathan P
- Pellacani G
- Saiag P
- Stockfleth E
- Stratigos AJ
- Van Akkooi ACJ
- Vieira R
- Zalaudek I
- Lorigan P
- Mandala M
- "European Association of Dermato-Oncology (EADO), the European Dermatology Forum (EDF), and the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC)"
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2024.115152
keywords:
- Humans
- Consensus
- "Dermoscopy/methods, standards"
- Europe
- "Melanoma/diagnosis, therapy, pathology"
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, therapy, pathology"
- Systematic Reviews as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# European consensus-based interdisciplinary guideline for melanoma. Part 1: Diagnostics - Update 2024.
**Authors:** Garbe C, Amaral T, Peris K, Hauschild A, Arenberger P, Basset-Seguin N, Bastholt L, Bataille V, Brochez L, Del Marmol V, Dréno B, Eggermont AMM, Fargnoli MC, Forsea AM, Höller C, Kaufmann R, Kelleners-Smeets N, Lallas A, Lebbé C, Leiter U, Longo C, Malvehy J, Moreno-Ramirez D, Nathan P, Pellacani G, Saiag P, Stockfleth E, Stratigos AJ, Van Akkooi ACJ, Vieira R, Zalaudek I, Lorigan P, Mandala M, European Association of Dermato-Oncology (EADO), the European Dermatology Forum (EDF), and the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC)
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2024.115152](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2024.115152)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2025 Jan 17;215:115152. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2024.115152. Epub
2024  Nov 28.

European consensus-based interdisciplinary guideline for melanoma. Part 1:
Diagnostics - Update 2024.

Garbe C(1), Amaral T(2), Peris K(3), Hauschild A(4), Arenberger P(5),
Basset-Seguin N(6), Bastholt L(7), Bataille V(8), Brochez L(9), Del Marmol
V(10), Dréno B(11), Eggermont AMM(12), Fargnoli MC(13), Forsea AM(14), Höller
C(15), Kaufmann R(16), Kelleners-Smeets N(17), Lallas A(18), Lebbé C(6), Leiter
U(2), Longo C(19), Malvehy J(20), Moreno-Ramirez D(21), Nathan P(22), Pellacani
G(23), Saiag P(24), Stockfleth E(25), Stratigos AJ(26), Van Akkooi ACJ(27),
Vieira R(28), Zalaudek I(29), Lorigan P(30), Mandala M(31); European Association
of Dermato-Oncology (EADO), the European Dermatology Forum (EDF), and the
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC).

Author information:
(1)Center for Dermatooncology, Department of Dermatology, Eberhard Karls
University, Tuebingen, Germany. Electronic address:
claus.garbe@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(2)Center for Dermatooncology, Department of Dermatology, Eberhard Karls
University, Tuebingen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Dermatology, Università Cattolica, Rome, and Fondazione
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli - IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein (UKSH),
Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(5)Department of Dermatovenereology, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(6)Université Paris Cite, AP-HP department of Dermatology INSERM U 976 Hôpital
Saint Louis Paris France.
(7)Department of Oncology, Odense University Hospital, Denmark.
(8)Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology Unit, School of Basic & Medical
Biosciences, King's College London, London SE1 7EH, UK.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(10)Department of Dermatology, Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Brussels, Belgium.
(11)Nantes Université, INSERM, CNRS, Immunology and New Concepts in
ImmunoTherapy, INCIT, UMR 1302/EMR6001, F-44000 Nantes, France.
(12)University Medical Center Utrecht & Princess Maxima Center, Utrecht, the
Netherlands; Comprehensive Cancer Center Munich of the Technical University
Munich and the Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany.
(13)San Gallicano Dermatological Institute - IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(14)Dermatology Department, Elias University Hospital, Carol Davila University
of Medicine and Pharmacy Bucharest, Romania.
(15)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.
(16)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Frankfurt University
Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany.
(17)Department of Dermatology, Maastricht University Medical Center+,
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(18)First Department of Dermatology, Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(19)Department of Dermatology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
and Azienda Unità Sanitaria Locale - IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Skin Cancer Centre,
Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(20)Melanoma Unit, Department of Dermatology, Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS,
Barcelona, Spain; University of Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques
August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras CIBERER, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain.
(21)Medical-&-Surgical Dermatology Service. Hospital Universitario Virgen
Macarena, Sevilla, Spain.
(22)Mount Vernon Cancer Centre, Northwood United Kingdom.
(23)Dermatology Unit, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(24)University Department of Dermatology, Université de Versailles-Saint Quentin
en Yvelines, APHP, Boulogne, France.
(25)Skin Cancer Center, Department of Dermatology, Ruhr-University Bochum, 44791
Bochum, Germany.
(26)1st Department of Dermatology, National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens School of Medicine, Andreas Sygros Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(27)Melanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, and Royal Prince
Alfred Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(28)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário
de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(29)Dermatology Clinic, Maggiore Hospital, University of Trieste, Trieste,
Italy.
(30)The University of Manchester, Oxford Rd, Manchester M13 9PL, UK.
(31)University of Perugia, Unit of Medical Oncology, Santa Maria della
Misericordia Hospital, Perugia, Italy.

This guideline was developed in close collaboration with multidisciplinary
experts from the European Association of Dermato-Oncology (EADO), the European
Dermatology Forum (EDF) and the European Organization for Research and Treatment
of Cancer (EORTC). Recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of melanoma
were developed on the basis of systematic literature research and consensus
conferences. Cutaneous melanoma (CM) is the most dangerous form of skin tumor
and accounts for 90 % of skin cancer mortality. The diagnosis of melanoma can be
made clinically and must always be confirmed by dermoscopy. If melanoma is
suspected, a histopathological examination is always required. Sequential
digital dermoscopy and whole-body photography can be used in high-risk patients
to improve the detection of early-stage melanoma. If available, confocal
reflectance microscopy can also improve the clinical diagnosis in special cases.
Melanoma is classified according to the 8th version of the American Joint
Committee on Cancer classification. For thin melanomas up to a tumor thickness
of 0.8 mm, no further diagnostic imaging is required. From stage IB, lymph node
sonography is recommended, but no further imaging examinations. From stage
IIB/C, whole-body examinations with computed tomography or positron emission
tomography CT in combination with magnetic resonance imaging of the brain are
recommended. From stage IIB/C and higher, a mutation test is recommended,
especially for the BRAF V600 mutation. It is important to perform a structured
follow-up to detect relapses and secondary primary melanomas as early as
possible. A stage-based follow-up regimen is proposed, which in the experience
of the guideline group covers the optimal requirements, although further studies
may be considered. This guideline is valid until the end of 2026.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2024.115152
PMID: 39700658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests: Dr. Amaral reports personal fees
for advisory board membership from Delcath and Philogen; personal fees as an
invited speaker from BMS, Neracare, Novartis and Pierre Fabre; personal fees for
a writing engagement from CeCaVa and Medtrix; institutional fees as local
principal investigator (PI) from Agenus Inc., AstraZeneca, BioNTech, BMS, HUYA
Bioscience, Immunocore, IO Biotech, MSD, Pfizer, Philogen, Regeneron, Roche and
University Hospital Essen; institutional fees as coordinating PI from Unicancer;
institutional research grants from iFIT and Novartis; institutional funding from
MNI - Naturwissenschaftliches und Medizinisches Institut, Neracare, Novartis,
Pascoe, Sanofi and Skyline-Dx; non-remunerated membership of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) and the Portuguese Society for Medical
Oncology; and a role as clinical expert in the area of medical oncology for
Infarmed. Dr. Arenberger reports personal fees from BMS, personal fees from MSD,
personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Sanofi, outside the submitted
work. Dr Basset-Seguin has nothing to disclose. Dr. Bastholt reports personal
fees for advisory boards from Bristol Myers-Squibb, Pierre Fabre, Merck MSD,
Novartis and Roche, outside the submitted work. Dr. Bataille has nothing to
disclose. Dr. Brochez has nothing to disclose. Dr. del Marmol reports grants and
personal fees from BMS, grants and personal fees from SANOFI, personal fees from
LEO Pharma, grants and personal fees from ALMIRALL, outside the submitted work.
Dr. Dreno reports personal fees from MSD, grants and personal fees from BMS,
grants and personal fees from Roche, grants and personal fees from Fabre,
outside the submitted work. A. Eggermont Consultant for: Agenus, Boehringer
Ingelheim, BioInvent, BioNTech, Brenus, CatalYm, Eurobio, GenOway, IO Biotech,
Imcheck, IQVIA, Merck&Co/MSD, Pfizer, QBiotics, Regeneron, Sairopa BV, ScanCell,
Scorpion Therapeutics, Secarna, SkylineDx BV, Thermosome, Trained Immunity
Discovery Speaker engagements: Merck/MSD, SkylineDx BVEquity: IO Biotech,
Sairopa BV, SkylineDX BV. Dr. Fargnoli reports grants and personal fees from
Almirall, personal fees from Leo Pharma, grants and personal fees from Janssen,
personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Lilly, personal fees from
Sanofi, personal fees from UCB, personal fees from Abbvie, personal fees from
AMGEN, personal fees from Pierre Fabre, grants and personal fees from Galderma,
personal fees from Sun Pharma, personal fees from BMS, personal fees from Kyowa
Kyrin, personal fees from Pfizer, personal fees from MSD, outside the submitted
work. Dr. Forsea has nothing to disclose. Dr. Garbe reports personal fees from
CeCaVa, personal fees from MSD, personal fees from NeraCare, personal fees from
Philogen, outside the submitted work. Dr. Hauschild reports grants and personal
fees from Amgen, grants and personal fees from BMS, grants and personal fees
from MerckPfizer, grants and personal fees from MSD/Merck, grants and personal
fees from Philogen, grants and personal fees from Pierre Fabre, grants and
personal fees from Regeneron, personal fees from Roche, grants and personal fees
from Sanofi-Genzyme, grants and personal fees from Novartis Pharma, personal
fees from Eisai, personal fees from Immunocore, grants and personal fees from
Replimune, personal fees from Seagen, personal fees from IO Biotech, personal
fees from Dermagnostix, personal fees from Incyte, grants and personal fees from
NeraCare, grants from Huya Biosciences, personal fees from Kyowa Kirin, personal
fees from Highlight Therapeutics, personal fees from Iovance, personal fees from
CureVac, personal fees from Xenthera, peronal fees from Agenus, personal fees
from Almirall, and personal fees from Sun Pharma, outside the submitted work.
Dr. Hoeller reports personal fees from Amgen, personal fees from Almirall,
personal fees from BMS, personal fees from MSD, personal fees from Novartis,
personal fees from Pierre Fabre, personal fees from Roche, personal fees from
Sanofi, outside the submitted work. Dr. Kandolf reports personal fees for
advisory boards from Bristol Myers-Squibb, MSD, Novartis Roche, Janssen, Abbvie,
outside the submitted work. Dr. Kaufmann reports other from Abbvie, other from
Almirall, other from Amgen, other from Astra Zeneca, other from Bionteck, other
from BMS, other from Galderma, other from Incyte, other from Janssen, other from
Leo, other from MSD, other from Novartis, other from Pfizer, other from Roche,
other from Sanofi, outside the submitted work. Dr. Kelleners-Smeets reports
personal fees from Sanofi, personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from MSD,
personal fees from Sun Pharma, outside the submitted work. Dr. Lallas reports
personal fees from Avene, personal fees from MSD, personal fees from Regeneron,
personal fees from BMS, outside the submitted work. Dr. Lebbe reports personal
fees from MSD, personal fees from Pierre Fabre, personal fees from BMS, personal
fees from Sanofi, personal fees from immunocore, outside the submitted work. Dr.
Leiter reports personal fees from Regeneron, Sanofi, personal fees from MSD,
personal fees from Novartis, Almirall Hermal, personal fees from Sun Pharma,
outside the submitted work. Dr. Longo has nothing to disclose. Dr. Lorigan
reports grants and personal fees from Pierre Fabre, personal fees from MSD,
grants and personal fees from BMS, personal fees from MLA diagnostics, outside
the submitted work. Dr. Malvehy reports grants and personal fees from Almirall,
personal fees from MSD, personal fees from Pierre Fabre, grants from Philogen,
grants from Castle biosciences, grants from BMS, grants and personal fees from
ISDIN, grants and personal fees from La Roche Posay, non-financial support and
other from Vivascope, non-financial support and other from Damae medical,
non-financial support and other from Canfield, non-financial support and other
from Fotofinder, outside the submitted work. Dr. Mandala reports personal fees
from BMS, personal fees from MSD, personal fees from Novartis, personal fees
from Regeneron, personal fees from Sun Pharma, outside the submitted work. Dr.
Moreno-Ramírez has nothing to disclose. Dr. Nathan reports personal fees from
Novartis, grants and personal fees from Immunocore, personal fees from BMS,
personal fees from SunPharma, personal fees from MSD, outside the submitted
work; Dr. Pellacani has nothing to disclose. Dr. Peris reports personal fees
from Abbvie, personal fees from Lilly, personal fees from Leo Pharma, personal
fees from Sanofi, personal fees from Almirall, personal fees from Novartis,
personal fees from Boehringer, personal fees from Amgen, outside the submitted
work. Dr. Saiag reports personal fees from Novartis, MSD, NeraCare, BMS, Pierre
Fabre, Merck, personal fees and grants from Damae Medical, outside the submitted
work. Dr. Stockfleth has nothing to disclose. Dr. Stratigos reports personal
fees from Sanofi, personal fees from Janssen CILAG, personal fees and
non-financial support from Novartis, grants from Genesis Pharma, grants from
Abbvie, grants and personal fees from BMS, personal fees from Regeneron, grants
from Leo-Pharma, grants from Lilly, outside the submitted work. Dr. van Akkooi
reports grants and personal fees from Amgen, personal fees from Bristol-Myers
Squibb, personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from MSD-Merck, grants and
personal fees from Merck-Pfizer, personal fees from Pierre Fabre, personal fees
from Sanofi, personal fees from Sirius Medical, personal fees from 4SC, personal
fees from Genmab, personal fees from Menarini Silicon Biosystems, from Skyline
Dx, outside the submitted work. Dr. Vieira has nothing to disclose. Dr. Zalaudek
reports personal fees from Philogen, personal fees from MSD, personal fees from
Novartis, personal fees from Sanofi, personal fees from La Roche Posay, personal
fees from Sunpharma, personal fees from Biogena, personal fees from Cieffe
Derma, outside the submitted work.
