---
reference_id: "PMID:28374938"
title: "Diagnostic use of computational retrotransposon detection: Successful definition of pathogenetic mechanism in a ciliopathy phenotype."
authors:
- Takenouchi T
- Kuchikata T
- Yoshihashi H
- Fujiwara M
- Uehara T
- Miyama S
- Yamada S
- Kosaki K
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38167
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic use of computational retrotransposon detection: Successful definition of pathogenetic mechanism in a ciliopathy phenotype.
**Authors:** Takenouchi T, Kuchikata T, Yoshihashi H, Fujiwara M, Uehara T, Miyama S, Yamada S, Kosaki K
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38167](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38167)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 May;173(5):1353-1357. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38167. Epub 
2017 Apr 4.

Diagnostic use of computational retrotransposon detection: Successful definition 
of pathogenetic mechanism in a ciliopathy phenotype.

Takenouchi T(1)(2), Kuchikata T(3), Yoshihashi H(3), Fujiwara M(1), Uehara T(1), 
Miyama S(4), Yamada S(5)(6), Kosaki K(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Tokyo Metropolitan Children's Medical Center, 
Fuchu, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Metropolitan Children's Medical Center, Fuchu, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Division of Human Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, 
Japan.

Among more than 5,000 human monogenic disorders with known causative genes, 
transposable element insertion of a Long Interspersed Nuclear Element 1 (LINE1, 
L1) is known as the mechanistic basis in only 13 genetic conditions. 
Meckel-Gruber syndrome is a rare ciliopathy characterized by occipital 
encephalocele and cystic kidney disease. Here, we document a boy with occipital 
encephalocele, post-axial polydactyly, and multicystic renal disease. A medical 
exome analysis detected a heterozygous frameshift mutation, c.4582_4583delCG 
p.(Arg1528Serfs*17) in CC2D2A in the maternally derived allele. The further use 
of a dedicated bioinformatics algorithm for detecting retrotransposon insertions 
led to the detection of an L1 insertion affecting exon 7 in the paternally 
derived allele. The complete sequencing and sequence homology analysis of the 
inserted L1 element showed that the L1 element was classified as L1HS (L1 human 
specific) and that the element had intact open reading frames in the two 
L1-encoded proteins. This observation ranks Meckel-Gruber syndrome as only the 
14th disorder to be caused by an L1 insertion among more than 5,000 known human 
genetic disorders. Although a transposable element detection algorithm is not 
included in the current best-practice next-generation sequencing analysis, the 
present observation illustrates the utility of such an algorithm, which would 
require modest computational time and resources. Whether the seemingly 
infrequent recognition of L1 insertion in the pathogenesis of human genetic 
diseases might simply reflect a lack of appropriate detection methods remains to 
be seen.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38167
PMID: 28374938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]