---
reference_id: "PMID:32048973"
title: "Microglia in Alzheimer's Disease."
authors:
- Süß P
- Schlachetzki JCM
journal: Curr Alzheimer Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2174/1567205017666200212155234
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microglia in Alzheimer's Disease.
**Authors:** Süß P, Schlachetzki JCM
**Journal:** Curr Alzheimer Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1567205017666200212155234](https://doi.org/10.2174/1567205017666200212155234)

## Content

1. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2020;17(1):29-43. doi: 10.2174/1567205017666200212155234.

Microglia in Alzheimer's Disease.

Süß P(1), Schlachetzki JCM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neurology, University Hospital Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universitat, Erlangen- Nürnberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0651, United States.

Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is the most frequent neurodegenerative disorder. 
Although proteinaceous aggregates of extracellular Amyloid-β (Aβ) and 
intracellular hyperphosphorylated microtubule- associated tau have long been 
identified as characteristic neuropathological hallmarks of AD, a disease- 
modifying therapy against these targets has not been successful. An emerging 
concept is that microglia, the innate immune cells of the brain, are major 
players in AD pathogenesis. Microglia are longlived tissue-resident professional 
phagocytes that survey and rapidly respond to changes in their microenvironment. 
Subpopulations of microglia cluster around Aβ plaques and adopt a transcriptomic 
signature specifically linked to neurodegeneration. A plethora of molecules and 
pathways associated with microglia function and dysfunction has been identified 
as important players in mediating neurodegeneration. However, whether microglia 
exert either beneficial or detrimental effects in AD pathology may depend on the 
disease stage. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge about the 
stage-dependent role of microglia in AD, including recent insights from genetic 
and gene expression profiling studies as well as novel imaging techniques 
focusing on microglia in human AD pathology and AD mouse models.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1567205017666200212155234
PMID: 32048973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]