---
reference_id: "PMID:33045405"
title: Expanding phenotypic and mutational spectra of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase deficiency.
authors:
- Rojnueangnit K
- Maneechai P
- Thaweekul P
- Piriyanon P
- Khositseth S
- Ittiwut C
- Chetruengchai W
- Kamolvisit W
- Theerapanon T
- Suphapeetiporn K
- Porntaveetus T
- Shotelersuk V
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.104086
keywords:
- Blood Glucose/metabolism
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase/genetics
- Infant
- Lipoproteins/blood
- "Liver/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/blood, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Phosphates/blood
- Triglycerides/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding phenotypic and mutational spectra of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase deficiency.
**Authors:** Rojnueangnit K, Maneechai P, Thaweekul P, Piriyanon P, Khositseth S, Ittiwut C, Chetruengchai W, Kamolvisit W, Theerapanon T, Suphapeetiporn K, Porntaveetus T, Shotelersuk V
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.104086](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.104086)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2020 Dec;63(12):104086. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.104086. Epub
 2020 Oct 9.

Expanding phenotypic and mutational spectra of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase
deficiency.

Rojnueangnit K(1), Maneechai P(1), Thaweekul P(1), Piriyanon P(1), Khositseth
S(1), Ittiwut C(2), Chetruengchai W(2), Kamolvisit W(2), Theerapanon T(3),
Suphapeetiporn K(2), Porntaveetus T(4), Shotelersuk V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Thammasat University,
Pathumthani, 12120, Thailand.
(2)Center of Excellence for Medical Genomics, Medical Genomics Cluster,
Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, 10330, Thailand; Excellence Center for Genomics and Precision Medicine,
King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, The Thai Red Cross Society, Bangkok,
10330, Thailand.
(3)Genomics and Precision Dentistry Research Unit, Department of Physiology,
Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(4)Genomics and Precision Dentistry Research Unit, Department of Physiology,
Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
Electronic address: thantrira.p@chula.ac.th.

Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3 methylglutaryl-CoA synthase-2 deficiency (HMGCS2D) is
a rare autosomal recessive inborn error of hepatic ketogenesis, caused by
mutations in HMGCS2. As its clinical and laboratory manifestations resemble many
other metabolic disorders, HMGCS2D definite diagnosis presents a challenge,
frequently requiring molecular tests. Only 26 patients with HMGCS2 mutations
have been previously described, and this study reports the first two unrelated
Thai patients, a 9-month-old male and an 8-month-old female, with HMGCS2D.
During acute episodes, steatorrhea and dyslipidemia occurred, both previously
unreported. Increased serum levels of triglycerides, very low density
lipoproteins (VLDL), and low density lipoproteins (LDL), along with a decreased
serum level of HDL were found. Both patients had hypophosphatemic
encephalopathy, and the female had metabolic acidosis without hypoglycemia. Trio
whole-exome sequencing (WES) revealed that the male harbored two HMGCS2
mutations, a novel c.1480C>T (p.Arg494*) and a previously reported c.1502G>C
(p.Arg501Pro), while the female was compound heterozygous for the c.1502G>C
(p.Arg501Pro) and a previously reported mutation, c.520T>C (p.Phe174Leu).
Interestingly, c.1502G>C (p.Arg501Pro) was not only found in both of our
patients but also detected heterozygously in 9 out of 1081 unrelated individuals
(allele frequency of 9/2162; 0.42%) in our in-house Thai exome database.
Discovery of this common mutation suggests there could be about 14 babies with
HMGCS2D within 800,000 newborns in Thailand annually. Therefore, awareness of
HMGCS2D among medical personnel in Thailand should be raised.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.104086
PMID: 33045405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
