---
reference_id: "PMID:37047635"
title: "Role of the Gut-Liver Axis in the Pathobiology of Cholangiopathies: Basic and Clinical Evidence."
authors:
- Bragazzi MC
- Venere R
- Vignone A
- Alvaro D
- Cardinale V
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24076660
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of the Gut-Liver Axis in the Pathobiology of Cholangiopathies: Basic and Clinical Evidence.
**Authors:** Bragazzi MC, Venere R, Vignone A, Alvaro D, Cardinale V
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24076660](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24076660)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 3;24(7):6660. doi: 10.3390/ijms24076660.

Role of the Gut-Liver Axis in the Pathobiology of Cholangiopathies: Basic and 
Clinical Evidence.

Bragazzi MC(1), Venere R(1), Vignone A(2), Alvaro D(2), Cardinale V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnology, Sapienza 
University of Rome Polo Pontino, 04100 Roma, Italy.
(2)Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, Sapienza University of 
Rome, 04100 Roma, Italy.

The "Gut-Liver Axis" refers to the physiological bidirectional interplay between 
the gut and its microbiota and the liver which, in health, occurs thanks to a 
condition of immune tolerance. In recent years, several studies have shown that, 
in case of a change in gut bacterial homeostasis or impairment of intestinal 
barrier functions, cholangiocytes, which are the epithelial cells lining the 
bile ducts, activate innate immune responses against gut-derived microorganisms 
or bacterial products that reach the liver via enterohepatic circulation. 
Intestinal dysbiosis or impaired intestinal barrier functions cause 
cholangiocytes to be exposed to an increasing amount of microorganisms that can 
reactivate inflammatory responses, thus inducing the onset of liver fibrosis. 
The present review focuses on the role of the gut-liver axis in the pathogenesis 
of cholangiopathies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24076660
PMCID: PMC10095354
PMID: 37047635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.