---
reference_id: "PMID:40237893"
title: Prevalence and Clinical Impact of BRAF p.V600E Mutation in Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma.
authors:
- Brumfield A
- Azar SA
- Nordgren R
- Cohen RN
- Sarne D
- Keutgen XM
- Applewhite M
- Angelos P
- Cipriani NA
journal: Endocr Pathol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12022-025-09859-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Female
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, epidemiology"
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/genetics, pathology, epidemiology"
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Prevalence
- Mutation
- Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/genetics"
- Young Adult
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and Clinical Impact of BRAF p.V600E Mutation in Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Brumfield A, Azar SA, Nordgren R, Cohen RN, Sarne D, Keutgen XM, Applewhite M, Angelos P, Cipriani NA
**Journal:** Endocr Pathol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12022-025-09859-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12022-025-09859-y)

## Content

1. Endocr Pathol. 2025 Apr 16;36(1):13. doi: 10.1007/s12022-025-09859-y.

Prevalence and Clinical Impact of BRAF p.V600E Mutation in Papillary Thyroid
Carcinoma.

Brumfield A(1), Azar SA(2), Nordgren R(3), Cohen RN(4), Sarne D(4), Keutgen
XM(2), Applewhite M(2), Angelos P(2), Cipriani NA(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 9501 Euclid Ave,
Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, The University of Chicago Medicine, 5841 S. Maryland
Avenue, MC 6040, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA.
(3)Department of Public Health Sciences, The University of Chicago, 5841 S.
Maryland Avenue, MC 2000, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago Medicine, 5841 S. Maryland
Avenue, MC 6040, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago Medicine, 5841 S. Maryland
Avenue, MC 6040, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA. Nicole.Cipriani@bsd.uchicago.edu.

Identifying risk factors in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) that warrant more
aggressive treatment is paramount. Importantly, the prevalence and clinical
significance of BRAF p.V600E mutation in PTC remain debatable. This study aims
to determine the association of BRAF p.V600E with demographic and
clinicopathologic characteristics, including recurrence. Single institution data
from consecutive PTC patients with BRAF p.V600E immunohistochemistry and/or
molecular testing was collected between 2018 and 2022, including BRAF status,
morphologic subtype, TN category, tumor size, nodal disease burden, tumor
multifocality, extrathyroidal extension, treatment, follow-up time,
loco-regional and distant recurrence, and mortality. This study included 301
patients, 30% male. The majority had BRAF p.V600E mutation (78.7%), and BRAF
p.V600E was associated with morphologic subtype (p < 0.001), with 88% of classic
subtype PTCs, 38% of PTCs with extensive follicular growth, and 100% of tall
cell subtype expressing BRAF p.V600E. BRAF p.V600E was not associated with tumor
size (p = 0.696) or nodal disease burden (p = 0.962). On multivariate analysis
using Cox proportional hazard model, large volume nodal disease burden (HR 3.37,
95%CI 1.49-7.64, p = 0.004) and male gender (HR 2.29, 95%CI 1.23-4.26,
p = 0.009) were significantly associated with recurrence. BRAF p.V600E (HR 0.71,
95% CI 0.31-1.65, p = 0.4) was not significantly associated with recurrence. In
conclusion, presence of BRAF p.V600E in the absence of high risk histologic
features does not have an impact on PTC recurrence, and thus, its utility in
risk stratification is questionable in the setting of other clinicopathologic
risk factors.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12022-025-09859-y
PMCID: PMC12003545
PMID: 40237893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Research Involving Humans: Consent
to participate was waived by the Institutional Board Review committee. Competing
interests: Nicole Cipriani is an editorial board member of Endocrine Pathology.
