---
reference_id: "PMID:37655205"
title: "Patient-reported outcomes following selpercatinib treatment in Chinese patients with advanced RET fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer and thyroid cancer, and RET-mutant medullary thyroid cancer in the phase II LIBRETTO-321 trial."
authors:
- Lu S
- Zheng X
- Sun Y
- Huang D
- Wu L
- Ji Q
- Zhou C
- Zhou J
- Guo Y
- Ge M
- Ding D
- Shao J
- Zhang W
- Gao M
- Cheng Y
journal: Ther Adv Med Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/17588359231189429
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patient-reported outcomes following selpercatinib treatment in Chinese patients with advanced RET fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer and thyroid cancer, and RET-mutant medullary thyroid cancer in the phase II LIBRETTO-321 trial.
**Authors:** Lu S, Zheng X, Sun Y, Huang D, Wu L, Ji Q, Zhou C, Zhou J, Guo Y, Ge M, Ding D, Shao J, Zhang W, Gao M, Cheng Y
**Journal:** Ther Adv Med Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/17588359231189429](https://doi.org/10.1177/17588359231189429)

## Content

1. Ther Adv Med Oncol. 2023 Aug 25;15:17588359231189429. doi:
10.1177/17588359231189429. eCollection 2023.

Patient-reported outcomes following selpercatinib treatment in Chinese patients
with advanced RET fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer and thyroid cancer,
and RET-mutant medullary thyroid cancer in the phase II LIBRETTO-321 trial.

Lu S(1), Zheng X(2), Sun Y(3), Huang D(4), Wu L(5), Ji Q(6), Zhou C(7), Zhou
J(8), Guo Y(9), Ge M(10), Ding D(11), Shao J(11), Zhang W(11), Gao
M(12)(13)(14), Cheng Y(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China.
(2)Department of Thyroid and Neck Tumor, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Key
Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin's Clinical Research Center
for Cancer, Tianjin, China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Jinan Central Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, Jinan, China.
(4)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute
and Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(5)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Hunan Cancer Hospital, The
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, China.
(6)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Shanghai, China.
(7)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, National Center for Respiratory
Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Disease, State Key
Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health,
The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(8)Department of Respiratory Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital, College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(10)Department of Head, Neck and Thyroid Surgery, Zhejiang Provincial People's
Hospital, People's Hospital of Hangzhou Medical College, Hangzhou, China.
(11)Eli Lilly and Company, Shanghai, China.
(12)Department of Thyroid and Neck Tumor, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Key
Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin's Clinical Research Center
for Cancer, Tianjin 300040, China.
(13)Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, Tianjin Union Medical Center,
Tianjin 300121, China.
(14)Tianjin Key Laboratory of General Surgery Inconstruction, Tianjin Union
Medical Center, Tianjin 300121, China.
(15)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Jilin Cancer Hospital, Changchun 130012,
Jilin, China.

BACKGROUND: Patient-reported outcomes (PROs) are increasingly becoming an
important part of clinical trials as they are helpful in analyzing the safety
and efficacy of treatment in chronic diseases like cancer.
OBJECTIVES: We report PROs and health-related quality of life (HRQoL) with
selpercatinib treatment among Chinese patients with rearranged in transfection
(RET) fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), RET fusion-positive
thyroid cancer (TC), and RET-mutant medullary TC (MTC) as an exploratory
analysis of the LIBRETTO-321 trial.
DESIGN: A total of 77 patients (47 RET fusion-positive NSCLC, 1 RET
fusion-positive TC, and 29 RET-mutant MTC) were enrolled. Compliance for
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) Quality of
Life Questionnaire-Core 30 (QLQ-C30) was 100% at baseline and >90% at each time
point.
METHODS: PROs were assessed using the EORTC QLQ-C30, and a bowel diary
assessment for MTC patients with baseline diarrhea using the Systemic
Therapy-Induced Diarrhea Assessment Tool. Data were collected at pre-dose; every
8 weeks from cycle 3; and every 12 weeks after cycle 13. A >10-point change from
baseline was considered clinically meaningful. PRO changes were summarized
through cycle 13.
RESULTS: Most patients with NSCLC or MTC showed improvement or remained stable
on the global health status and functional subscales. For global health status,
47.4% of NSCLC and MTC patients showed definite improvement with only 19.7%
showing definite worsening. For functional subscales, less than 30% of the
patients showed definite worsening. For symptom subscales, more than 64% of the
patients either improved or remained stable for the symptoms. For MTC patients
with bowel diary assessment (n = 5), there was no severity or worsening from
baseline in the diarrheal episodes observed during treatment with selpercatinib.
CONCLUSION: The study demonstrated favorable PROs in Chinese patients with RET
fusion-positive NSCLC, TC, and RET-mutant MTC treated with selpercatinib. HRQoL
was improved or stable as assessed by EORTC QLQ-30.
TRAIL REGISTRATION: This study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov
(https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04280081) ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT04280081.

© The Author(s), 2023.

DOI: 10.1177/17588359231189429
PMCID: PMC10467255
PMID: 37655205

Conflict of interest statement: SL, XZ, YS, DH, LW, QJ, CZ, JZ, YG, MhG, MG, and
YC claim no conflict of interest. DD, JS, and WZ are employees of Eli Lilly and
Company.
