---
reference_id: "PMID:20032810"
title: Profiling scoliosis in Rett syndrome.
authors:
- Percy AK
- Lee HS
- Neul JL
- Lane JB
- Skinner SA
- Geerts SP
- Annese F
- Graham J
- McNair L
- Motil KJ
- Barrish JO
- Glaze DG
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181d0187f
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Regression Analysis
- "Rett Syndrome/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Scoliosis/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Profiling scoliosis in Rett syndrome.
**Authors:** Percy AK, Lee HS, Neul JL, Lane JB, Skinner SA, Geerts SP, Annese F, Graham J, McNair L, Motil KJ, Barrish JO, Glaze DG
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181d0187f](https://doi.org/10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181d0187f)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2010 Apr;67(4):435-9. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181d0187f.

Profiling scoliosis in Rett syndrome.

Percy AK(1), Lee HS, Neul JL, Lane JB, Skinner SA, Geerts SP, Annese F, Graham
J, McNair L, Motil KJ, Barrish JO, Glaze DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA. apercy@uab.edu

To understand scoliosis, related comorbidities, and phenotype-genotype
correlations in individuals with Rett syndrome (RTT), the Rare Disease Clinical
Research Network database for RTT was probed. Clinical evaluations included a
detailed history and physical examination, comprehensive anthropometric
measurements, and two quantitative measures of clinical status, Clinical
Severity Scale (CSS) and motor-behavioral analysis (MBA). All data were exported
to the Data Technology Coordinating Center (DTCC) at the University of South
Florida. Scoliosis assessment was based on direct examination and curvature
measurements by radiography (Cobb angle). Statistical analyses included
univariate and multiple logistic regression models, adjusting for age at
enrollment or mutation type. Scoliosis data were available from 554 classic RTT
participants, mean age = 10 y (0-57 y). Scoliosis was noted in 292 (53%); mean
age = 15 y with scoliosis and 6 y without. Using multiple regression analysis,
MBA severity score, later acquisition, loss or absent walking, and constipation
were associated with scoliosis. Two common methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2)
mutations, R294X and R306C, had reduced risk for scoliosis. These findings
corroborated previous reports on scoliosis and extended understanding of
comorbidities, clinical severity, and relative risk reduction for specific
mutations. Clinical trial design should account for scoliosis and related
factors judiciously.

DOI: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181d0187f
PMCID: PMC2852102
PMID: 20032810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
