---
reference_id: "PMID:39340961"
title: "Cognitive functioning and falls in older people: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Sturnieks DL
- Chan LL
- Cerda MTE
- Arbona CH
- Pinilla BH
- Martinez PS
- Seng NW
- Smith N
- Menant JC
- Lord SR
journal: Arch Gerontol Geriatr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.archger.2024.105638
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Accidental Falls/prevention & control, statistics & numerical data"
- Cognition/physiology
- "Cognitive Dysfunction/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Executive Function
- Geriatric Assessment/methods
- Independent Living/psychology
- Neuropsychological Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive functioning and falls in older people: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Sturnieks DL, Chan LL, Cerda MTE, Arbona CH, Pinilla BH, Martinez PS, Seng NW, Smith N, Menant JC, Lord SR
**Journal:** Arch Gerontol Geriatr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.archger.2024.105638](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.archger.2024.105638)

## Content

1. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2025 Jan;128:105638. doi:
10.1016/j.archger.2024.105638.  Epub 2024 Sep 15.

Cognitive functioning and falls in older people: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Sturnieks DL(1), Chan LL(2), Cerda MTE(3), Arbona CH(3), Pinilla BH(3), Martinez 
PS(3), Seng NW(4), Smith N(4), Menant JC(2), Lord SR(2).

Author information:
(1)Falls, Balance and Injury Research Centre, Neuroscience Research Australia, 
Randwick, NSW, Australia; School of Biomedical Sciences - Faculty of Medicine 
and Health, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 
Electronic address: d.sturnieks@neura.edu.au.
(2)Falls, Balance and Injury Research Centre, Neuroscience Research Australia, 
Randwick, NSW, Australia; School of Population Health - Faculty of Medicine and 
Health, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Falls, Balance and Injury Research Centre, Neuroscience Research Australia, 
Randwick, NSW, Australia; Hospital Universitario de Getafe, Getafe, Madrid, 
Spain.
(4)Falls, Balance and Injury Research Centre, Neuroscience Research Australia, 
Randwick, NSW, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To identify which cognitive functions and specific neuropsychological 
assessments predict falls in older people living in the community.
METHODS: Five electronic databases were searched until 30/08/2022 for studies 
assessing the association between specific cognitive functions and faller status 
(prospective and retrospective), in community-dwelling older people. Risk of 
bias was assessed with the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. Meta-analyses synthesised the 
evidence regarding the associations between different neurocognitive subdomains 
and faller status.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight studies (20 retrospective, 18 prospective) involving 
37,101 participants were included. All but one study was rated high or medium 
quality. Meta-analyses were performed with data from 28 studies across 11 
neurocognitive subdomains and four specific neuropsychological tests. Poor 
cognitive flexibility, processing speed, free recall, working memory and 
sustained attention were significantly associated with faller status, but poor 
verbal fluency, visual perception, recognition memory, visuo-constructional 
reasoning and language were not. The Trail Making Test B was found to have the 
strongest association with faller status.
CONCLUSION: Poor performance in neurocognitive subdomains spanning processing 
speed, attention, executive function and aspects of memory are associated with 
falls in older people, albeit with small effect sizes. The Trail Making Test, a 
free-to-use, simple assessment of processing speed and mental flexibility, is 
recommended as the cognitive screening test for fall risk in older people.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2024.105638
PMID: 39340961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Stephen Lord reports financial 
support was provided by National Health and Medical Research Council. If there 
are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the 
work reported in this paper.