---
reference_id: "PMID:22373003"
title: Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS).
authors:
- Chrzanowska KH
- Gregorek H
- Dembowska-Bagińska B
- Kalina MA
- Digweed M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-13
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosomal Instability/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Hypogonadism/genetics, pathology"
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Microcephaly/genetics, pathology"
- "Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome/complications, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS).
**Authors:** Chrzanowska KH, Gregorek H, Dembowska-Bagińska B, Kalina MA, Digweed M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-7-13](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-7-13)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 Feb 28;7:13. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-13.

Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS).

Chrzanowska KH(1), Gregorek H, Dembowska-Bagińska B, Kalina MA, Digweed M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Al, 
Dzieci Polskich 20, 04-730 Warsaw, Poland. k.chrzanowska@czd.pl

Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome of 
chromosomal instability mainly characterized by microcephaly at birth, combined 
immunodeficiency and predisposition to malignancies. Due to a founder mutation 
in the underlying NBN gene (c.657_661del5) the disease is encountered most 
frequently among Slavic populations. The principal clinical manifestations of 
the syndrome are: microcephaly, present at birth and progressive with age, 
dysmorphic facial features, mild growth retardation, mild-to-moderate 
intellectual disability, and, in females, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. 
Combined cellular and humoral immunodeficiency with recurrent sinopulmonary 
infections, a strong predisposition to develop malignancies (predominantly of 
lymphoid origin) and radiosensitivity are other integral manifestations of the 
syndrome. The NBN gene codes for nibrin which, as part of a DNA repair complex, 
plays a critical nuclear role wherever double-stranded DNA ends occur, either 
physiologically or as a result of mutagenic exposure. Laboratory findings 
include: (1) spontaneous chromosomal breakage in peripheral T lymphocytes with 
rearrangements preferentially involving chromosomes 7 and 14, (2) sensitivity to 
ionizing radiation or radiomimetics as demonstrated in vitro by cytogenetic 
methods or by colony survival assay, (3) radioresistant DNA synthesis, (4) 
biallelic hypomorphic mutations in the NBN gene, and (5) absence of full-length 
nibrin protein. Microcephaly and immunodeficiency are common to DNA ligase IV 
deficiency (LIG4 syndrome) and severe combined immunodeficiency with 
microcephaly, growth retardation, and sensitivity to ionizing radiation due to 
NHEJ1 deficiency (NHEJ1 syndrome). In fact, NBS was most commonly confused with 
Fanconi anaemia and LIG4 syndrome. Genetic counselling should inform parents of 
an affected child of the 25% risk for further children to be affected. Prenatal 
molecular genetic diagnosis is possible if disease-causing mutations in both 
alleles of the NBN gene are known. No specific therapy is available for NBS, 
however, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation may be one option for some 
patients. Prognosis is generally poor due to the extremely high rate of 
malignancies.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-13
PMCID: PMC3314554
PMID: 22373003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]