---
reference_id: "PMID:30383639"
title: "Compound heterozygous mutations in the TH gene in a Chinese family with autosomal-recessive dopa-responsive dystonia: A case report."
authors:
- Feng B
- Sun G
- Kong Q
- Li Q
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000012870
keywords:
- Asian People/genetics
- "Dystonic Disorders/congenital, drug therapy, genetics"
- Genetic Testing
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Levodopa/therapeutic use
- Male
- Mutation
- Tyrosine 3-Monooxygenase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compound heterozygous mutations in the TH gene in a Chinese family with autosomal-recessive dopa-responsive dystonia: A case report.
**Authors:** Feng B, Sun G, Kong Q, Li Q
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000012870](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000012870)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Nov;97(44):e12870. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000012870.

Compound heterozygous mutations in the TH gene in a Chinese family with
autosomal-recessive dopa-responsive dystonia: A case report.

Feng B(1), Sun G(2), Kong Q(1), Li Q(2).

Author information:
(1)Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University,
Jining, China.

RATIONALE: Autosomal-recessive dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) is a rare clinical
disorder presenting as bradykinesia, dystonia, tremor and even severe
encephalopathy, and caused by tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency (THD). We report a
case of compound heterozygous mutations in the TH gene in a Chinese family with
autosomal-recessive DRD herein.
PATIENT CONCERNS: A 16-month-old Chinese boy presented with symptoms of movement
disorder and growth retardation in his infant period.
DIAGNOSES: The genetic test revealed compound heterozygous mutations in the TH
gene at c.457C>T and c.698G>A, which are pathogenic of DRD.
INTERVENTIONS: The patient was administrated low-dose levodopa.
OUTCOMES: The treatment resulted in the substantial improvement of dystonia. His
long-term neurological outcome need follow-up for years.
LESSONS: Gene mutation analysis is helpful and necessary to diagnose DRD and has
important guiding significance for the subsequent treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000012870
PMCID: PMC6221754
PMID: 30383639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.
