---
reference_id: "PMID:27738334"
title: Efficacy of crizotinib and pemetrexed-based chemotherapy in Chinese NSCLC patients with ROS1 rearrangement.
authors:
- Zhang L
- Jiang T
- Zhao C
- Li W
- Li X
- Zhao S
- Liu X
- Jia Y
- Yang H
- Ren S
- Zhou C
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2016'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12612
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- China
- Crizotinib
- Female
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- "Pemetrexed/administration & dosage"
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- "Pyrazoles/administration & dosage"
- "Pyridines/administration & dosage"
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Analysis
- "Translocation, Genetic"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of crizotinib and pemetrexed-based chemotherapy in Chinese NSCLC patients with ROS1 rearrangement.
**Authors:** Zhang L, Jiang T, Zhao C, Li W, Li X, Zhao S, Liu X, Jia Y, Yang H, Ren S, Zhou C
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2016)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.12612](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.12612)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2016 Nov 15;7(46):75145-75154. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12612.

Efficacy of crizotinib and pemetrexed-based chemotherapy in Chinese NSCLC
patients with ROS1 rearrangement.

Zhang L(1), Jiang T(1), Zhao C(2), Li W(1), Li X(2), Zhao S(1), Liu X(1), Jia
Y(1), Yang H(1), Ren S(1), Zhou C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital and Thoracic
Cancer Institute, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200433, P.R.
China.
(2)Department of Lung Cancer and Immunology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: ROS1 rearrangement is a novel molecular subgroup of non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). This study aimed to investigate the efficacy of crizotinib
and pemetrexed-based chemotherapy in Chinese NSCLC patients with ROS1
rearrangement.
RESULTS: A total of 2309 patients received ROS1 fusion detection and 51(2.2%)
patients had ROS1 rearrangement. There was no significant difference between
ROS1 fusion-positive and fusion-negative cohorts in demographic data. For the
ROS1 fusion-positive patients, crizotinb-treated group had a higher overall
response rate (ORR, 80.0%), disease control rate (DCR, 90.0%) and longer
progression-free survival (PFS, 294 days) compared with the rates in
pemetrexed-treated group (ORR, 40.8%; DCR, 71.4%; PFS, 179 days) and
non-pemetrexed-treated group (ORR, 25.0%; DCR, 47.7%; PFS, 110 days). Besides,
ORR, DCR and PFS were similar in three major ROS1 fusion partners. For the
first-line treatment, patients received pemetrexed had a significant longer PFS
than those received non-pemetrexed chemotherapy (209 vs. 146 days, P = 0.0107).
In pemetrexed-treated cohorts, ROS1-positive patients with low TS expression had
a statistically significant longer PFS than those with high TS expression (184
vs. 110 days, P = 0.0105).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively identified patients with NSCLC who
were screened for ROS1 fusion using multiplex reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) from October 2013 to February 2016. The thymidylate
synthase (TS) mRNA levels were tested using quantitative real-time RT-PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: Crizotinib was also highly active at treating Chinese NSCLC
patients with ROS1 rearrangement. TS expression could predict the efficacy of
pemetrexed-based therapy in ROS1 fusion-positive patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.12612
PMCID: PMC5342729
PMID: 27738334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST None.
