---
reference_id: "PMID:15096137"
title: "Cutaneous mastocytosis in children: a clinical analysis of 71 cases."
authors:
- Kiszewski AE
- Durán-Mckinster C
- Orozco-Covarrubias L
- Gutiérrez-Castrellón P
- Ruiz-Maldonado R
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2004.00830.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age Distribution
- Analysis of Variance
- "Biopsy, Needle"
- Chi-Square Distribution
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Incidence
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mast Cells/pathology
- "Mastocytosis, Cutaneous/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Mexico/epidemiology
- Probability
- "Remission, Spontaneous"
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
- Severity of Illness Index
- Sex Distribution
- "Urticaria Pigmentosa/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous mastocytosis in children: a clinical analysis of 71 cases.
**Authors:** Kiszewski AE, Durán-Mckinster C, Orozco-Covarrubias L, Gutiérrez-Castrellón P, Ruiz-Maldonado R
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1468-3083.2004.00830.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-3083.2004.00830.x)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2004 May;18(3):285-90. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2004.00830.x.

Cutaneous mastocytosis in children: a clinical analysis of 71 cases.

Kiszewski AE(1), Durán-Mckinster C, Orozco-Covarrubias L, Gutiérrez-Castrellón 
P, Ruiz-Maldonado R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, National Institute of Paediatrics, Insurgentes Sur 
3700-C, Col. Insurgentes-Cuicuilco, Delegación Coyoacán, Mexico DF, CP 04530.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the clinical features, response to therapy, evolution 
and prognosis of cutaneous mastocytosis in children.
BACKGROUND: Mastocytosis in children, instead of being induced by a potentially 
oncogenic c-kit mutation, is probably a clonal disease with benign prognosis.
METHODS: The clinicopathological features, evolution and response to treatment 
were analysed in 71 children with mastocytosis.
RESULTS: There were 53 (75%) cases of urticaria pigmentosa, 12 (17%) cases of 
mastocytoma, and six (8%) cases of diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis. In 92% of 
cases disease onset was in the first year of life. There was a male predominance 
1.8 : 1. Treatment did not modify the disease evolution. Eighty per cent of 
patients improved or had spontaneous resolution of the disease.
CONCLUSION: The most frequent clinical form of mastocytosis was urticaria 
pigmentosa followed by mastocytoma and diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis. Darier's 
sign was present in 94% of cases. A negative Darier's sign does not rule out 
mastocytosis. In contrast to adults, mastocytosis in children usually has a 
benign course making sophisticated or invasive diagnostic tests unnecessary. A 
classification of paediatric cutaneous mastocytosis is proposed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2004.00830.x
PMID: 15096137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]