---
reference_id: "PMID:31527856"
title: "Genome sequencing in healthcare: understanding the UK general public's views and implications for clinical practice."
authors:
- Ballard LM
- Horton RH
- Fenwick A
- Lucassen AM
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0504-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome sequencing in healthcare: understanding the UK general public's views and implications for clinical practice.
**Authors:** Ballard LM, Horton RH, Fenwick A, Lucassen AM
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-019-0504-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0504-4)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2020 Feb;28(2):155-164. doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0504-4. Epub 
2019 Sep 16.

Genome sequencing in healthcare: understanding the UK general public's views and 
implications for clinical practice.

Ballard LM(1), Horton RH(2), Fenwick A(2), Lucassen AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Ethics and Law at Southampton (CELS), Centre for Cancer Immunology, 
University of Southampton, School of Medicine, Southampton, UK. 
l.ballard@soton.ac.uk.
(2)Clinical Ethics and Law at Southampton (CELS), Centre for Cancer Immunology, 
University of Southampton, School of Medicine, Southampton, UK.

Technological advances have seen the offer of genome sequencing becoming part of 
mainstream medical practice. Research has elicited patient and health 
professional views on the ethical issues genome sequencing raises, however, we 
know little about the general public's views. These views offer an insight into 
people's faith in such technologies, informing discussion regarding the approach 
to consent in clinic. We aimed to garner public views regarding genome 
sequencing, incidental findings (IFs), and sharing genetic information with 
relatives. Participants (n = 1954) from the British general public completed a 
survey, distributed via email. Overall, the public had a positive view of 
genomic sequencing, choosing 'informative' as the most popular word (52%) and 
'family legacy' as the most popular analogy (33%) representing genomic 
sequencing for them. Fifty-three percent  agree that their relative had the 
right to be told about genetic information relevant to them. Fifty-four percent 
would expect to be told about IFs whether they had asked for them or not. 
Clinical practice needs to acknowledge these perspectives and expectations in 
order to facilitate meaningful discussion during the consent process for genomic 
tests. We suggest that: (a) optimistic perspectives on the usefulness of genomic 
tests need to be tempered by discussion in clinic about the likelihood that 
genomic results might be uninformative, uncertain or unexpected; (b) discussions 
regarding the familial nature of results are needed before testing: the majority 
of patients will welcome this and any concerns can be explored further; and (c) 
a wider discussion is required regarding the consent approach for genomic 
testing.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-019-0504-4
PMCID: PMC6974627
PMID: 31527856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.