---
reference_id: "PMID:1442504"
title: Cardiac manifestations of the antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Kaplan SD
- Chartash EK
- Pizzarello RA
- Furie RA
journal: Am Heart J
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1016/0002-8703(92)90420-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac manifestations of the antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Kaplan SD, Chartash EK, Pizzarello RA, Furie RA
**Journal:** Am Heart J (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0002-8703(92)90420-z](https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-8703(92)90420-z)

## Content

1. Am Heart J. 1992 Nov;124(5):1331-8. doi: 10.1016/0002-8703(92)90420-z.

Cardiac manifestations of the antiphospholipid syndrome.

Kaplan SD(1), Chartash EK, Pizzarello RA, Furie RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, North Shore University Hospital, Manhasset, NY 11030.

The antiphospholipid syndrome has been associated with multiple cardiac 
abnormalities. The earliest reports were of valvular disease, including 
verrucous endocarditis, as well as valvular thickening and insufficiency. 
Subsequently, antiphospholipid antibodies were implicated in coronary artery 
disease manifested by premature myocardial infarction and coronary artery bypass 
graft occlusion. In addition, there have been rare reports of intracardiac 
thrombi and diffuse cardiomyopathy in association with antiphospholipid 
antibodies. In this review, we discuss the nature and prevalence of the cardiac 
manifestations of the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome as well as some of the 
proposed pathophysiologic mechanisms. We also provide examples from our own 
experience. The expanding spectrum of cardiac disease associated with 
antiphospholipid antibodies suggests an important role for these antibodies in 
certain types of cardiac pathology.

DOI: 10.1016/0002-8703(92)90420-z
PMID: 1442504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]