---
reference_id: "PMID:39296495"
title: "Case Report: Ludwig's angina - 'The Dangerous Space'."
authors:
- Vasanth S
- Chandran S
- Pandyan DA
- Gnanam P
- Djearamane S
- Wong LS
- Selvaraj S
journal: F1000Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.12688/f1000research.127242.2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: Ludwig's angina - 'The Dangerous Space'.
**Authors:** Vasanth S, Chandran S, Pandyan DA, Gnanam P, Djearamane S, Wong LS, Selvaraj S
**Journal:** F1000Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.12688/f1000research.127242.2](https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.127242.2)

## Content

1. F1000Res. 2024 Jun 27;11:1511. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.127242.2.
eCollection  2022.

Case Report: Ludwig's angina - 'The Dangerous Space'.

Vasanth S(1), Chandran S(2), Pandyan DA(2), Gnanam P(3), Djearamane S(4), Wong 
LS(5), Selvaraj S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral And Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Dentistry, AIMST 
University, Bedong, Kedah, 08100, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Madha Dental College and 
Hospital, Chennai, 600069, India.
(3)Department of Prosthodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, AIMST University, Bedong, 
Kedah, 08100, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Science, Universiti Tunku Abdul 
Rahman, Kampar, Perak, 31900, Malaysia.
(5)Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, INTI International University, Nilai, 
71800, Malaysia.
(6)Department of Community Oral Health and Clinical Prevention, Faculty of 
Dentistry, University of Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpar, Malaysia.

Background: Ludwig's angina is a potentially life-threatening disease 
characterized by diffuse bilateral cellulitis with an odontogenic origin. This 
unique infection is now rare owing to the antibiotic era. Case: This patient 
presented to the emergency room with trismus, jaw and neck swelling, mild 
respiratory distress with tachypnea, hyperthermia, and panic. Clinical 
examination and radiographic evaluation confirmed the diagnosis of Ludwig's 
angina. As it is a quickly spreading infection, the patient was taken up for 
immediate surgical decompression leading to pus drainage, removal of the 
offending tooth, bacterial culture and sensitivity, and administration of 
empirical antibiotics. As we had operated promptly, there was no need for 
emergency airway intervention, and the patient had immediate relief from airway 
distress. Conclusions: Early accurate diagnosis with conservative surgical 
decompression, thereby negating the need for airway intervention, was vital to 
avoiding mortality which is always possible in such an expeditious infection.

Copyright: © 2024 Vasanth S et al.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.127242.2
PMCID: PMC11408913
PMID: 39296495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.