---
reference_id: "PMID:30639969"
title: A Survival Analysis of Pediatric Tonsillar Malignancies and Review of a Rare Case.
authors:
- Janz TA
- Nagasubramanian R
- Wei JL
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2018.12.033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Survival Analysis of Pediatric Tonsillar Malignancies and Review of a Rare Case.
**Authors:** Janz TA, Nagasubramanian R, Wei JL
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijporl.2018.12.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2018.12.033)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2019 Mar;118:160-164. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijporl.2018.12.033. Epub 2018 Dec 28.

A Survival Analysis of Pediatric Tonsillar Malignancies and Review of a Rare 
Case.

Janz TA(1), Nagasubramanian R(2), Wei JL(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Central Florida College of Medicine, Orlando, FL, USA.
(2)University of Central Florida College of Medicine, Orlando, FL, USA; Division 
of Hematology/Oncology, Nemours Children's Hospital, Orlando, FL, USA.
(3)University of Central Florida College of Medicine, Orlando, FL, USA; Division 
of Otolaryngology, Nemours Children's Hospital, Orlando, FL, USA. Electronic 
address: Julie.wei@nemours.org.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the survival of pediatric tonsillar cancer patients and 
review a rare case of pediatric tonsillar cancer.
METHODS: Pediatric patients in the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results 
(SEER) database were included from 1973 to 2014 based on a diagnosis of 
tonsillar malignancy using the ICD O-3 tonsil primary site codes of: C09.0, 
C09.1, C09.8, and C09.9. Patients were included from birth-18 years. Survival 
analysis was performed using Kaplan-Meier analysis. Additionally, a case of 
pediatric natural killer (NK) cell tonsillar lymphoma diagnosed and treated at 
the Nemours Children's hospital in Orlando, Florida is presented.
RESULTS: One hundred forty-one cases of tonsil cancer were identified. The mean 
age at diagnosis was 9.9 years (SD: 5.1, range: 0.0 (months)-18.0). Ninety five 
(67.4%) patients were male and 116 (82.3%) had unilateral malignancies. Burkitt 
lymphoma (32.6%) followed by diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) (27.0%) were 
the two most common histological types of tonsillar cancers. 79.4% of patients 
received chemotherapy and 81.6% received surgery as a part of their care. The 
5-year disease-specific survival rate was >90% for patient cohorts diagnosed 
from 1984 to 1993, 1994-2003, and 2004-2014 as compared to 64% for patients 
diagnosed from 1973 to 1983 (p = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Survival rates for pediatric patients with tonsillar cancer are 
excellent. Pediatric primary tonsil cancer occurred most commonly in adolescent 
males and usually presents as a unilateral mass. Lymphoma remains the 
predominant histological type of cancer. Most patients are likely to receive 
surgery and chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2018.12.033
PMID: 30639969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]