---
reference_id: "PMID:38368768"
title: "Risk factors for damage accrual in primary antiphospholipid syndrome: A retrospective single-center cohort study."
authors:
- Hoxha A
- Perin N
- Lovisotto M
- Calligaro A
- Del Ross T
- Favaro M
- Tonello M
- Doria A
- Simioni P
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2024.103180
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk factors for damage accrual in primary antiphospholipid syndrome: A retrospective single-center cohort study.
**Authors:** Hoxha A, Perin N, Lovisotto M, Calligaro A, Del Ross T, Favaro M, Tonello M, Doria A, Simioni P
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2024.103180](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2024.103180)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2024 Apr;144:103180. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2024.103180. Epub 2024
Feb  17.

Risk factors for damage accrual in primary antiphospholipid syndrome: A 
retrospective single-center cohort study.

Hoxha A(1), Perin N(2), Lovisotto M(2), Calligaro A(3), Del Ross T(3), Favaro 
M(3), Tonello M(3), Doria A(3), Simioni P(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine Unit, Thrombotic and Hemorrhagic Center, Department of 
Medicine, University of Padua, Italy. Electronic address: ariela.hoxha@unipd.it.
(2)Internal Medicine Unit, Thrombotic and Hemorrhagic Center, Department of 
Medicine, University of Padua, Italy.
(3)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Despite anticoagulant therapy, a antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) has 
a higher rate of recurrent events, which can lead to damage accrual and a 
negative impact on life quality.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the risk factors and APS subsets associated with damage 
accrual.
PATIENTS/METHODS: We conducted a retrospective single-center study. We reviewed 
the medical records of 282 APS patients, with a median age of 36 (IQR 30-46) 
years and a median of 195 (IQR 137-272) months. The primary endpoint was damage 
accrual during follow-up, defined as organ/tissue impairment present for at 
least six months or causing permanent loss. The secondary endpoints were early 
organ damage within six months of disease onset and death.
RESULTS: Eighty (28.4%) patients presented damage accrual; 52.5% developed 
damage within six months of APS onset, and 41.3% had more than one organ 
involved. Neuropsychiatric involvement, affecting 38.8% of the patients, was the 
most frequent, followed by peripheral vasculopathy and renal involvement, 35% 
either. Death happened in 7 (2.5 %) patients; damage accrual was associated with 
a 6-fold risk of death [OR 6.7 (95% CI 1.3-35.1), p = 0.03]. Microangiopathy and 
non-criteria manifestations were independent risk factors for damage accrual 
with 5-fold and 4-fold higher risk, respectively [(OR 4.9 (95% CI 2.1-11.7), 
p < 0.0001 and (OR 3.8 (95% CI 1.5-10.1), p = 0.007]. The cumulative incidence 
of damage accrual increased by 5.7-fold and 3.6-fold in patients with 
microangiopathy and non-criteria manifestations.
CONCLUSIONS: APS patients had a higher frequency of damage accrual. 
Microangiopathy and non-criteria manifestations were independent risk factors 
for damage accrual.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2024.103180
PMID: 38368768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All the 
authors have nothing to declare.