---
reference_id: "PMID:35306547"
title: Gastrointestinal Manifestations and Treatment Options in Fabry Disease Patients. A Systematic Review.
authors:
- Radulescu D
- Crisan D
- Militaru V
- Buzdugan E
- Stoicescu L
- Grosu A
- Vlad C
- Grapa C
- Radulescu ML
journal: J Gastrointestin Liver Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.15403/jgld-3855
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastrointestinal Manifestations and Treatment Options in Fabry Disease Patients. A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Radulescu D, Crisan D, Militaru V, Buzdugan E, Stoicescu L, Grosu A, Vlad C, Grapa C, Radulescu ML
**Journal:** J Gastrointestin Liver Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.15403/jgld-3855](https://doi.org/10.15403/jgld-3855)

## Content

1. J Gastrointestin Liver Dis. 2022 Mar 19;31(1):98-106. doi: 10.15403/jgld-3855.

Gastrointestinal Manifestations and Treatment Options in Fabry Disease Patients. 
A Systematic Review.

Radulescu D(1), Crisan D(1), Militaru V(1), Buzdugan E(1), Stoicescu L(1), Grosu 
A(1), Vlad C(2), Grapa C(3), Radulescu ML(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, Cluj-Napoca; 
Clinical Municipal Hospital, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(2)University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, Cluj-Napoca; 
Clinical Rehabilitation Hospital, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(3)University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, Cluj-Napoca, 
Romania. cristianagrapa@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Fabry disease (FD) is a rare chronic genetic disorder that 
presents under a paucity of symptoms. Gastrointestinal (GI) involvement is a 
common event and can sometimes be debilitating, but relatively often it is 
overlooked. We aimed to provide a systematic review of main GI symptoms in FD 
patients and treatment possibilities.
METHODS: We completed a systematic review of literature, using the MeSH terms: 
"Fabry disease", "gastrointestinal", "gastrointestinal", "digestive", 
"manifestations", "symptoms", "clinical", "treatment", "therapy" and the 
supplementary concepts "enzyme replacement", "chaperone", "Migalastat", in 
different combinations, with defined inclusion and exclusion criteria.
RESULTS: From 221 initial studies identified, through our selection process we 
included a final date base of 51 articles on GI signs and symptoms and their 
treatment. The primary GI manifestations of the disease consist of abdominal 
pain, bowel movement disorders or nausea and vomiting. Less frequent 
manifestations such as diverticular bowel disease, gastroesophageal reflux or 
achalasia have also been described. Main treatment options in FD are represented 
by enzyme replacement therapy and chaperone treatment. Patients presenting with 
GI symptoms unfortunately do not always respond to enzyme replacement, 
necessitating symptomatic relief.
CONCLUSION: Fabry disease is a rare disease that often involves the GI tract, 
affecting patients' quality of life and burdening the healthcare system. 
Physicians must be aware of the multitude of manifestations in this category of 
patients, to promptly recognize and treat them.

DOI: 10.15403/jgld-3855
PMID: 35306547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]