---
reference_id: "PMID:11078842"
title: "Acute annular outer retinopathy: report of four cases."
authors:
- Fekrat S
- Wilkinson CP
- Chang B
- Yannuzzi L
- Schatz H
- Haller JA
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s0002-9394(00)00560-2
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Fundus Oculi
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Male
- Pigment Epithelium of Eye/pathology
- "Retinal Diseases/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Retinal Vessels/pathology
- Retrospective Studies
- "Vision Disorders/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Visual Acuity
- Visual Fields
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute annular outer retinopathy: report of four cases.
**Authors:** Fekrat S, Wilkinson CP, Chang B, Yannuzzi L, Schatz H, Haller JA
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0002-9394(00)00560-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9394(00)00560-2)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2000 Nov;130(5):636-44. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9394(00)00560-2.

Acute annular outer retinopathy: report of four cases.

Fekrat S(1), Wilkinson CP, Chang B, Yannuzzi L, Schatz H, Haller JA.

Author information:
(1)Duke University Eye Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Ophthalmol. 2000 Nov;130(5):655-7. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9394(00)00738-8.

PURPOSE: To describe the clinical findings and course in four patients with 
acute annular outer retinopathy.
METHODS: Four patients were evaluated during the course of acute annular outer 
retinopathy, and the historical and clinical findings were retrospectively 
collected.
RESULTS: Four healthy patients developed the acute onset of visual field loss 
associated with a localized, white annular outer retinopathy. All patients were 
caucasian; two were women, aged 29 and 32 years, and two were men, aged 71 and 
79 years. The mean follow-up was 3.9 years (range, 1 to 6 years). On 
presentation, four eyes had an irregular, incomplete, peripapillary, annular 
band of gray-white, deep retinal opacification with visual
CONCLUSIONS: These four cases of acute annular outer retinopathy expand our 
knowledge of this disorder. Acute annular outer retinopathy may be a distinct 
entity or it may represent a variant of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy 
retinopathy. As more cases are recognized, the characteristic features of the 
disease spectrum, the etiology, and treatment options may be better elucidated.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9394(00)00560-2
PMID: 11078842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]