---
reference_id: "PMID:38991206"
title: "Tuberous Sclerosis Complex and the kidneys: what nephrologists need to know."
authors:
- Monich AG
- Bissler JJ
- Barreto FC
journal: J Bras Nefrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1590/2175-8239-JBN-2024-0013en
keywords:
- "Tuberous Sclerosis/complications, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- "Kidney Neoplasms/therapy, etiology"
- MTOR Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases
- "Angiomyolipoma/etiology, therapy"
- Nephrology
- Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 1 Protein/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Renal Cell/etiology, therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberous Sclerosis Complex and the kidneys: what nephrologists need to know.
**Authors:** Monich AG, Bissler JJ, Barreto FC
**Journal:** J Bras Nefrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1590/2175-8239-JBN-2024-0013en](https://doi.org/10.1590/2175-8239-JBN-2024-0013en)

## Content

1. J Bras Nefrol. 2024 Jul 5;46(3):e20240013. doi:
10.1590/2175-8239-JBN-2024-0013en. eCollection 2024.

Tuberous Sclerosis Complex and the kidneys: what nephrologists need to know.

Monich AG(1)(2), Bissler JJ(3)(4)(5), Barreto FC(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal do Paraná, Departamento de Clínica Médica, Programa de
Pós-Graduação em Medicina Interna e Ciências da Saúde, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.
(2)Hospital Universitário Evangélico Mackenzie, Serviço de Nefrologia, Curitiba,
PR, Brazil.
(3)University of Tennessee, Health Science Center, Le Bonheur Children's
Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Memphis, TN, USA.
(4)Le Bonheur Children's Hospital, Children's Foundation Research Institute,
Memphis, TN, USA.
(5)St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Pediatric Medicine Department,
Memphis, TN, USA.
(6)Universidade Federal do Paraná, Departamento de Clínica Médica, Serviço de
Nefrologia, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.

Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant disease characterized
by the development of hamartomas in the central nervous system, heart, skin,
lungs, and kidneys and other manifestations including seizures, cortical tubers,
radial migration lines, autism and cognitive disability. The disease is
associated with pathogenic variants in the TSC1 or TSC2 genes, resulting in the
hyperactivation of the mTOR pathway, a key regulator of cell growth and
metabolism. Consequently, the hyperactivation of the mTOR pathway leads to
abnormal tissue proliferation and the development of solid tumors. Kidney
involvement in TSC is characterized by the development of cystic lesions, renal
cell carcinoma and renal angiomyolipomas, which may progress and cause pain,
bleeding, and loss of kidney function. Over the past years, there has been a
notable shift in the therapeutic approach to TSC, particularly in addressing
renal manifestations. mTOR inhibitors have emerged as the primary therapeutic
option, whereas surgical interventions like nephrectomy and embolization being
reserved primarily for complications unresponsive to clinical treatment, such as
severe renal hemorrhage. This review focuses on the main clinical
characteristics of TSC, the mechanisms underlying kidney involvement, the recent
advances in therapy for kidney lesions, and the future perspectives.

O complexo da esclerose tuberosa (CET) é uma doença autossômica dominante
caracterizada pelo desenvolvimento de hamartomas no sistema nervoso central,
coração, pele, pulmões e rins e outras manifestações, incluindo convulsões,
tubérculos corticais, linhas de migração radial, autismo e deficiência
cognitiva. A doença está associada a variantes patogênicas nos genes TSC1 ou
TSC2, resultando na hiperativação da via mTOR, um importante regulador do
crescimento e metabolismo celular. Consequentemente, a hiperativação da via mTOR
leva à proliferação anormal do tecido e ao desenvolvimento de tumores sólidos. O
envolvimento renal no CET é caracterizado pelo desenvolvimento de lesões
císticas, carcinoma de células renais e angiomiolipomas renais, que podem
progredir e causar dor, sangramento e perda da função renal. Nos últimos anos,
houve uma mudança notável na abordagem terapêutica do CET, especialmente no
tratamento das manifestações renais. Os inibidores de mTOR surgiram como a
principal opção terapêutica, enquanto intervenções cirúrgicas como nefrectomia e
embolização são reservadas principalmente para complicações que não respondem ao
tratamento clínico, como hemorragia renal grave. Esta revisão se concentra nas
principais características clínicas do CET, nos mecanismos subjacentes ao
envolvimento renal, nos recentes avanços na terapia para lesões renais e nas
perspectivas futuras.

DOI: 10.1590/2175-8239-JBN-2024-0013en
PMCID: PMC11239183
PMID: 38991206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors have no
conflict of interest related to this publication.
