---
reference_id: "PMID:41055965"
title: Defective Notch1 signaling in endothelial cells drives pathogenesis in a mouse model of Adams-Oliver syndrome.
authors:
- Solano AF
- Preusse K
- Cain B
- Hotz R
- Gavini P
- Yuan Z
- Bowen B
- Maco G
- Neal H
- Gagliani EK
- Ahn C
- Lim HW
- Southgate L
- Kovall RA
- Kopan R
- Gebelein B
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1172/JCI187532
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Receptor, Notch1/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Immunoglobulin J Recombination Signal Sequence-Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Endothelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Scalp Dermatoses/genetics, metabolism, pathology, congenital"
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defective Notch1 signaling in endothelial cells drives pathogenesis in a mouse model of Adams-Oliver syndrome.
**Authors:** Solano AF, Preusse K, Cain B, Hotz R, Gavini P, Yuan Z, Bowen B, Maco G, Neal H, Gagliani EK, Ahn C, Lim HW, Southgate L, Kovall RA, Kopan R, Gebelein B
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI187532](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI187532)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2025 Oct 7;135(23):e187532. doi: 10.1172/JCI187532. eCollection
 2025 Dec 1.

Defective Notch1 signaling in endothelial cells drives pathogenesis in a mouse 
model of Adams-Oliver syndrome.

Solano AF(1)(2)(3), Preusse K(1), Cain B(1), Hotz R(1), Gavini P(1), Yuan Z(4), 
Bowen B(5), Maco G(5), Neal H(5), Gagliani EK(5), Ahn C(6), Lim HW(6)(7), 
Southgate L(8)(9), Kovall RA(4), Kopan R(1)(7), Gebelein B(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(2)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(3)Graduate Program in Molecular and Developmental Biology, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Xavier University, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(6)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(8)School of Health and Medical Sciences, City St George's, University of 
London, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Life Sciences and 
Medicine, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.

Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by 
scalp, limb, and cardiovascular defects. Although variants in the NOTCH1 
receptor, DLL4 ligand, and RBPJ transcription factor have been implicated in 
AOS, the driving tissue types and molecular mechanisms by which these variants 
cause pathogenesis are unknown. Here, we used quantitative binding assays to 
show that AOS-associated RBPJ missense variants compromise DNA binding but not 
cofactor binding. These findings suggest that AOS-associated RBPJ variants do 
not function as loss-of-function alleles but instead act as dominant-negative 
proteins that sequester cofactors from DNA. Consistent with this idea, mice 
carrying an AOS-associated Rbpj allele develop dominant phenotypes that include 
increased lethality and cardiovascular defects in a Notch1 heterozygous 
background, whereas Notch1 and Rbpj compound heterozygous null alleles are well 
tolerated. To facilitate studies into the tissues driving AOS pathogenesis, we 
employed conditional genetics to isolate the contribution of the vascular 
endothelium to the development of AOS-like phenotypes. Importantly, our studies 
show that expression of the Rbpj AOS allele in endothelial cells is both 
necessary and sufficient to cause lethality and cardiovascular defects. These 
data establish that reduced Notch1 signaling in the vasculature is a key driver 
of pathogenesis in this AOS mouse model.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI187532
PMCID: PMC12646667
PMID: 41055965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: RAK is on the scientific 
advisory board of Cellestia Biotech AG and has received research funding from 
Cellestia Biotech AG for projects unrelated to this manuscript.