---
reference_id: "PMID:34834538"
title: Personalized Medicine to Improve Treatment of Dopa-Responsive Dystonia-A Focus on Tyrosine Hydroxylase Deficiency.
authors:
- Nygaard G
- Szigetvari PD
- Grindheim AK
- Ruoff P
- Martinez A
- Haavik J
- Kleppe R
- Flydal MI
journal: J Pers Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/jpm11111186
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Personalized Medicine to Improve Treatment of Dopa-Responsive Dystonia-A Focus on Tyrosine Hydroxylase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Nygaard G, Szigetvari PD, Grindheim AK, Ruoff P, Martinez A, Haavik J, Kleppe R, Flydal MI
**Journal:** J Pers Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jpm11111186](https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm11111186)

## Content

1. J Pers Med. 2021 Nov 12;11(11):1186. doi: 10.3390/jpm11111186.

Personalized Medicine to Improve Treatment of Dopa-Responsive Dystonia-A Focus
on Tyrosine Hydroxylase Deficiency.

Nygaard G(1), Szigetvari PD(2), Grindheim AK(2), Ruoff P(3), Martinez A(2),
Haavik J(1)(2), Kleppe R(4), Flydal MI(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychiatry, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, 5009 Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Bioscience and Environmental Engineering, University
of Stavanger, 4021 Stavanger, Norway.
(4)Norwegian Centre for Maritime- and Diving Medicine, Department of
Occupational Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway.

Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) is a rare movement disorder associated with
defective dopamine synthesis. This impairment may be due to the fact of a
deficiency in GTP cyclohydrolase I (GTPCHI, GCH1 gene), sepiapterin reductase
(SR), tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), or 6-pyruvoyl tetrahydrobiopterin synthase
(PTPS) enzyme functions. Mutations in GCH1 are most frequent, whereas fewer
cases have been reported for individual SR-, PTP synthase-, and TH deficiencies.
Although termed DRD, a subset of patients responds poorly to L-DOPA. As this is
regularly observed in severe cases of TH deficiency (THD), there is an urgent
demand for more adequate or personalized treatment options. TH is a key enzyme
that catalyzes the rate-limiting step in catecholamine biosynthesis, and THD
patients often present with complex and variable phenotypes, which results in
frequent misdiagnosis and lack of appropriate treatment. In this expert opinion
review, we focus on THD pathophysiology and ongoing efforts to develop novel
therapeutics for this rare disorder. We also describe how different modeling
approaches can be used to improve genotype to phenotype predictions and to
develop in silico testing of treatment strategies. We further discuss the
current status of mathematical modeling of catecholamine synthesis and how such
models can be used together with biochemical data to improve treatment of DRD
patients.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm11111186
PMCID: PMC8625014
PMID: 34834538

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
A.K.G. reports to be an employee at Pluvia AS. A.M. reports personal fees from
Pluvia AS. Both activities are outside submitted work.
