---
reference_id: "PMID:37606431"
title: Recurrent Multidrug-Resistant Clostridium difficile Infection Secondary to Ulcerative Colitis a Case Report.
authors:
- Jaramillo AP
- Castells J
- Ibrahimli S
- Siegel S
journal: Med Sci (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/medsci11030052
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent Multidrug-Resistant Clostridium difficile Infection Secondary to Ulcerative Colitis a Case Report.
**Authors:** Jaramillo AP, Castells J, Ibrahimli S, Siegel S
**Journal:** Med Sci (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/medsci11030052](https://doi.org/10.3390/medsci11030052)

## Content

1. Med Sci (Basel). 2023 Aug 16;11(3):52. doi: 10.3390/medsci11030052.

Recurrent Multidrug-Resistant Clostridium difficile Infection Secondary to 
Ulcerative Colitis a Case Report.

Jaramillo AP(1), Castells J(2), Ibrahimli S(3), Siegel S(4).

Author information:
(1)General Practice, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences & 
Psychology, Fairfield, CA 94534, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, Universidad Católica de Santiago de Guayaquil, Guayaquil 
090615, Ecuador.
(3)Cardiology, First Moscow State Medical University, 119992 Moscow, Russia.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Coney Island Hospital, 2601 Ocean Parkway, 
Brooklyn, NY 11235, USA.

IBD consists of two diseases-CD and UC-that affect the digestive tract, with a 
greater affinity for the large bowel. In this case report, we focus on one of 
its most common complications. CDI is a pathology that is mostly secondary to 
UC. Another cause of this bacterial infection is established after the use of 
antibiotics, most commonly at the hospital level. Around 20 percent of CDI 
persists because of a chronic dysbiosis of the microbiota and low levels of 
antibodies against CD toxins. In this case report, we demonstrated mdCDI in a 
young woman after treatment with multiple drug therapies as well as with 
semi-invasive procedures as follows: antibiotics (vancomycin, fidaxomicin), 
anti-inflammatory agents (mesalamine, sulfasalazine), corticosteroids 
(budesonide, prednisone), integrin receptor antagonists (vedolizumab), several 
semi-invasive procedures such as fecal transplant microbiota (FMT), 
aminosalicylates (5-ASA), treatment with tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blockers 
(adalimumab, golimumab), and immunomodulators (upadcitinib, tofacitinib). This 
leads us to establish how rCDI and its resistance to different treatments make 
this a challenge for the health system, both for hospitals and for outpatients, 
as well as how time-consuming each treatment is from the first intake of the 
drug until its total efficacy or until patients reach a dose-response and 
time-response to the disease. Accordingly, this case report and other similar 
cases reflect the need for randomized control trials or meta-analyses to 
establish therapeutic guidelines for cases of mdCDI in the near future.

DOI: 10.3390/medsci11030052
PMCID: PMC10443252
PMID: 37606431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.