---
reference_id: "PMID:7632220"
title: "De la Chapelle dysplasia (atelosteogenesis type II): case report and review of the literature [corrected]."
authors:
- Schrander-Stumpel C
- Havenith M
- Linden EV
- Maertzdorf W
- Offermans J
- van der Harten J
journal: Clin Dysmorphol
year: '1994'
keywords:
- Adult
- Asphyxia Neonatorum
- Autopsy
- "Cleft Palate/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Diseases in Twins
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De la Chapelle dysplasia (atelosteogenesis type II): case report and review of the literature [corrected].
**Authors:** Schrander-Stumpel C, Havenith M, Linden EV, Maertzdorf W, Offermans J, van der Harten J
**Journal:** Clin Dysmorphol (1994)

## Content

1. Clin Dysmorphol. 1994 Oct;3(4):318-27.

De la Chapelle dysplasia (atelosteogenesis type II): case report and review of 
the literature [corrected].

Schrander-Stumpel C(1), Havenith M, Linden EV, Maertzdorf W, Offermans J, van 
der Harten J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Hospital Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Clin Dysmorphol 1995 Apr;4(2):183.

We report a male infant with de la Chapelle dysplasia (atelosteogenesis type 
II), a skeletal dysplasia characterized by severe shortening of the long bones, 
deficient ossification of distinct parts of the skeleton, cleft palate and 
neonatal death from asphyxia. This is a rare condition with only 10 patients 
described in the literature. We report the clinical, radiographical and 
histopathological data and summarize the data on the total of 11 patients. 
Differential diagnosis with diastrophic dysplasia and atelosteogenesis (type I) 
is discussed. On clinical and histological grounds we hypothesize that de la 
Chapelle dysplasia and diastrophic dysplasia are closely related. The mode of 
inheritance is autosomal recessive.

PMID: 7632220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]