---
reference_id: "PMID:39198715"
title: The evolving genetic landscape of telomere biology disorder dyskeratosis congenita.
authors:
- Tummala H
- Walne AJ
- Badat M
- Patel M
- Walne AM
- Alnajar J
- Chow CC
- Albursan I
- Frost JM
- Ballard D
- Killick S
- Szitányi P
- Kelly AM
- Raghavan M
- Powell C
- Raymakers R
- Todd T
- Mantadakis E
- Polychronopoulou S
- Pontikos N
- Liao T
- Madapura P
- Hossain U
- Vulliamy T
- Dokal I
journal: EMBO Mol Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s44321-024-00118-x
keywords:
- Dyskeratosis Congenita/genetics
- Humans
- "Telomere-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Telomere/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Shelterin Complex
- Female
- Mutation
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The evolving genetic landscape of telomere biology disorder dyskeratosis congenita.
**Authors:** Tummala H, Walne AJ, Badat M, Patel M, Walne AM, Alnajar J, Chow CC, Albursan I, Frost JM, Ballard D, Killick S, Szitányi P, Kelly AM, Raghavan M, Powell C, Raymakers R, Todd T, Mantadakis E, Polychronopoulou S, Pontikos N, Liao T, Madapura P, Hossain U, Vulliamy T, Dokal I
**Journal:** EMBO Mol Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s44321-024-00118-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s44321-024-00118-x)

## Content

1. EMBO Mol Med. 2024 Oct;16(10):2560-2582. doi: 10.1038/s44321-024-00118-x. Epub
 2024 Aug 28.

The evolving genetic landscape of telomere biology disorder dyskeratosis 
congenita.

Tummala H(1)(2), Walne AJ(3), Badat M(3)(4), Patel M(3), Walne AM(3), Alnajar 
J(3), Chow CC(3), Albursan I(3), Frost JM(3), Ballard D(5), Killick S(6), 
Szitányi P(7), Kelly AM(8), Raghavan M(9), Powell C(10), Raymakers R(11), Todd 
T(12), Mantadakis E(13), Polychronopoulou S(14), Pontikos N(15), Liao T(3), 
Madapura P(3), Hossain U(3)(4), Vulliamy T(3), Dokal I(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Genomics and Child Health, Blizard Institute, Faculty of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, Newark Street, London, E12AT, 
UK. h.tummala@qmul.ac.uk.
(2)Barts Health NHS Trust, London, UK. h.tummala@qmul.ac.uk.
(3)Centre for Genomics and Child Health, Blizard Institute, Faculty of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, Newark Street, London, E12AT, 
UK.
(4)Barts Health NHS Trust, London, UK.
(5)Department of Analytical, Environmental & Forensic Sciences, Kings College 
London, Franklin-Wilkins Building, Stamford Street, London, SE1 9NH, UK.
(6)Department of Haematology, Royal Bournemouth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, 
Bournemouth, BH7 7DW, UK.
(7)Department of Paediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Ke 
Karlovu 2, 128 08 Praha 2, Prague, Czech Republic.
(8)Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 
0QQ, UK.
(9)Clinical Haematology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 
2TH, UK.
(10)Clinical Genetics, Birmingham Women's and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, 
Birmingham, B15 2TG, UK.
(11)University Medical Center Utrecht, 3508 GA, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(12)Department of Haematology, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, EX2 5DW, 
UK.
(13)Department of Pediatrics' University General Hospital of Alexandroupolis, 
Democritus University of Thrace Faculty of Medicine, 6th Kilometer 
Alexandroupolis-Makris, 68 100 Alexandroupolis, Thrace, Greece.
(14)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Aghia Sophia Children's 
Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(15)Institute of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Brain Sciences, University College 
London, Gower St, London, WC1E 6BT, UK.

Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) is a rare inherited bone marrow failure syndrome, 
caused by genetic mutations that principally affect telomere biology. 
Approximately 35% of cases remain uncharacterised at the genetic level. To 
explore the genetic landscape, we conducted genetic studies on a large 
collection of clinically diagnosed cases of DC as well as cases exhibiting 
features resembling DC, referred to as 'DC-like' (DCL). This led us to identify 
several novel pathogenic variants within known genetic loci and in the novel 
X-linked gene, POLA1. In addition, we have also identified several novel 
variants in POT1 and ZCCHC8 in multiple cases from different families expanding 
the allelic series of DC and DCL phenotypes. Functional characterisation of 
novel POLA1 and POT1 variants, revealed pathogenic effects on protein-protein 
interactions with primase, CTC1-STN1-TEN1 (CST) and shelterin subunit complexes, 
that are critical for telomere maintenance. ZCCHC8 variants demonstrated ZCCHC8 
deficiency and signs of pervasive transcription, triggering inflammation in 
patients' blood. In conclusion, our studies expand the current genetic 
architecture and broaden our understanding of disease mechanisms underlying DC 
and DCL disorders.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s44321-024-00118-x
PMCID: PMC11473520
PMID: 39198715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.