---
reference_id: "PMID:39337031"
title: "Fatigue Assessment in Patients with Hereditary Hemochromatosis: First Use of the Popular Diagnostic Tools."
authors:
- Świątczak M
- Raczak A
- Świątczak A
- Młodziński K
- Sikorska K
- Jaźwińska A
- Kaufmann D
- Daniłowicz-Szymanowicz L
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13185544
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatigue Assessment in Patients with Hereditary Hemochromatosis: First Use of the Popular Diagnostic Tools.
**Authors:** Świątczak M, Raczak A, Świątczak A, Młodziński K, Sikorska K, Jaźwińska A, Kaufmann D, Daniłowicz-Szymanowicz L
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13185544](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13185544)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Sep 19;13(18):5544. doi: 10.3390/jcm13185544.

Fatigue Assessment in Patients with Hereditary Hemochromatosis: First Use of the 
Popular Diagnostic Tools.

Świątczak M(1), Raczak A(2), Świątczak A(3), Młodziński K(1), Sikorska K(4), 
Jaźwińska A(5), Kaufmann D(1), Daniłowicz-Szymanowicz L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology and Electrotherapy, Faculty of Medicine, Medical 
University of Gdańsk, Smoluchowskiego 17, 80-214 Gdańsk, Poland.
(2)Clinical Psychology Department, Faculty of Health Sciences, Medical 
University of Gdańsk, 80-214 Gdańsk, Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Hematology and Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Medical University of Gdańsk, 80-214 Gdańsk, Poland.
(4)Department of Tropical Medicine and Epidemiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Medical University of Gdańsk, 80-214 Gdańsk, Poland.
(5)Regional Blood Donation and Hemotherapy Center, 80-210 Gdańsk, Poland.

Background: Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is a genetic condition with fatigue 
as an essential but not precisely assessed symptom. While some well-specified 
scales for fatigue assessment in some pathologies exist, data on their 
usefulness in HH need to be collected. This research aimed to evaluate fatigue 
in HH using the Fatigue Assessment Scale (FAS), Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS), 
and Chalder Fatigue Scale (CFQ). Methodology: Seventy-nine HH patients underwent 
a questionnaire containing items about detailed medical history and the FAS, 
FSS, and CFQ scales. Twenty-five sex- and age-matched healthy persons 
constituted the control group (controls); additionally, thirty blood donors 
(donors) were compared. Results: The fatigue indices were significantly worse in 
the HH patients than in the controls and donors (HH vs. controls p-value: FAS = 
0.003, FSS < 0.001, and CFQ = 0.003; HH vs. donors p-value: FAS = 0.025, FSS < 
0.001, and CFQ = 0.041). There were no differences between the severity of 
fatigue and the specific genotype or the age of the patients. The HH women 
presented more severe fatigue than the men. High internal consistency and 
reliability for each scale were revealed: the Cronbach alpha values were as 
follows: FAS 0.92, FSS 0.95, and CFQ 0.93. Additionally, the construct validity 
and factorial validity of the implemented scales were confirmed. Conclusions: 
The HH patients exhibited significantly worse fatigue across all the scales. The 
FAS, FSS, and CFQ are simple and reliable diagnostic tools for assessing and 
quantifying fatigue for clinical and research purposes.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13185544
PMCID: PMC11432497
PMID: 39337031

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.