---
reference_id: "PMID:39315202"
title: "Clinical sequencing reveals diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic biomarkers for adult-type diffuse gliomas."
authors:
- Li Z
- Deng Z
- Liu F
- Li C
- Yang K
- Gong X
- Feng S
- Zeng Y
- Zhou H
- Fan F
- Luo C
- Liu Z
- Zhang M
journal: Heliyon
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e37712
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical sequencing reveals diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic biomarkers for adult-type diffuse gliomas.
**Authors:** Li Z, Deng Z, Liu F, Li C, Yang K, Gong X, Feng S, Zeng Y, Zhou H, Fan F, Luo C, Liu Z, Zhang M
**Journal:** Heliyon (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e37712](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e37712)

## Content

1. Heliyon. 2024 Sep 11;10(18):e37712. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e37712. 
eCollection 2024 Sep 30.

Clinical sequencing reveals diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic biomarkers 
for adult-type diffuse gliomas.

Li Z(1)(2), Deng Z(3), Liu F(1)(2), Li C(1)(2), Yang K(1)(2), Gong X(1)(2), Feng 
S(1)(2), Zeng Y(1)(2), Zhou H(1)(2), Fan F(1)(2), Luo C(1)(2), Liu Z(1)(2), 
Zhang M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Xiangya Hospital Central South University, 
Changsha, 410008, China.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital 
Central South University, Changsha, 410008, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Xiangya Hospital Central South University, Changsha, 
410008, China.

Diffuse gliomas in adults are highly infiltrative and largely incurable. Whole 
exome sequencing (WES) has been demonstrated very useful in genetic analysis. 
Here WES was performed to characterize genomic landscape of adult-type diffuse 
gliomas to discover the diagnostic, therapeutic and prognostic biomarkers. 
Somatic and germline variants of 66 patients with adult-type diffuse gliomas 
were detected by WES based on the next-generation sequencing. TCGA and CGGA 
datasets were included to analyze the integrated diagnosis and prognosis. Among 
66 patients, the diagnosis of 9 cases was changed, in which 8 cases of 
astrocytoma were corrected into IDH-wildtype glioblastoma (GBM), and 1 
oligodendroglioma without 1p/19q co-deletion into astrocytoma. The distribution 
of mutations including ATRX/TP53 differed in three cohorts. The genetic 
mutations in GBM mainly concentrated on the cell cycle, PI3K and RTK pathways. 
The mutational landscape of astrocytoma was more similar to that of GBM, with 
the highest frequency in germline variants. Patients with IDH-mutant astrocytoma 
harboring SNVs of PIK3CA and PIK3R1 showed a significantly worse overall 
survival (OS) than wild-type patients. AEBP1 amplification was associated with 
shorter OS in GBM. Our study suggests that clinical sequencing can recapitulate 
previous findings, which may provide a powerful approach to discover diagnostic, 
therapeutic and prognostic markers for precision medicine in adult-type diffuse 
gliomas.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e37712
PMCID: PMC11417559
PMID: 39315202

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.