---
reference_id: "PMID:17952069"
title: Neurological defects in trichothiodystrophy reveal a coactivator function of TFIIH.
authors:
- Compe E
- Malerba M
- Soler L
- Marescaux J
- Borrelli E
- Egly JM
journal: Nat Neurosci
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/nn1990
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- DNA Footprinting/methods
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Expression Regulation/physiology
- In Situ Hybridization
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission"
- Mutation
- "Myelin Basic Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
- "Nervous System Diseases/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- "RNA, Small Interfering/pharmacology"
- "Transcription Factor TFIIH/deficiency, physiology"
- Transfection
- "Trichothiodystrophy Syndromes/complications, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurological defects in trichothiodystrophy reveal a coactivator function of TFIIH.
**Authors:** Compe E, Malerba M, Soler L, Marescaux J, Borrelli E, Egly JM
**Journal:** Nat Neurosci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nn1990](https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1990)

## Content

1. Nat Neurosci. 2007 Nov;10(11):1414-22. doi: 10.1038/nn1990. Epub 2007 Oct 21.

Neurological defects in trichothiodystrophy reveal a coactivator function of 
TFIIH.

Compe E(1), Malerba M, Soler L, Marescaux J, Borrelli E, Egly JM.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 1 rue Laurent 
Fries, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C.U. Strasbourg, France.

Mutations in the XPD subunit of the DNA repair/transcription factor TFIIH yield 
the rare genetic disorder trichothiodystrophy (TTD). Although this syndrome was 
initially associated with a DNA repair defect, individuals with TTD develop 
neurological features, such as microcephaly and hypomyelination that could be 
connected to transcriptional defects. Here we show that an XPD mutation in TTD 
mice results in a spatial and selective deregulation of thyroid hormone target 
genes in the brain. Molecular analyses performed on the mice brain tissue 
demonstrate that TFIIH is required for the stabilization of thyroid hormone 
receptors (TR) to their DNA-responsive elements. The limiting amounts of TFIIH 
found in individuals with TTD thus contribute to the deregulation of 
TR-responsive genes. The discovery of an unexpected stabilizing function for 
TFIIH deepens our understanding of the pathogenesis and neurological 
manifestations observed in TTD individuals.

DOI: 10.1038/nn1990
PMID: 17952069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]