---
reference_id: "PMID:26704192"
title: Antifibrinolytic therapy for preventing oral bleeding in patients with haemophilia or Von Willebrand disease undergoing minor oral surgery or dental extractions.
authors:
- van Galen KP
- Engelen ET
- Mauser-Bunschoten EP
- van Es RJ
- Schutgens RE
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD011385.pub2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antifibrinolytic therapy for preventing oral bleeding in patients with haemophilia or Von Willebrand disease undergoing minor oral surgery or dental extractions.
**Authors:** van Galen KP, Engelen ET, Mauser-Bunschoten EP, van Es RJ, Schutgens RE
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD011385.pub2](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD011385.pub2)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Dec 24;(12):CD011385. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD011385.pub2.

Antifibrinolytic therapy for preventing oral bleeding in patients with 
haemophilia or Von Willebrand disease undergoing minor oral surgery or dental 
extractions.

van Galen KP(1), Engelen ET, Mauser-Bunschoten EP, van Es RJ, Schutgens RE.

Author information:
(1)Van Creveldkliniek / Department of Haematology, University Medical Centre 
Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3584CT.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Apr 19;4:CD011385. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD011385.pub3.

BACKGROUND: Minor oral surgery or dental extractions (oral or dental procedures) 
are widely performed and can be complicated by hazardous oral bleeding, 
especially in people with an inherited bleeding disorder such as haemophilia or 
Von Willebrand disease. The amount and severity of singular bleedings depend on 
disease-related factors, such as the severity of the haemophilia, both local and 
systemic patient factors (such as periodontal inflammation, vasculopathy or 
platelet dysfunction) and intervention-related factors (such as the type and 
number of teeth extracted or the dimension of the wound surface). Similar to 
local haemostatic measures and suturing, antifibrinolytic therapy is a cheap, 
safe and potentially effective treatment to prevent bleeding complications in 
individuals with bleeding disorders undergoing oral or dental procedures. 
However, a systematic review of trials reporting outcomes after oral surgery or 
a dental procedure in people with an inherited bleeding disorder, with or 
without, the use of antifibrinolytic agents has not been performed to date.
OBJECTIVES: The primary objective was to assess the efficacy of local or 
systemic use of antifibrinolytic agents to prevent bleeding complications in 
people with haemophilia or Von Willebrand disease undergoing oral or dental 
procedures. Secondary objectives were to assess if antifibrinolytic agents can 
replace or reduce the need for clotting factor concentrate therapy in people 
with haemophilia or Von Willebrand disease and to further establish the effects 
of these agents on bleeding in oral or dental procedures for each of these 
populations.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Cystic Fibrosis and Genetic Disorders 
Group's Coagulopathies Trials Register, compiled from electronic database 
searches of the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), of 
MEDLINE and from handsearching of journals and conference abstract books. We 
additionally searched the reference lists of relevant articles and reviews. We 
searched PubMed, Embase and The Cochrane Library. Additional searches were 
performed in ClinicalTrials.gov, WHO International Clinical Trials Registry 
Platform (ICTRP).Date of last search of the Cystic Fibrosis and Genetic 
Disorders Group's Coagulopathies Trials Register: 14 December 2015.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised and quasi-randomised controlled trials in people 
with haemophilia or Von Willebrand disease undergoing oral or dental procedures 
using antifibrinolytic agents (tranexamic acid or epsilon aminocaproic acid) to 
prevent perioperative bleeding compared to no intervention or usual care with or 
without placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently screened the titles and 
abstracts of all identified articles. Full texts were obtained for potentially 
relevant abstracts and two authors independently assessed these for inclusion 
based on the selection criteria. A third author verified trial eligibility. Two 
authors independently performed data extraction and risk of bias assessments 
using standardized forms.
MAIN RESULTS: While there were no eligible trials in people with Von Willebrand 
disease identified, two randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials 
(total of 59 participants) in people with haemophilia undergoing dental 
extraction were included. One trial of tranexamic acid published in 1972 
included 28 participants with mild, moderate or severe haemophilia A and B and 
one of epsilon aminocaproic acid published in 1971 included 31 people with 
haemophilia with factor VIII or factor IX levels less than 15%. Overall, the two 
included trials showed a beneficial effect of tranexamic acid and EACA, 
administered systemically, in reducing the number of bleedings, the amount of 
blood loss and the need for therapeutic clotting factor concentrates. Regarding 
postoperative bleeding, the tranexamic acid trial showed a risk difference of 
-0.64 (95% confidence interval -0.93 to - 0.36) and the EACA trial a risk 
difference of -0.50 (95% confidence interval 0.77 to -0.22). The combined risk 
difference of both trials was -0.57 (95% confidence interval -0.76 to -0.37), 
with the quality of the evidence (GRADE) for this outcome is rated as moderate. 
Side effects occurred once and required stopping epsilon aminocaproic acid 
(combined risk difference of -0.03 (95% CI -0.08 to 0.13). There was 
heterogeneity between the two trials regarding the proportion of people with 
severe haemophilia included, the concomitant standard therapy and fibrinolytic 
agent treatment regimens used. We cannot exclude that a selection bias has 
occurred in the epsilon aminocaproic acid trial, but overall the risk of bias 
appeared to be low for both trials.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Despite the discovery of a beneficial effect of 
systemically administered tranexamic acid and epsilon aminocaproic acid in 
preventing postoperative bleeding in people with haemophilia undergoing dental 
extraction, the limited number of randomised controlled trials identified, in 
combination with the small sample sizes and heterogeneity regarding standard 
therapy and treatment regimens between the two trials, do not allow us to 
conclude definite efficacy of antifibrinolytic therapy in oral or dental 
procedures in people with haemophilia. No trials were identified in people with 
Von Willebrand disease.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011385.pub2
PMID: 26704192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]