---
reference_id: "PMID:21150867"
title: "Update: outbreak of cholera — Haiti, 2010."
authors:
- Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
journal: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
year: '2010'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update: outbreak of cholera — Haiti, 2010.
**Authors:** Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
**Journal:** MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2010)

## Content

1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Dec 10;59(48):1586-90.

Update: outbreak of cholera — Haiti, 2010.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

The first cholera outbreak in Haiti in at least a century was confirmed by the 
Haitian National Public Health Laboratory on October 21, 2010. Surveillance data 
through December 3, provided by the Haitian Ministry of Public Health and 
Population (MSPP), indicated that the outbreak had spread nationwide and that 
cases of cholera and cholera-associated hospitalizations and deaths had climbed 
rapidly in November. As of December 3, MSPP reported 91,770 cases of cholera 
from all 10 departments and the capital city of Port-au-Prince; 43,243 (47.1%) 
patients had been hospitalized, and 2,071 (2.3%) had died. A rapid mortality 
assessment in Artibonite Department found that deaths occurred as rapidly as 2 
hours after symptom onset and identified important gaps in access to life-saving 
treatments, including oral rehydration solution (ORS). Urgent activities are 
under way, and additional efforts are imperative to reduce cholera mortality by 
expanding access to cholera treatment and to reduce cholera transmission by 
improving access to safe water and adequate sanitation.

PMID: 21150867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]