---
reference_id: "PMID:29956646"
title: "HADHB mutations cause infantile-onset axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease: A report of two cases."
authors:
- Lu Y
- Wu R
- Meng L
- Lv H
- Liu J
- Zuo Y
- Zhang W
- Yuan Y
- Wang Z
journal: Clin Neuropathol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.5414/NP301097
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HADHB mutations cause infantile-onset axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease: A report of two cases.
**Authors:** Lu Y, Wu R, Meng L, Lv H, Liu J, Zuo Y, Zhang W, Yuan Y, Wang Z
**Journal:** Clin Neuropathol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.5414/NP301097](https://doi.org/10.5414/NP301097)

## Content

1. Clin Neuropathol. 2018 Sep/Oct;37(5):232-238. doi: 10.5414/NP301097.

HADHB mutations cause infantile-onset axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease: A 
report of two cases.

Lu Y, Wu R, Meng L, Lv H, Liu J, Zuo Y, Zhang W, Yuan Y, Wang Z.

Mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency (MTPD) is a rare disorder caused 
by mutations in the HADHA and HADHB genes. Here, we report on two Han Chinese 
patients with HADHB mutation-associated infantile axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
disease (IACMT). Both patients were unrelated. Case 1 was a 19-year-old man, and 
case 2 was a 5-year-old boy. Both had delayed motor development and 
slowly-progressing distal muscle weakness with areflexia and foot deformities. 
The electrophysiology findings were compatible with axonal polyneuropathy in 
both patients. Blood tandem mass spectrometry showed increased concentrations of 
multiple acylcarnitines. Nerve biopsies showed axonal neuropathy with a moderate 
loss of myelinated fibers. Gene analysis identified two compound heterozygous 
mutations (c.184A>G/c.340A>G and c.488G>A/c.1175C>T, respectively) in the HADHB 
gene. The c.488G>A mutation was novel. This study broadens the phenotype of MTPD 
and suggests that the genetic testing of patients suffering from IACMT should 
include the HADHB gene. .

DOI: 10.5414/NP301097
PMID: 29956646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]