---
reference_id: "PMID:28797232"
title: "Prognostic significance of BRAF and NRAS mutations in melanoma: a German study from routine care."
authors:
- Heppt MV
- Siepmann T
- Engel J
- Schubert-Fritschle G
- Eckel R
- Mirlach L
- Kirchner T
- Jung A
- Gesierich A
- Ruzicka T
- Flaig MJ
- Berking C
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-017-3529-5
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Disease Progression
- Female
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- "Melanoma/diagnosis, drug therapy, metabolism"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, drug therapy, metabolism"
- Survival Analysis
- Cutaneous Malignant Melanoma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic significance of BRAF and NRAS mutations in melanoma: a German study from routine care.
**Authors:** Heppt MV, Siepmann T, Engel J, Schubert-Fritschle G, Eckel R, Mirlach L, Kirchner T, Jung A, Gesierich A, Ruzicka T, Flaig MJ, Berking C
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-017-3529-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-017-3529-5)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2017 Aug 10;17(1):536. doi: 10.1186/s12885-017-3529-5.

Prognostic significance of BRAF and NRAS mutations in melanoma: a German study 
from routine care.

Heppt MV(1)(2), Siepmann T(2), Engel J(3), Schubert-Fritschle G(3), Eckel R(3), 
Mirlach L(1), Kirchner T(4)(5), Jung A(4)(5), Gesierich A(6), Ruzicka T(1), 
Flaig MJ(1), Berking C(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital of Munich (LMU), 
Frauenlobstr. 9-11, 80337, Munich, Germany.
(2)Division of Health Care Sciences, Center for Clinical Research and Management 
Education, Dresden International University, Freiberger Str. 37, 01067, Dresden, 
Germany.
(3)Munich Cancer Registry (MCR) of the Munich Tumor Centre (TZM), Department of 
Medical Information Processing, Biometry and Epidemiology (IBE), University 
Hospital of Munich, Ludwig-Maximilian-University (LMU), Marchioninistr. 15, 
81377, Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Munich (LMU), Thalkirchner Str. 36, 
80337, Munich, Germany.
(5)DKTK (German Cancer Consortium), DKFZ (German Cancer Research Centre), Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 
2, 97080, Würzburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital of Munich (LMU), 
Frauenlobstr. 9-11, 80337, Munich, Germany. Carola.Berking@med.uni-muenchen.de.

BACKGROUND: Hotspot mutations of the oncogenes BRAF and NRAS are the most common 
genetic alterations in cutaneous melanoma. Specific inhibitors of BRAF and MEK 
have shown significant survival benefits in large phase III trials. However, the 
prognostic significance of BRAF and NRAS mutations outside of clinical trials 
remains unclear.
METHODS: The mutational status of BRAF (exon 15) and NRAS (exon 2 and 3) was 
determined in melanoma samples of 217 patients with pyrosequencing and Sanger 
sequencing. The genotypes were correlated with clinical outcomes and pathologic 
features of the primary tumors. Time to disease progression was calculated with 
the cumulative incidence function. Survival analyses were performed with 
Kaplan-Meier estimates and Cox proportional hazards regression analysis. 
Relative survival was calculated with the Ederer-II method. Treatment with BRAF 
and MEK inhibitors and immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) was allowed.
RESULTS: Mutations in BRAF and NRAS were identified in 40.1 and 24.4% of cases, 
respectively. Concurrent mutations in both genes were detected in further 2.3%. 
The remaining 33.2% were wild type for the investigated exons (WT). BRAF 
mutations were significantly associated with younger age at first diagnosis 
(p < 0.001) and truncal localization of the culprit primary (p = 0.002). The 
nodular subtype was most common in the NRAS cohort. In addition, NRAS-mutant 
melanoma patients showed a higher frequency of nodal relapse (p = 0.013) and 
development of metastatic disease (p = 0.021). The time to loco-regional nodal 
relapse was shortest in NRAS-mutant melanoma (p = 0.002). Presence of NRAS 
mutation was an independent risk factor for disease progression in multivariate 
analysis (HR 2.01; 95% CI 1.02 - 3.98). BRAF-mutant melanoma patients showed a 
tendency for better overall and relative survival. Genotype was not a consistent 
risk factor in multivariate analysis. Instead, positive sentinel lymph node 
status (HR 2.65; 95% CI 1.15 - 6.10) and treatment with ICB in stage IV disease 
(HR 0.17; 95% CI 0.06-0.48) were significant multivariate risk factors.
CONCLUSIONS: NRAS-mutant tumors tended to behave more aggressively particularly 
in early stages of the disease in this high-risk melanoma population. Treatment 
with immune checkpoint blockade improved survival in stage IV disease in a 
real-world setting.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-017-3529-5
PMCID: PMC5553744
PMID: 28797232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
retrospective analysis was approved by the institutional review board of the 
medical faculty of the Munich University Hospital. The design of the study was 
exclusively retrospective and all data that were used in this report were 
extracted from pre-existing routine patient records. All treatment decisions 
were made by the treating oncologists and entirely independent of this analysis. 
No additional data were obtained at any time during the data collection. For 
this design, the ethics committee did not require informed consent obtained by 
each patient. As part of the routine treatment information and consent, all 
patients provided signed informed consent before they started systemic treatment 
or underwent any invasive procedure. The study followed the principles of the 
Declaration of Helsinki and of good clinical practice. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: 
Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no 
competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.