---
reference_id: "PMID:39563271"
title: "Efficacy and safety of RET-TKI in advanced RET-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer in China: a real-world retrospective chart review."
authors:
- Lei S
- Tian L
- Yang L
- Yang Y
- Li J
- Hu X
- Hao X
- Xu H
- Wang Y
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-13155-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, mortality"
- Male
- Female
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, mortality"
- Retrospective Studies
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- China
- Adult
- Gene Rearrangement
- Treatment Outcome
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of RET-TKI in advanced RET-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer in China: a real-world retrospective chart review.
**Authors:** Lei S, Tian L, Yang L, Yang Y, Li J, Hu X, Hao X, Xu H, Wang Y
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-024-13155-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-024-13155-z)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2024 Nov 19;24(1):1427. doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-13155-z.

Efficacy and safety of RET-TKI in advanced RET-rearranged non-small cell lung
cancer in China: a real-world retrospective chart review.

Lei S(#)(1)(2), Tian L(#)(1), Yang L(3), Yang Y(1), Li J(1), Hu X(1), Hao X(1),
Xu H(4), Wang Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Center/National Clinical
Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Beijing Chest Hospital, Capital Medical
University & Beijing Tuberculosis and Thoracic Tumor Research Institute,
Beijing, 101149, China.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology and Radiation Sickness, Peking University
Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191, China.
(4)Department of Comprehensive Oncology, National Cancer Center/National
Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China.
xuhaiyan7609@sina.com.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Center/National Clinical
Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China. wangyanyifu@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Selective RET inhibitors have been approved by the Chinese
government for the treatment of RET-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer. This
study aimed to illustrate the efficacy and safety of selective RET inhibitors in
a real-world clinical context in China.
METHODS: Patients with locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) harboring RET rearrangement and receiving RET tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(RET-TKI) in the real world were enrolled in this retrospective study. Clinical
data, including baseline clinicopathological information, efficacy parameters
such as objective response rate (ORR) and progression-free survival (PFS), and
adverse events (AEs), were collected from the electronic medical record system.
The pattern of treatment failure of first-line RET-TKI was also described.
RESULTS: Fifty-one patients were enrolled in this study. RET-TKI induced an ORR
of 73.1% and a median PFS (mPFS) of 22.7 months (95%CI, 11.7-33.7) in the
first-line setting. The ORR and mPFS were 58.3% and 17.7 months (95%CI,
9.1-26.2), 55.6% and 14.7 months (95%CI, 12.6-16.8) in the second-line and
later-line settings, respectively. No significant difference was observed among
different application lines with respect to the ORR (P = 0.534) or PFS
(P = 0.795). In the first-line setting, RET-TKI significantly prolonged PFS
compared to other regimens including chemotherapy-based regimens, multikinase
inhibitors and other systemic regimens without chemotherapy (P < 0.05). Poor
ECOG performance status was related to shorter PFS (P = 0.018). The most common
AEs of grade 3 or worse were a decreased neutrophil count (11.4%) and anemia
(11.4%). No new AEs or grade 5 AEs were observed. Brain metastasis was one of
the most common patterns of treatment failure. In patients with baseline brain
metastasis, the intracranial ORR was 50%, and the DCR was 100%.
CONCLUSIONS: RET-TKI had favorable efficacy and safety in real-world contexts in
China and should be considered the preferred choice for first-line treatment in
RET-rearranged NSCLC patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-024-13155-z
PMCID: PMC11577726
PMID: 39563271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethics approval and consent to
participate The Ethics Committee of National Cancer Center/ Cancer Hospital/
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College approved
the study and waived the informed consent for its retrospective noninvasive
nature (Approval Number: 18–070/1648). Consent for publication All authors have
agreed the publication of this study. Competing interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
