---
reference_id: "PMID:33525536"
title: Current and Future Treatments for Classic Galactosemia.
authors:
- Delnoy B
- Coelho AI
- Rubio-Gozalbo ME
journal: J Pers Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/jpm11020075
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current and Future Treatments for Classic Galactosemia.
**Authors:** Delnoy B, Coelho AI, Rubio-Gozalbo ME
**Journal:** J Pers Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jpm11020075](https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm11020075)

## Content

1. J Pers Med. 2021 Jan 28;11(2):75. doi: 10.3390/jpm11020075.

Current and Future Treatments for Classic Galactosemia.

Delnoy B(1)(2)(3), Coelho AI(1), Rubio-Gozalbo ME(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 6229 HX 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre+, 6229 
HX Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University, 
6229 HX Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Type I (classic) galactosemia, galactose 1-phosphate uridylyltransferase 
(GALT)-deficiency is a hereditary disorder of galactose metabolism. The current 
therapeutic standard of care, a galactose-restricted diet, is effective in 
treating neonatal complications but is inadequate in preventing burdensome 
complications. The development of several animal models of classic galactosemia 
that (partly) mimic the biochemical and clinical phenotypes and the resolution 
of the crystal structure of GALT have provided important insights; however, 
precise pathophysiology remains to be elucidated. Novel therapeutic approaches 
currently being explored focus on several of the pathogenic factors that have 
been described, aiming to (i) restore GALT activity, (ii) influence the cascade 
of events and (iii) address the clinical picture. This review attempts to 
provide an overview on the latest advancements in therapy approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm11020075
PMCID: PMC7911353
PMID: 33525536

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.