---
reference_id: "PMID:38395885"
title: Genetic differentiation of Plasmodium vivax duffy binding protein in Ethiopia and comparison with other geographical isolates.
authors:
- Abebe A
- Dieng CC
- Dugassa S
- Abera D
- Shenkutie TT
- Assefa A
- Menard D
- Lo E
- Golassa L
journal: Malar J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12936-024-04887-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic differentiation of Plasmodium vivax duffy binding protein in Ethiopia and comparison with other geographical isolates.
**Authors:** Abebe A, Dieng CC, Dugassa S, Abera D, Shenkutie TT, Assefa A, Menard D, Lo E, Golassa L
**Journal:** Malar J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12936-024-04887-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12936-024-04887-1)

## Content

1. Malar J. 2024 Feb 23;23(1):55. doi: 10.1186/s12936-024-04887-1.

Genetic differentiation of Plasmodium vivax duffy binding protein in Ethiopia 
and comparison with other geographical isolates.

Abebe A(1)(2), Dieng CC(3), Dugassa S(4), Abera D(4), Shenkutie TT(3), Assefa 
A(5), Menard D(6)(7), Lo E(3), Golassa L(8).

Author information:
(1)Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, P.O. Box 
24756, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. abnetabas@gmail.com.
(2)Ethiopian Public Health Institute, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. 
abnetabas@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, Drexel 
University, Philadelphia, USA.
(4)Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, P.O. Box 
24756, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(5)Institute of Infectious Disease and Global Health, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(6)Malaria Genetics and Resistance Unit, INSERM U1201, Institut Pasteur, 
Université Paris Cité, 75015, Paris, France.
(7)Dynamics of Host-Pathogen Interactions, Université de Strasbourg, Institute 
of Parasitology and Tropical Diseases, 67000, Strasbourg, France.
(8)Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, P.O. Box 
24756, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. lgolassa@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax Duffy binding protein (PvDBP) is a merozoite 
surface protein located in the micronemes of P. vivax. The invasion of human 
reticulocytes by P. vivax merozoites depends on the parasite DBP binding domain 
engaging Duffy Antigen Receptor for Chemokine (DARC) on these red blood cells 
(RBCs). PvDBPII shows high genetic diversity which is a major challenge to its 
use in the development of a vaccine against vivax malaria.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted from February 2021 to September 
2022 in five study sites across Ethiopia. A total of 58 blood samples confirmed 
positive for P. vivax by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were included in the 
study to determine PvDBPII genetic diversity. PvDBPII were amplified using 
primers designed from reference sequence of P. vivax Sal I strain. Assembling of 
sequences was done using Geneious Prime version 2023.2.1. Alignment and 
phylogenetic tree constructions using MEGA version 10.1.1. Nucleotide diversity 
and haplotype diversity were analysed using DnaSP version 6.12.03, and haplotype 
network was generated with PopART version 1.7.
RESULTS: The mean age of the participants was 25 years, 5 (8.6%) participants 
were Duffy negatives. From the 58 PvDBPII sequences, seven haplotypes based on 
nucleotide differences at 8 positions were identified. Nucleotide diversity and 
haplotype diversity were 0.00267 ± 0.00023 and 0.731 ± 0.036, respectively. 
Among the five study sites, the highest numbers of haplotypes were identified in 
Arbaminch with six different haplotypes while only two haplotypes were 
identified in Gambella. The phylogenetic tree based on PvDBPII revealed that 
parasites of different study sites shared similar genetic clusters with few 
exceptions. Globally, a total of 39 haplotypes were identified from 223 PvDBPII 
sequences representing different geographical isolates obtained from NCBI 
archive. The nucleotide and haplotype diversity were 0.00373 and 0.845 ± 0.015, 
respectively. The haplotype prevalence ranged from 0.45% to 27.3%. Two 
haplotypes were shared among isolates from all geographical areas of the globe.
CONCLUSIONS: PvDBPII of the Ethiopian P. vivax isolates showed low nucleotide 
but high haplotype diversity, this pattern of genetic variability suggests that 
the population may have undergone a recent expansion. Among the Ethiopian P. 
vivax isolates, almost half of the sequences were identical to the Sal-I 
reference sequence. However, there were unique haplotypes observed in the 
Ethiopian isolates, which does not share with isolates from other geographical 
areas. There were two haplotypes that were common among populations across the 
globe. Categorizing population haplotype frequency can help to determine common 
haplotypes for designing an effective blood-stage vaccine which will have a 
significant role for the control and elimination of P. vivax.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-024-04887-1
PMCID: PMC10885561
PMID: 38395885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.