---
reference_id: "PMID:34398296"
title: "Skip segment Hirschsprung's disease: report of two rare cases and management."
authors:
- Yang H
- Ma Y
- Yang S
- Huang Y
- Chen G
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-021-04981-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skip segment Hirschsprung's disease: report of two rare cases and management.
**Authors:** Yang H, Ma Y, Yang S, Huang Y, Chen G
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-021-04981-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-021-04981-4)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2021 Nov;37(11):1563-1568. doi: 10.1007/s00383-021-04981-4. 
Epub 2021 Aug 16.

Skip segment Hirschsprung's disease: report of two rare cases and management.

Yang H(1), Ma Y(2), Yang S(3), Huang Y(1), Chen G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, National Children's Medical Center, Children's 
Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 201102, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, National Children's Medical Center, Children's 
Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 201102, China.
(3)Department of Surgery, National Children's Medical Center, Children's 
Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 201102, China. ysb8479@163.com.

PURPOSE: Skip segment Hirschsprung's disease (SS-HSCR) is defined as the 
occurrence of a segment of ganglionated intestine surrounded proximally and 
distally by aganglionosis. The presence of the skip intestinal segment often 
leads to clinical misdiagnosis, missed diagnosis or inadequate resection of the 
lesions. The purpose was to describe two new cases of SS-HSCR with the aim of 
proposing questions regarding the diagnosis and treatment of this rare disease.
METHODS: We reported two cases of infants with SS-HSCR that were admitted to our 
institution within the last 3 years.
RESULTS: One patient had a skip segment of ganglionated intestine in the 
ascending colon. In the other patient, there were no ganglionic cells in the 
rectum and appendix, but ganglionic cells were visible in the proximal ascending 
colon. The entire colons in the both cases were finally resected, and a 
pull-through operation was performed.
CONCLUSION: Multipoint biopsy should be performed when the biopsy results are 
inconsistent with clinical manifestations. Intraoperative laparoscopic 
identification of the transition zone may be necessary when TCA is suspected. 
Multisegment biopsy is needed to as a preventative measure for SS-HSCR if TCA is 
indicated during surgery. Further study is required to determine the optimal 
length and method of retention of segments.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-021-04981-4
PMID: 34398296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]