---
reference_id: "PMID:36835562"
title: Epigenetic Regulation of Driver Genes in Testicular Tumorigenesis.
authors:
- von Eyben FE
- Kristiansen K
- Kapp DS
- Hu R
- Preda O
- Nogales FF
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24044148
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetic Regulation of Driver Genes in Testicular Tumorigenesis.
**Authors:** von Eyben FE, Kristiansen K, Kapp DS, Hu R, Preda O, Nogales FF
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24044148](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24044148)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Feb 19;24(4):4148. doi: 10.3390/ijms24044148.

Epigenetic Regulation of Driver Genes in Testicular Tumorigenesis.

von Eyben FE(1), Kristiansen K(2)(3)(4), Kapp DS(5), Hu R(6), Preda O(7), 
Nogales FF(8).

Author information:
(1)Center for Tobacco Control Research, Birkevej 17, 5230 Odense, Denmark.
(2)Laboratory of Genomics and Molecular Biomedicine, August Krogh Building 
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 13, 2100 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)BGI-Research, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518120, China.
(4)Institute of Metagenomics, Qingdao-Europe Advanced Institute for Life 
Sciences, BGI-Qingdao, Qingdao 166555, China.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 
USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin 
Hospital and Clinics, Madison, WI 53792, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, San Cecilio University Hospital, 18071 Granada, CP, 
Spain.
(8)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University Granada, 18071 
Granada, CP, Spain.

In testicular germ cell tumor type II (TGCT), a seminoma subtype expresses an 
induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) panel with four upregulated genes, 
OCT4/POU5F1, SOX17, KLF4, and MYC, and embryonal carcinoma (EC) has four 
upregulated genes, OCT4/POU5F1, SOX2, LIN28, and NANOG. The EC panel can 
reprogram cells into iPSC, and both iPSC and EC can differentiate into teratoma. 
This review summarizes the literature on epigenetic regulation of the genes. 
Epigenetic mechanisms, such as methylations of cytosines on the DNA string and 
methylations and acetylations of histone 3 lysines, regulate expression of these 
driver genes between the TGCT subtypes. In TGCT, the driver genes contribute to 
well-known clinical characteristics and the driver genes are also important for 
aggressive subtypes of many other malignancies. In conclusion, epigenetic 
regulation of the driver genes are important for TGCT and for oncology in 
general.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24044148
PMCID: PMC9966837
PMID: 36835562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.