---
reference_id: "PMID:38683353"
title: CIRSE Standards of Practice on Carotid Artery Stenting.
authors:
- Spiliopoulos S
- Blanc R
- Gandini R
- Müller-Hülsbeck S
- Reith W
- Moschovaki-Zeiger O
journal: Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00270-024-03707-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Stents
- "Carotid Stenosis/therapy, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CIRSE Standards of Practice on Carotid Artery Stenting.
**Authors:** Spiliopoulos S, Blanc R, Gandini R, Müller-Hülsbeck S, Reith W, Moschovaki-Zeiger O
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00270-024-03707-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00270-024-03707-y)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2024 Jun;47(6):705-716. doi: 
10.1007/s00270-024-03707-y. Epub 2024 Apr 29.

CIRSE Standards of Practice on Carotid Artery Stenting.

Spiliopoulos S(1), Blanc R(2), Gandini R(3), Müller-Hülsbeck S(4), Reith W(5), 
Moschovaki-Zeiger O(6).

Author information:
(1)Interventional Radiology Unit, 2nd Department of Radiology, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, "Attikon" University General Hospital, 
Athens, Greece. stavspiliop@med.uoa.gr.
(2)Department of Interventional Neuroradiology, Foundation Rothschild Hospital, 
Paris, France.
(3)Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology/Neuroradiology, University of Rome 
"Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
(4)Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology/Neuroradiology, DIAKO Hospital, 
Flensburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Neuroradiology, Saarland University, Homberg, Germany.
(6)Interventional Radiology Unit, 2nd Department of Radiology, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, "Attikon" University General Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Carotid artery stenting has been used effectively to treat internal 
carotid artery stenosis since 1989 (Mathias et al. in World J Surg. 
25(3):328-34, 2001), with refined and expanded techniques and tools presently 
delivering outstanding results in percutaneous endoluminal treatment of carotid 
artery stenosis.
PURPOSE: This CIRSE Standards of Practice document is directed at interventional 
radiologists and details the guidelines for carotid artery stenting, as well as 
the different implementation techniques. In addition to updating all previously 
published material on the different clinical indications, it will provide all 
technical details reflective of European practice for carotid artery stenting. 
CIRSE Standards of Practice documents do not aim to implement a standard of 
clinical patient care, but rather to provide a realistic strategy and best 
practices for the execution of this procedure.
METHODS: The writing group, which was established by the CIRSE Standards of 
Practice Committee, consisted of five clinicians with internationally recognised 
expertise in carotid artery stenting procedures. The writing group reviewed 
existing literature on carotid artery stenting procedures, performing a 
pragmatic evidence search using PubMed to select relevant publications in the 
English language from 2006 to 2022.
RESULTS: Carotid artery stenting has an established role in the management of 
internal carotid artery stenosis; this Standards of Practice document provides 
up-to-date recommendations for its safe performance.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00270-024-03707-y
PMCID: PMC11164804
PMID: 38683353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare they have no conflict of 
interest.