---
reference_id: "PMID:31701854"
title: "Clinical Management of Patients with Dengue Infection in Japan: Results from National Database of Health Insurance Claims."
authors:
- Kajimoto Y
- Kitajima T
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.19-0070
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Management of Patients with Dengue Infection in Japan: Results from National Database of Health Insurance Claims.
**Authors:** Kajimoto Y, Kitajima T
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.19-0070](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.19-0070)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2020 Jan;102(1):191-194. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.19-0070.

Clinical Management of Patients with Dengue Infection in Japan: Results from 
National Database of Health Insurance Claims.

Kajimoto Y(1)(2), Kitajima T(3).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Global Health Research Coordinating Center, Kanagawa Institute of Industrial 
Science and Technology, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Social Sciences, Kyorin University, Tokyo, Japan.

Dengue guidelines for diagnosis, treatment, prevention, and control (WHO, 2011) 
recommend acetaminophen and isotonic fluid for patients with dengue infection 
but do not recommend nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and hypotonic 
fluid. Other research showed no evidence of efficacy of platelet infusion in 
prophylactic. This research aims to clarify to what extent dengue patients were 
managed in accordance with the guidelines in Japan. We extracted claim data of 
patients with either dengue fever (DF) or dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) from 
the National Database of Health Insurance Claims and Specific Health Checkups of 
Japan between 2011 and 2015. The total number of patients was 1,370, which 
consisted of 1,306 DF patients and 64 DHF patients; 185 patients were younger 
than (<) 20 years and 1,185 patients were aged 20 years or older (≥). Among 
them, 24.5% of DF patients and 48.4% of DHF patients received hypotonic 
intravenous fluid, 12.9% and 18.8% NSAIDs, and 1.3% and 17.2% platelet 
transfusion, respectively. Comparing patients aged < 20 years with patients aged 
≥ 20 years, 57.8% and 54.5% received acetaminophen, 6.5% and 14.3% received 
NSAIDs, 40.0% and 38.3% received isotonic fluid, and 37.8% and 23.7% received 
hypotonic fluid, respectively. Platelet transfusion was used for 1.3% of DH and 
17.2% of DHF patients. The study indicated that dengue patients in Japan might 
have increased risks of developing adverse events because of receiving the 
treatment that the guidelines do not recommend. More effort is needed to 
facilitate medical practitioners to follow the guidelines.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.19-0070
PMCID: PMC6947782
PMID: 31701854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]