---
reference_id: "PMID:29088246"
title: Gorlin syndrome-derived induced pluripotent stem cells are hypersensitive to hedgehog-mediated osteogenic induction.
authors:
- Hasegawa D
- Ochiai-Shino H
- Onodera S
- Nakamura T
- Saito A
- Onda T
- Watanabe K
- Nishimura K
- Ohtaka M
- Nakanishi M
- Kosaki K
- Yamaguchi A
- Shibahara T
- Azuma T
journal: PLoS One
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186879
keywords:
- Acyltransferases/genetics
- Adult
- "Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4/genetics
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 6/genetics
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Gene Expression Profiling/methods
- Hedgehog Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Osteogenesis/genetics
- Patched-1 Receptor/genetics
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- Wnt Proteins/genetics
- Young Adult
- Zinc Finger Protein GLI1/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gorlin syndrome-derived induced pluripotent stem cells are hypersensitive to hedgehog-mediated osteogenic induction.
**Authors:** Hasegawa D, Ochiai-Shino H, Onodera S, Nakamura T, Saito A, Onda T, Watanabe K, Nishimura K, Ohtaka M, Nakanishi M, Kosaki K, Yamaguchi A, Shibahara T, Azuma T
**Journal:** PLoS One (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0186879](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0186879)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2017 Oct 31;12(10):e0186879. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186879.
eCollection 2017.

Gorlin syndrome-derived induced pluripotent stem cells are hypersensitive to
hedgehog-mediated osteogenic induction.

Hasegawa D(1), Ochiai-Shino H(2), Onodera S(2), Nakamura T(2), Saito A(2), Onda
T(1), Watanabe K(1), Nishimura K(3), Ohtaka M(4), Nakanishi M(4), Kosaki K(5),
Yamaguchi A(6), Shibahara T(1), Azuma T(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Tokyo Dental College, Tokyo,
Japan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Tokyo Dental College, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan.
(4)Biotechnology Research Institute for Drug Discovery, National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(5)Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.
(6)Oral Health Science Center, Tokyo Dental College, Tokyo, Japan.

Gorlin syndrome is an autosomal dominant inherited syndrome that predisposes a
patient to the formation of basal cell carcinomas, odontogenic keratocysts, and
skeletal anomalies. Causative mutations in several genes associated with the
sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway, including PTCH1, have been identified in
Gorlin syndrome patients. However, no definitive genotype-phenotype correlations
are evident in these patients, and their clinical presentation varies greatly,
often leading to delayed diagnosis and treatment. We generated iPSCs from four
unrelated Gorlin syndrome patients with loss-of-function mutations in PTCH1
using the Sendai virus vector (SeVdp(KOSM)302). The patient-derived iPSCs
exhibited basic iPSC features, including stem cell marker expression,
totipotency, and the ability to form teratomas. GLI1 expression levels were
greater in fibroblasts and patient-derived iPSCs than in the corresponding
control cells. Patient-derived iPSCs expressed lower basal levels than control
iPSCs of the genes encoding the Hh ligands Indian Hedgehog (IHH) and SHH, the Hh
acetyltransferase HHAT, Wnt proteins, BMP4, and BMP6. Most of these genes were
upregulated in patient-derived iPSCs grown in osteoblast differentiation medium
(OBM) and downregulated in control iPSCs cultured in OBM. The expression of GLI1
and GLI2 substantially decreased in both control and patient-derived iPSCs
cultured in OBM, whereas GLI3, SHH, and IHH were upregulated in patient-derived
iPSCs and downregulated in control iPSCs grown in OBM. Activation of Smoothened
by SAG in cells grown in OBM significantly enhanced alkaline phosphatase
activity in patient-derived iPSCs compared with control iPSC lines. In summary,
patient-derived iPSCs expressed lower basal levels than the control iPSCs of the
genes encoding Hh, Wnt, and bone morphogenetic proteins, but their expression of
these genes strongly increased under osteogenic conditions. These findings
indicate that patient-derived iPSCs are hypersensitive to osteogenic induction.
We propose that Hh signaling is constituently active in iPSCs from Gorlin
syndrome patients, enhancing their response to osteogenic induction and
contributing to disease-associated abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186879
PMCID: PMC5663396
PMID: 29088246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have no
conflicts of interest directly relevant to the content of this article. Dr.
Mahito Nakanishi is the founder and chief technology officer (CTO) of
Tokiwa-Bio, Inc. However, this does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies
on sharing data and materials.
