---
reference_id: "PMID:32580537"
title: Evolving pathologic concepts of serrated lesions of the colorectum.
authors:
- Kim JH
- Kang GH
journal: J Pathol Transl Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.4132/jptm.2020.04.15
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evolving pathologic concepts of serrated lesions of the colorectum.
**Authors:** Kim JH, Kang GH
**Journal:** J Pathol Transl Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4132/jptm.2020.04.15](https://doi.org/10.4132/jptm.2020.04.15)

## Content

1. J Pathol Transl Med. 2020 Jul;54(4):276-289. doi: 10.4132/jptm.2020.04.15.
Epub  2020 Jun 26.

Evolving pathologic concepts of serrated lesions of the colorectum.

Kim JH(1)(2), Kang GH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Laboratory of Epigenetics, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Here, we provide an up-to-date review of the histopathology and molecular
pathology of serrated colorectal lesions. First, we introduce the updated
contents of the 2019 World Health Organization classification for serrated
lesions. The sessile serrated lesion (SSL) is a new diagnostic terminology that
replaces sessile serrated adenoma and sessile serrated polyp. The diagnostic
criteria for SSL were revised to require only one unequivocal distorted serrated
crypt, which is sufficient for diagnosis. Unclassified serrated adenomas have
been included as a new category of serrated lesions. Second, we review ongoing
issues concerning the morphology of serrated lesions. Minor morphologic variants
with distinct molecular features were recently defined, including serrated
tubulovillous adenoma, mucin-rich variant of traditional serrated adenoma (TSA),
and superficially serrated adenoma. In addition to intestinal dysplasia and
serrated dysplasia, minimal deviation dysplasia and not otherwise specified
dysplasia were newly suggested as dysplasia subtypes of SSLs. Third, we
summarize the molecular features of serrated lesions. The critical determinant
of CpG island methylation development in SSLs is patient age. Interestingly,
there may be ethnic differences in BRAF/KRAS mutation frequencies in SSLs. The
molecular pathogenesis of TSAs is divided into KRAS and BRAF mutation pathways.
SSLs with MLH1 methylation can progress into favorable prognostic microsatellite
instability-positive (MSI+)/CpG island methylator phenotype-positive (CIMP+)
carcinomas, whereas MLH1-unmethylated SSLs and BRAF-mutated TSAs can be
precursors of poor-prognostic MSI-/CIMP+ carcinomas. Finally, based on our
recent data, we propose an algorithm for stratifying risk subgroups of
non-dysplastic SSLs.

DOI: 10.4132/jptm.2020.04.15
PMCID: PMC7385269
PMID: 32580537

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest J.H.K. and G.H.K.,
contributing editors of the Journal of Pathology and Translational Medicine,
were not involved in the editorial evaluation or decision to publish this
article.
