---
reference_id: "PMID:23389333"
title: Novel OCRL mutations in Chinese children with Lowe syndrome.
authors:
- Zhang YQ
- Wang F
- Ding J
- Yan H
- Yang YL
journal: World J Pediatr
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s12519-013-0406-4
keywords:
- Asian People/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/genetics
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel OCRL mutations in Chinese children with Lowe syndrome.
**Authors:** Zhang YQ, Wang F, Ding J, Yan H, Yang YL
**Journal:** World J Pediatr (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12519-013-0406-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12519-013-0406-4)

## Content

1. World J Pediatr. 2013 Feb;9(1):53-7. doi: 10.1007/s12519-013-0406-4. Epub 2013
 Feb 7.

Novel OCRL mutations in Chinese children with Lowe syndrome.

Zhang YQ(1), Wang F, Ding J, Yan H, Yang YL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, 100034 Beijing,
China.

BACKGROUND: Lowe syndrome is a rare X-linked recessive hereditary disease caused
by mutations of the OCRL gene, which encodes an inositol
polyphosphate-5-phosphatase. The disease is clinically characterized by
congenital cataracts, psychomotor retardation, and proximal tubulopathy.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed three unrelated Chinese patients with Lowe
syndrome, clinically diagnosed by the abnormalities of eyes, nervous system, and
kidneys. Genetic analysis of the OCRL gene was done for the three patients as
well as their family members.
RESULTS: Three OCRL gene mutations were detected in our study. Two of the
mutations, g.1897delT in exon 18 (patient 1) and g.1470delG in exon 15 (patient
2), were novel. A missense mutation (p.Y513C) in exon 15, which had been
reported previously, was found in patient 3. The mothers of all patients were
heterozygous carriers of the respective mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Three Chinese children were diagnosed with Lowe syndrome through
clinical and genetic analyses. And two novel mutations in the OCRL gene were
identified.

DOI: 10.1007/s12519-013-0406-4
PMID: 23389333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
