---
reference_id: "PMID:39050308"
title: "Hereditary Tyrosinemia Type-1 With Late Presentation: A Case Report."
authors:
- Ilyaz M
- Jadhav RS
- Pande V
- Mane S
- Mokkarala P
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.62990
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Tyrosinemia Type-1 With Late Presentation: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Ilyaz M, Jadhav RS, Pande V, Mane S, Mokkarala P
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.62990](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.62990)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jun 23;16(6):e62990. doi: 10.7759/cureus.62990. eCollection 2024 
Jun.

Hereditary Tyrosinemia Type-1 With Late Presentation: A Case Report.

Ilyaz M(1), Jadhav RS(1), Pande V(1), Mane S(1), Mokkarala P(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics, Dr. D. Y. Patil Medical College, Hospital & Research Centre, Dr. 
D. Y. Patil Vidyapeeth (Deemed to be University), Pune, IND.

The etiology of hereditary tyrosinemia type 1 (HT-1) is the absence of 
fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH), an enzyme that catalyzes the last stage of 
the tyrosine breakdown process. With an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, 
it is an uncommon genetic condition. We present a case of HT-1 in a 
three-year-old female child characterized by abdominal distension, facial edema, 
lower limb edema, and an enlarged liver with parenchymal disease. A liver biopsy 
confirmed mixed nodular cirrhosis, and a subsequent whole exome sequencing 
revealed autosomal recessive inheritance of tyrosinemia type 1. The patient is 
currently undergoing treatment with capsule nitisinone 5 mg, which inhibits the 
second step of tyrosine degradation to prevent tyrosinemia, along with a 
restricted protein diet, while awaiting liver transplantation.

Copyright © 2024, Ilyaz et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.62990
PMCID: PMC11268983
PMID: 39050308

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived 
by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.