---
reference_id: "PMID:1731223"
title: A chimaeric 11 beta-hydroxylase/aldosterone synthase gene causes glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism and human hypertension.
authors:
- Lifton RP
- Dluhy RG
- Powers M
- Rich GM
- Cook S
- Ulick S
- Lalouel JM
journal: Nature
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1038/355262a0
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Chimera
- "Crossing Over, Genetic"
- Cytochrome P-450 CYP11B2
- Cytochrome P-450 Enzyme System/genetics
- Exons
- Female
- Humans
- "Hyperaldosteronism/enzymology, genetics"
- "Hypertension/enzymology, genetics"
- Introns
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Oligodeoxyribonucleotides
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Steroid 11-beta-Hydroxylase/genetics
- Steroid Hydroxylases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A chimaeric 11 beta-hydroxylase/aldosterone synthase gene causes glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism and human hypertension.
**Authors:** Lifton RP, Dluhy RG, Powers M, Rich GM, Cook S, Ulick S, Lalouel JM
**Journal:** Nature (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1038/355262a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/355262a0)

## Content

1. Nature. 1992 Jan 16;355(6357):262-5. doi: 10.1038/355262a0.

A chimaeric 11 beta-hydroxylase/aldosterone synthase gene causes
glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism and human hypertension.

Lifton RP(1), Dluhy RG, Powers M, Rich GM, Cook S, Ulick S, Lalouel JM.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah, Eccles Institute of
Human Genetics, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132.

Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (GRA), an autosomal dominant disorder,
is characterized by hypertension with variable hyperaldosteronism and by high
levels of the abnormal adrenal steroids 18-oxocortisol and 18-hydroxycortisol,
which are all under control of adrenocorticotropic hormone and suppressible by
glucocorticoids. These abnormalities could result from ectopic expression of
aldosterone synthase, which is normally expressed only in adrenal glomerulosa,
in the adrenal fasciculata. Genes encoding aldosterone synthase and steroid 11
beta-hydroxylase (expressed in both adrenal fasciculata and glomerulosa), which
are 95% identical and lie on chromosome 8q (refs 7, 10), are therefore candidate
genes for GRA. Here we demonstrate complete linkage of GRA in a large kindred to
a gene duplication arising from unequal crossing over, fusing the 5' regulatory
region of 11 beta-hydroxylase to the coding sequences of aldosterone synthase
(maximum lod score 5.23 for complete linkage, odds ratio of 170,000:1). This
mutation can account for all the physiological abnormalities of GRA. Our result
represents the demonstration of a mutation causing hypertension in otherwise
phenotypically normal animals or humans.

DOI: 10.1038/355262a0
PMID: 1731223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
