---
reference_id: "PMID:30377230"
title: Genetic Analysis of 400 Patients Refines Understanding and Implicates a New Gene in Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome.
authors:
- Bu F
- Zhang Y
- Wang K
- Borsa NG
- Jones MB
- Taylor AO
- Takanami E
- Meyer NC
- Frees K
- Thomas CP
- Nester C
- Smith RJH
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2018070759
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/blood, genetics"
- Blood Coagulation Factors/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Complement System Proteins/genetics
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Vitronectin/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Analysis of 400 Patients Refines Understanding and Implicates a New Gene in Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome.
**Authors:** Bu F, Zhang Y, Wang K, Borsa NG, Jones MB, Taylor AO, Takanami E, Meyer NC, Frees K, Thomas CP, Nester C, Smith RJH
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2018070759](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2018070759)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2018 Dec;29(12):2809-2819. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2018070759. Epub
 2018 Oct 30.

Genetic Analysis of 400 Patients Refines Understanding and Implicates a New Gene
in Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome.

Bu F(1)(2), Zhang Y(2), Wang K(3), Borsa NG(2), Jones MB(2), Taylor AO(2),
Takanami E(2), Meyer NC(2), Frees K(2), Thomas CP(4), Nester C(2)(4)(5), Smith
RJH(6)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Center, Southwest Hospital, Chongqing, China; and.
(2)Molecular Otolaryngology and Renal Research Laboratories.
(3)College of Public Health.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of
Medicine, and.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa.
(6)Molecular Otolaryngology and Renal Research Laboratories,
richard-smith@uiowa.edu.

BACKGROUND: Genetic variation in complement genes is a predisposing factor for
atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS), a life-threatening thrombotic
microangiopathy, however interpreting the effects of genetic variants is
challenging and often ambiguous.
METHODS: We analyzed 93 complement and coagulation genes in 400 patients with
aHUS, using as controls 600 healthy individuals from Iowa and 63,345 non-Finnish
European individuals from the Genome Aggregation Database. After adjusting for
population stratification, we then applied the Fisher exact, modified Poisson
exact, and optimal unified sequence kernel association tests to assess
gene-based variant burden. We also applied a sliding-window analysis to define
the frequency range over which variant burden was significant.
RESULTS: We found that patients with aHUS are enriched for ultrarare coding
variants in the CFH, C3, CD46, CFI, DGKE, and VTN genes. The majority of the
significance is contributed by variants with a minor allele frequency of <0.1%.
Disease-related variants tend to occur in specific complement protein domains of
FH, CD46, and C3. We observed no enrichment for multiple rare coding variants in
gene-gene combinations.
CONCLUSIONS: In known aHUS-associated genes, variants with a minor allele
frequency >0.1% should not be considered pathogenic unless valid enrichment
and/or functional evidence are available. VTN, which encodes vitronectin, an
inhibitor of the terminal complement pathway, is implicated as a novel
aHUS-associated gene. Patients with aHUS are not enriched for multiple rare
variants in complement genes. In aggregate, these data may help in directing
clinical management of aHUS.

Copyright © 2018 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2018070759
PMCID: PMC6287871
PMID: 30377230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
