---
reference_id: "PMID:36255170"
title: "Mucosal and systemic immune responses to Vibrio cholerae infection and oral cholera vaccines (OCVs) in humans: a systematic review."
authors:
- Naidu A
- Lulu S S
journal: Expert Rev Clin Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/1744666X.2022.2136650
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucosal and systemic immune responses to Vibrio cholerae infection and oral cholera vaccines (OCVs) in humans: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Naidu A, Lulu S S
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/1744666X.2022.2136650](https://doi.org/10.1080/1744666X.2022.2136650)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2022 Dec;18(12):1307-1318. doi: 
10.1080/1744666X.2022.2136650. Epub 2022 Oct 28.

Mucosal and systemic immune responses to Vibrio cholerae infection and oral 
cholera vaccines (OCVs) in humans: a systematic review.

Naidu A(1), Lulu S S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Bio Sciences and Technology, Vellore 
Institute of Technology, Vellore, India.

INTRODUCTION: Cholera is an enteric disease caused by Vibrio cholerae, a 
water-borne pathogen, and characterized by severe diarrhea. Vaccines have been 
recommended for use by the WHO in resource-limited settings. Efficacies of the 
currently licensed cholera vaccines are not optimal in endemic settings and low 
in children below the age of five, a section of the population most susceptible 
to the disease. Development of next generation of cholera vaccines would require 
a detailed understanding of the required protective immune responses.
AREA COVERED: In this review, we revisit clinical trials which are focused on 
the early transcriptional mucosal responses elicited during Vibrio cholerae 
infection and upon vaccination along with summarizing various components of the 
effector immune response against Vibrio cholerae.
EXPERT OPINION: The inability of currently licensed killed/inactivated vaccines 
to elicit key inflammatory pathways locally may explain their restricted 
efficacy in endemic settings. More studies are required to understand the 
immunogenicity of the live attenuated cholera vaccine in these regions. Various 
extrinsic and intrinsic factors influence anti-cholera immunity and need to be 
considered to develop region-specific next generation vaccines.

DOI: 10.1080/1744666X.2022.2136650
PMID: 36255170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]