---
reference_id: "PMID:21146802"
title: An infant with transient neonatal pustular melanosis presenting as pustules.
authors:
- Chia PS
- Leung C
- Hsu YL
- Lo CY
journal: Pediatr Neonatol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/S1875-9572(10)60069-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An infant with transient neonatal pustular melanosis presenting as pustules.
**Authors:** Chia PS, Leung C, Hsu YL, Lo CY
**Journal:** Pediatr Neonatol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1875-9572(10)60069-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1875-9572(10)60069-1)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neonatol. 2010 Dec;51(6):356-8. doi: 10.1016/S1875-9572(10)60069-1.

An infant with transient neonatal pustular melanosis presenting as pustules.

Chia PS(1), Leung C, Hsu YL, Lo CY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, No. 21 Sec. 2 Na Ya 
South Road, Panchiao, Taipei, Taiwan.

Transient neonatal pustular melanosis is mostly found in full-term black 
infants. It is a benign and self-limited disease, and the etiology is still 
unknown. We present a full-term female neonate with multiple vesiculopustular 
and pigmented macular lesions found immediately after her birth. A skin biopsy 
showed vesicles consisting of intracorneal and subcorneal aggregates of 
neutrophils, which is compatible with transient neonatal pustular melanosis. 
Although it is rare in Taiwan and Asian countries, transient neonatal pustular 
melanosis should always be considered when pustulosis is found in the neonatal 
period to prevent the use of unnecessary antibiotics. Dermatological 
consultation and histological confirmation are sometimes required for the final 
diagnosis.

Copyright © 2010 Taiwan Pediatric Association. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1875-9572(10)60069-1
PMID: 21146802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]