---
reference_id: "PMID:18417261"
title: The hematologic manifestations of the antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Uthman I
- Godeau B
- Taher A
- Khamashta M
journal: Blood Rev
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2008.03.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The hematologic manifestations of the antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Uthman I, Godeau B, Taher A, Khamashta M
**Journal:** Blood Rev (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.blre.2008.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.blre.2008.03.005)

## Content

1. Blood Rev. 2008 Jul;22(4):187-94. doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2008.03.005. Epub 2008
Apr  15.

The hematologic manifestations of the antiphospholipid syndrome.

Uthman I(1), Godeau B, Taher A, Khamashta M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, American University of Beirut, 
Beirut, Lebanon.

Various hematological pathologies have been described in association with 
antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). Thrombocytopenia is frequently found in APS 
patients, its incidence has ranged from 22-42% in different series, it is 
usually moderate (>50x10(9)/L) without clinical manifestation and requires no 
intervention. A high percentage of patients with isolated idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic purpura have antiphospholipid antibodies, however the 
pathogenetic role and the clinical importance of these antibodies in this 
condition is still not clear. Other hematological manifestations reported in 
association with APS include: bone marrow necrosis, and various thrombotic 
microangiopathic syndromes such as: thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, 
hemolytic-uremic syndrome, HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low 
platelet) syndrome, and catastrophic APS. A high index of suspicion is needed 
for the early recognition and treatment of these conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.blre.2008.03.005
PMID: 18417261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]