---
reference_id: "PMID:28536304"
title: "Abnormal glycogen chain length pattern, not hyperphosphorylation, is critical in Lafora disease."
authors:
- Nitschke F
- Sullivan MA
- Wang P
- Zhao X
- Chown EE
- Perri AM
- Israelian L
- Juana-López L
- Bovolenta P
- Rodríguez de Córdoba S
- Steup M
- Minassian BA
journal: EMBO Mol Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.15252/emmm.201707608
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain/pathology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Dual-Specificity Phosphatases/deficiency, metabolism"
- Female
- "Glycogen/chemistry, metabolism"
- Lafora Disease/pathology
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Molecular Weight
- Phosphorylation
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor"
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/deficiency, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal glycogen chain length pattern, not hyperphosphorylation, is critical in Lafora disease.
**Authors:** Nitschke F, Sullivan MA, Wang P, Zhao X, Chown EE, Perri AM, Israelian L, Juana-López L, Bovolenta P, Rodríguez de Córdoba S, Steup M, Minassian BA
**Journal:** EMBO Mol Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.15252/emmm.201707608](https://doi.org/10.15252/emmm.201707608)

## Content

1. EMBO Mol Med. 2017 Jul;9(7):906-917. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201707608.

Abnormal glycogen chain length pattern, not hyperphosphorylation, is critical in
Lafora disease.

Nitschke F(1), Sullivan MA(1)(2), Wang P(1), Zhao X(1), Chown EE(1)(3), Perri
AM(1), Israelian L(1)(3), Juana-López L(4), Bovolenta P(5), Rodríguez de Córdoba
S(4), Steup M(1), Minassian BA(6)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Glycation and Diabetes, Mater Research Institute, Translational Research
Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Qld, Australia.
(3)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas and Ciber de Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC-UAM and Ciber de Enfermedades
Raras, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada berge.minassian@sickkids.ca.
(7)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas
Southwestern, Dallas, TX, USA.

Lafora disease (LD) is a fatal progressive epilepsy essentially caused by
loss-of-function mutations in the glycogen phosphatase laforin or the ubiquitin
E3 ligase malin. Glycogen in LD is hyperphosphorylated and poorly hydrosoluble.
It precipitates and accumulates into neurotoxic Lafora bodies (LBs). The leading
LD hypothesis that hyperphosphorylation causes the insolubility was recently
challenged by the observation that phosphatase-inactive laforin rescues the
laforin-deficient LD mouse model, apparently through correction of a general
autophagy impairment. We were for the first time able to quantify brain glycogen
phosphate. We also measured glycogen content and chain lengths, LBs, and
autophagy markers in several laforin- or malin-deficient mouse lines expressing
phosphatase-inactive laforin. We find that: (i) in laforin-deficient mice,
phosphatase-inactive laforin corrects glycogen chain lengths, and not
hyperphosphorylation, which leads to correction of glycogen amounts and
prevention of LBs; (ii) in malin-deficient mice, phosphatase-inactive laforin
confers no correction; (iii) general impairment of autophagy is not necessary in
LD We conclude that laforin's principle function is to control glycogen chain
lengths, in a malin-dependent fashion, and that loss of this control underlies
LD.

© 2017 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/emmm.201707608
PMCID: PMC5494504
PMID: 28536304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
