---
reference_id: "PMID:40260920"
title: New Phenotypic Features in FGFR1-Related Osteoglophonic Dysplasia.
authors:
- Othman AA
- Babcock HE
- Gill CS
- Fraser JL
- Regier DS
- Kaur R
- Simpson KL
- Ferreira CR
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64092
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics, diagnosis"
- Fibroblast Growth Factor-23
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 1/genetics"
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Phenotypic Features in FGFR1-Related Osteoglophonic Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Othman AA, Babcock HE, Gill CS, Fraser JL, Regier DS, Kaur R, Simpson KL, Ferreira CR
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.64092](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.64092)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2025 Sep;197(9):e64092. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64092. Epub 2025
 Apr 22.

New Phenotypic Features in FGFR1-Related Osteoglophonic Dysplasia.

Othman AA(1), Babcock HE(1)(2), Gill CS(3), Fraser JL(4)(5)(6), Regier DS(6), 
Kaur R(2), Simpson KL(6), Ferreira CR(2).

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Unit on Skeletal Genomics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child 
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center and Scottish Rite for Children, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(4)Prenatal Pediatrics Institute, Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC, 
USA.
(5)Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Children's National Hospital, 
Washington, DC, USA.
(6)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's National Hospital, 
Washington, DC, USA.

Osteoglophonic dysplasia (OGD) is a rare skeletal disorder caused by certain 
variants in FGFR1. The FGFR1 gene encodes a receptor vital for osteogenesis in 
the axial and craniofacial skeleton. Key OGD features include craniosynostosis, 
craniofacial dysmorphism, impacted teeth, rhizomelic shortening, and 
nonossifying fibromas. Patients may have hypophosphatemia due to high FGF23 
levels. We report two OGD patients with the c.1141T > C FGFR1 variant 
[p.(Cys381Arg)], initially diagnosed with Pfeiffer syndrome. Both showed classic 
symptoms as well as signs not previously reported, including elevated frontal 
temperature and overlapping toes. This report emphasizes distinguishing OGD from 
similar disorders and expanding the clinical phenotype.

© 2025 Wiley Periodicals LLC. This article has been contributed to by U.S. 
Government employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64092
PMCID: PMC12339206
PMID: 40260920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors report no 
conflict of interest.