---
reference_id: "PMID:38721146"
title: "Testicular differentiation in 46,XX DSD: an overview of genetic causes."
authors:
- Ferrari MTM
- Silva ESDN
- Nishi MY
- Batista RL
- Mendonca BB
- Domenice S
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1385901
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Testis/pathology, metabolism"
- Animals
- Female
- "46, XX Disorders of Sex Development/genetics, pathology"
- Sex Differentiation/genetics
- "Disorders of Sex Development/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Testicular differentiation in 46,XX DSD: an overview of genetic causes.
**Authors:** Ferrari MTM, Silva ESDN, Nishi MY, Batista RL, Mendonca BB, Domenice S
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2024.1385901](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2024.1385901)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024 Apr 24;15:1385901. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2024.1385901. eCollection 2024.

Testicular differentiation in 46,XX DSD: an overview of genetic causes.

Ferrari MTM(1), Silva ESDN(1), Nishi MY(1), Batista RL(1), Mendonca BB(#)(1)(2), 
Domenice S(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Disciplina de Endocrinologia e Metabologia, Laboratório de Hormônios e 
Genética Molecular/LIM42, Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Sequenciamento em Larga Escala (SELA), Faculdade de Medicina 
da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(#)Contributed equally

In mammals, the development of male or female gonads from fetal bipotential 
gonads depends on intricate genetic networks. Changes in dosage or temporal 
expression of sex-determining genes can lead to differences of gonadal 
development. Two rare conditions are associated with disruptions in ovarian 
determination, including 46,XX testicular differences in sex development (DSD), 
in which the 46,XX gonads differentiate into testes, and 46,XX ovotesticular 
DSD, characterized by the coexistence of ovarian and testicular tissue in the 
same individual. Several mechanisms have been identified that may contribute to 
the development of testicular tissue in XX gonads. This includes translocation 
of SRY to the X chromosome or an autosome. In the absence of SRY, other genes 
associated with testis development may be overexpressed or there may be a 
reduction in the activity of pro-ovarian/antitesticular factors. However, it is 
important to note that a significant number of patients with these DSD 
conditions have not yet recognized a genetic diagnosis. This finding suggests 
that there are additional genetic pathways or epigenetic mechanisms that have 
yet to be identified. The text will provide an overview of the current 
understanding of the genetic factors contributing to 46,XX DSD, specifically 
focusing on testicular and ovotesticular DSD conditions. It will summarize the 
existing knowledge regarding the genetic causes of these differences. 
Furthermore, it will explore the potential involvement of other factors, such as 
epigenetic mechanisms, in developing these conditions.

Copyright © 2024 Ferrari, Silva, Nishi, Batista, Mendonca and Domenice.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1385901
PMCID: PMC11076692
PMID: 38721146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.