---
reference_id: "PMID:33712527"
title: IgM Autoantibodies to Complement Factor H in Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome.
authors:
- Cugno M
- Berra S
- Depetri F
- Tedeschi S
- Griffini S
- Grovetti E
- Caccia S
- Cresseri D
- Messa P
- Testa S
- Giglio F
- Peyvandi F
- Ardissino G
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2020081224
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/blood, diagnosis, immunology"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Complement Factor H/immunology
- Female
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin M/immunology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IgM Autoantibodies to Complement Factor H in Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome.
**Authors:** Cugno M, Berra S, Depetri F, Tedeschi S, Griffini S, Grovetti E, Caccia S, Cresseri D, Messa P, Testa S, Giglio F, Peyvandi F, Ardissino G
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2020081224](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2020081224)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2021 May 3;32(5):1227-1235. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2020081224.
Epub  2021 Mar 12.

IgM Autoantibodies to Complement Factor H in Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome.

Cugno M(1), Berra S(2), Depetri F(1), Tedeschi S(3), Griffini S(1), Grovetti
E(1), Caccia S(2), Cresseri D(4), Messa P(4), Testa S(5), Giglio F(6), Peyvandi
F(1), Ardissino G(5).

Author information:
(1)Medicina Interna, Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia Medico-Chirurgica e dei
Trapianti, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e
Cura a Carattere Scientifico Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan,
Italy.
(2)L. Sacco Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Milan,
Milan, Italy.
(3)Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(4)Unità Operativa di Nefrologia, Dialisi e Trapianto Renale, Fondazione
Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Ca' Granda, Ospedale
Maggiore Policlinico, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(5)Center for Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome Prevention, Control and Management,
Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Ca' Granda,
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(6)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura
a Carattere Scientifico S. Raffaele Scientific Institution, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS), a severe thrombotic
microangiopathy, is often related to complement dysregulation, but the
pathomechanisms remain unknown in at least 30% of patients. Researchers have
described autoantibodies to complement factor H of the IgG class in 10% of
patients with aHUS but have not reported anti-factor H autoantibodies of the IgM
class.
METHODS: In 186 patients with thrombotic microangiopathy clinically presented as
aHUS, we searched for anti-factor H autoantibodies of the IgM class and those of
the IgG and IgA classes. We used immunochromatography to purify anti-factor H
IgM autoantibodies and immunoenzymatic methods and a competition assay with
mapping mAbs to characterize interaction with the target protein.
RESULTS: We detected anti-factor H autoantibodies of the IgM class in seven of
186 (3.8%) patients with thrombotic microangiopathy presented as aHUS. No
association was observed between anti-factor H IgM and homozygous deletions
involving CFHR3-CFHR1. A significantly higher proportion of patients with bone
marrow transplant-related thrombotic microangiopathy had anti-factor H IgM
autoantibodies versus other patients with aHUS: three of 20 (15%) versus four of
166 (2.4%), respectively. The identified IgM autoantibodies recognize the SCR
domain 19 of factor H molecule in all patients and interact with the factor H
molecule, inhibiting its binding to C3b.
CONCLUSIONS: Detectable autoantibodies to factor H of the IgM class may be
present in patients with aHUS, and their frequency is six-fold higher in
thrombotic microangiopathy forms associated with bone marrow transplant. The
autoantibody interaction with factor H's active site may support an autoimmune
mechanism in some cases previously considered to be of unknown origin.

Copyright © 2021 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2020081224
PMCID: PMC8259677
PMID: 33712527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
