---
reference_id: "PMID:17172831"
title: Wnt/Wingless pathway activation and chromosome 6 loss characterize a distinct molecular sub-group of medulloblastomas associated with a favorable prognosis.
authors:
- Clifford SC
- Lusher ME
- Lindsey JC
- Langdon JA
- Gilbertson RJ
- Straughton D
- Ellison DW
journal: Cell Cycle
year: '2006'
doi: 10.4161/cc.5.22.3446
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Cerebellar Neoplasms/classification, diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Medulloblastoma/classification, diagnosis, genetics"
- Prognosis
- Signal Transduction
- "Wnt Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "beta Catenin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wnt/Wingless pathway activation and chromosome 6 loss characterize a distinct molecular sub-group of medulloblastomas associated with a favorable prognosis.
**Authors:** Clifford SC, Lusher ME, Lindsey JC, Langdon JA, Gilbertson RJ, Straughton D, Ellison DW
**Journal:** Cell Cycle (2006)
**DOI:** [10.4161/cc.5.22.3446](https://doi.org/10.4161/cc.5.22.3446)

## Content

1. Cell Cycle. 2006 Nov;5(22):2666-70. doi: 10.4161/cc.5.22.3446. Epub 2006 Nov
15.

Wnt/Wingless pathway activation and chromosome 6 loss characterize a distinct 
molecular sub-group of medulloblastomas associated with a favorable prognosis.

Clifford SC(1), Lusher ME, Lindsey JC, Langdon JA, Gilbertson RJ, Straughton D, 
Ellison DW.

Author information:
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, UK. s.c.clifford@ncl.ac.uk

The accurate assessment of disease risk remains a major goal in children with 
medulloblastoma. Activation of the canonical Wnt/Wingless (Wnt/Wg) signalling 
pathway occurs in up to 25% of cases and is associated with a favorable disease 
outcome. To explore the molecular pathogenesis of Wnt/Wg-active 
medulloblastomas, and to investigate any genetic basis for their observed 
clinical behavior, we assessed a series of primary medulloblastomas for evidence 
of Wnt/Wg pathway activation, alongside a genome-wide analysis of associated 
copy-number aberrations. Cases displaying evidence of Wnt/Wg activation (CTNNB1 
mutation and/or beta-catenin nuclear stabilisation) were exclusively associated 
with a distinct genomic signature involving loss of an entire copy of chromosome 
6 but few other aberrations (p < 0.001). In contrast, Wnt/Wg-negative tumors 
coclustered into an unrelated sub-group characterised by multiple established 
genomic defects common in medulloblastoma (losses of chromosomes 17p, 8, 10 and 
16; gains of chromosomes 7 and 17q). Further investigation of specific genetic 
defects in a larger independent cohort demonstrated that loss of chromosome 6 
was exclusively observed in Wnt/Wg-active tumors, but not in Wnt/Wg-negative 
cases (8/13 vs. 0/19; p = 0.0001), while pathway activation was independent of 
chromosome 17 aberrations, the most common chromosomal alterations detected in 
medulloblastoma (p = 0.005). Wnt/Wg-active tumors could not be distinguished on 
the basis of clinical or pathological disease features. Our data indicate that 
Wnt/Wg-active tumors represent an independent molecular sub-group of 
medulloblastomas characterised by a distinct pattern of genomic aberrations. 
These findings provide a strong biological basis to support (1) the 
idiosyncratic clinical behavior of Wnt/Wg-active medulloblastomas, and (2) the 
development of beta-catenin status as an independent marker for therapeutic 
stratification in this disease.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.5.22.3446
PMID: 17172831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]