---
reference_id: "PMID:37367062"
title: "Oxytocin's Regulation of Thermogenesis May Be the Link to Prader-Willi Syndrome."
authors:
- Camerino C
journal: Curr Issues Mol Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cimb45060313
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oxytocin's Regulation of Thermogenesis May Be the Link to Prader-Willi Syndrome.
**Authors:** Camerino C
**Journal:** Curr Issues Mol Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cimb45060313](https://doi.org/10.3390/cimb45060313)

## Content

1. Curr Issues Mol Biol. 2023 Jun 6;45(6):4923-4935. doi: 10.3390/cimb45060313.

Oxytocin's Regulation of Thermogenesis May Be the Link to Prader-Willi Syndrome.

Camerino C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, Section of 
Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Bari Aldo Moro, P.za G. Cesare 
11, 70100 Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology "V. Erspamer", Sapienza University 
of Rome, P.le Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.

Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a genetic neurodevelopmental disorder that is 
caused by either the deletion of the paternal allele of 15q11-q13, maternal 
uniparental disomy of chromosome 15 or defects in the chromosome 15 imprinting 
centre and is characterized by cognitive impairment, hyperphagia and low 
metabolic rate with significant risk of obesity, as well as a variety of other 
maladaptive behaviours and autistic spectrum disorder (ASD). Many of the 
features seen in PWS are thought to be due to hypothalamic dysfunction resulting 
in hormonal abnormalities and impaired social functioning. The preponderance of 
evidence indicates that the Oxytocin system is dysregulated in PWS individuals 
and that this neuropeptide pathways may provide promising targets for 
therapeutic intervention although the process by which this dysregulation occurs 
in PWS awaits mechanistic investigation. PWS individuals present abnormalities 
in thermoregulation an impaired detection for temperature change and altered 
perception of pain indicating an altered autonomic nervous system. Recent 
studies indicate that Oxytocin is involved in thermoregulation and pain 
perception. This review will describe the update on PWS and the recent 
discoveries on Oxytocin regulation of thermogenesis together with the potential 
link between Oxytocin regulation of thermogenesis and PWS to create a new 
groundwork for the treatment of this condition.

DOI: 10.3390/cimb45060313
PMCID: PMC10297258
PMID: 37367062

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.