---
reference_id: "PMID:21533779"
title: "Ellis-van Creveld syndrome and congenital heart defects: presentation of an additional 32 cases."
authors:
- Hills CB
- Kochilas L
- Schimmenti LA
- Moller JH
journal: Pediatr Cardiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s00246-011-0006-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ellis-van Creveld syndrome and congenital heart defects: presentation of an additional 32 cases.
**Authors:** Hills CB, Kochilas L, Schimmenti LA, Moller JH
**Journal:** Pediatr Cardiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00246-011-0006-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00246-011-0006-9)

## Content

1. Pediatr Cardiol. 2011 Oct;32(7):977-82. doi: 10.1007/s00246-011-0006-9. Epub 
2011 May 1.

Ellis-van Creveld syndrome and congenital heart defects: presentation of an 
additional 32 cases.

Hills CB(1), Kochilas L, Schimmenti LA, Moller JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, University of Minnesota, MMC 94 Delaware 
St SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. chills@chc-pa.org

Comment in
    Pediatr Cardiol. 2012 Apr;33(4):491; discussion 491-2. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-012-0155-5.
    Pediatr Cardiol. 2012 Jun;33(5):874-5. doi: 10.1007/s00246-012-0270-3.

Ellis-van Creveld (EVC) syndrome is a rare genetic abnormality that has been 
linked to a mutation in the EVC or EVC2 genes. Common atrium (CA) is an uncommon 
cardiac malformation, and yet it is commonly found in patients with EVC. We 
performed a retrospective review of the cases submitted to the Pediatric Cardiac 
Care Consortium (PCCC) between 1982 and 2007. A review of the English-language 
literature for previously published cases, as well as current genetic research 
findings, was also performed. Thirty-two pediatric patients with congenital 
heart disease (CHD) and EVC syndrome were identified in the PCCC database. 
Twenty-eight (88%) had an endocardial cushion defect, with 15 of these having 
primary failure of atrial septation resulting in CA. Persistent left superior 
vena cava (LSVC) and pulmonary venous connection abnormalities were common. The 
incidence of persistent LSVC and pulmonary venous abnormalities were greater 
than previously reported for patients with EVC. Our study reviews the reported 
literature and adds 32 additional cases from the PCCC database. Review of the 
cardiac phenotype in patients with EVC syndrome reveals a characteristic pattern 
of atrioventricular canal defects with systemic and pulmonary venous 
abnormalities. The frequent association of these abnormalities is strongly 
reminiscent of the cardiac phenotype found in patients with heterotaxy 
syndromes. Emerging molecular and developmental studies suggest that EVC and 
EVC2 proteins may be important for cilia function, which is implicated in the 
pathogenesis of heterotaxy syndromes. It is speculated that coordinate function 
between the EVC proteins is required for a cilia-dependent cardiac 
morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00246-011-0006-9
PMID: 21533779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]