---
reference_id: "PMID:11360116"
title: Four year follow-up of a case of fucosidosis treated with unrelated donor bone marrow transplantation.
authors:
- Miano M
- Lanino E
- Gatti R
- Morreale G
- Fondelli P
- Celle ME
- Stroppiano M
- Crescenzi F
- Dini G
journal: Bone Marrow Transplant
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1702994
keywords:
- Bone Marrow Transplantation
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Family Health
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Fucosidosis/complications, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Tissue Donors
- Transplantation Chimera
- Transplantation Conditioning
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Four year follow-up of a case of fucosidosis treated with unrelated donor bone marrow transplantation.
**Authors:** Miano M, Lanino E, Gatti R, Morreale G, Fondelli P, Celle ME, Stroppiano M, Crescenzi F, Dini G
**Journal:** Bone Marrow Transplant (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.bmt.1702994](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bmt.1702994)

## Content

1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2001 Apr;27(7):747-51. doi: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1702994.

Four year follow-up of a case of fucosidosis treated with unrelated donor bone
marrow transplantation.

Miano M(1), Lanino E, Gatti R, Morreale G, Fondelli P, Celle ME, Stroppiano M,
Crescenzi F, Dini G.

Author information:
(1)BMT Unit, Department of Pediatrics, G Gaslini Children's Hospital, 16148
Genoa, Italy.

Fucosidosis is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal disorder caused by
alpha-fucosidase deficiency. We report a child with fucosidosis, second daughter
of non-consanguineous parents, for whom biochemical diagnosis followed clinical
evidence of the disease in her older sister. Based on previous experiences, the
indication to transplant was considered. Since she lacked a matched sibling, an
unrelated marrow donor was found. At pre-hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
evaluation, first signs of neurological involvement were clinically detectable.
MRI showed diffuse hypomyelination and auditory brainstem responses and
somatic-sensorial evoked potentials were altered. Visual evoked potentials were
normal, tortuosity in the retinal veins and peripapillary hemorrhages were
detected. Bone marrow transplantation conditioning was with a regimen of
busulphan, thiotepa and cyclophosphamide; in vivo Campath 1G, cyclosporin A and
short course methotrexate were given to prevent graft-versus-host disease. The
patient engrafted rapidly and her post-transplant course was complicated by
moderate graft-versus-host disease, transient episodes of idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura, repeated septic complications and recurrent episodes
of Sweet's syndrome. Sequential short tandem repeat polymorphisms on peripheral
blood and bone marrow cells documented the persistence of donor engraftment.
Follow-up showed a progressive rise of enzymatic levels. Psychomotor development
improved, as confirmed by evaluation of evoked potentials and by MRI scanning.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1702994
PMID: 11360116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
