---
reference_id: "PMID:32893998"
title: Wilms tumor.
authors:
- Pater L
- Melchior P
- Rübe C
- Cooper BT
- McAleer MF
- Kalapurakal JA
- Paulino AC
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.28257
keywords:
- Child
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Humans
- "Kidney Neoplasms/pathology, therapy"
- Prognosis
- Survival Rate
- "Wilms Tumor/pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilms tumor.
**Authors:** Pater L, Melchior P, Rübe C, Cooper BT, McAleer MF, Kalapurakal JA, Paulino AC
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.28257](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.28257)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2021 May;68 Suppl 2:e28257. doi: 10.1002/pbc.28257. Epub
 2020 Sep 7.

Wilms tumor.

Pater L(1), Melchior P(2), Rübe C(2), Cooper BT(3), McAleer MF(4), Kalapurakal 
JA(5), Paulino AC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Saarland University Hospital, Homburg, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York 
University School of Medicine, New York, New York.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.

The objectives for the treatment of Wilms tumor in both the Children's Oncology 
Group (COG) and the International Society of Paediatric Oncology (SIOP) have 
focused on improving cure rates and minimizing toxicity by limiting the use of 
radiation and doxorubicin. Although the timing of surgery is different in COG 
(upfront surgery) and SIOP (upfront chemotherapy with delayed surgery), both are 
effective strategies and have the same survival. Fewer patients are treated with 
radiotherapy in the SIOP trials but with higher doses. The prognostic 
significance of biological markers such as 1q gain and clinical outcomes with 
novel radiation techniques such as intensity modulated radiation therapy will be 
determined in upcoming clinical trials. A closer collaboration between COG and 
SIOP could help promote research and improve the clinical outcomes of children 
with Wilms tumor.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.28257
PMID: 32893998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]