---
reference_id: "PMID:1821256"
title: "The psychiatric presentations of Wilson's disease."
authors:
- Akil M
- Schwartz JA
- Dutchak D
- Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan V
- Brewer GJ
journal: J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1176/jnp.3.4.377
keywords:
- Acetates/therapeutic use
- Acetic Acid
- Adult
- "Depressive Disorder/diagnosis, drug therapy, psychology"
- Female
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/diagnosis, drug therapy, psychology"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Neurocognitive Disorders/diagnosis, drug therapy, psychology"
- Neurologic Examination
- Neuropsychological Tests
- "Personality Disorders/diagnosis, drug therapy, psychology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The psychiatric presentations of Wilson's disease.
**Authors:** Akil M, Schwartz JA, Dutchak D, Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan V, Brewer GJ
**Journal:** J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1176/jnp.3.4.377](https://doi.org/10.1176/jnp.3.4.377)

## Content

1. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1991 Fall;3(4):377-82. doi:
10.1176/jnp.3.4.377.

The psychiatric presentations of Wilson's disease.

Akil M(1), Schwartz JA, Dutchak D, Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan V, Brewer GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Comment in
    J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1992 Summer;4(3):349-50. doi:
10.1176/jnp.4.3.349.

We reviewed the records of 42 patients with Wilson's disease participating in a
zinc acetate treatment protocol and interviewed 17 of them. Five of the patients
studied were asymptomatic. A significant number of symptomatic patients (64.8%)
reported psychiatric symptoms at the time of initial presentation. These
symptoms were severe enough to warrant psychiatric intervention in almost half
of all symptomatic patients before the diagnosis of Wilson's disease was made.
Personality changes, particularly irritability and aggression, were most
commonly described (45.9%), followed by depression (27%). Cognitive changes,
anxiety, psychosis, and catatonia, while less frequent, also occurred. These
data underscore the need to include Wilson's disease in the differential
diagnosis of psychiatric disorders.

DOI: 10.1176/jnp.3.4.377
PMID: 1821256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
