---
reference_id: "PMID:17638425"
title: "Achondrogenesis Type IA (Houston-Harris): a still-unresolved molecular phenotype."
authors:
- Aigner T
- Rau T
- Niederhagen M
- Zaucke F
- Schmitz M
- Pöhls U
- Stöss H
- Rauch A
- Thiel CT
journal: Pediatr Dev Pathol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.2350/06-07-0134.1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Achondrogenesis Type IA (Houston-Harris): a still-unresolved molecular phenotype.
**Authors:** Aigner T, Rau T, Niederhagen M, Zaucke F, Schmitz M, Pöhls U, Stöss H, Rauch A, Thiel CT
**Journal:** Pediatr Dev Pathol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2350/06-07-0134.1](https://doi.org/10.2350/06-07-0134.1)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2007 Jul-Aug;10(4):328-34. doi: 10.2350/06-07-0134.1.

Achondrogenesis Type IA (Houston-Harris): a still-unresolved molecular 
phenotype.

Aigner T(1), Rau T, Niederhagen M, Zaucke F, Schmitz M, Pöhls U, Stöss H, Rauch 
A, Thiel CT.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, Liebigstrasse 26, Leipzig, Germany. 
thomas.aigner@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

Comment in
    Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2007 Jul-Aug;10(4):253-5. doi: 10.2350/07-01-0216.1.

Achondrogenesis type IA (Houston-Harris) is an extremely rare lethal 
chondrodysplasia with a characteristic severe disarrangement of endochondral 
ossification. The growth plate cartilage completely lacks columnar-zone 
formation and shows chondrocyte expansion due to intracellular vacuoles. This 
article on a new case of achondrogenesis type IA confirms these findings and 
demonstrates, on the ultrastructural level, the retention of fine fibrillar 
material within the rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER). Molecular analysis in the 
presented case of achondrogenesis type IA did not reveal mutations in the COL2A1 
and SLC26A2 genes, which are known to cause achondrogenesis types IB and type 
II. Although the extracellular cartilage matrix was severely altered, all of the 
investigated matrix molecules (collagens, aggrecan, matrilins, cartilage 
oligomeric protein [COMP]) showed a normal distribution pattern. The only 
exception was type-X collagen, which was significantly reduced. Overall, our 
study suggests a disturbance in cartilage matrix assembly in the present case 
due to the retention of some sort of matrix component within the rER. 
Presumably, as a consequence of this event, processes of chondrocyte maturation 
and differentiation and endochondral bone formation are severely affected in 
this case of achondrogenesis type IA.

DOI: 10.2350/06-07-0134.1
PMID: 17638425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]