---
reference_id: "PMID:26131547"
title: Sepiapterin Reductase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Friedman J
- Galosi S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sepiapterin Reductase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Friedman J, Galosi S

## Content

1. Sepiapterin Reductase Deficiency.

Friedman J(1), Galosi S(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2015 Jul 1 [updated 2025 Sep 18].

Author information:
(1)Clinical Professor, Neurosciences and Pediatrics, Rady Children’s Institute 
for Genomic Medicine, University of California San Diego / Rady Children’s 
Hospital San Diego, San Diego, California
(2)Department of Human Neuroscience, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The phenotypic spectrum of sepiapterin reductase 
deficiency (SRD) is broad, ranging from significant motor and cognitive deficits 
to isolated movement disorder. Many individuals have developmental delay / 
intellectual disability, with a minority of individuals having mild learning 
disabilities or normal cognition. The movement disorder phenotype can include 
axial hypotonia, levodopa-responsive dystonia (often presenting as oculogyric 
crises), parkinsonian signs (tremor, bradykinesia, and/or rigidity), and limb 
hypertonia and hyperreflexia that can be associated with clonus and may be 
misdiagnosed as cerebral palsy. Autonomic dysfunction is typically present in 
half of individuals. Epilepsy is rare and mostly characterized as febrile 
seizures. Neurologic symptoms typically demonstrate diurnal fluctuation. 
Affected individuals can also experience behavioral and psychiatric symptoms 
(inattention, irritability, depression, anxiety); endocrinologic abnormalities 
(growth hormone deficiency, hypothyroidism, reduced levels of IGF-1, IGFBP-3, 
T3, free T3, and T4) due to dopamine depletion; and sleep disturbances 
(hypersomnolence, drowsiness, narcolepsy/cataplexy, and/or difficulty initiating 
or maintaining sleep related to alteration of the sleep-wake circadian rhythm). 
Treatment may result in improvement or resolution of symptoms over time, 
depending on the severity of the symptom and the timing and response to 
treatment.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The analyte pattern consistent with a diagnosis of SRD 
includes decreased levels of homovanillic acid (HVA) and 5-hyroxyindolacetic 
acid (5-HIAA) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with normal to slightly increased 
levels of neopterin and elevated levels of total biopterin, dihydrobiopterin 
(BH2), and sepiapterin in CSF and urine. The molecular diagnosis is established 
in a proband with consistent analyte findings and/or suggestive clinical 
features by identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in SPR by molecular 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Levodopa (0.1-16 mg/kg/day) in combination with 
10%-25% carbidopa or benserazide, with the most common ratio of levodopa to 
dopamine decarboxylase (DC) inhibitor being 4:1. In combination with levodopa, 
1-6 mg/kg/day of 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) may provide additional clinical 
benefit. These medications may reduce manifestations of SRD, although the 
response can range from complete resolution to partial improvement. They most 
consistently correct motor abnormalities, while cognitive manifestations remain 
more refractory in some individuals. The initiation of treatment with levodopa 
with or without 5-HTP in the first year of life reverses the developmental delay 
and could prevent cognitive impairment. Other agents used when 
levodopa/5-HTP/carbidopa are not tolerated or sufficiently effective include 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors, serotonin reuptake inhibitors, melatonin, dopamine 
agonists, anticholinergics, and methylphenidate. Supportive care: Feeding 
therapy; gastrostomy tube placement may be required for persistent feeding 
issues; standard treatment for developmental delay / intellectual disability, 
epilepsy, and spasticity. Surveillance: Evaluation of CSF neurotransmitter 
metabolites should be performed as needed during drug dose titration if the 
clinical response is not satisfactory, and during clinical follow up to clarify 
otherwise unexplainable discrepancies. This is particularly important for 
children under two years old, since neurologic symptoms can be difficult to 
evaluate in this age group. At each visit, monitor those with seizures as 
clinically indicated; assess for new manifestations (seizures, changes in tone, 
movement disorders); measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status 
and safety of oral intake; monitor developmental progress and educational needs; 
and assess for behavioral issues (inattention, anxiety, depression and/or 
irritability) and sleep disturbances. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Although 
adverse events with specific agents have not been reported in persons with SRD, 
several should be avoided on a theoretic basis, including sulfa drugs (which 
impair BH4 biosynthesis); methotrexate (which inhibits dihydropteridine 
reductase); nitrous oxide (which may impair folate metabolism); neuroleptics and 
other dopamine antagonists. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate 
to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger 
at-risk sibs of an affected individual via molecular genetic testing (if the 
pathogenic variants in the family are known) or urine sepiapterin concentration 
(if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known). Pregnancy management: 
No pregnancies have been reported to date in women with SRD; however, it would 
seem prudent for women with SRD to continue levodopa therapy during pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SRD is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for an SPR pathogenic variant, each sib of 
an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% 
chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the 
familial pathogenic variants. Once the SPR pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives 
and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 26131547