---
reference_id: "PMID:133253"
title: Echocardiographic study on hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Toshima H
- Koga Y
- Uemura S
- Zinnouchi J
- Kimura N
journal: Jpn Heart J
year: '1976'
doi: 10.1536/ihj.17.275
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Echocardiographic study on hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Toshima H, Koga Y, Uemura S, Zinnouchi J, Kimura N
**Journal:** Jpn Heart J (1976)
**DOI:** [10.1536/ihj.17.275](https://doi.org/10.1536/ihj.17.275)

## Content

1. Jpn Heart J. 1976 May;17(3):275-89. doi: 10.1536/ihj.17.275.

Echocardiographic study on hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Toshima H, Koga Y, Uemura S, Zinnouchi J, Kimura N.

Echocardiographic study was performed on 21 cases with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy (HCM), 10 obstructive and 11 nonobstructive. Asymmetric septal 
hypertrophy was demonstrated in both obstructive and nonobstructive HCM. In all 
cases of HCM studied, the thickness of the interventricular septum was 1.4 cm or 
more (1.4-3.7 cm) and the ratio of septal to left ventricular posterior wall 
thickness was 1.4 or more (1.4-3.2). A systolic anterior movement of the mitral 
valve (SAM) was observed in obstructive cases only and characterized by a large 
backward component in late systole and an extreme approximation to the 
interventricular septum at its peak. Patients with HCM also showed abnormal 
echocardiographic indices of the left ventricular diastolic properties, such as 
the rate of diastolic descent of the mitral valve (DDR), mean diastolic 
posterior wall velocity (mPWVd), D/S ratio and mean rapid filling rate (mRFR). 
DDR correlated well with the ratio of rapid filling to total filling volume, 
rapid filling fraction, (r = 0.79, p less than 0.001), suggesting that reduced 
DDR in HCM was related with an abnormal left atrio-ventricular flow pattern. A 
significant correlation was also observed between mRFR and negative maximum 
dp/dt derived from the first derivative curve of the left ventricular pressure 
(r = o.68, p less than 0.005). Thus echocardiography was proved to be a valuable 
means for investigation of the left ventricular properties during early 
diastole.

DOI: 10.1536/ihj.17.275
PMID: 133253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]