---
reference_id: "PMID:36554659"
title: Human Monkeypox-A Global Public Health Emergency.
authors:
- Zardi EM
- Chello C
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph192416781
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human Monkeypox-A Global Public Health Emergency.
**Authors:** Zardi EM, Chello C
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph192416781](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph192416781)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Dec 14;19(24):16781. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph192416781.

Human Monkeypox-A Global Public Health Emergency.

Zardi EM(1), Chello C(2).

Author information:
(1)Internistic Ultrasound Service, Department of Medicine and Surgery, 
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Campus Bio-Medico, Via Alvaro del Portillo, 
200, 00128 Rome, Italy.
(2)PhD Course, Department of Medicine and Surgery, Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario Campus Bio-Medico di Roma, 00128 Rome, Italy.

Monkeypox, a viral zoonosis caused by an Orthopoxvirus, is clinically 
characterized by fever, headache, lymphadenopathy, myalgia, rash and burdened by 
some complications that can be severe and life threatening. Monkeypox, endemic 
in some central and west African countries, in tropical areas near equator, rose 
to the headlines following its recent outbreak in non-endemic countries of 
Europe and the USA. Thus, the World Health Organization, worried about the 
growing dimension of the problem, declared monkeypox a global public health 
emergency. Now, after months of careful observation, the western scientific 
research is drawing conclusion that African endemic countries represent a 
reserve pool able to feed, through travelers and sexual networks, the outbreak 
in non-endemic countries in which high-risk communities such as gay and bisexual 
men are the most affected. Prevention through vaccination and early diagnosis 
are the core to breaking the chain of diffusion of this epidemic. Particular 
attention should be paid to avoid the spread from endemic countries, also 
implementing the economic investments in their public health system. Information 
campaigns and assistance to high-risk classes in non-endemic countries are 
important priorities, however, assuming that specific treatments for this 
disease are still tentative.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph192416781
PMCID: PMC9779584
PMID: 36554659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflict of interest 
related to this study. The present study was self-funded.