---
reference_id: "PMID:20538734"
title: "Effects of the TP53 p.R249S mutant on proliferation and clonogenic properties in human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines: interaction with hepatitis B virus X protein."
authors:
- Gouas DA
- Shi H
- Hautefeuille AH
- Ortiz-Cuaran SL
- Legros PC
- Szymanska KJ
- Galy O
- Egevad LA
- Abedi-Ardekani B
- Wiman KG
- Hantz O
- Caron de Fromentel C
- Chemin IA
- Hainaut PL
journal: Carcinogenesis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq118
keywords:
- Aflatoxin B1/toxicity
- "Africa, Western/epidemiology"
- "Asia, Southeastern/epidemiology"
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/chemically induced, epidemiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Division/drug effects
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- DNA Primers
- Gene Silencing
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/chemically induced, epidemiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- RNA Interference
- Risk Factors
- Trans-Activators/metabolism
- "Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics, pharmacology"
- Viral Regulatory and Accessory Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of the TP53 p.R249S mutant on proliferation and clonogenic properties in human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines: interaction with hepatitis B virus X protein.
**Authors:** Gouas DA, Shi H, Hautefeuille AH, Ortiz-Cuaran SL, Legros PC, Szymanska KJ, Galy O, Egevad LA, Abedi-Ardekani B, Wiman KG, Hantz O, Caron de Fromentel C, Chemin IA, Hainaut PL
**Journal:** Carcinogenesis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/carcin/bgq118](https://doi.org/10.1093/carcin/bgq118)

## Content

1. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Aug;31(8):1475-82. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq118. Epub 2010
Jun 10.

Effects of the TP53 p.R249S mutant on proliferation and clonogenic properties in
human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines: interaction with hepatitis B virus X
protein.

Gouas DA(1), Shi H, Hautefeuille AH, Ortiz-Cuaran SL, Legros PC, Szymanska KJ,
Galy O, Egevad LA, Abedi-Ardekani B, Wiman KG, Hantz O, Caron de Fromentel C,
Chemin IA, Hainaut PL.

Author information:
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Molecular Carcinogenesis Group,
Lyon, France.

Aflatoxin B(1) (AFB(1)) is a risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in
many low-resource countries. Although its metabolites bind at several positions
in TP53, a mutation at codon 249 (AGG to AGT, arginine to serine, p.R249S)
accounts for 90% of TP53 mutations in AFB(1)-related HCC. This specificity
suggests that p.R249S confers a selective advantage during hepatocarcinogenesis.
Using HCC cell lines, we show that p.R249S has lost the capacity to bind to p53
response elements and to transactivate p53 target genes. In p53-null Hep3B
cells, stable transfection of p.R249S or of another mutant, p.R248Q, did not
induce significant changes in cell proliferation and survival after cytotoxic
stress. In contrast, in a cell line that constitutively expresses both p.R249S
and the hepatitis B virus antigen HBx (PLC/PRF/5), silencing of either p.R249S
or HBx by RNA interference slowed down proliferation, with no additive effects
when both factors were silenced. Furthermore, the two proteins appear to form a
complex. In human HCC samples, mutation at codon 249 did not correlate with
p.R249S protein accumulation or HBx truncation status. We suggest that p.R249S
may contribute to hepatocarcinogenesis through interaction with HBx, conferring
a subtle growth advantage at early steps of the transformation process, but that
this interaction is not required for progression to advanced HCC.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgq118
PMID: 20538734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
