---
reference_id: "PMID:28947110"
title: Genetic testing for Huntington disease.
authors:
- Quaid KA
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801893-4.00010-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic testing for Huntington disease.
**Authors:** Quaid KA
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-12-801893-4.00010-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801893-4.00010-9)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2017;144:113-126. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801893-4.00010-9.

Genetic testing for Huntington disease.

Quaid KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States. Electronic address: kquaid@iu.edu.

In 1983, Huntington disease (HD) became the first disease to be mapped to a 
previously unknown location on chromosome 4. This discovery meant that we could 
now identify whether some individuals at risk for HD would develop HD in the 
future using a method called linkage testing. Testing was first offered through 
research protocols designed to assess whether testing could be done safely in 
this population. Testing guidelines were soon developed by the Huntington's 
Disease Society of America and the International Huntington Association in 
collaboration with the World Federation of Neurology. The gene for HD was found 
in 1993, allowing for direct gene testing for the mutant HTT allele. This 
chapter will discuss the development of guidelines and recent revisions to the 
guidelines, prenatal testing, and testing in three complicated situations: (1) 
the testing of minors; (2) anonymous testing; and (3) testing individuals at 25% 
risk. Studies examining the outcomes of predictive testing will also be 
discussed. Outcome studies have shown that testing can be done safely in the 
context of testing protocols that include neurologic examinations, pretest 
counseling, psychiatric/psychologic assessment, results in person, and available 
follow-up support. It appears that anxiety and depression prior to testing are 
better predictors of psychologic status after testing than the test result 
itself.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801893-4.00010-9
PMID: 28947110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]