---
reference_id: "PMID:11095479"
title: "Familial splenomegaly: macrophage hypercatabolism of lipoproteins associated with apolipoprotein E mutation [apolipoprotein E (delta149 Leu)]."
authors:
- Nguyen TT
- Kruckeberg KE
- "O'Brien JF"
- Ji ZS
- Karnes PS
- Crotty TB
- Hay ID
- Mahley RW
- "O'Brien T"
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1210/jcem.85.11.6981
keywords:
- Adult
- Alanine Transaminase/blood
- Animals
- Apolipoproteins E/genetics
- Binding Sites
- Exons
- Humans
- "Hypertriglyceridemia/complications, genetics"
- Leucine
- Lipoproteins/blood
- Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-1
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Postoperative Complications
- Rabbits
- "Receptors, Lipoprotein/metabolism"
- Sequence Deletion
- Spleen/pathology
- Splenectomy
- "Splenomegaly/genetics, pathology, surgery"
- Triglycerides/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial splenomegaly: macrophage hypercatabolism of lipoproteins associated with apolipoprotein E mutation [apolipoprotein E (delta149 Leu)].
**Authors:** Nguyen TT, Kruckeberg KE, O'Brien JF, Ji ZS, Karnes PS, Crotty TB, Hay ID, Mahley RW, O'Brien T
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.85.11.6981](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.85.11.6981)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Nov;85(11):4354-8. doi: 10.1210/jcem.85.11.6981.

Familial splenomegaly: macrophage hypercatabolism of lipoproteins associated 
with apolipoprotein E mutation [apolipoprotein E (delta149 Leu)].

Nguyen TT(1), Kruckeberg KE, O'Brien JF, Ji ZS, Karnes PS, Crotty TB, Hay ID, 
Mahley RW, O'Brien T.

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Endocrinology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, Minnesota 
55905, USA. nguyen.tu@mayo.edu

Splenomegaly with sea-blue histiocytes is not associated with dyslipidemia, 
except in severe cases of hypertriglyceridemia, Tangier disease, or lecithin 
cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency. We describe two kindreds in which the 
sea-blue histiocyte syndrome was associated with an apoE variant in the absence 
of severe dyslipidemia. Both patients presented with mild hypertriglyceridemia 
and splenomegaly. After splenectomy both patients developed severe 
hypertriglyceridemia. Pathological evaluation of the spleen revealed the 
presence of sea-blue histiocytes. A mutation of apoE was demonstrated, with a 
3-bp deletion resulting in the loss of a leucine at position 149 in the 
receptor-binding region of the apoE molecule [apoE (delta149 Leu)]. Although 
both probands were unrelated, they were of French Canadian ancestry, suggesting 
the possibility of a founder effect. In summary, we describe two unrelated 
probands with primary sea-blue histiocytosis who had normal or mildly elevated 
serum triglyceride concentrations that markedly increased after splenectomy. In 
addition, we provide evidence linking the syndrome to an inherited dominant 
mutation in the apoE gene, a 3-bp deletion on the background of an apoE 3 allele 
that causes a derangement in lipid metabolism and leads to splenomegaly in the 
absence of severe hypertriglyceridemia.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.85.11.6981
PMID: 11095479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]