---
reference_id: "PMID:22693659"
title: "Diagnosis of fanconi anemia: chromosomal breakage analysis."
authors:
- Oostra AB
- Nieuwint AW
- Joenje H
- de Winter JP
journal: Anemia
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1155/2012/238731
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of fanconi anemia: chromosomal breakage analysis.
**Authors:** Oostra AB, Nieuwint AW, Joenje H, de Winter JP
**Journal:** Anemia (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2012/238731](https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/238731)

## Content

1. Anemia. 2012;2012:238731. doi: 10.1155/2012/238731. Epub 2012 May 24.

Diagnosis of fanconi anemia: chromosomal breakage analysis.

Oostra AB(1), Nieuwint AW, Joenje H, de Winter JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Van der 
Boechorststraat 7, 1081 BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare inherited syndrome with diverse clinical symptoms 
including developmental defects, short stature, bone marrow failure, and a high 
risk of malignancies. Fifteen genetic subtypes have been distinguished so far. 
The mode of inheritance for all subtypes is autosomal recessive, except for 
FA-B, which is X-linked. Cells derived from FA patients are-by 
definition-hypersensitive to DNA cross-linking agents, such as mitomycin C, 
diepoxybutane, or cisplatinum, which becomes manifest as excessive growth 
inhibition, cell cycle arrest, and chromosomal breakage upon cellular exposure 
to these drugs. Here we provide a detailed laboratory protocol for the accurate 
assessment of the FA diagnosis as based on mitomycin C-induced chromosomal 
breakage analysis in whole-blood cultures. The method also enables a 
quantitative estimate of the degree of mosaicism in the lymphocyte compartment 
of the patient.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/238731
PMCID: PMC3368163
PMID: 22693659