---
reference_id: "PMID:38764065"
title: P. gingivalis in oral-prostate axis exacerbates benign prostatic hyperplasia via IL-6/IL-6R pathway.
authors:
- Wang SY
- Cai Y
- Hu X
- Li F
- Qian XH
- Xia LY
- Gao B
- Wu L
- Xie WZ
- Gu JM
- Deng T
- Zhu C
- Jia HC
- Peng WQ
- Huang J
- Fang C
- Zeng XT
journal: Mil Med Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40779-024-00533-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# P. gingivalis in oral-prostate axis exacerbates benign prostatic hyperplasia via IL-6/IL-6R pathway.
**Authors:** Wang SY, Cai Y, Hu X, Li F, Qian XH, Xia LY, Gao B, Wu L, Xie WZ, Gu JM, Deng T, Zhu C, Jia HC, Peng WQ, Huang J, Fang C, Zeng XT
**Journal:** Mil Med Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40779-024-00533-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40779-024-00533-8)

## Content

1. Mil Med Res. 2024 May 20;11(1):30. doi: 10.1186/s40779-024-00533-8.

P. gingivalis in oral-prostate axis exacerbates benign prostatic hyperplasia via 
IL-6/IL-6R pathway.

Wang SY(#)(1), Cai Y(#)(1)(2), Hu X(#)(1)(2), Li F(1)(2), Qian XH(1)(3), Xia 
LY(4), Gao B(5), Wu L(6), Xie WZ(7), Gu JM(1)(2), Deng T(1), Zhu C(1)(2), Jia 
HC(1)(2), Peng WQ(6)(8), Huang J(9), Fang C(10), Zeng XT(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Center for Evidence-Based and Translational Medicine, Zhongnan Hospital of 
Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, 
China.
(3)Department of Urology, Huaihe Hospital of Henan University, Kaifeng, 475000, 
Henan, China.
(4)Department of Stomatology, Taihe Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, 
Shiyan, 442000, Hubei, China.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Taihe Hospital, Hubei University of 
Medicine, Shiyan, 442000, Hubei, China.
(6)Department of Stomatology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
430071, China.
(7)Henan Provincial Engineering Research Center for Microecological Regulatory 
of Oral Environment and Oral Implantology, Kaifeng University Health Science 
Center, Kaifeng, 475000, Henan, China.
(8)School of Stomatology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China.
(9)Center for Evidence-Based and Translational Medicine, Zhongnan Hospital of 
Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, China. huangjiao1019@163.com.
(10)Center for Evidence-Based and Translational Medicine, Zhongnan Hospital of 
Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, China. vitsippa@whu.edu.cn.
(11)Center for Evidence-Based and Translational Medicine, Zhongnan Hospital of 
Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, China. zengxiantao1128@163.com.
(12)Department of Urology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, 
China. zengxiantao1128@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is the most common disease in 
elderly men. There is increasing evidence that periodontitis increases the risk 
of BPH, but the specific mechanism remains unclear. This study aimed to explore 
the role and mechanism of the key periodontal pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis 
(P. gingivalis) in the development of BPH.
METHODS: The subgingival plaque (Sp) and prostatic fluid (Pf) of patients with 
BPH concurrent periodontitis were extracted and cultured for 16S rDNA 
sequencing. Ligature-induced periodontitis, testosterone-induced BPH and the 
composite models in rats were established. The P. gingivalis and its toxic 
factor P. gingivalis lipopolysaccharide (P.g-LPS) were injected into the ventral 
lobe of prostate in rats to simulate its colonization of prostate. P.g-LPS was 
used to construct the prostate cell infection model for mechanism exploration.
RESULTS: P. gingivalis, Streptococcus oralis, Capnocytophaga ochracea and other 
oral pathogens were simultaneously detected in the Pf and Sp of patients with 
BPH concurrent periodontitis, and the average relative abundance of P. 
gingivalis was found to be the highest. P. gingivalis was detected in both Pf 
and Sp in 62.5% of patients. Simultaneous periodontitis and BPH synergistically 
aggravated prostate histological changes. P. gingivalis and P.g-LPS infection 
could induce obvious hyperplasia of the prostate epithelium and stroma 
(epithelial thickness was 2.97- and 3.08-fold that of control group, 
respectively), and increase of collagen fibrosis (3.81- and 5.02-fold that of 
control group, respectively). P. gingivalis infection promoted prostate cell 
proliferation, inhibited apoptosis, and upregulated the expression of 
inflammatory cytokines interleukin-6 (IL-6; 4.47-fold), interleukin-6 receptor-α 
(IL-6Rα; 5.74-fold) and glycoprotein 130 (gp130; 4.47-fold) in prostatic tissue. 
P.g-LPS could significantly inhibit cell apoptosis, promote mitosis and 
proliferation of cells. P.g-LPS activates the Akt pathway through 
IL-6/IL-6Rα/gp130 complex, which destroys the imbalance between proliferation 
and apoptosis of prostate cells, induces BPH.
CONCLUSION: P. gingivalis was abundant in the Pf of patients with BPH concurrent 
periodontitis. P. gingivalis infection can promote BPH, which may affect the 
progression of BPH via inflammation and the Akt signaling pathway.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40779-024-00533-8
PMCID: PMC11103868
PMID: 38764065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.