---
reference_id: "PMID:28623084"
title: "Pathogenesis of Human Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A Cellular Perspective."
authors:
- Moulton VR
- Suarez-Fueyo A
- Meidan E
- Li H
- Mizui M
- Tsokos GC
journal: Trends Mol Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2017.05.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of Human Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A Cellular Perspective.
**Authors:** Moulton VR, Suarez-Fueyo A, Meidan E, Li H, Mizui M, Tsokos GC
**Journal:** Trends Mol Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molmed.2017.05.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2017.05.006)

## Content

1. Trends Mol Med. 2017 Jul;23(7):615-635. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2017.05.006.
Epub  2017 Jun 13.

Pathogenesis of Human Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A Cellular Perspective.

Moulton VR(1), Suarez-Fueyo A(2), Meidan E(3), Li H(2), Mizui M(4), Tsokos 
GC(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic 
address: vmoulton@bidmc.harvard.edu.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of 
Rheumatology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, Japan.
(5)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic 
address: gtsokos@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disease affecting 
multiple organs. A complex interaction of genetics, environment, and hormones 
leads to immune dysregulation and breakdown of tolerance to self-antigens, 
resulting in autoantibody production, inflammation, and destruction of 
end-organs. Emerging evidence on the role of these factors has increased our 
knowledge of this complex disease, guiding therapeutic strategies and 
identifying putative biomarkers. Recent findings include the characterization of 
genetic/epigenetic factors linked to SLE, as well as cellular effectors. Novel 
observations have provided an improved understanding of the contribution of 
tissue-specific factors and associated damage, T and B lymphocytes, as well as 
innate immune cell subsets and their corresponding abnormalities. The intricate 
web of involved factors and pathways dictates the adoption of tailored 
therapeutic approaches to conquer this disease.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmed.2017.05.006
PMCID: PMC5650102
PMID: 28623084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]