---
reference_id: "PMID:29681100"
title: Bohring-Opitz syndrome caused by an ASXL1 mutation inherited from a germline mosaic mother.
authors:
- Bedoukian E
- Copenheaver D
- Bale S
- Deardorff M
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38686
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Craniosynostoses/diagnosis, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons
- Facies
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Maternal Inheritance
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bohring-Opitz syndrome caused by an ASXL1 mutation inherited from a germline mosaic mother.
**Authors:** Bedoukian E, Copenheaver D, Bale S, Deardorff M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38686](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38686)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 May;176(5):1249-1252. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38686.

Bohring-Opitz syndrome caused by an ASXL1 mutation inherited from a germline 
mosaic mother.

Bedoukian E(1), Copenheaver D(2), Bale S(2), Deardorff M(1).

Author information:
(1)Roberts Individualized Medical Genetics Center, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, Maryland.

Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS) is characterized clinically by severe developmental 
delays, microcephaly, failure to thrive, and characteristic facial features 
(prominent eyes, facial nevus simplex [flammeus], and others). Most patients 
meeting the clinical criteria for BOS (MIM: 605039) have a de novo nonsense or 
frameshift variant in ASXL1. We report a case of BOS caused by a pathogenic 
ASXL1 variant inherited from a germline mosaic mother. The ASXL1 mutation was 
detected via trio exome sequencing. The sequencing data demonstrated that the 
variant was inherited maternally but that the maternal variant was 
underrepresented in comparison to the normal allele. These results suggested 
maternal mosaicism for the variant. Additional testing on the mother was 
performed on buccal cell DNA, which was also consistent with mosaicism. The 
mother had been reported to be healthy and the family history is unremarkable. 
This is the first report of BOS caused by a mutation inherited from an 
unaffected, presumed germline mosaic parent. This phenomenon has been reported 
for other traditionally de novo dominant disorders like CHARGE syndrome and 
Cornelia de Lange syndrome. This case emphasizes the need for accurate low but 
non-negative recurrence risk counseling for families with children with BOS and 
it impacts exome interpretation strategy.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38686
PMID: 29681100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]