---
reference_id: "PMID:28334938"
title: Clinical and genetic characterization of leukoencephalopathies in adults.
authors:
- Lynch DS
- Rodrigues Brandão de Paiva A
- Zhang WJ
- Bugiardini E
- Freua F
- Tavares Lucato L
- Macedo-Souza LI
- Lakshmanan R
- Kinsella JA
- Merwick A
- Rossor AM
- Bajaj N
- Herron B
- McMonagle P
- Morrison PJ
- Hughes D
- Pittman A
- Laurà M
- Reilly MM
- Warren JD
- Mummery CJ
- Schott JM
- Adams M
- Fox NC
- Murphy E
- Davagnanam I
- Kok F
- Chataway J
- Houlden H
journal: Brain
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awx045
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- "Leukoencephalopathies/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic characterization of leukoencephalopathies in adults.
**Authors:** Lynch DS, Rodrigues Brandão de Paiva A, Zhang WJ, Bugiardini E, Freua F, Tavares Lucato L, Macedo-Souza LI, Lakshmanan R, Kinsella JA, Merwick A, Rossor AM, Bajaj N, Herron B, McMonagle P, Morrison PJ, Hughes D, Pittman A, Laurà M, Reilly MM, Warren JD, Mummery CJ, Schott JM, Adams M, Fox NC, Murphy E, Davagnanam I, Kok F, Chataway J, Houlden H
**Journal:** Brain (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awx045](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awx045)

## Content

1. Brain. 2017 May 1;140(5):1204-1211. doi: 10.1093/brain/awx045.

Clinical and genetic characterization of leukoencephalopathies in adults.

Lynch DS(1)(2), Rodrigues Brandão de Paiva A(3), Zhang WJ(1), Bugiardini E(4), 
Freua F(3), Tavares Lucato L(5), Macedo-Souza LI(6), Lakshmanan R(7), Kinsella 
JA(8), Merwick A(9)(10), Rossor AM(4)(11), Bajaj N(12), Herron B(13), McMonagle 
P(14), Morrison PJ(15), Hughes D(1), Pittman A(1), Laurà M(4), Reilly MM(4), 
Warren JD(16), Mummery CJ(16), Schott JM(16), Adams M(7), Fox NC(16), Murphy 
E(9), Davagnanam I(7), Kok F(3), Chataway J(17), Houlden H(1)(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(2)Leonard Wolfson Experimental Neurology Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, 
London, UK.
(3)Neurogenetics Unit, Neurology Department, Hospital das Clínicas da 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
UK.
(5)Instituto de Radiologia, Hospital das Clínicas da Universidade de São Paulo, 
São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Centro de Estudos do Genoma Humano, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(7)Lysholm Department of Neuroradiology, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, UK.
(8)Neurology Department, St. Vincent's University Hospital and University 
College Dublin, Ireland.
(9)Charles Dent Metabolic Unit, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, UK.
(10)Chelsea and Westminster NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(11)Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(12)Department of Neurology, Queens Medical Centre, Nottingham, UK.
(13)Department of Neuropathology, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, Northern 
Ireland, UK.
(14)Department of Neurology, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, Northern Ireland, 
UK.
(15)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens University of Belfast, 
97 Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7AE, UK.
(16)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(17)Department of Neuroinflammation, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(18)Neurogenetics Laboratory, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
Queen Square, London, UK.

Leukodystrophies and genetic leukoencephalopathies are a rare group of disorders 
leading to progressive degeneration of cerebral white matter. They are 
associated with a spectrum of clinical phenotypes dominated by dementia, 
psychiatric changes, movement disorders and upper motor neuron signs. Mutations 
in at least 60 genes can lead to leukoencephalopathy with often overlapping 
clinical and radiological presentations. For these reasons, patients with 
genetic leukoencephalopathies often endure a long diagnostic odyssey before 
receiving a definitive diagnosis or may receive no diagnosis at all. In this 
study, we used focused and whole exome sequencing to evaluate a cohort of 
undiagnosed adult patients referred to a specialist leukoencephalopathy service. 
In total, 100 patients were evaluated using focused exome sequencing of 6100 
genes. We detected pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 26 cases. The 
most frequently mutated genes were NOTCH3, EIF2B5, AARS2 and CSF1R. We then 
carried out whole exome sequencing on the remaining negative cases including 
four family trios, but could not identify any further potentially 
disease-causing mutations, confirming the equivalence of focused and whole exome 
sequencing in the diagnosis of genetic leukoencephalopathies. Here we provide an 
overview of the clinical and genetic features of these disorders in adults.

© The Author (2017). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awx045
PMCID: PMC5405235
PMID: 28334938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]