---
reference_id: "PMID:37403154"
title: "Adult Hirschsprung's disease presenting as chronic constipation: a case report."
authors:
- Rahardjo TM
- Nurzaman YA
- Natalia J
- Hapdijaya I
- Devina L
- Andrianto H
- Mahardhika JC
journal: J Med Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13256-023-03986-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult Hirschsprung's disease presenting as chronic constipation: a case report.
**Authors:** Rahardjo TM, Nurzaman YA, Natalia J, Hapdijaya I, Devina L, Andrianto H, Mahardhika JC
**Journal:** J Med Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13256-023-03986-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13256-023-03986-y)

## Content

1. J Med Case Rep. 2023 Jul 5;17(1):308. doi: 10.1186/s13256-023-03986-y.

Adult Hirschsprung's disease presenting as chronic constipation: a case report.

Rahardjo TM(1), Nurzaman YA(2), Natalia J(3), Hapdijaya I(3), Devina L(3), 
Andrianto H(3), Mahardhika JC(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Maranatha Christian University, Suria Sumantri 65, 
Bandung, West Java, 40164, Indonesia. theresiarahardjo@gmail.com.
(2)Unggul Karsa Medika Teaching Hospital, Taman Kopo Indah III Block H-1, 
Bandung, West Java, 40218, Indonesia.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Maranatha Christian University, Suria Sumantri 65, 
Bandung, West Java, 40164, Indonesia.

BACKGROUND: Hirschsprung's disease is a congenital disorder identified by the 
absence of ganglion cells at the Meissner's plexus of the submucosa and 
Auerbach's plexus of the muscularis. This disease can be found in approximately 
1 in 5000 live births. It is a congenital disorder that is rarely diagnosed in 
adults, where 95% of cases are diagnosed in infants aged under 1 year old. Here 
we present a rare case of adult Hirschsprung's disease to enrich the body of 
knowledge  in diagnosing adult patients with chronic refractory constipation 
symptoms.
CASE REPORT: An 18-year-old Indonesian woman came to the general surgery 
department of Unggul Karsa Medika Teaching Hospital with a defecating problem 
(constipation) since childhood. There was no history of her passage of meconium. 
A contrast enema study showed that the sigmoid colon was dilated and the rectum 
was narrowed, with rectosigmoid index < 1. With these findings, it was suspected 
that the patient may have ultra-short segment Hirschsprung's disease. The 
patient was then referred to the digestive surgery department of referral 
hospital for surgical treatment.
CONCLUSION: In adult patients presenting with history of constipation since 
childhood, it is necessary to consider the possibility of Hirschsprung's disease 
that was not diagnosed in early childhood. Hirschsprung's disease in adults is 
usually a short or ultra-short aganglionic segment because it shows relatively 
mild symptoms. Surgical removal of the aganglionic segment of the gut is the 
definitive treatment for Hirschsprung's disease.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-023-03986-y
PMCID: PMC10320872
PMID: 37403154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare that this case report has no 
conflicts of interests.