---
reference_id: "PMID:28647185"
title: Relationship between catecholamine level and gene polymorphism of β1 adrenergic receptor G1165C in children with EV71 infection in hand foot and mouth disease.
authors:
- Lei ZX
- Li BT
- Li HA
- Li XM
- Xie MF
- Huang T
- Wang Q
- Wang YZ
- Lin QY
- Zhou LR
- Feng NC
- Li X
- Zhu DM
- Hai YP
- Cui L
- Zhang YQ
- Liu ZW
- Wu SY
- Chen YZ
- Zhu KQ
- He XJ
- Xiang W
journal: Asian Pac J Trop Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.apjtm.2017.05.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship between catecholamine level and gene polymorphism of β1 adrenergic receptor G1165C in children with EV71 infection in hand foot and mouth disease.
**Authors:** Lei ZX, Li BT, Li HA, Li XM, Xie MF, Huang T, Wang Q, Wang YZ, Lin QY, Zhou LR, Feng NC, Li X, Zhu DM, Hai YP, Cui L, Zhang YQ, Liu ZW, Wu SY, Chen YZ, Zhu KQ, He XJ, Xiang W
**Journal:** Asian Pac J Trop Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.apjtm.2017.05.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apjtm.2017.05.006)

## Content

1. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2017 May;10(5):473-477. doi:
10.1016/j.apjtm.2017.05.006.  Epub 2017 May 18.

Relationship between catecholamine level and gene polymorphism of β1 adrenergic 
receptor G1165C in children with EV71 infection in hand foot and mouth disease.

Lei ZX(1), Li BT(1), Li HA(2), Li XM(3), Xie MF(3), Huang T(4), Wang Q(3), Wang 
YZ(1), Lin QY(1), Zhou LR(1), Feng NC(3), Li X(1), Zhu DM(3), Hai YP(3), Cui 
L(5), Zhang YQ(3), Liu ZW(3), Wu SY(3), Chen YZ(3), Zhu KQ(6), He XJ(7), Xiang 
W(8).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital of 
Hainan Province (Children's Hospital of Hainan Province), Haikou 570206, China.
(2)Pediatrics, The Hainan Affiliated Hospital of University of South China, 
Haikou 570206, China; Pediatric Nephrology, The Second Xiangya Hospital of 
Central South University, Changsha 410000, China.
(3)Pediatrics, The Hainan Affiliated Hospital of University of South China, 
Haikou 570206, China.
(4)Pediatrics, Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital of Hainan Province 
(Children's Hospital of Hainan Province), Haikou 570206, China.
(5)Pediatrics, The Hainan Affiliated Hospital of University of South China, 
Haikou 570206, China; Neonatal, Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital of 
Hainan Province (Children's Hospital of Hainan Province), Haikou 570206, China.
(6)Labway Clinical Laboratory Shanghai Ltd, No. 74, Qing Chi Road, Changning 
District, Shanghai 200335, China.
(7)Pediatrics, The Affiliated Hospital of Hainan Medical University, Haikou 
570206, China. Electronic address: hexj7150@163.com.
(8)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital of 
Hainan Province (Children's Hospital of Hainan Province), Haikou 570206, China. 
Electronic address: 13907533529@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between the levels of plasma 
adrenaline and norepinephrine and gene polymorphism of β1 adrenergic receptor 
G1165C in children with enterovirus 71 (EV71) infection in hand foot and mouth 
disease (HFMD).
METHODS: The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used to detect the expression 
of gene polymorphism of β1 adrenergic receptor G1165C in vitro. The levels of 
plasma adrenaline and norepinephrine were measured by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: The plasma norepinephrine level of severe group was significantly 
higher than the mild group in children with EV71 infection in HFMD (P < 0.05); 
however, the levels of plasma adrenaline in two groups had no statistical 
differences (P > 0.05); There was no significant difference in the distribution 
of β1 adrenergic receptor G1165C genotype and allele between EV71 infection 
group and healthy control group (P > 0.05). Further analysis of EV71 infection 
group by dividing it into mild and severe groups showed that there was no 
significant difference in the distribution of genotype and allele between these 
two groups as well (P > 0.05). There was no significant difference in the levels 
of epinephrine and norepinephrine in different genotypes of EV71 infection group 
(P > 0.05), and in the levels of plasma epinephrine and norepinephrine in the 
mild and severe groups (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: As the disease gets worse, the plasma norepinephrine level has a 
rising trend in children with EV71 infection in HFMD, which is an important 
indicator to evaluate the progress of the disease. However, the gene 
polymorphism of β1 adrenergic receptor G1165C have no significant correlation, 
not only with the susceptibility and severity of EV71 infection in hand, foot 
and mouth disease, but also with the levels of catecholamine.

Copyright © 2017 Hainan Medical University. Production and hosting by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apjtm.2017.05.006
PMID: 28647185