---
reference_id: "PMID:16520822"
title: "Association of the NRG1 gene and schizophrenia: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Munafò MR
- Thiselton DL
- Clark TG
- Flint J
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001817
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of the NRG1 gene and schizophrenia: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Munafò MR, Thiselton DL, Clark TG, Flint J
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.mp.4001817](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.mp.4001817)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2006 Jun;11(6):539-46. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001817.

Association of the NRG1 gene and schizophrenia: a meta-analysis.

Munafò MR(1), Thiselton DL, Clark TG, Flint J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. 
marcus.munafo@bris.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Mol Psychiatry. 2006 Jun;11(6):613.

We investigated the association of the NRG1 gene and schizophrenia using 
meta-analytic techniques, combining all published data while restricting our 
analysis to studies investigating the most commonly reported single marker 
(SNP8NRG221533). We also investigated whether ancestry (European vs East Asian) 
and study design (family-based vs case-control) moderated any association. We 
found no evidence for an association of SNP8NRG221533 with schizophrenia, and 
significant between-study heterogeneity, which persisted when family-based 
studies were combined separately. However, when haplotype-based P-values were 
combined, there was evidence in support of an association of NRG1 with 
schizophrenia, and no evidence of between-study heterogeneity. Our meta-analysis 
provides support for the association of NRG1 with schizophrenia, but indicates 
that firmly establishing the role of NRG1 gene in schizophrenia by genetic 
association requires much larger sample sizes than have hitherto been reported. 
Association analyses and replications should take place at the level of the 
gene, rather than at the level of SNP, haplotype, or functional variant. 
Meta-analysis would then be carried out on the basis of the combination of 
P-values.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001817
PMID: 16520822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]