---
reference_id: "PMID:32800189"
title: Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Associated COPD.
authors:
- Strange C
journal: Clin Chest Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2020.05.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Associated COPD.
**Authors:** Strange C
**Journal:** Clin Chest Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccm.2020.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccm.2020.05.003)

## Content

1. Clin Chest Med. 2020 Sep;41(3):339-345. doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2020.05.003.

Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Associated COPD.

Strange C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep Medicine, Medical 
University of South Carolina, 96 Jonathan Lucas Street, MSC630, Charleston, SC 
29425, USA. Electronic address: strangec@musc.edu.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) was the first genetic risk factor for 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) described. In the more than 
50 years since its description, the disease continues to provide insights into 
more common forms of COPD. Although AATD is caused by a single genetic variant, 
the clinical manifestations of disease include panacinar emphysema, airway 
hyperresponsiveness, and bronchiectasis. With improved molecular understanding 
of the mechanisms of disease pathogenesis and progression, new therapies in 
addition to intravenous augmentation therapy are on the horizon.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccm.2020.05.003
PMID: 32800189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Dr C. Strange is a medical 
director of AlphaNet, a not-for-profit disease management company for AATD. Dr 
C. Strange consults on AATD with AstraZeneca, CSL Behring, Dicerna, Grifols, and 
Vertex. He has grants paid to the Medical University of South Carolina from 
Adverum, CSA Medical, CSL Behring, Grifols, MatRx, Novartis, Nuvaira, Pulmonx, 
Takeda, and Vertex.