---
reference_id: "PMID:35629030"
title: "New Insights into the Pathogenesis of Giant Cell Arteritis: Mechanisms Involved in Maintaining Vascular Inflammation."
authors:
- Greigert H
- Genet C
- Ramon A
- Bonnotte B
- Samson M
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/jcm11102905
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Insights into the Pathogenesis of Giant Cell Arteritis: Mechanisms Involved in Maintaining Vascular Inflammation.
**Authors:** Greigert H, Genet C, Ramon A, Bonnotte B, Samson M
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm11102905](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm11102905)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2022 May 20;11(10):2905. doi: 10.3390/jcm11102905.

New Insights into the Pathogenesis of Giant Cell Arteritis: Mechanisms Involved 
in Maintaining Vascular Inflammation.

Greigert H(1)(2)(3), Genet C(3), Ramon A(3)(4), Bonnotte B(1)(3), Samson 
M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Dijon University 
Hospital, 14 Bd. Gaffarel, 21000 Dijon, France.
(2)Department of Vascular Medicine, Dijon University Hospital, 14 Bd. Gaffarel, 
21000 Dijon, France.
(3)INSERM, EFS BFC, UMR1098, RIGHT Interactions Greffon-Hôte-Tumeur/Ingénierie 
Cellulaire et Génique, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, 21000 Dijon, France.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Dijon University Hospital, 14 Bd. Gaffarel, 21000 
Dijon, France.

The giant cell arteritis (GCA) pathophysiology is complex and multifactorial, 
involving a predisposing genetic background, the role of immune aging and the 
activation of vascular dendritic cells by an unknown trigger. Once activated, 
dendritic cells recruit CD4 T cells and induce their activation, proliferation 
and polarization into Th1 and Th17, which produce interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and 
interleukin-17 (IL-17), respectively. IFN-γ triggers the production of 
chemokines by vascular smooth muscle cells, which leads to the recruitment of 
additional CD4 and CD8 T cells and also monocytes that differentiate into 
macrophages. Recent data have shown that IL-17, IFN-γ and GM-CSF induce the 
differentiation of macrophage subpopulations, which play a role in the 
destruction of the arterial wall, in neoangiogenesis or intimal hyperplasia. 
Under the influence of different mediators, mainly endothelin-1 and PDGF, 
vascular smooth muscle cells migrate to the intima, proliferate and change their 
phenotype to become myofibroblasts that further proliferate and produce 
extracellular matrix proteins, increasing the vascular stenosis. In addition, 
several defects in the immune regulatory mechanisms probably contribute to 
chronic vascular inflammation in GCA: a defect in the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway, a 
quantitative and qualitative Treg deficiency, the implication of resident cells, 
the role of GM-CSF and IL-6, the implication of the NOTCH pathway and the role 
of mucosal-associated invariant T cells and tissue-resident memory T cells.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11102905
PMCID: PMC9143803
PMID: 35629030

Conflict of interest statement: Maxime Samson: Abbvie (consultant), Boerhinger 
Ingelheim (consultant), Vifor Pharma (consultant and invitation to congresses), 
Roche Chugai (consultant and invitation to congresses), Novartis (consultant and 
research grant); Bernard Bonnotte: Roche-Chugai (consultant and remuneration for 
symposiums), Boerhinger Ingelheim (consultant).