---
reference_id: "PMID:19811408"
title: Involvement of T(H)1/T(H)2 cytokines in the pathogenesis of autoimmune skin disease-Pemphigus vulgaris.
authors:
- Satyam A
- Khandpur S
- Sharma VK
- Sharma A
journal: Immunol Invest
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1080/08820130902943097
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Involvement of T(H)1/T(H)2 cytokines in the pathogenesis of autoimmune skin disease-Pemphigus vulgaris.
**Authors:** Satyam A, Khandpur S, Sharma VK, Sharma A
**Journal:** Immunol Invest (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08820130902943097](https://doi.org/10.1080/08820130902943097)

## Content

1. Immunol Invest. 2009;38(6):498-509. doi: 10.1080/08820130902943097.

Involvement of T(H)1/T(H)2 cytokines in the pathogenesis of autoimmune skin 
disease-Pemphigus vulgaris.

Satyam A(1), Khandpur S, Sharma VK, Sharma A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.

Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is classical example of antigen-driven severe autoimmune 
bullous skin disorder. Auto reactive T cells are critical for the induction and 
regulation of antibody production. With regard to cytokine production profiles, 
it has been reported that qualitative as well as quantitative alterations in 
cytokine production can result in activation of inefficacious effector 
mechanisms and therefore, complex and severe impairment in immune functions. The 
purpose of this study was to observe the alterations in the levels of T(H)1 
[Interleukin-2 (IL-2), Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)] and T(H)2 (IL-4 and IL-10) 
cytokines in the sera from patients affected with PV and compared with Pemphigus 
foliaceus and healthy subjects. This work is aimed to comprehend the involvement 
of T(H)1 and T(H)2 cells as inflammatory infiltrate in the modulation of 
acantholysis and production of pemphigus lesions. Seventy PV, 13 PF and 50 
healthy, age-matched individuals without any generalized skin diseases were 
included in this study. The diagnosis of PV and PF patients was confirmed by 
histopathology (hematoxylin and eosin) and / direct immunofluorescence. The 
levels of T(H)1 cytokines (IL-2 and IFN-gamma) and T(H)2 cytokine markers (IL-4 
and IL-10) were estimated by high sensitivity ELISA kits. All patients with PV 
and PF showed significantly (p < 0.000) elevated levels of T(H)2 cytokines 
(IL-10 and IL-4) as compared with healthy controls. However, the mean 
concentration of T(H)1 cytokines (IL-2 and IFN-gamma) was significantly 
decreased in patients as compared to healthy individuals. Both T(H)1 and T(H)2 
cytokines did not show any significant difference between PV and PF cases. 
Current concepts support the idea that PV, induced by autoantibodies against 
Dsg3, is the consequence of an imbalance between Dsg3-reactive T(H)2 and T(H)1 
cells that may be critical for the maintenance of tolerance against Dsg3. 
Cytokine profile for confirmed PV cases showed direct evidences for involvement 
of T cell responses. Increase in IL-4 and IL-10 shows induction of T(H)2 cells 
in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disorders Pemphigus vulgaris. The decreased 
levels of IL-2 and IFN-gamma might demonstrate the inhibitory effects by IL-4 
and IL-10, which suppress the expansion of T(H)1 population.

DOI: 10.1080/08820130902943097
PMID: 19811408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]