---
reference_id: "PMID:40402956"
title: Silencing NRF2 enhances arsenic trioxide-induced ferroptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
authors:
- Huang M
- Li D
- Xia Z
- Liao S
- Si W
- Yuan C
- Liao Y
- Wu W
- Jiang M
- Yu X
- Quan Y
journal: PLoS One
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0322746
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ferroptosis/drug effects, genetics"
- Arsenic Trioxide/pharmacology
- "NF-E2-Related Factor 2/genetics, metabolism"
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/metabolism, genetics, pathology, drug therapy"
- "Liver Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, genetics, drug therapy"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Lipid Peroxidation/drug effects
- Amino Acid Transport System y+/metabolism
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- Cell Survival/drug effects
- Phospholipid Hydroperoxide Glutathione Peroxidase/metabolism
- Gene Silencing
- Heme Oxygenase-1/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Silencing NRF2 enhances arsenic trioxide-induced ferroptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
**Authors:** Huang M, Li D, Xia Z, Liao S, Si W, Yuan C, Liao Y, Wu W, Jiang M, Yu X, Quan Y
**Journal:** PLoS One (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0322746](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0322746)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2025 May 22;20(5):e0322746. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0322746.
eCollection 2025.

Silencing NRF2 enhances arsenic trioxide-induced ferroptosis in hepatocellular
carcinoma cells.

Huang M(1)(2), Li D(1)(2), Xia Z(2)(3), Liao S(1), Si W(1), Yuan C(1), Liao
Y(1), Wu W(1), Jiang M(3), Yu X(1), Quan Y(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Scientific Research and Experiment Center, Zhaoqing Medical
College, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Oncology, The First People's Hospital of Zhaoqing Affiliated to
Zhaoqing Medical College, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.
(3)The First Clinical Medical School, Guangdong Medical University, Zhanjiang,
Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a leading cause of cancer-related
deaths worldwide, with high mortality rates partially due to limited therapeutic
options and drug resistance. Arsenic trioxide (ATO), a compound clinically
proven for acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), has garnered attention for its
emerging efficacy in solid tumors, including HCC. However, the molecular
mechanisms driving ATO's antitumor activity in HCC remain incompletely
understood. In this study, we aimed to elucidate the ferroptosis-dependent
effects of ATO on HCC and and propose a potential therapeutic strategy.
METHODS: The response of HCC cells to ATO was evaluated using cell viability,
wound healing, colony formation, Transwell migration assays, and cell cycle
analysis. ATO-induced ferroptosis was assessed by measuring lipid peroxidation
(via C11-BODIPY staining), intracellular iron levels, and malondialdehyde (MDA)
production. Western blotting was performed to quantify protein levels of NRF2,
HO-1, SLC7A11, and GPX4; immunofluorescence staining was employed to determine
NRF2 subcellular localization.
RESULTS: ATO exhibited significant cytotoxicity and inhibited the progression of
HCC cells. Treatment with ATO resulted in a notable increase in lipid ROS and
MDA levels, which were subsequently reversed by the ferroptosis inhibitors Fer-1
and DFO. Mechanistically, ATO induced ferroptosis by inhibiting GPX4.
Furthermore, NRF2 and its downstream targets, HO-1 and SLC7A11, were upregulated
during ferroptosis. NRF2 knockdown enhanced lipid peroxidation and ATO-induced
cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: ATO significantly promoted ferroptosis in HCC cells, and NRF2
knockdown enhanced the cytotoxic effects of ATO.

Copyright: © 2025 Huang et al. This is an open access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0322746
PMCID: PMC12097587
PMID: 40402956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
