---
reference_id: "PMID:37074092"
title: "Seminoma in 46, XY Gonadal Dysgenesis: Rare Presentation and Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Adra M
- Nakanishi H
- Papachristodoulou E
- Karaoli E
- Gerasimou P
- Miltiadous A
- Nicolaou K
- Loizou L
- Skordis N
journal: J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2023.2023-12-11
keywords:
- Humans
- "Gonadal Dysgenesis, 46,XY/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- "Seminoma/diagnosis, pathology, genetics"
- Child
- "Testicular Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology"
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seminoma in 46, XY Gonadal Dysgenesis: Rare Presentation and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Adra M, Nakanishi H, Papachristodoulou E, Karaoli E, Gerasimou P, Miltiadous A, Nicolaou K, Loizou L, Skordis N
**Journal:** J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2023.2023-12-11](https://doi.org/10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2023.2023-12-11)

## Content

1. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2024 Dec 4;16(4):495-500. doi: 
10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2023.2023-12-11. Epub 2023 Apr 19.

Seminoma in 46, XY Gonadal Dysgenesis: Rare Presentation and Review of the 
Literature.

Adra M(1)(2), Nakanishi H(1)(2), Papachristodoulou E(3), Karaoli E(3), Gerasimou 
P(4), Miltiadous A(4), Nicolaou K(4), Loizou L(3), Skordis N(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)St George’s University of London Medical School, London, UK
(2)University of Nicosia Medical School, Nicosia, Cyprus
(3)Makarios Hospital, Clinic of Paediatric Oncology, Nicosia, Cyprus
(4)Karaiskakio Foundation, Molecular Hematology-Oncology, Nicosia, Cyprus
(5)Private Practice, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Nicosia, Cyprus

Swyer syndrome is a rare congenital condition that serves as a risk factor for 
developing germ cell tumors. The condition belongs to the group of 46, XY 
disorders of sexual development, is characterized by complete gonadal dysgenesis 
(CGD) and is mostly manifested as delayed puberty and primary amenorrhea during 
adolescence. Individuals with Swyer syndrome are known to be phenotypically 
female with normal internal and external female genitalia at birth. 46, XY GD 
involves a high risk of gonadoblastoma development with malignant potential such 
that the onset is greatest at or after the event of puberty. This report of a 
12-year-old phenotypic female with 46, XY GD, who developed an advanced 
metastatic seminoma, highlights the rarity of the development of a seminoma in 
the context of 46, XY CGD.

©Copyright 2024 by Turkish Society for Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes / 
The Journal of Clinical Research in Pediatric Endocrinology published by Galenos 
Publishing House.

DOI: 10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2023.2023-12-11
PMCID: PMC11629731
PMID: 37074092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared.