---
reference_id: "PMID:38609644"
title: Neurofilaments as biomarkers in neurological disorders - towards clinical application.
authors:
- Khalil M
- Teunissen CE
- Lehmann S
- Otto M
- Piehl F
- Ziemssen T
- Bittner S
- Sormani MP
- Gattringer T
- Abu-Rumeileh S
- Thebault S
- Abdelhak A
- Green A
- Benkert P
- Kappos L
- Comabella M
- Tumani H
- Freedman MS
- Petzold A
- Blennow K
- Zetterberg H
- Leppert D
- Kuhle J
journal: Nat Rev Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41582-024-00955-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurofilaments as biomarkers in neurological disorders - towards clinical application.
**Authors:** Khalil M, Teunissen CE, Lehmann S, Otto M, Piehl F, Ziemssen T, Bittner S, Sormani MP, Gattringer T, Abu-Rumeileh S, Thebault S, Abdelhak A, Green A, Benkert P, Kappos L, Comabella M, Tumani H, Freedman MS, Petzold A, Blennow K, Zetterberg H, Leppert D, Kuhle J
**Journal:** Nat Rev Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41582-024-00955-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-024-00955-x)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Neurol. 2024 May;20(5):269-287. doi: 10.1038/s41582-024-00955-x. Epub 
2024 Apr 12.

Neurofilaments as biomarkers in neurological disorders - towards clinical 
application.

Khalil M(1), Teunissen CE(2), Lehmann S(3), Otto M(4), Piehl F(5), Ziemssen 
T(6), Bittner S(7), Sormani MP(8)(9), Gattringer T(10)(11), Abu-Rumeileh S(4), 
Thebault S(12), Abdelhak A(13), Green A(13), Benkert P(14)(15), Kappos 
L(14)(15), Comabella M(16), Tumani H(17), Freedman MS(18), Petzold A(19)(20), 
Blennow K(21)(22)(23)(24), Zetterberg H(21)(22)(25)(26)(27)(28), Leppert 
D(14)(15), Kuhle J(29)(30).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. 
michael.khalil@medunigraz.at.
(2)Neurochemistry Laboratory Department of Laboratory Medicine, Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Vrije Universiteit, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)LBPC-PPC, Université de Montpellier, INM INSERM, IRMB CHU de Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.
(4)Department of Neurology, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle 
(Saale), Germany.
(5)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(6)Center of Clinical Neuroscience, Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine 
and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, Focus Program Translational Neuroscience (FTN), and 
Immunotherapy (FZI), Rhine-Main Neuroscience Network (rmn2), University Medical 
Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(8)Department of Health Sciences, University of Genova, Genova, Italy.
(9)IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genova, Italy.
(10)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(11)Division of Neuroradiology, Vascular and Interventional Radiology, 
Department of Radiology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(12)Multiple Sclerosis Division, Department of Neurology, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(13)Weill Institute for Neurosciences, Department of Neurology, University of 
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(14)Multiple Sclerosis Centre and Research Center for Clinical Neuroimmunology 
and Neuroscience (RC2NB), Departments of Biomedicine and Clinical Research, 
University Hospital and University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(15)Department of Neurology, University Hospital and University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(16)Neurology Department, Multiple Sclerosis Centre of Catalonia, Vall d'Hebron 
University Hospital, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(17)Department of Neurology, CSF Laboratory, Ulm University Hospital, Ulm, 
Germany.
(18)Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, The Ottawa Hospital Research 
Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(19)Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, MS 
Centre and Neuro-ophthalmology Expertise Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(20)Moorfields Eye Hospital, The National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery and the Queen Square Institute of Neurology, UCL, London, UK.
(21)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Mölndal, Sweden.
(22)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(23)Paris Brain Institute, ICM, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Sorbonne University, 
Paris, France.
(24)Neurodegenerative Disorder Research Center, Division of Life Sciences and 
Medicine, and Department of Neurology, Institute on Aging and Brain Disorders, 
University of Science and Technology of China and First Affiliated Hospital of 
USTC, Hefei, P. R. China.
(25)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
UK.
(26)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London, UK.
(27)Hong Kong Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hong Kong, China.
(28)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of Wisconsin 
School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI, USA.
(29)Multiple Sclerosis Centre and Research Center for Clinical Neuroimmunology 
and Neuroscience (RC2NB), Departments of Biomedicine and Clinical Research, 
University Hospital and University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. 
Jens.Kuhle@usb.ch.
(30)Department of Neurology, University Hospital and University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland. Jens.Kuhle@usb.ch.

Neurofilament proteins have been validated as specific body fluid biomarkers of 
neuro-axonal injury. The advent of highly sensitive analytical platforms that 
enable reliable quantification of neurofilaments in blood samples and simplify 
longitudinal follow-up has paved the way for the development of neurofilaments 
as a biomarker in clinical practice. Potential applications include assessment 
of disease activity, monitoring of treatment responses, and determining 
prognosis in many acute and chronic neurological disorders as well as their use 
as an outcome measure in trials of novel therapies. Progress has now moved the 
measurement of neurofilaments to the doorstep of routine clinical practice for 
the evaluation of individuals. In this Review, we first outline current 
knowledge on the structure and function of neurofilaments. We then discuss 
analytical and statistical approaches and challenges in determining 
neurofilament levels in different clinical contexts and assess the implications 
of neurofilament light chain (NfL) levels in normal ageing and the confounding 
factors that need to be considered when interpreting NfL measures. In addition, 
we summarize the current value and potential clinical applications of 
neurofilaments as a biomarker of neuro-axonal damage in a range of neurological 
disorders, including multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer disease, frontotemporal 
dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, stroke and cerebrovascular disease, 
traumatic brain injury, and Parkinson disease. We also consider the steps needed 
to complete the translation of neurofilaments from the laboratory to the 
management of neurological diseases in clinical practice.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41582-024-00955-x
PMID: 38609644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]