---
reference_id: "PMID:25343378"
title: Transcriptional repressor Tbx3 is required for the hormone-sensing cell lineage in mammary epithelium.
authors:
- Kunasegaran K
- Ho V
- Chang TH
- De Silva D
- Bakker ML
- Christoffels VM
- Pietersen AM
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110191
keywords:
- Aging/metabolism
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Cell Lineage/drug effects
- "Epithelial Cells/drug effects, metabolism"
- Female
- Fluorescence
- "Genes, Reporter"
- Hormones/pharmacology
- "Mammary Glands, Animal/cytology, growth & development, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Receptors, Estrogen/metabolism"
- Repressor Proteins/metabolism
- T-Box Domain Proteins/metabolism
- "Transcription, Genetic/drug effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptional repressor Tbx3 is required for the hormone-sensing cell lineage in mammary epithelium.
**Authors:** Kunasegaran K, Ho V, Chang TH, De Silva D, Bakker ML, Christoffels VM, Pietersen AM
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0110191](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0110191)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 24;9(10):e110191. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110191. 
eCollection 2014.

Transcriptional repressor Tbx3 is required for the hormone-sensing cell lineage 
in mammary epithelium.

Kunasegaran K(1), Ho V(1), Chang TH(1), De Silva D(1), Bakker ML(2), 
Christoffels VM(2), Pietersen AM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Research, National Cancer Centre 
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; Program in Cancer & Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS 
Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Center for Heart Failure Research, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Research, National Cancer Centre 
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; Program in Cancer & Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS 
Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; Department of 
Physiology, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

The transcriptional repressor Tbx3 is involved in lineage specification in 
several tissues during embryonic development. Germ-line mutations in the Tbx3 
gene give rise to Ulnar-Mammary Syndrome (comprising reduced breast development) 
and Tbx3 is required for mammary epithelial cell identity in the embryo. Notably 
Tbx3 has been implicated in breast cancer, which develops in adult mammary 
epithelium, but the role of Tbx3 in distinct cell types of the adult mammary 
gland has not yet been characterized. Using a fluorescent reporter knock-in 
mouse, we show that in adult virgin mice Tbx3 is highly expressed in luminal 
cells that express hormone receptors, and not in luminal cells of the alveolar 
lineage (cells primed for milk production). Flow cytometry identified Tbx3 
expression already in progenitor cells of the hormone-sensing lineage and 
co-immunofluorescence confirmed a strict correlation between estrogen receptor 
(ER) and Tbx3 expression in situ. Using in vivo reconstitution assays we 
demonstrate that Tbx3 is functionally relevant for this lineage because 
knockdown of Tbx3 in primary mammary epithelial cells prevented the formation of 
ER+ cells, but not luminal ER- or basal cells. Interestingly, genes that are 
repressed by Tbx3 in other cell types, such as E-cadherin, are not repressed in 
hormone-sensing cells, highlighting that transcriptional targets of Tbx3 are 
cell type specific. In summary, we provide the first analysis of Tbx3 expression 
in the adult mammary gland at a single cell level and show that Tbx3 is 
important for the generation of hormone-sensing cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110191
PMCID: PMC4208772
PMID: 25343378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.