---
reference_id: "PMID:31842975"
title: DNA methylation instability by BRAF-mediated TET silencing and lifestyle-exposure divides colon cancer pathways.
authors:
- Noreen F
- Küng T
- Tornillo L
- Parker H
- Silva M
- Weis S
- Marra G
- Rad R
- Truninger K
- Schär P
journal: Clin Epigenetics
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13148-019-0791-1
keywords:
- Animals
- Caco-2 Cells
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Colonic Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Methylation
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Dioxygenases
- Down-Regulation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Female
- Gene Regulatory Networks
- HT29 Cells
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Mixed Function Oxygenases/metabolism
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms, Experimental"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/metabolism
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA methylation instability by BRAF-mediated TET silencing and lifestyle-exposure divides colon cancer pathways.
**Authors:** Noreen F, Küng T, Tornillo L, Parker H, Silva M, Weis S, Marra G, Rad R, Truninger K, Schär P
**Journal:** Clin Epigenetics (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13148-019-0791-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13148-019-0791-1)

## Content

1. Clin Epigenetics. 2019 Dec 16;11(1):196. doi: 10.1186/s13148-019-0791-1.

DNA methylation instability by BRAF-mediated TET silencing and
lifestyle-exposure divides colon cancer pathways.

Noreen F(1)(2), Küng T(1), Tornillo L(3), Parker H(4), Silva M(5), Weis S(1),
Marra G(4), Rad R(5), Truninger K(6)(7), Schär P(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Mattenstrasse 28, CH-4058,
Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 4053, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, 4056, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zurich, 8057, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(5)Department of Medicine II, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, 81675, Munich, Germany.
(6)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Mattenstrasse 28, CH-4058,
Basel, Switzerland. k.truninger@gastroenterologie-oberaargau.ch.
(7)Gastroenterologie Oberaargau, CH-4900, Langenthal, Switzerland.
k.truninger@gastroenterologie-oberaargau.ch.
(8)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Mattenstrasse 28, CH-4058,
Basel, Switzerland. primo.schaer@unibas.ch.

BACKGROUND: Aberrations in DNA methylation are widespread in colon cancer (CC).
Understanding origin and progression of DNA methylation aberrations is essential
to develop effective preventive and therapeutic strategies. Here, we aimed to
dissect CC subtype-specific methylation instability to understand underlying
mechanisms and functions.
METHODS: We have assessed genome-wide DNA methylation in the healthy normal
colon mucosa (HNM), precursor lesions and CCs in a first comprehensive study to
delineate epigenetic change along the process of colon carcinogenesis.
Mechanistically, we used stable cell lines, genetically engineered mouse model
of mutant BRAFV600E and molecular biology analysis to establish the role of
BRAFV600E-mediated-TET inhibition in CpG-island methylator phenotype (CIMP)
inititation.
RESULTS: We identified two distinct patterns of CpG methylation instability,
determined either by age-lifestyle (CC-neutral CpGs) or genetically (CIMP-CpGs).
CC-neutral-CpGs showed age-dependent hypermethylation in HNM, all precursors,
and CCs, while CIMP-CpGs showed hypermethylation specifically in sessile
serrated adenomas/polyps (SSA/Ps) and CIMP-CCs. BRAFV600E-mutated CCs and
precursors showed a significant downregulation of TET1 and TET2 DNA
demethylases. Stable expression of BRAFV600E in nonCIMP CC cells and in a
genetic mouse model was sufficient to repress TET1/TET2 and initiate
hypermethylation at CIMP-CpGs, reversible by BRAFV600E inhibition.
BRAFV600E-driven CIMP-CpG hypermethylation occurred at genes associated with
established CC pathways, effecting functional changes otherwise achieved by
genetic mutation in carcinogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Hence, while age-lifestyle-driven hypermethylation occurs generally
in colon carcinogenesis, BRAFV600E-driven hypermethylation is specific for the
"serrated" pathway. This knowledge will advance the use of epigenetic biomarkers
to assess subgroup-specific CC risk and disease progression.

DOI: 10.1186/s13148-019-0791-1
PMCID: PMC6916434
PMID: 31842975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
