---
reference_id: "PMID:24470531"
title: Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
authors:
- Farid M
- Demicco EG
- Garcia R
- Ahn L
- Merola PR
- Cioffi A
- Maki RG
journal: Oncologist
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2013-0328
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Nerve Sheath Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
**Authors:** Farid M, Demicco EG, Garcia R, Ahn L, Merola PR, Cioffi A, Maki RG
**Journal:** Oncologist (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1634/theoncologist.2013-0328](https://doi.org/10.1634/theoncologist.2013-0328)

## Content

1. Oncologist. 2014 Feb;19(2):193-201. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2013-0328. Epub
 2014 Jan 27.

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.

Farid M(1), Demicco EG, Garcia R, Ahn L, Merola PR, Cioffi A, Maki RG.

Author information:
(1)Tisch Cancer Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York,
USA.

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST) are uncommon, biologically
aggressive soft tissue sarcomas of neural origin that pose tremendous challenges
to effective therapy. In 50% of cases, they occur in the context of
neurofibromatosis type I, characterized by loss of function mutations to the
tumor suppressor neurofibromin; the remainder arise sporadically or following
radiation therapy. Prognosis is generally poor, with high rates of relapse
following multimodality therapy in early disease, low response rates to
cytotoxic chemotherapy in advanced disease, and propensity for rapid disease
progression and high mortality. The last few years have seen an explosion in
data surrounding the potential molecular drivers and targets for therapy above
and beyond neurofibromin loss. These data span multiple nodes at various levels
of cellular control, including major signal transduction pathways, angiogenesis,
apoptosis, mitosis, and epigenetics. These include classical cancer-driving
genetic aberrations such as TP53 and phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) loss
of function, and upregulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and
(mechanistic) target of rapamycin (TOR) pathways, as well as less ubiquitous
molecular abnormalities involving inhibitors of apoptosis proteins, aurora
kinases, and the Wingless/int (Wnt) signaling pathway. We review the current
understanding of MPNST biology, current best practices of management, and recent
research developments in this disease, with a view to informing future
advancements in patient care.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2013-0328
PMCID: PMC3926794
PMID: 24470531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures of potential conflicts of interest
may be found at the end of this article.
