---
reference_id: "PMID:39493181"
title: "Compact Arterial Monitoring Device Use in Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta (REBOA): A Simple Validation Study in Swine."
authors:
- Lussier G
- Evans AJ
- Houston I
- Wilsnack A
- Russo CM
- Vietor R
- Bedocs P
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.70789
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compact Arterial Monitoring Device Use in Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta (REBOA): A Simple Validation Study in Swine.
**Authors:** Lussier G, Evans AJ, Houston I, Wilsnack A, Russo CM, Vietor R, Bedocs P
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.70789](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.70789)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Oct 3;16(10):e70789. doi: 10.7759/cureus.70789. eCollection 2024
Oct.

Compact Arterial Monitoring Device Use in Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon
Occlusion of the Aorta (REBOA): A Simple Validation Study in Swine.

Lussier G(1), Evans AJ(2), Houston I(1), Wilsnack A(2), Russo CM(2), Vietor
R(3)(2), Bedocs P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center,
Bethesda, USA.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, Bethesda, USA.

Introduction Hemorrhage is the leading cause of preventable death in trauma in
both the military and civilian settings worldwide. Medical studies from
Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) and Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) informed
change in military prehospital medicine by influencing widespread tourniquet
distribution and training on their use to stop life-threatening extremity
hemorrhage. In the military setting, there has been a significant reduction in
preventable death due to extremity exsanguination since the widespread
implementation of tourniquets within the Department of Defense. However,
noncompressible hemorrhage remains a significant cause of mortality, especially
in the prehospital setting. In select patients, resuscitative endovascular
balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA) is an adjunct that can be utilized to
slow or stop non-compressible hemorrhage until the patient reaches definitive
care. However, frontline medical providers face the challenge of reliable,
accurate blood pressure measurement in REBOA patients. REBOA, used in
conjunction with a small disposable pressure monitor, can bridge the gap in
capabilities, creating a more balanced resuscitation and reducing blood product
requirements with the added benefit of invasive blood pressure monitoring
capability. The authors of this study propose the sustained use and further
validation of a small, disposable pressure monitor in REBOA to monitor
beat-to-beat variation in both hemodynamically stable and unstable patients and
seek to offer a pathway for use in austere environments. Materials and methods
Yorkshire swine (n = 4) were selected for partial REBOA (pREBOA) placement and
compass transducer measurement in conjunction with a vascular experimental
protocol. Appropriate vascular and arterial line access was obtained,
hemorrhagic shock was initiated, and REBOA with an in-line Compass™ device (CD)
pressure transducer (Centurion Medical Products, Williamston, MI) was used to
occlude the aorta. Mean arterial pressures were measured via the CD, recorded,
and compared to the control arterial line at hypotensive, normotensive, and
hypertensive pressures. Results At hypotensive pressures, 30% of the CD readings
fell within 1 mmHg of control arterial line readings, and 52.3% were within 2
mmHg. At normotensive pressures, 46% of the CD readings fell within 1 mmHg of
control arterial line readings, and 64.2% were within 2 mmHg. At hypertensive
pressures, 60% of the CD readings fell within 1 mmHg of control arterial line
readings, and 82% were within 2 mmHg. All CD data points at all pressures were
within 8 mmHg of the control arterial line readings. Conclusions In conclusion,
the CD is a compact, inexpensive, portable pressure-sensing device that may
potentially augment the safety and functionality of the REBOA in trauma patients
both at the point of injury and in the hospital. This novel study conducted on
four swine subjects demonstrated a remarkable correlation to the traditional
equipment intensive arterial line setups, and issues of stasis and
non-pulsatility were easily troubleshot. Future studies should investigate CD
use in REBOA catheters under different physiological conditions, specifically
arrhythmias, and in different environments (prehospital, air medical transport,
and austere locations).

Copyright © 2024, Lussier et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.70789
PMCID: PMC11531354
PMID: 39493181

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: All authors have confirmed that
this study did not involve human participants or tissue. Animal subjects:
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC): The research protocol was
approved by the IACUC of the Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences. Ethical approval and Trial Registration Details Per Reviewer Request
Below:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
USUHS / DOD – SPONSORED ANIMAL RESEARCH PROPOSALS MUST USE THIS STANDARDIZED
FORMAT Reference DOD Directive 3216.1 & USUHS Instruction 3203
*************************************************************************************Specific
information requested in the following animal-use protocol template is a result
of requirements of the Animal Welfare Act regulations (AWAR), the Guide for the
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and other applicable Federal regulations and
DOD directives.
*************************************************************************************
This document is intended to be an aid in the preparation of a USUHS DOD –
sponsored animal use proposal. The instructions and written explanations
provided for individual paragraphs (ref. animal-use protocol template in AR
40-33 / USUHSINST 3203, Appendix C) are coded as hidden text. To see the
instructions and examples for each section, select the “Show/Hide ¶” button on
your tool bar. To print the hidden text, select “Print” on the drop down file
menu. Under the “Options” button, select “Hidden text” under the “Include with
document” section. Use of a word processor makes completion of this template a
“fill-in-the-blanks” exercise. Please provide all response entries in the
following font: Arial, Regular, 12, Black. Please do NOT submit this page of
instructions with your animal protocol submission. With the exception of title
headings, each paragraph and subparagraph in the following template must have a
response. Portions of the template that are not applicable to your particular
protocol, (i.e., no surgery or no prolonged restraint) should be marked “N/A”.
There are no space limitations for the responses. Do not delete any sections.
Pertinent standing operating procedures or similar documents that are readily
available to your IACUC may be referenced to assist in the description of
specific procedures. It is critical that only animal studies or procedures
documented in an IACUC – approved protocol be performed at your facility.
Additionally, Principal Investigators, or other delegated research personnel,
should keep accurate experimental records and be able to provide an audit trail
of animal expenditures and use that correlates to their approved protocol. USUHS
FORM 3206 ANIMAL STUDY PROPOSAL PROTOCOL COVER SHEET PROTOCOL NUMBER: SUR-19-965
PROTOCOL TITLE: Partial resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the
aorta (PREBOA) characterization of targeted distal flow and permissive regional
hypoperfusion in a porcine model (Sus scrofa domesticus) of hemorrhagic shock
GRANT TITLE (if different from above): NA USUHS PROJECT NUMBER// DAI GRANT
NUMBER: Pending FUNDING AGENCY: USU USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018
Previous versions are obsolete EARLIEST ANTICIPATED FUNDING START DATE: Pending
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Joseph White, MAJ, MC, USA Surgery 301-319-2852 28 Feb
2017 MAJ Joseph White, MD Department Office telephone Date SCIENTIFIC REVIEW:
This animal use proposal received an appropriate peer scientific review and is
consistent with good scientific research practice. CAPT Eric A. Elster
Department Office telephone Date STATISTICAL REVIEW: A person knowledgeable in
biostatistics reviewed this proposal to ensure that the number of animals used
is appropriate to obtain sufficient data and/or is not excessive, and the
statistical design is appropriate for the intent of the study. Statistics USUS
301-295-9468 28 Feb 2017 Cara Olsen, MS, DrPH Department Office telephone Date
ATTENDING VETERINARIAN: In accordance with the Animal Welfare Regulations, the
Attending Veterinarian was consulted in the planning of procedures and
manipulations that may cause more than slight or momentary pain or distress,
even if relieved by anesthetics or analgesics. All signatures are required prior
to submission to the IACUC Office. LAM 301-295-9492 Anna B. Mullins, DVM, DACLAM
Department Office telephone Date BIOSAFETY OFFICER: Only required if using any
infectious pathogens. EHS Peter Bouma Department Office telephone Date USUHS
Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are obsolete ANIMAL PROTOCOL
NUMBER: Pending PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Joseph M. White, MD, FACS MAJ, MC, USA
Assistant Program Director, Vascular Surgery Fellowship Assistant Professor of
Surgery The Department of Surgery at Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences and Walter Reed National Military Medical Center Office: 301-319-2852
Email: joseph.m.white70.mil@mail.mil ANIMAL PROTOCOL TITLE: Partial
resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (PREBOA)
characterization of targeted distal flow and permissive regional hypoperfusion
in a porcine model (Sus scrofa domesticus) of hemorrhagic shock GRANT TITLE (if
different from above): NA USUHS PROJECT NUMBER// DAI GRANT NUMBER: Pending
CO-INVESTIGATOR(S): Todd E. Rasmussen, MD FACS Colonel USAF MC Shumacker
Professor of Surgery Associate Dean for Clinical Research F. Edward Hebert
School of Medicine - "America's Medical School" Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences 4301 Jones Bridge Road Bethesda, Maryland 20814-4712 Office:
301-295-3016 Mobile: 210-508-7062 Email: todd.rasmussen@usuhs.edu Paul W. White,
MD, FACS LTC, MC, USA Program Director, Vascular Surgery Fellowship Associate
Professor of Surgery, The Department of Surgery at Uniformed Services University
of the Health Sciences and Walter Reed National Military Medical Center Office:
301-295-4779 Email: paul.w.white4.mil@mail.mil Thomas A. Davis, PhD Deputy Vice
Chair of Research Professor USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous
versions are obsolete USU Walter Reed Surgery Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences 4301 Jones Bridge Road Bethesda, MD 20814 Office:
301-295-9825 Mobile: 301-204-5212 Email: thomas.davis@usuhs.edu I. NON-TECHNICAL
SYNOPSIS: During recent military conflicts, medics and surgeons treat combat
trauma patients with critical injuries to the chest, abdomen, and pelvis areas
where it can be nearly impossible to control bleeding to save a service member’s
life. While the application of tourniquets helps prevent life-threatening blood
loss from wounds to extremities (arms and legs), nothing exists for critical
injuries to the chest, abdomen, and pelvis in combat and in emergency care
environments. A new technology referred to as resuscitative endovascular balloon
occlusion of the aorta (REBOA) has been used in trauma patients suffering from
rapid blood loss as a result of injuries to their chest, abdomen, and pelvis.
This technique involves rapidly placing a flexible catheter into the femoral
artery in the groin, maneuvering, and placement in the aorta, and then inflation
of an attached balloon at the tip to stop the uncontrolled bleeding. Not
surprisingly, total blockage of blood flow to areas to various regions of the
body for an extensive time period has resulted in some serious follow-on medical
complications. In this proposal, we will test and evaluate the next generation
of PREBOA (partial PREBOA) in a well-characterized non-survival swine hemorrhage
model. We hypothesize that this new technology will permit longer utilization,
enhance organ oxygenation to maintain tissue viability and increase patient
survival II. BACKGROUND: II.1. Background: In the current conflicts, many
wounded service members have survived catastrophic traumatic injuries. They
would have died from these injuries in previous wars, but improvements in
battlefield medical care and the use of body armor have increased survival
rates. Hemorrhage, particularly non-compressible torso hemorrhage (NCTH), has
been identified as a leading cause of preventable death on the modern
battlefield.[1,2] Analysis from the recent wars in Iraq and Afghanistan has
demonstrated that hemorrhage was the underlying physiologic insult in 90% of
potentially survivable battlefield injuries.[3] The stratification of mortality
from death on the battlefield from 2001-2011 (Iraq and Afghanistan) demonstrated
that 87.3% of all injury mortality occurred in the pre-MTF environment.[3] Of
the pre-MTF deaths, 75.7% (n = 3,040) were classified as nonsurvivable, and
24.3% (n = 976) were deemed potentially survivable (PS). The injury/physiologic
focus of PS acute mortality was largely associated with hemorrhage (90.9%). The
site of lethal hemorrhage was truncal (67.3%), followed by junctional (19.2%)
and peripheral-extremity (13.5%) hemorrhage. The management of traumatic
hemorrhage (specifically, NCTH) requires innovative strategies and devices to
overcome the current trend identified in modern combat. PREBOA seeks to address
this critical gap and alter casualty mortality rates as a result. Resuscitative
Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta (REBOA) has emerged as a promising
technique for cases of severe NCTH during trauma. An emerging set of
pre-clinical and clinical data on the use of REBOA reports highly successful
outcomes following brief periods of occlusion; however, longer periods of
occlusion are associated with significantly increased mortality.[4,5]
Therapeutic strategies that incorporate regulated partial distal aortic flow and
perfusion are a potential technique to mitigate ongoing distal ischemia and
subsequent reperfusion injury while potentially avoiding the deleterious USUHS
Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are obsolete complications
of distal clot disruption with ongoing hemorrhage and supraphysiologic central
and cerebral pressures.[6] In order to allow distal aortic flow and perfusion at
a controlled and regulated level, REBOA distal flow characteristics require
additional pre-clinical testing and evaluation. The PREBOA-PRO Catheter utilizes
the same basic technological characteristics as the existing ER-REBOA Catheter –
complete large vessel occlusion and blood pressure monitoring – with minor
modifications to the balloon design to help facilitate a smoother transition
between full occlusion and no occlusion. The PREBOA-PRO Catheter employs a
composite balloon design that arranges a non-compliant partner or “spine”
balloon in parallel with a compliant occlusion balloon. When the balloon system
is fully inflated, complete occlusion is achieved. During balloon deflation,
bypass channels initially open around the partner balloon, allowing a limited
amount of blood to flow past the balloon, while maintaining balloon wall
apposition Figure 1). This permits modulation of blood pressure gradient across
the balloon during inflation/deflation cycles. Partial REBOA is a a technique,
which shows great promise to reduce morbidities associated with survival from
REBOA and extend the amount of time in which REBOA can be performed. REBOA is a
resuscitative adjunct that augments central and cerebral perfusion while
mitigating lethal hemorrhage secondary to NCTH. Next generation Prytime Medical
Devices Inc. partial REBOA (PREBOA-PRO) catheter is currently not FDA-approved
for use. Standard REBOA catheter systems are currently in use in military Role
I, II, and III facilities and Medical Treatment Facilities. Forward elements
such as GHOST-T (Golden Hour Offset Surgical Treatment-Teams) and SOST (Special
Operations Surgical Teams) have incorporated and implemented REBOA technology on
the forward edge of the battlefield. Civilian level 1 trauma centers currently
use REBOA catheter systems. Clinical use typically employs “all-or-nothing”
REBOA, meaning that the balloon is fully inflated or completely deflated. PREBOA
allows for distal aortic flow, potentially expanding the resuscitation envelope.
This would represent lengthening the “golden hour” and augmenting austere or
prolonged field care. Permissive Regional Hypoperfusion (PRH) following complete
aortic occlusion incorporates regulated partial distal aortic flow and perfusion
with subsequent mitigation of distal ischemia and reperfusion injury. This
concept potentially avoids the deleterious complications of distal clot
disruption with ongoing hemorrhage and supraphysiologic central and cerebral
pressures. Building upon the knowledge acquired during previous REBOA testing:
REBOA Distal Flow Dynamics and Targeted Distal Flow Characterization (which
characterizes the flow-volume relationship and TDF fidelity), this project
attempts to identify the critical flow threshold at which Permissive Regional
Hypoperfusion (PRH) allows for optimal metabolic and physiologic results. The
overarching goal is to decrease morbidity and mortality in the out-of-hospital
(prehospital, en-route and far forward medicine) environment scenarios using a
partial occlusive endovascular device (pREBOA) to lessen hypotension and
ischemia-reperfusion injury while augmenting pulmonary and cerebral perfusion.
In this study, we will compare several state-of the-art intravascular occlusion
devices in a swine model of lethal non-compressible torso hemorrhage (NCTH).
Figure 1: The pREBOA-PROTM Catheter USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018
Previous versions are obsolete II.2. Literature Search for Duplication: II.2.1.
Literature Source(s) Searched: PubMed, DTIC, and NIH RePORT were searched to
avoid unnecessary duplication of research. II.2.2. Date of Search: 8 January
2018 II.2.3. Period of Search: 1990 to present II.2.4. Key Words and Search
Strategy: Separate search terms: PREBOA (partial resuscitative endovascular
balloon occlusion of the aorta) in a large animal model (9) REBOA (resuscitative
endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta) in a large animal model (14)
Combined search terms: PREBOA (partial resuscitative endovascular balloon
occlusion of the aorta) in a large animal model AND Sus scrofa domesticus (7)
REBOA (resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta) in a large
animal model AND Sus scrofa domesticus (9) PREBOA (partial resuscitative
endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta) in a large animal model AND
Hemorrhagic shock (7) REBOA (resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the
aorta) in a large animal model AND Hemorrhagic shock (9) (Please see appendix A)
II.2.5. Results of Search: Summary: No studies were identified in the literature
that would appear to duplicate the proposed large-animal research project. The
PREBOA-PRO prototype to be evaluated is novel, and no duplicative in vivo
studies were identified. Please see Appendix A for Search Results. III.
OBJECTIVE\HYPOTHESIS: The objectives of this study are two-fold (1) to
characterize distal aortic flow following PREBOA using the ER-REBOA, and
PREBOA-PRO catheters in an established, translational, swine model of lethal
NCTH and (2) to identify the critical threshold at which Permissive Regional
Hypoperfusion (PRH) allows for reduced perfusion pressure promoting clot
stabilization (avoidance of hemorrhage), mitigates tissue ischemia and
reperfusion injury, and dampens supraphysiologic central and cerebral pressures.
We hypothesis the PREBOA-PRO catheters will demonstrate superior Targeted Distal
Flow (TDF) fidelity compared to the ER-REBOA and that a TDF of 150mL/min will
demonstrate. USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are
obsolete clot stabilization (avoid free intraperitoneal hemorrhage), mitigate
distal ischemia and reperfusion injury and result in a reduction of
supraphysiologic central and cerebral pressures thereby demonstrating superior
Permissive Regional Hypoperfusion (PRH). IV. MILITARY RELEVANCE: Eastridge and
colleagues reported that hemorrhage is the leading cause of preventable death on
the modern battlefield. Between October 2001 and June 2011, 4,596 battlefield
fatalities were reviewed and analyzed during the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The stratification of mortality demonstrated that 87.3% of all injury mortality
occurred in the pre-MTF (Medical Treatment Facility) environment. Of the pre-MTF
deaths, 75.7% (n = 3,040) were classified as nonsurvivable, and 24.3% (n = 976)
were deemed potentially survivable (PS). The injury/physiologic focus of PS
acute mortality was largely associated with hemorrhage (90.9%). The site of
lethal hemorrhage was truncal (67.3%), followed by junctional (19.2%) and
peripheral-extremity (13.5%) hemorrhage.[3] The management of hemorrhage is
critical to improving combat causality care (CCC) in the military. Resuscitative
Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta (REBOA) has emerged as a promising
technique for cases of severe NCTH during trauma. Prompt control of bleeding and
resuscitation in the field can reduce mortality by as much as 20%. Importantly,
hemorrhage is a major mechanism of death in potentially survivable combat
injuries, underscoring the necessity for initiatives to mitigate bleeding and to
develop new solutions to provide for prolonged Damage Control Resuscitation
(pDCR), particularly in the prehospital-en route and prolonged field care (PFC)
austere environment. Treatments initiated within the “Golden Hour”- 60 minutes
post-injury have resulted in increased survival. REBOA devices provide a
short-term survival advantage by preventing exsanguination and augmenting
perfusion of the heart, lungs, and brain. However, experimental observation
suggests that complete aortic occlusion using REBOA can lead to severe
multifactorial complications, including myocardial dysfunction, respiratory
distress, traumatic brain injury, and distal organ/extremity
ischemia-reperfusion injury, resulting in multi-organ dysfunction and death.
Therapeutic strategies that incorporate regulated partial distal aortic flow and
perfusion are a potential technique to mitigate ongoing distal ischemia and
subsequent reperfusion injury while potentially avoiding the deleterious
complications of distal clot disruption with ongoing hemorrhage and
supraphysiologic central and cerebral pressures. In order to allow distal aortic
flow and perfusion at a controlled and regulated level, REBOA distal flow
characteristics require additional investigation. V. MATERIALS AND METHODS: V.1.
Experimental Design and General Procedures: General Overview/Concept Specific
Aims Model Development Animals: Two animals from each experimental group will be
considered a pilot study for each named study. These animals will be used to
teach and perfect various aspects procedures associated with two proposed animal
models (Section V.4.3.2. Procedure) to include but not limited to the surgical
preparation, sedation, intubation, anesthesia monitoring, cut downs, placement
of arterial and venous lines, injury induction, REBOA insertion and placement,
radiographic assessments, as well clinical and laboratory monitoring. USUHS Form
3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are obsolete Experiment 1: In a
controlled prefixed bleed hemorrhagic shock model, evaluate and characterize
distal aortic flow rate capabilities with the ER-REBOA, PREBOA-PRO (N=2 pilot
animals + 8 animals per treatment arm; total 18 animals). Experiment 2:
Following complete aortic occlusion and PRH in a swine traumatic liver
amputation uncontrolled bleed hemorrhagic shock model (approximately 30% of the
liver followed by 1.5 minutes of free hemorrhage), evaluate and characterize
associated hemodynamics and metabolic/physiologic consequences of TDF at 50
mL/min (Grp 1), 150 mL/min (Grp 2), 300 mL/min (Grp 3), 500 mL/min (Grp 4) and
1000 mL/min (Grp 5). N=2 pilot animals + 8 animals per treatment arm; total 42
swine. (*Please see section V.4.3.2. Procedure for additional operative details
regarding the specific sequence of events/conduct of the operation) V.1.1.
Experiment 1: Target Distal Perfusion (18 animals) (USDA pain category D)
Experimental Design 1: Uncontrolled bleed hemorrhagic shock (HS) will be
simulated by withdrawing 25% of estimated blood volume through an arterial
sheath into citrated blood collection bags over a 30-minute period to simulate
the prehospital environment. Complete aortic occlusion will be initiated by
inflating the aortic occlusion balloon catheter until there is loss of a distal
arterial waveform and occlusion will be sustained for 20 minutes. After 15
minutes of occlusion, shed blood volume will be returned through the central
venous line via rapid infusion (Belmont Instruments, Billerica, MD) at the rate
of 150 cc/min. Following 20 minutes of Zone I aortic occlusion, incremental
balloon deflation at a rate of 0.5 cc every 30 seconds will occur until the
balloon is completely deflated. Physiologic parameters and aortic flow
measurements will be collected. Onset of aortic flow during balloon deflation
will be defined as the time point when flow reaches 50 mL/min (approximately 2%
of baseline full flow) to account for the fidelity of the aortic flow probe at
very low flow rates. The estimated time for incremental balloon deflation is
15-20 minutes (average balloon total volume: 5.25cc-7.25cc). Upon completion of
the incremental balloon deflation, the subsequent phase of testing will
determine balloon fidelity and the ability to provide a targeted distal flow.
Using data extracted from the initial phase of the experiment, a balloon volume
that corresponds with a targeted distal flow of 150ml/min will be selected. The
aortic occlusion balloon catheter will be inflated and targeted distal flow
recorded over a 90 minute period. At the end of the experiment, the animals will
be humanely euthanized according to V.4.6. V.1.2. Experiment 2: Permissive
Regional Hypoperfusion (42 animals) (USDA pain category D) Experimental Design
2: HS shock will be initiated by traumatic amputation of the liver
(approximately 30% total liver volume) followed by 1.5 minutes of free
hemorrhage. The liver will be marked along the planned transection plane, 2 cm
to the left of Cantlie's line, to provide amputation of approximately 80% of the
left lateral lobe of the liver and 40% of the left medial lobe of the liver
(approximately 30% of total liver volume) similar to previous descriptions. At
Time 0, the liver will be sharply transected, and the abdomen rapidly closed
with cable ties. Complete occlusion of the aorta will be achieved with REBOA 1.5
minutes following the initiation of injury. Complete aortic occlusion will be
initiated by inflating the PREBOA-Pro until there is loss of a distal arterial
waveform and occlusion is sustained for 20 minutes. Following 20 minutes of Zone
I aortic occlusion, PRH with partial aortic occlusion will occur. The pREBOA
will be deflated to achieve a distal aortic flow of 50mL/min (Group 1),
150mL/min (Group 2), USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions
are obsolete 300mL/min (Group 3), 500mL/min (Group 4) and 1000 mL/min (Group 5).
The variable deflation of occlusion balloon will correlate to the goal TDF
specific to Groups 1-5. PRH phase will continue for 70 minutes. Next, study
animals will undergo a damage control surgery with definitive hemorrhage control
and resuscitation with whole blood. Blood volume will be returned through the
central venous line via rapid infusion (Belmont Instruments, Billerica, MD) at
the rate of 150 cc/min. The REBOA catheter will be removed and the study animals
will complete a 240- minute critical care phase (continued hemodynamic
monitoring and resuscitation). At the end of the experiment, the animals will be
humanely euthanized according to V.4.6. 2 Animals are for pilot. V.2. Data
Analysis: Experiment 1: Two endovascular balloon occlusion devices (ER-REBOA and
PREBOA-PRO) will be tested and evaluated. The association between flow and
volume will be assessed for each experimental animal using linear regression
with flow as the dependent variable and volume as the independent variable. For
overall comparisons, the separate regressions will be combined across animals
and compared between groups using a multilevel regression model with
subject-specific random intercepts and slopes, and fixed effects of group,
volume, and the interaction of group and volume. A primary hypothesis is that
the slope (the increase in flow corresponding to a specific decrease in volume)
will be greater in the ER-REBOA group than in the PREBOA-PRO (next generation
REBOA catheter) group. With a sample size of 8 animals per group and an average
of 15 measurements per animal, if the within-animal correlation is 0.5, the
study will have 80% power to detect a significant difference if, across the
range of volumes, the increase in flow is lower in the PREBOA-PRO group than the
ER-REBOA group by 0.74 standard deviations. If the standard deviation of the
distal flow rate is close to 300 mL/minute, as has been observed in similar
studies, this corresponds to a result in which the difference in flow rates from
the lowest to the highest volume is reduced in the PREBOA-PRO group by 222
mL/minute compared to the ER-REBOA group. For testing whether the variability in
flow level over time differs between groups, the within- subject standard
deviation will be calculated for each animal and these standard deviations will
be compared between groups using a Mann-Whitney U test. Although we have no
prior data on the within-subject standard deviation, the power of the
Mann-Whitney U test is expected to be similar to that of a corresponding
Student's t test. With 8 animals per group, the study will have 80% power to
detect a difference of 1.5 standard deviations. Actual power may be slightly
lower but is still expected to be adequate. Experiment 2: Five distal flow rates
will be evaluated in order to determine optimal regional permissive hypotension
following partial REBOA in a model of lethal hemorrhagic shock. Mortality will
be compared across groups using Fisher's exact test. When comparing the flow
rate with the highest vs. lowest mortality rate, if mortality is 90% vs. 10% and
the sample size is 8 per group, Fisher's exact test with a 5% two-sided
significance level will have 80% power to detect a difference. If a Bonferroni
adjustment is used to account for pairwise comparisons among 5 groups (flow
rates) the power will be 80% to detect a significant difference if the true
rates are 95% and 5%. Therefore, the sample size is sufficient to detect the
expected large differences in mortality. Histologic, physiologic and metabolic
parameters will be compared across groups using one- way ANOVA followed by
Tukey's pairwise comparisons. A sample size of 8 per group will have 80% power
to detect differences of 1.9 standard deviations between groups based on ANOVA
contrasts with 5% two-sided significance level after adjustment for multiple
comparisons. USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are
obsolete V.3. Laboratory Animals Required and Justification: V.3.1. Non-animal
Alternatives Considered: No feasible non-animal alternatives are available to
study PREBOA physiology with metabolic and physiologic endpoints. V.3.2. Animal
Model and Species Justification: Swine species allows for significant advantage
due to the animals arterial capacity (i.e. arterial size and structural
similarity to human arteries) to allow for and facilitate most endovascular
devices and procedures. Specifically, the porcine common femoral artery can
accommodate 7 French arterial sheaths (the required arterial sheath size for the
PREBOA-PRO and ER- REBOA-PRO catheter). Additionally, histologic similarities
between swine and human aneurysmal models are favorable. V.3.3. Laboratory
Animals ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERATIONS: Does the protocol have any provisions that
would qualify it to be identified as one that Refines, Reduces, or Replaces
(3R's) the use of animals in relation to other protocols or procedures performed
in the past? Y/N (circle): YES SECTION V.3.5. Exceptions to the Guide for the
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (Please check all applicable): Use of
Paralytics (V.4.1.2.3.) Prolonged Restraint (V.4.2.) Multiple Major Survival
Surgery (V.4.3.6.) Use of Non-pharmaceutical grade chemicals (V.4.4.1.) Use of
Complete Freund’s Adjuvant (V.4.4.3.) Death as an endpoint (V.4.5.) Food/Water
Restriction (V.5.1.2. Single Housing of Social Species (V.5.1.3) Restriction of
Environmental Enrichment (V.5.3.2.) [x] Drug Use/Controlled Substances (Appendix
B) Use of any Infectious Pathogen (Cover Page and VII.) IDENTIFICATION OF
SPECIES AND STRAIN: In accounting for animal numbers, please ensure that the
strain of animal as well as the species is identified. If more than one strain
of any species will be used, please list each proposed strain in a separate
column. If more than two species/strains are to be used, duplicate Sections
V.3.3.1 – V.3.4 , and Section V.4.1.1.1, on subsequent pages to cover all
requested strains. Species #1 V.3.3.1. Genus & Species: Sus scrofa domesticus
V.3.3.2. Strain/Stock: Yorkshire swine USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018
Previous versions are obsolete V.3.3.3. Source/Vender: ABI V.3.3.4. Age: Adult
V.3.3.5. Weight: 70-100 kg V.3.3.6. Sex: Female V.3.3.7. Special Consideration:
None V.3.4. Number of Animals Required (by Species): Sus scrofa domesticus: 60
V.3.5. Refinement, Reduction, Replacement (3 Rs): V.3.5.1. Refinement: General
anesthesia will be used for all surgical procedures. All surgical procedures
will be performed by skilled surgeons. All animals will receive buprenorphine
pre-operatively to ensure pain is well managed during surgery. V.3.5.2.
Reduction: No adaptive model would be possible to decrease the number of animals
required. Please see power analysis (Section V.2 Data Analysis) as to how the
power analysis was structured and established. Computer models not applicable.
V.3.5.3. Replacement: None: Non-animal models cannot replace the animal model
for this study. The intact physiology of the whole living animal is required to
attain the goals outlined in this study. V.4. Technical Methods: V.4.1. Pain /
Distress Assessment: V.4.1.1. APHIS Form 7023 Information: V.4.1.1.1. Number of
Animals: V.4.1.1.1. 1. Column C: V.4.1.1.1. 2. Column D: 18 Experiment #1, 42
Experiment #2, Total 60 V.4.1.2. Pain Relief / Prevention: V.4.1.2.1.
Anesthesia/Analgesia/Tranquilization: Anesthesia is induced using ketamine
(33mg/kg) intramuscularly and maintained with 1% to 4% inhaled isoflurane.
General anesthesia will be used for all surgical procedures. Pre- operative pain
medication is buprenorphine at 0.01-0.05 mg/kg given SQ at rate of every 4-12
USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are obsolete hrs.
Additional pain medication options include carprofen (2 mg kg/SC) or meloxicam
(0.4mg/kg SC). V.4.1.2.2. Pre- and Post-procedural (not surgery) Provisions: NA
V.4.1.2.3. Paralytics: None V.4.1.3. Literature Search for Alternatives to
Painful or Distressful Procedures: No reasonable alternatives are available to
study V.4.1.3.1. Sources Searched: The USDA site
(http://www.nal.usda.gov/awic/databases/databse.htm) was searched for possible
alternatives. V.4.1.3.2. Date of Search: December 2017 V.4.1.3.3. Period of
Search: 1990 – Present V.4.1.3.4. Key Words of Search: Combined search terms:
Swine AND resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta AND
Alternatives to Painful or Distressful Procedures (0) V.4.1.3.5. Results of
Search: Summary: We were unable to find alternatives to the painful/distressful
procedures in this protocol because the intact physiology of the whole living
animal is required to attain the goals outlined in this study. Please see
Appendix A for Search Results V.4.1.4. Unalleviated Painful or Distressful
Procedure Justification: NA V.4.2. Prolonged Restraint: None V.4.3. Surgery:
*Please see Sections V.1 and V.4.3.2. V.4.3.1. Pre-surgical Provisions: Pigs
will receive no food after 1500 hrs on the day before the procedure, with
fasting from at least 12 hrs to no more than 24 hrs prior to surgery. V.4.3.2.
Procedure: USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are
obsolete A. General Considerations for Animal Preparation Yorkshire-cross swine
(Sus scrofa), will be premedicated with Ketamine intramuscularly. Following
isoflurane induction and endotracheal intubation, maintenance anesthesia will
consist of 1-4% isoflurane in 100% oxygen. To offset the vasodilatory effects of
general anesthesia, an intravenous infusion of norepinephrine (0.01 μg/kg per
hour) will be instituted upon venous access and titrated to achieve a target MAP
between 65 and 75 mm Hg. The infusion rate will remain constant for the
remainder of the experiment. Animals will be mechanically ventilated with tidal
volumes of 7 to 10 mL/kg and a respiratory rate of 10 to 15 breaths per minute
sufficient to maintain end-tidal CO2 at 40 ± 5 mm Hg. Isotonic sodium chloride
solution will be administered at a rate of 5 mL/kg per hour to overcome
insensible losses. An underbody warmer set at 39°C will be used to maintain body
temperature. Venous access will be established through a central line in the
right internal jugular vein (percutaneous access). Proximal and distal arterial
access will be obtained through a 7 Fr 13-cm introducer sheath (Boston
Scientific, Marlborough, MA) placed in the right femoral artery and left
brachial (axillary) artery via surgical cut-downs. The animals will undergo
midline laparotomy and splenectomy to minimize hemodynamic variation from
autotransfusion. Foley catheter will be placed through open surgical cystotomy.
The distal aorta will then exposed by longitudinally dividing the
retroperitoneal tissues to facilitate placement of a periaortic flow probe
(Transonic Systems Inc, Ithaca, NY). The proximal flow probe will be placed at
the common carotid artery. The abdomen was closed with cable ties. B. Vascular
Exposure and Monitoring Lines A 5 Fr microcatheter (Cook Medical, Inc.,
Bloomington, IN) will be placed into the brachial artery for hemodynamic
monitoring and to facilitate required laboratory draws. This catheter will be
inserted along the medial aspect of the front limb. Using the palpable pulse as
a landmark, the brachial artery will be dissected out sharply through a
longitudinal incision. Care will be taken to avoid the small lateral branches,
and silk ties will be used to isolate the vessel. The micocatheter will be
inserted following needle and guidewire placement in a modified Seldinger
fashion. The catheter will be secured in place using the distal silk tie.
Additional anchoring sutures will then be placed to avoid catheter dislodgement.
C. Carotid Artery Exposure for Proximal TRANS-SONIC Flow Probe (TSFP) placement
Carotid artery exposure will commence with an incision over the anterior border
of the sternocleidomastoid. The dissection will be carried through the skin and
subcutaneous tissue to the level of the platysma. The platysma will be divided
using electrocautery. The sternocleidomastoid will be identified and reflected
laterally. The jugular vein and its nodal packet will be identified. The jugular
vein will be reflected laterally along with the nodal packet to expose the
carotid sheath. Venous tributaries will be divided between heavy silk sutures if
required. The common carotid will be identified and circumferentially isolated
from surrounding tissues. A Rummel tourniquet will be positioned at the proximal
common carotid artery and large vessel-loop placed at the distal common carotid
artery. Next, the proximal TSFP will be secured into position. D. Laparotomy
with Splenectomy and Cystotomy The operation will commence with a standard
midline laparotomy incision. The dissection will be carried through the dermis
and subcutaneous tissue to the level of the fascia. The fascia will be entered
in the midline. The incision will be extended to the xiphoid cranially and to
the pubic symphysis caudally. An Omni retractor versus Balfour retractor will be
placed to retract the abdominal wall. The small bowel will be collected into a
bowel bag and placed toward the animals right-side. The spleen vasculature will
be isolated (does not required mid-line mobilization). The major and minor
splenic pedicles will be suture-ligated and splenectomy USUHS Form 3206 –
Revised February 2018 Previous versions are obsolete completed. Next, the
bladder will be visualized. A small cystotomy will be created sharply and
standard Foley catheter placed. The Foley will be sutured into position. E.
Infrarenal Abdominal Aortic Exposure for Distal TRANS-SONIC Flow Probe (TSFP)
placement A midline laparotomy incision will be completed in standard fashion.
The animal’s visceral contents will be mobilized in a similar fashion to human
aortic surgery in order to facilitate wide exposure of the infrarenal abdominal
aorta. This typically requires cranial mobilization of the transverse colon and
lateral retraction of the small bowel to the animal’s right side. The large
swine spleen will be removed as previously described. The small bowel will be
gathered into a bowel bag and placed within the right lateral aspect of the
animal’s peritoneal cavity. The retroperitoneal tissues overlying the aorta will
be divided exposing the underlying aorta. The renal arteries will be identified
and will serve as the cranial extent of the surgical field. Proximal and distal
control will be obtained through circumferential dissection and isolation. The
distal TSFP will be sized to the animals’ aorta at the trifurcation. Following
circumferential dissection and isolation, the flow probe will be placed. F.
Alternative Retroperitoneal Exposure of Right External Iliac Vessels (if
required) The iliac vessels will be exposed using a standard retroperitoneal
approach through a right transverse-oblique incision. Dissection will proceed in
standard fashion through the layers of the abdominal wall until the peritoneum
is identified. The peritoneal sac is mobilized away from the abdominal sidewall
using gentle blunt dissection. Once the iliac artery and vein are exposed, the
cephalad lymphatic tissue overlying the artery is swept medially. Proximal and
distal exposure is obtained and vessel loops are placed around the external
iliac artery. G. Percutaneous Common Femoral Artery Access Ultrasound-guided
percutaneous access will be achieved at the common femoral artery (RIGHT versus
LEFT) utilizing the 5-French micro-puncture system in a retrograde fashion
following radiographic identification of the femoral head. Next, the
micro-system sheath will be exchanged for a standard 7 French sheath. The 7 F
sheath will be secure into place with 3-0 nylon suture. Non-survival Exploratory
Laparotomy The non-survival exploratory laparotomy (NSEL) will be completed at
the index operation. The NSEL will be completed through the previous midline
laparotomy incision. Final laboratory evaluation (please see Outcome Measures
for list of variables) and physiologic/metabolic markers will be completed. The
animal will be euthanized. Next, tissue samples from the renal parenchyma,
myocardium, liver, small bowel, hind limb muscle and brain will be collected.
Outcome Measures Vital signs – including monitoring of central hemodynamics,
pulmonary artery pressure, cardiac output and cardiac index – and other
physiologic monitoring such as core body temperature, mean arterial pressure
(MAP), ventilation rate, heart-rate, LEFT heart function. CBC, chemistries,
arterial blood gases, measures of coagulation (ROTEM). Total blood loss will be
monitored in hemorrhaged animals and resuscitation requirements during recovery
phase of the experiments will also be measured. Mortality of the model and
within the various study groups will be assessed and all animals will undergo
necropsy (following death or euthanasia) with tissue samples from renal
parenchyma, myocardium, liver, small bowel, hind limb muscle and brain preserved
in both RNA. Later tissue preservation medium (gene mRNA transcript expression
analysis using RT-PCR) and in 10% buffered formalin solution for embedded in
USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are obsolete paraffin,
sectioned and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for histopathological
assessment by a pathologist blinded to the intervention. V.4.3.3. Post-surgical
Provisions: NA V.4.3.4. Location: LAM Surgery Room as assigned V.4.3.5.
Surgeons: Surgeon (Attending Vascular Surgeons) Todd Rasmussen, MD Joseph White,
MD V.4.3.6. Multiple Major Survival Operative Procedures: V.4.3.6.1. Procedures:
No additional procedures V.4.3.6.2. Scientific Justification: NA V.4.4. Animal
Manipulations: V.4.4.1. Injections: All injected agents will be Pharmaceutical
Grade products.The diluent used will be Normal Saline if needed. Drug Dose Conc
Route Approx Volume Frequenc y Site Needle size Ketamine 33 mg/kg 100 mg/mL IM
or SC 6-9 mL Once Thigh or neck 18-23ga 0.5-1 in Atropine 0.05 mg/kg 0.54 mg/mL
IM or SC 0.5-2 mL Once Thigh or neck 18-23ga 0.5-1 in Euthanasia solution 100
mg/kg Per label IV or IC 4-6 mL Once Catheter or IC 20-23ga 0.5-1 in (IC 20-
23ga 2-2.5”) Buprenorphine 0.01- 0.05mg/kg Per label IM or SC 1ml q4-12hrs Thigh
or neck 18-23ga 0.5-1 in Carprofen 2-4mg/kg 50mg/ml SC 3-4ml As needed q12hrs
Thigh or neck 18-23ga 0.5-1 in Meloxicam 0.1-0.4mg/kg 5mg/ml SC 1.5-2ml As
needed q 24hrs Thigh or neck 18-23ga 0.5-1 in Norepinephrine 0.01ug/kg/hr Per
label IV Calculated based on length of surgical procedures CRI Catheter 20-23ga
0.5-1 in V.4.4.2. Biosamples: CBC Clinical chemistries Arterial blood gases
Measures of coagulation (ROTEM) Tissue Collections: following death or
euthanasia, all animals will undergo necropsy with tissue samples collected from
the renal parenchyma, myocardium, liver, small bowel, hind limb muscle and brain
preserved in both RNALater and formalin. Tissues preserved in RNALater tissue
preservation medium will be assessed for gene mRNA transcript expression
analysis using RT-PCR and tissues preserved in 10% buffered formalin solution
will be embedded in USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions
are obsolete paraffin, sectioned and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
for histopathological assessment by a pathologist blinded to the intervention.
V.4.4.3. Adjuvants: None V.4.4.4. Monoclonal Antibody (MAbs) Production: None
V.4.4.5. Animal Identification: Cage cards, animal numbers/tags V.4.4.6.
Behavioral Studies: NA V.4.4.7. Other Procedures: All procedures described in
section V.4.3.2. V.4.4.8. Tissue Sharing: Any and all remaining available
tissues or samples from this protocol may be used by other investigators after
the appropriate necropsy has been completed. V.4.5. Study Endpoint: Experiment 1
(Non-survival experiment): Completion of surgical intervention with
identification of TDF. Animals will be euthanized in accordance with (IAW)
V.4.6. Estimated time from induction of anesthesia to euthanasia is 150 minutes.
Experiment 2 (Non-survival experiment): Completion of SICU intervention
following surgery with PRH. Animals will be euthanized IAW V.4.6. Estimated time
from induction of anesthesia to euthanasia is 360 minutes. V.4.6. Euthanasia:
Euthanasia methods will be IAW the most current AVMA Guidelines for the
Euthanasia of Animals. A pentobarbital based euthanasia solution will be
utilized for euthanasia (e.g. Euthasol, 100 mg/kg, 1mL/10pounds body weight)
while still under general anesthesia. The route of administration would either
be IV through ear vein or femoral vein or intracardiac. Death will be confirmed
with blood pressure-heart rate evaluation. V.5. Veterinary Care: V.5.1.
Husbandry Considerations: Except as noted below, routine animal husbandry will
be provided in accordance with LAM Husbandry SOPs for each species in this
protocol. V.5.1.1. Study Room: Building Assigned by LAM Room V.5.1.2. Special
Husbandry Provisions: Food Restriction: Pigs will receive no food after 1500 hrs
on the day before the procedure, with fasting from at least 12 hrs to no more
than 24 hrs prior to surgery. Fluid Restriction: None V.5.1.3. Exceptions: NA
V.5.2. Veterinary Medical Care: USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous
versions are obsolete V.5.2.1. Routine Veterinary Medical Care: Animals will be
observed and cared for by LAM personnel according to LAM SOPs. Health rounds are
conducted by veterinary technicians and by animal husbandry personnel twice a
day. Any animal deemed to be ill will be evaluated by the PI and/or a LAM
Veterinarian and treated or euthanized as deemed appropriate. V.5.2.2. Emergency
Veterinary Medical Care: All emergency, weekend, and holiday care is provided by
two animal husbandry technicians, one or more veterinary technicians, and an
on-call veterinarian. Essential husbandry procedures and health rounds are
conducted by LAM personnel once daily during weekend and holidays. V.5.2.3
Environmental Enrichment: Except as indicated below, all animals on this
protocol will be provided with routine environmental enrichment in accordance
with LAM SOPs and IACUC Policies. Examples include balls, toys and food
enrichment treats for large animal species. V.5.2.4. Enrichment Strategy: Prior
to experimentation, all animals on this protocol will be provided with routine
environmental enrichment in accordance with LAM SOPs and IACUC Policies.
V.5.3.5. Enrichment Restrictions: None USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018
Previous versions are obsolete VI. STUDY PERSONNEL QUALIFICATIONS AND TRAINING:
STUDY PERSONNEL QUALIFICATIONS/TRAINING Protocol Activity Name Qualifications
Specific Training USU IT Course/ IACUC/CITI Surgical procedures Todd Rasmussen
MD Vascular surgeon USU PI training 04/09/18; 5/15/2018 ALAS Working with the
IACUC; 5/15/2018 Introduction to Swine Surgical procedures Joseph White MD
Vascular surgeon USU PI training 05/14/18; 5/16/2018 ALAS Working with the
IACUC; 5/16/2018 Introduction to Swine Administration and tissue collections;
laboratory assessments Thomas Davis PhD 35+ years in small and large animal
model studies in DoD, academia and industry/biotech USU PI training 05/14/18;
5/15/2018 ALAS Working with the IACUC; 5/15/2018 Introduction to Swine Pre and
Intraoperative care, assistance with surgical procedures John Mares B.S.
Research Associate-III laboratory/Surgical Tech with an abundance of training in
pre and post operative care in NHP and Swine models USU PI training 05/14/18;
5/21/2018 ALAS Working with the IACUC; 5/21/2018 Introduction to Swine Pre and
Intraoperative care, assistance with surgical procedures Monet Schuler Research
Associate-I Surgical Technician; wealth of training in pre and post operative
emergency care for large animal USU PI training 05/14/18; 5/21/2018 ALAS Working
with the IACUC; 5/21/2018 Introduction to Swine VII.BIOHAZARDS/SAFETY: USUHS
Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are obsolete Biohazard
concerns include: zoonotic disease control, lab safety (large animals will be
used for this study), isoflurane exposure and waste gas safety, sharp instrument
safety and any formalin exposure and safety measures. Isoflurane, Telazol,
Ketamine, Xylazine, and Chlorprep will be stored and used in accordance with
USU/LAM policy. All anesthetic gases will be properly scavenged. Occupational
Health and Preventive Medicine guidelines and joint safety manual will be
followed. All personnel participating in this protocol will be advised of the
potential for zoonotic disease transmission. Investigators and Center for
Laboratory Animal Medicine personnel will follow established standard USU/DoD
Occupational Health and Preventive Medicine guidelines. “Occupational Health
Program”. All personnel working with animals will wear protective clothing
(scrubs, cap, mask, gloves, lab coat and shoe covers at a minimum). All
disposable safety items are deposited in appropriate waste receptacles prior to
departing the laboratory. All sharps are handled and disposed of in accordance
with USU standard procedures. A. Zoonotic Disease: B. Safety Hazards: B.
Isoflurane: C. Isoflurane Exposure: Safety procedures will be followed during
use to include scavenging and properly insufflating the animal’s endotracheal
tube cuff. D. Sharp Instruments: Syringes/needles used for injections will be
disposed of in an appropriate sharps container. Lab staff are properly trained
in the use of scalpels, syringes, and surgical instruments. E. Infectious Agents
that do not cause Zoonoses: VIII. ENCLOSURES: IX. EXTRAMUAL COLLABORATION: If
there are any collaborations with outside entities, please explain here. None.X.
ASSURANCES: As the Principal Investigator on this protocol, I acknowledge my
responsibilities and provide assurances for the following: A. Animal Use: The
animals authorized for use in this protocol will be used only in the activities
and in the manner described herein, unless a modification is specifically
approved by the IACUC prior to its implementation. B. Duplication of Effort: I
have made a reasonable, good faith effort to ensure that this protocol is not an
unnecessary duplication of previous experiments. C. Statistical Assurance: I
assure that I have consulted with an individual who is qualified to evaluate the
statistical design or strategy of this proposal, and that the “minimum number of
animals needed for scientific validity are used.” USUHS Form 3206 – Revised
February 2018 Previous versions are obsolete D. Biohazard\Safety: I have taken
into consideration and made the proper coordination regarding all applicable
rules and regulations concerning radiation protection, biosafety, recombinant
issues, and so forth, in the preparation of this protocol. E. Training: I verify
that the personnel performing the animal procedures / manipulations /
observations described in this protocol are technically competent and have been
properly trained to ensure that no unnecessary pain or distress will be caused
to the animals as a result of the procedures / manipulations. F. Training: I
verify that I have attended the USUHS Investigator/Animal User Training Course.
21 May 2018 Principle Investigator Signature Date G. Training: The following
personnel will attend the next USUHS Investigator/Animal User Training Course:
21 May 2018 Principle Investigator Signature Date H. Responsibility: I
acknowledge the inherent moral, ethical and administrative obligations
associated with the performance of this animal use protocol, and I assure that
all individuals associated with this project will demonstrate a concern for the
health, comfort, welfare, and well- being of the research animals. Additionally,
I pledge to conduct this study in the spirit of the fourth "R" that the DOD has
embraced, namely, "Responsibility" for implementing animal use alternatives
where feasible and conducting humane and lawful research. 21 May 2018 Principle
Investigator Signature Date I. Painful Procedure(s): I am conducting biomedical
experiments which may potentially cause more than momentary or slight pain or
distress to animals. This potential pain and/or distress WILL be relieved with
the use of anesthetics, analgesics and/or tranquilizers. I have considered
alternatives to such procedures; however, using the methods and sources
described in the protocol, I have determined that alternative procedures are not
available to accomplish the objectives of this proposed experiment. 21 May 2018
Principle Investigator Signature Date USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018
Previous versions are obsolete XI. PROTOCOL ABSTRACT: A. Animal Protocol Number:
Pending B. Animal Protocol Title: Partial resuscitative endovascular balloon
occlusion of the aorta (PREBOA) characterization of targeted distal flow and
permissive regional hypoperfusion in a porcine model (Sus scrofa domesticus) of
hemorrhagic shock C. Principal Investigator: Joseph M. White, MD FACS MAJ MC USA
Associate Program Director, Vascular Surgery Fellowship Assistant Professor of
Surgery The Department of Surgery at Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences and Walter Reed National Military Medical Center Office 301-295-8711 D.
Performing Organization: Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences E.
Funding: USU F. Objective and Approach: The objectives of this study are two
fold (1) to characterize distal aortic flow following PREBOA using the ER-REBOA,
PREBOA-PRO and Coda LP (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN) catheters in an
established, translational, swine model of lethal non-compressible torso
hemorrhage (NCTH) and (2) to identify the critical threshold at which Permissive
Regional Hypoperfusion (PRH) allows for reduced perfusion pressure promoting
clot stabilization (avoidance of hemorrhage), mitigates tissue ischemia and
reperfusion injury, and dampens supraphysiologic central and cerebral pressures.
Experiment 1: In a controlled prefixed bleed hemorrhagic shock model, evaluate
and characterize distal aortic flow rate capabilities with the ER-REBOA,
pREBOA-PRO and Coda LP (N= 8 swine per treatment arm; total 24 swine).
Experiment 2: Following complete aortic occlusion and PRH in a swine traumatic
liver amputation uncontrolled bleed hemorrhagic shock model (approximately 30%
of the liver followed by 1.5 minutes of free hemorrhage), evaluate and
characterize associated hemodynamics and metabolic/physiologic consequences of
TDF at 50 mL/min (Grp 1), 150 mL/min (Grp 2), 300 mL/min (Grp 3) and 500 mL/min
(Grp 4). N= 8 swine per treatment arm; total 32 swine. G. Indexing Terms
(Descriptors): Partial resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta
(PREBOA) Targeted Distal Flow (TDF) Permissive Regional Hypoperfusion (PRH)
Porcine model (Sus scrofa domesticus) of hemorrhagic shock USUHS Form 3206 –
Revised February 2018 Previous versions are obsolete References 1. Holcomb JB,
McMullin NR, Pearse L, et al. Causes of death in US Special Operations Forces in
the Global War on Terrorism. Ann Surgical 2007;245:986-991. 2. White JM,
Stannard A, Burkhardt GE, et al. The epidemiology of vascular injury in the wars
in Iraq and Afghanistan. Ann Surg. 2011 Jun;253(6):1184-9. 3. Eastridge BJ,
Mabry RL, Seguin P, Cantrell J, Tops T, Uribe P, Mallett O, Zubko T, Oetjen-
Gerdes L, Rasmussen TE, Butler FK, Kotwal RS, Holcomb JB, Wade C, Champion H,
Lawnick M, Moores L, Blackbourne LH. Death on the battlefield (2001-2011):
implications for the future of combat casualty care. J Trauma Acute Care Surg.
2012 Dec;73(6 Suppl 5):S431-7. 4. White JM, Cannon JW, Stannard A, Markov NP,
Spencer JR, Rasmussen TE. Endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta is
superior to resuscitative thoracotomy with aortic clamping in a porcine model of
hemorrhagic shock. Surgery. 2011 Sep;150(3):400-9. 5. DuBose JJ, Scalea T, et
al. The AAST Prospective Aortic Occlusion for Resuscitation in Trauma and Acute
Care Surgery (AORTA) Registry: Data on contemporary utilization and outcomes of
aortic occlusion and resuscitative balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA). J
Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016 Sep;81(3):409-19. 6. Williams TK, Neff LP, Johnson
MA, Ferencz SA, Davidson AJ, Russo RM, Rasmussen TE. Extending resuscitative
endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta: Endovascular variable aortic
control in a lethal model of hemorrhagic shock. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016
Aug;81(2):294-301. USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are
obsolete Appendix A Partial Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the
Aorta (P-REBOA) in a Pig Model (Sus scrota) Objectives: We investigated the
hemodynamic and physiologic effects of partial Resuscitative Endovascular
Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta ( REBOA .versus the current practiced complete
REBOA (c- REBOA ) technique. Methods: Fifteen Yorkshire-cross swine were
subjected to 25% total blood volume loss.They were randomized to either c- REBOA
, p- REBOA , or no intervention. Aortic pressures, visceral arterial pressures,
and serum makers of ischemia www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1022767 - 221 KB -
2015-08-14 Partial Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta
(P-REBOA) in a Pig Model (Sus scrofa) with ongoing Resuscitation INTRODUCTION:
Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta ( REBOA ) is limited
by the short duration of tolerable ischemia and resulting.reperfusion injury. P-
REBOA relies on regional permissive hypo-perfusion to limit exsanguination while
providing limited perfusion to distal tissue.beds. METHODS: An automated
extracorporeal circuit was developed to perform P- REBOA . The circuit was used
in a large animal model of highly lethal www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1024014 -
452 KB - 2016-01-08 A Novel Fluoroscopy-free, Resuscitative Endovascular Aortic
Balloon Occlusion System in a Model of Hemorrhagic Shock Michigan BACKGROUND:
Resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta ( REBOA ) is a
potentially lifesaving maneuver in the setting of.hemorrhagic shock. However,
emergent use of REBOA is limited by existing technology, which requires large
sheath arterial access and fluoroscopy- guided.balloon positioning. The
objectives of this study were to describe a new, fluoroscopy-free REBOA system
and to compare its efficacy to existing technology
www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA615139 - 1 MB - 2013-07-01 Partial Resuscitative
Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta (P-REBOA) in a Pig Model (Sus
scrofa) Background: Partial REBOA (P- REBOA ) may permit longer periods of
occlusion by allowing some degree of distal perfusion. However the ability of
this.procedure to limit exsanguination is unclear. We evaluated the impact of P-
REBOA on immediate survival in a highly lethal swine liver injury model.through
hemodilution. Randomized swine received no intervention (control), P- REBOA , or
complete REBOA (C- REBOA ). Central mean arterial pressure
www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1023092 - 173 KB - 2015-09-10 The Inflammatory
Sequelae of Aortic Balloon Occlusion in Hemorrhagic Shock of the aorta REBOA
Noncompressible torso hemorrhage Hemorrhagic shock Resuscitation a b s t r a c t
Background.Resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta ( REBOA )
is a hemorrhage control and resuscitative adjunct that has been demonstrated to
improve central perfusion during hemorrhagic shock.swine (Sus scrofa, weight 70
90 kg) underwent a 35% blood volume controlled hemorrhage followed by thoracic
aortic balloon occlusion of 30 (30 REBOA) www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA615153
- 1 MB - 2014-04-13 Aortic Balloon Occlusion is Effective in Controlling Pelvic
Hemorrhage endo- vascular aortic balloon occlusion ( REBOA ) of the distal aorta
in a porcine model of pelvic hemorrhage. Methods: Swine were entered into
three.impregnated gauze (Combat Gauze) (CG, n 1⁄4 7), or REBOA (n 1⁄4 7). The
protocol was repeated with a dilutional coagulopathy (CG-C, n 1⁄4 7, and REBOA
-C, n.the REBOA and CG groups (822 415 mL/min USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February
2018 Previous versions are obsolete versus 11 13 and 0.2 0.4 mL/min
respectively; P < 0.001). MAP following intervention (at 15 min) was the
www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA616881 - 408 KB - 2012-05-08 Assessing the
Hemodynamic Effects of Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta
(REBOA) in Traumatic Cardiac Arrest When Closed Chest Compressions are Augmented
by Directing the Area of Maximal Compression Over the Left Ventricle in a Swine
Model (sus scrofa) Assessing the hemodynamic effects of Resuscitative
Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta ( REBOA ) in traumatic cardiac
arrest when closed.survival (to 60 minutes), when performing chest compressions
(CC) directly over the left ventricle, are maintained if REBOA is added to the
www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1017235 - 163 KB - 2016-09-15 Clinical Study of
Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta (REBOA) for Severe
Pelvic Fracture and Intra Abdominal Hemorrhagic Shock using Continuous Vital
Signs AWARD NUMBER: W81XWH-15-1-0025 TITLE: Clinical Study of Resuscitative
Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta ( REBOA ) for Severe Pelvic. REBOA )
for Severe Pelvic Fracture & Intra- Abdominal Hemorrhagic Shock using Continuous
Vital Signs 5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 6. AUTHOR(S) 5d.sites. Resuscitative
balloon occlusion of the aorta ( REBOA ) has been clinically demonstrated to
stop bleeding below the diaphragm. It has the potential
www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1033989 - 2 MB - 2016-03-01 Technique Development
for a Polytrauma Model to Study Partial Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon
Occlusion of the Aorta (P-REBOA) in Swine (Sus scrofa) p- reboa (partial
resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta)
www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1024018 - 429 KB - 2016-06-01 Clinical Study of
Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta (REBOA) for Severe
Pelvic Fracture and Intra Abdominal Hemorrhagic Shock using Continuous Vital
Signs AWARD NUMBER: W81XWH-15-1-0025 TITLE: Clinical Study of Resuscitative
Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta ( REBOA ) for Severe
Pelvic.Hemorrhagic Shock 5b. GRANT NUMBER W81XWH-15-1-0025 Clinical Study of
Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta ( REBOA ) for
Severe.Placed REBOA Appendix B: Brief Clinical Summary and Review of Data
Capture 28 Process: Continuous Vital Signs (VS) and Videography Appendix C
www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1043372 - 2 MB - 2017-11-01 PDF The Effect Of
Supraphysiologic Blood Pressure on Traumatic Brain Injury and Proximal Tissue
Beds During Resuscitative Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta and Variable Aortic
Control in a Porcine Model (Sus scrofa) of Polytrauma. Mandatory) The Effect of
REBOA , Partial Aortic Occlusion and Aggressive Blood Transfusion on Traumatic
Brain Injury in a Swine Polytrauma Model.Objectives: Despite clinical reports of
poor outcomes, the degree to which REBOA exacerbates traumatic brain injury
(TBI) is not known. We hypothesized that.combined effects of increased proximal
mean arterial pressure (pMAP), carotid blood flow (Qcarotid), and intracranial
pressure (ICP) from REBOA would www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1032867 - 254 KB -
2017-04-27 PDF Physiologic Tolerance of Descending Thoracic Aortic Balloon
Occlusion in a Swine Model of Hemorrhagic Shock REBOA ) is an emerging technique
in trauma; however, the physiological sequelae are un- quantified. The
objectives of this study are to characterize the.burden of reperfusion and organ
USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are obsolete
dysfunction of REBOA incurred during 30 or 90 minutes of class IV shock in a
survivable porcine model of hemorrhage.Methods: Following the induction of
shock, animals were randomized into 4 groups (n=6): 30 minutes of shock alone
(30-Shock) or REBOA (30- REBOA ) and www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA568504 - 1
MB - 2013-01-10 PDF Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta
Improves Survival in Lethal Hemorrhage Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon
Occlusion of the Aorta ( REBOA ) using generic balloon catheters placed into the
descending aorta under fluoroscopy has.been used to treat hemorrhagic shock in
animal models. We tested a new non-image guided 7F ER- REBOA catheter (Pryor
Medical Arvada, CO) for its.potential to improve survival in a 100% lethal model
of hemorrhagic shock. We hypothesized that ER- REBOA , placed without
fluoroscopic guidance, improves www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA614875 - 55 KB -
2014-01-01 PDF The Effect of Infrarenal Aortic Balloon Occlusion on Weaning from
Supraceliac Aortic Balloon Occlusion in a Porcine Model (Sus scrofa) of
Hemorrhagic Shock Objectives: We sought to determine whether stepwise
reperfusion after supraceliac (Zone-1) REBOA by transitioning to infrarenal
(Zone-3) occlusion.hemorrhage of 25 blood volume, 45 minutes of Zone-1 REBOA ,
then resuscitation with shed blood. Critical care began with deflation of the
Zone-1 balloon in.all animals, and continued for six hours. Half of the animals
were randomly assigned to Zone-3 REBOA for an additional 45 minutes following
Zone-1 www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1035356 - 755 KB - 2017-06-15 PDF Assessing
Hemorrhage Severity with Continuous Automatic Heart-Rate-Complexity Monitoring
in Swine transfusion of shed blood (TSB, n=7); or endovascular balloon occlusion
of the aorta ( REBOA ) (Pryor Medical, Arvada, CO) for up to 60 minutes
followed.by TSB (n=21). Epinephrine boluses were given if mean arterial pressure
(MAP) < 40 mmHg in the TSB and REBOA groups. After resuscitative.7 in group TSB,
and 1/21 in group REBOA . SampEn and MSE decreased with hemorrhage and increased
after interventions (TSB or REBOA +TSB). www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA621471 -
56 KB - 2014-12-02 PDF Endovascular Perfusion Augmentation for Critical Care
(EPACC) as a Resuscitative Adjunct ina Swine (Sus scrofa) Polytrauma Model of
Ischemia Reperfusion Injury. Florida in January. This work has resulted in one
manuscript entitled Location Is Everything: The Hemodynamic Effects of REBOA in
Zone 1 versus Zone 3 of.wounded soldiers in hemorrhagic shock when REBOA is
going to be used. 12. PROTOCOL OUTCOME SUMMARY: (Please provide, in "ABSTRACT"
format, a summary.Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta ( REBOA ) is an
emerging technology to augment proximal blood pressure during the resuscitation
of patients with non www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1044086 - 874 KB - 2017-12-21
PDF The Effect of Hypothermia on Prolonged Distal Aortic Balloon Occlusion in a
Porcine Model (Sus scrofa) of Hemorrhage normothermia followed by 4 hours of
zone III REBOA , resuscitation with shed blood, and 3 hours of critical care.
Physiologic parameters were continuously.Conclusion: External cooling during
prolonged zone III REBOA decreased ischemic muscle injury and resulted in lower
compartment pressures following www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1038226 - 657 KB -
2017-06- 12 PDF USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are
obsolete Prospective Evaluation of the Correlation Between Torso Height and
Aortic Anatomy in Respect of a Fluoroscopy Free Aortic Balloon Occlusion System
endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta ( REBOA ) provides inflow control
and afterload support to patients with circulatory collapse from hemorrhage.7 It
can.deterioration, or as a substitute to open cross- clamping in the moribund
patient.8 REBOA is de- signed as a proactive maneuver, which can be in- serted
in.aortic balloon occlusion during endovascular aneurysm repair,12,13 many of
these constrains have been overcome. The use of REBOA in traumatic hemorrhagic
www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA614718 - 547 KB - 2014-06-01 PDF Endovascular
Therapy in Trauma of the aorta ( REBOA ) The most common cause of death from
aortic trauma remains hemorrhagic shock compounded by ongoing coagulopathy, thus
early.with REBOA [37–40]. Descriptions of its use for trauma are few [41–43],
but may be useful for control of non- compressible torso hemorrhage in the.these
areas, but the potential exists to train trauma surgeons in this technique. The
use of REBOA to obtain proximal control at the level of the
www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA620818 - 528 KB - 2014-11-23 PDF Technique
Refinement and Validation of Variable Aortic Occlusion via Extracorporeal Flow
Circuit in a Pig Model (Sus scrofa) of Uncontrolled Hemorrhage with Subsequent
Resuscitation and Critical Care Rasmussen TE. Extending REBOA : Endovascular
Variable Aortic Control (EVAC) in a Lethal Model of Hemorrhagic Shock. The
Journal of Trauma and Acute Care www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/AD1022574 - 698 KB
- 2016-07-24 Morphometric Analysis of Torso Arterial Anatomy with Implications
for Resuscitative Aortic Occlusion balloon occlusion of the aorta ( REBOA ) as
an adjunct for hemorrhagic shock. J Trauma. 2011;71:1869Y1872. 5. Sierink JC,
Saltzherr TP, Beenen LFM, Luitse JSK www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA614948 - 4
MB - 2013-08-01 PREBOA Pre-clinical Experience (large animal models) White JM,
Cannon JW, Stannard A, Markov NP, Spencer JR, Rasmussen TE. Endovascular balloon
occlusion of the aorta is superior to resuscitative thoracotomy with aortic
clamping in a porcine model of hemorrhagic shock. Surgery. 2011
Sep;150(3):400-9. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2011.06.010. The objective of this study
is to characterize resuscitative aortic balloon occlusion (BO) compared to
thoracotomy with aortic clamping in a model of hemorrhagic shock. A total of 18
swine (3 groups; 6 animals/group) were used in this study. Swine in class IV
shock underwent no aortic occlusion (NO), thoracotomy and clamp occlusion (CO),
or endovascular BO. Animals in the NO group underwent direct placement of a
temporary vascular shunt (TVS) at the injury site, whereas animals in the CO and
BO groups underwent aortic occlusion before TVS placement. Hemodynamic and
physiologic measures were collected.The central aortic pressure, carotid blood
flow and brain oxygenation as measured by oximetry increased in the CO and BO
groups compared to the NO group (P < .05). During resuscitation, the BO group
was less acidotic than the CO group (pH,7.35 vs 7.24; P < .05) with a lower
serum lactate level (4.27 vs 6.55; P < .05) and pCO2 level (43.5 vs 49.9; P <
.05). During resuscitation, the BO group required less fluid (667 mL vs 2,166
mL; P < .05) and norepinephrine (0 mcg vs 52.1 mcg; P < .05) than the CO group.
Resuscitative aortic BO increases central perfusion pressures with less
physiologic disturbance than thoracotomy with aortic clamping in a model of
hemorrhagic shock. USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are
obsolete Endovascular BO of the aorta should be explored further as an option in
the management of noncompressible torso hemorrhage (NCTH). Davidson AJ, Russo
RM, Ferencz SE, Cannon JW, Rasmussen TE, Neff LP, Johnson MA, Williams TK.
Incremental balloon deflation following complete resuscitative endovascular
balloon occlusion of the aorta results in steep inflection of flow and rapid
reperfusion in a large animal model of hemorrhagic shock. J Trauma Acute Care
Surg. 2017 Jul;83(1):139-143. doi: 10.1097/TA.0000000000001502. Study completed
in 2016. The objective of this study was to characterize the hemodynamic effect
of incremental balloon deflation following sustained REBOA, particularly with
respect to mean arterial pressure (MAP) and aortic flow. Hemorrhage shock was
simulated (25% total estimate blood volume). Next, complete aortic occlusion was
initiated with ER-REBOA for 60 minutes. This was followed by incremental balloon
deflation of 0.5cc every 30 seconds. Physiologic parameters and aortic flow
measurements were collected. Rapid increase in aortic flow during single-balloon
deflation was observed in all animals (664-1241 mL/min MAX). Key observations:
(1) a large proportion of aortic flow returned during a discrete time point
(i.e., deflation step); (2) the precise onset of this rapid return of flow was
variable and unpredictable across animals; (3) this rapid reintroduction of
aortic flow corresponded with a significant drop in MAP despite ongoing
aggressive blood resuscitation. Johnson MA, Davidson AJ, Russo RM, Ferencz SE,
Gotlib O, Rasmussen TE, Neff LP, Williams TK. Small changes, big effects: The
hemodynamics of partial and complete aortic occlusion to inform next generation
resuscitation techniques and technologies. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017
Jun;82(6):1106-1111. doi: 10.1097/TA.0000000000001446. The study hypothesized
that proximal blood pressure would be an inaccurate predictor of distal aortic
flow but that distal mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) would provide a more
accurate estimate of aortic flow at various levels of hemorrhage following
complete aortic occlusion. The aim of the study was to examine the relationship
between blood pressure and aortic flow at varying degrees of occlusion, across
iterative levels of hemorrhage. The seven animals used in this experiment had no
significant differences in baseline physiology. Following full clamp release at
both 10% and 20% hemorrhage, aortic flow was markedly increased relative to
baseline flow (10%: 1,599 ± 785 mL/min, p < 0.01; 20%: 1,070 ± 396 mL/min, p <
0.01), but increased flow was not evident after 30% and 40% hemorrhage (30%: 337
± 490 mL/min, p = 0.12; 40%: −83 ± 256 mL/min, p = 0.42). During aortic
occlusion, proximal MAP increased for all levels of hemorrhage when compared
with baseline. During occlusion, a distal MAP was present at all levels of
hemorrhage. The average distal MAP during occlusion was smaller after 40%
hemorrhage when compared with 10% hemorrhage (6.5 ± 2.6 mmHg vs 10.0 ± 1.7 mmHg,
Fig. 3C, p = 0.03). During clamp release, aortic flow was linearly related to
distal MAP across all levels of hemorrhage. Aortic flow increased at a rate of
30.7 ± 10.1 mL/min (40% hemorrhage) to 50.5 ± 10.8 mL/min (10% hemorrhage) for
every increase of 1 mm Hg in MAP, with no statistical differences between groups
(p > 0.05). Aortic flow was not linearly related to proximal MAP at any level of
hemorrhage. This study described the relationship between proximal blood
pressure, distal blood pressure, and distal aortic blood flow during aortic
occlusion and reperfusion at varying shock states. The study demonstrated that
supraphysiologic blood pressure occurs during occlusion in Classes I and II
shock, which has the potential to exacerbate injuries to the brain and create
increased stress on the cardiopulmonary system. Furthermore, the study
demonstrated that aortic hyperemia occurs during reperfusion from complete
occlusion in Classes I and II shock. Finally, the study demonstrated that aortic
blood USUHS Form 3206 – Revised February 2018 Previous versions are obsolete
flow has a linear relationship with distal blood pressure during reperfusion, a
critical concept that can be used to help transition from complete to pREBOA.
Russo RM, Neff LP, Lamb CM, Cannon JW, Galante JM, Clement NF, Grayson JK,
Williams TK. Partial Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta
in Swine Model of Hemorrhagic Shock. J Am Coll Surg. 2016 Aug;223(2):359-68.
doi: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2016.04.037. Epub 2016 Apr 29. The physiologic impact
of P-REBOA for sustained therapy in hemorrhagic shock has not been fully
characterized. In an effort to test this effect, we hypothesized P-REBOA would
preserve proximal aortic mean arterial pressure (MAP) closer to normal
physiologic levels and concurrently reduce distal ischemia and systemic
metabolic injury compared with C-REBOA in a porcine hemorrhagic shock model. In
this study, we have demonstrated that P-REBOA maintained proximal MAP at more
physiologically normal levels during intervention and after balloon deflation,
and avoided the hemodynamic extremes seen with C-REBOA. Partial REBOA also
simultaneously maintained enough distal perfusion to minimize organ ischemia and
the systemic burden of ischemia reperfusion injury compared with C-REBOA.
Maintaining proximal MAP within a normal physiologic range with P-REBOA can
reduce the incidence of cardiac dysfunction, cerebral edema, and respiratory
failure compared with sustained aortic occlusion. Partial REBOA can also offer a
way to extend the duration of intervention beyond what is currently possible
with C-REBOA. Russo RM, Williams TK, Grayson JK, Lamb CM, Cannon JW, Clement NF,
Galante JM, Neff LP. Extending the golden hour: Partial resuscitative
endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta in a highly lethal swine liver
injury model. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016 Mar;80(3):372-8; discussion 378-80.
doi: 10.1097/TA.0000000000000940. The objective of this study was to examine the
feasibility and effectiveness of sustained P- REBOA compared with complete REBOA
(CREBOA) in a porcine model of lethal hemorrhagic shock. In addition, this
investigation aimed to characterize the impact of P-REBOA compared with C-REBOA
on cMAP, distal hemorrhage, and markers of ischemia-reperfusion injury.
Procedural blood losswas quantified, and additional blood was removed to
standardize preinjury blood loss at 10% of the total circulating blood volume
(6.6 mL/kg) over 5 minutes. The liver was marked along the planned transection
plane, 2 cm to the left of Cantlie's line, to provide amputation of
approximately 80% of the left lateral lobe of the liver and 40% of the left
medial lobe of the liver (approximately 30% of the total liver volume) similar
to previous descriptions. The swine were then assigned via a block randomization
scheme to no intervention (controls), P-REBOA, or C-REBOA. In this study of
highly lethal uncontrolled hemorrhage in swine, P- REBOA proved effective at
maintaining a reliable and reproducible aortic pressure gradient over time,
despite ongoing hemorrhage. P-REBOA increased survival time beyond the golden
hour while maintaining physiologic cMAP and carotid blood flow. This
preservation of baseline proximal pressure and flow may theoretically reduce
injury to tissue beds above the point of aortic occlusion. USUHS Form 3206 –
Revised February 2018 Previous versions are obsolete Appendix B: PI NAME: COL
Todd Rasmussen, MD; USAF MC PROTCOL NUMBER: DRUGS AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Please list ALL drugs and controlled substances that will be used under this
protocol, indicating the DEA Schedule if known. Provide both the Approved Name
and the Proprietary Name of each drug if known. This list, once approved, will
be used by the IACUC and the USU Pharmacy to determine which drugs and
controlled substances can be supplied to the Principal Investigator. The
Pharmacy will not dispense to the PI any drug that is not included in this list.
Drug Name DEA Schedule (I, II, III, or IV) (Please give both approved and (if
known) Proprietary Names if possible) _____________________________
_________________________ Issued protocol number SUR-19-965. Conflicts of
interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors
declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no
financial support was received from any organization for the submitted work.
Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no financial
relationships at present or within the previous three years with any
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.
