---
reference_id: "PMID:25632202"
title: Prognostic value of KRAS and BRAF mutations in curatively resected colorectal cancer.
authors:
- Kadowaki S
- Kakuta M
- Takahashi S
- Takahashi A
- Arai Y
- Nishimura Y
- Yatsuoka T
- Ooki A
- Yamaguchi K
- Matsuo K
- Muro K
- Akagi K
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i4.1275
keywords:
- Aged
- Asian People/genetics
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "Colectomy/adverse effects, mortality"
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/ethnology, genetics, mortality, pathology, surgery"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Japan/epidemiology
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Microsatellite Instability
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Staging
- Phenotype
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- ras Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic value of KRAS and BRAF mutations in curatively resected colorectal cancer.
**Authors:** Kadowaki S, Kakuta M, Takahashi S, Takahashi A, Arai Y, Nishimura Y, Yatsuoka T, Ooki A, Yamaguchi K, Matsuo K, Muro K, Akagi K
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v21.i4.1275](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v21.i4.1275)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Jan 28;21(4):1275-83. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v21.i4.1275.

Prognostic value of KRAS and BRAF mutations in curatively resected colorectal 
cancer.

Kadowaki S(1), Kakuta M(1), Takahashi S(1), Takahashi A(1), Arai Y(1), Nishimura 
Y(1), Yatsuoka T(1), Ooki A(1), Yamaguchi K(1), Matsuo K(1), Muro K(1), Akagi 
K(1).

Author information:
(1)Shigenori Kadowaki, Akira Ooki, Kensei Yamaguchi, Division of 
Gastroenterology, Saitama Cancer Center, Saitama 362-0806, Japan.

AIM: To investigate the prognostic role of KRAS and BRAF mutations after 
adjustment for microsatellite instability (MSI) status in Japanese colorectal 
cancer (CRC) population.
METHODS: We assessed KRAS and BRAF mutations and MSI status in 813 Japanese 
patients with curatively resected, stage I-III CRC and examined associations of 
these mutations with disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) using 
uni- and multivariate Cox proportional hazards models.
RESULTS: KRAS and BRAF mutations were detected in 312 (38%) of 812 and 40 (5%) 
of 811 tumors, respectively. KRAS mutations occurred more frequently in females 
than in males (P=0.02), while the presence of BRAF mutations was significantly 
associated with the female gender (P=0.006), proximal tumor location (P<0.001), 
mucinous or poorly differentiated histology (P<0.001), and MSI-high tumors 
(P<0.001). After adjusting for relevant variables, including MSI status, KRAS 
mutations were associated with poorer DFS (HR=1.35; 95%CI: 1.03-1.75) and OS 
(HR=1.46; 95%CI: 1.09-1.97). BRAF mutations were poor prognostic factors for DFS 
(HR=2.20; 95%CI: 1.19-4.06) and OS (HR=2.30; 95%CI: 1.15-4.71). Neither the BRAF 
by MSI interaction test nor the KRAS by MSI interaction test yielded 
statistically significant results for DFS and OS.
CONCLUSION: KRAS and BRAF mutations are associated with inferior survival, 
independent of MSI status, in Japanese patients with curatively resected CRC.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i4.1275
PMCID: PMC4306173
PMID: 25632202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]