---
reference_id: "PMID:25604084"
title: "Mutations in COA3 cause isolated complex IV deficiency associated with neuropathy, exercise intolerance, obesity, and short stature."
authors:
- Ostergaard E
- Weraarpachai W
- Ravn K
- Born AP
- Jønson L
- Duno M
- Wibrand F
- Shoubridge EA
- Vissing J
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102914
keywords:
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cyclooxygenase 1/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics, pathology"
- "Dwarfism/genetics, pathology"
- Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics
- Exercise/physiology
- Exome
- Female
- Fibroblasts
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic"
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Obesity/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in COA3 cause isolated complex IV deficiency associated with neuropathy, exercise intolerance, obesity, and short stature.
**Authors:** Ostergaard E, Weraarpachai W, Ravn K, Born AP, Jønson L, Duno M, Wibrand F, Shoubridge EA, Vissing J
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102914](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102914)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2015 Mar;52(3):203-7. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102914. Epub
2015  Jan 20.

Mutations in COA3 cause isolated complex IV deficiency associated with 
neuropathy, exercise intolerance, obesity, and short stature.

Ostergaard E(1), Weraarpachai W(2), Ravn K(1), Born AP(3), Jønson L(4), Duno 
M(1), Wibrand F(1), Shoubridge EA(5), Vissing J(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Human Genetics and Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of 
Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Genomic Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Human Genetics and Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(6)Department of Neurology and Neuromuscular Research Unit, University of 
Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: We investigated a subject with an isolated cytochrome c oxidase 
(COX) deficiency presenting with an unusual phenotype characterised by 
neuropathy, exercise intolerance, obesity, and short stature.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Blue-native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE) 
analysis showed an almost complete lack of COX assembly in subject fibroblasts, 
consistent with the very low enzymatic activity, and pulse-labelling 
mitochondrial translation experiments showed a specific decrease in synthesis of 
the COX1 subunit, the core catalytic subunit that nucleates assembly of the 
holoenzyme. Whole exome sequencing identified compound heterozygous mutations 
(c.199dupC, c.215A>G) in COA3, a small inner membrane COX assembly factor, 
resulting in a pronounced decrease in the steady-state levels of COA3 protein. 
Retroviral expression of a wild-type COA3 cDNA completely rescued the COX 
assembly and mitochondrial translation defects, confirming the pathogenicity of 
the mutations, and resulted in increased steady-state levels of COX1 in control 
cells, demonstrating a role for COA3 in the stabilisation of this subunit. COA3 
exists in an early COX assembly complex that contains COX1 and other COX 
assembly factors including COX14 (C12orf62), another single pass transmembrane 
protein that also plays a role in coupling COX1 synthesis with holoenzyme 
assembly. Immunoblot analysis showed that COX14 was undetectable in COA3 subject 
fibroblasts, and that COA3 was undetectable in fibroblasts from a COX14 subject, 
demonstrating the interdependence of these two COX assembly factors.
CONCLUSIONS: The mild clinical course in this patient contrasts with nearly all 
other cases of severe COX assembly defects that are usually fatal early in life, 
and underscores the marked tissue-specific involvement in mitochondrial 
diseases.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102914
PMID: 25604084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]