---
reference_id: "PMID:36630841"
title: "Prevalence of dysphagia in patients with multiple sclerosis: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Mirmosayyeb O
- Ebrahimi N
- Shekarian A
- Afshari-Safavi A
- Shaygannejad V
- Barzegar M
- Bagherieh S
journal: J Clin Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2023.01.006
keywords:
- Humans
- "Multiple Sclerosis/complications, epidemiology"
- "Deglutition Disorders/epidemiology, etiology"
- Prevalence
- Bibliometrics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of dysphagia in patients with multiple sclerosis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Mirmosayyeb O, Ebrahimi N, Shekarian A, Afshari-Safavi A, Shaygannejad V, Barzegar M, Bagherieh S
**Journal:** J Clin Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jocn.2023.01.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2023.01.006)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurosci. 2023 Feb;108:84-94. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2023.01.006. Epub
2023  Jan 9.

Prevalence of dysphagia in patients with multiple sclerosis: A systematic review
and meta-analysis.

Mirmosayyeb O(1), Ebrahimi N(2), Shekarian A(2), Afshari-Safavi A(3),
Shaygannejad V(1), Barzegar M(1), Bagherieh S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran; Isfahan Neurosciences Research Center, Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(2)Isfahan Neurosciences Research Center, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Faculty of Health, North
Khorasan University of Medical Sciences, Bojnurd, Iran.
(4)Isfahan Neurosciences Research Center, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. Electronic address: sarabagherieh20@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Dysphagia is a major disorder observed in patients with multiple
sclerosis (MS), yet different prevalence rates are reported for it. Therefore,
we designed this study to estimate the pooled prevalence of dysphagia in
patients with MS.
METHOD: We searched PubMed, Scopus, EMBASE, Web of Science, and gray literature
including references from the identified studies, reviews studies, and
conference abstracts which were published up to May 2022. Articles that were
relevant to our topic and could provide information regarding the prevalence of
dysphagia among MS patients were included; however, articles with self-report
screening strategies were excluded.
RESULTS: The literature search found 997 articles. After eliminating duplicates,
672 articles remained. Two conference abstracts were included for final
analysis. A total of 11,266 MS cases and 5047 MS patients with dysphagia were
included in the meta-analysis. The overall prevalence of dysphagia across all 54
studies was 44.8 % (95 % CI: [40.4 %-49.2 %]), with a high level of
heterogeneity between countries (Q=; I2 = 94.96 %; p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The results of this systematic review shows that the prevalence of
dysphagia in MS patients is 45% which is greatly higher compared to the general
population.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2023.01.006
PMID: 36630841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
