---
reference_id: "PMID:31885560"
title: Characterising SRD5A2 Gene Variants in 37 Indonesian Patients with 5-Alpha-Reductase Type 2 Deficiency.
authors:
- Marzuki NS
- Idris FP
- Kartapradja HD
- Harahap AR
- Batubara JRL
journal: Int J Endocrinol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1155/2019/7676341
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterising SRD5A2 Gene Variants in 37 Indonesian Patients with 5-Alpha-Reductase Type 2 Deficiency.
**Authors:** Marzuki NS, Idris FP, Kartapradja HD, Harahap AR, Batubara JRL
**Journal:** Int J Endocrinol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2019/7676341](https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/7676341)

## Content

1. Int J Endocrinol. 2019 Dec 1;2019:7676341. doi: 10.1155/2019/7676341.
eCollection 2019.

Characterising SRD5A2 Gene Variants in 37 Indonesian Patients with
5-Alpha-Reductase Type 2 Deficiency.

Marzuki NS(1)(2), Idris FP(1), Kartapradja HD(1), Harahap AR(1)(2), Batubara
JRL(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology, Jakarta 10430, Indonesia.
(2)Doctoral Program in Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta 10430,
Indonesia.
(3)Department of Child Health, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta 10430, Indonesia.

The 5-alpha-reductase type 2 deficiency (5ARD2) is an autosomal recessive
condition associated with impairment in the conversion of testosterone to
dihydrotestosterone. This condition leads to undervirilisation in 46,XY
individuals. To date, there have been more than 100 variations identified in the
gene responsible for 5ARD2 development (steroid 5-alpha-reductase 2, SRD5A2).
However, few studies have examined the molecular characterisation of Indonesian
5ARD2 cases. In the current study, we analysed 37 subjects diagnosed with 46,XY
DSD (disorders of sex development) with confirmed variations in the SRD5A2 gene.
We examined results from testosterone/dihydrotestosterone (T/DHT) and urinary
etiocholanolone/androsterone (Et/An) ratios, as well as from molecular and
clinical analyses. Twelve variants in the SRD5A2 gene were identified, and 6 of
which were novel, namely, c.34-38delGinsCCAGC, p.Arg50His, p.Tyr136 ∗ ,
p.Gly191Arg, p.Phe194Ile, and p.Ile253Val variants. Moreover, we determined that
20 individuals contained harmful mutations, while the remaining 17 variants were
benign. Those containing harmful mutations exhibited more severe phenotypes with
median external genitalia masculinisation scores (EMS) of 3 (1.5-9) and were
more likely to be diagnosed at a later age, reared as female, and virilised at
pubertal age. In addition, the respective sensitivities for detecting severe
5ARD2 cases using T/DHT (cutoff: 10) and urinary Et/An ratios (cutoff: 0.95)
were 85% and 90%, whereas mild cases were only identified with 64.7% and 47.1%
sensitivity, respectively. Although we were unable to identify clear
correlations between genotypic and phenotypic characteristics in this study, we
clearly showed that individuals who were homozygous or compound heterozygous for
any of the harmful mutations were more likely to exhibit classic 5ARD2
phenotypes, lower EMS, female assignment at birth, and virilisation during
puberty. These results serve to inform the development of improved clinical and
molecular 5ARD2 diagnostic approaches, specifically in Indonesian patients.

Copyright © 2019 Nanis S. Marzuki et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/7676341
PMCID: PMC6914983
PMID: 31885560

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no personal or financial
conflicts of interest to declare.
