---
reference_id: "PMID:27052163"
title: PRRT2 Is a Key Component of the Ca(2+)-Dependent Neurotransmitter Release Machinery.
authors:
- Valente P
- Castroflorio E
- Rossi P
- Fadda M
- Sterlini B
- Cervigni RI
- Prestigio C
- Giovedì S
- Onofri F
- Mura E
- Guarnieri FC
- Marte A
- Orlando M
- Zara F
- Fassio A
- Valtorta F
- Baldelli P
- Corradi A
- Benfenati F
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.03.005
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium Signaling
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Exocytosis
- "Hippocampus/cytology, metabolism"
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Neurotransmitter Agents/metabolism
- "Presynaptic Terminals/metabolism, physiology"
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- Synaptic Potentials
- Synaptic Vesicles/metabolism
- Synaptosomal-Associated Protein 25/metabolism
- Synaptotagmins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PRRT2 Is a Key Component of the Ca(2+)-Dependent Neurotransmitter Release Machinery.
**Authors:** Valente P, Castroflorio E, Rossi P, Fadda M, Sterlini B, Cervigni RI, Prestigio C, Giovedì S, Onofri F, Mura E, Guarnieri FC, Marte A, Orlando M, Zara F, Fassio A, Valtorta F, Baldelli P, Corradi A, Benfenati F
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2016.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.03.005)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2016 Apr 5;15(1):117-131. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.03.005. Epub
2016  Mar 24.

PRRT2 Is a Key Component of the Ca(2+)-Dependent Neurotransmitter Release 
Machinery.

Valente P(1), Castroflorio E(2), Rossi P(1), Fadda M(1), Sterlini B(2), Cervigni 
RI(3), Prestigio C(2), Giovedì S(1), Onofri F(1), Mura E(3), Guarnieri FC(3), 
Marte A(1), Orlando M(4), Zara F(5), Fassio A(2), Valtorta F(3), Baldelli P(2), 
Corradi A(1), Benfenati F(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Genova, Viale Benedetto 
XV, 3, 16132 Genova, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Genova, Viale Benedetto 
XV, 3, 16132 Genova, Italy; Center for Synaptic Neuroscience and Technology, 
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Largo Rosanna Benzi 10, 16132 Genova, Italy.
(3)San Raffaele Scientific Institute and Vita Salute University, Via Olgettina 
58, 20132 Milano, Italy.
(4)Center for Synaptic Neuroscience and Technology, Istituto Italiano di 
Tecnologia, Largo Rosanna Benzi 10, 16132 Genova, Italy.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Via Gerolamo Gaslini, 
5, 16148 Genova, Italy.
(6)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Genova, Viale Benedetto 
XV, 3, 16132 Genova, Italy; Center for Synaptic Neuroscience and Technology, 
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Largo Rosanna Benzi 10, 16132 Genova, Italy. 
Electronic address: fabio.benfenati@iit.it.

Comment in
    Epilepsy Curr. 2017 May-Jun;17(3):165-166. doi: 10.5698/1535-7511.17.3.165.

Heterozygous mutations in proline-rich transmembrane protein 2 (PRRT2) underlie 
a group of paroxysmal disorders, including epilepsy, kinesigenic dyskinesia, and 
migraine. Most of the mutations lead to impaired PRRT2 expression, suggesting 
that loss of PRRT2 function may contribute to pathogenesis. We show that PRRT2 
is enriched in presynaptic terminals and that its silencing decreases the number 
of synapses and increases the number of docked synaptic vesicles at rest. 
PRRT2-silenced neurons exhibit a severe impairment of synchronous release, 
attributable to a sharp decrease in release probability and Ca(2+) sensitivity 
and associated with a marked increase of the asynchronous/synchronous release 
ratio. PRRT2 interacts with the synaptic proteins SNAP-25 and synaptotagmin 1/2. 
The results indicate that PRRT2 is intimately connected with the Ca(2+)-sensing 
machinery and that it plays an important role in the final steps of 
neurotransmitter release.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.03.005
PMCID: PMC4826441
PMID: 27052163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]