---
reference_id: "PMID:28081767"
title: "Hidradenitis suppurativa and perianal Crohn disease: differential diagnosis."
authors:
- Bassas-Vila J
- González Lama Y
journal: Actas Dermosifiliogr
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S0001-7310(17)30006-6
keywords:
- Adalimumab/therapeutic use
- "Anus Diseases/etiology, surgery"
- Biological Factors/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/diagnosis, etiology"
- Colonoscopy
- "Crohn Disease/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, surgery"
- "Cutaneous Fistula/etiology, surgery"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, surgery"
- Humans
- "Intestinal Fistula/etiology, surgery"
- Organ Specificity
- Phenotype
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/antagonists & inhibitors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hidradenitis suppurativa and perianal Crohn disease: differential diagnosis.
**Authors:** Bassas-Vila J, González Lama Y
**Journal:** Actas Dermosifiliogr (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0001-7310(17)30006-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0001-7310(17)30006-6)

## Content

1. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2016 Sep;107 Suppl 2:27-31. doi: 
10.1016/S0001-7310(17)30006-6.

Hidradenitis suppurativa and perianal Crohn disease: differential diagnosis.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Bassas-Vila J(1), González Lama Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Servei de Dermatologia, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, 
Badalona, Barcelona, España. Electronic address: julibassas@gmail.com.
(2)Unidad de Enfermedad Inflamatoria Intestinal, Servicio de Gastroenterología y 
Hepatología, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Majadahonda, Madrid, 
España.

The first description of perianal fistulas and complications in Crohn disease 
was made 75 years ago by Penner and Crohn. Published studies have subsequently 
confirmed that perianal fistulas are the most common manifestations of 
fistulising Crohn disease. Hidradenitis suppurativa was described in 1854 by a 
French surgeon, Aristide Verneuil. It is a chronic, inflammatory, recurrent and 
debilitating disease of the pilosebaceous follicle, that usually manifests after 
puberty with deep, painful and inflamed lesions in the areas of the body with 
apocrine glands, usually the axillary, inguinal and anogenital regions. The 
differential diagnosis between hidradenitis suppurativa and Crohn disease can be 
challenging, especially when the disease is primarily perianal. When they occur 
simultaneously, hidradenitis suppurativa and Crohn disease show severe 
phenotypes and patients can respond to anti-tumour necrosis factor therapy, 
although adalimumab is currently the only treatment with demonstrated efficacy 
in hidradenitis suppurativa and Crohn disease. In addition, there is sometimes a 
need for different complementary surgical procedures.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier España, S.L.U. y AEDV. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0001-7310(17)30006-6
PMID: 28081767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]