---
reference_id: "PMID:26974157"
title: Astrocytes are central in the pathomechanisms of vanishing white matter.
authors:
- Dooves S
- Bugiani M
- Postma NL
- Polder E
- Land N
- Horan ST
- van Deijk AL
- van de Kreeke A
- Jacobs G
- Vuong C
- Klooster J
- Kamermans M
- Wortel J
- Loos M
- Wisse LE
- Scheper GC
- Abbink TE
- Heine VM
- van der Knaap MS
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1172/JCI83908
keywords:
- Animals
- "Astrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Coculture Techniques
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Eukaryotic Initiation Factor-2B/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Leukoencephalopathies/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Oligodendroglia/metabolism, pathology"
- "White Matter/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Astrocytes are central in the pathomechanisms of vanishing white matter.
**Authors:** Dooves S, Bugiani M, Postma NL, Polder E, Land N, Horan ST, van Deijk AL, van de Kreeke A, Jacobs G, Vuong C, Klooster J, Kamermans M, Wortel J, Loos M, Wisse LE, Scheper GC, Abbink TE, Heine VM, van der Knaap MS
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI83908](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI83908)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2016 Apr 1;126(4):1512-24. doi: 10.1172/JCI83908. Epub 2016 Mar
 14.

Astrocytes are central in the pathomechanisms of vanishing white matter.

Dooves S, Bugiani M, Postma NL, Polder E, Land N, Horan ST, van Deijk AL, van de 
Kreeke A, Jacobs G, Vuong C, Klooster J, Kamermans M, Wortel J, Loos M, Wisse 
LE, Scheper GC, Abbink TE, Heine VM, van der Knaap MS.

Vanishing white matter (VWM) is a fatal leukodystrophy that is caused by 
mutations in genes encoding subunits of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 
2B (eIF2B). Disease onset and severity are codetermined by genotype. White 
matter astrocytes and oligodendrocytes are almost exclusively affected; however, 
the mechanisms of VWM development remain unclear. Here, we used VWM mouse 
models, patients' tissue, and cell cultures to investigate whether astrocytes or 
oligodendrocytes are the primary affected cell type. We generated 2 mouse models 
with mutations (Eif2b5Arg191His/Arg191His and Eif2b4Arg484Trp/Arg484Trp) that 
cause severe VWM in humans and then crossed these strains to develop mice with 
various mutation combinations. Phenotypic severity was highly variable and 
dependent on genotype, reproducing the clinical spectrum of human VWM. In all 
mutant strains, impaired maturation of white matter astrocytes preceded onset 
and paralleled disease severity and progression. Bergmann glia and retinal 
Müller cells, nonforebrain astrocytes that have not been associated with VWM, 
were also affected, and involvement of these cells was confirmed in VWM 
patients. In coculture, VWM astrocytes secreted factors that inhibited 
oligodendrocyte maturation, whereas WT astrocytes allowed normal maturation of 
VWM oligodendrocytes. These studies demonstrate that astrocytes are central in 
VWM pathomechanisms and constitute potential therapeutic targets. Importantly, 
astrocytes should also be considered in the pathophysiology of other white 
matter disorders.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI83908
PMCID: PMC4811153
PMID: 26974157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]