---
reference_id: "PMID:23770102"
title: Creatine deficiency syndrome. A treatable myopathy due to arginine-glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency.
authors:
- Nouioua S
- Cheillan D
- Zaouidi S
- Salomons GS
- Amedjout N
- Kessaci F
- Boulahdour N
- Hamadouche T
- Tazir M
journal: Neuromuscul Disord
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2013.04.011
keywords:
- "Amidinotransferases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Child
- "Creatine/blood, urine"
- "Developmental Disabilities/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Glycine/analogs & derivatives, blood, urine"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- "Speech Disorders/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Creatine deficiency syndrome. A treatable myopathy due to arginine-glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency.
**Authors:** Nouioua S, Cheillan D, Zaouidi S, Salomons GS, Amedjout N, Kessaci F, Boulahdour N, Hamadouche T, Tazir M
**Journal:** Neuromuscul Disord (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nmd.2013.04.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmd.2013.04.011)

## Content

1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2013 Aug;23(8):670-4. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2013.04.011. Epub
 2013 Jun 14.

Creatine deficiency syndrome. A treatable myopathy due to arginine-glycine
amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency.

Nouioua S(1), Cheillan D, Zaouidi S, Salomons GS, Amedjout N, Kessaci F,
Boulahdour N, Hamadouche T, Tazir M.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie and Laboratoire de Neurosciences, CHU Mustapha Bacha,
Université d'Alger, Algeria.

We report two sisters, aged 11 and 6years, with AGAT deficiency syndrome (OMIM
612718) which is the least common creatine deficiency syndrome. They were born
full-term to consanguineous parents and had moderate developmental delay.
Examination showed an important language delay, a progressive proximal muscular
weakness in the lower limbs with Gowers sign and myopathic electromyography.
Investigations revealed undetectable guanidinoacetate and low level of creatine
in plasma and urine, characteristic findings of AGAT deficiency syndrome. Brain
magnetic resonance spectroscopy showed a markedly reduced level of creatine.
Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GATM) gene sequencing revealed a homozygous
missense mutation in exon 4:c.608A>C, (p.Tyr203Ser). Thirteen months after
beginning the treatment with oral creatine monohydrate 200mg/kg/day, then
400mg/kg/day, there was a dramatic improvement in muscle strength with Gowers
sign disappearance in both patients, and a mild improvement in language and
cognitive functions. AGAT deficiency syndrome should be considered in all
patients with language retardation and cognitive impairment associated to a
myopathy of unknown etiology such that early diagnosis must lead to creatine
supplementation to cure the myopathy and improve language and cognitive
function.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2013.04.011
PMID: 23770102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
