---
reference_id: "PMID:36543887"
title: "Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a neurodegenerative disorder poised for successful therapeutic translation."
authors:
- Mead RJ
- Shan N
- Reiser HJ
- Marshall F
- Shaw PJ
journal: Nat Rev Drug Discov
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41573-022-00612-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a neurodegenerative disorder poised for successful therapeutic translation.
**Authors:** Mead RJ, Shan N, Reiser HJ, Marshall F, Shaw PJ
**Journal:** Nat Rev Drug Discov (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41573-022-00612-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41573-022-00612-2)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2023 Mar;22(3):185-212. doi: 10.1038/s41573-022-00612-2. 
Epub 2022 Dec 21.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a neurodegenerative disorder poised for 
successful therapeutic translation.

Mead RJ(1)(2)(3), Shan N(4), Reiser HJ(4), Marshall F(5), Shaw PJ(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Health, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(2)Neuroscience Institute, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(3)Keapstone Therapeutics, The Innovation Centre, Broomhall, Sheffield, UK.
(4)Aclipse Therapeutics, Radnor, PA, US.
(5)MSD UK Discovery Centre, Merck, Sharp and Dohme (UK) Limited, London, UK.
(6)Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Health, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. 
pamela.shaw@sheffield.ac.uk.
(7)Neuroscience Institute, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. 
pamela.shaw@sheffield.ac.uk.
(8)Keapstone Therapeutics, The Innovation Centre, Broomhall, Sheffield, UK. 
pamela.shaw@sheffield.ac.uk.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating disease caused by 
degeneration of motor neurons. As with all major neurodegenerative disorders, 
development of disease-modifying therapies has proven challenging for multiple 
reasons. Nevertheless, ALS is one of the few neurodegenerative diseases for 
which disease-modifying therapies are approved. Significant discoveries and 
advances have been made in ALS preclinical models, genetics, pathology, 
biomarkers, imaging and clinical readouts over the last 10-15 years. At the same 
time, novel therapeutic paradigms are being applied in areas of high unmet 
medical need, including neurodegenerative disorders. These developments have 
evolved our knowledge base, allowing identification of targeted candidate 
therapies for ALS with diverse mechanisms of action. In this Review, we discuss 
how this advanced knowledge, aligned with new approaches, can enable effective 
translation of therapeutic agents from preclinical studies through to clinical 
benefit for patients with ALS. We anticipate that this approach in ALS will also 
positively impact the field of drug discovery for neurodegenerative disorders 
more broadly.

© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41573-022-00612-2
PMCID: PMC9768794
PMID: 36543887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R.J.M. is cofounder of and holds shares in 
Keapstone Therapeutics, collaborates and receives funding from BenevolentAI, 
Quell Therapeutics, Sosei Heptares and MSD, is a consultant to Aclipse 
Therapeutics, has shares in Aclipse One Inc and is an inventor on patents 
related to M102. N.S. is an employee and shareholder of Aclipse Therapeutics. 
H.J.R. is the chairman of the Board of Aclipse Therapeutics. F.M. is an employee 
and shareholder of Merck and Co. P.J.S. is an advisory board member and 
consultant for Biogen, Aclipse Therapeutics, Quell Therapeutics, BenevolentAI, 
QurAlis, Astex, GeniUS and Eli Lilly and collaborates with and receives research 
funding from Quell Therapeutics, Aclipse Therapeutics, Pfizer and SwanBio. She 
is a cofounder of and holds shares in Keapstone Therapeutics and holds shares in 
Aclipse One Inc. She is an inventor on patents related to low-dose IL-2, SRSF1 
and M102. Support for clinical trials participation in the last five years has 
been received from Biogen, Alexion, Orion Pharma, WAVE, the EU Horizon 2020 
programme and UK NIHR.