---
reference_id: "PMID:39691005"
title: "Sporadic Late-Onset Nemaline Rod Myopathy: An Interesting Case."
authors:
- Narwal A
- Mann M
- Srivastava AK
- Sharma MC
journal: Neurol India
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4103/ni.ni_1008_21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sporadic Late-Onset Nemaline Rod Myopathy: An Interesting Case.
**Authors:** Narwal A, Mann M, Srivastava AK, Sharma MC
**Journal:** Neurol India (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4103/ni.ni_1008_21](https://doi.org/10.4103/ni.ni_1008_21)

## Content

1. Neurol India. 2024 Nov 1;72(6):1270-1272. doi: 10.4103/ni.ni_1008_21. Epub
2024  Dec 17.

Sporadic Late-Onset Nemaline Rod Myopathy: An Interesting Case.

Narwal A(1), Mann M(2), Srivastava AK(2), Sharma MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.
(2)Department of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

Sporadic late-onset nemaline rod myopathy is a rare, acquired, sub-acute, 
adult-onset myopathy characterized by proximal muscle weakness and nemaline rods 
in the myofibers. In contrast to its congenital form, the prevalence in adult 
population is comparatively rare. Herein, we report a case of 60-year-old male 
who presented with insidious onset proximal muscle weakness with myopathic 
pattern on electromyography. Histopathological examination showed type 1 and 2 
muscle fiber atrophy with minimal chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate. Modified 
Gomori trichrome staining revealed granular deposits in the myofibers. 
Ultrastructure examination showed numerous nemaline rods in the myofibers; 
hence, the diagnosis of sporadic late-onset nemaline myopathy was rendered. Its 
association with monoclonal protein has been reported in the past. One should be 
aware of this rare entity as without correct diagnosis, there can be treatment 
failure and unfavorable outcome.

Copyright © 2024 Neurology India, Neurological Society of India.

DOI: 10.4103/ni.ni_1008_21
PMID: 39691005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]