---
reference_id: "PMID:24815737"
title: De novo oligoclonal expansions of circulating plasmablasts in active and relapsing IgG4-related disease.
authors:
- Mattoo H
- Mahajan VS
- Della-Torre E
- Sekigami Y
- Carruthers M
- Wallace ZS
- Deshpande V
- Stone JH
- Pillai S
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2014.03.034
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Antibody Diversity/genetics
- "Antibody-Producing Cells/drug effects, physiology"
- "Antigens, CD/metabolism"
- Autoantigens/immunology
- "B-Lymphocytes/drug effects, physiology"
- Cell Proliferation
- Clone Cells
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Immune System Diseases/immunology, therapy"
- Immunoglobulin G/metabolism
- Lymphocyte Activation
- "Lymphocytosis/immunology, therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Recurrence
- Rituximab
- "Somatic Hypermutation, Immunoglobulin/genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De novo oligoclonal expansions of circulating plasmablasts in active and relapsing IgG4-related disease.
**Authors:** Mattoo H, Mahajan VS, Della-Torre E, Sekigami Y, Carruthers M, Wallace ZS, Deshpande V, Stone JH, Pillai S
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2014.03.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2014.03.034)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 Sep;134(3):679-87. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2014.03.034.  Epub 2014 May 6.

De novo oligoclonal expansions of circulating plasmablasts in active and
relapsing IgG4-related disease.

Mattoo H(1), Mahajan VS(1), Della-Torre E(1), Sekigami Y(1), Carruthers M(1),
Wallace ZS(1), Deshpande V(1), Stone JH(2), Pillai S(3).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.
Electronic address: jhstone@partners.org.
(3)Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.
Electronic address: pillai@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a poorly understood, multiorgan,
chronic inflammatory disease characterized by tumefactive lesions, storiform
fibrosis, obliterative phlebitis, and accumulation of IgG4-expressing plasma
cells at disease sites.
OBJECTIVE: The role of B cells and IgG4 antibodies in IgG4-RD pathogenesis is
not well defined. We evaluated patients with IgG4-RD for activated B cells in
both disease lesions and peripheral blood and investigated their role in disease
pathogenesis.
METHODS: B-cell populations from the peripheral blood of 84 patients with active
IgG4-RD were analyzed by using flow cytometry. The repertoire of B-cell
populations was analyzed in a subset of patients by using next-generation
sequencing. Fourteen of these patients were longitudinally followed for 9 to 15
months after rituximab therapy.
RESULTS: Numbers of CD19(+)CD27(+)CD20(-)CD38(hi) plasmablasts, which are
largely IgG4(+), are increased in patients with active IgG4-RD. These expanded
plasmablasts are oligoclonal and exhibit extensive somatic hypermutation, and
their numbers decrease after rituximab-mediated B-cell depletion therapy; this
loss correlates with disease remission. A subset of patients relapse after
rituximab therapy, and circulating plasmablasts that re-emerge in these subjects
are clonally distinct and exhibit enhanced somatic hypermutation. Cloning and
expression of immunoglobulin heavy and light chain genes from expanded
plasmablasts at the peak of disease reveals that disease-associated IgG4
antibodies are self-reactive.
CONCLUSIONS: Clonally expanded CD19(+)CD27(+)CD20(-)CD38(hi) plasmablasts are a
hallmark of active IgG4-RD. Enhanced somatic mutation in activated B cells and
plasmablasts and emergence of distinct plasmablast clones on relapse indicate
that the disease pathogenesis is linked to de novo recruitment of naive B cells
into T cell-dependent responses by CD4(+) T cells, likely driving a
self-reactive disease process.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2014.03.034
PMCID: PMC4149918
PMID: 24815737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that
they have no relevant conflict of interest
