---
reference_id: "PMID:32409695"
title: The genetic and clinical characteristics of aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency in mainland China.
authors:
- Wen Y
- Wang J
- Zhang Q
- Chen Y
- Bao X
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-020-0770-6
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/drug therapy, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Aromatic-L-Amino-Acid Decarboxylases/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- China
- Cohort Studies
- Demography
- Dopamine Agonists/therapeutic use
- Exons
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genetic Variation
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Introns
- Male
- Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Muscle Hypotonia/complications, genetics"
- Mutation
- Pyridoxine/therapeutic use
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genetic and clinical characteristics of aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency in mainland China.
**Authors:** Wen Y, Wang J, Zhang Q, Chen Y, Bao X
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-020-0770-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-020-0770-6)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2020 Sep;65(9):759-769. doi: 10.1038/s10038-020-0770-6. Epub 2020
 May 14.

The genetic and clinical characteristics of aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
deficiency in mainland China.

Wen Y(1), Wang J(1), Zhang Q(1), Chen Y(1), Bao X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.
zwhang@pku.edu.cn.

Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency (AADCD) is a rare
neurotransmitter metabolic disorder caused by DDC gene mutations, which leads to
the metabolic disturbance of dopamine and serotonin. Most of the reported cases
came from Taiwan China, but patients from mainland China were seldomly reported.
The current study was the largest AADCD patient cohort from mainland China.
Twenty-three patients with clinical features of AADCD and DDC gene variants were
recruited. A total of 16 DDC variants were identified in this study, of which
four variants (c.2T>C, c.277A>G, c.1021+1G>A, c.565G>T) were never reported
previously. The intronic variant c.714+4A>T was the most common one, with an
allele frequency of 45.7%. And patients carried this intronic variant presented
with severe clinical manifestations, all of whom were bedridden. In this study,
the average onset age was 3.61 ± 1.28 months and the average age of diagnosis
was 12.91 ± 5.62 months. Early onset hypotonia, oculogyric crises, and autonomic
symptoms such as excessive sweating, nasal congestion and profuse nasal, and
oropharyngeal secretions, were common in our patients. Eighteen patients (78.3%)
got various degree of improvement after using pyridoxine monotherapy or
different combination of pyridoxine, dopamine agonists, and monoamine oxidase
(MAO) inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-020-0770-6
PMCID: PMC7387242
PMID: 32409695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
