---
reference_id: "PMID:22940089"
title: Phenotypic expression of Bardet-Biedl syndrome in patients homozygous for the common M390R mutation in the BBS1 gene.
authors:
- Cox KF
- Kerr NC
- Kedrov M
- Nishimura D
- Jennings BJ
- Stone EM
- Sheffield VC
- Iannaccone A
journal: Vision Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2012.08.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic expression of Bardet-Biedl syndrome in patients homozygous for the common M390R mutation in the BBS1 gene.
**Authors:** Cox KF, Kerr NC, Kedrov M, Nishimura D, Jennings BJ, Stone EM, Sheffield VC, Iannaccone A
**Journal:** Vision Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.visres.2012.08.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visres.2012.08.005)

## Content

1. Vision Res. 2012 Dec 15;75:77-87. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2012.08.005. Epub 2012
 Aug 24.

Phenotypic expression of Bardet-Biedl syndrome in patients homozygous for the 
common M390R mutation in the BBS1 gene.

Cox KF(1), Kerr NC, Kedrov M, Nishimura D, Jennings BJ, Stone EM, Sheffield VC, 
Iannaccone A.

Author information:
(1)University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Hamilton Eye Institute, 
Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

PURPOSE: To characterize the phenotype of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) patients 
homozygous for the BBS1 M390R mutation.
METHODS: Three patients [PT1, F, 27 years old (yo) at last examination, 14-year 
follow-up (F/U) PT2, F, 15-yo PT3, M, 15-yo, both 1-year F/U] underwent eye 
exams, Goldmann visual fields (GVFs), dark- (DA) and light-adapted (LA) 
electroretinograms (ERGs), spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) 
and fundus autofluorescence (FAF). Vision and systemic history were also 
collected.
RESULTS: All patients had night blindness, hyperopic astigmatism, ptosis or mild 
blepharospasm, foot polydactyly, 5th finger clinodactyly, history of headaches, 
and variable, diet-responsive obesity. Two had asthma, PT1 was developmentally 
delayed, PT2 had Asperger-like symptoms, and PT3 had normal cognition. At age 
14, acuity was 20/100 in PT1, who had nystagmus since age 2, 20/40 in PT2 and 
20/30 in PT3. By 27yo PT1 progressed to 20/320, by 15 yo PT2 was 20/60 and PT3 
remained stable. PT1 had well preserved peripheral GVFs, with minimal 
progression over 10 years of F/U. PT2 and PT3 presented with ring scotomas and 
I4e<5°. All patients had severe generalized visual sensitivity depression. ERGs 
were consistently recordable (also rod ERG in PT3 after 60 min DA), but 
progressed to non-recordable in PT1. Mixed DA ERGs exhibited electronegativity. 
In PT3, this was partly due to a bleaching effect during bright-flash DA 
averaging, partly to ON≫OFF LA response compromise. PT2 and 3 had, on SD-OCTs, 
generalized macular thinning, normal retinal lamination, and widespread 
photoreceptor outer/inner segment attenuation except foveally, and multiple 
rings of abnormal FAF configuring a complex bull's eye-pattern. PT1 had macular 
atrophy. All patients also had peripapillary nerve fiber layer thickening.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed phenotype matches very closely that reported in 
patients by Azari et al. (IOVS 2006) and in the Bbs1-M390R knock-in mouse model, 
and expands it to the characterization of important ERG response characteristics 
that provide insight in the pathogenesis of retinopathy in these patients. Our 
findings confirm the consistent pathogenicity of the BBS1 M390R mutation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.visres.2012.08.005
PMID: 22940089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]