---
reference_id: "PMID:19648123"
title: Mutation in IFT80 in a fetus with the phenotype of Verma-Naumoff provides molecular evidence for Jeune-Verma-Naumoff dysplasia spectrum.
authors:
- Cavalcanti DP
- Huber C
- Sang KH
- Baujat G
- Collins F
- Delezoide AL
- Dagoneau N
- Le Merrer M
- Martinovic J
- Mello MF
- Vekemans M
- Munnich A
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.069468
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation in IFT80 in a fetus with the phenotype of Verma-Naumoff provides molecular evidence for Jeune-Verma-Naumoff dysplasia spectrum.
**Authors:** Cavalcanti DP, Huber C, Sang KH, Baujat G, Collins F, Delezoide AL, Dagoneau N, Le Merrer M, Martinovic J, Mello MF, Vekemans M, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2009.069468](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2009.069468)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2011 Feb;48(2):88-92. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.069468. Epub 2009 Jul
 30.

Mutation in IFT80 in a fetus with the phenotype of Verma-Naumoff provides 
molecular evidence for Jeune-Verma-Naumoff dysplasia spectrum.

Cavalcanti DP(1), Huber C, Sang KH, Baujat G, Collins F, Delezoide AL, Dagoneau 
N, Le Merrer M, Martinovic J, Mello MF, Vekemans M, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V.

Author information:
(1)Perinatal Genetic Program, Department of Medical Genetic, FCM, UNICAMP, 
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. denisepc@unicamp.br

BACKGROUND: The lethal group of short-rib polydactyly (SRP) includes type I 
(Saldino-Noonan; MIM 263530), type II (Majewski; MIM 263520), type III 
(Verma-Naumoff; MIM 263510) and type IV (Beemer-Langer; MIM 269860). Jeune and 
Ellis-van Creveld dysplasias also used to be classified in the SRP group. 
Recently, mutations in a gene encoding a protein involved in intraflagellar 
transport, IFT80, have been identified in 3/39 patients with Jeune dysplasia but 
no extraskeletal manifestation.
METHODS: Because of clinical and radiological similarities between Jeune 
dysplasia and the other lethal types of SRP, the authors decided to investigate 
IFT80 in a cohort of fetuses with the lethal forms of SRP (Majewski, 
Verma-Naumoff and Beemer-Langer) and antenatally diagnosed cases of Jeune 
dysplasia. Fifteen fetuses were identified. A double-molecular approach was 
adopted. For consanguineous families and for those with recurrent sibs, a 
haplotype analysis around the gene locus was first performed, and, for the 
others, all the coding exons of IFT80 were directly sequenced.
RESULTS: Using the haplotype approach for two families, the authors excluded the 
IFT80 region as a candidate for them. Direct sequencing of IFT80 in the other 13 
cases showed a G-to-C transversion in exon 8 (G241R) in only one SRP case 
closely related to the type III phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings show that mutations in IFT80 can also be responsible 
for a lethal form of SRP and provide the molecular basis for the 
Jeune-Verma-Naumoff dysplasia spectrum.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2009.069468
PMID: 19648123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]