---
reference_id: "PMID:28235999"
title: "Concise review of the management of iatrogenic emesis using cannabinoids: emphasis on nabilone for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting."
authors:
- Pergolizzi JV Jr
- Taylor R
- LeQuang JA
- Zampogna G
- Raffa RB
journal: Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00280-017-3257-1
keywords:
- "Antiemetics/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects
- Cannabinoids/therapeutic use
- "Cannabis/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Dronabinol/adverse effects, analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Iatrogenic Disease
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Vomiting/chemically induced, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Concise review of the management of iatrogenic emesis using cannabinoids: emphasis on nabilone for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.
**Authors:** Pergolizzi JV Jr, Taylor R, LeQuang JA, Zampogna G, Raffa RB
**Journal:** Cancer Chemother Pharmacol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00280-017-3257-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00280-017-3257-1)

## Content

1. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2017 Mar;79(3):467-477. doi:
10.1007/s00280-017-3257-1. Epub 2017 Feb 24.

Concise review of the management of iatrogenic emesis using cannabinoids:
emphasis on nabilone for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.

Pergolizzi JV Jr(1), Taylor R(1), LeQuang JA(2), Zampogna G(1), Raffa RB(3).

Author information:
(1)NEMA Research, Inc., 868 106th Ave North, Naples, FL, 34108, USA.
(2)NEMA Research, Inc., 868 106th Ave North, Naples, FL, 34108, USA.
joann@leqmedical.com.
(3)University of Arizona College of Pharmacy, Tucson, AZ, USA.

Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) is a prevalent, distressing, and
burdensome side effect of cancer chemotherapy. It is estimated to affect the
majority of patients receiving certain anti-cancer drug regimens and can be
treatment-limiting, even for life-saving medications. Despite seemingly numerous
options, such as antimuscarinic anticholinergics, antihistamines, 5-HT3 receptor
antagonists, dopamine receptor antagonists, and neurokinin-1 receptor
antagonists, preventative therapies are often inadequately effective,
particularly for "delayed CINV"-leaving an important unmet clinical need.
Cannabinoid receptor agonists, by virtue of their unique mechanism of action and
efficacy and safety data reported in clinical trials, appear to offer a useful
additional option. The mechanistic value of cannabinoids has been well known for
many years, but these agents may have been underutilized in the past because of
the notoriety and legal status of marijuana. While botanical marijuana contains
nearly 500 components, including the psychoactive tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),
nabilone is an established, single-entity synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist
that has become the focus of renewed interest. We review the basic pharmacology
and clinical trial data of nabilone for use in prophylaxis and treatment of
CINV.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-017-3257-1
PMID: 28235999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
