---
reference_id: "PMID:38519239"
title: "Executive summary of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease: known knowns and known unknowns."
authors:
- Levin A
- Ahmed SB
- Carrero JJ
- Foster B
- Francis A
- Hall RK
- Herrington WG
- Hill G
- Inker LA
- Kazancıoğlu R
- Lamb E
- Lin P
- Madero M
- McIntyre N
- Morrow K
- Roberts G
- Sabanayagam D
- Schaeffner E
- Shlipak M
- Shroff R
- Tangri N
- Thanachayanont T
- Ulasi I
- Wong G
- Yang CW
- Zhang L
- Robinson KA
- Wilson L
- Wilson RF
- Kasiske BL
- Cheung M
- Earley A
- Stevens PE
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2023.10.016
keywords:
- Humans
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/diagnosis, therapy, complications"
- Kidney Transplantation/adverse effects
- Renal Dialysis/adverse effects
- Nephrology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Executive summary of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease: known knowns and known unknowns.
**Authors:** Levin A, Ahmed SB, Carrero JJ, Foster B, Francis A, Hall RK, Herrington WG, Hill G, Inker LA, Kazancıoğlu R, Lamb E, Lin P, Madero M, McIntyre N, Morrow K, Roberts G, Sabanayagam D, Schaeffner E, Shlipak M, Shroff R, Tangri N, Thanachayanont T, Ulasi I, Wong G, Yang CW, Zhang L, Robinson KA, Wilson L, Wilson RF, Kasiske BL, Cheung M, Earley A, Stevens PE
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2023.10.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2023.10.016)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2024 Apr;105(4):684-701. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2023.10.016.

Executive summary of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the 
Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease: known knowns and known 
unknowns.

Levin A(1), Ahmed SB(2), Carrero JJ(3), Foster B(4), Francis A(5), Hall RK(6), 
Herrington WG(7), Hill G(8), Inker LA(9), Kazancıoğlu R(10), Lamb E(11), Lin 
P(12), Madero M(13), McIntyre N(14), Morrow K(15), Roberts G(16), Sabanayagam 
D(17), Schaeffner E(18), Shlipak M(19), Shroff R(20), Tangri N(21), 
Thanachayanont T(22), Ulasi I(23), Wong G(17), Yang CW(24), Zhang L(25), 
Robinson KA(26), Wilson L(26), Wilson RF(26), Kasiske BL(27), Cheung M(28), 
Earley A(28), Stevens PE(29).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada. Electronic address: alevin@providencehealth.bc.ca.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Department of Medicine, Queensland Children's Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia.
(6)Division of Nephrology, Duke School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(7)Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(8)Manchester, UK.
(9)Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(10)Division of Nephrology, Bezmialem Vakif University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(11)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, East Kent Hospitals University NHS 
Foundation Trust, Canterbury, UK.
(12)Director of Primary Care Initiatives, Canadian Heart Research Center, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(13)Division of Nephrology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chavéz, 
Mexico City, Mexico.
(14)London Health Sciences Centre-Victoria Hospital, Western University, London, 
Ontario, Canada.
(15)Department of Nutrition and Exercise Science, Bastyr University, Kenmore, 
Washington, USA; Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, University of 
Washington, Kenmore, Washington, USA.
(16)UW Center for Dialysis Innovation & Kidney Research Institute, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.
(17)Western Renal Service, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(18)Division of Nephrology and Intensive Care Medicine, Charité 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(19)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(20)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, UCL Great Ormond Street Hospital 
Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(21)Division of Nephrology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(22)Division of Nephrology, Bhumirajanagarindra Kidney Institute, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(23)Department of Medicine, Ituku-Ozalla Campus, University of Nigeria, Enugu, 
Nigeria.
(24)Division of Nephrology, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(25)Renal Division, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(26)The Johns Hopkins University Evidence-based Practice Center, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(27)Hennepin County Medical Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, USA.
(28)KDIGO, Brussels, Belgium.
(29)Department of Nephrology, Kent Kidney Care Centre, East Kent Hospitals 
University NHS Foundation Trust, Canterbury, UK. Electronic address: 
pstevens@nhs.net.

The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Clinical Practice 
Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) 
updates the KDIGO 2012 guideline and has been developed with patient partners, 
clinicians, and researchers around the world, using robust methodology. This 
update, based on a substantially broader base of evidence than has previously 
been available, reflects an exciting time in nephrology. New therapies and 
strategies have been tested in large and diverse populations that help to inform 
care; however, this guideline is not intended for people receiving dialysis nor 
those who have a kidney transplant. The document is sensitive to international 
considerations, CKD across the lifespan, and discusses special considerations in 
implementation. The scope includes chapters dedicated to the evaluation and risk 
assessment of people with CKD, management to delay CKD progression and its 
complications, medication management and drug stewardship in CKD, and optimal 
models of CKD care. Treatment approaches and actionable guideline 
recommendations are based on systematic reviews of relevant studies and 
appraisal of the quality of the evidence and the strength of recommendations 
which followed the "Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and 
Evaluation" (GRADE) approach. The limitations of the evidence are discussed. The 
guideline also provides practice points, which serve to direct clinical care or 
activities for which a systematic review was not conducted, and it includes 
useful infographics and describes an important research agenda for the future. 
It targets a broad audience of people with CKD and their healthcare, while being 
mindful of implications for policy and payment.

Copyright © 2023 Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2023.10.016
PMID: 38519239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]