---
reference_id: "PMID:28347805"
title: β2-glycoprotein I and its antibodies involve in the pathogenesis of the antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Bai A
journal: Immunol Lett
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2017.03.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# β2-glycoprotein I and its antibodies involve in the pathogenesis of the antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Bai A
**Journal:** Immunol Lett (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.imlet.2017.03.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imlet.2017.03.013)

## Content

1. Immunol Lett. 2017 Jun;186:15-19. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2017.03.013. Epub 2017 
Mar 24.

β2-glycoprotein I and its antibodies involve in the pathogenesis of the 
antiphospholipid syndrome.

Bai A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanchang 
University, Nanchang 330006, China. Electronic address: baiap@163.com.

The antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is characterized by venous or arterial 
thrombosis, and associated with dysfunctions of endothelial cells and monocytes. 
β2-glycoprotein I is a phospholipid-binding glycoprotein, and its antibodies 
have been reported to correlate strongly with thrombotic risk and play putative 
role in the pathogenesis of APS, whereas the biofunctions of 
anti-β2-glycoprotein I antibodies remain largely uncertain. It is noted that 
β2-glycoprotein I exhibits direct interaction with membrane Toll-like receptors, 
and through this interaction, the complex of β2-glycoprotein I and its 
antibodies induces intracellular signals via Toll-like receptors, resulting in 
activation of endothelial cells and monocytes, and expression of proinflammatory 
cytokines. In this review, we further discussed the recent findings of 
β2-glycoprotein I/antibody complex. Once activated by β2-glycoprotein I/antibody 
and their signals, endothelial cells release microparticle/extracellular 
vesicles which can further stimulate the surrounding rest cells with 
procoagulant and pro-inflammatory properties in a paracrine or/and autocrine 
manner. Novel evidence of β2-glycoprotein I/antibody complex bioactivities may 
provide insight into the molecular mechanisms that the complex regulates cell 
function and involves in APS pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2017 European Federation of Immunological Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2017.03.013
PMID: 28347805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]