---
reference_id: "PMID:38855058"
title: Bibliometric Analysis of Cough Variant Asthma from 1993 to 2022.
authors:
- Zhu Z
- Wu J
- Chen W
- Luo F
- Zhao X
journal: J Asthma Allergy
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2147/JAA.S452097
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bibliometric Analysis of Cough Variant Asthma from 1993 to 2022.
**Authors:** Zhu Z, Wu J, Chen W, Luo F, Zhao X
**Journal:** J Asthma Allergy (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2147/JAA.S452097](https://doi.org/10.2147/JAA.S452097)

## Content

1. J Asthma Allergy. 2024 Jun 4;17:517-537. doi: 10.2147/JAA.S452097. eCollection
 2024.

Bibliometric Analysis of Cough Variant Asthma from 1993 to 2022.

Zhu Z(#)(1)(2), Wu J(#)(1)(2), Chen W(1)(2)(3), Luo F(1)(2), Zhao X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Children's Health and Chinese Medicine, Nanjing 
University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Liyang Branch of Jiangsu Provincial Hospital of Chinese Medicine, Changzhou, 
People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Cough variant asthma (CVA) is a chronic inflammatory disease 
characterized by recurrent coughing, a prevalent cause of chronic cough in 
children and adults. As a unique form of asthma, researchers have recently 
become increasingly interested in developing effective diagnostic and treatment 
methods. Currently, there has been no bibliometric analysis in CVA. Therefore, 
this study aims to enrich this knowledge network by examining the current 
development status, research focal points, and emerging trends in this field.
METHODS: Articles and reviews on CVA published between 1993 and 2022 were 
collected from the Web of Science Core Collection (WoSCC) database. Relevant 
data from the reports were extracted, and collaborative network analysis was 
performed using CiteSpace and VOSviewer software.
RESULTS: 772 articles were included in this study, indicating a significant 
increase since 2019. The countries with the highest output are China, Japan. The 
Journal of Asthma and Pulmonary Pharmacology Therapeutics emerged as the most 
prolific journals in this field. Keyword analysis revealed 22 clusters, 
highlighting airway inflammation, airway hyperresponsiveness, and eosinophil as 
the main focus and frontier of research on CVA.
CONCLUSION: From the visual analysis results, the research of CVA is still in 
the development stage, and there is no unified definition of pathogenesis, 
diagnostic criteria and treatment strategies. Therefore, researchers and teams 
should actively carry out cross-institutional and cross-regional cooperation, 
expand cooperation areas, and carry out high-quality clinical research in the 
future.

© 2024 Zhu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JAA.S452097
PMCID: PMC11162189
PMID: 38855058

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.