---
reference_id: PMID:38370438
title: "Impact of sleep disruption on cognitive function in patients with postacute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection: initial findings from a Neuro-COVID-19 clinic."
authors:
- Reid KJ
- Ingram LT
- Jimenez M
- Orban ZS
- Abbott SM
- Grimaldi D
- Knutson KL
- Zee PC
- Koralnik IJ
- Maas MB
journal: Sleep Adv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/sleepadvances/zpae002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of sleep disruption on cognitive function in patients with postacute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection: initial findings from a Neuro-COVID-19 clinic.
**Authors:** Reid KJ, Ingram LT, Jimenez M, Orban ZS, Abbott SM, Grimaldi D, Knutson KL, Zee PC, Koralnik IJ, Maas MB
**Journal:** Sleep Adv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/sleepadvances/zpae002](https://doi.org/10.1093/sleepadvances/zpae002)

## Content

1. Sleep Adv. 2024 Jan 12;5(1):zpae002. doi: 10.1093/sleepadvances/zpae002. 
eCollection 2024.

Impact of sleep disruption on cognitive function in patients with postacute 
sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection: initial findings from a Neuro-COVID-19 clinic.

Reid KJ(1)(2), Ingram LT(1)(2), Jimenez M(1), Orban ZS(1), Abbott SM(1)(2), 
Grimaldi D(1)(2), Knutson KL(1)(2), Zee PC(1)(2), Koralnik IJ(1), Maas MB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Davee Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Center for Circadian and Sleep Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Fatigue, brain fog, and sleep disturbance are among the most 
common symptoms of postacute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC). We sought 
to determine the impact of sleep disruption on cognition and quality of life in 
patients with neurologic manifestations of PASC (Neuro-PASC).
METHODS: Thirty-nine patients were recruited from Neuro-COVID-19 clinic. Mean 
age was 48.1 years, 71.8% were female, and 82% were never hospitalized for 
COVID-19. Patients were evaluated via clinical assessment, quality-of-life 
measures in domains of cognitive function, fatigue, sleep disturbance, anxiety, 
and depression, NIH Toolbox cognitive tests, and 7 days of wrist actigraphy.
RESULTS: The median number of neurologic symptoms attributed to PASC was 6, with 
brain fog being the most common in 89.7%. Regarding non-neurologic symptoms, 
94.9% complained of fatigue and 74.4% of insomnia. Patients reported significant 
impairment in all quality-of-life domains and performed worse in a task of 
attention compared to a normative US population. Actigraphy showed Neuro-PASC 
patients had lower sleep efficiency, longer sleep latency (both p < 0.001), and 
later sleep midpoint (p = 0.039) compared to 71 age-matched healthy controls 
with no PASC history. Self-reported cognitive symptoms correlated with the 
severity of fatigue (p < 0.001), anxiety (p = 0.05), and depression (p < 0.01). 
Objective evidence of sleep disruption measured by wakefulness after sleep 
onset, sleep efficiency, and latency were associated with decreased performance 
in attention and processing speed.
CONCLUSION: Prospective studies including larger populations of patients are 
needed to fully determine the interplay of sleep disruption on the cognitive 
function and quality of life of patients with PASC.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Sleep 
Research Society.

DOI: 10.1093/sleepadvances/zpae002
PMCID: PMC10873785
PMID: 38370438