---
reference_id: "PMID:40095936"
title: "Cystathionine β-Synthase Deficiency in the E-HOD Registry-Part II: Dietary and Pharmacological Treatment."
authors:
- Morris AAM
- Sokolová J
- Pavlíková M
- Gleich F
- Kölker S
- Dionisi-Vici C
- Baumgartner MR
- Hannibal L
- Blom HJ
- Huemer M
- Kožich V
- E‐HOD Consortium
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12844
keywords:
- Humans
- "Homocystinuria/diet therapy, drug therapy, diagnosis, blood"
- Registries
- Betaine/therapeutic use
- Female
- Pyridoxine/therapeutic use
- Child
- Adult
- Male
- "Cystathionine beta-Synthase/deficiency, genetics"
- Methionine
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Infant
- Homocysteine/blood
- Young Adult
- "Infant, Newborn"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cystathionine β-Synthase Deficiency in the E-HOD Registry-Part II: Dietary and Pharmacological Treatment.
**Authors:** Morris AAM, Sokolová J, Pavlíková M, Gleich F, Kölker S, Dionisi-Vici C, Baumgartner MR, Hannibal L, Blom HJ, Huemer M, Kožich V, E‐HOD Consortium
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12844](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12844)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2025 Jan;48(1):e12844. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12844.

Cystathionine β-Synthase Deficiency in the E-HOD Registry-Part II: Dietary and 
Pharmacological Treatment.

Morris AAM(1), Sokolová J(2), Pavlíková M(3), Gleich F(4), Kölker S(4), 
Dionisi-Vici C(5), Baumgartner MR(6), Hannibal L(7), Blom HJ(8), Huemer M(6)(9), 
Kožich V(2); E‐HOD Consortium.

Collaborators: Arantes RR, Blanco FA, Baghdasaryan A, Ballhausen D, 
Blasco-Alonso J, Brouwers M, Bueno M, Burgos R, Villarroya EC, Cano A, Couce ML, 
Crushell E, Heras JL, Ficicioglu C, Jiménez MCG, Gaspar A, Leguina DG, Chapman 
KA, Chien YH, Janssen MCH, Ješina P, Kaufman C, Lachmann R, Lavigne C, Lund AM, 
Lüsebrink N, Maillot F, Martins AM, Olivas SM, Mention K, Miñana IV, Mochel F, 
Monavari A, Moreira S, Moreno CA, Mundy H, Murphy E, Olivieri G, Paquay S, 
Peña-Quintana L, Ramadža DP, Porras-Hurtado GL, Quijada-Fraile P, 
Redonnet-Vernhet I, Rennings A, Pons MR, Santra S, Servais A, Schiaffino MC, 
Schiff M, Schwahn BC, Schwartz IVD, Sremba LJ, Stainforth C, Stepien KM, 
Sykut-Cegielska J, Terry A, Piñera IV, Williams M, Zeman J, Zielonka M.

Author information:
(1)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS 
Trust, Manchester, UK.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles 
University-First Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital in Prague, 
Prague, Czechia.
(3)Department of Probability and Mathematical Statistics, Charles 
University-Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Prague, Czechia.
(4)Centre for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Department of Pediatrics I, 
Division of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Medical Faculty of 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Division of Metabolism, Bambino Gesù Children's Research Hospital, Rome, 
Italy.
(6)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Children's 
Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)Laboratory of Clinical Biochemistry and Metabolism, Center for General 
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, 
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Landeskrankenhaus Bregenz, Bregenz, Austria.

Cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) deficiency (classical homocystinuria) has a wide 
range of severity. Mildly affected patients typically present as adults with 
thromboembolism and respond to treatment with pyridoxine. Severely affected 
patients usually present during childhood with learning difficulties, ectopia 
lentis and skeletal abnormalities; they are pyridoxine non-responders (NR) or 
partial responders (PR) and require treatment with a low-methionine diet and/or 
betaine. The European network and registry for Homocystinurias and methylation 
Defects (E-HOD) has published management guidelines for CBS deficiency and 
recommended keeping plasma total homocysteine (tHcy) concentrations below 
100 μmol/L. We have now analysed data from 311 patients in the registry to see 
how closely treatment follows the guidelines. Pyridoxine-responsive patients 
generally achieved tHcy concentrations below 50 μmol/L, but many NRs and PRs had 
a mean tHcy considerably above 100 μmol/L. Most NRs were managed with betaine 
and a special diet. This usually involved severe protein restriction and a 
methionine-free amino acid mixture, but some patients had a natural protein 
intake substantially above the WHO safe minimum. Work is needed on the 
methionine content of dietary protein as estimates vary widely. Contrary to the 
guidelines, most NRs were on pyridoxine, sometimes at dangerously high doses. 
tHcy concentrations were similar in groups prescribed high or low betaine doses 
and natural protein intakes. High tHcy levels were probably often due to poor 
compliance. Comparing time-to-event graphs for NR patients detected by newborn 
screening and those ascertained clinically showed that treatment could prevent 
thromboembolism (risk ratio 0.073) and lens dislocation (risk ratio 0.069).

© 2025 The Author(s). Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12844
PMCID: PMC11729643
PMID: 40095936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Andrew A. M. Morris received an honorarium for a 
lecture from Travere and subsequently provided consultancy to Travere, for which 
honoraria were paid to E‐HOD funds. Stefan Kölker declares that a Dietmar Hopp 
Foundation grant was awarded to his institution. Carlo Dionisi‐Vici received 
consulting fees from Mamoxi and participated in Advisory Board of Nutricia and 
Vitaflo. Matthias R. Baumgartner declares that a research grant from Nutricia 
Milupa GmbH was awarded to his institution. Martina Huemer declares consultancy 
honoraria or travel support from Nutricia Metabolics, Sanofi, Chiesi and 
Immedica Pharma, all unrelated to this work. Her institution has received 
unrestricted research grants from Nutricia Metabolics, Sanofi and Travere. 
Viktor Kožich provided consultancy to GAIN Therapeutic and Travere, honoraria 
were paid to E‐HOD funds. The other authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
E‐HOD has been receiving support for its activities from Aeglea, Gain 
Therapeutic, Nutricia Metabolics, Recordati, SOBI, Travere and Vitaflo. The 
authors confirm independence from the sponsors; the content of the article has 
not been influenced by the sponsors.