---
reference_id: "PMID:20605038"
title: Comparative study of arsenic removal by iron using electrocoagulation and chemical coagulation.
authors:
- Lakshmanan D
- Clifford DA
- Samanta G
journal: Water Res
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2010.06.018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative study of arsenic removal by iron using electrocoagulation and chemical coagulation.
**Authors:** Lakshmanan D, Clifford DA, Samanta G
**Journal:** Water Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.watres.2010.06.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2010.06.018)

## Content

1. Water Res. 2010 Nov;44(19):5641-52. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2010.06.018. Epub
2010  Jun 15.

Comparative study of arsenic removal by iron using electrocoagulation and 
chemical coagulation.

Lakshmanan D(1), Clifford DA, Samanta G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, N 107 Engineering Bldg 1, 
University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204-4003, USA. divagar_79@yahoo.co.in

This research studied As(III) and As(V) removal during electrocoagulation (EC) 
in comparison with FeCl(3) chemical coagulation (CC). The study also attempted 
to verify chlorine production and the reported oxidation of As(III) during EC. 
Results showed that As(V) removal during batch EC was erratic at pH 6.5 and the 
removal was higher-than-expected based on the generation of ferrous iron 
(Fe(2+)) during EC. As(V) removal by batch EC was equal to or better than CC at 
pH 7.5 and 8.5, however soluble Fe(2+) was observed in the 0.2-μm membrane 
filtrate at pH 7.5 (10-45%), and is a cause for concern. Continuous steady-state 
operation of the EC unit confirmed the deleterious presence of soluble Fe(2+) in 
the treated water. The higher-than-expected As(V) removals during batch mode 
were presumed due to As(V) adsorption onto the iron rod oxyhydroxides surfaces 
prior to the attainment of steady-state operation. As(V) removal increased with 
decreasing pH during both CC and EC, however EC at pH 6.5 was anomalous because 
of erratic Fe(2+) oxidation. The best adsorption capacity was observed with CC 
at pH 6.5, while lower but similar adsorption capacities were observed at pH 7.5 
and 8.5 with CC and EC. A comparison of As(III) adsorption showed better 
removals during EC compared with CC possibly due to a temporary pH increase 
during EC. In contrast to literature reports, As(III) oxidation was not observed 
during EC, and As(III) adsorption onto iron hydroxides during EC was only 5-30% 
that of As(V) adsorption. Also in contrast to literature, significant Cl(2) was 
not generated during EC, in fact, the rods actually produced a significant 
chlorine demand due to reduced iron oxides on the rod. Although Cl(2) generation 
and As(III) oxidation are possible using a graphite anode, a combination of 
graphite and iron rods in the same EC unit did not produce As(III) oxidation. 
However, a two-stage process (graphite anode followed by iron anode in separate 
chambers) was effective in As(III) oxidation and removal. The competing ions, 
silica and phosphate interfered with As(V) adsorption during both CC and EC. 
However, the degree of interference depends on the concentration and presence of 
other competing ions. In particular, the presence of silica lowered the effect 
of phosphate with increasing pH due to silica's own significant effect at high 
pHs.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2010.06.018
PMID: 20605038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]