---
reference_id: "PMID:31879555"
title: "Neuropsychiatric decompensation in adolescents and adults with Phelan-McDermid syndrome: a systematic review of the literature."
authors:
- Kolevzon A
- Delaby E
- Berry-Kravis E
- Buxbaum JD
- Betancur C
journal: Mol Autism
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13229-019-0291-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychiatric decompensation in adolescents and adults with Phelan-McDermid syndrome: a systematic review of the literature.
**Authors:** Kolevzon A, Delaby E, Berry-Kravis E, Buxbaum JD, Betancur C
**Journal:** Mol Autism (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13229-019-0291-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-019-0291-3)

## Content

1. Mol Autism. 2019 Dec 24;10:50. doi: 10.1186/s13229-019-0291-3. eCollection
2019.

Neuropsychiatric decompensation in adolescents and adults with Phelan-McDermid 
syndrome: a systematic review of the literature.

Kolevzon A(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Delaby E(6), Berry-Kravis E(7), Buxbaum 
JD(1)(2)(4)(5)(8)(9), Betancur C(6).

Author information:
(1)1Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY USA.
(2)2Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY USA.
(3)3Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY USA.
(4)4Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY USA.
(5)5Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY USA.
(6)6Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Neuroscience Paris Seine, Institut de 
Biologie Paris Seine, Paris, France.
(7)7Department of Pediatrics, Neurological Sciences, Biochemistry, Rush 
University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois USA.
(8)8Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY USA.
(9)9Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY USA.

Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS) is caused by haploinsufficiency of the SHANK3 
gene on chromosome 22q13.33 and is characterized by intellectual disability, 
hypotonia, severe speech impairments, and autism spectrum disorder. Emerging 
evidence indicates that there are changes over time in the phenotype observed in 
individuals with PMS, including severe neuropsychiatric symptoms and loss of 
skills occurring in adolescence and adulthood. To gain further insight into 
these phenomena and to better understand the long-term course of the disorder, 
we conducted a systematic literature review and identified 56 PMS cases showing 
signs of behavioral and neurologic decompensation in adolescence or adulthood 
(30 females, 25 males, 1 gender unknown). Clinical presentations included 
features of bipolar disorder, catatonia, psychosis, and loss of skills, 
occurring at a mean age of 20 years. There were no apparent sex differences in 
the rates of these disorders except for catatonia, which appeared to be more 
frequent in females (13 females, 3 males). Reports of individuals with point 
mutations in SHANK3 exhibiting neuropsychiatric decompensation and loss of 
skills demonstrate that loss of one copy of SHANK3 is sufficient to cause these 
manifestations. In the majority of cases, no apparent cause could be identified; 
in others, symptoms appeared after acute events, such as infections, prolonged 
or particularly intense seizures, or changes in the individual's environment. 
Several individuals had a progressive neurological deterioration, including one 
with juvenile onset metachromatic leukodystrophy, a severe demyelinating 
disorder caused by recessive mutations in the ARSA gene in 22q13.33. These 
reports provide insights into treatment options that have proven helpful in some 
cases, and are reviewed herein. Our survey highlights how little is currently 
known about neuropsychiatric presentations and loss of skills in PMS and 
underscores the importance of studying the natural history in individuals with 
PMS, including both cross-sectional and long-term longitudinal analyses. Clearer 
delineation of these neuropsychiatric symptoms will contribute to their 
recognition and prompt management and will also help uncover the underlying 
biological mechanisms, potentially leading to improved interventions.

© The Author(s). 2019.

DOI: 10.1186/s13229-019-0291-3
PMCID: PMC6930682
PMID: 31879555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsAK receives research support 
from AMO Pharma and consults to Ovid Therapeutics, Coronis Neurosciences, 
LabCorp, sema4, and Takeda. EBK has received funding from Seaside Therapeutics, 
Novartis, Roche, Alcobra, Neuren, Cydan, Fulcrum, GW, Neurotrope, Marinus, 
Zynerba, BioMarin, Ovid, Yamo, Acadia, Ionis, Ultragenyx, and Lumos 
Pharmaceuticals to consult on trial design or development strategies and/or 
conduct clinical studies in fragile X syndrome or other neurologic, 
neurodevelopmental, or neurodegenerative disorders; from 
Vtesse/Sucampo/Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals to conduct clinical trials in 
Niemann-Pick disease type C; and from Asuragen Inc. to develop testing standards 
for FMR1 testing. All funding to EBK is directed to Rush University Medical 
Center in support of rare disease programs. JDB and Mount Sinai Hospital hold a 
shared patent for the use of insulin-like growth factor-1 in Phelan-McDermid 
syndrome; JDB consults with Coronis Neurosciences and sema4. AK, EBK, and CB are 
on the advisory board of the Phelan-McDermid Syndrome Foundation. ED declares 
that she has no competing interests.