---
reference_id: "PMID:5002114"
title: Specificity of exercise in exercise-induced asthma.
authors:
- Fitch KD
- Morton AR
journal: Br Med J
year: '1971'
doi: 10.1136/bmj.4.5787.577
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Specificity of exercise in exercise-induced asthma.
**Authors:** Fitch KD, Morton AR
**Journal:** Br Med J (1971)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmj.4.5787.577](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.4.5787.577)

## Content

1. Br Med J. 1971 Dec 4;4(5787):577-81. doi: 10.1136/bmj.4.5787.577.

Specificity of exercise in exercise-induced asthma.

Fitch KD, Morton AR.

Ventilatory function after three types of exercise-running, cycling, and 
swimming-was studied in 10 control subjects and 40 asthmatic patients. All 
performed eight minutes of submaximal aerobic exercise during each of the 
programmes, which were conducted in a randomly selected order. Biotelemetric 
monitoring of heart rates was used to equate the intensity of the exertion 
undertaken during the three systems of exercise. No control subject showed any 
significant variation in ventilatory capacity after exercise, and the responses 
after the three forms of exercise did not differ.In asthmatics exercise-induced 
asthma was observed after 72.5% of running tests, 65% of cycling tests, and 35% 
of swimming tests. In addition, those patients who developed exercise-induced 
asthma after swimming were noted to have significantly smaller falls in FEV(1) 
levels than were recorded after running and cycling. These results were 
statistically significant (P <0.01).The unexplained aetiology of increased 
airways resistance after exercise in asthmatics is discussed. This study 
indicates that swimming should be recommended in preference to running or 
cycling as an exercise programme for adults and children with asthma.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.4.5787.577
PMCID: PMC1799935
PMID: 5002114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]