---
reference_id: "PMID:40310476"
title: Progress and Challenges in the Treatment of Fabry Disease.
authors:
- Lenders M
- Menke ER
- Brand E
journal: BioDrugs
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s40259-025-00723-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progress and Challenges in the Treatment of Fabry Disease.
**Authors:** Lenders M, Menke ER, Brand E
**Journal:** BioDrugs (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40259-025-00723-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40259-025-00723-3)

## Content

1. BioDrugs. 2025 Jul;39(4):517-535. doi: 10.1007/s40259-025-00723-3. Epub 2025
May  1.

Progress and Challenges in the Treatment of Fabry Disease.

Lenders M(1), Menke ER(1), Brand E(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine D (Nephrology, Hypertension and Rheumatology), and 
Interdisciplinary Fabry Center (IFAZ), University Hospital Muenster, 
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 48149, Muenster, Germany.
(2)Internal Medicine D (Nephrology, Hypertension and Rheumatology), and 
Interdisciplinary Fabry Center (IFAZ), University Hospital Muenster, 
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 48149, Muenster, Germany. Eva.Brand@ukmuenster.de.

Fabry disease is a rare but life-threatening, X-linked, inherited lysosomal 
storage disorder in which globotriaosylceramide is insufficiently metabolized 
because of reduced α-galactosidase A activity. Cellular globotriaosylceramide 
accumulation causes a multisystemic disease, which, if left untreated, reduces 
life expectancy in female and male individuals by around 10 and 20 years, 
respectively, leading to progressive renal failure, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
cardiac arrhythmia, and premature cerebral infarction. The method of choice for 
confirming the diagnosis is the determination of reduced α-galactosidase A 
activity in leukocytes in male individuals and the molecular genetic detection 
of a disease-causing mutation in female individuals. Current approved treatment 
includes enzyme replacement therapy (agalsidase alfa [0.2 mg/kg body weight], 
agalsidase beta or pegunigalsidase alfa [both 1.0 mg/kg body weight]) every 
other week intravenously or, if a responding ('amenable') α-galactosidase A 
mutation is present, oral pharmacological chaperone therapy (migalastat 123 mg, 
every other day). Future therapeutic options may include substrate reduction 
therapy, gene therapy, messenger RNA therapy, and/or vesicle-packaged enzyme 
replacement therapy. This review presents current and future treatment options 
with advantages and disadvantages of the different treatment options.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40259-025-00723-3
PMCID: PMC12185606
PMID: 40310476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Funding: Open Access funding 
enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. No funding was received for the 
preparation of this article. Conflicts of interest/competing interests: Malte 
Lenders received research grants and/or speaker honoraria from Amicus 
Therapeutics, Sanofi, Chiesi, Sumitomo Pharma, and Takeda. Eva Brand received 
research grants and/or speaker honoraria from Amicus Therapeutics, Sanofi, 
Chiesi, Takeda, and Eleva. Elise Raphaela Menke has no conflicts of interest 
that are directly relevant to the content of this article. Ethics approval: Not 
applicable. Consent to participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not 
applicable. Availability of data and material: The original contributions 
presented in the study are included in the article. Code availability: Not 
applicable. Authors’ contributions: ML, ERM, and EB wrote the manuscript. All 
authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.