---
reference_id: "PMID:40684392"
title: Melatonin Attenuates Spinal Cord Injury by Regulating Ferroptosis Through the Nrf2/HO-1/GPX4 Pathway.
authors:
- Yu Z
- Wu D
- Shi T
- Chen D
- Feng H
- Chen H
- Lin H
- Sun L
- Liu W
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-025-05226-4
keywords:
- Animals
- Ferroptosis/drug effects
- "Melatonin/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Spinal Cord Injuries/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- NF-E2-Related Factor 2/metabolism
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Phospholipid Hydroperoxide Glutathione Peroxidase/metabolism
- Heme Oxygenase-1/metabolism
- Mice
- Male
- "Neurons/drug effects, metabolism"
- Rats
- "Mitochondria/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Neuroprotective Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Recovery of Function/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Melatonin Attenuates Spinal Cord Injury by Regulating Ferroptosis Through the Nrf2/HO-1/GPX4 Pathway.
**Authors:** Yu Z, Wu D, Shi T, Chen D, Feng H, Chen H, Lin H, Sun L, Liu W
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-025-05226-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-025-05226-4)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2025 Dec;62(12):15530-15549. doi: 10.1007/s12035-025-05226-4.
Epub 2025 Jul 20.

Melatonin Attenuates Spinal Cord Injury by Regulating Ferroptosis Through the
Nrf2/HO-1/GPX4 Pathway.

Yu Z(#)(1)(2), Wu D(#)(1), Shi T(#)(1), Chen D(1), Feng H(1)(3), Chen H(4), Lin
H(1), Sun L(5), Liu W(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, No.29
Xin Quan Road, Fuzhou, 350001, Fujian, China.
(2)Department of Minimally Invasive Spinal Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of
Putian University, Putian, 351100, Fujian, China.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic, Laibin People's Hospital, Laibin, 546100, Guangxi,
China.
(4)School of Health, Fujian Medical University, No. 1 Xuefu North Road, Fuzhou,
350001, Fujian, China.
(5)School of Health, Fujian Medical University, No. 1 Xuefu North Road, Fuzhou,
350001, Fujian, China. sunlei0417@fjmu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Orthopedics, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, No.29
Xin Quan Road, Fuzhou, 350001, Fujian, China. wengeunion@fjmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Spinal cord injury (SCI) is one of the most devastating and catastrophic types
of injury, with high rates of mortality and disability. Ferroptosis has become
the target of many major incurable human diseases. By inhibiting ferroptosis,
melatonin (MT) can reduce the damage in various organs, but the protective
effect of MT on SCI has not been reported yet. The modified Ellen's method was
used to establish an SCI rat model. The protective effect of MT on spinal cord
neurons and the recovery of motor function were observed. In in vitro
experiments, an oxygen-glucose deprivation/reoxygenation (OGD/R) model was
established by using mouse hippocampal neuron (HT22) cells to simulate spinal
cord ischemia-reperfusion injury. A ferroptosis model directly induced by
Erastin was also used. The nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)
inhibitor ML 385 was used to further detect the mechanism through which MT
inhibits ferroptosis and protects neuronal cells. Our study demonstrates that in
rats, melatonin can promote the recovery of behavior and injured tissue after
SCI. Under the electron microscope, MT inhibited neuron ferroptosis, rescued
damaged mitochondria, and partially restored the mitochondrial structure. ML385,
an Nrf2 inhibitor, reversed the effects of MT. Overall, MT may alleviate early
SCI by inhibiting ferroptosis through activating the Nrf2/heme
oxygenase-1(HO-1)/glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX 4) pathway.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-025-05226-4
PMID: 40684392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Institutional Review Board
Statement: Animal care and experimental procedures were approved by the Animal
Ethics Committee of the Fujian Medical University (Protocol Code IACUC FJMU
2023–0225, approved in 2023) and performed in accordance with the National
Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Consent
to Participate: Not applicable. Conflict of interest: The authors declare no
competing interests.
