---
reference_id: "PMID:35741804"
title: "State of the Science for Kidney Disorders in Phelan-McDermid Syndrome: UPK3A, FBLN1, WNT7B, and CELSR1 as Candidate Genes."
authors:
- McCoy MD
- Sarasua SM
- DeLuca JM
- Davis S
- Phelan K
- Rogers RC
- Boccuto L
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13061042
content_type: abstract_only
---

# State of the Science for Kidney Disorders in Phelan-McDermid Syndrome: UPK3A, FBLN1, WNT7B, and CELSR1 as Candidate Genes.
**Authors:** McCoy MD, Sarasua SM, DeLuca JM, Davis S, Phelan K, Rogers RC, Boccuto L
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13061042](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13061042)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Jun 10;13(6):1042. doi: 10.3390/genes13061042.

State of the Science for Kidney Disorders in Phelan-McDermid Syndrome: UPK3A, 
FBLN1, WNT7B, and CELSR1 as Candidate Genes.

McCoy MD(1), Sarasua SM(1), DeLuca JM(1), Davis S(1), Phelan K(2), Rogers RC(3), 
Boccuto L(1).

Author information:
(1)Healthcare Genetics Program, School of Nursing, Clemson University, Clemson, 
SC 29634, USA.
(2)Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Fort Myers, FL 33908, USA.
(3)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenville, SC 29605, USA.

Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by 
chromosomal rearrangements affecting the 22q13.3 region or by SHANK3 pathogenic 
variants. The scientific literature suggests that up to 40% of individuals with 
PMS have kidney disorders, yet little research has been conducted on the renal 
system to assess candidate genes attributed to these disorders. Therefore, we 
first conducted a systematic review of the literature to identify kidney 
disorders in PMS and then pooled the data to create a cohort of individuals to 
identify candidate genes for renal disorders in PMS. We found 7 types of renal 
disorders reported: renal cysts, renal hypoplasia or agenesis, hydronephrosis, 
vesicoureteral reflux, kidney dysplasia, horseshoe kidneys, and pyelectasis. 
Association analysis from the pooled data from 152 individuals with PMS across 
22 articles identified three genomic regions spanning chromosomal bands 
22q13.31, 22q13.32, and 22q13.33, significantly associated with kidney 
disorders. We propose UPK3A, FBLN1, WNT7B, and CELSR1, located from 4.5 Mb to 
5.5 Mb from the telomere, as candidate genes. Our findings support the 
hypothesis that genes included in this region may play a role in the 
pathogenesis of kidney disorders in PMS.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13061042
PMCID: PMC9223119
PMID: 35741804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.