---
reference_id: "PMID:39625784"
title: Genotype-First Analysis in an Unselected Health System-Based Population and Phenotypic Severity of COL4A5 Variants.
authors:
- Zellers M
- Solanki K
- Kelly MA
- Murphy KM
- Retterer K
- Kirchner HL
- Bucaloiu ID
- Moore B
- Mirshahi T
- Chang AR
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.0000000580
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-First Analysis in an Unselected Health System-Based Population and Phenotypic Severity of COL4A5 Variants.
**Authors:** Zellers M, Solanki K, Kelly MA, Murphy KM, Retterer K, Kirchner HL, Bucaloiu ID, Moore B, Mirshahi T, Chang AR
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.0000000580](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.0000000580)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2025 Jun 1;36(6):1138-1151. doi: 10.1681/ASN.0000000580.
Epub  2024 Dec 3.

Genotype-First Analysis in an Unselected Health System-Based Population and
Phenotypic Severity of COL4A5 Variants.

Zellers M(1), Solanki K(2), Kelly MA(3), Murphy KM(4), Retterer K(4), Kirchner
HL(2), Bucaloiu ID(5), Moore B(3), Mirshahi T(3), Chang AR(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine, Scranton, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Population Health Sciences, Geisinger, Danville, Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Genomic Health, Geisinger, Danville, Pennsylvania.
(4)Geisinger, Danville, Pennsylvania.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Geisinger, Danville, Pennsylvania.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2024 Aug 09:2024.06.04.24308453. doi: 10.1101/2024.06.04.24308453.

KEY POINTS: In an unselected health system–based research study, we show that
the phenotypic spectrum of X-linked Alport syndrome is wider than previously
known. Kidney risks were lower for patients with p.Gly624Asp, a hypomorphic
variant that is thought to have originated in Central and Eastern Europe. Many
patients in this study had not been diagnosed with Alport syndrome, and
consequently, many had not received appropriate testing and treatment.
BACKGROUND: Our knowledge of X-linked Alport syndrome comes mostly from selected
cohorts with more severe disease.
METHODS: We examined the phenotypic spectrum of X-linked Alport syndrome in men
and women with a genotype-based approach using data from the Geisinger MyCode
DiscovEHR study, an unselected health system–based cohort with exome sequencing
and electronic health records. Patients with COL4A5 variants reported as
pathogenic or likely pathogenic in ClinVar, or protein-truncating variants, were
each matched with up to five controls without COL4A3/4/5 variants by
sociodemographics, diabetes diagnosis, and year of first outpatient encounter.
Phenotypes examined included dipstick hematuria, bilateral sensorineural hearing
loss, proteinuria, lower eGFR, and kidney failure.
RESULTS: Of 170,856 patients, there were 29 hemizygous men (mean age 52 years
[SD 20]) and 55 heterozygous women (mean age 59 years [SD 19]) with a
pathogenic/likely pathogenic COL4A5 variant, including 48 with the hypomorphic
variant p.Gly624Asp. Overall, penetrance (having any Alport syndrome phenotypic
feature) was the highest for non-p.Gly624Asp variants (men: 94%, women: 85%) and
intermediate for p.Gly624Asp (men: 77%, women: 69%) compared with controls (men:
32%, women: 50%). The proportion with kidney failure was the highest for men
with non-p.Gly624Asp variants (44%) and intermediate for men with p.Gly624Asp
(15%) and women with non-p.Gly624Asp variants (10%) compared with controls (men:
3%, women: 2%). Only 47% of patients with COL4A5 had completed albuminuria
screening, and a minority were taking renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
inhibitors. Only 38% of men and 16% of women had a known diagnosis of Alport
syndrome or thin basement membrane disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Using a genotype-first approach, we show that men and women with
X-linked Alport syndrome are at higher risk of related phenotypic features with
a wider spectrum of severity than has been described previously and variability
by genotype.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.0000000580
PMCID: PMC12147960
PMID: 39625784

Conflict of interest statement: Includes pathogenic or likely pathogenic
variants (except for p.Gly624Asp) in ClinVar by >1 submitter and no conflicts or
conflicting variants with a ratio of ≥6 pathogenic/likely pathogenic to other
classifications. Disclosure forms, as provided by each author, are available
with the online version of the article at http://links.lww.com/JSN/E983.
