---
reference_id: "PMID:41152985"
title: Resolving intra-tumor heterogeneity and clonal evolution of core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia patients with single-cell resolution.
authors:
- Hablesreiter R
- Strzelecka PM
- Kopp K
- Estrada N
- Dolnik A
- Tilgner M
- Fustero-Torre C
- Thol F
- Heidel FH
- Heuser M
- Haghverdi L
- Bullinger L
- Christen F
- Damm F
journal: Exp Hematol Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s40164-025-00718-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Resolving intra-tumor heterogeneity and clonal evolution of core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia patients with single-cell resolution.
**Authors:** Hablesreiter R, Strzelecka PM, Kopp K, Estrada N, Dolnik A, Tilgner M, Fustero-Torre C, Thol F, Heidel FH, Heuser M, Haghverdi L, Bullinger L, Christen F, Damm F
**Journal:** Exp Hematol Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40164-025-00718-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40164-025-00718-4)

## Content

1. Exp Hematol Oncol. 2025 Oct 28;14(1):127. doi: 10.1186/s40164-025-00718-4.

Resolving intra-tumor heterogeneity and clonal evolution of core-binding factor 
acute myeloid leukemia patients with single-cell resolution.

Hablesreiter R(1), Strzelecka PM(1), Kopp K(1), Estrada N(1), Dolnik A(1), 
Tilgner M(1), Fustero-Torre C(1), Thol F(2), Heidel FH(2)(3), Heuser M(2)(4), 
Haghverdi L(5), Bullinger L(1)(6), Christen F(#)(1), Damm F(#)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität Zu 
Berlin, Department of Hematology, Oncology and Cancer Immunology, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, 
Hannover Medical School (MHH), Hannover, Germany.
(3)Leibniz Institute on Aging, Fritz-Lipmann-Institute, Jena, Germany.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine IV, University Hospital Halle (Saale), 
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany.
(5)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association 
(MDC), Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology (BIMSB), Berlin, Germany.
(6)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner Site Berlin and German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität Zu 
Berlin, Department of Hematology, Oncology and Cancer Immunology, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Germany. 
frederik.damm@charite.de.
(8)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner Site Berlin and German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. frederik.damm@charite.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Reconstructing and understanding intra-tumor heterogeneity, the coexistence of 
multiple genetically distinct subclones within the tumor of a patient, and tumor 
development is essential for resolving carcinogenesis and for identifying 
mechanisms of therapy resistance. While bulk sequencing can provide a broad view 
on tumoral complexity/heterogeneity of a patient, single-cell analysis remains 
essential to identify rare subclones that might drive chemotherapy resistance. 
In this study, we performed an integrated analysis of bulk and single-cell DNA 
sequencing data of core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia patients, defined 
by the presence of a RUNX1::RUNX1T1 or CBFB::MYH11 fusion gene. By single-cell 
sequencing, we inferred tumor phylogenies for 8 patients at diagnosis including 
patient-specific somatic variants, somatic copy-number alterations and fusion 
genes, and studied clonal evolution under the pressure of chemotherapy for 3 
patients. As a result, we developed an approach to reliably integrate subclonal 
somatic copy number alterations into phylogenetic trees and clonal evolution 
analysis, obtaining unprecedented resolution of intra-tumor heterogeneity in CBF 
AML. We were able to show that the fusion gene is among the earliest events of 
leukemogenesis at single-cell level. We identified remaining tumor clones in 6 
patients with complete remission samples indicating incomplete eradication of 
the tumor clones. Here, we show that identifying the order of mutation 
acquisition can provide valuable insights into evolutionary history, offering a 
framework to improve drug selection in the era of targeted therapies.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40164-025-00718-4
PMCID: PMC12570578
PMID: 41152985

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: All study protocols were approved by the Institutional Review 
Boards at each participating center in accordance with the Declaration of 
Helsinki (Charité–Universitätsmedizin Berlin: EA1_271_14, Medizinische 
Hochschule Hannover (MHH): 936-2011). Each patient provided written informed 
consent for the research use of their specimens before enrollment. Consent for 
publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: FD reports personal fees from 
AbbVie, Amgen, Astra Zeneca, BeiGene, Gilead, Incyte, Novartis, and Roche 
outside the submitted work. LB reports advisory roles for Abbvie, Amgen, 
Astellas, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead, Hexal, Janssen, 
Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Menarini, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi, Servier; as well as 
research funding from Bayer, Jazz Pharmaceuticals. MH declares honoraria from 
Abbvie, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, Qiagen, 
Servier, Sobi, paid consultancy for AvenCell, Abbvie, Astellas, Glycostem, 
Janssen, LabDelbert, Miltenyi, Novartis, Pfizer, PinotBio, Servier, and research 
funding to his institution from Abbvie, Servier, Astellas, BergenBio, Glycostem, 
Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Karyopharm, Loxo Oncology, Novartis, PinotBio.