---
reference_id: "PMID:22036072"
title: Single gene disorders of the aortic wall.
authors:
- Halushka MK
journal: Cardiovasc Pathol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2011.09.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single gene disorders of the aortic wall.
**Authors:** Halushka MK
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Pathol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.carpath.2011.09.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carpath.2011.09.004)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2012 Jul-Aug;21(4):240-4. doi:
10.1016/j.carpath.2011.09.004.  Epub 2011 Oct 27.

Single gene disorders of the aortic wall.

Halushka MK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. mhalush1@jhmi.edu

Genetic diseases that affect the vasculature primarily affect the aortic root 
and ascending aorta. These conditions lead to aortic root dilatation, which, if 
not treated, will result in dissection and death. Often, aortic disease is just 
one manifestation of a syndrome with diverse findings. Some of these diseases 
were described over 100 years ago based on physical manifestations, and their 
causative genes are among the first described Mendelian causes of cardiovascular 
disease. Within the pediatric and young adult population, there are over 15 
causes of ascending aortic disease. Previously, these diverse diseases, along 
with their histopathology, have been extensively characterized. Most genetic 
causes of root aneurysm are extremely rare. Amongst these, five diseases are 
relatively common with known genetic mutations for which pathologists should be 
familiar. These are Marfan syndrome, vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome, Turner syndrome, and familial thoracic aneurysm and 
dissection. This review will focus on these important causes of genetic aortic 
disease. The aim is to briefly describe the historical record and physical 
manifestations and then focus on cardiovascular complications, the causative 
genes, and current research into these entities.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carpath.2011.09.004
PMID: 22036072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]