---
reference_id: "PMID:28894616"
title: Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma Presenting with Streptococcus intermedius Cerebral Abscess.
authors:
- Nayfe R
- Ascha MS
- Rehmus EH
journal: Case Rep Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1155/2017/5819676
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma Presenting with Streptococcus intermedius Cerebral Abscess.
**Authors:** Nayfe R, Ascha MS, Rehmus EH
**Journal:** Case Rep Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2017/5819676](https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/5819676)

## Content

1. Case Rep Pathol. 2017;2017:5819676. doi: 10.1155/2017/5819676. Epub 2017 Aug
15.

Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma Presenting with Streptococcus intermedius
Cerebral Abscess.

Nayfe R(1), Ascha MS(2), Rehmus EH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(3)McDowell Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic Akron General, Akron, OH, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral abscess is caused by inoculation of an organism into the
brain parenchyma from a site distant from the central nervous system.
Streptococcus intermedius (S. intermedius) is a commensal organism that is
normally present in the aerodigestive tract and was reported to be the cause of
brain abscesses after esophageal dilatation or upper endoscopy.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report the case of a 53-year-old female who presented with
hematemesis and melena followed by left-sided weakness. Initially, her
hemiplegia was found to be secondary to a right thalamic brain abscess caused by
S. intermedius. Investigations led to the diagnosis of a mid-esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma. We hypothesize that the cause of the abscess with this bacterium
that naturally resides in the digestive tract and oral cavity is secondary to
hematogenous spread from breach in the mucosal integrity from ulceration due to
the cancer.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, our case is the first in the literature to
describe a brain abscess caused by S. intermedius in association with a
previously undiagnosed esophageal squamous cell carcinoma without any prior
esophageal intervention.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/5819676
PMCID: PMC5574295
PMID: 28894616
