---
reference_id: "PMID:28954104"
title: The recurrent nevus phenomenon.
authors:
- Castagna RD
- Stramari JM
- Chemello RML
journal: An Bras Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20176190
keywords:
- Biopsy
- Cell Proliferation
- Dermoscopy
- Female
- Humans
- Melanocytes/pathology
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/pathology"
- "Nevus, Pigmented/pathology, surgery"
- "Skin Neoplasms/pathology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The recurrent nevus phenomenon.
**Authors:** Castagna RD, Stramari JM, Chemello RML
**Journal:** An Bras Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1590/abd1806-4841.20176190](https://doi.org/10.1590/abd1806-4841.20176190)

## Content

1. An Bras Dermatol. 2017 Jul-Aug;92(4):531-533. doi: 
10.1590/abd1806-4841.20176190.

The recurrent nevus phenomenon.

Castagna RD(1), Stramari JM(1), Chemello RML(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria (UFSM) - 
Santa Maria (RS), Brazil.

Recurrent melanocytic nevus is a proliferation of melanocytes arising from a 
melanocytic nevus removed partially. Asymmetry and irregular pigmentation may 
lead to misdiagnosis of melanoma. We report a patient presented with a lesion on 
the lower abdomen, which was removed by shave excision. Anatomopathological 
examination revealed an intradermal melanocytic nevus. Two months later, a new 
irregular hyperpigmented lesion appeared in the surgical scar. Histopathology of 
the excisional biopsy revealed a recurrent melanocytic nevus. Recurrent 
melanocytic nevus manifests as a scar with hyper or hypopigmented areas, linear 
streaking, stippled pigmented halos, and/or diffuse pigmentation patterns. 
Histologically, the dermoepidermal junction and the superficial dermis show 
melanocytic proliferation overlying the scarred area. When a pathological report 
of the previous lesion is not available, complete excision is the gold standard. 
Otherwise, regular dermoscopic monitoring is a therapeutic option. The present 
report emphasizes the importance of histopathological examination of the excised 
material - even in cases of suspected benign lesions - and warns patients about 
the possibility of recurrence in case of incompletely removed lesions.

DOI: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20176190
PMCID: PMC5595602
PMID: 28954104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: none.