---
reference_id: "PMID:23149878"
title: "Urea cycle defects and hyperammonemia: effects on functional imaging."
authors:
- Gropman AL
- Prust M
- Breeden A
- Fricke S
- VanMeter J
journal: Metab Brain Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s11011-012-9348-0
keywords:
- Attention/physiology
- Brain/pathology
- Cognition/physiology
- "Cognition Disorders/etiology, psychology"
- Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Executive Function/physiology
- Free Radical Scavengers/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Hyperammonemia/pathology, psychology"
- Intelligence Tests
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Memory, Short-Term/physiology"
- Neuropsychological Tests
- Quality of Life
- Reactive Nitrogen Species/metabolism
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/pathology, psychology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urea cycle defects and hyperammonemia: effects on functional imaging.
**Authors:** Gropman AL, Prust M, Breeden A, Fricke S, VanMeter J
**Journal:** Metab Brain Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11011-012-9348-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-012-9348-0)

## Content

1. Metab Brain Dis. 2013 Jun;28(2):269-75. doi: 10.1007/s11011-012-9348-0. Epub
2012 Nov 13.

Urea cycle defects and hyperammonemia: effects on functional imaging.

Gropman AL(1), Prust M, Breeden A, Fricke S, VanMeter J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Children's National Medical Center, George
Washington University of Health Sciences, 111 Michigan Avenue, NW, Washington,
DC 20010, USA. agropman@childrensnational.org

The urea-cycle disorders (UCDs) are a group of congenital enzyme and carrier
deficiencies predisposing to hyperammonemia (HA). HA causes changes in the
central nervous system (CNS) including alterations of neurotransmitter function,
cell volume, and energy deprivation ultimately leading to cerebral edema.
Neuropathological findings of UCDs primarily reflect changes in astrocyte
morphology. Neurological features accompanying acute HA include changes in
behavior and consciousness in the short term, and potential for impairments in
memory and executive function as long-term effects. Plasma measures of ammonia
and glutamine, although useful for clinical monitoring, prove poor markers of
CNS function. Multimodal neuroimaging has potential to investigate impact on
cognitive function by interrogating neural networks, connectivity and
biochemistry. As neuroimaging methods become increasingly sophisticated, they
will play a critical role in clinical monitoring and treatment of metabolic
disease. We describe our findings in UCDs; with focus on Ornithine
Transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD) the only X linked UCD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11011-012-9348-0
PMCID: PMC3594356
PMID: 23149878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
