---
reference_id: "PMID:23707712"
title: "Molecular basis of acid ceramidase deficiency in a neonatal form of Farber disease: identification of the first large deletion in ASAH1 gene."
authors:
- Alves MQ
- Le Trionnaire E
- Ribeiro I
- Carpentier S
- Harzer K
- Levade T
- Ribeiro MG
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.04.019
keywords:
- "Acid Ceramidase/genetics, metabolism"
- Chromosome Breakpoints
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons
- "Farber Lipogranulomatosis/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Introns
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Sphingolipids/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular basis of acid ceramidase deficiency in a neonatal form of Farber disease: identification of the first large deletion in ASAH1 gene.
**Authors:** Alves MQ, Le Trionnaire E, Ribeiro I, Carpentier S, Harzer K, Levade T, Ribeiro MG
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.04.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.04.019)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2013 Jul;109(3):276-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.04.019.
Epub  2013 May 4.

Molecular basis of acid ceramidase deficiency in a neonatal form of Farber
disease: identification of the first large deletion in ASAH1 gene.

Alves MQ(1), Le Trionnaire E, Ribeiro I, Carpentier S, Harzer K, Levade T,
Ribeiro MG.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Department, National Health Institute Doutor Ricardo Jorge (INSARJ),
Oporto, Portugal.

Farber disease, also known as Farber's lipogranulomatosis, is a clinically
heterogeneous autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the ASAH1 gene.
This gene codes for acid ceramidase, a lysosomal heterodimeric enzyme that
hydrolyzes ceramide into sphingosine and fatty acid. To date, less than 25
distinct mutations have been identified in Farber patients, but no large
deletions have yet been reported. In this work, cultured fibroblasts from a
Farber patient with the rare neonatal form of Farber disease were studied to
elucidate the molecular basis of this extremely severe phenotype. Direct
sequencing of ASAH1 genomic DNA revealed the causative heterozygous mutation in
the donor splice site consensus sequence of intron 11, g.24491A > G (c.917 + 4A
> G), that resulted in the absence of detectable mRNA. Subsequent analysis of
ASAH1 mRNA showed total skipping of exons 3 to 5. Long-range PCR and sequencing
led to the identification of a gross deletion of ASAH1 gene, g.8728_18197del
(c.126-3941_382 + 1358del) predicting the synthesis of a truncated polypeptide,
p.Tyr42_Leu127delinsArgfs*10. Accordingly, no molecular forms corresponding to
precursor or proteolytically processed mature protein were observed. These
findings indicate that any functionally active acid ceramidase is absent in
patient cells, underscoring the severity of the clinical phenotype. Molecular
findings in the non-consanguineous parents confirmed the compound heterozygous
ASAH1 genotype identified in this Farber case. This work unravels for the first
time the mutations underlying the neonatal form of Farber disease and represents
the first report of a large deletion identified in the ASAH1 gene. Screening for
gross deletions in other patients in whom the mutation present in the second
allele had not yet been identified is required to elucidate further its overall
contribution for the molecular pathogenesis of this devastating disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.04.019
PMID: 23707712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
