---
reference_id: "PMID:24867507"
title: "Is it time to revise the normal range of serum uric acid levels?"
authors:
- Desideri G
- Castaldo G
- Lombardi A
- Mussap M
- Testa A
- Pontremoli R
- Punzi L
- Borghi C
journal: Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci
year: '2014'
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Biomarkers/blood
- Female
- "Gout/blood, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Healthy Volunteers
- Humans
- "Hyperuricemia/blood, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Male
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prevalence
- Reference Values
- Risk Factors
- Sex Factors
- Uric Acid/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is it time to revise the normal range of serum uric acid levels?
**Authors:** Desideri G, Castaldo G, Lombardi A, Mussap M, Testa A, Pontremoli R, Punzi L, Borghi C
**Journal:** Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci (2014)

## Content

1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2014;18(9):1295-306.

Is it time to revise the normal range of serum uric acid levels?

Desideri G(1), Castaldo G, Lombardi A, Mussap M, Testa A, Pontremoli R, Punzi L, 
Borghi C.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Unit, Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, 
University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy. giovambattista.desideri@cc.univaq.it.

The actual reference range of serum uric acid has been assessed according to its 
variations among healthy individuals. i.e. those without clinical evidence of 
gout. By this approach, serum uric acid values between 3.5 and 7.2 mg/dL in 
adult males and postmenopausal women and between 2.6 and 6.0 mg/dL in 
premenopausal women have been identified as normal in many countries. However, 
this definition of normal range of serum uric acid in the general population is 
inevitably influenced by what we consider as "normal", since the absence of gout 
flares does not necessarily imply the absence of uric acid-related damage. 
Indeed, a growing body of evidence indicates that silent deposition of 
monosodium urate crystals as a result of hyperuricaemia may occur and lead to 
early destructive skeletal changes. In addition, a growing body of evidences 
demonstrates that uric acid might play a pathophysiological role in many 
"cardio-nephro-metabolic" disorders, which seems to be independent of the 
deposition of monosodium urate crystals, since it is evident also for serum uric 
acid concentrations below the saturation point for monosodium urate. Taken 
together, these findings strongly suggest to carefully reconsider the concept of 
"asymptomaticity" for chronic hyperuricemia and to consequently revise the 
normal range of serum uric acid levels also considering the progressive 
worldwide increase of circulating levels of uric acid, which could lead to a 
"shift to right" (i.e. toward higher values) of normal range. In the light of 
the new scientific knowledge on the pathophysiological role of uric acid in 
human disease, a threshold value < 6.0 mg/dL (< 360 µmol/L) seems to better 
identify true "healthy subjects" and should reasonably be considered for all 
subjects.

PMID: 24867507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]