---
reference_id: "PMID:39119456"
title: Dietary gangliosides rescue GM3 synthase deficiency outcomes in mice accompanied by neurogenesis in the hippocampus.
authors:
- Inokuchi JI
- Go S
- Suzuki A
- Nakagawasai O
- Odaira-Satoh T
- Veillon L
- Nitta T
- McJarrow P
- Kanoh H
- Inamori KI
- Tan-No K
- Collett M
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1387221
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dietary gangliosides rescue GM3 synthase deficiency outcomes in mice accompanied by neurogenesis in the hippocampus.
**Authors:** Inokuchi JI, Go S, Suzuki A, Nakagawasai O, Odaira-Satoh T, Veillon L, Nitta T, McJarrow P, Kanoh H, Inamori KI, Tan-No K, Collett M
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2024.1387221](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2024.1387221)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2024 Jul 25;18:1387221. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1387221.
eCollection 2024.

Dietary gangliosides rescue GM3 synthase deficiency outcomes in mice accompanied
by neurogenesis in the hippocampus.

Inokuchi JI(1)(2), Go S(1), Suzuki A(1), Nakagawasai O(3), Odaira-Satoh T(3),
Veillon L(1), Nitta T(1), McJarrow P(4), Kanoh H(1), Inamori KI(1), Tan-No K(3),
Collett M(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Glycopathology, Institute of Molecular Biomembranes and
Glycobiology, Tohoku Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Forefront Research Centre, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University,
Toyonaka, Japan.
(3)Division of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku Medical
and Pharmaceutical University, Sendai, Japan.
(4)Fonterra Research and Development Centre, Palmerston North, New Zealand.

Ganglioside GM3 synthase is a key enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of
gangliosides. GM3 synthase deficiency (GM3SD) causes an absence of GM3 and all
downstream biosynthetic derivatives, including all the a-, b-, c-series
gangliosides, commonly found in neural tissues. The affected individuals
manifest with severe irritability, intractable seizures, hearing loss,
blindness, and profound intellectual disability. It has been reported that oral
ganglioside supplementation has achieved some significant improvements in
clinical symptoms, growth parameters, and developmental and cognitive scores in
GM3SD patients. To gain insight into the molecular mechanisms of this
supplementation, we performed supplementation of oral bovine milk gangliosides
to GM3 synthase-deficient mice from early weaning periods. The oral milk
ganglioside preparations were dominated by GM3 and GD3 gangliosides. Oral milk
ganglioside supplementation improved the decreased cognitive function observed
in GM3 synthase-deficient mice. The improvement in cognitive function was
accompanied by increased ganglioside levels and neurogenesis in the hippocampus
in the supplemented animals.

Copyright © 2024 Inokuchi, Go, Suzuki, Nakagawasai, Odaira-Satoh, Veillon,
Nitta, McJarrow, Kanoh, Inamori, Tan-No and Collett.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1387221
PMCID: PMC11308210
PMID: 39119456

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The authors declare that this
study received funding from Fonterra co-operative Group Ltd. The funder had the
following involvement in the study: study design, analysis and interpretation of
data, the writing of this article and the decision to submit it for publication.
