---
reference_id: "PMID:31181280"
title: Influence of chemokines on the endothelial permeability and cellular transmigration during dengue.
authors:
- Cipitelli MDC
- Amâncio Paiva I
- Badolato-Corrêa J
- de-Oliveira-Pinto LM
journal: Immunol Lett
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2019.06.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Influence of chemokines on the endothelial permeability and cellular transmigration during dengue.
**Authors:** Cipitelli MDC, Amâncio Paiva I, Badolato-Corrêa J, de-Oliveira-Pinto LM
**Journal:** Immunol Lett (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.imlet.2019.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imlet.2019.06.001)

## Content

1. Immunol Lett. 2019 Aug;212:88-97. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2019.06.001. Epub 2019 
Jun 7.

Influence of chemokines on the endothelial permeability and cellular 
transmigration during dengue.

Cipitelli MDC(1), Amâncio Paiva I(1), Badolato-Corrêa J(1), de-Oliveira-Pinto 
LM(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Viral Immunology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz 
Fundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Viral Immunology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz 
Fundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Electronic address: lpinto@ioc.fiocruz.br.

During a pathogenic infection, an inflammatory process is triggered in which 
several inflammatory mediators, such as cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, 
complement system components, nitric oxide, and others induce integrity 
alteration on the endothelial barrier. Chemokines are responsible for regulating 
leukocyte trafficking under homeostatic conditions as well as activating immune 
system cells under inflammatory conditions. They are crucial molecules in the 
early stages of infection, leading to the recruitment of immune cells, namely 
neutrophils, monocytes, natural killer (NK) cells, natural killer T cells (NKT), 
dendritic cells (DC), T lymphocytes and all cells expressing chemokine receptors 
for inflammatory sites. Other functions, such as collagen production, tissue 
repair, a proliferation of hematopoietic precursors and angiogenesis, are also 
performed by these molecules. Chemokines, amongst inflammatory mediators, play a 
key role in dengue immunopathogenesis. Dengue fever is a disease caused by the 
dengue virus (DENV). It is characterized by a broad spectrum of clinical 
manifestations ranging from asymptomatic cases to mild and severe symptomatic 
ones. As for the latter, the appearance of hemorrhagic manifestations and 
changes in vascular permeability may lead the patient to develop cavitary 
effusions, organ involvement, and even death. As chemokines exert an influence 
on various homeostatic and inflammatory processes, acting vigorously on vascular 
endothelial activation and cell migration, the main purpose of this chapter is 
to discuss the influence of chemokines on the alteration of endothelial 
permeability and migration of T lymphocytes in DENV infection.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2019.06.001
PMID: 31181280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]