---
reference_id: "PMID:29517885"
title: LZTR1- and SMARCB1-Related Schwannomatosis.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Dhamija R
- Plotkin S
- Gomes A
- Babovic-Vuksanovic D
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LZTR1- and SMARCB1-Related Schwannomatosis.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Dhamija R, Plotkin S, Gomes A, Babovic-Vuksanovic D

## Content

1. LZTR1- and SMARCB1-Related Schwannomatosis.

Dhamija R(1), Plotkin S(2), Gomes A(3), Babovic-Vuksanovic D(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2018 Mar 8 [updated 2025 Dec 4].

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genomics and Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota
(2)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School;, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
(3)Department of Clinical and Diagnostics Sciences, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama
(4)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: LZTR1- and SMARCB1-related schwannomatosis are 
characterized by a predisposition to develop multiple non-intradermal 
schwannomas. Individuals most commonly present between the second and fourth 
decade of life. The most common presenting feature is localized or diffuse pain 
or asymptomatic mass. Schwannomas most often affect peripheral nerves and spinal 
nerves. Meningiomas have only been reported in individuals with SMARCB1-related 
schwannomatosis. Malignancy remains a risk especially in individuals with 
SMARCB1-related schwannomatosis.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of LZTR1- or SMARCB1-related schwannomatosis is 
established in a proband with characteristic clinical findings and a 
heterozygous germline pathogenic variant in LZTR1 or SMARCB1 identified by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Comprehensive, multimodal approach to 
pain management, guided by a pain management specialist or neurologist; referral 
to mental health professionals as needed for anxiety and/or depression; surgery 
for schwannomas associated with uncontrolled localized pain or a neurologic 
deficit; meningioma treatment as for sporadic meningioma. Surveillance: Annual 
neurologic examination and pain assessment; brain and spine MRI or whole-body 
MRI every two to three years beginning at age 12 years, with fine cuts through 
internal auditory canal in those w/LZTR1-related schwannomatosis; assessment for 
anxiety and depression annually or as needed. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Radiation can increase the risk for malignant transformation and should be 
avoided when possible. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to 
evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an 
affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would 
benefit from surveillance and clinical management.
GENETIC COUNSELING: LZTR1- and SMARCB1-related schwannomatosis are inherited in 
an autosomal dominant manner with reduced penetrance. Fewer than 20% of 
individuals diagnosed with LZTR1- or SMARCB1-related schwannomatosis have an 
affected parent. In families in which the proband represents a simplex case, the 
proportion of probands with a de novo pathogenic variant is approximately 30% 
for LZTR1-related schwannomatosis and 10% for SMARCB1-related schwannomatosis. 
Each child of an individual with LZTR1- or SMARCB1-related schwannomatosis has 
up to a 50% chance of inheriting a pathogenic variant. Once a germline LZTR1 or 
SMARCB1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, 
predictive testing for at-risk asymptomatic family members and prenatal and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 29517885