---
reference_id: "PMID:7797201"
title: "A study of the association of Epstein-Barr virus with Burkitt's lymphoma occurring in a Chinese population."
authors:
- Chan JK
- Tsang WY
- Ng CS
- Wong CS
- Lo ES
journal: Histopathology
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb01437.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A study of the association of Epstein-Barr virus with Burkitt's lymphoma occurring in a Chinese population.
**Authors:** Chan JK, Tsang WY, Ng CS, Wong CS, Lo ES
**Journal:** Histopathology (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb01437.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb01437.x)

## Content

1. Histopathology. 1995 Mar;26(3):239-45. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb01437.x.

A study of the association of Epstein-Barr virus with Burkitt's lymphoma 
occurring in a Chinese population.

Chan JK(1), Tsang WY, Ng CS, Wong CS, Lo ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong.

There is a strong association (approximately 95%) of endemic Burkitt's lymphoma 
with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), whereas the association is weak for the sporadic 
form occurring in Western countries (approximately 15%). In the Middle East, 
North Africa and South America, 60-80% of Burkitt's lymphomas harbour EBV. These 
epidemiological differences suggest that either the endemicity of EBV or 
socio-economic conditions, or both, may influence the pathogenetic role of EBV 
in Burkitt's lymphoma. Since only meagre data are available on Asians, this 
study was performed to address this issue by studying cases from Hong Kong, 
where EBV seroconversion occurs in the first few years of life but the 
socio-economic conditions approach those of Western countries. In situ 
hybridization for EBV encoded RNAs (EBERs) was performed on paraffin sections of 
18 cases of Burkitt's lymphoma. Labelling of the neoplastic cells was detected 
in five cases (27.7%). In contrast, among 54 cases of B-cell lymphomas of 
various subtypes studied for comparison, signals for EBER were detected in only 
one case each of T-cell-rich large B-cell lymphoma, anaplastic large cell 
lymphoma and Reed-Sternberg-like cells occurring in B-cell chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma. The strong labelling with oligo-dT probe 
(which hybridized with the polyadenylated ends of mRNA) in all cases suggested 
that the negative results were genuine and not due to poor preservation of RNA 
in the tissues. Thus, among B-cell neoplasms occurring in Chinese, Burkitt's 
lymphoma shows a statistically stronger association (P < 0.01) with EBV than 
with other types of B-cell lymphoma.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb01437.x
PMID: 7797201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]