---
reference_id: "PMID:39226257"
title: Melatonin mitigates chemotherapy-induced small intestinal atrophy in rats and reduces cytotoxicity in murine intestinal organoids.
authors:
- Peters K
- Lerma Clavero A
- Kullenberg F
- Kopsida M
- Dahlgren D
- Heindryckx F
- Lennernäs H
- Sjöblom M
journal: PLoS One
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0307414
keywords:
- Animals
- Melatonin/pharmacology
- Rats
- Organoids/drug effects
- "Fluorouracil/adverse effects, pharmacology"
- Mice
- "Intestine, Small/drug effects, pathology"
- "Mucositis/chemically induced, pathology, prevention & control, drug therapy"
- Male
- "Atrophy/chemically induced, drug therapy"
- "Intestinal Mucosa/drug effects, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Melatonin mitigates chemotherapy-induced small intestinal atrophy in rats and reduces cytotoxicity in murine intestinal organoids.
**Authors:** Peters K, Lerma Clavero A, Kullenberg F, Kopsida M, Dahlgren D, Heindryckx F, Lennernäs H, Sjöblom M
**Journal:** PLoS One (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0307414](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0307414)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2024 Sep 3;19(9):e0307414. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0307414.
eCollection 2024.

Melatonin mitigates chemotherapy-induced small intestinal atrophy in rats and
reduces cytotoxicity in murine intestinal organoids.

Peters K(1)(2), Lerma Clavero A(1), Kullenberg F(2), Kopsida M(1), Dahlgren
D(2), Heindryckx F(1), Lennernäs H(2), Sjöblom M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.

Cancer continues to pose a significant global health challenge, with
gastrointestinal (GI) cancers among the most prevalent and deadly forms. These
cancers often lead to high mortality rates and demand the use of potent
cytotoxic chemotherapeutics. For example, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) forms the
backbone of chemotherapy regimens for various GI cancers, including colorectal
cancer. While these chemotherapeutics efficiently kill cancer cells, they
frequently cause off-target effects such as chemotherapy-induced mucositis
(CIM), characterized by debilitating symptoms like pain, nausea, and diarrhoea,
necessitating medical intervention. In this study, we elucidated the potential
of melatonin and misoprostol to reduce 5-FU-induced small intestinal mucositis.
Morphological and cellular changes in the jejunum, along with colonic faecal
water content were quantified in rats as markers for CIM. Additionally, the
effects of melatonin were investigated in vitro on 5-FU treated murine
intestinal organoids. The results showed that melatonin prevented villus atrophy
in the rat jejunal mucosa and upheld cell viability in murine intestinal
organoids. In contrast, misoprostol alone or in combination with melatonin did
not significantly affect CIM caused by 5-FU. These in vivo and in vitro
experiments provided promising insights that melatonin may be used as a
preventive and/or adjuvant combination therapy to prevent and reduce CIM,
holding the potential to enhance cancer treatment outcomes and improve patient
quality-of-life.

Copyright: © 2024 Peters et al. This is an open access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0307414
PMCID: PMC11371236
PMID: 39226257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
