---
reference_id: "PMID:27889062"
title: Monoallelic Mutations in the Translation Initiation Codon of KLHL24 Cause Skin Fragility.
authors:
- He Y
- Maier K
- Leppert J
- Hausser I
- Schwieger-Briel A
- Weibel L
- Theiler M
- Kiritsi D
- Busch H
- Boerries M
- Hannula-Jouppi K
- Heikkilä H
- Tasanen K
- Castiglia D
- Zambruno G
- Has C
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.005
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Child
- "Codon, Initiator/genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- "Skin/metabolism, pathology"
- Skin Abnormalities/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monoallelic Mutations in the Translation Initiation Codon of KLHL24 Cause Skin Fragility.
**Authors:** He Y, Maier K, Leppert J, Hausser I, Schwieger-Briel A, Weibel L, Theiler M, Kiritsi D, Busch H, Boerries M, Hannula-Jouppi K, Heikkilä H, Tasanen K, Castiglia D, Zambruno G, Has C
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.005)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Dec 1;99(6):1395-1404. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.005. 
Epub 2016 Nov 23.

Monoallelic Mutations in the Translation Initiation Codon of KLHL24 Cause Skin 
Fragility.

He Y(1), Maier K(1), Leppert J(1), Hausser I(2), Schwieger-Briel A(3), Weibel 
L(3), Theiler M(3), Kiritsi D(1), Busch H(4), Boerries M(4), Hannula-Jouppi 
K(5), Heikkilä H(6), Tasanen K(7), Castiglia D(8), Zambruno G(9), Has C(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg 
79104, Germany.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(3)Department of Paediatric Dermatology, University Children's Hospital Zurich, 
Zurich 8091, Switzerland; Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, 
Zurich 8091, Switzerland.
(4)Systems Biology of the Cellular Microenvironment Group, Institute of 
Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, 
Freiburg 79104, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research 
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg 69120, Germany; Comprehensive Cancer Center Freiburg, 
Freiburg 79106, Germany.
(5)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of Helsinki and 
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki 00014, Finland; Folkhälsan Institute of 
Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki 00014, Finland.
(6)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of Helsinki and 
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki 00014, Finland.
(7)Department of Dermatology, PEDEGO Research Unit, Medical Research Center 
Oulu, Oulu University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu 90014, Finland.
(8)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, Istituto Dermopatico 
dell'Immacolata, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Rome 
00167, Italy.
(9)Genetic and Rare Diseases Research Area, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Rome 00165, Italy.
(10)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg 
79104, Germany. Electronic address: cristina.has@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

The genetic basis of epidermolysis bullosa, a group of genetic disorders 
characterized by the mechanically induced formation of skin blisters, is largely 
known, but a number of cases still remain genetically unsolved. Here, we used 
whole-exome and targeted sequencing to identify monoallelic mutations, c.1A>G 
and c.2T>C, in the translation initiation codon of the gene encoding kelch-like 
protein 24 (KLHL24) in 14 individuals with a distinct skin-fragility phenotype 
and skin cleavage within basal keratinocytes. Remarkably, mutation c.1A>G 
occurred de novo and was recurrent in families originating from different 
countries. The striking similarities of the clinical features of the affected 
individuals point to a unique and very specific pathomechanism. We showed that 
mutations in the translation initiation codon of KLHL24 lead to the usage of a 
downstream translation initiation site with the same reading frame and formation 
of a truncated polypeptide. The pathobiology was examined in keratinocytes and 
fibroblasts of the affected individuals and via expression of mutant KLHL24, and 
we found mutant KLHL24 to be associated with abnormalities of intermediate 
filaments in keratinocytes and fibroblasts. In particular, KLHL24 mutations were 
associated with irregular and fragmented keratin 14. Recombinant overexpression 
of normal KLHL24 promoted keratin 14 degradation, whereas mutant KLHL24 showed 
less activity than the normal molecule. These findings identify KLHL24 mutations 
as a cause of skin fragility and identify a role for KLHL24 in maintaining the 
balance between intermediate filament stability and degradation required for 
skin integrity.

Copyright Â© 2016 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.005
PMCID: PMC5142111
PMID: 27889062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]