---
reference_id: "PMID:37065759"
title: Can type 1 diabetes be an unexpected complication of obesity?
authors:
- Oboza P
- Ogarek N
- Olszanecka-Glinianowicz M
- Kocelak P
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1121303
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Can type 1 diabetes be an unexpected complication of obesity?
**Authors:** Oboza P, Ogarek N, Olszanecka-Glinianowicz M, Kocelak P
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2023.1121303](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1121303)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Mar 31;14:1121303. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1121303. eCollection 2023.

Can type 1 diabetes be an unexpected complication of obesity?

Oboza P(1), Ogarek N(2), Olszanecka-Glinianowicz M(3), Kocelak P(2).

Author information:
(1)Students' Scientific Society at the Pathophysiology Unit, Department of 
Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences in Katowice, The Medical University 
of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(2)Pathophysiology Unit, Department of Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medical 
Sciences in Katowice, The Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(3)Health Promotion and Obesity Management Unit, Department of Pathophysiology, 
Faculty of Medical Sciences in Katowice, The Medical University of Silesia, 
Katowice, Poland.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is one of the most common chronic autoimmune diseases, 
characterized by absolute insulin deficiency caused via inflammatory destruction 
of the pancreatic β-cell. Genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors play a 
role in the development of diseases. Almost ⅕ of cases involve people under the 
age of 20. In recent years, the incidence of both T1D and obesity has been 
increasing, especially among children, adolescents, and young people. In 
addition, according to the latest study, the prevalence of overweight or obesity 
in people with T1D has increased significantly. The risk factors of weight gain 
included using exogenous insulin, intensifying insulin therapy, fear of 
hypoglycemia and related decrease in physical activity, and psychological 
factors, such as emotional eating and binge eating. It has also been suggested 
that T1D may be a complication of obesity. The relationship between body size in 
childhood, increase in body mass index values in late adolescence and the 
development of T1D in young adulthood is considered. Moreover, the coexistence 
of T1D and T2D is increasingly observed, this situation is called double or 
hybrid diabetes. This is associated with an increased risk of the earlier 
development of dyslipidemia, cardiovascular diseases, cancer, and consequently a 
shortening of life. Thus, the purpose of this review was to summarize the 
relationships between overweight or obesity and T1D.

Copyright © 2023 Oboza, Ogarek, Olszanecka-Glinianowicz and Kocelak.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1121303
PMCID: PMC10102381
PMID: 37065759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.