---
reference_id: "PMID:37328298"
title: "Potential Alternative Therapeutic Modalities for Management Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma: A Review."
authors:
- Afshari K
- Sohal KS
journal: Cancer Control
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/10732748231185003
keywords:
- Humans
- Squamous Cell Carcinoma of Head and Neck/therapy
- Head and Neck Neoplasms/therapy
- Immunotherapy
- Larynx
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potential Alternative Therapeutic Modalities for Management Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma: A Review.
**Authors:** Afshari K, Sohal KS
**Journal:** Cancer Control (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/10732748231185003](https://doi.org/10.1177/10732748231185003)

## Content

1. Cancer Control. 2023 Jan-Dec;30:10732748231185003. doi: 
10.1177/10732748231185003.

Potential Alternative Therapeutic Modalities for Management Head and Neck 
Squamous Cell Carcinoma: A Review.

Afshari K(1), Sohal KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Muhimbili University of Health 
and Allied Sciences, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) includes malignancies of the lip 
and oral cavity, oropharynx, nasopharynx, larynx, and hypopharynx. It is among 
the most common malignancy worldwide, affecting nearly 1 million people 
annually. The traditional treatment options for HNSCC include surgery, 
radiotherapy, and conventional chemotherapy. However, these treatment options 
have their specific sequelae, which produce high rates of recurrence and severe 
treatment-related disabilities. Recent technological advancements have led to 
tremendous progress in understanding tumor biology, and hence the emergence of 
several alternative therapeutic modalities for managing cancers (including 
HNSCC). These treatment options are stem cell targeted therapy, gene therapy, 
and immunotherapy. Therefore, this review article aims to provide an overview of 
these alternative treatments of HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1177/10732748231185003
PMCID: PMC10278411
PMID: 37328298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.