---
reference_id: "PMID:37060436"
title: Mechanisms of Sarcomere Protein Mutation-Induced Cardiomyopathies.
authors:
- Barefield DY
- Alvarez-Arce A
- Araujo KN
journal: Curr Cardiol Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11886-023-01876-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of Sarcomere Protein Mutation-Induced Cardiomyopathies.
**Authors:** Barefield DY, Alvarez-Arce A, Araujo KN
**Journal:** Curr Cardiol Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11886-023-01876-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11886-023-01876-9)

## Content

1. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2023 Jun;25(6):473-484. doi: 10.1007/s11886-023-01876-9.
Epub  2023 Apr 15.

Mechanisms of Sarcomere Protein Mutation-Induced Cardiomyopathies.

Barefield DY(1), Alvarez-Arce A(2), Araujo KN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Loyola University Chicago, 2160 
S. 1st Ave, Maywood, IL, 60153, USA. dbarefield@luc.edu.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Loyola University Chicago, 2160 
S. 1st Ave, Maywood, IL, 60153, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The pace of identifying cardiomyopathy-associated mutations 
and advances in our understanding of sarcomere function that underlies many 
cardiomyopathies has been remarkable. Here, we aim to synthesize how these 
advances have led to the promising new treatments that are being developed to 
treat cardiomyopathies.
RECENT FINDINGS: The genomics era has identified and validated many genetic 
causes of hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathies. Recent advances in our 
mechanistic understanding of sarcomere pathophysiology include high-resolution 
molecular models of sarcomere components and the identification of the myosin 
super-relaxed state. The advances in our understanding of sarcomere function 
have yielded several therapeutic agents that are now in development and clinical 
use to correct contractile dysfunction-mediated cardiomyopathy. New genes linked 
to cardiomyopathy include targets with limited clinical evidence and require 
additional investigation. Large portions of cardiomyopathy with family history 
remain genetically undiagnosed and may be due to polygenic disease.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11886-023-01876-9
PMCID: PMC11141690
PMID: 37060436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Conflict of Interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.