---
reference_id: "PMID:16411234"
title: "Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP): genotype correlation to FAP phenotype with osteomas and sebaceous cysts."
authors:
- Bisgaard ML
- Bülow S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP): genotype correlation to FAP phenotype with osteomas and sebaceous cysts.
**Authors:** Bisgaard ML, Bülow S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.31010](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.31010)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Feb 1;140(3):200-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31010.

Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP): genotype correlation to FAP phenotype with 
osteomas and sebaceous cysts.

Bisgaard ML(1), Bülow S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Department G, Copenhagen 
University, Panum Institute 24.4, Copenhagen N, Denmark.

Gardner syndrome is characterized by the triad of colorectal adenomas, soft and 
hard tissue tumors. This disorder was regarded as a separate disease until the 
identification of the APC gene when it was recognized that mutations in the APC 
gene were the underlying cause of both Gardner syndrome and familial adenomatous 
polyposis (FAP). The present study aimed at examining whether a particular APC 
genotype could be delineated in FAP patients with benign extracolonic 
manifestations: sebaceous cysts and/or osteomas. A questionnaire was sent to all 
Danish FAP patients (N = 234) asking for occurrence of sebaceous cysts and 
palpable osteomas. Medical records later verified positive findings, when 
possible. The results for each patient were correlated to the position of his or 
her mutation in the APC gene. Positive participation compliance was 77% (N = 
180), and in 105 of these patients the pathogenic APC mutation was known. 
Palpable osteomas were reported in 17 of the patients in whom a pathogenic 
mutation had been identified. Osteomas were only identified in patients with 
mutations between codon 767 and 1513, a gene area also associated with 
congenital hypertrophy of the retinal-pigmented epithelium (CHRPE) and 
hepatoblastoma. Sebaceous cysts were reported in 51% of the patients, and their 
APC mutations were evenly distributed in the gene with no particular hotspot. 
Osteomas appeared most frequently in patients with sebaceous cysts, odds ratio 
6.6, P < 0.001. The study provides molecular evidence that Gardner syndrome is a 
variant of FAP and essentially obsolete in clinical practice.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31010
PMID: 16411234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]