---
reference_id: "PMID:25689887"
title: Antigen production using heterologous expression of dengue virus-2 non-structural protein 1 (NS1) in Nicotiana tabacum (Havana) for immunodiagnostic purposes.
authors:
- Amaro MO
- Xisto MF
- Dias AC
- Versiani AF
- Cardoso SA
- Otoni WC
- da Silva CC
- De Paula SO
journal: Plant Cell Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00299-015-1753-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antigen production using heterologous expression of dengue virus-2 non-structural protein 1 (NS1) in Nicotiana tabacum (Havana) for immunodiagnostic purposes.
**Authors:** Amaro MO, Xisto MF, Dias AC, Versiani AF, Cardoso SA, Otoni WC, da Silva CC, De Paula SO
**Journal:** Plant Cell Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00299-015-1753-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00299-015-1753-5)

## Content

1. Plant Cell Rep. 2015 Jun;34(6):919-28. doi: 10.1007/s00299-015-1753-5. Epub
2015  Feb 18.

Antigen production using heterologous expression of dengue virus-2 
non-structural protein 1 (NS1) in Nicotiana tabacum (Havana) for 
immunodiagnostic purposes.

Amaro MO(1), Xisto MF, Dias AC, Versiani AF, Cardoso SA, Otoni WC, da Silva CC, 
De Paula SO.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunovirology, Department of General Biology, 
Federal University of Viçosa, Av. PH Rolfs, s/n Campus Universitário, Viçosa, 
MG, CEP 36570-000, Brazil.

Erratum in
    Plant Cell Rep. 2016 Oct;35(10):2205. doi: 10.1007/s00299-016-2043-6.

Expression of dengue-2 virus NS1 protein in Nicotiana tabacum plants for 
development of dengue immunodiagnostic kits. Dengue is one of the most important 
diseases caused by arboviruses in the world. A significant increase in its 
geographical distribution has been noticed over the last 20 years, with 
continuous transmission of several serotypes and emergence of the hemorrhagic 
fever in areas where the disease was previously not prevalent. Although the 
methodological processes for dengue diagnosis are in deep development and 
improvement, a limitation for the realization of dengue diagnostic tests is the 
difficulty of large-scale production of the antigen to be used in diagnostic 
tests. Due to this demand, the purpose of this study was to obtain the 
non-structural protein 1 (NS1) from dengue-2 serotype by heterologous expression 
in Nicotiana tabacum (Havana). After confirmation of the NS1 protein gene 
integration in the plant genome, the heterologous protein was characterized 
using SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting. In an immunoenzymatic test, the recombinant 
NS1 protein presents an antigen potential for development of dengue 
immunodiagnostic kits.

DOI: 10.1007/s00299-015-1753-5
PMID: 25689887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]