---
reference_id: "PMID:32120056"
title: Ghost spasticity in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Trompetto C
- Currà A
- Puce L
- Mori L
- Pallecchi I
- Gazzola P
- Fabbri S
- Uccelli A
- Novi G
- Crisafulli O
- Serrati C
- Marinelli L
journal: J Electromyogr Kinesiol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jelekin.2020.102408
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ghost spasticity in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Trompetto C, Currà A, Puce L, Mori L, Pallecchi I, Gazzola P, Fabbri S, Uccelli A, Novi G, Crisafulli O, Serrati C, Marinelli L
**Journal:** J Electromyogr Kinesiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jelekin.2020.102408](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelekin.2020.102408)

## Content

1. J Electromyogr Kinesiol. 2020 Apr;51:102408. doi:
10.1016/j.jelekin.2020.102408.  Epub 2020 Feb 20.

Ghost spasticity in multiple sclerosis.

Trompetto C(1), Currà A(2), Puce L(3), Mori L(1), Pallecchi I(4), Gazzola P(5), 
Fabbri S(5), Uccelli A(1), Novi G(3), Crisafulli O(3), Serrati C(6), Marinelli 
L(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health, University of Genoa, Italy; Department of Neuroscience, IRCCS 
Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
(2)Academic Neurology Unit, A. Fiorini Hospital, Terracina (LT), Department of 
Medical-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, Sapienza University of Rome, Polo 
Pontino, Italy.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health, University of Genoa, Italy.
(4)CNR-SPIN, Physics Department, Genoa, Italy.
(5)Neurology Unit, P.A. Micone Hospital, ASL3 Genovese, Genoa, Italy.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, 
Italy.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health, University of Genoa, Italy; Department of Neuroscience, IRCCS 
Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy. Electronic address: 
lucio.marinelli@unige.it.

Spasticity is the velocity-dependent hypertonia frequently encountered in 
patients affected by Upper Motor Neuron Syndrome. It is due to a tonic stretch 
reflex, which is evoked in patients at rest. The aim of this study, performed 
using surface electromyography (EMG), was to investigate stretch reflex 
excitability in the hamstrings muscles of patients affected by progressive 
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) and to correlate EMG results with clinical findings. 
Thirty patients and 20 age-matched healthy controls were investigated. EMG 
activity was recorded from biceps femoris muscle with the patient at rest. To 
stretch hamstrings muscles, the patient's leg was manually moved from maximal 
flexion to maximal extension at 3 different velocities to investigate both 
phasic and tonic stretch reflex. Only 7 patients were affected by hypertonia of 
the hamstrings; 4 of them showed muscle contracture. A tonic stretch reflex was 
present in the vast majority of the recruited patients, whether they presented 
hypertonia of the hamstrings or not. Tonic stretch reflex is often present in 
the hamstrings muscles of progressive MS patients without producing increased 
muscle tone. This "ghost spasticity" is likely to be, for its intrinsic 
features, an important risk factor for the development of contractures in the 
hamstrings muscles.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jelekin.2020.102408
PMID: 32120056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.