---
reference_id: "PMID:37834374"
title: Dysautonomia in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
authors:
- Oprisan AL
- Popescu BO
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241914927
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysautonomia in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Oprisan AL, Popescu BO
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241914927](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241914927)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Oct 5;24(19):14927. doi: 10.3390/ijms241914927.

Dysautonomia in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.

Oprisan AL(1)(2), Popescu BO(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Carol Davila University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, 020021 Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Neurology, Colentina Clinical Hospital, 020125 Bucharest, 
Romania.
(3)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Neurosciences and Experimental Neurology, Victor 
Babes National Institute of Pathology, 050096 Bucharest, Romania.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease, 
characterized in its typical presentation by a combination of lower and upper 
motor neuron symptoms, with a progressive course and fatal outcome. Due to 
increased recognition of the non-motor symptoms, it is currently considered a 
multisystem disorder with great heterogeneity, regarding genetical, clinical, 
and neuropathological features. Often underestimated, autonomic signs and 
symptoms have been described in patients with ALS, and various method analyses 
have been used to assess autonomic nervous system involvement. The aim of this 
paper is to offer a narrative literature review on autonomic disturbances in 
ALS, based on the scarce data available to date.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241914927
PMCID: PMC10573406
PMID: 37834374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.