---
reference_id: "PMID:25457751"
title: "Ebola virus convalescent blood products: where we are now and where we may need to go."
authors:
- Burnouf T
- Seghatchian J
journal: Transfus Apher Sci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.transci.2014.10.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola virus convalescent blood products: where we are now and where we may need to go.
**Authors:** Burnouf T, Seghatchian J
**Journal:** Transfus Apher Sci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.transci.2014.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.transci.2014.10.003)

## Content

1. Transfus Apher Sci. 2014 Oct;51(2):120-5. doi: 10.1016/j.transci.2014.10.003.

Ebola virus convalescent blood products: where we are now and where we may need 
to go.

Burnouf T(1), Seghatchian J.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Materials and Tissue Engineering, College of 
Oral Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. thburnouf@gmail.com

The world is regularly exposed to emerging infections with the potential to 
burst into a pandemic. One possible way to treat patients, when no other 
treatment is yet developed,is passive immunization performed by transfusing 
blood, plasma or plasma immunoglobul infractions obtained from convalescent 
donors who have recovered from the disease and have developed protective 
antibodies. The most recent on-going epidemic is caused by the Ebola virus, a 
filovirus responsible for Ebola virus disease, a severe, often lethal, 
hemorrhagic fever. Recently, the use of convalescent blood products was proposed 
by the WHO as one early option for treating patients with Ebola virus disease. 
This publication provides an overview of the various convalescent blood products 
and technological options that could theoretically be considered when there is a 
need to rely on this therapeutic approach.In countries without access to 
advanced blood-processing technologies, the choice may initially be restricted 
to convalescent whole blood or plasma. In technologically advanced countries, 
additional options for convalescent blood products are available, including 
virally inactivated plasma and fractionated immunoglobulins. The preparation of 
minipool immunoglobulins is also a realistic option to consider.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transci.2014.10.003
PMCID: PMC7106377
PMID: 25457751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]