---
reference_id: "PMID:20717034"
title: "Ear canal cholesteatoma: meta-analysis of clinical characteristics with update on classification, staging and treatment."
authors:
- Dubach P
- Mantokoudis G
- Caversaccio M
journal: Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/MOO.0b013e32833da84e
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ear canal cholesteatoma: meta-analysis of clinical characteristics with update on classification, staging and treatment.
**Authors:** Dubach P, Mantokoudis G, Caversaccio M
**Journal:** Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOO.0b013e32833da84e](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOO.0b013e32833da84e)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010 Oct;18(5):369-76. doi: 
10.1097/MOO.0b013e32833da84e.

Ear canal cholesteatoma: meta-analysis of clinical characteristics with update 
on classification, staging and treatment.

Dubach P(1), Mantokoudis G, Caversaccio M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Inselspital, Bern 
University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. 
patrick.dubach@insel.ch

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: We present an update on clinical evaluation, staging, 
classification and treatment of canal cholesteatoma, including a meta-analysis 
of clinical data of the last 30 years.
RECENT FINDINGS: Ear canal cholesteatoma is frequently associated secondarily to 
other canal pathologies. The cause for the rare idiopathic form of the disease 
remains enigmatic. Epidemiologic and experimental studies of its pathogenesis 
have increased; however, the main explanatory theory of a deficient migratory 
capacity of the canal epithelium affected has been falsified only recently. 
Therefore, the debate on the pathogenesis has gained additional impetus and more 
data is needed.
SUMMARY: Canal cholesteatoma is a rarity in otologic pathology, often leading to 
misdiagnosis as external otitis or otomycosis by physicians unfamiliar with the 
disease. It presents typically with otorrhea, focal erosion and keratin 
accumulation in the osseous ear canal and has to be distinguished from keratosis 
obturans, which leads to otalgia and bilateral conductive hearing loss by 
ceruminal plugs, with circumferential distention of the ear canal. Treatment by 
canaloplasty is curative and highly successful. Alternative conservative 
treatment is feasible, however, requiring long-term follow up, with often 
painful cleaning of the lesion.

DOI: 10.1097/MOO.0b013e32833da84e
PMID: 20717034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]