---
reference_id: "PMID:37048085"
title: "Microglia Mediated Neuroinflammation in Parkinson's Disease."
authors:
- Isik S
- Yeman Kiyak B
- Akbayir R
- Seyhali R
- Arpaci T
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12071012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microglia Mediated Neuroinflammation in Parkinson's Disease.
**Authors:** Isik S, Yeman Kiyak B, Akbayir R, Seyhali R, Arpaci T
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12071012](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12071012)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Mar 25;12(7):1012. doi: 10.3390/cells12071012.

Microglia Mediated Neuroinflammation in Parkinson's Disease.

Isik S(1)(2), Yeman Kiyak B(2)(3), Akbayir R(2)(4), Seyhali R(2)(4), Arpaci 
T(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Engineering and 
Natural Sciences, Uskudar University, Uskudar, Istanbul 34662, Turkey.
(2)Stem Cell Research and Application Center (USKOKMER), Uskudar University, 
Uskudar, Istanbul 34662, Turkey.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Hamidiye Health Sciences, 
University of Health Sciences, Uskudar, Istanbul 34668, Turkey.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Science, Uskudar University, 
Uskudar, Istanbul 34662, Turkey.

Parkinson's Disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder 
seen, especially in the elderly. Tremor, shaking, movement problems, and 
difficulty with balance and coordination are among the hallmarks, and 
dopaminergic neuronal loss in substantia nigra pars compacta of the brain and 
aggregation of intracellular protein α-synuclein are the pathological 
characterizations. Neuroinflammation has emerged as an involving mechanism at 
the initiation and development of PD. It is a complex network of interactions 
comprising immune and non-immune cells in addition to mediators of the immune 
response. Microglia, the resident macrophages in the CNS, take on the leading 
role in regulating neuroinflammation and maintaining homeostasis. Under normal 
physiological conditions, they exist as "homeostatic" but upon pathological 
stimuli, they switch to the "reactive state". Pro-inflammatory (M1) and 
anti-inflammatory (M2) phenotypes are used to classify microglial activity with 
each phenotype having its own markers and released mediators. When M1 microglia 
are persistent, they will contribute to various inflammatory diseases, including 
neurodegenerative diseases, such as PD. In this review, we focus on the role of 
microglia mediated neuroinflammation in PD and also signaling pathways, 
receptors, and mediators involved in the process, presenting the studies that 
associate microglia-mediated inflammation with PD. A better understanding of 
this complex network and interactions is important in seeking new therapies for 
PD and possibly other neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12071012
PMCID: PMC10093562
PMID: 37048085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.