---
reference_id: "PMID:23623397"
title: "Eculizumab in AQP4-IgG-positive relapsing neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders: an open-label pilot study."
authors:
- Pittock SJ
- Lennon VA
- McKeon A
- Mandrekar J
- Weinshenker BG
- Lucchinetti CF
- "O'Toole O"
- Wingerchuk DM
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70076-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eculizumab in AQP4-IgG-positive relapsing neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders: an open-label pilot study.
**Authors:** Pittock SJ, Lennon VA, McKeon A, Mandrekar J, Weinshenker BG, Lucchinetti CF, O'Toole O, Wingerchuk DM
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70076-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70076-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2013 Jun;12(6):554-62. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70076-0. Epub
 2013 Apr 26.

Eculizumab in AQP4-IgG-positive relapsing neuromyelitis optica spectrum 
disorders: an open-label pilot study.

Pittock SJ(1), Lennon VA, McKeon A, Mandrekar J, Weinshenker BG, Lucchinetti CF, 
O'Toole O, Wingerchuk DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, College of Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55902, USA. pittock.sean@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2013 Jun;12(6):529-31. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70089-9.

BACKGROUND: Complement activation after binding of an IgG autoantibody to 
aquaporin 4 (AQP4) is thought to be a major determinant of CNS inflammation and 
astrocytic injury in neuromyelitis optica. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the use of eculizumab--a therapeutic monoclonal IgG that neutralises 
the complement protein C5--in neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders.
METHODS: Between Oct 20, 2009, and Nov 3, 2010, we recruited patients from two 
US centres into an open-label trial. Patients were AQP4-IgG-seropositive, aged 
at least 18 years, had a neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder, and had at 
least two attacks in the preceding 6 months or three in the previous 12 months. 
Patients received meningococcal vaccine at a screening visit and 2 weeks later 
began eculizumab treatment. They received 600 mg intravenous eculizumab weekly 
for 4 weeks, 900 mg in the fifth week, and then 900 mg every 2 weeks for 48 
weeks. The coprimary endpoints were efficacy (measured by number of attacks [new 
worsening of neurological function lasting for more than 24 h and not 
attributable to an identifiable cause]) and safety. Secondary endpoints were 
disability (measured by expanded disability status scale), ambulation (Hauser 
score), and visual acuity. At follow-up visits (after 6 weeks and 3, 6, 9, and 
12 months of treatment; and 3 and 12 months after discontinuation), complete 
neurological examination was undertaken and an adverse event questionnaire 
completed. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00904826.
FINDINGS: We enrolled 14 patients, all of whom were women. After 12 months of 
eculizumab treatment, 12 patients were relapse free; two had had possible 
attacks. The median number of attacks per year fell from three before treatment 
(range two to four) to zero (zero to one) during treatment (p<0·0001). No 
patient had worsened disability by any outcome measure. Median score on the 
expanded disability status scale improved from 4·3 (range 1·0-8·0) before 
treatment to 3·5 (0-8·0) during treatment (p=0·0078). Two patients improved by 
two points and three improved by one point on the Hauser score; no change was 
recorded for the other patients. Visual acuity had improved in at least one eye 
by one point in four patients, and by two points in one patient; no change was 
recorded for other patients. One patient had meningococcal sepsis and sterile 
meningitis about 2 months after the first eculizumab infusion, but resumed 
treatment after full recovery. No other drug-related serious adverse events 
occurred. Eight attacks in five patients were reported within 12 months of 
eculizumab withdrawal.
INTERPRETATION: Eculizumab seems to be well tolerated, significantly reduce 
attack frequency, and stabilise or improve neurological disability measures in 
patients with aggressive neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders. The apparent 
effects of eculizumab deserve further investigation in larger, randomised 
controlled studies.
FUNDING: Alexion Pharmaceuticals.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70076-0
PMID: 23623397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]