---
reference_id: "PMID:27742023"
title: Current Perspectives on Imaging for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic Sclerosis, and Dermatomyositis/Polymyositis.
authors:
- Kolasinski SL
- Chi AS
- Lopez-Garib AJ
journal: Rheum Dis Clin North Am
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.rdc.2016.07.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current Perspectives on Imaging for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic Sclerosis, and Dermatomyositis/Polymyositis.
**Authors:** Kolasinski SL, Chi AS, Lopez-Garib AJ
**Journal:** Rheum Dis Clin North Am (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rdc.2016.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rdc.2016.07.007)

## Content

1. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2016 Nov;42(4):711-732. doi:
10.1016/j.rdc.2016.07.007.  Epub 2016 Sep 9.

Current Perspectives on Imaging for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic 
Sclerosis, and Dermatomyositis/Polymyositis.

Kolasinski SL(1), Chi AS(2), Lopez-Garib AJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Penn Musculoskeletal Center, 3737 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA. Electronic address: Sharon.kolasinski@uphs.upenn.edu.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Penn Musculoskeletal Center, 3737 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.

Systemic rheumatic diseases frequently pose diagnostic challenges to the 
clinician. The precise nature of the disorder can be obscure and different 
disorders can present with similar symptoms, such as joint pain. Plain 
radiographs provide an appropriate starting point for detection of joint 
abnormalities. Musculoskeletal ultrasound and MRI offer greater sensitivity in 
detecting synovitis, tenosynovitis and bony erosions, among other features. 
However, due to the rarity of these diseases and lack of prospective 
longitudinal trials, a broader picture of the epidemiology of these findings and 
their implications for treatment and outcomes remains to be determined.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rdc.2016.07.007
PMID: 27742023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]