---
reference_id: "PMID:24412248"
title: Cerebrospinal fluid complement activation in patients with pneumococcal and meningococcal meningitis.
authors:
- Mook-Kanamori BB
- Brouwer MC
- Geldhoff M
- Ende Av
- van de Beek D
journal: J Infect
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2013.12.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrospinal fluid complement activation in patients with pneumococcal and meningococcal meningitis.
**Authors:** Mook-Kanamori BB, Brouwer MC, Geldhoff M, Ende Av, van de Beek D
**Journal:** J Infect (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jinf.2013.12.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2013.12.016)

## Content

1. J Infect. 2014 Jun;68(6):542-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2013.12.016. Epub 2014 Jan
 9.

Cerebrospinal fluid complement activation in patients with pneumococcal and 
meningococcal meningitis.

Mook-Kanamori BB(1), Brouwer MC(1), Geldhoff M(1), Ende Av(2), van de Beek D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Center, Center of Infection and 
Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Academic Medical Center, Center of 
Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, The Netherlands; The 
Netherlands Reference Laboratory for Bacterial Meningitis, Academic Medical 
Center, Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Center, Center of Infection and 
Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
d.vandebeek@amc.uva.nl.

BACKGROUND: Recent research into the treatment of bacterial meningitis has 
examined the innate immune system, specifically the complement system, as a 
potential target for adjuvant therapy. However, the effects of blocking the 
complement system may be pathogen dependent.
METHODS: We measured cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of complement components 
C1q, C3a, iC3b, C5a, sC5b-9, CFH and MBL in 310 patients with pneumococcal and 
meningococcal meningitis from a prospective nationwide cohort study. The CSF 
complement component levels were successfully determined for between 289 (93%) 
and 307 (99%) patients, depending on available volumes of stored CSF.
RESULTS: Complement factors C1q and MBL as well as common complement pathway 
factors C3a, iC3b, C5a, sC5b-9 and complement regulator CFH were all elevated in 
patients with bacterial meningitis as compared to the controls. CSF levels of 
complement components C5a and sC5b-9 were higher in patients with pneumococcal 
meningitis compared to those with meningococcal meningitis. After correction for 
age, immunocompromised state and level of consciousness, the CSF concentrations 
of C5a and sC5b-9 remained different between causative microorganisms (P = 0.006 
and P = 0.016 respectively). In pneumococcal meningitis high C5a and C5b-9 
levels are associated with the occurrence of systemic complications, unfavorable 
outcome and death, whereas an inverse relationship between C5b-9 levels and 
mortality is observed in meningococcal meningitis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows striking variations in complement activation 
depending on the pathogen responsible for the bacterial meningitis. In 
pneumococcal meningitis, high CSF complement levels were a strong indicator of 
disease severity and mortality, however in meningococcal meningitis, an inverse 
relationship between sC5b-9 and mortality was observed.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2013.12.016
PMID: 24412248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]