---
reference_id: "PMID:25782010"
title: A novel mouse model for stable engraftment of a human immune system and human hepatocytes.
authors:
- Strick-Marchand H
- Dusséaux M
- Darche S
- Huntington ND
- Legrand N
- Masse-Ranson G
- Corcuff E
- Ahodantin J
- Weijer K
- Spits H
- Kremsdorf D
- Di Santo JP
journal: PLoS One
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119820
keywords:
- Animals
- "B-Lymphocytes/immunology, physiology, transplantation"
- Cell Lineage
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chimerism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Hepatocytes/immunology, parasitology, virology"
- Humans
- "Immune System/cytology, physiology"
- "Killer Cells, Natural/immunology, physiology, transplantation"
- Kinetics
- "Liver Diseases/immunology, parasitology, virology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "T-Lymphocytes/immunology, physiology, transplantation"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mouse model for stable engraftment of a human immune system and human hepatocytes.
**Authors:** Strick-Marchand H, Dusséaux M, Darche S, Huntington ND, Legrand N, Masse-Ranson G, Corcuff E, Ahodantin J, Weijer K, Spits H, Kremsdorf D, Di Santo JP
**Journal:** PLoS One (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0119820](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0119820)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 17;10(3):e0119820. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119820.
eCollection 2015.

A novel mouse model for stable engraftment of a human immune system and human
hepatocytes.

Strick-Marchand H(1), Dusséaux M(1), Darche S(1), Huntington ND(1), Legrand
N(2), Masse-Ranson G(1), Corcuff E(1), Ahodantin J(3), Weijer K(2), Spits H(2),
Kremsdorf D(3), Di Santo JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Innate Immunity Unit, Department of Immunology, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France; Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U668,
Paris, France.
(2)Academic Medical Center at the University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(3)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U845,
Faculté de Médecine Paris Descartes, Paris, France.

Hepatic infections by hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV) and
Plasmodium parasites leading to acute or chronic diseases constitute a global
health challenge. The species tropism of these hepatotropic pathogens is
restricted to chimpanzees and humans, thus model systems to study their
pathological mechanisms are severely limited. Although these pathogens infect
hepatocytes, disease pathology is intimately related to the degree and quality
of the immune response. As a first step to decipher the immune response to
infected hepatocytes, we developed an animal model harboring both a human immune
system (HIS) and human hepatocytes (HUHEP) in BALB/c Rag2-/- IL-2Rγc-/-
NOD.sirpa uPAtg/tg mice. The extent and kinetics of human hepatocyte engraftment
were similar between HUHEP and HIS-HUHEP mice. Transplanted human hepatocytes
were polarized and mature in vivo, resulting in 20-50% liver chimerism in these
models. Human myeloid and lymphoid cell lineages developed at similar
frequencies in HIS and HIS-HUHEP mice, and splenic and hepatic compartments were
humanized with mature B cells, NK cells and naïve T cells, as well as monocytes
and dendritic cells. Taken together, these results demonstrate that HIS-HUHEP
mice can be stably (> 5 months) and robustly engrafted with a humanized immune
system and chimeric human liver. This novel HIS-HUHEP model provides a platform
to investigate human immune responses against hepatotropic pathogens and to test
novel drug strategies or vaccine candidates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119820
PMCID: PMC4364106
PMID: 25782010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Concerning the authors that
are employed by the commercial company AXENIS, this does not alter their
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.
