---
reference_id: "PMID:12480040"
title: "Meta-analysis of results from eight randomized, placebo-controlled trials on the effect of cilostazol on patients with intermittent claudication."
authors:
- Thompson PD
- Zimet R
- Forbes WP
- Zhang P
journal: Am J Cardiol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0002-9149(02)02869-2
keywords:
- Aged
- "Cholesterol, HDL/blood"
- Cilostazol
- "Clinical Trials, Phase III as Topic"
- Double-Blind Method
- Exercise Test
- Female
- Humans
- "Intermittent Claudication/blood, drug therapy"
- Male
- Multicenter Studies as Topic
- Pentoxifylline/therapeutic use
- "Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Quality of Life
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Tetrazoles/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Treatment Outcome
- Triglycerides/blood
- "Vasodilator Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Walking
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meta-analysis of results from eight randomized, placebo-controlled trials on the effect of cilostazol on patients with intermittent claudication.
**Authors:** Thompson PD, Zimet R, Forbes WP, Zhang P
**Journal:** Am J Cardiol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0002-9149(02)02869-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9149(02)02869-2)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiol. 2002 Dec 15;90(12):1314-9. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9149(02)02869-2.

Meta-analysis of results from eight randomized, placebo-controlled trials on the 
effect of cilostazol on patients with intermittent claudication.

Thompson PD(1), Zimet R, Forbes WP, Zhang P.

Author information:
(1)Hartford Hospital, Hartford, Connecticut 06102, USA. pthomps@harthosp.org

We examined the effect of cilostazol, a type III phosphodiesterase inhibitor, on 
pain-free and maximal walking distance and quality of life measures. The present 
study examined adverse effects in 2,702 patients with stable, moderate to severe 
claudication enrolled in 8 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. 
Treatment duration ranged from 12 to 24 weeks. Cilostazol therapy increased 
maximal and pain-free walking distances by 50% and 67%, respectively. In 
subgroup analysis, cilostazol increased pain-free and maximal walking distance 
similarly in men and women, in older (>/=65 years) and younger patients, and in 
patients with and without diabetes. Quality-of-life assessments revealed 
enhanced scores for physical well-being. Cilostazol-treated patients reported a 
higher incidence of headache, bowel complaints, and palpitations than patients 
given placebos. Cilostazol decreased triglycerides by 15.8% and increased 
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol by 12.8%, but there were no deleterious 
effects on any hematologic or serum markers. We conclude that cilostazol 
significantly increases walking distance and quality-of-life measures in 
patients with claudication without major adverse effects.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9149(02)02869-2
PMID: 12480040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]