---
reference_id: "PMID:36496108"
title: "Neuropharmacological effect of risperidone: From chemistry to medicine."
authors:
- Bhat AA
- Gupta G
- Afzal O
- Kazmi I
- Al-Abbasi FA
- Alfawaz Altamimi AS
- Almalki WH
- Alzarea SI
- Singh SK
- Dua K
journal: Chem Biol Interact
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2022.110296
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropharmacological effect of risperidone: From chemistry to medicine.
**Authors:** Bhat AA, Gupta G, Afzal O, Kazmi I, Al-Abbasi FA, Alfawaz Altamimi AS, Almalki WH, Alzarea SI, Singh SK, Dua K
**Journal:** Chem Biol Interact (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cbi.2022.110296](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbi.2022.110296)

## Content

1. Chem Biol Interact. 2023 Jan 5;369:110296. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2022.110296.
Epub  2022 Dec 7.

Neuropharmacological effect of risperidone: From chemistry to medicine.

Bhat AA(1), Gupta G(2), Afzal O(3), Kazmi I(4), Al-Abbasi FA(4), Alfawaz 
Altamimi AS(3), Almalki WH(5), Alzarea SI(6), Singh SK(7), Dua K(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Suresh Gyan Vihar University, Jagatpura, 302017, Mahal 
Road, Jaipur, India.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Suresh Gyan Vihar University, Jagatpura, 302017, Mahal 
Road, Jaipur, India; Department of Pharmacology, Saveetha Dental College, 
Saveetha Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences, Saveetha University, 
Chennai, India; Uttaranchal Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Uttaranchal 
University, Dehradun, India. Electronic address: gauravpharma25@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, Prince Sattam 
Bin Abdulaziz University, Al Kharj, 11942, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Umm Al-Qura University, 
Makkah, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Jouf University, Sakaka, 
Al-Jouf, Saudi Arabia.
(7)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, 
Punjab, 144411, India; Faculty of Health, Australian Research Centre in 
Complementary and Integrative Medicine, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, 
NSW, 2007, Australia.
(8)Faculty of Health, Australian Research Centre in Complementary and 
Integrative Medicine, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, 2007, 
Australia; Discipline of Pharmacy, Graduate School of Health, University of 
Technology Sydney, NSW, 2007, Australia.

As the second-oldest atypical antipsychotic, risperidone has a long history of 
off-label usage for treating behavioural and psychological signs and symptoms of 
dementia (BPSD), such as agitation, aggressiveness, and psychosis. Risperidone 
has been shown in several trials to have a statistically significant benefit 
when used in a therapeutic context. Several lines of evidence suggest a possible 
role of risperidone via the antagonistic effect of Dopamine D2 and 5HT-receptor 
in different neurological diseases like cognitive dysfunction of schizophrenia, 
neuroinflammation, Huntington's disease, and sleep cycle management. Therefore, 
the pharmacological interactions of risperidone in all these diseases were 
investigated. Some reports on the use of risperidone in the treatment of 
dopaminergic psychosis have been slightly conflicting. However, more research is 
needed to evaluate the role of risperidone in the treatment of these 
neurological diseases.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2022.110296
PMID: 36496108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.