---
reference_id: "PMID:7802002"
title: "Cardiac abnormalities in the Bardet-Biedl syndrome: echocardiographic studies of 22 patients."
authors:
- Elbedour K
- Zucker N
- Zalzstein E
- Barki Y
- Carmi R
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320520208
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac abnormalities in the Bardet-Biedl syndrome: echocardiographic studies of 22 patients.
**Authors:** Elbedour K, Zucker N, Zalzstein E, Barki Y, Carmi R
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320520208](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320520208)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1994 Aug 15;52(2):164-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320520208.

Cardiac abnormalities in the Bardet-Biedl syndrome: echocardiographic studies of 
22 patients.

Elbedour K(1), Zucker N, Zalzstein E, Barki Y, Carmi R.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Division, Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University of the 
Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet. 2000 Jan 3;90(1):80-1. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(20000103)90:1<80::aid-ajmg14>3.0.co;2-e.

The Bardet-Biedl syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder of polydactyly, 
obesity, tapetoretinal degeneration, mental retardation, hypogenitalism, and 
renal involvement. A high incidence of congenital and acquired heart disease was 
reported in the former "Laurence-Moon-Biedl-Bardet" syndrome. However, since the 
establishment of the Bardet-Biedl syndrome as a separate clinical entity, 
cardiac involvement has not been evaluated in this disorder. We have performed 
echocardiographic studies on 22 patients with the Bardet-Biedl syndrome from 
three extended, highly inbred Bedouin families. In addition to previously 
reported congenital heart defects we have observed hypertrophy of the 
interventricular septum and dilated cardiomyopathy. Our findings of cardiac 
involvement in 50% of the cases suggest that echocardiographic examination 
should be included in the clinical evaluation and follow-up of patients with 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320520208
PMID: 7802002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]