---
reference_id: "PMID:16470722"
title: Study of transaldolase deficiency in urine samples by capillary LC-MS/MS.
authors:
- Vas G
- Conkrite K
- Amidon W
- Qian Y
- Bánki K
- Perl A
journal: J Mass Spectrom
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/jms.1004
keywords:
- Animals
- Capillary Electrochromatography/methods
- Mass Spectrometry/methods
- Mice
- Pentose Phosphate Pathway
- Sugar Phosphates/urine
- "Transaldolase/chemistry, metabolism"
- Urinalysis/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Study of transaldolase deficiency in urine samples by capillary LC-MS/MS.
**Authors:** Vas G, Conkrite K, Amidon W, Qian Y, Bánki K, Perl A
**Journal:** J Mass Spectrom (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jms.1004](https://doi.org/10.1002/jms.1004)

## Content

1. J Mass Spectrom. 2006 Apr;41(4):463-9. doi: 10.1002/jms.1004.

Study of transaldolase deficiency in urine samples by capillary LC-MS/MS.

Vas G(1), Conkrite K, Amidon W, Qian Y, Bánki K, Perl A.

Author information:
(1)SUNY Upstate Medical University, Department of Medicine, NY 13210, USA.

Transaldolase (TAL) is a key enzyme of the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). TAL
deficiency is a newly recognized cause of liver cirrhosis. We have developed an
ion-pair LC separation combined with negative ion electrospray MS/MS detection
method to assess PPP metabolites in urine samples from TAL-deficient mice.
Sedoheptulose 7-phosphate (S7P), C5-polyols D-arabitol and D-ribitol, and
6-phosphogluconate (6PG) levels were markedly increased in urine of
TAL-deficient mice with respect to those of wild-type and heterozygote
littermates. The detection limits of S7P, D-arabitol, and 6PG were 0.15 +/-
0.015 pmol, 3.5 +/- 0.41 pmol, and 0.61 +/- 0.055 pmol, respectively. The limit
of quantitation was 0.4 +/- 0.024 nmol/ml for S7P, 1.6 +/- 0.11 nmol/ml for 6PG
and 10 +/- 0.7 nmol/ml for D-arabitol. Additional metabolites, hexose
6-phosphates (m/z 259), D-ribose 5-phosphate and D-xylulose 5-phosphate (m/z
229), D-fructose 1,6-diphosphate (m/z 339), C6-polyols (m/z 181) and GSSG (m/z
611), that have been positively identified in mouse urine, showed similar levels
in control and TAL-deficient mice.

Copyright (c) 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jms.1004
PMCID: PMC3127395
PMID: 16470722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
