---
reference_id: "PMID:37624665"
title: The SWI/SNF Complex in Neural Crest Cell Development and Disease.
authors:
- Fountain DM
- Sauka-Spengler T
journal: Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-genom-011723-082913
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Mice
- Humans
- Neural Crest
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Aggression
- Homozygote
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mammals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The SWI/SNF Complex in Neural Crest Cell Development and Disease.
**Authors:** Fountain DM, Sauka-Spengler T
**Journal:** Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-genom-011723-082913](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genom-011723-082913)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2023 Aug 25;24:203-223. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-genom-011723-082913.

The SWI/SNF Complex in Neural Crest Cell Development and Disease.

Fountain DM(1), Sauka-Spengler T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, United Kingdom; email: daniel.fountain@imm.ox.ac.uk, 
tatjana.sauka-spengler@imm.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, USA.

While the neural crest cell population gives rise to an extraordinary array of 
derivatives, including elements of the craniofacial skeleton, skin pigmentation, 
and peripheral nervous system, it is today increasingly recognized that Schwann 
cell precursors are also multipotent. Two mammalian paralogs of the SWI/SNF 
(switch/sucrose nonfermentable) chromatin-remodeling complexes, BAF 
(Brg1-associated factors) and PBAF (polybromo-associated BAF), are critical for 
neural crest specification during normal mammalian development. There is 
increasing evidence that pathogenic variants in components of the BAF and PBAF 
complexes play central roles in the pathogenesis of neural crest-derived tumors. 
Transgenic mouse models demonstrate a temporal window early in development where 
pathogenic variants in Smarcb1 result in the formation of aggressive, poorly 
differentiated tumors, such as rhabdoid tumors. By contrast, later in 
development, homozygous inactivation of Smarcb1 requires additional pathogenic 
variants in tumor suppressor genes to drive the development of differentiated 
adult neoplasms derived from the neural crest, which have a comparatively good 
prognosis in humans.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-genom-011723-082913
PMID: 37624665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]