---
reference_id: "PMID:37604067"
title: European consensus-based interdisciplinary guideline for diagnosis and treatment of basal cell carcinoma-update 2023.
authors:
- Peris K
- Fargnoli MC
- Kaufmann R
- Arenberger P
- Bastholt L
- Seguin NB
- Bataille V
- Brochez L
- Del Marmol V
- Dummer R
- Forsea AM
- Gaudy-Marqueste C
- Harwood CA
- Hauschild A
- Höller C
- Kandolf L
- Kellerners-Smeets NWJ
- Lallas A
- Leiter U
- Malvehy J
- Marinović B
- Mijuskovic Z
- Moreno-Ramirez D
- Nagore E
- Nathan P
- Stratigos AJ
- Stockfleth E
- Tagliaferri L
- Trakatelli M
- Vieira R
- Zalaudek I
- Garbe C
- "EADO”A, EDF”B, ESTRO”C, UEMS”D and EADV”E"
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2023.113254
keywords:
- Aged
- Humans
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/diagnosis, therapy"
- Consensus
- Hedgehog Proteins
- Immunotherapy
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# European consensus-based interdisciplinary guideline for diagnosis and treatment of basal cell carcinoma-update 2023.
**Authors:** Peris K, Fargnoli MC, Kaufmann R, Arenberger P, Bastholt L, Seguin NB, Bataille V, Brochez L, Del Marmol V, Dummer R, Forsea AM, Gaudy-Marqueste C, Harwood CA, Hauschild A, Höller C, Kandolf L, Kellerners-Smeets NWJ, Lallas A, Leiter U, Malvehy J, Marinović B, Mijuskovic Z, Moreno-Ramirez D, Nagore E, Nathan P, Stratigos AJ, Stockfleth E, Tagliaferri L, Trakatelli M, Vieira R, Zalaudek I, Garbe C, EADO”A, EDF”B, ESTRO”C, UEMS”D and EADV”E
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2023.113254](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2023.113254)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2023 Oct;192:113254. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2023.113254. Epub 2023
Jul 28.

European consensus-based interdisciplinary guideline for diagnosis and treatment
of basal cell carcinoma-update 2023.

Peris K(1), Fargnoli MC(2), Kaufmann R(3), Arenberger P(4), Bastholt L(5),
Seguin NB(6), Bataille V(7), Brochez L(8), Del Marmol V(9), Dummer R(10), Forsea
AM(11), Gaudy-Marqueste C(12), Harwood CA(13), Hauschild A(14), Höller C(15),
Kandolf L(16), Kellerners-Smeets NWJ(17), Lallas A(18), Leiter U(19), Malvehy
J(20), Marinović B(21), Mijuskovic Z(16), Moreno-Ramirez D(22), Nagore E(23),
Nathan P(24), Stratigos AJ(25), Stockfleth E(26), Tagliaferri L(27), Trakatelli
M(28), Vieira R(29), Zalaudek I(30), Garbe C(19); EADO”A, EDF”B, ESTRO”C, UEMS”D
and EADV”E.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Dermatology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome,
Italy; Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
Electronic address: ketty.peris@unicatt.it.
(2)Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, University of
L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University Hospital
Frankfurt, Germany.
(4)Department of Dermatovenereology, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Oncology, Odense University Hospital, Denmark.
(6)Dermatology Department, Saint-Louis Hospital, Paris, France.
(7)Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology Unit, School of Basic & Medical
Biosciences, King's College London, London SE1 7EH, UK.
(8)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Brussels, Belgium.
(10)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich and University Zurich,
Switzerland.
(11)Department of Oncologic Dermatology, Elias University Hospital Bucharest,
Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania.
(12)Aix-Marseille University, Dermatology and Skin Cancer Department, APHM,
Marseille, France.
(13)Centre for Cell Biology and Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute, Barts and
the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London,
London, UK.
(14)Department of Dermatology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(15)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.
(16)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Military Medical Academy,
Belgrade, Serbia.
(17)GROW-School for Oncology and Reproduction, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, Netherlands; Department of Dermatology, Maastricht University
Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(18)First Department of Dermatology, Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(19)Centre for Dermatooncology, Department of Dermatology, Eberhard-Karls
University, Tuebingen, Germany.
(20)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona (Melanoma Unit),
University of Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Barcelona & CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain.
(21)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University Hospital Center
Zagreb, Croatia.
(22)Dermatology. Medicine School, University of Seville, University Hospital
Virgen Macarena, Seville-Spain.
(23)Department of Dermatology, Instituto Valenciano de Oncologia, Valencia,
Spain.
(24)Mount-Vernon Cancer Centre, Northwood, UK.
(25)First Department of Dermatology-Venereology, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, School of Medicine, Andreas Sygros Hospital, Athens,
Greece.
(26)Department of Dermatology, Skin Cancer Center, Ruhr-University Bochum, 44791
Bochum, Germany.
(27)Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, UOC di Radioterapia,
Dipartimento di Scienze Radiologiche, Radioterapiche ed Ematologiche, Rome,
Italy.
(28)Second Department of Dermatology, Aristotle University Medical School,
Papageorgiou General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(29)Coimbra Hospital and Universitary Centre, Coimbra, Portugal.
(30)Dermatology Clinic, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common malignant tumour in white
populations. Multidisciplinary experts from European Association of
Dermato-Oncology (EADO), European Dermatology Forum, European Society for
Radiotherapy and Oncology (ESTRO), Union Européenne des Médecins Spécialistes,
and the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology developed updated
recommendations on diagnosis and treatment of BCC. BCCs were categorised into
'easy-to-treat' (common) and 'difficult-to-treat' according to the new EADO
clinical classification. Diagnosis is based on clinico-dermatoscopic features,
although histopathological confirmation is mandatory in equivocal lesions. The
first-line treatment of BCC is complete surgery. Micrographically controlled
surgery shall be offered in high-risk and recurrent BCC, and BCC located on
critical anatomical sites. Topical therapies and destructive approaches can be
considered in patients with low-risk superficial BCC. Photodynamic therapy is an
effective treatment for superficial and low-risk nodular BCCs. Management of
'difficult-to-treat' BCCs should be discussed by a multidisciplinary tumour
board. Hedgehog inhibitors (HHIs), vismodegib or sonidegib, should be offered to
patients with locally advanced and metastatic BCC. Immunotherapy with anti-PD1
antibodies (cemiplimab) is a second-line treatment in patients with
a progression of disease, contraindication, or intolerance to HHI therapy.
Radiotherapy represents a valid alternative in patients who are not candidates
for or decline surgery, especially elderly patients. Electrochemotherapy may be
offered when surgery or radiotherapy is contraindicated. In Gorlin patients,
regular skin examinations are required to diagnose and treat BCCs at an early
stage. Long-term follow-up is recommended in patients with high-risk BCC,
multiple BCCs, and Gorlin syndrome.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2023.113254
PMID: 37604067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
