---
reference_id: "PMID:33431469"
title: Management of a case of bilateral dengue maculopathy with intravitreal steroid therapy.
authors:
- Patel S
- Aggarwal K
- Kumawat D
- Samanta R
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2020-239039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of a case of bilateral dengue maculopathy with intravitreal steroid therapy.
**Authors:** Patel S, Aggarwal K, Kumawat D, Samanta R
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2020-239039](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2020-239039)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2021 Jan 11;14(1):e239039. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2020-239039.

Management of a case of bilateral dengue maculopathy with intravitreal steroid 
therapy.

Patel S(1), Aggarwal K(1), Kumawat D(2), Samanta R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Rishikesh, India.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Rishikesh, India deveshkumawat21@gmail.com.

Bilateral sight threatening macular and optic nerve inflammation may occur with 
dengue fever, necessitating the use of systemic steroids. We report a case of 
bilateral dengue maculopathy in an elderly woman managed with targeted 
intravitreal steroid therapy. A 63-year-old woman presented with acute-onset 
painless diminution of vision in both eyes following a dengue fever episode. She 
had bilateral foveal inflammatory lesions, macular oedema, small vessel 
occlusions at the macula and scattered retinal haemorrhages and cotton-wool 
spots. Following systemic evaluation, intravitreal triamcinolone acetonide 
injection was performed in both eyes at an interval of 3 days. The foveal lesion 
and macular oedema resolved quickly in both eyes with a normal foveal 
architecture at the end of 6-week follow-up. The visual acuity improved 
considerably in both eyes. Inflammatory retinopathy in dengue fever may be 
managed with a targeted intravitreal steroid injection approach.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2020-239039
PMCID: PMC7802665
PMID: 33431469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.