---
reference_id: "PMID:33964344"
title: "Konzo risk factors, determinants and etiopathogenesis: What is new? A systematic review."
authors:
- Baguma M
- Nzabara F
- Maheshe Balemba G
- Malembaka EB
- Migabo C
- Mudumbi G
- Bito V
- Cliff J
- Rigo JM
- Chabwine JN
journal: Neurotoxicology
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2021.05.001
keywords:
- Africa/epidemiology
- Cyanides/poisoning
- Dietary Proteins
- Humans
- "Malnutrition/epidemiology, metabolism"
- Manihot/adverse effects
- "Motor Neuron Disease/chemically induced, epidemiology, metabolism"
- "Protein Deficiency/epidemiology, metabolism"
- Risk Factors
- Thiocyanates/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Konzo risk factors, determinants and etiopathogenesis: What is new? A systematic review.
**Authors:** Baguma M, Nzabara F, Maheshe Balemba G, Malembaka EB, Migabo C, Mudumbi G, Bito V, Cliff J, Rigo JM, Chabwine JN
**Journal:** Neurotoxicology (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuro.2021.05.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2021.05.001)

## Content

1. Neurotoxicology. 2021 Jul;85:54-67. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2021.05.001. Epub
2021  May 5.

Konzo risk factors, determinants and etiopathogenesis: What is new? A systematic 
review.

Baguma M(1), Nzabara F(2), Maheshe Balemba G(3), Malembaka EB(4), Migabo C(5), 
Mudumbi G(6), Bito V(7), Cliff J(8), Rigo JM(7), Chabwine JN(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hôpital Provincial Général de Référence de 
Bukavu (HPGRB), Université Catholique de Bukavu (UCB), Bukavu, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo; Biomedical Research Institute (BIOMED), UHasselt - 
Hasselt University, Agoralaan, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium. Electronic address: 
baguma.akonkwa@ucbukavu.ac.cd.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Hôpital Provincial Général de Référence de 
Bukavu (HPGRB), Université Catholique de Bukavu (UCB), Bukavu, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo; École Régionale de Santé Publique (ERSP), Université 
Catholique de Bukavu (UCB), Bukavu, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Hôpital Provincial Général de Référence de 
Bukavu (HPGRB), Université Catholique de Bukavu (UCB), Bukavu, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo.
(4)École Régionale de Santé Publique (ERSP), Université Catholique de Bukavu 
(UCB), Bukavu, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(5)Faculty of Agronomy, Université Catholique de Bukavu (UCB), Bukavu, 
Democratic Republic of the Congo; Department of Geography and Environmental 
Studies, College of Social Sciences and Humanities, Jimma University, Jimma, 
Ethiopia.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Hôpital Provincial Général de Référence de Bukavu 
(HPGRB), Université Catholique de Bukavu (UCB), Bukavu, Democratic Republic of 
the Congo.
(7)Biomedical Research Institute (BIOMED), UHasselt - Hasselt University, 
Agoralaan, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(8)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Community Health, Eduardo Mondlane 
University, Maputo, Mozambique.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Hôpital Provincial Général de Référence de 
Bukavu (HPGRB), Université Catholique de Bukavu (UCB), Bukavu, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo; Department of Neuroscience and Movement Science, Faculty 
of Science and Medicine, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.

Konzo is a toxico-nutritional upper motor neuron disease causing a spastic 
paraparesis in schoolchildren and childbearing women in some African countries. 
Almost a century since the first description of konzo, its underlying 
etiopathogenic mechanisms and causative agent remain unknown. This paper aims at 
refreshing the current knowledge of konzo determinants and pathogenesis in order 
to enlighten potential new research and management perspectives. Literature 
research was performed in PubMed and Web of Science databases according to the 
PRISMA methodology. Available data show that cassava-derived cyanide poisoning 
and protein malnutrition constitute two well-documented risk factors of konzo. 
However, observational studies have failed to demonstrate the causal 
relationship between konzo and cyanide poisoning. Thiocyanate, the current 
marker of choice of cyanide exposure, may underestimate the actual level of 
cyanide poisoning in konzo patients as a larger amount of cyanide is detoxified 
via other unusual pathways in the context of protein malnutrition characterizing 
these patients. Furthermore, the appearance of konzo may be the consequence of 
the interplay of several factors including cyanide metabolites, nutritional 
deficiencies, psycho-emotional and geo-environmental factors, resulting in 
pathophysiologic phenomena such as excitotoxicity or oxidative stress, 
responsible for neuronal damage that takes place at sparse cellular and/or 
subcellular levels.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuro.2021.05.001
PMID: 33964344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]