---
reference_id: "PMID:29699546"
title: Elevated urinary excretion of free pyridinoline in Friesian horses suggests a breed-specific increase in collagen degradation.
authors:
- Saey V
- Tang J
- Ducatelle R
- Croubels S
- De Baere S
- Schauvliege S
- van Loon G
- Chiers K
journal: BMC Vet Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12917-018-1454-8
keywords:
- Amino Acids/urine
- Animals
- Collagen/metabolism
- "Collagen Diseases/genetics, urine, veterinary"
- Female
- "Horse Diseases/genetics, metabolism, urine"
- Horses
- Inbreeding
- Male
- Species Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated urinary excretion of free pyridinoline in Friesian horses suggests a breed-specific increase in collagen degradation.
**Authors:** Saey V, Tang J, Ducatelle R, Croubels S, De Baere S, Schauvliege S, van Loon G, Chiers K
**Journal:** BMC Vet Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12917-018-1454-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12917-018-1454-8)

## Content

1. BMC Vet Res. 2018 Apr 25;14(1):139. doi: 10.1186/s12917-018-1454-8.

Elevated urinary excretion of free pyridinoline in Friesian horses suggests a
breed-specific increase in collagen degradation.

Saey V(1), Tang J(2), Ducatelle R(3), Croubels S(4), De Baere S(4), Schauvliege
S(5), van Loon G(6), Chiers K(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Department of Pathology, Bacteriology and
Avian Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke,
Belgium. veronique.saey@ugent.be.
(2)Bioanalytical Facility, Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia,
Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7UQ, UK.
(3)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Department of Pathology, Bacteriology and
Avian Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke,
Belgium.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Biochemistry, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.
(5)Deparment of Surgery and anaesthesiology of domestic animals, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.
(6)Department of Large Animal Internal Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Friesian horses are known for their high inbreeding rate resulting
in several genetic diseases such as hydrocephaly and dwarfism. This last decade,
several studies focused on two other presumed hereditary traits in Friesian
horses: megaoesophagus and aortic rupture. The pathogenesis of these diseases
remains obscure but an important role of collagen has been hypothesized. The
purpose of this study was to examine possible breed-related differences in
collagen catabolism. Urinary specimens from Friesian (n = 17, median age
10 years old) and Warmblood horses (n = 17, median age 10 years old) were
assessed for mature collagen cross-links, i.e. pyridinoline (PYD)
(=hydroxylysylpyridinoline/HP) and deoxypyridinoline (DPD) (lysylpyridinoline
/LP). Solid-phase extraction was performed, followed by reversed-phase
ion-paired liquid chromatography prior to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS)
detection.
RESULTS: Mean urinary concentrations of free PYD, expressed as fPYD/creatinine
ratio, were significantly higher in Friesian horses compared to Warmblood horses
(28.5 ± 5.2 versus 22.2 ± 9.6 nmol/mmol, p = 0.02) while mean fDPD/creatinine
ratios were similar in both horse breeds (3.0 ± 0.7 versus 4.6 ± 3.7 nmol/mmol,
p = 0.09).
CONCLUSIONS: Since DPD is considered a specific bone degradation marker and PYD
is more widely distributed in connective tissues, the significant elevation in
the mean PYD/DPD ratio in Friesian versus Warmblood horses (9.6 ± 1.6 versus
5.7 ± 1.8, p < 0.0001) suggests a soft tissue origin for the increased fPYD
levels. Considering that a previous study found no differences in total collagen
content between Friesian and Warmblood horses for tendon and aortic tissue, this
indicates a higher rate of collagen degradation. The latter might, at least in
part, explain the predisposition of Friesians to connective tissue disorders.

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-018-1454-8
PMCID: PMC5921786
PMID: 29699546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL: An approved animal use protocol
was waived by the chairperson of the ethical committee of the Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine (Ghent University) as urine in the awake horses was
collected by the owner/keeper not invasively during spontaneous voiding. The
anesthetized horses were sampled by urinary catheterization as standard
procedure during operation. A written consent was obtained from the owner/keeper
of each animal. All of the patients that were omitted to the University
hospital, were treated following the institutional guidelines. COMPETING
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
