---
reference_id: "PMID:31558434"
title: Novel dynamics of human mucociliary differentiation revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing of nasal epithelial cultures.
authors:
- Ruiz García S
- Deprez M
- Lebrigand K
- Cavard A
- Paquet A
- Arguel MJ
- Magnone V
- Truchi M
- Caballero I
- Leroy S
- Marquette CH
- Marcet B
- Barbry P
- Zaragosi LE
journal: Development
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1242/dev.177428
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel dynamics of human mucociliary differentiation revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing of nasal epithelial cultures.
**Authors:** Ruiz García S, Deprez M, Lebrigand K, Cavard A, Paquet A, Arguel MJ, Magnone V, Truchi M, Caballero I, Leroy S, Marquette CH, Marcet B, Barbry P, Zaragosi LE
**Journal:** Development (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.177428](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.177428)

## Content

1. Development. 2019 Oct 23;146(20):dev177428. doi: 10.1242/dev.177428.

Novel dynamics of human mucociliary differentiation revealed by single-cell RNA 
sequencing of nasal epithelial cultures.

Ruiz García S(1), Deprez M(1), Lebrigand K(1), Cavard A(1), Paquet A(1), Arguel 
MJ(1), Magnone V(1), Truchi M(1), Caballero I(2), Leroy S(1)(3), Marquette 
CH(3), Marcet B(1), Barbry P(4), Zaragosi LE(4).

Author information:
(1)Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS, IPMC, Sophia-Antipolis 06560, France.
(2)ISP, INRA, Université Tours, Nouzilly 37380, France.
(3)Université Côte d'Azur, CHU de Nice, Pulmonology Department, Nice 06000, 
France.
(4)Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS, IPMC, Sophia-Antipolis 06560, France 
barbry@ipmc.cnrs.fr zaragosi@ipmc.cnrs.fr.

The upper airway epithelium, which is mainly composed of multiciliated, goblet, 
club and basal cells, ensures proper mucociliary function and can regenerate in 
response to assaults. In chronic airway diseases, defective repair leads to 
tissue remodeling. Delineating key drivers of differentiation dynamics can help 
understand how normal or pathological regeneration occurs. Using single-cell 
transcriptomics and lineage inference, we have unraveled trajectories from basal 
to luminal cells, providing novel markers for specific populations. We report 
that: (1) a precursor subgroup of multiciliated cells, which we have entitled 
deuterosomal cells, is defined by specific markers, such as DEUP1, FOXN4, YPEL1, 
HES6 and CDC20B; (2) goblet cells can be precursors of multiciliated cells, thus 
explaining the presence of hybrid cells that co-express markers of goblet and 
multiciliated cells; and (3) a repertoire of molecules involved in the 
regeneration process, such as keratins or components of the Notch, Wnt or 
BMP/TGFβ pathways, can be identified. Confirmation of our results on fresh human 
and pig airway samples, and on mouse tracheal cells, extend and confirm our 
conclusions regarding the molecular and cellular choreography at work during 
mucociliary epithelial differentiation.

© 2019. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.177428
PMCID: PMC6826037
PMID: 31558434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.