---
reference_id: "PMID:33684130"
title: Added-value of mosquito vector breeding sites from street view images in the risk mapping of dengue incidence in Thailand.
authors:
- Su Yin M
- Bicout DJ
- Haddawy P
- Schöning J
- Laosiritaworn Y
- Sa-Angchai P
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009122
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Added-value of mosquito vector breeding sites from street view images in the risk mapping of dengue incidence in Thailand.
**Authors:** Su Yin M, Bicout DJ, Haddawy P, Schöning J, Laosiritaworn Y, Sa-Angchai P
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0009122](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0009122)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Mar 8;15(3):e0009122. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009122. eCollection 2021 Mar.

Added-value of mosquito vector breeding sites from street view images in the 
risk mapping of dengue incidence in Thailand.

Su Yin M(1), Bicout DJ(2)(3), Haddawy P(1)(4), Schöning J(4), Laosiritaworn 
Y(5), Sa-Angchai P(6).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of ICT, Mahidol University, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.
(2)Biomathematics and Epidemiology, EPSP-TIMC, UMR CNRS 5525, Grenoble-Alpes 
University, VetAgro Sup, Grenoble, France.
(3)Laue-Langevin Institute, Theory group, Grenoble, France.
(4)Bremen Spatial Cognition Center, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany.
(5)Information Technology Center, Department of Disease Control, Ministry of 
Public Health, Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Dengue is an emerging vector-borne viral disease across the world. The primary 
dengue mosquito vectors breed in containers with sufficient water and nutrition. 
Outdoor containers can be detected from geotagged images using state-of-the-art 
deep learning methods. In this study, we utilize such container information from 
street view images in developing a risk mapping model and determine the added 
value of including container information in predicting dengue risk. We developed 
seasonal-spatial models in which the target variable dengue incidence was 
explained using weather and container variable predictors. Linear mixed models 
with fixed and random effects are employed in our models to account for 
different characteristics of containers and weather variables. Using data from 
three provinces of Thailand between 2015 and 2018, the models are developed at 
the sub-district level resolution to facilitate the development of effective 
targeted intervention strategies. The performance of the models is evaluated 
with two baseline models: a classic linear model and a linear mixed model 
without container information. The performance evaluated with the correlation 
coefficients, R-squared, and AIC shows the proposed model with the container 
information outperforms both baseline models in all three provinces. Through 
sensitivity analysis, we investigate the containers that have a high impact on 
dengue risk. Our findings indicate that outdoor containers identified from 
street view images can be a useful data source in building effective dengue risk 
models and that the resulting models have potential in helping to target 
container elimination interventions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009122
PMCID: PMC7971869
PMID: 33684130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.