---
reference_id: "PMID:7550350"
title: A missense mutation in the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha 4 subunit is associated with autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy.
authors:
- Steinlein OK
- Mulley JC
- Propping P
- Wallace RH
- Phillips HA
- Sutherland GR
- Scheffer IE
- Berkovic SF
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1038/ng1095-201
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Chickens
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 20"
- DNA Primers
- "Epilepsy, Frontal Lobe/genetics"
- Female
- Frontal Lobe/metabolism
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Rats
- "Receptors, Nicotinic/chemistry, genetics"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A missense mutation in the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha 4 subunit is associated with autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy.
**Authors:** Steinlein OK, Mulley JC, Propping P, Wallace RH, Phillips HA, Sutherland GR, Scheffer IE, Berkovic SF
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1095-201](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1095-201)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1995 Oct;11(2):201-3. doi: 10.1038/ng1095-201.

A missense mutation in the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha 4
subunit is associated with autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy.

Steinlein OK(1), Mulley JC, Propping P, Wallace RH, Phillips HA, Sutherland GR,
Scheffer IE, Berkovic SF.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Germany.

Epilepsy affects at least 2% of the population at some time in their lives. The
epilepsies are a heterogeneous group of disorders, many with an inherited
component. Although specific genes have been identified in a few rare diseases
causing seizures as part of a more diffuse brain disorder, the molecular
pathology of the common idiopathic epilepsies is still unknown. Linkage has been
reported for some generalised epilepsy syndromes, but only very recently for
familial partial epilepsy syndromes. Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe
epilepsy (ADNFLE) is a partial epilepsy causing frequent, violent, brief
seizures at night, usually beginning in childhood. The gene for ADNFLE maps to
chromosome 20q13.2-q13.3 in one large Australian kindred. The neuronal nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor alpha 4 subunit (CHRNA4) maps to the same region of 20q
(ref. 12) and the gene is expressed in all layers of the frontal cortex. We
screened affected family members for mutations within CHRNA4 and found a
missense mutation that replaces serine with phenylalanine at codon 248, a
strongly conserved amino acid residue in the second transmembrane domain. The
mutation is present in all 21 available affected family members and in four
obligate carriers, but not in 333 healthy control subjects.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1095-201
PMID: 7550350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
