---
reference_id: "PMID:25122204"
title: Population-based incidence and prevalence of facioscapulohumeral dystrophy.
authors:
- Deenen JC
- Arnts H
- van der Maarel SM
- Padberg GW
- Verschuuren JJ
- Bakker E
- Weinreich SS
- Verbeek AL
- van Engelen BG
journal: Neurology
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000797
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Facioscapulohumeral/epidemiology"
- Netherlands/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Registries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Population-based incidence and prevalence of facioscapulohumeral dystrophy.
**Authors:** Deenen JC, Arnts H, van der Maarel SM, Padberg GW, Verschuuren JJ, Bakker E, Weinreich SS, Verbeek AL, van Engelen BG
**Journal:** Neurology (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000000797](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000000797)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2014 Sep 16;83(12):1056-9. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000797. Epub
2014 Aug 13.

Population-based incidence and prevalence of facioscapulohumeral dystrophy.

Deenen JC(1), Arnts H(2), van der Maarel SM(2), Padberg GW(2), Verschuuren
JJ(2), Bakker E(2), Weinreich SS(2), Verbeek AL(2), van Engelen BG(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (J.C.W.D., H.A., G.W.P., B.G.M.v.E.) and
Department for Health Evidence (A.L.M.V.), Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Department of Human Genetics (S.M.v.d.M.), Department
of Neurology (J.J.G.M.V.), and Department of Clinical Genetics (E.B.), Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands; and VU University Medical
Center (S.S.W.), Amsterdam, the Netherlands. hanneke.deenen@radboudumc.nl.
(2)From the Department of Neurology (J.C.W.D., H.A., G.W.P., B.G.M.v.E.) and
Department for Health Evidence (A.L.M.V.), Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Department of Human Genetics (S.M.v.d.M.), Department
of Neurology (J.J.G.M.V.), and Department of Clinical Genetics (E.B.), Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands; and VU University Medical
Center (S.S.W.), Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the incidence and prevalence of facioscapulohumeral
muscular dystrophy (FSHD) in the Netherlands.
METHODS: Using 3-source capture-recapture methodology, we estimated the total
yearly number of newly found symptomatic individuals with FSHD, including those
not registered in any of the 3 sources. To this end, symptomatic individuals
with FSHD were available from 3 large population-based registries in the
Netherlands if diagnosed within a 10-year period (January 1, 2001 to December
31, 2010). Multiplication of the incidence and disease duration delivered the
prevalence estimate.
RESULTS: On average, 52 people are newly diagnosed with FSHD every year. This
results in an incidence rate of 0.3/100,000 person-years in the Netherlands. The
prevalence rate was 12/100,000, equivalent to 2,000 affected individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: We present population-based incidence and prevalence estimates
regarding symptomatic individuals with FSHD, including an estimation of the
number of symptomatic individuals not present in any of the 3 used registries.
This study shows that the total number of symptomatic persons with FSHD in the
population may well be underestimated and a considerable number of affected
individuals remain undiagnosed. This suggests that FSHD is one of the most
prevalent neuromuscular disorders.

© 2014 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000797
PMCID: PMC4166358
PMID: 25122204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
