---
reference_id: "PMID:21126241"
title: A population study of Lesch-Nyhan disease in the UK.
authors:
- McCarthy GT
- Green EM
- Ogunbona O
- Simmonds HA
- Fairbanks L
- Pountney T
- Bryant E
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2010.03786.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Community Health Planning
- Health Surveys
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Prevalence
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- United Kingdom/epidemiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A population study of Lesch-Nyhan disease in the UK.
**Authors:** McCarthy GT, Green EM, Ogunbona O, Simmonds HA, Fairbanks L, Pountney T, Bryant E
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1469-8749.2010.03786.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8749.2010.03786.x)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2011 Jan;53(1):34-9. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-8749.2010.03786.x. Epub 2010 Sep 24.

A population study of Lesch-Nyhan disease in the UK.

McCarthy GT(1), Green EM, Ogunbona O, Simmonds HA, Fairbanks L, Pountney T, 
Bryant E.

Author information:
(1)South Downs Health NHS Trust, Chailey Heritage Clinical Services, East 
Sussex, UK. gramsay39@tiscali.co.uk

Comment in
    Dev Med Child Neurol. 2011 Jan;53(1):6-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-8749.2010.03791.x.

AIM: The aims of this study were to identify all people with Lesch-Nyhan disease 
(LND) born in the UK between 1988 and 2008, and to obtain a clinical profile 
including age at diagnosis, genetic background, family history, neurological 
signs, and medications.
METHOD: Potential participants were contacted through the British Paediatric 
Neurology Surveillance Unit. Questionnaires were sent to each child's paediatric 
neurologist or primary consultant. Two purine laboratories provided metabolic 
information.
RESULTS: Twenty-three live males with LND in the 0- to 20-year age band and 
eight live males over the age of 20 years were identified. Thirty-one live 
people with LND were identified in the UK in 2008, giving a prevalence of 1 in 2 
million people. Over the 20 years of study, there was a mean incidence rate of 
0.18 per 100 000 live births, range 0 to 0.5.
INTERPRETATION: To our knowledge, this study is the first to provide details of 
the prevalence and incidence of LND in the UK. The data highlight that clinical 
profiles, at the time of diagnosis, and management of the disease are variable. 
There is the need for ongoing monitoring of allopurinol dosage and metabolic 
screening.

© The Authors. Journal compilation © Mac Keith Press 2010.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2010.03786.x
PMID: 21126241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]