---
reference_id: "PMID:14722918"
title: Mutations of ARX are associated with striking pleiotropy and consistent genotype-phenotype correlation.
authors:
- Kato M
- Das S
- Petras K
- Kitamura K
- Morohashi KI
- Abuelo DN
- Barr M
- Bonneau D
- Brady AF
- Carpenter NJ
- Cipero KL
- Frisone F
- Fukuda T
- Guerrini R
- Iida E
- Itoh M
- Lewanda AF
- Nanba Y
- Oka A
- Proud VK
- Saugier-Veber P
- Schelley SL
- Selicorni A
- Shaner R
- Silengo M
- Stewart F
- Sugiyama N
- Toyama J
- Toutain A
- Vargas AL
- Yanazawa M
- Zackai EH
- Dobyns WB
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/humu.10310
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Agenesis of Corpus Callosum
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Corpus Callosum/pathology
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Genetic Linkage/genetics
- "Genitalia, Female/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Genitalia, Male/abnormalities, pathology"
- Genotype
- "Homeodomain Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lymphocytes/chemistry, metabolism, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Sex Chromosome Disorders/genetics
- "Transcription Factors/biosynthesis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of ARX are associated with striking pleiotropy and consistent genotype-phenotype correlation.
**Authors:** Kato M, Das S, Petras K, Kitamura K, Morohashi KI, Abuelo DN, Barr M, Bonneau D, Brady AF, Carpenter NJ, Cipero KL, Frisone F, Fukuda T, Guerrini R, Iida E, Itoh M, Lewanda AF, Nanba Y, Oka A, Proud VK, Saugier-Veber P, Schelley SL, Selicorni A, Shaner R, Silengo M, Stewart F, Sugiyama N, Toyama J, Toutain A, Vargas AL, Yanazawa M, Zackai EH, Dobyns WB
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.10310](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.10310)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2004 Feb;23(2):147-159. doi: 10.1002/humu.10310.

Mutations of ARX are associated with striking pleiotropy and consistent
genotype-phenotype correlation.

Kato M(1)(2), Das S(1), Petras K(1), Kitamura K(3), Morohashi KI(4), Abuelo
DN(5), Barr M(6), Bonneau D(7), Brady AF(8), Carpenter NJ(9), Cipero KL(10),
Frisone F(11), Fukuda T(4), Guerrini R(12), Iida E(3), Itoh M(13), Lewanda
AF(14)(15), Nanba Y(16), Oka A(16), Proud VK(17), Saugier-Veber P(18), Schelley
SL(19), Selicorni A(20), Shaner R(5), Silengo M(21), Stewart F(22), Sugiyama
N(4), Toyama J(23), Toutain A(24), Vargas AL(25), Yanazawa M(3), Zackai EH(10),
Dobyns WB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata,
Japan.
(3)Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Okazaki, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island.
(6)Teratology Unit, Departments of Pediatrics, Pathology, and Obstetrics,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(7)Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Angers,
Angers, France.
(8)North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, Kennedy-Galton Centre, North
West London Hospitals NHS Trust, London, UK.
(9)HA Chapman Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Oklahoma Health
Science Center, Tulsa, Oklahoma.
(10)Division of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia and the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(11)Congregazione Suore Infermiere dell'Addolorata, Ospedale Generale di Zona
"Valduce", Divisione di Patologia Neonatale, Como, Italy.
(12)INPE Istituto di Neuropsichiatria e Psicopedagogia dellíeta evolutiva,
Universita degli Studi di Pisa-IRCCS Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy.
(13)National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, National Institute of
Neuroscience, Tokyo, Japan.
(14)Division of Genetics, Inova Fairfax Hospital for Children, Falls Church,
Virginia.
(15)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(16)Tottori University School of Medicine, Yonago, Japan.
(17)Department of Pediatrics (Medical Genetics), Eastern Virginia Medical
School; Norfolk, Virginia.
(18)Service de Médecine Néonatale et Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Rouen, Rouen, France.
(19)Department of Pediatrics (Genetics), Stanford University, Stanford,
California.
(20)Centro di Genetica Clinica per l'Infanzia, I Clinica Pediatrica Università
di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(21)Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
(22)Department of Medical Genetics, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, UK.
(23)Department of Pediatrics, Okinawa Child Development Center, Okinawa, Japan.
(24)Service de Génétique et Service de Neuropédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Tours, Tours, France.
(25)Instituto de Genética; Universidad Nacional de Cuyo, Mendoza, Argentina.

We recently identified mutations of ARX in nine genotypic males with X-linked
lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia (XLAG), and in several female relatives
with isolated agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC). We now report 13 novel and
two recurrent mutations of ARX, and one nucleotide change of uncertain
significance in 20 genotypic males from 16 families. Most had XLAG, but two had
hydranencephaly and abnormal genitalia, and three males from one family had
Proud syndrome or ACC with abnormal genitalia. We obtained detailed clinical
information on all 29 affected males, including the nine previously reported
subjects. Premature termination mutations consisting of large deletions,
frameshifts, nonsense mutations, and splice site mutations in exons 1 to 4
caused XLAG or hydranencephaly with abnormal genitalia. Nonconservative missense
mutations within the homeobox caused less severe XLAG, while conservative
substitution in the homeodomain caused Proud syndrome. A nonconservative
missense mutation near the C-terminal aristaless domain caused unusually severe
XLAG with microcephaly and mild cerebellar hypoplasia. In addition, several less
severe phenotypes without malformations have been reported, including mental
retardation with cryptogenic infantile spasms (West syndrome), other seizure
types, dystonia or autism, and nonsyndromic mental retardation. The ARX
mutations associated with these phenotypes have included polyalanine expansions
or duplications, missense mutations, and one deletion of exon 5. Together, the
group of phenotypes associated with ARX mutations demonstrates remarkable
pleiotropy, but also comprises a nearly continuous series of developmental
disorders that begins with hydranencephaly, lissencephaly, and agenesis of the
corpus callosum, and ends with a series of overlapping syndromes with apparently
normal brain structure.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.10310
PMID: 14722918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
