---
reference_id: "PMID:37180321"
title: "5-Alpha reductase deficiency; an important cause of 46, XY DSD: Report of three cases within a family."
authors:
- Noroozi Asl S
- Ibrahimi R
- Bagheri S
- Lotfi M
journal: Clin Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ccr3.7269
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 5-Alpha reductase deficiency; an important cause of 46, XY DSD: Report of three cases within a family.
**Authors:** Noroozi Asl S, Ibrahimi R, Bagheri S, Lotfi M
**Journal:** Clin Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ccr3.7269](https://doi.org/10.1002/ccr3.7269)

## Content

1. Clin Case Rep. 2023 May 10;11(5):e7269. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.7269. eCollection
2023  May.

5-Alpha reductase deficiency; an important cause of 46, XY DSD: Report of three
cases within a family.

Noroozi Asl S(1), Ibrahimi R(2), Bagheri S(1), Lotfi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences Mashhad Iran.
(2)Student Research Committee, Faculty of Medicine Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences Mashhad Iran.

KEY CLINICAL MESSAGE: 5-Alpha reductase deficiency is an important cause of 46,
XY disorder of sex development. Timely diagnosis and proper management by a
multidisciplinary team can lead to a favorable outcome. Sex assignment should be
deferred until puberty because spontaneous virilization occurs and the patient
can engage in the decision-making process.
ABSTRACT: 5-Alpha reductase deficiency is a genetic disorder causing 46, XY
disorder of sex development (DSD). Typical clinical feature is a male with
ambiguous genitalia or undervirilization at birth. Here we report three cases of
this disorder within a family.

© 2023 The Authors. Clinical Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ccr3.7269
PMCID: PMC10172458
PMID: 37180321

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to
declare.
