---
reference_id: "PMID:23103540"
title: "Epileptic seizures, movement disorders, and breathing disturbances in Rett syndrome: diagnostic relevance of video-polygraphy."
authors:
- "d'Orsi G"
- Trivisano M
- Luisi C
- Demaio V
- Di Claudio MT
- Pascarella MG
- Sciruicchio V
- Galeone D
- La Neve A
- Scarpelli F
- Calvario T
- Minervini M
- La Selva L
- Specchio LM
journal: Epilepsy Behav
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2012.08.033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epileptic seizures, movement disorders, and breathing disturbances in Rett syndrome: diagnostic relevance of video-polygraphy.
**Authors:** d'Orsi G, Trivisano M, Luisi C, Demaio V, Di Claudio MT, Pascarella MG, Sciruicchio V, Galeone D, La Neve A, Scarpelli F, Calvario T, Minervini M, La Selva L, Specchio LM
**Journal:** Epilepsy Behav (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yebeh.2012.08.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yebeh.2012.08.033)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Behav. 2012 Nov;25(3):401-7. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2012.08.033. Epub 
2012 Oct 26.

Epileptic seizures, movement disorders, and breathing disturbances in Rett 
syndrome: diagnostic relevance of video-polygraphy.

d'Orsi G(1), Trivisano M, Luisi C, Demaio V, Di Claudio MT, Pascarella MG, 
Sciruicchio V, Galeone D, La Neve A, Scarpelli F, Calvario T, Minervini M, La 
Selva L, Specchio LM.

Author information:
(1)Epilepsy Center, Clinic of Nervous System Diseases, University of Foggia, 
Riuniti Hospital, Foggia, Italy. giudorsi@yahoo.it

Epileptic seizures, movement disorders and breathing disturbances may be 
observed in Rett syndrome, and correct diagnosis is mandatory for the 
management. We evaluated the usefulness of video-polygraphy in the differential 
diagnosis between epileptic and non-epileptic paroxysmal events in eight 
patients with Rett syndrome. Based on video analysis, myoclonic seizures were 
usually misdiagnosed as movement disorders and stereotypies; the events 
identified by parents as generalized tonic-clonic seizures included episodes of 
motor activity and breathing abnormality. Myoclonic seizures aggravated by 
inappropriate treatment were evident in four patients; hyperventilation and 
apnea during wakefulness were present in all patients, while central sleep 
apneas were present in one patient; sinus tachycardia and cardiac arrhythmias 
emerged in six patients; cortical myoclonus was disclosed in five patients. In 
Rett syndrome, video-polygraphy is essential in characterizing the clinical 
features of paroxysmal events, determining autonomic dysfunctions, documenting 
myoclonic motor phenomena, and evaluating the responses to the treatment of 
epilepsy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2012.08.033
PMID: 23103540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]