---
reference_id: "PMID:25549406"
title: "Dengue pathogenesis: a disease driven by the host response."
authors:
- Martina BE
journal: Sci Prog
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3184/003685014X14049173153889
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue pathogenesis: a disease driven by the host response.
**Authors:** Martina BE
**Journal:** Sci Prog (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3184/003685014X14049173153889](https://doi.org/10.3184/003685014X14049173153889)

## Content

1. Sci Prog. 2014;97(Pt 3):197-214. doi: 10.3184/003685014X14049173153889.

Dengue pathogenesis: a disease driven by the host response.

Martina BE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Viroscience, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. b.martina@erasmusmc.nl

Dengue viruses cause mild disease in the majority of infected individuals. In 
most cases, the disease is characterised by fever, headache, pain behind the 
eyes, muscle ache, joint pains, vomiting and diarrhoea. In a low percentage of 
patients, bleeding and loss of plasma (haemorrhage and plasma leakage) may 
occur. The hyper-permeability syndrome results in plasma leakage and, if the 
compensatory mechanisms of the body fail to control the plasma leakage or if 
medical intervention is late, shock may set in. Profound shock will subsequently 
lead to acidic blood (metabolic acidosis) and development of disseminated 
intravascular coagulation (DIC). During DIC multiple micro thromboses occur, 
leading to organ failure. The mechanisms governing pathogenesis of these forms 
of severe disease are not clear. High amounts of virus in the blood are believed 
to cause vascular fragility which, together with infection of endothelial cells 
and high levels of cytokines and other soluble mediators, may result in 
bleeding. In the absence of a correlation between the amount of virus in the 
blood and disease severity, it is likely that response to infection is an 
important cause of disease. The aberrant immune response to infection is 
believed to result in a cytokine storm, defined as an imbalance between 
cytokines driving an inflammation (pro-inflammatory) and those silencing an 
inflammation (anti-inflammatory). Several lines of evidence indicate that 
displacement of viral genotype and host genetic background are key factors 
driving the production of a cytokine storm. Several cytokines are known to 
induce apoptosis, a form of cell suicide (cause of haemorrhage), and/or affect 
adherens junctions (cause permeability) in vitro. Whether these cytokines may 
have such effects in vivo remains to be established.

DOI: 10.3184/003685014X14049173153889
PMCID: PMC10365407
PMID: 25549406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]