---
reference_id: "PMID:29669044"
title: Polymorphisms of Arsenic (+3 Oxidation State) Methyltransferase and Arsenic Methylation Capacity Affect the Risk of Bladder Cancer.
authors:
- Lin YC
- Chen WJ
- Huang CY
- Shiue HS
- Su CT
- Ao PL
- Pu YS
- Hsueh YM
journal: Toxicol Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfy087
keywords:
- "Arsenic/metabolism, urine"
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Logistic Models
- Male
- Methylation
- Methyltransferases/genetics
- Middle Aged
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Risk
- Sociological Factors
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/enzymology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polymorphisms of Arsenic (+3 Oxidation State) Methyltransferase and Arsenic Methylation Capacity Affect the Risk of Bladder Cancer.
**Authors:** Lin YC, Chen WJ, Huang CY, Shiue HS, Su CT, Ao PL, Pu YS, Hsueh YM
**Journal:** Toxicol Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/toxsci/kfy087](https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfy087)

## Content

1. Toxicol Sci. 2018 Jul 1;164(1):328-338. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfy087.

Polymorphisms of Arsenic (+3 Oxidation State) Methyltransferase and Arsenic
Methylation Capacity Affect the Risk of Bladder Cancer.

Lin YC(1)(2)(3), Chen WJ(4)(5), Huang CY(6)(7), Shiue HS(8), Su CT(5)(9), Ao
PL(5), Pu YS(6), Hsueh YM(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Shuang Ho Hospital.
(2)Department of Health Examination, Wan Fang Hospital.
(3)Department of Family Medicine, School of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, College of Public Health,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
(5)School of Public Health, College of Public Health, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Urology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Urology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Hsin Chu Branch,
Hsin Chu, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Chinese Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung
University, College of Medicine, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Family Medicine, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(10)Department of Public Health, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    Toxicol Sci. 2018 Aug 1;164(2):644. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfy163.

The mechanisms underlying how arsenic methylation capacity affects bladder
cancer (BC) are still unclear. The objective of this study was to explore the
effects of polymorphisms of arsenic (+3 oxidation state) methyltransferase
(AS3MT) on BC risk. We conducted a hospital-based study and enrolled 216 BC and
648 healthy controls from 2007 to 2011. Urinary arsenic profiles were measured
using high-performance liquid chromatography-hydride generation-atomic
absorption spectrometry. The gene polymorphisms of AS3MT were identified using
the Sequenom MassARRAY platform with iPLEX Gold chemistry. Inefficient arsenic
methylation capacity (high monomethylarsonic acid percentage [MMA%] and low
dimethylarsinic acid percentage [DMA%]) was associated with increased risk of BC
in a dose-response relationship. AS3MT rs11191438 (C > G) G/G genotype, AS3MT
rs10748835 (A > G) G/G genotype, and AS3MT rs1046778 (C > T) T/T genotype were
found to be related to BC risk, where the odds ratio (OR) (95% CI) was 0.50
(0.31-0.82), 0.49 (0.30-0.79), and 0.54 (0.36-0.80), respectively. The
combination of AS3MT haplotype 2 (AS3MT rs11191453, rs11191454, rs10748835, and
rs1046778)'s high-risk haplotype (C-G-A-C, T-A-A-C, and T-G-G-T) was
significantly associated with increased risk of BC. Among controls, only 3 of
the 9 candidate genotypes evaluated, rs1119438 C/C, rs10748835 A/A and rs1046778
C/C, were associated with significantly higher MMA% compared with the other
genotypes. No other genotypes or haplotypes were related to arsenic methylation
capacity. High MMA%, low DMA% and AS3MT rs1046778 C/C + C/T genotype predicted a
significantly higher risk of BC according to stepwise multiple logistic
regression analyses. AS3MT gene polymorphisms and arsenic methylation capacity
appeared to affect BC risk independently.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfy087
PMID: 29669044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
