---
reference_id: "PMID:36645468"
title: "Personalizing atomoxetine dosing in children with ADHD: what can we learn from current supporting evidence."
authors:
- Fu D
- Guo HL
- Hu YH
- Fang WR
- Liu QQ
- Xu J
- Wu DD
- Chen F
journal: Eur J Clin Pharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00228-022-03449-1
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Atomoxetine Hydrochloride/therapeutic use
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/drug therapy
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Drug Interactions
- Pharmacogenetics
- Adrenergic Uptake Inhibitors/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Personalizing atomoxetine dosing in children with ADHD: what can we learn from current supporting evidence.
**Authors:** Fu D, Guo HL, Hu YH, Fang WR, Liu QQ, Xu J, Wu DD, Chen F
**Journal:** Eur J Clin Pharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00228-022-03449-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00228-022-03449-1)

## Content

1. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2023 Mar;79(3):349-370. doi: 10.1007/s00228-022-03449-1.
 Epub 2023 Jan 16.

Personalizing atomoxetine dosing in children with ADHD: what can we learn from
current supporting evidence.

Fu D(1)(2), Guo HL(1), Hu YH(1), Fang WR(2), Liu QQ(3), Xu J(4), Wu DD(5), Chen
F(6).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Department of Pharmacy, Children's
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences and Clinical Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Children Health Care, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, 72 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210008, China.
(4)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Department of Pharmacy, Children's
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. njxujing@163.com.
(5)Department of Children Health Care, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, 72 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210008, China. 18262636952@163.com.
(6)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Department of Pharmacy, Children's
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. cy.chen508@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: There is marked heterogeneity in treatment response of atomoxetine in
patients with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), especially for
the pediatric population. This review aims to evaluate current evidence to
characterize the dose-exposure relationship, establish clinically relevant
metrics for systemic exposure to atomoxetine, define a therapeutic exposure
range, and to provide a dose-adaptation strategy before implementing
personalized dosing for atomoxetine in children with ADHD.
METHODS: A comprehensive search was performed across electronic databases
(PubMed and Embase) covering the period of January 1, 1985 to July 10, 2022, to
summarize recent advances in the pharmacokinetics,
pharmacogenomics/pharmacogenetics (PGx), therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM),
physiologically based pharmacokinetics (PBPK), and population pharmacokinetics
(PPK) of atomoxetine in children with ADHD.
RESULTS: Some factors affecting the pharmacokinetics of atomoxetine were
summarized, including food, CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 phenotypes, and drug‒drug
interactions (DDIs). The association between treatment response and genetic
polymorphisms of genes encoding pharmacological targets, such as norepinephrine
transporter (NET/SLC6A2) and dopamine β hydroxylase (DBH), was also discussed.
Based on well-developed and validated assays for monitoring plasma
concentrations of atomoxetine, the therapeutic reference range in pediatric
patients with ADHD proposed by several studies was summarized. However,
supporting evidence on the relationship between systemic atomoxetine exposure
levels and clinical response was far from sufficient.
CONCLUSION: Personalizing atomoxetine dosage may be even more complex than
anticipated thus far, but elucidating the best way to tailor the non-stimulant
to a patient's individual need will be achieved by combining two strategies:
detailed research in linking the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in
pediatric patients, and better understanding in nature and causes of ADHD, as
well as environmental stressors.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-022-03449-1
PMID: 36645468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
