---
reference_id: "PMID:39848746"
title: "KDIGO 2025 clinical practice guideline for the evaluation, management, and treatment of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD): executive summary."
authors:
- Torres VE
- Ahn C
- Barten TRM
- Brosnahan G
- Cadnapaphornchai MA
- Chapman AB
- Cornec-Le Gall E
- Drenth JPH
- Gansevoort RT
- Harris PC
- Harris T
- Horie S
- Liebau MC
- Liew M
- Mallett AJ
- Mei C
- Mekahli D
- Odland D
- Ong ACM
- Onuchic LF
- Pei YP
- Perrone RD
- Rangan GK
- Rayner B
- Torra R
- Balk EM
- Gordon CE
- Earley A
- Mustafa RA
- Devuyst O
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2024.07.010
keywords:
- Humans
- "Polycystic Kidney, Autosomal Dominant/therapy, diagnosis, complications, epidemiology"
- Disease Progression
- Nephrology/standards
- Female
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/therapy, etiology"
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KDIGO 2025 clinical practice guideline for the evaluation, management, and treatment of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD): executive summary.
**Authors:** Torres VE, Ahn C, Barten TRM, Brosnahan G, Cadnapaphornchai MA, Chapman AB, Cornec-Le Gall E, Drenth JPH, Gansevoort RT, Harris PC, Harris T, Horie S, Liebau MC, Liew M, Mallett AJ, Mei C, Mekahli D, Odland D, Ong ACM, Onuchic LF, Pei YP, Perrone RD, Rangan GK, Rayner B, Torra R, Balk EM, Gordon CE, Earley A, Mustafa RA, Devuyst O
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2024.07.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2024.07.010)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2025 Feb;107(2):234-254. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2024.07.010.

KDIGO 2025 clinical practice guideline for the evaluation, management, and 
treatment of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD): executive 
summary.

Torres VE(1), Ahn C(2), Barten TRM(3), Brosnahan G(4), Cadnapaphornchai MA(5), 
Chapman AB(6), Cornec-Le Gall E(7), Drenth JPH(3), Gansevoort RT(8), Harris 
PC(9), Harris T(10), Horie S(11), Liebau MC(12), Liew M(13), Mallett AJ(14), Mei 
C(15), Mekahli D(16), Odland D(17), Ong ACM(18), Onuchic LF(19), Pei YP(20), 
Perrone RD(21), Rangan GK(22), Rayner B(23), Torra R(24), Balk EM(25), Gordon 
CE(26), Earley A(27), Mustafa RA(28), Devuyst O(29).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA. 
Electronic address: torres.vicente@mayo.edu.
(2)Laboratory of Transplantation Immunology, Seoul National University, Seoul, 
South Korea.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Radboud University Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Section of Nephrology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(7)Department of Nephrology, Centre de reference MAladies Rénales Héréditaires 
de l'Enfant et de l'Adulte (MARHEA), University Hospital of Brest, Brest, 
France; Division of Nephrology, Inserm UMR1078, Brest, France.
(8)Department of Nephrology, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(9)Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(10)Polycystic Kidney Disease Charity UK, London, UK.
(11)Department of Urology, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Rare Diseases, Medical Faculty, 
Cologne, Germany; Department of Pediatrics, Center for Family Health, Medical 
Faculty, Cologne, Germany; Department of Pediatrics, Center for Molecular 
Medicine, Medical Faculty, Cologne, Germany; University Hospital Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany.
(13)Patient partner, Hong Kong, China.
(14)Department of Renal Medicine, Townsville University Hospital, Townsville, 
Queensland, Australia.
(15)Department of Nephrology, Changzheng Hospital, Shanghai, China.
(16)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(17)PKD Foundation, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(18)Department of Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Disease, University of 
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(19)Division of Nephrology, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(20)Division of Nephrology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(21)Division of Nephrology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(22)Department of Renal Medicine, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, The 
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(23)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Groote Schuur Hospital, University 
of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(24)Department of Nephrology, Fundació Puigvert, IR Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(25)Center for Evidence Synthesis in Health, Brown University School of Public 
Health, Providence, Rhode Island, USA.
(26)Division of Nephrology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA; Center for Evidence Synthesis in Health, Brown University 
School of Public Health, Providence, Rhode Island, USA.
(27)KDIGO, Brussels, Belgium.
(28)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, 
University of Kansas, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.
(29)Institute of Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Division 
of Nephrology, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, UCLouvain Medical School, 
Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: olivier.devuyst@saintluc.uclouvain.be.

The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) 2025 Clinical Practice 
Guideline for the Evaluation, Management, and Treatment of Autosomal Dominant 
Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) represents the first KDIGO guideline on this 
subject. Its scope includes nomenclature, diagnosis, prognosis, and prevalence; 
kidney manifestations; chronic kidney disease (CKD) management and progression, 
kidney failure, and kidney replacement therapy; therapies to delay progression 
of kidney disease; polycystic liver disease; intracranial aneurysms and other 
extrarenal manifestations; lifestyle and psychosocial aspects; pregnancy and 
reproductive issues; pediatric issues; and approaches to the management of 
people with ADPKD. The guideline has been developed with patient partners, 
clinicians, and researchers around the world, with the goal to generate a useful 
resource for healthcare providers and patients by providing actionable 
recommendations. The development of this guideline followed an explicit process 
of evidence review and appraisal, based on a rigorous, formal systematic 
literature review. The strength of recommendations follows the Grading of 
Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) approach. The 
guideline also provides practice points serving to direct clinical care or 
activities relating to areas for which a systematic review was not conducted. 
Limitations of the evidence are discussed. Research recommendations to address 
gaps in knowledge, and implications for policy and payment, are provided. The 
guideline targets a broad audience of healthcare providers, people living with 
ADPKD, and stakeholders involved in the various aspects of ADPKD care.

Copyright © 2024 Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2024.07.010
PMID: 39848746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]