---
reference_id: "PMID:31830496"
title: Community-acquired group B streptococcal meningitis in adults.
authors:
- van Kassel MN
- van Haeringen KJ
- Brouwer MC
- Bijlsma MW
- van de Beek D
journal: J Infect
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2019.12.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Community-acquired group B streptococcal meningitis in adults.
**Authors:** van Kassel MN, van Haeringen KJ, Brouwer MC, Bijlsma MW, van de Beek D
**Journal:** J Infect (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jinf.2019.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2019.12.002)

## Content

1. J Infect. 2020 Mar;80(3):255-260. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2019.12.002. Epub 2019
Dec  10.

Community-acquired group B streptococcal meningitis in adults.

van Kassel MN(1), van Haeringen KJ(1), Brouwer MC(1), Bijlsma MW(1), van de Beek 
D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Meibergdreef 9, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Meibergdreef 9, the Netherlands. 
Electronic address: D.vandeBeek@amsterdamumc.nl.

Comment in
    J Infect. 2020 Jul;81(1):147-178. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2020.03.009.

INTRODUCTION: Streptococcus agalactiae (group B streptococci; GBS) is an 
uncommon cause of bacterial meningitis in adults.
METHODS: We reviewed literature published between 1975 and 2018. Studies were 
included if they reported age, sex and outcome of patients above 16 years of age 
with cerebrospinal fluid culture (CSF) positive for GBS.
RESULTS: Sixty-seven articles describing 141 patients were included. Median age 
was 56 years (IQR 41-66); 52% were male. Fifty-three patients (38%) were 
immunocompromised and CSF leakage was reported in 9 (10%) of 88 immunocompetent 
patients. Sixty-two patients (44%) had extra-meningeal foci of infection, most 
commonly endocarditis, which occurred in 14 patients (12%). Twenty-eight 
patients (23%) were described as previously healthy. Forty-four (31%) of the 141 
patients died, after a median duration of 5 days after admission. Death was 
associated with advanced age and an immunocompromised state.
CONCLUSION: GBS meningitis in adults mainly occurs in those with underlying 
conditions such as immunocompromised state, CSF leakage, and endocarditis. These 
conditions should be actively sought for in adults with GBS meningitis.

Copyright © 2019 The British Infection Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2019.12.002
PMID: 31830496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]