---
reference_id: "PMID:41320327"
title: Cardiac Angiosarcoma.
authors:
- Chen C
- Zhang S
- Yang J
- Zhang J
journal: Int Heart J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1536/ihj.25-303
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cardiac Tamponade/diagnosis, etiology"
- Heart Atria/pathology
- "Heart Neoplasms/therapy, pathology, diagnosis, complications"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/therapy, pathology, diagnosis, complications"
- "Pericardial Effusion/diagnosis, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac Angiosarcoma.
**Authors:** Chen C, Zhang S, Yang J, Zhang J
**Journal:** Int Heart J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1536/ihj.25-303](https://doi.org/10.1536/ihj.25-303)

## Content

1. Int Heart J. 2025;66(6):1025-1028. doi: 10.1536/ihj.25-303.

Cardiac Angiosarcoma.

Chen C(1)(2)(3), Zhang S(4), Yang J(2)(3)(5), Zhang J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Central Laboratory, The First College of Clinical Medical Science, China
Three Gorges University & Yichang Central People's Hospital.
(2)Hubei Provincial Clinical Research Center for Ischemic Cardiovascular
Disease.
(3)Hubei Key Laboratory of Ischemic Cardiovascular Disease.
(4)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The First College of Clinical Medical
of Science, China Three Gorges University, Yichang Central People's Hospital.
(5)Department of Cardiology, The First College of Clinical Medical Science,
China Three Gorges University & Yichang Central People's Hospital.

Angiosarcoma is the most aggressive primary malignant cardiac tumor, typically
involving the right atrium and characterized by its high invasiveness, rapid
progression, and nonspecific clinical manifestations. The patient presented with
recurrent hemorrhagic pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade. Imaging
revealed a right atrial mass, and intraoperative findings confirmed extensive
invasion into the pericardium and adjacent structures, necessitating a partial
palliative resection. Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of
angiosarcoma. After surgery, the patient received a combination regimen of
chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and targeted therapy, with an overall survival of
11 months. A deeper understanding of this disease, clarification of the
therapeutic challenges, and the development of evidence-based treatment
guidelines are needed to provide more reliable and potentially life-saving
strategies for patients with this disease.

DOI: 10.1536/ihj.25-303
PMID: 41320327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
