---
reference_id: "PMID:27859258"
title: "Motile and non-motile cilia in human pathology: from function to phenotypes."
authors:
- Mitchison HM
- Valente EM
journal: J Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/path.4843
keywords:
- Animals
- Cilia/genetics
- Ciliopathies/genetics
- Eye Abnormalities/genetics
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Neurons/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Motile and non-motile cilia in human pathology: from function to phenotypes.
**Authors:** Mitchison HM, Valente EM
**Journal:** J Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/path.4843](https://doi.org/10.1002/path.4843)

## Content

1. J Pathol. 2017 Jan;241(2):294-309. doi: 10.1002/path.4843.

Motile and non-motile cilia in human pathology: from function to phenotypes.

Mitchison HM(1), Valente EM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genomic Medicine Programme, University College London, UCL Great 
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, 
UK.
(2)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy.
(3)Neurogenetics Unit, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Via del Fosso di Fiorano, 
00143, Rome, Italy.

Erratum in
    J Pathol. 2017 Mar;241(4):564. doi: 10.1002/path.4881.

Ciliopathies are inherited human disorders caused by both motile and non-motile 
cilia dysfunction that form an important and rapidly expanding disease category. 
Ciliopathies are complex conditions to diagnose, being multisystem disorders 
characterized by extensive genetic heterogeneity and clinical variability with 
high levels of lethality. There is marked phenotypic overlap among distinct 
ciliopathy syndromes that presents a major challenge for their recognition, 
diagnosis, and clinical management, in addition to posing an on-going task to 
develop the most appropriate family counselling. The impact of next-generation 
sequencing and high-throughput technologies in the last decade has significantly 
improved our understanding of the biological basis of ciliopathy disorders, 
enhancing our ability to determine the possible reasons for the extensive 
overlap in their symptoms and genetic aetiologies. Here, we review the diverse 
functions of cilia in human health and disease and discuss a growing shift away 
from the classical clinical definitions of ciliopathy syndromes to a more 
functional categorization. This approach arises from our improved understanding 
of this unique organelle, revealed through new genetic and cell biological 
insights into the discrete functioning of subcompartments of the cilium (basal 
body, transition zone, intraflagellar transport, motility). Mutations affecting 
these distinct ciliary protein modules can confer different genetic diseases and 
new clinical classifications are possible to define, according to the nature and 
extent of organ involvement. Copyright © 2016 Pathological Society of Great 
Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2016 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.4843
PMID: 27859258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]