---
reference_id: "PMID:10970761"
title: "Immunologic diagnosis of tuberculosis: a review."
authors:
- Chan ED
- Heifets L
- Iseman MD
journal: Tuber Lung Dis
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1054/tuld.2000.0243
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunologic diagnosis of tuberculosis: a review.
**Authors:** Chan ED, Heifets L, Iseman MD
**Journal:** Tuber Lung Dis (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1054/tuld.2000.0243](https://doi.org/10.1054/tuld.2000.0243)

## Content

1. Tuber Lung Dis. 2000;80(3):131-40. doi: 10.1054/tuld.2000.0243.

Immunologic diagnosis of tuberculosis: a review.

Chan ED(1), Heifets L, Iseman MD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
Colorado Health Sciences Center and National Jewish Medical and Research Center, 
Denver, CO, USA. chane@njc.org

The diagnosis of tuberculosis (TB) principally rests on the sputum examination 
and culture. However, the sensitivity of sputum smear for acid-fast bacteria is 
only approximately 50% and sputum culture has a relatively long turnaround time. 
As a result, a number of studies have been conducted in an attempt to find a 
rapid and accurate diagnostic test for TB. They include serological assays 
against various mycobacterial antigens. Here we review the merits and 
deficiencies of the serological tests for TB. In general, serological assays 
have a high negative predictive value, making them potentially useful as a 
screening test to rule out active TB although in HIV-positive individuals, low 
sensitivity and low negative predictive value compromises the accuracy of the 
seroassays in this group of individuals. In populations where the prevalence of 
latent TB infection is high, the relatively low positive predictive value of the 
tests reduces their specificity for active TB. Furthermore, the higher costs and 
greater training required in performing these tests makes it important that 
future studies also assess whether their use affects patient outcomes in 
management of TB.

Copyright 2000 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.

DOI: 10.1054/tuld.2000.0243
PMID: 10970761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]