---
reference_id: "PMID:29704188"
title: "Mucolipidosis type III, a series of adult patients."
authors:
- Oussoren E
- van Eerd D
- Murphy E
- Lachmann R
- van der Meijden JC
- Hoefsloot LH
- Verdijk R
- Ruijter GJG
- Maas M
- Hollak CEM
- Langendonk JG
- van der Ploeg AT
- Langeveld M
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-018-0186-z
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Carpal Tunnel Syndrome/complications, diagnosis"
- "Cognitive Dysfunction/complications, diagnosis"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mucolipidoses/complications, diagnosis"
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucolipidosis type III, a series of adult patients.
**Authors:** Oussoren E, van Eerd D, Murphy E, Lachmann R, van der Meijden JC, Hoefsloot LH, Verdijk R, Ruijter GJG, Maas M, Hollak CEM, Langendonk JG, van der Ploeg AT, Langeveld M
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-018-0186-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-018-0186-z)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2018 Sep;41(5):839-848. doi: 10.1007/s10545-018-0186-z.
Epub 2018 Apr 27.

Mucolipidosis type III, a series of adult patients.

Oussoren E(1), van Eerd D(2), Murphy E(3), Lachmann R(3), van der Meijden JC(4),
Hoefsloot LH(5), Verdijk R(6), Ruijter GJG(5), Maas M(7), Hollak CEM(8),
Langendonk JG(2), van der Ploeg AT(4), Langeveld M(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases,
Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's Hospital, P.O. Box 2060, 3000 CB, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. e.oussoren@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases,
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Charles Dent Metabolic Unit, National Hospital for Neurology and
Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, UK.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases,
Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's Hospital, P.O. Box 2060, 3000 CB, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases,
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Mucolipidosis type III α/β or γ (MLIII) are rare autosomal recessive
diseases, in which reduced activity of the enzyme UDP-N-acetyl
glucosamine-1-phosphotransferase (GlcNAc-PTase) leads to intra-lysosomal
accumulation of different substrates. Publications on the natural history of
MLIII, especially the milder forms, are scarce. This study provides a detailed
description of the disease characteristics and its natural course in adult
patients with MLIII.
METHODS: In this retrospective chart study, the clinical, biochemical and
molecular findings in adult patients with a confirmed diagnosis of MLIII from
three treatment centres were collected.
RESULTS: Thirteen patients with MLIII were included in this study. Four patients
(31%) were initially misdiagnosed with a type of mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS).
Four patients (31%) had mild cognitive impairment. Six patients (46%) needed
help with activities of daily living (ADL) or were wheelchair-dependent. All
patients had dysostosis multiplex and progressive secondary osteoarthritis,
characterised by cartilage destruction and bone lesions in multiple joints. All
patients underwent multiple orthopaedic surgical interventions as early as the
second or third decades of life, of which total hip replacement (THR) was the
most common procedure (61% of patients). Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) was found
in 12 patients (92%) and in eight patients (61%), CTS release was performed.
CONCLUSIONS: Severe skeletal abnormalities, resulting from abnormal bone
development and severe progressive osteoarthritis, are the hallmark of MLIII,
necessitating surgical orthopaedic interventions early in life. Future therapies
for this disease should focus on improving cartilage and bone quality,
preventing skeletal complications and improving mobility.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-018-0186-z
PMCID: PMC6133174
PMID: 29704188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Esmee Oussoren had no
conflict of interests concerning any aspect of the submitted work. Outside of
the submitted work, she was funded by the European Union, 7th Framework
Programme ‘Euclyd – a European Consortium for Lysosomal Storage Diseases’.
Health F2/2008 grant agreement 201678. European Community’s Seventh Framework
Programme. FP7/2007–2013 – MeuSIX [304999]. ZonMw – Dutch organization for
healthcare research and innovation of care. Grants 152001003 and 152001004.
Esmee Oussoren participated in advisory board meetings for Ultragenyx. David van
Eerd had no conflict of interests concerning any aspect of the submitted work.
Elaine Murphy had no conflict of interests concerning any aspect of the
submitted work. Robin Lachmann had no conflict of interests concerning any
aspect of the submitted work. Jan C. van der Meijden had no conflict of
interests concerning any aspect of the submitted work. Lies H. Hoefsloot had no
conflict of interests concerning any aspect of the submitted work. Rob Verdijk
had no conflict of interests concerning any aspect of the submitted work. George
J.G. Ruijter had no conflict of interests concerning any aspect of the submitted
work. Mario Maas had no conflict of interests concerning any aspect of the
submitted work. Carla E.M. Hollak had no conflict of interests concerning any
aspect of the submitted work. Outside of the submitted work, she is involved in
pre-marketing studies with Genzyme, Protalix and Idorsia. Financial arrangements
are made through AMC Research BV. No fees, travel support or grants are obtained
from the Pharmaceutical Industry. Janneke G. Langendonk had no conflict of
interests concerning any aspect of the submitted work. Ans T. van der Ploeg had
no conflict of interests concerning any aspect of the submitted work. Outside
the submitted work, she advises on the implementation and development of
innovative therapies to various industries and received grants for research via
agreements between Erasmus MC and industry, at times also involving public or
private charity funding aimed to improve prospects for patients. The work has
been specifically performed in the field of Pompe disease, but also for other
LSDs and neuromuscular disorders. Mirjam Langeveld had no conflict of interests
concerning any aspect of the submitted work. Outside of the submitted work, she
is involved in pre-marketing studies with Genzyme, Protalix and Idorsia.
Financial arrangements are made through AMC Research BV. No fees, travel support
or grants are obtained from the Pharmaceutical Industry. ETHICS APPROVAL: All
procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the
responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and
with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2000. Informed consent was
obtained from all patients for being included in the study.
