---
reference_id: "PMID:17944709"
title: Invasive fungal infections among inpatients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome at a Chinese university hospital.
authors:
- Shen YZ
- Qi TK
- Ma JX
- Jiang XY
- Wang JR
- Xu QN
- Huang Q
- Liu XN
- Sun HQ
- Lu HZ
journal: Mycoses
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0507.2007.01421.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Invasive fungal infections among inpatients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome at a Chinese university hospital.
**Authors:** Shen YZ, Qi TK, Ma JX, Jiang XY, Wang JR, Xu QN, Huang Q, Liu XN, Sun HQ, Lu HZ
**Journal:** Mycoses (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1439-0507.2007.01421.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0507.2007.01421.x)

## Content

1. Mycoses. 2007 Nov;50(6):475-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0507.2007.01421.x.

Invasive fungal infections among inpatients with acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome at a Chinese university hospital.

Shen YZ(1), Qi TK, Ma JX, Jiang XY, Wang JR, Xu QN, Huang Q, Liu XN, Sun HQ, Lu 
HZ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Invasive fungal infections (IFIs) have become a major cause of morbidity and 
mortality among people with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), however, 
little is known about the clinical features and prognosis of IFI in AIDS in 
China. This study aimed to characterise the clinical features and prognosis of 
IFI in AIDS patients in China. We retrospectively reviewed the records of all 
HIV-infected patients at a Chinese university hospital between December 2004 and 
May 2006. We identified 35 patients with IFI. IFIs included thrush, oesophageal 
candidiasis, fungal pneumonia, cryptococcosis, penicilliosis and fungaemia, 
44.4% of IFIs occurred in the digestive tract, 71.8% of IFIs occurred in 
patients with CD4(+)T-lymphocyte counts <100 cells mm(-3). Candida albicans 
accounted for 57.4% of fungal pathogens isolated. All the patients received both 
antiretroviral and antifungal therapy; 27 patients were cured and eight died. 
IFI is one of the most common opportunistic infections in AIDS patients in 
China. IFIs mainly occur in patients with low CD4(+)T-lymphocyte counts. The 
majority of IFIs occur in the digestive tract. The most common pathogen causing 
IFI is C. albicans. The mortality rate remains high although antiretroviral 
therapy and many newer antifungals are available in China.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1439-0507.2007.01421.x
PMID: 17944709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]