---
reference_id: "PMID:34292351"
title: Bone mineral density and oxidative stress in adolescent girls with anorexia nervosa.
authors:
- Čagalová A
- Tichá Ľ
- Gaál Kovalčíková A
- Šebeková K
- Podracká Ľ
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-021-04199-5
keywords:
- "Absorptiometry, Photon"
- Adolescent
- Anorexia Nervosa/complications
- Bone Density
- Female
- Humans
- Lumbar Vertebrae/metabolism
- Osteoporosis
- Oxidative Stress
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone mineral density and oxidative stress in adolescent girls with anorexia nervosa.
**Authors:** Čagalová A, Tichá Ľ, Gaál Kovalčíková A, Šebeková K, Podracká Ľ
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-021-04199-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-021-04199-5)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2022 Jan;181(1):311-321. doi: 10.1007/s00431-021-04199-5. Epub
2021 Jul 22.

Bone mineral density and oxidative stress in adolescent girls with anorexia
nervosa.

Čagalová A(1), Tichá Ľ(1), Gaál Kovalčíková A(1), Šebeková K(2), Podracká Ľ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, National Institute of
Children's Diseases, Comenius University, Limbová 1, 833 40, Bratislava,
Slovakia.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University,
Sasinkova 4, 811 08, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, National Institute of
Children's Diseases, Comenius University, Limbová 1, 833 40, Bratislava,
Slovakia. podracka12@yahoo.com.

Oxidative stress appears to be involved in the pathogenesis of osteoporosis-a
serious complication of anorexia nervosa (AN). We evaluated the oxidative status
in adolescent girls with AN and its potential relationship with bone mineral
density (BMD). Girls with AN (n = 43) and age-matched healthy controls (n = 20)
underwent anthropometric and BMD examination. Markers of bone turnover,
oxidative stress, and antioxidant status were measured. Participants with AN and
controls did not differ in BMD at the lumbar spine (p = 0.17) and total body
less head BMD (p = 0.08). BMD at the total hip was lower (p < 0.001) in the AN
group compared with the controls. Levels of antioxidant status markers-ferric
reduction antioxidant power, total antioxidant capacity, and reduced and
oxidized glutathione ratio (all p < 0.001)-were significantly lower, whereas
those of advanced oxidation protein products (AOPP), fructosamines, and advanced
glycation end products (AGEs) (all p < 0.001) were higher in AN patients than in
healthy controls. BMD and bone turnover markers were positively correlated with
antioxidant status markers, while they were negatively correlated with AOPP,
fructosamines, and AGEs levels.  Conclusion: This is the first study to assess a
potential association between oxidative status and BMD in adolescents with AN.
We demonstrated that in young girls, the imbalance of oxidative status and
reduced BMD are concurrently manifested at the time of the diagnosis of AN.
Disturbance of oxidative status could play a pathogenetic role in AN-associated
decreased BMD. What is Known: • Osteoporosis is a serious complication of AN,
and in affected adolescents may result in a permanent deficit in bone mass. •
Oxidative and carbonyl stress may be involved in the development of bone loss.
What is New: • Adolescents girls with AN have impaired antioxidant defense and
increased oxidative damage to biomolecules. • Disturbance of oxidative status
could affect bone loss and could contribute to decreased BMD in adolescent
females with AN.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-021-04199-5
PMID: 34292351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
