---
reference_id: "PMID:24507514"
title: Demyelination in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Lubetzki C
- Stankoff B
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52001-2.00004-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Demyelination in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Lubetzki C, Stankoff B
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-52001-2.00004-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-52001-2.00004-2)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2014;122:89-99. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52001-2.00004-2.

Demyelination in multiple sclerosis.

Lubetzki C(1), Stankoff B(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière, 
Salpêtrière Hospital, UMR S975, Paris, France. Electronic address: 
catherine.lubetzki@psl.aphp.fr.
(2)Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière, 
Salpêtrière Hospital, UMR S975, Paris, France.

This review, focused on demyelination in multiple sclerosis, is divided in two 
parts. The first part addresses the many and not exclusive mechanisms leading to 
demyelination in the central nervous system. Although the hypothesis that a 
primary oligodendrocyte or myelin injury induces a secondary immune response in 
the central nervous system is still a matter of debate, most recent advances 
underline the influence of a primary immune response against myelin antigen(s), 
with a diversity of potential targets. Whereas multiple sclerosis was long 
considered as a T cell-mediated disease, the role of B lymphocytes is now 
increasingly recognized, and the influence of antibodies on tissue damage 
actively investigated. The second part of the review describes the axonal 
consequences of demyelination. Segmental demyelination results in conduction 
block or slowing of conduction through adaptative responses, notably related to 
modifications in the distribution of voltage gated sodium channels along the 
denuded axon. If demyelination persists, these changes, as well as the loss of 
trophic and metabolic support, will lead to irreversible axonal damage and loss. 
In this respect, favouring early myelin repair, during a window of time when 
axonal damage is still reversible, might pave the way for neuroprotection.

© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52001-2.00004-2
PMCID: PMC7152443
PMID: 24507514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]