---
reference_id: "PMID:39534772"
title: "Could cough hypersensitivity symptom profile differentiate phenotypes of chronic cough?"
authors:
- Kim MY
- Won HK
- Oh JY
- Lee JH
- Jo EJ
- Kang SY
- Lee JH
- Lee SE
- Kang N
- Kim YC
- Lee HY
- An J
- Yoo Y
- Shim JS
- Park SY
- Park HK
- Kim MH
- Kim SH
- Kim SH
- Chang YS
- Kim SH
- Lee BJ
- Birring SS
- Song WJ
journal: ERJ Open Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1183/23120541.00260-2024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Could cough hypersensitivity symptom profile differentiate phenotypes of chronic cough?
**Authors:** Kim MY, Won HK, Oh JY, Lee JH, Jo EJ, Kang SY, Lee JH, Lee SE, Kang N, Kim YC, Lee HY, An J, Yoo Y, Shim JS, Park SY, Park HK, Kim MH, Kim SH, Kim SH, Chang YS, Kim SH, Lee BJ, Birring SS, Song WJ
**Journal:** ERJ Open Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1183/23120541.00260-2024](https://doi.org/10.1183/23120541.00260-2024)

## Content

1. ERJ Open Res. 2024 Nov 11;10(6):00260-2024. doi: 10.1183/23120541.00260-2024. 
eCollection 2024 Nov.

Could cough hypersensitivity symptom profile differentiate phenotypes of chronic 
cough?

Kim MY(1), Won HK(2), Oh JY(3), Lee JH(3), Jo EJ(4), Kang SY(5), Lee JH(6), Lee 
SE(4)(7), Kang N(8), Kim YC(9), Lee HY(10), An J(11), Yoo Y(12), Shim JS(13), 
Park SY(14), Park HK(15), Kim MH(13), Kim SH(16), Kim SH(17), Chang YS(16), Kim 
SH(18), Lee BJ(8), Birring SS(19), Song WJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Busan Paik Hospital, Inje University College 
of Medicine, Busan, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Veterans Health Service Medical Center, 
Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Pusan National 
University, Busan, Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Gachon University Gil Medical Center, 
Incheon, Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University Wonju College of Medicine, 
Wonju, Korea.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University Yangsan Hospital, 
Yangsan, Korea.
(8)Division of Allergy, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, 
Korea.
(10)Division of Allergy, Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul St Mary's 
Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(11)Department of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital at Gangdong, College of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Korea.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Gangneung Asan Hospital, Gangneung, Korea.
(13)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Ewha Womans 
University, Seoul, Korea.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical 
Care Medicine, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(15)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Kyungpook National 
University Chilgok Hospital, Daegu, Korea.
(16)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, Korea.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine, Hanyang University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(18)Department of Internal Medicine, Eulji University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(19)Centre for Human and Applied Physiological Sciences, School of Basic and 
Medical Biosciences, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College 
London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Recently, cough reflex hypersensitivity has been proposed as a 
common underlying feature of chronic cough in adults. However, symptoms and 
clinical characteristics of cough hypersensitivity have not been studied amongst 
phenotypes of chronic cough. This study aimed to compare symptom features, such 
as cough triggers and associated throat sensations, of cough hypersensitivity in 
patients with asthmatic chronic cough and those with refractory chronic cough 
(RCC).
METHODS: Patients with chronic cough from the Korean Chronic Cough Registry were 
prospectively evaluated over 6 months. Physicians determined the aetiological 
diagnosis based on clinical evaluations and responses to treatment at the 
6-month follow-up visit. Symptoms of cough hypersensitivity and cough-specific 
quality of life were assessed using the Cough Hypersensitivity Questionnaire 
(CHQ) and the Leicester Cough Questionnaire (LCQ), respectively.
RESULTS: The analysis included 280 patients who completed the follow-up: 79 with 
asthmatic cough (cough variant asthma or eosinophilic bronchitis) and 201 with 
RCC. Baseline CHQ scores were similar between the groups (8.3±3.7 in asthmatic 
cough versus 8.9±3.9 in RCC; p=0.215, adjusted for age, sex and LCQ score). 
There were no significant between-group differences in the LCQ and cough 
severity Visual Analog Scale scores. Both groups showed a similar negative 
correlation with LCQ scores (asthmatic cough: r=-0.427, p<0.001; RCC: r=-0.306, 
p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The symptoms of cough hypersensitivity may not distinguish between 
asthmatic cough and RCC. This suggests that chronic cough is the primary 
diagnosis in both phenotypes. It indicates a shared mechanism in their cough 
pathogenesis, despite having potentially different treatable traits.

Copyright ©The authors 2024.

DOI: 10.1183/23120541.00260-2024
PMCID: PMC11551855
PMID: 39534772

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: S.S. Birring declares 
grants from Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. and consulting fees from Merck, Shionogi, 
Bayer, Nerre, Genentech/Roche and Bellus. Conflict of interest: W-J. Song 
declares grants from Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. and AstraZeneca; consulting fees 
from Merck, Bellus, AstraZeneca, Shionogi and GSK; and lecture fees from Merck, 
AstraZeneca, GSK, Sanofi and Novartis; and is deputy chief editor of this 
journal. Conflict of interest: The other authors declare that they have no 
competing interests.