---
reference_id: "PMID:34390072"
title: "Concurrent cardiac transthyretin and brain β amyloid accumulation among the older adults: The Hisayama study."
authors:
- Hamasaki H
- Shijo M
- Nakamura A
- Honda H
- Yamada Y
- Oda Y
- Ohara T
- Ninomiya T
- Iwaki T
journal: Brain Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/bpa.13014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Concurrent cardiac transthyretin and brain β amyloid accumulation among the older adults: The Hisayama study.
**Authors:** Hamasaki H, Shijo M, Nakamura A, Honda H, Yamada Y, Oda Y, Ohara T, Ninomiya T, Iwaki T
**Journal:** Brain Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bpa.13014](https://doi.org/10.1111/bpa.13014)

## Content

1. Brain Pathol. 2022 Jan;32(1):e13014. doi: 10.1111/bpa.13014. Epub 2021 Aug 13.

Concurrent cardiac transthyretin and brain β amyloid accumulation among the 
older adults: The Hisayama study.

Hamasaki H(1), Shijo M(1)(2), Nakamura A(1), Honda H(1), Yamada Y(3), Oda Y(3), 
Ohara T(4)(5), Ninomiya T(5)(6), Iwaki T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Fukuoka Dental College Medical and Dental 
Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(4)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(6)Department of Center for Cohort Studies, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Previous studies have revealed risk for cognitive impairment in cardiovascular 
diseases. We investigated the relationship between degenerative changes of the 
brain and heart, with reference to Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathologies, cardiac 
transthyretin amyloid (ATTR) deposition, and cardiac fibrosis. A total of 240 
consecutive autopsy cases of a Japanese population-based study were examined. β 
amyloid (Aβ) of senile plaques, phosphorylated tau protein of neurofibrillary 
tangles, and ATTR in the hearts were immunohistochemically detected and graded 
according to the NIH-AA guideline for AD pathology and as Tanskanen reported, 
respectively. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) was graded according to the 
Vonsattel scale. Cardiac fibrosis was detected by picrosirius red staining, 
followed by image analysis. Cardiac ATTR deposition occurred after age 75 years 
and increased in an age-dependent manner. ATTR deposition was more common, and 
of higher grades, in the dementia cases. We subdivided the cases into two age 
groups: ≤90 years old (n = 173) and >90 years old (n = 67), which was the mean 
and median age at death of the AD cases. When adjusted for age and sex, TTR 
deposition grades correlated with Aβ phase score (A2-3), the Consortium to 
Establish a Registry for AD score (sparse to frequent), and high Braak stage 
(V-VI) only in those aged ≤90 years at death. No significant correlation was 
observed between the cardiac ATTR deposition and CAA stages, or between cardiac 
fibrosis and AD pathologies. Collectively, AD brain pathology correlated with 
cardiac TTR deposition among the older adults ≤90 years.

© 2021 The Authors. Brain Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.13014
PMCID: PMC8713523
PMID: 34390072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.