---
reference_id: "PMID:25536104"
title: "Mutation profiling in cholangiocarcinoma: prognostic and therapeutic implications."
authors:
- Churi CR
- Shroff R
- Wang Y
- Rashid A
- Kang HC
- Weatherly J
- Zuo M
- Zinner R
- Hong D
- Meric-Bernstam F
- Janku F
- Crane CH
- Mishra L
- Vauthey JN
- Wolff RA
- Mills G
- Javle M
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115383
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation profiling in cholangiocarcinoma: prognostic and therapeutic implications.
**Authors:** Churi CR, Shroff R, Wang Y, Rashid A, Kang HC, Weatherly J, Zuo M, Zinner R, Hong D, Meric-Bernstam F, Janku F, Crane CH, Mishra L, Vauthey JN, Wolff RA, Mills G, Javle M
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0115383](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0115383)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 23;9(12):e115383. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115383. 
eCollection 2014.

Mutation profiling in cholangiocarcinoma: prognostic and therapeutic 
implications.

Churi CR(1), Shroff R(1), Wang Y(1), Rashid A(1), Kang HC(1), Weatherly J(1), 
Zuo M(1), Zinner R(1), Hong D(1), Meric-Bernstam F(1), Janku F(1), Crane CH(1), 
Mishra L(1), Vauthey JN(1), Wolff RA(1), Mills G(1), Javle M(1).

Author information:
(1)The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United 
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is clinically heterogeneous; intra and 
extrahepatic CCA have diverse clinical presentations. Next generation sequencing 
(NGS) technology may identify the genetic differences between these entities and 
identify molecular subgroups for targeted therapeutics.
METHODS: We describe successful NGS-based testing of 75 CCA patients along with 
the prognostic and therapeutic implications of findings. Mutation profiling was 
performed using either a) NGS panel of hotspot regions in 46 cancer-related 
genes using a 318-chip on Ion PGM Sequencer or b) Illumina HiSeq 2000 sequencing 
platform for 3,769 exons of 236 cancer-related genes plus 47 introns from 19 
genes to an average depth of 1000X. Clinical data was abstracted and correlated 
with clinical outcome. Patients with targetable mutations were referred to 
appropriate clinical trials.
RESULTS: There were significant differences between intrahepatic (n = 55) and 
extrahepatic CCA (n = 20) in regard to the nature and frequency of the genetic 
aberrations (GAs). IDH1 and DNA repair gene alterations occurred more frequently 
in intrahepatic CCA, while ERBB2 GAs occurred in the extrahepatic group. 
Commonly occurring GAs in intrahepatic CCA were TP53 (35%), KRAS (24%), ARID1A 
(20%), IDH1 (18%), MCL1 (16%) and PBRM1 (11%). Most frequent GAs in extrahepatic 
CCA (n = 20) were TP53 (45%), KRAS (40%), ERBB2 (25%), SMAD4 (25%), FBXW7 (15%) 
and CDKN2A (15%). In intrahepatic CCA, KRAS, TP53 or MAPK/mTOR GAs were 
significantly associated with a worse prognosis while FGFR GAs correlated with a 
relatively indolent disease course. IDH1 GAs did not have any prognostic 
significance. GAs in the chromatin modulating genes, BAP1 and PBRM1 were 
associated with bone metastases and worse survival in extrahepatic CCA. 
Radiologic responses and clinical benefit was noted with EGFR, FGFR, C-met, 
B-RAF and MEK inhibitors.
CONCLUSION: There are significant genetic differences between intra and 
extrahepatic CCA. NGS can potentially identify disease subsets with distinct 
prognostic and therapeutic implications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115383
PMCID: PMC4275227
PMID: 25536104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors confirm that 
there are no competing interests for this study.