---
reference_id: "PMID:40020669"
title: FAK inhibition combined with the RAF-MEK clamp avutometinib overcomes resistance to targeted and immune therapies in BRAF V600E melanoma.
authors:
- Lubrano S
- Cervantes-Villagrana RD
- Faraji F
- Ramirez S
- Sato K
- Adame-Garcia SR
- Officer A
- Arang N
- Rigiracciolo DC
- Anguiano Quiroz PY
- Martini C
- Wang Y
- Ferguson FM
- Bacchiocchi A
- Halaban R
- Coma S
- Holmen SL
- Pachter JA
- Aplin AE
- Gutkind JS
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2025.02.001
keywords:
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, immunology"
- Humans
- Animals
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/drug effects"
- Mice
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Immunotherapy/methods
- "Focal Adhesion Kinase 1/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/drug effects
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FAK inhibition combined with the RAF-MEK clamp avutometinib overcomes resistance to targeted and immune therapies in BRAF V600E melanoma.
**Authors:** Lubrano S, Cervantes-Villagrana RD, Faraji F, Ramirez S, Sato K, Adame-Garcia SR, Officer A, Arang N, Rigiracciolo DC, Anguiano Quiroz PY, Martini C, Wang Y, Ferguson FM, Bacchiocchi A, Halaban R, Coma S, Holmen SL, Pachter JA, Aplin AE, Gutkind JS
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2025.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2025.02.001)

## Content

1. Cancer Cell. 2025 Mar 10;43(3):428-445.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2025.02.001.
Epub 2025 Feb 27.

FAK inhibition combined with the RAF-MEK clamp avutometinib overcomes resistance
to targeted and immune therapies in BRAF V600E melanoma.

Lubrano S(1), Cervantes-Villagrana RD(2), Faraji F(3), Ramirez S(4), Sato K(2),
Adame-Garcia SR(2), Officer A(2), Arang N(5), Rigiracciolo DC(4), Anguiano
Quiroz PY(6), Martini C(7), Wang Y(8), Ferguson FM(8), Bacchiocchi A(9), Halaban
R(9), Coma S(10), Holmen SL(11), Pachter JA(10), Aplin AE(12), Gutkind JS(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Pisa, 56126 Pisa, Italy; Moores Cancer
Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Department
of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address: lubrano.simone16@gmail.com.
(2)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA; Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(3)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA; Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, UC San Diego
Health, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(4)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.
(5)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA; Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(6)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA; John Muir College, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.
(7)Department of Pharmacy, University of Pisa, 56126 Pisa, Italy.
(8)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Skaggs School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.
(10)Verastem Oncology, Needham, MA 02494, USA.
(11)Department of Surgery, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Huntsman
Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.
(12)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology and Cancer Biology, Sidney Kimmel
Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, US.
(13)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA; Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address:
sgutkind@health.ucsd.edu.

Widespread BRAF mutations result in persistent RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK (MAPK) signaling
in melanoma. BRAF (BRAFi) and MEK (MEKi) inhibitors are approved for BRAF V600E
melanomas, including those progressing on immunotherapy; however, rapid
resistance to these agents highlights the need for novel strategies. Here,
transcriptome analysis of BRAF V600E melanomas from patients resistant to BRAFi
and MEKi shows activation of focal adhesion signaling. Consistently, BRAFi,
MEKi, and the RAF-MEK clamp avutometinib activate focal adhesion kinase (FAK) in
melanoma cells. Mechanistically, inhibition of an MAPK-RhoE (RND3) feedback loop
results in the adaptive activation of RhoA-FAK-AKT. In turn, FAK inhibitors
(FAKi) exert potent pro-apoptotic activity when combined with MAPK pathway
inhibition. FAKi plus avutometinib overcomes resistance in multiple models
derived from BRAFi plus MEKi-resistant melanoma patients and
immunotherapy-resistant syngeneic mouse models. These findings provide a
rationale for the development of avutometinib in combination with FAKi for
patients with BRAF V600E melanoma progressing on BRAFi plus MEKi or
immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2025.02.001
PMCID: PMC11903146
PMID: 40020669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests J.S.G. reports
consulting fees from Radionetics Oncology, BTB Therapeutics, Pangea
Therapeutics, and io9 and is the founder of Kadima Pharmaceuticals, all
unrelated to the current study. J.A.P. and S.C. are employees of Verastem, which
has not influenced this study. A.E.A. has ownership interest in patent number
9880150 and has a pending patent, PCT/US22/76492. F.M.F. is a scientific
co-founder and equity holder in Proximity Therapeutics, and is or was recently a
consultant or received speaking honoraria from Eli Lilly, RA Capital, Tocris
BioTechne, and Plexium Inc.
