---
reference_id: "PMID:31699627"
title: "Cognitive remediation for schizophrenia: An expert working group white paper on core techniques."
authors:
- Bowie CR
- Bell MD
- Fiszdon JM
- Johannesen JK
- Lindenmayer JP
- McGurk SR
- Medalia AA
- Penadés R
- Saperstein AM
- Twamley EW
- Ueland T
- Wykes T
journal: Schizophr Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2019.10.047
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive remediation for schizophrenia: An expert working group white paper on core techniques.
**Authors:** Bowie CR, Bell MD, Fiszdon JM, Johannesen JK, Lindenmayer JP, McGurk SR, Medalia AA, Penadés R, Saperstein AM, Twamley EW, Ueland T, Wykes T
**Journal:** Schizophr Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.schres.2019.10.047](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2019.10.047)

## Content

1. Schizophr Res. 2020 Jan;215:49-53. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2019.10.047. Epub
2019  Nov 4.

Cognitive remediation for schizophrenia: An expert working group white paper on 
core techniques.

Bowie CR(1), Bell MD(2), Fiszdon JM(3), Johannesen JK(3), Lindenmayer JP(4), 
McGurk SR(5), Medalia AA(6), Penadés R(7), Saperstein AM(6), Twamley EW(8), 
Ueland T(9), Wykes T(10).

Author information:
(1)Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada. Electronic address: 
bowiec@queensu.ca.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine, USA; VA Connecticut 
Healthcare System, USA.
(4)Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, USA; New York University 
School of Medicine, USA.
(5)Boston University, USA.
(6)Columbia University Medical Center, USA.
(7)Hospital Clínic Barcelona, University of Barcelona, IDIBAPS-CIBERSAM, Spain.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, USA; Center of 
Excellence for Stress and Mental Health and Research Service, VA San Diego 
Healthcare System, USA.
(9)NORMENT, KG Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research, Institute of Clinical 
Medicine, University of Oslo and Division of Mental Health and Addiction, Oslo 
University Hospital, Norway; Department of Psychology, University of Oslo, 
Norway.
(10)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, 
UK; South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

Cognitive remediation is now widely recognized as an effective treatment for 
cognitive deficits in schizophrenia. Its effects are meaningful, durable, and 
related to improvements in everyday functional outcomes. As with many therapies, 
the evolution of cognitive remediation has resulted in treatment programs that 
use a variety of specific techniques, yet share common core principles. This 
paper is the product of a cognitive remediation expert working group consensus 
meeting to identify core features of the treatment and produce recommendations 
for its design, conduct, reporting, and implementation. Four techniques were 
identified as core features of cognitive remediation: facilitation by a 
therapist, cognitive exercise, procedures to develop problem-solving strategies, 
and procedures to facilitate transfer to real world functioning. Treatment 
techniques within each of these core features are presented to facilitate 
decisions for clinical trials and implementation in clinical settings.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2019.10.047
PMID: 31699627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest CR Bowie has 
received in-kind research accounts from Scientific Brain Training Pro. T Wykes 
Wykes is one of the creators of CIRCuiTS but does not receive any financial 
rewards for this IP.