---
reference_id: "PMID:35259956"
title: Epidemicity of cholera spread and the fate of infection control measures.
authors:
- Trevisin C
- Lemaitre JC
- Mari L
- Pasetto D
- Gatto M
- Rinaldo A
journal: J R Soc Interface
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2021.0844
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemicity of cholera spread and the fate of infection control measures.
**Authors:** Trevisin C, Lemaitre JC, Mari L, Pasetto D, Gatto M, Rinaldo A
**Journal:** J R Soc Interface (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rsif.2021.0844](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2021.0844)

## Content

1. J R Soc Interface. 2022 Mar;19(188):20210844. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2021.0844.
Epub  2022 Mar 9.

Epidemicity of cholera spread and the fate of infection control measures.

Trevisin C(1), Lemaitre JC(1), Mari L(2), Pasetto D(3), Gatto M(2), Rinaldo 
A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Ecohydrology ENAC/IIE/ECHO, École polytechinque fédérale de 
Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne 1015, Switzerland.
(2)Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di 
Milano, Milano 20133, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze Ambientali, Informatica e Statistica, Università Ca' 
Foscari Venezia, Venezia 30172, Italy.
(4)Dipartimento ICEA, Università degli studi di Padova, Padova 35131, Italy.

The fate of ongoing infectious disease outbreaks is predicted through 
reproduction numbers, defining the long-term establishment of the infection, and 
epidemicity indices, tackling the reactivity of the infectious pool to new 
contagions. Prognostic metrics of unfolding outbreaks are of particular 
importance when designing adaptive emergency interventions facing real-time 
assimilation of epidemiological evidence. Our aim here is twofold. First, we 
propose a novel form of the epidemicity index for the characterization of 
cholera epidemics in spatial models of disease spread. Second, we examine in 
hindsight the survey of infections, treatments and containment measures carried 
out for the now extinct 2010-2019 Haiti cholera outbreak, to suggest that 
magnitude and timing of non-pharmaceutical and vaccination interventions imply 
epidemiological responses recapped by the evolution of epidemicity indices. 
Achieving negative epidemicity greatly accelerates fading of infections and thus 
proves a worthwhile target of containment measures. We also show that, in our 
model, effective reproduction numbers and epidemicity indices are explicitly 
related. Therefore, providing an upper bound to the effective reproduction 
number (significantly lower than the unit threshold) warrants negative 
epidemicity and, in turn, a rapidly fading outbreak preventing coalescence of 
sparse local sub-threshold flare-ups.

DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2021.0844
PMCID: PMC8905172
PMID: 35259956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare we have no competing interests.