---
reference_id: "PMID:34244015"
title: "Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor: molecular landscape, targeted therapeutics, and remaining challenges."
authors:
- Mahajan P
- Casanova M
- Ferrari A
- Fordham A
- Trahair T
- Venkatramani R
journal: Curr Probl Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2021.100768
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- "Neoplasms, Muscle Tissue/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, surgery"
- "Pyrimidines/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Sulfones/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor: molecular landscape, targeted therapeutics, and remaining challenges.
**Authors:** Mahajan P, Casanova M, Ferrari A, Fordham A, Trahair T, Venkatramani R
**Journal:** Curr Probl Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2021.100768](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2021.100768)

## Content

1. Curr Probl Cancer. 2021 Aug;45(4):100768. doi: 
10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2021.100768. Epub 2021 Jul 1.

Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor: molecular landscape, targeted therapeutics, 
and remaining challenges.

Mahajan P(1), Casanova M(2), Ferrari A(2), Fordham A(3), Trahair T(4), 
Venkatramani R(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Cancer and Hematology Centers, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(2)Pediatric Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milano, 
Italy.
(3)Children's Cancer Institute, C25 Lowy Cancer Research Centre, UNSW Sydney New 
South Wales, Australia.
(4)Children's Cancer Institute, C25 Lowy Cancer Research Centre, UNSW Sydney New 
South Wales, Australia; Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children's Hospital, 
Randwick, New South Wales, Australia; School of Women's and Children's Health, 
UNSW Medicine, New South Wales, Australia.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Cancer and Hematology Centers, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. Electronic address: 
Venkatra@bcm.edu.

Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) is a rare mesenchymal tumor of 
intermediate malignant potential that predominantly affects children, 
adolescents and young adults. IMT has a predilection for the lung, abdomen, 
pelvis, and retroperitoneum, however, can affect any part of the body. IMT is 
typically localized, and multifocal or metastatic disease is uncommon. Complete 
surgical resection is the treatment of choice when feasible. There is no 
established standard of care for unresectable and advanced IMT. Approximately 
half of IMTs harbor anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangements, and 
fusions involving ROS1, PDGFRβ, RET and NTRK have also been described. Given the 
molecular landscape of IMT, management of these tumors has evolved to include 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors and novel targeted therapeutics. This review 
highlights the molecular characteristics, evolution of targeted therapies and 
the remaining challenges in the management of IMT.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2021.100768
PMID: 34244015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]