---
reference_id: "PMID:38427927"
title: "Impact of Helicobacter pylori Infection and Treatment on Colorectal Cancer in a Large, Nationwide Cohort."
authors:
- Shah SC
- Camargo MC
- Lamm M
- Bustamante R
- Roumie CL
- Wilson O
- Halvorson AE
- Greevy R
- Liu L
- Gupta S
- Demb J
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.23.00703
keywords:
- Humans
- "Helicobacter Infections/drug therapy, epidemiology, complications"
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/microbiology, epidemiology"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Helicobacter pylori/isolation & purification"
- Retrospective Studies
- Aged
- Incidence
- United States/epidemiology
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Cohort Studies
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of Helicobacter pylori Infection and Treatment on Colorectal Cancer in a Large, Nationwide Cohort.
**Authors:** Shah SC, Camargo MC, Lamm M, Bustamante R, Roumie CL, Wilson O, Halvorson AE, Greevy R, Liu L, Gupta S, Demb J
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.23.00703](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.23.00703)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2024 Jun 1;42(16):1881-1889. doi: 10.1200/JCO.23.00703. Epub
2024  Mar 1.

Impact of Helicobacter pylori Infection and Treatment on Colorectal Cancer in a 
Large, Nationwide Cohort.

Shah SC(1)(2), Camargo MC(3), Lamm M(1), Bustamante R(1)(2), Roumie CL(4)(5)(6), 
Wilson O(4), Halvorson AE(7), Greevy R(7), Liu L(8), Gupta S(1)(2), Demb J(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, 
CA.
(3)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD.
(4)Department of Medicine, VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Clinical 
Services Research and Development, Nashville, TN.
(5)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN.
(6)Department of Medicine, VA Geriatrics Research Education and Clinical Center 
(GRECC), VA Tennessee Valley Health System, Nashville, TN.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN.
(8)Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Herbert Wertheim School of 
Public Health and Human Longevity Science, University of California, San Diego, 
San Diego, CA.

PURPOSE: Helicobacter pylori is the most common cause of infection-associated 
cancer worldwide. We aimed to evaluate the impact of H. pylori infection and 
treatment on colorectal cancer (CRC) incidence and mortality.
PATIENTS: US Veterans who completed H. pylori testing between 1999 and 2018.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort analysis among adults within the 
Veterans Health Administration who completed testing for H. pylori. The primary 
exposures were (1) H. pylori test result (positive/negative) and (2) H. pylori 
treatment (untreated/treated) among H. pylori-positive individuals. The primary 
outcomes were CRC incidence and mortality. Follow-up started at the first H. 
pylori testing and continued until the earliest of incident or fatal CRC, 
non-CRC death, or December 31, 2019.
RESULTS: Among 812,736 individuals tested for H. pylori, 205,178 (25.2%) tested 
positive. Being H. pylori-positive versus H. pylori-negative was associated with 
higher CRC incidence and mortality. H. pylori treatment versus no treatment was 
associated with lower CRC incidence and mortality (absolute risk reduction 
0.23%-0.35%) through 15-year follow-up. Being H. pylori-positive versus H. 
pylori-negative was associated with an 18% (adjusted hazard ratio [adjusted HR], 
1.18 [95% CI, 1.12 to 1.24]) and 12% (adjusted HR, 1.12 [95% CI, 1.03 to 1.21]) 
higher incident and fatal CRC risk, respectively. Individuals with untreated 
versus treated H. pylori infection had 23% (adjusted HR, 1.23 [95% CI, 1.13 to 
1.34]) and 40% (adjusted HR, 1.40 [95% CI, 1.24 to 1.58]) higher incident and 
fatal CRC risk, respectively. The results were more pronounced in the analysis 
restricted to individuals with nonserologic testing.
CONCLUSION: H. pylori positivity may be associated with small but statistically 
significant higher CRC incidence and mortality; untreated individuals, 
especially those with confirmed active infection, appear to be most at risk.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.23.00703
PMCID: PMC11588569
PMID: 38427927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest and Financial Disclosures: 
All authors report no conflicts of interest that are relevant to this article. 
Shailja C. Shah serves as an ad hoc consultant and advisor for Phathom 
Pharmaceuticals and ad hoc consultant for RedHill Biopharma.