---
reference_id: "PMID:35886065"
title: Clinical Features and Novel Genetic Variants Associated with Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome.
authors:
- Chen C
- Wang R
- Yuan Y
- Li J
- Yu X
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13071283
keywords:
- Eye
- Genetic Testing
- "Hermanski-Pudlak Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Features and Novel Genetic Variants Associated with Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome.
**Authors:** Chen C, Wang R, Yuan Y, Li J, Yu X
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13071283](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13071283)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Jul 20;13(7):1283. doi: 10.3390/genes13071283.

Clinical Features and Novel Genetic Variants Associated with Hermansky-Pudlak 
Syndrome.

Chen C(1), Wang R(1), Yuan Y(1), Li J(1), Yu X(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology and 
Visual Science, Guangzhou 510060, China.

Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) is a rare autosomal recessive syndromic form of 
albinism, characterized by oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) and other systemic 
complications. The purpose of this study was to investigate patients with 
HPS-associated gene mutations and describe associated ocular and extraocular 
phenotypes. Fifty-four probands clinically diagnosed as albinism were enrolled. 
Ophthalmic examinations and genetic testing were performed in all subjects. The 
phenotypic and genetic features were evaluated. HPS-associated gene mutation was 
identified in four of the patients with albinism phenotype. Clinically, 
photophobia, and nystagmus was detected in all (4/4) patients, and strabismus 
was found in one (1/4) patient. Fundus examination revealed fundus 
hypopigmentation and foveal hypoplasia in all (8/8) eyes. Eight novel causative 
mutations were detected in these four HPS probands. Five (62.5%, 5/8) of the 
mutations were nonsense, two of the mutations were missense (25%, 2/8), and one 
of the mutations was frameshift (12.5%, 1/8). All patients in our study carried 
compound heterozygous variants, and all these pathogenic variants were 
identified to be novel, with most (62.5%, 5/8) of the mutations being nonsense. 
Our results improved the understanding of clinical ocular features, and expanded 
the spectrum of known variants and the genetic background of HPS.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13071283
PMCID: PMC9321923
PMID: 35886065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.