---
reference_id: "PMID:29355452"
title: "Retrospective study of paraneoplastic neurological syndromes in a Chinese Han population from Shandong, East China."
authors:
- Miao S
- Liao S
- Li H
- Niu B
- Hu H
- Qian Y
- Guo H
- Cao B
journal: Int J Neurosci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/00207454.2018.1430693
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antigens, Tumor-Associated, Carbohydrate/metabolism"
- "China/epidemiology, ethnology"
- Electroencephalography
- Electromyography
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Keratin-19/metabolism
- Limbic Encephalitis/etiology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neural Conduction
- Neurologic Examination
- "Paraneoplastic Polyneuropathy/complications, diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrospective study of paraneoplastic neurological syndromes in a Chinese Han population from Shandong, East China.
**Authors:** Miao S, Liao S, Li H, Niu B, Hu H, Qian Y, Guo H, Cao B
**Journal:** Int J Neurosci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00207454.2018.1430693](https://doi.org/10.1080/00207454.2018.1430693)

## Content

1. Int J Neurosci. 2018 Sep;128(9):821-827. doi: 10.1080/00207454.2018.1430693. 
Epub 2018 Feb 5.

Retrospective study of paraneoplastic neurological syndromes in a Chinese Han 
population from Shandong, East China.

Miao S(1)(2), Liao S(1)(2), Li H(3), Niu B(2), Hu H(2), Qian Y(1)(2), Guo 
H(1)(2), Cao B(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Neurology , Graduate School of the Second Military Medical 
University , Shanghai , China.
(2)b Department of Neurology , General Hospital of Jinan Military Command , 
Jinan , China.
(3)c Department of Neurology, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital , Shandong 
University , Jinan , China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the clinical features, diagnostic strategies and 
therapeutic methods associated with paraneoplastic neurological syndromes.
METHODS: A retrospective study of paraneoplastic neurological syndromes was 
performed at a single center in Shandong, East China. The medical records and 
follow-up data of 28 patients were intensively reviewed between February 2011 
and December 2014.
RESULTS: Twenty-four (85.7%) patients experienced subacute or chronic onset of 
disease, and the most common symptoms reported were mild myasthenia and 
paresthesias. Twenty-five (89.3%) patients presented nervous system lesions 
prior to occult tumors, and the median time frame between paraneoplastic 
neurological syndromes onset and the diagnosis of a tumor was 15 weeks. 
Sensorimotor neuropathy, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome and limbic 
encephalitis were the three most common neurological syndromes reported. 
Elevated serum tumor markers were observed in 44.0% of patients, while 40.7% of 
patients were positive for onconeural antibodies. Tumors were detected in 21 
(75.0%) patients after repeated whole-body screening, and lung carcinomas were 
the most common primary tumor detected. Seventeen patients received anti-tumor 
or immunological therapy, and clinical symptoms were relieved in 13 (76.5%) of 
these patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In the majority of paraneoplastic neurological syndromes patients, 
the onset of disease is subacute or chronic with mild clinical symptoms. Nervous 
system lesions usually occur prior to occult tumors with complicated and various 
clinical manifestations. Neither tumor markers nor onconeural antibodies exhibit 
a high rate of occurrence, while repeated whole-body screening is helpful in 
identifying occult tumors. Early diagnosis and treatment are crucial to these 
patients.

DOI: 10.1080/00207454.2018.1430693
PMID: 29355452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]