---
reference_id: "PMID:28757318"
title: "New Treatment Option for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Two Long-Acting Bronchodilators in a Single Metered-Dose Inhaler."
authors:
- Self TH
- Ellingson S
journal: Am J Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.07.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Treatment Option for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Two Long-Acting Bronchodilators in a Single Metered-Dose Inhaler.
**Authors:** Self TH, Ellingson S
**Journal:** Am J Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.07.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.07.011)

## Content

1. Am J Med. 2017 Nov;130(11):1251-1254. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.07.011. Epub 
2017 Jul 27.

New Treatment Option for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Two Long-Acting 
Bronchodilators in a Single Metered-Dose Inhaler.

Self TH(1), Ellingson S(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Methodist University Hospital, 
Memphis. Electronic address: tself@uthsc.edu.
(2)University of Tennessee Health Science Center, PGY2 Internal Medicine 
Pharmacy Residency, Methodist University Hospital, Memphis.

Erratum in
    Am J Med. 2018 Feb;131(2):213. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.11.006.

Combination long-acting inhaled bronchodilators are central to the management of 
patients with moderate to very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Glycopyrrolate is a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), and formoterol 
fumarate is a long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA). In randomized controlled trials, 
this LAMA/LABA combination in a metered-dose inhaler was shown to be effective 
in improving pulmonary function and quality of life. Clinicians now have the 
availability of 3 delivery systems for LAMA/LABA therapy, including metered-dose 
inhaler, dry-powder inhaler, and Soft Mist inhaler. On the basis of numerous 
patient factors, such as cognitive ability, manual strength/dexterity, and peak 
inspiratory flow, clinicians may select the most appropriate inhalation device. 
For each inhalation device, persistent patient education is absolutely 
essential, including observation of patient use. International evidence-based 
guidelines stress the critical importance of ensuring correct use of inhalation 
devices.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.07.011
PMID: 28757318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]