---
reference_id: "PMID:11747808"
title: Dual inhibition of sister chromatid separation at metaphase.
authors:
- Stemmann O
- Zou H
- Gerber SA
- Gygi SP
- Kirschner MW
journal: Cell
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00603-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dual inhibition of sister chromatid separation at metaphase.
**Authors:** Stemmann O, Zou H, Gerber SA, Gygi SP, Kirschner MW
**Journal:** Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00603-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00603-1)

## Content

1. Cell. 2001 Dec 14;107(6):715-26. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00603-1.

Dual inhibition of sister chromatid separation at metaphase.

Stemmann O(1), Zou H, Gerber SA, Gygi SP, Kirschner MW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Separation of sister chromatids in anaphase is mediated by separase, an 
endopeptidase that cleaves the chromosomal cohesin SCC1. Separase is inhibited 
by securin, which is degraded at the metaphase-anaphase transition. Using 
Xenopus egg extracts, we demonstrate that high CDC2 activity inhibits anaphase 
but not securin degradation. We show that separase is kept inactive under these 
conditions by a mechanism independent of binding to securin. Mutation of a 
single phosphorylation site on separase relieves the inhibition and rescues 
chromatid separation in extracts with high CDC2 activity. Using quantitative 
mass spectrometry, we show that, in intact cells, there is complete 
phosphorylation of this site in metaphase and significant dephosphorylation in 
anaphase. We propose that separase activation at the metaphase-anaphase 
transition requires the removal of both securin and an inhibitory phosphate.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00603-1
PMID: 11747808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]