---
reference_id: "PMID:34676800"
title: Pathogenesis and virulence of herpes simplex virus.
authors:
- Zhu S
- Viejo-Borbolla A
journal: Virulence
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1982373
keywords:
- Encephalitis
- Female
- Herpes Genitalis
- Herpes Simplex/pathology
- "Herpesvirus 1, Human/genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Virulence
- Virus Latency/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis and virulence of herpes simplex virus.
**Authors:** Zhu S, Viejo-Borbolla A
**Journal:** Virulence (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21505594.2021.1982373](https://doi.org/10.1080/21505594.2021.1982373)

## Content

1. Virulence. 2021 Dec;12(1):2670-2702. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1982373.

Pathogenesis and virulence of herpes simplex virus.

Zhu S(1), Viejo-Borbolla A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology, Hannover Medical School, Cluster of Excellence RESIST 
(Exc 2155), Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Two of the most prevalent human viruses worldwide, herpes simplex virus type 1 
and type 2 (HSV-1 and HSV-2, respectively), cause a variety of diseases, 
including cold sores, genital herpes, herpes stromal keratitis, meningitis and 
encephalitis. The intrinsic, innate and adaptive immune responses are key to 
control HSV, and the virus has developed mechanisms to evade them. The immune 
response can also contribute to pathogenesis, as observed in stromal keratitis 
and encephalitis. The fact that certain individuals are more prone than others 
to suffer severe disease upon HSV infection can be partially explained by the 
existence of genetic polymorphisms in humans. Like all herpesviruses, HSV has 
two replication cycles: lytic and latent. During lytic replication HSV produces 
infectious viral particles to infect other cells and organisms, while during 
latency there is limited gene expression and lack of infectious virus particles. 
HSV establishes latency in neurons and can cause disease both during primary 
infection and upon reactivation. The mechanisms leading to latency and 
reactivation and which are the viral and host factors controlling these 
processes are not completely understood. Here we review the HSV life cycle, the 
interaction of HSV with the immune system and three of the best-studied 
pathologies: Herpes stromal keratitis, herpes simplex encephalitis and genital 
herpes. We also discuss the potential association between HSV-1 infection and 
Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1982373
PMCID: PMC8923070
PMID: 34676800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declare no conflict of interest. 
The funders had no role in the design of the study, in the writing of the 
manuscript or in the decision to publish.