---
reference_id: "PMID:38893003"
title: "Alopecia Areata of the Nails: Diagnosis and Management."
authors:
- Pelzer C
- Iorizzo M
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13113292
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alopecia Areata of the Nails: Diagnosis and Management.
**Authors:** Pelzer C, Iorizzo M
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13113292](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13113292)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Jun 3;13(11):3292. doi: 10.3390/jcm13113292.

Alopecia Areata of the Nails: Diagnosis and Management.

Pelzer C(1), Iorizzo M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Kantonsspital St.
Gallen, 9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland.
(2)Private Dermatology Practice, 6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Background: Alopecia areata (AA) is a common form of non-scarring alopecia
characterized by acute hair loss. Nail involvement, though not always present,
can occur in AA patients. Nail changes are more frequent in severe forms of AA
and in children. Methods: Literature related to nail changes in AA was
comprehensively reviewed after a search on the PubMed database without time
restrictions in order to identify common clinical presentations and associated
factors to aid clinicians with the correct evaluation and management of these
dystrophies. Results: Nail changes in AA include pitting, trachyonychia,
leukonychia, red lunula, and miscellaneous alterations such as longitudinal
ridging and brittle nails. Nail changes are usually asymptomatic but,
nevertheless, sometimes cosmetically disfiguring and can be associated with a
reduced quality of life and impaired daily activities. Conclusions: Nail changes
in AA may precede or follow hair loss and can occur as an isolated finding.
Diagnosis may require a biopsy for definitive identification. Spontaneous
improvement is possible, particularly in children, and treatment is not always
necessary. Further research is, however, needed to establish a consensus on
treatment approaches according to age and severity.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13113292
PMCID: PMC11172645
PMID: 38893003

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
