---
reference_id: "PMID:30979932"
title: Evidence for altered neurodevelopment and neurodegeneration in Wolfram syndrome using longitudinal morphometry.
authors:
- Lugar HM
- Koller JM
- Rutlin J
- Eisenstein SA
- Neyman O
- Narayanan A
- Chen L
- Shimony JS
- Hershey T
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-42447-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Neuroimaging
- Prognosis
- "Wolfram Syndrome/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence for altered neurodevelopment and neurodegeneration in Wolfram syndrome using longitudinal morphometry.
**Authors:** Lugar HM, Koller JM, Rutlin J, Eisenstein SA, Neyman O, Narayanan A, Chen L, Shimony JS, Hershey T
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-019-42447-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42447-9)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2019 Apr 12;9(1):6010. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-42447-9.

Evidence for altered neurodevelopment and neurodegeneration in Wolfram syndrome
using longitudinal morphometry.

Lugar HM(1), Koller JM(1), Rutlin J(1), Eisenstein SA(1), Neyman O(1), Narayanan
A(1), Chen L(2), Shimony JS(3), Hershey T(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA. tammy@wustl.edu.
(5)Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. tammy@wustl.edu.

Wolfram syndrome is a rare disease caused by mutations in the WFS1 gene leading
to symptoms in early to mid-childhood. Brain structural abnormalities are
present even in young children, but it is not known when these abnormalities
arise. Such information is critical in determining optimal outcome measures for
clinical trials and in understanding the aberrant neurobiological processes in
Wolfram syndrome. Using voxel-wise and regional longitudinal analyses, we
compared brain volumes in Wolfram patients (n = 29; ages 5-25 at baseline; mean
follow-up = 3.6 years), to age and sex-equivalent controls (n = 52; ages 6-26 at
baseline; mean follow-up = 2.0 years). Between groups, white and gray matter
volumes were affected differentially during development. Controls had uniformly
increasing volume in white matter, whereas the Wolfram group had stable (optic
radiations) or decreasing (brainstem, ventral pons) white matter volumes. In
gray matter, controls had stable (thalamus, cerebellar cortex) or decreasing
volumes (cortex), whereas the Wolfram group had decreased volume in thalamus and
cerebellar cortex. These patterns suggest that there may be early, stalled white
matter development in Wolfram syndrome, with additional degenerative processes
in both white and gray matter. Ideally, animal models could be used to identify
the underlying mechanisms and develop specific interventions.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-42447-9
PMCID: PMC6461605
PMID: 30979932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
