---
reference_id: "PMID:11231901"
title: Axonemal dynein intermediate-chain gene (DNAI1) mutations result in situs inversus and primary ciliary dyskinesia (Kartagener syndrome).
authors:
- Guichard C
- Harricane MC
- Lafitte JJ
- Godard P
- Zaegel M
- Tack V
- Lalau G
- Bouvagnet P
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/319511
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axonemal dynein intermediate-chain gene (DNAI1) mutations result in situs inversus and primary ciliary dyskinesia (Kartagener syndrome).
**Authors:** Guichard C, Harricane MC, Lafitte JJ, Godard P, Zaegel M, Tack V, Lalau G, Bouvagnet P
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/319511](https://doi.org/10.1086/319511)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Apr;68(4):1030-5. doi: 10.1086/319511. Epub 2001 Feb 23.

Axonemal dynein intermediate-chain gene (DNAI1) mutations result in situs 
inversus and primary ciliary dyskinesia (Kartagener syndrome).

Guichard C(1), Harricane MC, Lafitte JJ, Godard P, Zaegel M, Tack V, Lalau G, 
Bouvagnet P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Equipe d'Accueil 3088, 
Université C. Bernard Lyon 1, 69373 Lyon cedex 8, France.

Kartagener syndrome (KS) is a trilogy of symptoms (nasal polyps, bronchiectasis, 
and situs inversus totalis) that is associated with ultrastructural anomalies of 
cilia of epithelial cells covering the upper and lower respiratory tracts and 
spermatozoa flagellae. The axonemal dynein intermediate-chain gene 1 (DNAI1), 
which has been demonstrated to be responsible for a case of primary ciliary 
dyskinesia (PCD) without situs inversus, was screened for mutation in a series 
of 34 patients with KS. We identified compound heterozygous DNAI1 gene defects 
in three independent patients and in two of their siblings who presented with 
PCD and situs solitus (i.e., normal position of inner organs). Strikingly, these 
five patients share one mutant allele (splice defect), which is identical to one 
of the mutant DNAI1 alleles found in the patient with PCD, reported elsewhere. 
Finally, this study demonstrates a link between ciliary function and situs 
determination, since compound mutation heterozygosity in DNAI1 results in PCD 
with situs solitus or situs inversus (KS).

DOI: 10.1086/319511
PMCID: PMC1275621
PMID: 11231901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]