---
reference_id: "PMID:20634686"
title: Acquired thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura associated with reversible severe renal failure requiring hemodialysis.
authors:
- Prasad A
- Shah D
- Asija A
- Nelson J
journal: Am J Ther
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/MJT.0b013e3181df8e42
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acquired thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura associated with reversible severe renal failure requiring hemodialysis.
**Authors:** Prasad A, Shah D, Asija A, Nelson J
**Journal:** Am J Ther (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MJT.0b013e3181df8e42](https://doi.org/10.1097/MJT.0b013e3181df8e42)

## Content

1. Am J Ther. 2012 Jan;19(1):e53-5. doi: 10.1097/MJT.0b013e3181df8e42.

Acquired thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura associated with reversible severe 
renal failure requiring hemodialysis.

Prasad A(1), Shah D, Asija A, Nelson J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA. 
draakanksha@gmail.com

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is an uncommon hematologic disorder 
characterized by microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MHA) and thrombocytopenia 
with or without fever, renal failure, and neurologic manifestations. Although 
the full pentad was required for the diagnosis of TTP until recently, because of 
the high mortality of untreated TTP and the varying manifestations of the 
disease itself, diagnostic criteria for TTP have been relaxed since the 
emergence of plasma exchange as effective treatment for TTP. The occurrence of 
MHA and thrombocytopenia without an alternate cause is now sufficient to 
initiate therapy. Renal dysfunction in acquired TTP, when it occurs, is 
transient and responds to therapeutic plasma exchange readily. Here we report a 
patient with acquired TTP who had no preexisting renal pathology but developed 
severe prolonged renal failure requiring multiple rounds of hemodialysis with 
eventual complete recovery of renal function. We adopted an intensive approach 
including steroids, rituximab, cyclosporine, twice daily plasma exchange, and 
hemodialysis. We believe that this was responsible for complete recovery of the 
patient. However, the reason for this unusually severe renal manifestation needs 
further study.

DOI: 10.1097/MJT.0b013e3181df8e42
PMID: 20634686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]