---
reference_id: "PMID:35066146"
title: "Retinal cadherins and the retinal cadherinopathies: Current concepts and future directions."
authors:
- Yusuf IH
- Garrett AM
- MacLaren RE
- Charbel Issa P
journal: Prog Retin Eye Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2021.101038
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cadherins/genetics, metabolism"
- Macular Degeneration/genetics
- Retina/metabolism
- Retinal Degeneration/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinal cadherins and the retinal cadherinopathies: Current concepts and future directions.
**Authors:** Yusuf IH, Garrett AM, MacLaren RE, Charbel Issa P
**Journal:** Prog Retin Eye Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.preteyeres.2021.101038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.preteyeres.2021.101038)

## Content

1. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2022 Sep;90:101038. doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2021.101038.
 Epub 2022 Jan 21.

Retinal cadherins and the retinal cadherinopathies: Current concepts and future 
directions.

Yusuf IH(1), Garrett AM(2), MacLaren RE(1), Charbel Issa P(3).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK; Oxford Eye 
Hospital and NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Department of Ophthalmology, Visual and 
Anatomical Sciences, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, 
USA.
(3)Nuffield Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK; Oxford Eye 
Hospital and NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK. Electronic address: study-enquiry@outlook.com.

Cadherins are a superfamily of calcium-dependent intercellular adhesion 
molecules that are widely expressed in living tissues. Within the retina and 
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), cadherins contribute to tissue morphogenesis, 
neural circuit formation, adherens junctions of the outer blood-retinal barrier, 
photoreceptor disc morphogenesis, maintenance and survival. Four monogenic 
disorders involving genes which encode cadherins have been identified as causes 
of inherited retinal degeneration: the retinal cadherinopathies (CDHR1, CDH23, 
PCDH15, CDH3). Biallelic variants in CDHR1 result in cone-rod dystrophy, 
rod-cone dystrophy or late-onset macular dystrophy which may be misclassified as 
dry age-related macular degeneration. Biallelic variants in CDH23 and PCDH15 
underlie Usher Syndrome type 1D and 1F. Hypotrichosis with juvenile macular 
dystrophy results from biallelic variants in CDH3, which contributes to adherens 
tight junctions between RPE cells. In this review, we summarise the 
classification of cadherins, and the role of cadherins in the physiology and 
morphogenesis of the inner and outer retina. Cadherins expressed in primate 
photoreceptors (CDHR1, CDH23 and PCDH15) have evolved complex roles in outer 
segment disc morphogenesis and maintenance involving intracellular heterophilic 
interactions which are as yet incompletely characterised. We highlight what is 
currently unknown about the molecular function of these cadherins, and review 
the pathogenesis, clinical phenotype and molecular genetics of each monogenic 
retinal cadherinopathy. Genes regulating the expression and post-translational 
modification of retinal cadherins, or those coding for as yet unidentified 
interacting partners, are candidates for unsolved cases of retinal degeneration. 
This group of disorders is potentially treatable; we summarise the likely 
molecular therapeutic approaches and future directions for each retinal 
cadherinopathy.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2021.101038
PMID: 35066146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]