---
reference_id: "PMID:38304669"
title: "Recognition of Significantly Delayed Spinal Cord Ischemia Following Thoracic Endovascular Aortic Repair: A Case Report and Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Kelly H
- Herman D
- Loo K
- Narangoli A
- Watson E
- Berlant C
- Huerta M
- Labak CM
- Zhou X
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.51522
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recognition of Significantly Delayed Spinal Cord Ischemia Following Thoracic Endovascular Aortic Repair: A Case Report and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Kelly H, Herman D, Loo K, Narangoli A, Watson E, Berlant C, Huerta M, Labak CM, Zhou X
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.51522](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.51522)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jan 2;16(1):e51522. doi: 10.7759/cureus.51522. eCollection 2024
Jan.

Recognition of Significantly Delayed Spinal Cord Ischemia Following Thoracic
Endovascular Aortic Repair: A Case Report and Review of the Literature.

Kelly H(1), Herman D(1), Loo K(1), Narangoli A(2), Watson E(2), Berlant C(3),
Huerta M(4), Labak CM(4), Zhou X(4).

Author information:
(1)Neurology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland,
USA.
(2)Neurology, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, Cleveland, USA.
(3)Emergency Medicine, University Hospitals St. John Medical Center, Westlake,
USA.
(4)Neurological Surgery, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center,
Cleveland, USA.

Spinal cord ischemia (SCI) is an uncommon but serious complication of thoracic
endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR). SCI after TEVAR is thought to result from
decreased segmental blood supply to an important network of collateral blood
flow in the spinal cord. Little is known about the prevalence and optimal
treatment of SCI that occurs beyond the periprocedural period. We report a case
of delayed SCI in a 67-year-old patient who underwent TEVAR. The patient
presented almost two years after TEVAR with acute paraplegia preceded by
pre-syncope. The delayed SCI was likely triggered by pre-syncope, a thrombosed
endoleak shown on imaging, and the patient's vascular risk factors. Treatments
included cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage, mean arterial pressure (MAP)
augmentation, and a naloxone infusion, which resulted in moderate recovery in
lower extremity motor function. This case highlights the tenuous nature of
spinal cord perfusion after TEVAR and that prompt recognition and early
treatment of SCI are critical in preventing the progression from ischemia to
infarction.

Copyright © 2024, Kelly et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.51522
PMCID: PMC10831204
PMID: 38304669

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
