---
reference_id: "PMID:39633384"
title: "Systematic quantitative modeling of the natural history of Aicardi syndrome: A cross sectional study of 245 published cases."
authors:
- Urban OY
- Driedger JH
- Garbade SF
- Hoffmann GF
- Kölker S
- Ries M
- Syrbe S
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03375-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Aicardi Syndrome
- Female
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Infant
- Male
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic quantitative modeling of the natural history of Aicardi syndrome: A cross sectional study of 245 published cases.
**Authors:** Urban OY, Driedger JH, Garbade SF, Hoffmann GF, Kölker S, Ries M, Syrbe S
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03375-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03375-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Dec 4;19(1):457. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03375-8.

Systematic quantitative modeling of the natural history of Aicardi syndrome: A 
cross sectional study of 245 published cases.

Urban OY(1), Driedger JH(1), Garbade SF(2), Hoffmann GF(2), Kölker S(2), Ries 
M(#)(2), Syrbe S(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Epileptology, Center for Pediatric and Adolescent 
Medicine, Clinic 1, Medical Faculty of Heidelberg, Heidelberg University, Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 430, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Division of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Center for Pediatric 
and Adolescent Medicine, Clinic 1, Medical Faculty of Heidelberg, Heidelberg 
University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Division of Pediatric Epileptology, Center for Pediatric and Adolescent 
Medicine, Clinic 1, Medical Faculty of Heidelberg, Heidelberg University, Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 430, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany. 
Steffen.Syrbe@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Aicardi syndrome is a rare epileptic encephalopathy, almost exclusively 
affecting girls. It was first described as a triad of infantile spasms, 
chorioretinal defects and agenesis of the corpus callosum. The etiology remains 
unknown and there is uncertainty on best practice therapy and outcome. We aimed 
at defining quantitative clinical endpoints that will inform future research and 
clinical trials.
METHODS: Quantitative natural history modeling of cases with Aicardi syndrome 
from published clinical reports. Main outcome measures were age at disease 
onset, survival and diagnostic delay. Phenotypic features of affected 
individuals as well as neuroradiological and ophthalmological features were 
descriptively stated. STROBE criteria were respected.
RESULTS: Two hundred forty-five cases were available for analysis. Median age at 
disease onset was 2.2 months. Median diagnostic delay was 1 month. Mortality was 
estimated with 6% at 1 and 17% at 5 years of age. 60% of children showed the 
classic clinical features, while 40% met the revised diagnostic criteria. We 
delineate possible predictors of disease severity and of seizure control.
CONCLUSION: We provide natural history data including geographical localization 
of 245 published patients with Aicardi syndrome. Quantitative history modeling 
in rare epileptic encephalopathies will help to raise disease awareness and 
facilitate future clinical trials as one core element of quantitative systems 
pharmacology.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03375-8
PMCID: PMC11616230
PMID: 39633384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: O.U. declares that he has no competing interests. G.F.H. declares 
that he has no competing interests. S.K. declares that he has no competing 
interests. S.S. declares that he has no competing interests.