---
reference_id: "PMID:37919024"
title: Management of Monogenic and Syndromic Obesity.
authors:
- Han JC
- Rasmussen MC
- Forte AR
- Schrage SB
- Zafar SK
- Haqq AM
journal: Gastroenterol Clin North Am
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.gtc.2023.08.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Monogenic and Syndromic Obesity.
**Authors:** Han JC, Rasmussen MC, Forte AR, Schrage SB, Zafar SK, Haqq AM
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Clin North Am (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gtc.2023.08.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gtc.2023.08.005)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2023 Dec;52(4):733-750. doi: 
10.1016/j.gtc.2023.08.005. Epub 2023 Sep 27.

Management of Monogenic and Syndromic Obesity.

Han JC(1), Rasmussen MC(2), Forte AR(2), Schrage SB(2), Zafar SK(2), Haqq AM(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA; Diabetes, Obesity, 
and Metabolism Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 
USA; The Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
joan.han@mssm.edu.
(2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; Department of Agricultural, Food and 
Nutritional Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Similar to the general population, lifestyle interventions focused on nutrition 
and physical activity form the foundation for treating obesity caused by rare 
genetic disorders. Additional therapies, including metreleptin and 
setmelanotide, that target defects within the leptin signaling pathway can 
effectively synergize with lifestyle efforts to treat monogenic disorders of 
leptin, leptin receptor, proopiomelanocortin (POMC), and proprotein convertase 
subtilisin/kexin type 1 (PCSK1) and syndromic conditions, such as the 
ciliopathies Bardet-Biedl and Alström syndromes, whose pathophysiological 
mechanisms also converge on the leptin pathway. Investigational treatments for 
Prader-Willi syndrome target specific defects caused by reduced expression of 
paternally derived genes within the chromosome 15q region.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gtc.2023.08.005
PMID: 37919024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure J.C. Han is a clinical trial 
investigator for multi-site research studies sponsored by Rhythm 
Pharmaceuticals. A.M. Haqq is a clinical trial investigator for multi-site 
research studies sponsored by Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Levo Therapeutics, and Eli 
Lilly. She has received grants from the Weston Family Microbiome Initiative and 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Canada, payment as a speaker for Pfizer 
Canada, and is a member of advisory boards for Pfizer, Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, 
and Novo Nordisk Canada. The remaining authors have no disclosures.