---
reference_id: "PMID:36699005"
title: Ciliary signaling proteins are mislocalized in the brains of Bardet-Biedl syndrome 1-null mice.
authors:
- Stubbs T
- Bingman JI
- Besse J
- Mykytyn K
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.1092161
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ciliary signaling proteins are mislocalized in the brains of Bardet-Biedl syndrome 1-null mice.
**Authors:** Stubbs T, Bingman JI, Besse J, Mykytyn K
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2022.1092161](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2022.1092161)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Jan 9;10:1092161. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.1092161.
eCollection 2022.

Ciliary signaling proteins are mislocalized in the brains of Bardet-Biedl
syndrome 1-null mice.

Stubbs T(1), Bingman JI(1), Besse J(1), Mykytyn K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States.

In the brain, primary cilia are found on most, if not all, central neurons. The
importance of neuronal cilia is underscored by the fact that human diseases
caused by primary cilia dysfunction, which are known as ciliopathies, are
associated with neuropathologies, including neuropsychiatric disorders and
learning and memory deficits. Neuronal cilia are enriched for certain G
protein-coupled receptors and their downstream effectors, suggesting they sense
and respond to neuromodulators in the extracellular milieu. GPCR ciliary
localization is disrupted in neurons from mouse models of the ciliopathy
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, with GPCRs failing to localize to cilia, indicating the
Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins are required for trafficking of G protein-coupled
receptors into neuronal cilia. Yet, dopamine receptor 1 accumulates in cilia in
the absence of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins, suggesting Bardet-Biedl syndrome
proteins are required for normal ciliary import and export. To further explore
the roles of the Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins in neuronal cilia, we examined
localization of ciliary signaling proteins in a new constitutive Bbs1 knockout
mouse model. Interestingly, we find that two additional ciliary G
protein-coupled receptors (Gpr161 and Gpr19) abnormally accumulate in cilia on
Bardet-Biedl syndrome neurons. In addition, we find that the GPCR signaling
protein β-arrestin accumulates in a subset of cilia in the brain, suggesting the
presence of additional unidentified ciliary G protein-coupled receptors. These
results confirm the importance of the Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins in
establishing ciliary GPCR pathways and indicate that loss of Bbs1 leads to
complex changes in the localization of signaling proteins in the brain.

Copyright © 2023 Stubbs, Bingman, Besse and Mykytyn.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.1092161
PMCID: PMC9868275
PMID: 36699005

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
