---
reference_id: "PMID:33414089"
title: "Cholestasis as a dominating symptom of patients with CYP27A1 mutations: An analysis of 17 Chinese infants."
authors:
- Zhang P
- Zhao J
- Peng XM
- Qian YY
- Zhao XM
- Zhou WH
- Wang JS
- Wu BB
- Wang HJ
journal: J Clin Lipidol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2020.12.004
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- China/epidemiology
- Cholestanetriol 26-Monooxygenase/genetics
- Cholestasis/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Xanthomatosis, Cerebrotendinous/genetics, diagnosis"
- East Asian People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholestasis as a dominating symptom of patients with CYP27A1 mutations: An analysis of 17 Chinese infants.
**Authors:** Zhang P, Zhao J, Peng XM, Qian YY, Zhao XM, Zhou WH, Wang JS, Wu BB, Wang HJ
**Journal:** J Clin Lipidol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacl.2020.12.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacl.2020.12.004)

## Content

1. J Clin Lipidol. 2021 Jan-Feb;15(1):116-123. doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2020.12.004.
Epub 2020 Dec 14.

Cholestasis as a dominating symptom of patients with CYP27A1 mutations: An
analysis of 17 Chinese infants.

Zhang P(1), Zhao J(2), Peng XM(1), Qian YY(1), Zhao XM(1), Zhou WH(3), Wang
JS(2), Wu BB(4), Wang HJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Key Laboratory of Birth Defects, Pediatrics
Research Institute, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Center for Pediatric Liver Diseases, Children's Hospital of Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.
(3)Center for Molecular Medicine and Key Laboratory of Birth Defects, Pediatrics
Research Institute, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China;
Department of Neonates, Key Laboratory of Neonatal Diseases, Ministry of Health,
Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Center for Molecular Medicine and Key Laboratory of Birth Defects, Pediatrics
Research Institute, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
Electronic address: bingbingwu2010@163.com.
(5)Center for Molecular Medicine and Key Laboratory of Birth Defects, Pediatrics
Research Institute, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
Electronic address: huijunwang@fudan.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: CYP27A1 is the disease-causing gene of cerebrotendinous
xanthomatosis (CTX). As a treatable lipid storage disease, early treatment can
improve the prognosis. However, CTX patients reported in the literature are
mostly adult patients; the phenotype spectrum of CTX in the infantile population
remains elusive.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate the phenotype spectrum of infants who carried
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in the CYP27A1 gene and were suspected
of having CTX.
METHODS: From June 2014 to May 2020, infants with pathogenic or likely
pathogenic variants in CYP27A1 gene were enrolled, who underwent next-generation
sequencing or Sanger sequencing in Children's Hospital of Fudan University.
Patient characteristics, clinical treatments and outcomes were extracted from
electronic medical records.
RESULTS: A total of 17 patients with an average onset age of 8 (1-42) days were
found. The average diagnosis age was ten months. Cholestasis was the dominant
symptom of these infants. Thirteen variants were detected, of which c.379C > T
was a hotspot variant (26.5% alleles, 9/34). Cholestatic CTX is usually
underestimated, but it could be severe or even fatal in infancy. For outcomes, 5
suffered from liver failure (36%, 5/14), 1 still showed cholestasis (7%, 1/14),
7 were asymptomatic (50%, 7/14), and 1 presented seizure and developmental delay
in later childhood (7%, 1/14).
CONCLUSION: Based on this infantile cohort, we concluded that it is necessary to
consider the possibility of CTX caused by CYP27A1 gene variants for infants with
cholestasis.

Copyright © 2020 National Lipid Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacl.2020.12.004
PMID: 33414089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
