---
reference_id: "PMID:41384162"
title: "Expanding the causes of Fever of Unknown Origin in immunocompromised patients: report of two cases highlighting the role of SARS-CoV-2."
authors:
- Calitri C
- Romano F
- Perinzano A
- Rizzello B
- Carbutto MD
- Ranzani FA
- Angilletta R
- Mussa M
- Calcagno A
journal: Infez Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.53854/liim-3304-10
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the causes of Fever of Unknown Origin in immunocompromised patients: report of two cases highlighting the role of SARS-CoV-2.
**Authors:** Calitri C, Romano F, Perinzano A, Rizzello B, Carbutto MD, Ranzani FA, Angilletta R, Mussa M, Calcagno A
**Journal:** Infez Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.53854/liim-3304-10](https://doi.org/10.53854/liim-3304-10)

## Content

1. Infez Med. 2025 Dec 1;33(4):448-452. doi: 10.53854/liim-3304-10. eCollection 
2025.

Expanding the causes of Fever of Unknown Origin in immunocompromised patients: 
report of two cases highlighting the role of SARS-CoV-2.

Calitri C(1), Romano F(1), Perinzano A(1), Rizzello B(1), Carbutto MD(1), 
Ranzani FA(1), Angilletta R(1), Mussa M(1), Calcagno A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, Amedeo di Savoia 
Hospital, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.

Fever of Unknown Origin (FUO) remains a diagnostic challenge for clinicians, 
with multiple infectious and non-infectious etiologies. SARS-CoV-2 can determine 
a prolonged viral shedding in the immunocompromised host, firstly in those 
receiving B-cell targeted therapies, being responsible of persistent infection 
which may configure as a FUO. We report two cases of long-lasting fever in 
patients with multiple sclerosis and B-cell depletion, finally diagnosed as 
COVID-19. We suggest the inclusion of SARS-CoV-2 testing in the differential 
diagnosis of FUO.

DOI: 10.53854/liim-3304-10
PMCID: PMC12695171
PMID: 41384162

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None of the authors has 
conflicts of interest to declare.