---
reference_id: "PMID:17160903"
title: "Nemaline myopathy with minicores caused by mutation of the CFL2 gene encoding the skeletal muscle actin-binding protein, cofilin-2."
authors:
- Agrawal PB
- Greenleaf RS
- Tomczak KK
- Lehtokari VL
- Wallgren-Pettersson C
- Wallefeld W
- Laing NG
- Darras BT
- Maciver SK
- Dormitzer PR
- Beggs AH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/510402
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nemaline myopathy with minicores caused by mutation of the CFL2 gene encoding the skeletal muscle actin-binding protein, cofilin-2.
**Authors:** Agrawal PB, Greenleaf RS, Tomczak KK, Lehtokari VL, Wallgren-Pettersson C, Wallefeld W, Laing NG, Darras BT, Maciver SK, Dormitzer PR, Beggs AH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/510402](https://doi.org/10.1086/510402)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Jan;80(1):162-7. doi: 10.1086/510402. Epub 2006 Nov 14.

Nemaline myopathy with minicores caused by mutation of the CFL2 gene encoding 
the skeletal muscle actin-binding protein, cofilin-2.

Agrawal PB(1), Greenleaf RS, Tomczak KK, Lehtokari VL, Wallgren-Pettersson C, 
Wallefeld W, Laing NG, Darras BT, Maciver SK, Dormitzer PR, Beggs AH.

Author information:
(1)Genomics Program, the Divisions of Genetics and Neonatology, Children's 
Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

Nemaline myopathy (NM) is a congenital myopathy characterized by muscle weakness 
and nemaline bodies in affected myofibers. Five NM genes, all encoding 
components of the sarcomeric thin filament, are known. We report identification 
of a sixth gene, CFL2, encoding the actin-binding protein muscle cofilin-2, 
which is mutated in two siblings with congenital myopathy. The proband's muscle 
contained characteristic nemaline bodies, as well as occasional fibers with 
minicores, concentric laminated bodies, and areas of F-actin accumulation. Her 
affected sister's muscle was reported to exhibit nonspecific myopathic changes. 
Cofilin-2 levels were significantly lower in the proband's muscle, and the 
mutant protein was less soluble when expressed in Escherichia coli, suggesting 
that deficiency of cofilin-2 may result in reduced depolymerization of actin 
filaments, causing their accumulation in nemaline bodies, minicores, and, 
possibly, concentric laminated bodies.

DOI: 10.1086/510402
PMCID: PMC1785312
PMID: 17160903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]