---
reference_id: "PMID:34830328"
title: Keratins as an Inflammation Trigger Point in Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex.
authors:
- Evtushenko NA
- Beilin AK
- Kosykh AV
- Vorotelyak EA
- Gurskaya NG
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms222212446
keywords:
- "Alarmins/genetics, metabolism"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress/genetics
- "Epidermis/metabolism, pathology"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Inflammation
- "Intermediate Filaments/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Keratin-14/genetics, metabolism"
- "Keratin-5/genetics, metabolism"
- "Keratinocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/metabolism
- Protein Aggregates
- Proteolysis
- Signal Transduction
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Keratins as an Inflammation Trigger Point in Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex.
**Authors:** Evtushenko NA, Beilin AK, Kosykh AV, Vorotelyak EA, Gurskaya NG
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms222212446](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222212446)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 18;22(22):12446. doi: 10.3390/ijms222212446.

Keratins as an Inflammation Trigger Point in Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex.

Evtushenko NA(1), Beilin AK(1)(2), Kosykh AV(1), Vorotelyak EA(2), Gurskaya 
NG(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Precision Genome Editing and Genetic Technologies for Biomedicine, 
Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Ostrovityanova 1, 117997 
Moscow, Russia.
(2)Koltzov Institute of Developmental Biology of Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Vavilova 26, 119334 Moscow, Russia.
(3)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Miklukho-Maklaya 
16/10, 117997 Moscow, Russia.

Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is a group of inherited keratinopathies 
that, in most cases, arise due to mutations in keratins and lead to 
intraepidermal ruptures. The cellular pathology of most EBS subtypes is 
associated with the fragility of the intermediate filament network, cytolysis of 
the basal layer of the epidermis, or attenuation of hemidesmosomal/desmosomal 
components. Mutations in keratins 5/14 or in other genes that encode associated 
proteins induce structural disarrangements of different strengths depending on 
their locations in the genes. Keratin aggregates display impaired dynamics of 
assembly and diminished solubility and appear to be the trigger for endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) stress upon being phosphorylated by MAPKs. Global changes in 
cellular signaling mainly occur in cases of severe dominant EBS mutations. The 
spectrum of changes initiated by phosphorylation includes the inhibition of 
proteasome degradation, TNF-α signaling activation, deregulated proliferation, 
abnormal cell migration, and impaired adherence of keratinocytes. ER stress also 
leads to the release of proinflammatory danger-associated molecular pattern 
(DAMP) molecules, which enhance avalanche-like inflammation. Many instances of 
positive feedback in the course of cellular stress and the development of 
sterile inflammation led to systemic chronic inflammation in EBS. This 
highlights the role of keratin in the maintenance of epidermal and immune 
homeostasis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222212446
PMCID: PMC8624175
PMID: 34830328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.