---
reference_id: "PMID:38327254"
title: "Genetic and acquired sucrase-isomaltase deficiency: A clinical review."
authors:
- Danialifar TF
- Chumpitazi BP
- Mehta DI
- Di Lorenzo C
journal: J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/jpn3.12151
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics"
- Dietary Sucrose
- Starch
- "Sucrase-Isomaltase Complex/genetics, deficiency"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and acquired sucrase-isomaltase deficiency: A clinical review.
**Authors:** Danialifar TF, Chumpitazi BP, Mehta DI, Di Lorenzo C
**Journal:** J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jpn3.12151](https://doi.org/10.1002/jpn3.12151)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2024 Apr;78(4):774-782. doi: 10.1002/jpn3.12151.
 Epub 2024 Feb 8.

Genetic and acquired sucrase-isomaltase deficiency: A clinical review.

Danialifar TF(1)(2), Chumpitazi BP(3)(4), Mehta DI(5), Di Lorenzo C(6).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.
(4)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Center for Digestive Health and Nutrition, Arnold Palmer Hospital for 
Children, Orlando, Florida, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and 
Nutrition, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Genetic sucrase-isomaltase deficiency (GSID) is an inherited deficiency in the 
ability to digest sucrose and potentially starch due to mutations in the 
sucrase-isomaltase (SI) gene. Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency is 
historically considered to be a rare condition affecting infants with chronic 
diarrhea as exposure to dietary sucrose begins. Growing evidence suggests that 
individuals with SI variants may present later in life, with symptoms 
overlapping with those of irritable bowel syndrome. The presence of SI genetic 
variants may, either alone or in combination, affect enzyme activity and lead to 
symptoms of different severity. As such, a more appropriate term for this 
inherited condition is GSID, with a recognition of a spectrum of severity and 
onset of presentation. Currently, disaccharidase assay on duodenal mucosal 
tissue homogenates is the gold standard in diagnosing SI deficiency. A 
deficiency in the SI enzyme can be present at birth (genetic) or acquired later, 
often in association with damage to the enteric brush-border membrane. Other 
noninvasive diagnostic alternatives such as sucrose breath tests may be useful 
but require further validation. Management of GSID is based on sucrose and 
potentially starch restriction tailored to the individual patients' tolerance 
and symptoms. As this approach may be challenging, additional treatment with 
commercially available sacrosidase is available. However, some patients may 
require continued starch restriction. Further research is needed to clarify the 
true prevalence of SI deficiency, the pathobiology of single SI heterozygous 
mutations, and to define optimal diagnostic and treatment algorithms in the 
pediatric population.

© 2024 The Authors. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition 
published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of European Society for Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition and North American Society for 
Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1002/jpn3.12151
PMID: 38327254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]