---
reference_id: "PMID:1414892"
title: Prospects for cardioreparation.
authors:
- Ollivier JP
- Bouchet VA
journal: Am J Cardiol
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1016/0002-9149(92)91355-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prospects for cardioreparation.
**Authors:** Ollivier JP, Bouchet VA
**Journal:** Am J Cardiol (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0002-9149(92)91355-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-9149(92)91355-8)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiol. 1992 Oct 8;70(10):27C-36C. doi: 10.1016/0002-9149(92)91355-8.

Prospects for cardioreparation.

Ollivier JP(1), Bouchet VA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Hôpital du Val-de-Grâce, Paris, France.

The structure of the myocardium has 2 principal components, a myocytic 
compartment and a non-myocytic compartment that consists primarily of 
interstitial tissue. It appears that increased collagen production is mainly 
responsible for the functional consequences of structural remodelling. The 
concept of cardioreparation implies both a restoration of structural 
abnormalities and a return of cardiac function to or toward normal. In 
spontaneously hypertensive rats with left ventricular hypertrophy and adverse 
structural remodeling of the cardiac interstitium, angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibition has resulted in restoration of myocardial integrity and stiffness 
toward normal. Further research needs to be undertaken to identify the molecular 
mechanisms involved in the development of interstitial myocardial fibrosis, and 
reliable methods for assessing the interstitium and the changes that occur 
within it in clinical practice need to be developed.

DOI: 10.1016/0002-9149(92)91355-8
PMID: 1414892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]