---
reference_id: "PMID:21401588"
title: "Axon-glial interaction in the CNS: what we have learned from mouse models of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease."
authors:
- Gruenenfelder FI
- Thomson G
- Penderis J
- Edgar JM
journal: J Anat
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2011.01363.x
keywords:
- Animals
- "Axons/metabolism, physiology"
- "Central Nervous System/metabolism, physiology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- Myelin Proteolipid Protein/metabolism
- Myelin Sheath/metabolism
- "Neuroglia/metabolism, physiology"
- "Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease/metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axon-glial interaction in the CNS: what we have learned from mouse models of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease.
**Authors:** Gruenenfelder FI, Thomson G, Penderis J, Edgar JM
**Journal:** J Anat (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1469-7580.2011.01363.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7580.2011.01363.x)

## Content

1. J Anat. 2011 Jul;219(1):33-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2011.01363.x. Epub
2011  Mar 14.

Axon-glial interaction in the CNS: what we have learned from mouse models of 
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease.

Gruenenfelder FI(1), Thomson G, Penderis J, Edgar JM.

Author information:
(1)Applied Neurobiology Group, Institute of Infection, Immunity and 
Inflammation, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of 
Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

In the central nervous system (CNS) the majority of axons are surrounded by a 
myelin sheath, which is produced by oligodendrocytes. Myelin is a lipid-rich 
insulating material that facilitates the rapid conduction of electrical impulses 
along the myelinated nerve fibre. Proteolipid protein and its isoform DM20 
constitute the most abundant protein component of CNS myelin. Mutations in the 
PLP1 gene encoding these myelin proteins cause Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease and 
the related allelic disorder, spastic paraplegia type 2. Animal models of these 
diseases, particularly models lacking or overexpressing Plp1, have shed light on 
the interplay between axons and oligodendrocytes, and how one component 
influences the other.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Anatomy © 2011 Anatomical Society of Great 
Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2011.01363.x
PMCID: PMC3130158
PMID: 21401588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]