---
reference_id: "PMID:31705665"
title: "Glycogen storage disease type Ib: role of glucose-6-phosphate transporter in cell metabolism and function."
authors:
- Sim SW
- Weinstein DA
- Lee YM
- Jun HS
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13666
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antiporters/genetics, metabolism"
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type I/genetics, immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Mesenchymal Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Monosaccharide Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycogen storage disease type Ib: role of glucose-6-phosphate transporter in cell metabolism and function.
**Authors:** Sim SW, Weinstein DA, Lee YM, Jun HS
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1873-3468.13666](https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.13666)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 2020 Jan;594(1):3-18. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13666. Epub 2019 Nov
22.

Glycogen storage disease type Ib: role of glucose-6-phosphate transporter in
cell metabolism and function.

Sim SW(1), Weinstein DA(2), Lee YM(2), Jun HS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, College of Science and
Technology, Korea University, Sejong, Korea.
(2)Glycogen Storage Disease Program, University of Connecticut School of
Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.

Cellular metabolism generally refers to biochemical processes that produce or
consume energy within the cell. Recent studies have established that aberrant
metabolic states caused by internal or external stresses and genetic mutations
are intertwined with several human pathologies. Gaining insight into these
metabolic alterations is, therefore, essential for understanding the
pathophysiology of various diseases. Glycogen storage disease type Ib (GSD-Ib)
is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by hypoglycemia, excessive
glycogen accumulation in the liver and kidney, neutropenia, neutrophil
dysfunction, and inflammatory bowel disease. GSD-Ib is caused by a deficiency of
glucose-6-phosphate transporter (G6PT). Recently, it was reported that
deficiency of G6PT also leads to the aberrant proliferation and differentiation
of mesenchymal stem cells and impaired regulatory T-cell function. This review
describes the broad impact of altered cellular metabolism resulting from a lack
of G6PT activity on cellular function and considers the prospects of developing
novel approaches for GSD-Ib treatment.

© 2019 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.13666
PMID: 31705665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
