---
reference_id: "PMID:40017560"
title: "Acid Ceramidase Deficiency: New Insights on SMA-PME Natural History, Biomarkers, and In Cell Enzyme Activity Assay."
authors:
- Cuinat S
- Rollier P
- Grand K
- Sanchez-Lara PA
- Allen-Sharpley M
- Levade T
- Vanier MT
- Lion Francois L
- Chemaly N
- de Lattre C
- Moreau C
- Paquot A
- Beghyn T
- de Masfrand S
- Bézieau S
- Mercier S
- Boespflug-Tanguy O
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200243
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acid Ceramidase Deficiency: New Insights on SMA-PME Natural History, Biomarkers, and In Cell Enzyme Activity Assay.
**Authors:** Cuinat S, Rollier P, Grand K, Sanchez-Lara PA, Allen-Sharpley M, Levade T, Vanier MT, Lion Francois L, Chemaly N, de Lattre C, Moreau C, Paquot A, Beghyn T, de Masfrand S, Bézieau S, Mercier S, Boespflug-Tanguy O
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200243](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200243)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2025 Feb 26;11(2):e200243. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200243. 
eCollection 2025 Apr.

Acid Ceramidase Deficiency: New Insights on SMA-PME Natural History, Biomarkers, 
and In Cell Enzyme Activity Assay.

Cuinat S(1), Rollier P(2), Grand K(3), Sanchez-Lara PA(3), Allen-Sharpley M(3), 
Levade T(4)(5), Vanier MT(6), Lion Francois L(7), Chemaly N(8), de Lattre C(9), 
Moreau C(10), Paquot A(10), Beghyn T(10), de Masfrand S(1), Bézieau S(1)(11), 
Mercier S(1)(11), Boespflug-Tanguy O(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes.
(2)Service de Génétique Clinique, CLAD Ouest, CHU Rennes, France.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Guerin Children's at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA.
(4)Laboratoire de Biochimie, CHU Toulouse.
(5)INSERM U1037, Centre de Recherches en Cancérologie de Toulouse, Université 
Paul Sabatier Toulouse, France.
(6)Laboratoire Gillet-Mérieux, Hospices Civils de Lyon, INSERM U820, France.
(7)Service de neurologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Hospices Civils 
de Lyon, France.
(8)Service de Neuropédiatrie, CRMR Epilepsies rares, Hôpital Necker Enfants 
Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(9)ESEAN APF France handicap, SMR pédiatrique, Nantes, France.
(10)APTEEUS SAS, Campus Institut Pasteur Lille, France.
(11)Inserm UMR 1087 / CNRS UMR 6291, Institut du thorax, Nantes Université, 
France.
(12)AP-HP, Service de Neuropédiatrie, CRMR LEUKOFRANCE, Hôpital Robert Debré, 
Paris, France; and.
(13)INSERM UMR 1141, NeuroDiderot, Université Paris Cité, France.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Spinal muscular atrophy with progressive myoclonic 
epilepsy (SMA-PME) due to acid ceramidase deficiency is a rare disorder, allelic 
with Farber disease, resulting from recessive ASAH1 variants. Patients present 
in early childhood with muscle weakness due to anterior horn degeneration and/or 
progressive drug-resistant myoclonic epilepsy. Death usually results from 
respiratory complications or status epilepticus during adolescence.
METHODS: We identified 9 patients with SMA-PME from 5 different families 
followed in neurology, rehabilitation, and genetics departments of university 
hospitals in France and the United States. During disease progression, motor 
functional scores were assessed for seven of them and C26-ceramide 
quantification on dried blood spots (DBSs) was performed for 4 of them. An in 
cell assay, measuring the degradation rate of ceramides in living skin 
fibroblasts, was also performed in 2 patients. Finally, a literature review was 
conducted.
RESULTS: Twelve years after the molecular characterization of SMA-PME, here we 
present the detailed history of 9 patients from 5 different families with 4 new 
ASAH1 variants. The prospective follow-up for 4 of them allows us to evaluate 
the relevance of functional scales and of C26-ceramide assay on DBS, as a 
biomarker. In addition, an in cell assay could provide a more reliable level of 
the residual ceramidase activity. Based on a comprehensive literature review, we 
provide a detailed description of the natural history of the 44 patients with 
SMA-PME diagnosed to date and show a genotype-phenotype correlation for the 2 
main variants and the disease onset.
DISCUSSION: This study presents the detailed natural history of SMA-PME. Given 
the rarity of this disease and the current lack of a reliable biomarker for 
patient follow-up, this work may serve as a retrospective control group for 
future therapeutic trials.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200243
PMCID: PMC11867579
PMID: 40017560

Conflict of interest statement: Quantification of C26-ceramide on DBSs was 
carried out by Camille Moreau, Adrien Paquot, and Terence Beghyn from the 
biotechnology company APTEEUS, and funded by the patient organization ASAP for 
Children. The other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. Full 
disclosure form information provided by the authors is available with the full 
text of this article at Neurology.org/NG.