---
reference_id: "PMID:28689508"
title: Social inappropriateness in neurodegenerative disorders.
authors:
- Desmarais P
- Lanctôt KL
- Masellis M
- Black SE
- Herrmann N
journal: Int Psychogeriatr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1017/S1041610217001260
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Social inappropriateness in neurodegenerative disorders.
**Authors:** Desmarais P, Lanctôt KL, Masellis M, Black SE, Herrmann N
**Journal:** Int Psychogeriatr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S1041610217001260](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1041610217001260)

## Content

1. Int Psychogeriatr. 2018 Feb;30(2):197-207. doi: 10.1017/S1041610217001260.
Epub  2017 Jul 10.

Social inappropriateness in neurodegenerative disorders.

Desmarais P(1), Lanctôt KL(1), Masellis M(2), Black SE(3), Herrmann N(4).

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Psychiatry,Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre,Toronto,Canada.
(2)Cognitive & Movement Disorders Clinic,Sunnybrook Health Sciences 
Centre,Toronto,Canada.
(3)L.C. Campbell Cognitive Neurology Research Unit,Sunnybrook Health Sciences 
Centre,Toronto,Canada.
(4)Hurvitz Brain Sciences Program,Sunnybrook Research Institute,Toronto,Canada.

Comment in
    Int Psychogeriatr. 2018 Feb;30(2):171-175. doi: 10.1017/S1041610218000042.

BACKGROUND: New onset of mood and behavioral changes in middle-aged patients are 
frequently the first manifestations of an unrecognized neurocognitive disorder. 
Impairment of social cognition, the cognitive ability to process social 
information coming from others, such as emotions, to attribute mental states to 
others, and to respond appropriately to them, is often at the origin of 
behavioral manifestations in neurodegenerative disorders.
METHODS: This paper reviews the current literature on social cognition 
impairment in neurocognitive disorders, particularly in prodromal stages of 
behavioral-variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD), and Lewy body dementia (LBD). The concepts 
of social cognition will be reviewed, including its impairment and neural basis, 
its clinical assessment, and the different therapeutic interventions available 
clinically.
RESULTS: Socially inappropriate behaviors, such as loss of empathy, 
inappropriateness of affect, and disinhibition are frequently reported in 
prodromal bvFTD and in prodromal AD. Lack of self-control, reduced perception of 
social cues, such as recognition of facial emotions and sarcastic speech, and 
impaired Theory of Mind all contribute to the neuropsychiatric symptoms and are 
secondary to neurodegeneration in specific brain regions. In contrasts to bvFTD 
and AD, deficits in social cognition in IPD occur later in the course of the 
disease and are often multifactorial in origin.
CONCLUSIONS: Through various manifestations, social inappropriateness is 
frequently the first clinical sign of a neurodegenerative process, especially in 
AD and bvFTD, years before noticeable impairment on classical neuropsychological 
assessment and brain atrophy on imaging.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610217001260
PMID: 28689508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]