---
reference_id: "PMID:23401855"
title: The MCM8-MCM9 complex promotes RAD51 recruitment at DNA damage sites to facilitate homologous recombination.
authors:
- Park J
- Long DT
- Lee KY
- Abbas T
- Shibata E
- Negishi M
- Luo Y
- Schimenti JC
- Gambus A
- Walter JC
- Dutta A
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.01503-12
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Survival
- Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
- Cisplatin/pharmacology
- DNA Damage/genetics
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Green Fluorescent Proteins
- HEK293 Cells
- HeLa Cells
- Homologous Recombination
- Humans
- Mice
- Minichromosome Maintenance Proteins
- RNA Interference
- "RNA, Small Interfering"
- Rad51 Recombinase/metabolism
- Recombinational DNA Repair
- Xenopus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The MCM8-MCM9 complex promotes RAD51 recruitment at DNA damage sites to facilitate homologous recombination.
**Authors:** Park J, Long DT, Lee KY, Abbas T, Shibata E, Negishi M, Luo Y, Schimenti JC, Gambus A, Walter JC, Dutta A
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.01503-12](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01503-12)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;33(8):1632-44. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01503-12. Epub 2013
Feb  11.

The MCM8-MCM9 complex promotes RAD51 recruitment at DNA damage sites to 
facilitate homologous recombination.

Park J(1), Long DT, Lee KY, Abbas T, Shibata E, Negishi M, Luo Y, Schimenti JC, 
Gambus A, Walter JC, Dutta A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

The minichromosome maintenance protein homologs MCM8 and MCM9 have previously 
been implicated in DNA replication elongation and prereplication complex 
(pre-RC) formation, respectively. We found that MCM8 and MCM9 physically 
associate with each other and that MCM8 is required for the stability of MCM9 
protein in mammalian cells. Depletion of MCM8 or MCM9 in human cancer cells or 
the loss of function MCM9 mutation in mouse embryo fibroblasts sensitizes cells 
to the DNA interstrand cross-linking (ICL) agent cisplatin. Consistent with a 
role in the repair of ICLs by homologous recombination (HR), knockdown of MCM8 
or MCM9 significantly reduces HR repair efficiency. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation analysis using human DR-GFP cells or Xenopus egg extract 
demonstrated that MCM8 and MCM9 proteins are rapidly recruited to DNA damage 
sites and promote RAD51 recruitment. Thus, these two metazoan-specific MCM 
homologs are new components of HR and may represent novel targets for treating 
cancer in combination with DNA cross-linking agents.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01503-12
PMCID: PMC3624244
PMID: 23401855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]