---
reference_id: "PMID:38822438"
title: Tetanus- a case report highlighting the challenges in diagnosis and treatment.
authors:
- Boer M
- de Voogd M
- Niemeijer ND
- van Hoeven L
journal: Trop Dis Travel Med Vaccines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40794-024-00220-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tetanus- a case report highlighting the challenges in diagnosis and treatment.
**Authors:** Boer M, de Voogd M, Niemeijer ND, van Hoeven L
**Journal:** Trop Dis Travel Med Vaccines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40794-024-00220-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40794-024-00220-5)

## Content

1. Trop Dis Travel Med Vaccines. 2024 Jun 1;10(1):10. doi: 
10.1186/s40794-024-00220-5.

Tetanus- a case report highlighting the challenges in diagnosis and treatment.

Boer M(1), de Voogd M(1), Niemeijer ND(1), van Hoeven L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, IJsselland Hospital, Capelle aan den IJssel, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, IJsselland Hospital, Capelle aan den IJssel, 
The Netherlands. lvhoeven@ysl.nl.

Tetanus has become an increasingly rare infectious disease due to the 
development of successful vaccination programs in the mid-20th century. In 
resource-rich countries, mainly unvaccinated or partly vaccinated risk groups 
are affected, whereas tetanus still remains prevalent in resource-limited 
countries. The decreasing incidence in developed countries has hindered clinical 
trials evaluating the best treatment modalities for tetanus infections. Current 
guidelines are based on a small number of studies and case reports. So far, 
these studies have shown potential benefits of treating tetanus infections with 
benzodiazepines, magnesium sulfate and baclofen. Additionally, several 
treatments have been shown to be useful in stabilizing and supporting patients 
with tetanus. However, each treatment modality has limitations, from negative 
side effects to logistical challenges, especially in developing countries. 
Therefore, further knowledge is required to evaluate the best use of each 
treatment and to further optimize patient care. This knowledge can contribute to 
the reduction of the burden of disease in countries where tetanus remains 
prevalent and where resources are limited, though vaccination is the most 
effective method to achieve this. This case report describes the treatment of a 
Dutch patient with tetanus infection and illustrates the role of benzodiazepines 
as well as other key aspects of treating patients with tetanus.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40794-024-00220-5
PMCID: PMC11143707
PMID: 38822438

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.