---
reference_id: "PMID:39456573"
title: "Update on Neoadjuvant and Adjuvant BRAF Inhibitors in Papillary Craniopharyngioma: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Cossu G
- Ramsay DSC
- Daniel RT
- El Cadhi A
- Kerherve L
- Morlaix E
- Houidi SA
- Millot-Piccoli C
- Chapon R
- Le Van T
- Cao C
- Farah W
- Lleu M
- Baland O
- Beaurain J
- Petit JM
- Lemogne B
- Messerer M
- Berhouma M
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16203479
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on Neoadjuvant and Adjuvant BRAF Inhibitors in Papillary Craniopharyngioma: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Cossu G, Ramsay DSC, Daniel RT, El Cadhi A, Kerherve L, Morlaix E, Houidi SA, Millot-Piccoli C, Chapon R, Le Van T, Cao C, Farah W, Lleu M, Baland O, Beaurain J, Petit JM, Lemogne B, Messerer M, Berhouma M
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16203479](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16203479)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Oct 14;16(20):3479. doi: 10.3390/cancers16203479.

Update on Neoadjuvant and Adjuvant BRAF Inhibitors in Papillary 
Craniopharyngioma: A Systematic Review.

Cossu G(1)(2), Ramsay DSC(3)(4), Daniel RT(1), El Cadhi A(2), Kerherve L(2), 
Morlaix E(2), Houidi SA(2), Millot-Piccoli C(2), Chapon R(2), Le Van T(2), Cao 
C(2), Farah W(2), Lleu M(2), Baland O(2), Beaurain J(2), Petit JM(5), Lemogne 
B(6), Messerer M(1), Berhouma M(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital of Lausanne and University of 
Lausanne, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital of Dijon Bourgogne, 21000 
Dijon, France.
(3)Imperial Brain and Spine Initiative, London W2 1NY, UK.
(4)Imperial College School of Medicine, London W2 1PG, UK.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital of Dijon Bourgogne, 21000 
Dijon, France.
(6)Department of Neuroradiology, University Hospital of Dijon Bourgogne, 21000 
Dijon, France.
(7)Functional and Molecular Imaging Team (CNRS 6302), Molecular Chemistry 
Institute (ICMUB), University of Burgundy, 21078 Dijon, France.

Background/Objectives: The recent discovery of BRAF mutation in papillary 
craniopharyngiomas opened new avenues for targeted therapies to control tumour 
growth, decreasing the need for invasive treatments and relative complications. 
The aim of this systematic review was to summarize the recent scientific data 
dealing with the use of targeted therapies in papillary craniopharyngiomas, as 
adjuvant and neoadjuvant treatments. Methods: The PRISMA guidelines were 
followed with searches performed in Scopus, MEDLINE, and Embase, following a 
dedicated PICO approach. Results: We included 21 pertinent studies encompassing 
53 patients: 26 patients received BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi) as adjuvant treatment, 
while 25 received them as neoadjuvant treatment. In the adjuvant setting, BRAFi 
were used to treat recurrent tumours after surgery or adjuvant radiation 
therapy. The most common regimen combined dabrafenib (BRAFi) with trametinib 
(MEK1 and 2 inhibitor) in 81% of cases. The mean treatment length was 8.8 months 
(range 1.6 to 28 months) and 32% were continuing BRAFi. A reduction of tumour 
volume variable from 24% to 100% was observed at cerebral MRI during treatment 
and volumetric reduction ≥80% was described in 64% of cases. Once the treatment 
was stopped, adjuvant treatments were performed to stabilize patients in 
remission in 11 cases (65%) or when a progression was detected in three cases 
(12%). In four cases no further therapies were administered (16%). Mean 
follow-up after the end of targeted therapy was 17.1 months. As neoadjuvant 
regimen, 36% of patients were treated with dabrafenib and trametinib with a near 
complete radiological response in all the cases with a mean treatment of 5.7 
months. The neoadjuvant use of verumafenib (BRAFi) and cometinib (MEK1 
inhibitor) induced a near complete response in 15 patients (94%), with a median 
volumetric reduction between 85% and 91%. Ten patients did not receive further 
treatments. Side effects varied among studies. The optimal timing, sequencing, 
and duration of treatment of these new therapies should be established. 
Moreover, questions remain about the choice of specific BRAF/MEK inhibitors, the 
optimal protocol of treatment, and the strategies for managing adverse events. 
Conclusions: Treatment is shifting to a wider multidisciplinary management, 
where a key role is played by targeted therapies, to improve outcomes and 
quality of life for patients with BRAF-mutated craniopharyngiomas. Future, 
larger comparative trials will optimize their protocol of use and integration 
into multimodal strategies of treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16203479
PMCID: PMC11506763
PMID: 39456573

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.