---
reference_id: "PMID:36274124"
title: "Addison's disease triggered by infection with mycobacterium abscessus, but not by adrenal tuberculosis or MAC pulmonary disease, in a subject with type 2 diabetes mellitus: case report."
authors:
- Kaneto H
- Tatsumi F
- Ohnishi M
- Iwamoto Y
- Katakura Y
- Shimoda M
- Nakanishi S
- Kaku K
- Mune T
journal: BMC Endocr Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12902-022-01178-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Addison's disease triggered by infection with mycobacterium abscessus, but not by adrenal tuberculosis or MAC pulmonary disease, in a subject with type 2 diabetes mellitus: case report.
**Authors:** Kaneto H, Tatsumi F, Ohnishi M, Iwamoto Y, Katakura Y, Shimoda M, Nakanishi S, Kaku K, Mune T
**Journal:** BMC Endocr Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12902-022-01178-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12902-022-01178-1)

## Content

1. BMC Endocr Disord. 2022 Oct 23;22(1):257. doi: 10.1186/s12902-022-01178-1.

Addison's disease triggered by infection with mycobacterium abscessus, but not 
by adrenal tuberculosis or MAC pulmonary disease, in a subject with type 2 
diabetes mellitus: case report.

Kaneto H(1), Tatsumi F(2), Ohnishi M(2), Iwamoto Y(2), Katakura Y(2), Shimoda 
M(2), Nakanishi S(2), Kaku K(2), Mune T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kawasaki Medical 
School, 577 Matsushima, Kurashiki, 701-0192, Japan. kaneto@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kawasaki Medical 
School, 577 Matsushima, Kurashiki, 701-0192, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Addison's disease is primary adrenal dysfunction and is 
characterized by decrease of cortisol level and increase of adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH) level. It is known that infection is one of main causes of 
Addison's disease. Among various infections, tuberculous infection accounts for 
the majority of them. Recently the number of subjects with non-tuberculous 
mycobacterial infection has been increased, and the infection can also bring 
about Addison's disease. Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) pulmonary disease 
accounts for the majority of non-tuberculous mycobacterial infection.
CASE PRESENTATION: An 83-year-old female was suspected of having adrenal failure 
in our outpatient care and hospitalized in our institution. There was 
pigmentation in her face, hands and legs, especially in auricle and nail beds in 
her hands and legs. In rapid ACTH load test (0.25 mg of 1-24 ACTH), cortisol 
level was not increased at all. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed 
swelling of both adrenal glands accompanied by calcification. QuantiFERON test 
was negative and mycobacterium tuberculosis complex was negative in PCR test 
using bronchial lung lavage fluid. These data ruled out the possibility of 
adrenal tuberculosis. It is known that MAC pulmonary disease accounts for the 
majority of non-tuberculous mycobacterial infection. In this subject, however, 
anti-MAC antibody was negative and MAC-related bacteria were not detected in PCR 
test using bronchial lung lavage fluid. These data ruled out the possibility of 
MAC pulmonary disease. Mycobacterium abscessus (Mab) was positive in bronchial 
lung lavage fluid culture. Based on these data, we diagnosed this subject with 
Addison's disease triggered by infection with mycobacterium abscessus, but not 
by adrenal tuberculous or MAC pulmonary disease. Decreased sodium level and 
increased eosinophil number were normalized and appetite loss was markedly 
mitigated after starting hydrocortisone therapy. A chest CT which was taken 
about 6 months later showed drastic reduction of consolidation in the upper lobe 
of the left lung although calcification in the adrenal gland was still observed.
CONCLUSIONS: We should bear in mind the possibility of Addison's disease 
triggered by another type of infection rather than adrenal tuberculosis or MAC 
pulmonary disease.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12902-022-01178-1
PMCID: PMC9590194
PMID: 36274124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We do not have any potential conflicts of 
interest relevant to this article.