---
reference_id: "PMID:12771245"
title: Celiac neuropathy.
authors:
- Chin RL
- Sander HW
- Brannagan TH
- Green PH
- Hays AP
- Alaedini A
- Latov N
journal: Neurology
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000063307.84039.c7
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antibody Specificity
- Biopsy
- "Celiac Disease/complications, diet therapy, immunology"
- Female
- "Gait Disorders, Neurologic/etiology, immunology"
- Gangliosides/immunology
- Gliadin/immunology
- Glutens/adverse effects
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin A/immunology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Paresthesia/etiology, immunology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Sural Nerve/pathology
- Transglutaminases/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Celiac neuropathy.
**Authors:** Chin RL, Sander HW, Brannagan TH, Green PH, Hays AP, Alaedini A, Latov N
**Journal:** Neurology (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1212/01.wnl.0000063307.84039.c7](https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000063307.84039.c7)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2003 May 27;60(10):1581-5. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000063307.84039.c7.

Celiac neuropathy.

Chin RL(1), Sander HW, Brannagan TH, Green PH, Hays AP, Alaedini A, Latov N.

Author information:
(1)Peripheral Neuropathy Center, Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill 
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10022, USA. 
RUC9002@med.cornell.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2003 May 27;60(10):1566-8. doi: 
10.1212/01.wnl.0000067475.16126.5f.

BACKGROUND: Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic inflammatory enteropathy resulting 
from sensitivity to ingested gluten. Neurologic complications are estimated to 
occur in 10% of affected patients, with ataxia and peripheral neuropathy being 
the most common problems. The incidence and clinical presentation of patients 
with CD-associated peripheral neuropathy have not previously been investigated.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the incidence of CD in patients with neuropathy and to 
characterize the clinical presentation.
METHODS: The records of 20 patients with neuropathy and biopsy-confirmed CD were 
reviewed.
RESULTS: Six of the 20 patients had neuropathic symptoms alone without 
gastrointestinal involvement, and neuropathic symptoms preceded other CD 
symptoms in another 3 patients. All patients had burning, tingling, and numbness 
in their hands and feet, with distal sensory loss, and nine had diffuse 
paresthesias involving the face, trunk, or lumbosacral region. Only two had 
weakness. Results of electrophysiologic studies were normal or mildly abnormal 
in 18 (90%) of the patients. Sural nerve biopsies, obtained from three patients, 
revealed mild to severe axonopathy. Using the agglutination assay, 13 (65%) of 
the patients were positive for ganglioside antibodies. Excluding patients who 
were referred with the diagnosis of celiac neuropathy, CD was seen in 
approximately 2.5% of all neuropathy patients and in 8% of patients with 
neuropathy and normal electrophysiologic studies seen at our center.
CONCLUSION: CD is commonly associated with sensory neuropathy and should be 
considered even in the absence of gastrointestinal symptoms.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000063307.84039.c7
PMID: 12771245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]