---
reference_id: "PMID:34869113"
title: Quantification of Differential Metabolites in Dried Blood Spots Using Second-Tier Testing for SCADD/IBDD Disorders Based on Large-Scale Newborn Screening in a Chinese Population.
authors:
- Zhou W
- Cai H
- Li H
- Ji Z
- Gu M
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.757424
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantification of Differential Metabolites in Dried Blood Spots Using Second-Tier Testing for SCADD/IBDD Disorders Based on Large-Scale Newborn Screening in a Chinese Population.
**Authors:** Zhou W, Cai H, Li H, Ji Z, Gu M
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2021.757424](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2021.757424)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Nov 19;9:757424. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.757424.
eCollection  2021.

Quantification of Differential Metabolites in Dried Blood Spots Using 
Second-Tier Testing for SCADD/IBDD Disorders Based on Large-Scale Newborn 
Screening in a Chinese Population.

Zhou W(1)(2), Cai H(3), Li H(1), Ji Z(4), Gu M(1).

Author information:
(1)Newborn Screening Center, The Affiliated Xuzhou Maternity and Child Health 
Care Hospital of Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, China.
(2)Research Center for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Jiangsu Key 
Laboratory of Brain Disease Bioinformation, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, 
China.
(3)Pharmacology College, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, China.
(4)The First Clinical College, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, China.

Background: Although newborn screening (NBS) for metabolic defects using the 
marker butyl carnitine (C4) combined with the C4-to-acetylcarnitine ratio is 
adequate, the incorporation of novel parameters may improve differential testing 
for these disorders without compromising sensitivity. Methods: Analytical and 
clinical performance was evaluated by MS/MS using 237 initially positive 
neonatal samples between March 2019 and March 2020 at the Newborn Screening 
Center of Xuzhou Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital. Additionally, 
second-tier testing by ultraperformance liquid chromatography-tandem mass 
spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) combined with the quantification of ethylmalonate 
(EMA) or isobutyryl-glycine (IBG) in dried blood spots (DBSs) was performed to 
reduce the false-positive rate. Results: We reviewed initial MS/MS data for DBSs 
from 469,730 neonates, and a second-tier test was performed using 237 samples 
that exceeded the C4 concentration cutoff value. Eleven variants of the ACADS 
gene were identified, with c.1031A>G (p.E344G) being the most common. Fifteen 
ACAD8 mutations were identified in seven patients, and Swiss modeling and amino 
acid conservation analyses were conducted for the novel variants. Based on a 
retrospective analysis of EMA and IBG, the application of second-tier tests 
before the release of neonatal screening results reduced referrals by over 
91.89% and improved the positive predictive value (PPV) for short-chain acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency/isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SCADD/IBDD) 
screening. Conclusion: A screening algorithm including EMA/IBG improves target 
differential testing for NBS and may eliminate unnecessary referrals while 
maintaining 100% sensitivity. Second-tier screening using UPLC-MS/MS as a rapid 
and convenient supplemental DNA sequencing method may be beneficial for 
differential detection.

Copyright © 2021 Zhou, Cai, Li, Ji and Gu.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.757424
PMCID: PMC8639864
PMID: 34869113

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.