---
reference_id: "PMID:25370419"
title: Simultaneous sinus and lung infections in patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia.
authors:
- Alanin MC
- Johansen HK
- Aanaes K
- Høiby N
- Pressler T
- Skov M
- Nielsen KG
- von Buchwald C
journal: Acta Otolaryngol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3109/00016489.2014.962185
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Simultaneous sinus and lung infections in patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Alanin MC, Johansen HK, Aanaes K, Høiby N, Pressler T, Skov M, Nielsen KG, von Buchwald C
**Journal:** Acta Otolaryngol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3109/00016489.2014.962185](https://doi.org/10.3109/00016489.2014.962185)

## Content

1. Acta Otolaryngol. 2015 Jan;135(1):58-63. doi: 10.3109/00016489.2014.962185.
Epub  2014 Nov 5.

Simultaneous sinus and lung infections in patients with primary ciliary 
dyskinesia.

Alanin MC(1), Johansen HK, Aanaes K, Høiby N, Pressler T, Skov M, Nielsen KG, 
von Buchwald C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery and Audiology.

CONCLUSION: The sinuses should be considered as a bacterial reservoir and a 
target for surgery and antibiotic treatment in patients with primary ciliary 
dyskinesia (PCD). The observed decrease in serum precipitating antibodies 
(precipitins) against Pseudomonas aeruginosa may indicate a beneficial effect of 
combined endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS) and concomitant medical treatment.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this research, which is the first study addressing 
bacteriology in the sinuses of patients with PCD, was to examine the association 
between sinus and lung infections.
METHODS: We reviewed findings of bacterial pathogens from the sinuses obtained 
during ESS and the lung infection status in eight PCD patients over a 6 year 
period. Precipitins against P. aeruginosa were used as a marker of severity of 
chronic infection and effect of treatment.
RESULTS: Preoperatively, seven of the eight patients (88%) exhibited 
intermittent or chronic pulmonary infection with P. aeruginosa. Sinus cultures 
were obtained during ESS in seven patients. The sinuses were colonized with P. 
aeruginosa in four of seven patients (57%). Bacterial sinusitis was found in 
five of seven patients (71%) and the same bacterium was found in the sinuses and 
lungs in all cases. Decreasing precipitins against P. aeruginosa were observed 
postoperatively in three of four evaluable patients.

DOI: 10.3109/00016489.2014.962185
PMID: 25370419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]