---
reference_id: "PMID:34942009"
title: "Parainfluenza viruses: A trigger for type 1 diabetes new onset?"
authors:
- Silvestri F
- Lapa D
- Ferrara C
- Grisolia D
- Costantino F
- Castilletti C
- Tromba V
journal: New Microbiol
year: '2021'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parainfluenza viruses: A trigger for type 1 diabetes new onset?
**Authors:** Silvestri F, Lapa D, Ferrara C, Grisolia D, Costantino F, Castilletti C, Tromba V
**Journal:** New Microbiol (2021)

## Content

1. New Microbiol. 2021 Oct;44(4):241-244. Epub 2021 Dec 19.

Parainfluenza viruses: A trigger for type 1 diabetes new onset?

Silvestri F(1), Lapa D(2), Ferrara C(3), Grisolia D(1), Costantino F(1), 
Castilletti C(2), Tromba V(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Diabetology Unit, Department of Maternal and Infantile Health, 
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute for Infectious Diseases "Lazzaro 
Spallanzani" IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Section Health 
Statistics - Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Type 1 diabetes (T1DM) ethiopathogenesis is still being studied, since the role 
of environmental factors , especially viruses, is not yet clear. This study was 
conducted on 31 paediatric patients with T1DM at onset. We analysed: 
Coxsackieviruses A (CoxA), Coxsackieviruses B (CoxB), Echoviruses (Echo); 
Influenzavirus A and B (IV-A and IV-B); Adenovirus (AdV); Parainfluenza viruses 
1-2 and 3 (PiV 1-2-3); Cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Respiratory Syncytial Virus 
(RSV). Enteroviruses, especially CoxB and Echo, are most represented. 
Unexpectedly, Parainfluenza viruses were detected in seasonal subgroups, with 
peaks in autumn and spring, and spread homogeneously in different age groups.

PMID: 34942009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]