---
reference_id: "PMID:36769387"
title: Current Advances in Gene Therapies of Genetic Auditory Neuropathy Spectrum Disorder.
authors:
- Saidia AR
- Ruel J
- Bahloul A
- Chaix B
- Venail F
- Wang J
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12030738
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current Advances in Gene Therapies of Genetic Auditory Neuropathy Spectrum Disorder.
**Authors:** Saidia AR, Ruel J, Bahloul A, Chaix B, Venail F, Wang J
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12030738](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12030738)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Jan 17;12(3):738. doi: 10.3390/jcm12030738.

Current Advances in Gene Therapies of Genetic Auditory Neuropathy Spectrum 
Disorder.

Saidia AR(1), Ruel J(1)(2), Bahloul A(1), Chaix B(3), Venail F(1)(3), Wang 
J(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Neurosciences of Montpellier (INM), University Montpellier, 
INSERM, 34295 Montpellier, France.
(2)Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, Aix-Marseille University, CNRS, UMR 7291, 
13331 Marseille, France.
(3)Department of ENT and Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital of 
Montpellier, 34295 Montpellier, France.

Auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder (ANSD) refers to a range of hearing 
impairments characterized by an impaired transmission of sound from the cochlea 
to the brain. This defect can be due to a lesion or defect in the inner hair 
cell (IHC), IHC ribbon synapse (e.g., pre-synaptic release of glutamate), 
postsynaptic terminals of the spiral ganglion neurons, or demyelination and 
axonal loss within the auditory nerve. To date, the only clinical treatment 
options for ANSD are hearing aids and cochlear implantation. However, despite 
the advances in hearing-aid and cochlear-implant technologies, the quality of 
perceived sound still cannot match that of the normal ear. Recent advanced 
genetic diagnostics and clinical audiology made it possible to identify the 
precise site of a lesion and to characterize the specific disease mechanisms of 
ANSD, thus bringing renewed hope to the treatment or prevention of auditory 
neurodegeneration. Moreover, genetic routes involving the replacement or 
corrective editing of mutant sequences or defected genes to repair damaged cells 
for the future restoration of hearing in deaf people are showing promise. In 
this review, we provide an update on recent discoveries in the molecular 
pathophysiology of genetic lesions, auditory synaptopathy and neuropathy, and 
gene-therapy research towards hearing restoration in rodent models and in 
clinical trials.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12030738
PMCID: PMC9918155
PMID: 36769387

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.