---
reference_id: "PMID:37269968"
title: "Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis -An updated review."
authors:
- Alqahtani T
- Deore SL
- Kide AA
- Shende BA
- Sharma R
- Dadarao Chakole R
- Nemade LS
- Kishor Kale N
- Borah S
- Shrikant Deokar S
- Behera A
- Dhawal Bhandari D
- Gaikwad N
- Kalam Azad A
- Ghosh A
journal: Mitochondrion
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2023.05.007
keywords:
- Humans
- Parkinson Disease/pathology
- Alzheimer Disease/pathology
- Huntington Disease/metabolism
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/pathology
- Oxidative Stress/physiology
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/metabolism
- Mitochondria/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis -An updated review.
**Authors:** Alqahtani T, Deore SL, Kide AA, Shende BA, Sharma R, Dadarao Chakole R, Nemade LS, Kishor Kale N, Borah S, Shrikant Deokar S, Behera A, Dhawal Bhandari D, Gaikwad N, Kalam Azad A, Ghosh A
**Journal:** Mitochondrion (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mito.2023.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mito.2023.05.007)

## Content

1. Mitochondrion. 2023 Jul;71:83-92. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2023.05.007. Epub 2023
Jun  1.

Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in Alzheimer's disease, and 
Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis -An 
updated review.

Alqahtani T(1), Deore SL(2), Kide AA(2), Shende BA(2), Sharma R(3), Dadarao 
Chakole R(4), Nemade LS(5), Kishor Kale N(6), Borah S(7), Shrikant Deokar S(6), 
Behera A(8), Dhawal Bhandari D(9), Gaikwad N(10), Kalam Azad A(11), Ghosh A(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, King Khalid University, Abha 
62529, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Government College of Pharmacy, Amravati, Maharastra 444604, India.
(3)University Institute of Pharma Sciences, Chandigarh University, Mohali, 
Punjab 140413, India.
(4)Government College of Pharmacy, Vidyanagar, Karad, Maharashtra 415124, India.
(5)Govindrao Nikam College of Pharmacy, Sawarde, Maharashtra 415606, India.
(6)PES's Modern College of Pharmacy, Nigdi, Pune, Maharashtra 411044, India.
(7)Department of Pharmacognosy, University of Science and Technology Meghalaya 
Technocity, Ri-Bhoi, Meghalaya 793101, India.
(8)Faculty of Pharmacy, DIT University, Dehradun, Uttarakhand 248009, India.
(9)University Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Panjab University, 
Chandigarh 160014, India.
(10)Department of Pharmaceutics, P.E.S. Modern College of Pharmacy, Nigdi, Pune 
411044, India.
(11)Faculty of Pharmacy, MAHSA University, Bandar Saujana Putra, Selangor 42610, 
Malaysia. Electronic address: aphdukm@gmail.com.
(12)Department of Computational Biology and Biotechnology, Mahapurusha Srimanta 
Sankaradeva Viswavidyalaya, Guwahati, Assam 781032, India. Electronic address: 
dra.ghosh@gauhat.ac.in.

Misfolded proteins in the central nervous system can induce oxidative damage, 
which can contribute to neurodegenerative diseases in the mitochondria. 
Neurodegenerative patients face early mitochondrial dysfunction, impacting 
energy utilization. Amyloid-ß and tau problems both have an effect on 
mitochondria, which leads to mitochondrial malfunction and, ultimately, the 
onset of Alzheimer's disease. Cellular oxygen interaction yields reactive oxygen 
species within mitochondria, initiating oxidative damage to mitochondrial 
constituents. Parkinson's disease, linked to oxidative stress, α-synuclein 
aggregation, and inflammation, results from reduced brain mitochondria activity. 
Mitochondrial dynamics profoundly influence cellular apoptosis via distinct 
causative mechanisms. The condition known as Huntington's disease is 
characterized by an expansion of polyglutamine, primarily impactingthe cerebral 
cortex and striatum. Research has identified mitochondrial failure as an early 
pathogenic mechanism contributing to HD's selective neurodegeneration. The 
mitochondria are organelles that exhibit dynamism by undergoing fragmentation 
and fusion processes to attain optimal bioenergetic efficiency. They can also be 
transported along microtubules and regulateintracellular calcium homeostasis 
through their interaction with the endoplasmic reticulum. Additionally, the 
mitochondria produce free radicals. The functions of eukaryotic cells, 
particularly in neurons, have significantly deviated from the traditionally 
assigned role of cellular energy production. Most of them areimpaired in HD, 
which may lead to neuronal dysfunction before symptoms manifest. This article 
summarizes the most important changes in mitochondrial dynamics that come from 
neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Huntington's and 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Finally, we discussed about novel techniques that 
can potentially treat mitochondrial malfunction and oxidative stress in four 
most dominating neuro disorders.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mito.2023.05.007
PMID: 37269968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.