---
reference_id: "PMID:20123446"
title: US outbreak investigations highlight the need for safe injection practices and basic infection control.
authors:
- Perz JF
- Thompson ND
- Schaefer MK
- Patel PR
journal: Clin Liver Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2009.11.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# US outbreak investigations highlight the need for safe injection practices and basic infection control.
**Authors:** Perz JF, Thompson ND, Schaefer MK, Patel PR
**Journal:** Clin Liver Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cld.2009.11.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cld.2009.11.004)

## Content

1. Clin Liver Dis. 2010 Feb;14(1):137-51; x. doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2009.11.004.

US outbreak investigations highlight the need for safe injection practices and 
basic infection control.

Perz JF(1), Thompson ND, Schaefer MK, Patel PR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, Prevention and Response Branch, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road, MS A-31, Atlanta, 
GA 30333, USA. jperz@cdc.gov

Current understanding of viral hepatitis transmission in United States health 
care settings indicates progress over the past several decades with respect to 
the risks from transfusions or blood products. Likewise, risks to health care 
providers from sharps injuries and other blood and body fluid exposures have 
been reduced as a consequence of widespread hepatitis B vaccination and the 
adoption of safer work practices. Increasing recognition of outbreaks involving 
patient-to-patient spread of hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus infections, 
however, has uncovered a disturbing trend. This article highlights the 
importance of basic infection control and the need for increased awareness of 
safe injection practices.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cld.2009.11.004
PMID: 20123446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]