---
reference_id: "PMID:32092380"
title: Topical treatment strategies to manipulate human skin pigmentation.
authors:
- Rachmin I
- Ostrowski SM
- Weng QY
- Fisher DE
journal: Adv Drug Deliv Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2020.02.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topical treatment strategies to manipulate human skin pigmentation.
**Authors:** Rachmin I, Ostrowski SM, Weng QY, Fisher DE
**Journal:** Adv Drug Deliv Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.addr.2020.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2020.02.002)

## Content

1. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2020 Jan 1;153:65-71. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2020.02.002.
Epub  2020 Feb 21.

Topical treatment strategies to manipulate human skin pigmentation.

Rachmin I(1), Ostrowski SM(1), Weng QY(1), Fisher DE(2).

Author information:
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital Department 
of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(2)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital Department 
of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic 
address: dfisher3@partners.org.

Skin pigmentation is a result of melanin produced by melanocytes in the 
epidermis. Melanocyte activity, along with the type and distribution of 
melanins, is the main driver for diversity of skin pigmentation. Dark melanin 
acts to protect against the deleterious effects of ultraviolet (UV) radiation, 
including photo-aging and skin cancer formation. In turn, UV radiation activates 
skin melanocytes to induce further pigmentation (i.e., "tanning pathway"). The 
well-characterized MSH/MC1R-cAMP-MITF pathway regulates UV-induced melanization. 
Pharmacologic activation of this pathway ("sunless tanning") represents a 
potential strategy for skin cancer prevention, particularly in those with light 
skin or the "red hair" phenotype who tan poorly after UV exposure due to MC1R 
inactivating polymorphisms. Skin hyperpigmentation can also occur as a result of 
inflammatory processes and dermatological disorders such as melasma. While 
primarily of cosmetic concern, these conditions can dramatically impact quality 
of life of affected patients. Several topical agents are utilized to treat skin 
pigmentation disorders. Here, we review melanogenesis induced by UV exposure and 
the agents that target this pathway.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2020.02.002
PMCID: PMC7442613
PMID: 32092380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Statement Dr. Fisher has a financial 
interest in Soltego, Inc., a company developing SIK inhibitors for topical skin 
darkening treatments that might be used for a broad set of human applications. 
Dr. Fisher’s interests were reviewed and are managed by Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Partners HealthCare in accordance with their conflict of interest 
policies.