---
reference_id: "PMID:19676060"
title: Spectrum of p63 mutations in a selected patient cohort affected with ankyloblepharon-ectodermal defects-cleft lip/palate syndrome (AEC).
authors:
- Rinne T
- Bolat E
- Meijer R
- Scheffer H
- van Bokhoven H
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32793
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Cleft Lip/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Cleft Palate/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Cohort Studies
- "DNA/chemistry, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Exons/genetics
- Eyelids/abnormalities
- Humans
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Monomeric GTP-Binding Proteins
- Mutation
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
- SAM Domain and HD Domain-Containing Protein 1
- Sequence Alignment
- Syndrome
- "Trans-Activators/chemistry, genetics"
- Transcription Factors
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spectrum of p63 mutations in a selected patient cohort affected with ankyloblepharon-ectodermal defects-cleft lip/palate syndrome (AEC).
**Authors:** Rinne T, Bolat E, Meijer R, Scheffer H, van Bokhoven H
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.32793](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32793)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Sep;149A(9):1948-51. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32793.

Spectrum of p63 mutations in a selected patient cohort affected with 
ankyloblepharon-ectodermal defects-cleft lip/palate syndrome (AEC).

Rinne T(1), Bolat E, Meijer R, Scheffer H, van Bokhoven H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre Nijmegen, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Heterozygous mutations in the p63 gene underlie a group of at least seven 
allelic syndromes, including ankyloblepharon-ectodermal defects-cleft lip/palate 
syndrome (AEC) and Rapp Hodgkin syndrome (RHS), which involves varying degrees 
of ectodermal dysplasia, orofacial clefting and limb malformations. Mutations in 
the AEC and Rapp Hodgkin syndromes cluster in the 3' end of the p63 gene. 
Previously reported mutations are mainly missense and frameshift mutations in 
exons 13 and 14, affecting the p63alpha-specific SAM (sterile alpha motif) and 
TI (transactivation inhibitory) domains. A patient cohort affected by AEC 
syndrome was evaluated during International Research Symposium supported by the 
National Foundation for Ectodermal Dysplasias. Nineteen patients underwent full 
clinical evaluations and 18 had findings consistent with a diagnosis of AEC 
syndrome. These 19 patients, along with 5 additional relatives had genomic DNA 
analysis. Twenty-one of the 24 participants from 12 families were found to have 
mutations in the p63 gene. Eleven different mutations were identified; 10 were 
novel mutations. Eight were missense mutations within the coding region of the 
SAM domain. Three other mutations were located in exon 14 sequences, which 
encode the TI domain. The effects of the mutations in the SAM and TI domains are 
poorly understood and functional studies are required to understand the 
pathological mechanisms. However, AEC and RHS mutations in the 5' and 3' ends of 
the p63 gene point towards a critical role of the DeltaNp63alpha isoform for the 
AEC/RHS phenotype.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32793
PMID: 19676060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]