---
reference_id: "PMID:36539954"
title: Association between FLT3-ITD and additional chromosomal abnormalities in the prognosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Vu MP
- Nguyen CN
- Vu H
- Nguyen TM
- Nguyen TT
- Pham PT
journal: J Int Med Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/03000605221138490
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Mutation/genetics
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Prognosis
- Tretinoin/therapeutic use
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/drug therapy"
- "fms-Like Tyrosine Kinase 3/genetics, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between FLT3-ITD and additional chromosomal abnormalities in the prognosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Vu MP, Nguyen CN, Vu H, Nguyen TM, Nguyen TT, Pham PT
**Journal:** J Int Med Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/03000605221138490](https://doi.org/10.1177/03000605221138490)

## Content

1. J Int Med Res. 2022 Dec;50(12):3000605221138490. doi:
10.1177/03000605221138490.

Association between FLT3-ITD and additional chromosomal abnormalities in the
prognosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Vu MP(1)(2), Nguyen CN(2), Vu H(2), Nguyen TM(1), Nguyen TT(2), Pham PT(1).

Author information:
(1)Hanoi Medical University, Department of Hematology, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(2)Bach Mai Hospital, Center for Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Hanoi,
Vietnam.

OBJECTIVES: Internal tandem duplications of the Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 gene
(FLT3-ITD) and additional chromosomal abnormalities (ACA) are prognostic factors
in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). This study aimed to
determine the effect of the association between FLT3-ITD and ACA in the
prognosis of APL.
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study including 60 patients with APL
treated with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and chemotherapy. Five-year overall
survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) were analyzed in patient
groups according to the presence of FLT3-ITD and ACA.
RESULTS: FLT3-ITD was an independent adverse factor for 5-year PFS, and ACA was
an independent adverse factor for 5-year OS. There were significant differences
in OS and PFS among the groups: FLT3-ITD-negative without ACA, FLT3-ITD-positive
without ACA, FLT3-ITD-negative with ACA, and FLT3-ITD-positive with ACA. The OS
times were 52.917, 45.813, 25.375, and 23.417 months, and the PFS times were
48.833, 38.563, 23.250, and 17.333 months, respectively.
CONCLUSION: FLT3-ITD and ACA are associated with the poorest OS and PFS outcomes
in patients with APL treated with chemotherapy plus ATRA.

DOI: 10.1177/03000605221138490
PMCID: PMC9791292
PMID: 36539954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicting interests in
preparing this article.
