---
reference_id: "PMID:35422069"
title: Microvascular stabilization via blood-brain barrier regulation prevents seizure activity.
authors:
- Greene C
- Hanley N
- Reschke CR
- Reddy A
- Mäe MA
- Connolly R
- Behan C
- "O'Keeffe E"
- Bolger I
- Hudson N
- Delaney C
- Farrell MA
- "O'Brien DF"
- Cryan J
- Brett FM
- Beausang A
- Betsholtz C
- Henshall DC
- Doherty CP
- Campbell M
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-29657-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microvascular stabilization via blood-brain barrier regulation prevents seizure activity.
**Authors:** Greene C, Hanley N, Reschke CR, Reddy A, Mäe MA, Connolly R, Behan C, O'Keeffe E, Bolger I, Hudson N, Delaney C, Farrell MA, O'Brien DF, Cryan J, Brett FM, Beausang A, Betsholtz C, Henshall DC, Doherty CP, Campbell M
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-022-29657-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-29657-y)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2022 Apr 14;13(1):2003. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-29657-y.

Microvascular stabilization via blood-brain barrier regulation prevents seizure 
activity.

Greene C(1), Hanley N(1), Reschke CR(2)(3), Reddy A(1), Mäe MA(4), Connolly 
R(2)(5)(6), Behan C(2)(5)(6), O'Keeffe E(1), Bolger I(1), Hudson N(1), Delaney 
C(1), Farrell MA(7), O'Brien DF(8), Cryan J(7), Brett FM(7), Beausang A(7), 
Betsholtz C(4), Henshall DC(2)(9), Doherty CP(2)(5)(6), Campbell M(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, 2, Ireland.
(2)FutureNeuro, Science Foundation Ireland Research Centre for Chronic and Rare 
Neurological Diseases, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, University of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, RCSI University of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Dublin, 2, Ireland.
(4)Department of Immunology, Genetics, and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Department of Neurology, Health Care Centre, Hospital 5, St James's Hospital, 
Dublin, 8, Ireland.
(6)Academic Unit of Neurology, Room 5.41, Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity 
College Dublin, Dublin, 2, Ireland.
(7)Department of Neuropathology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(9)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, RCSI University of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Dublin, 2, Ireland.
(10)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, 2, Ireland. 
matthew.campbell@tcd.ie.
(11)FutureNeuro, Science Foundation Ireland Research Centre for Chronic and Rare 
Neurological Diseases, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, University of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Dublin, Ireland. matthew.campbell@tcd.ie.

Comment in
    Epilepsy Curr. 2022 Oct 8;22(5):321-323. doi: 10.1177/15357597221127164.

Blood-brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction is associated with worse epilepsy outcomes 
however the underlying molecular mechanisms of BBB dysfunction remain to be 
elucidated. Tight junction proteins are important regulators of BBB integrity 
and in particular, the tight junction protein claudin-5 is the most enriched in 
brain endothelial cells and regulates size-selectivity at the BBB. Additionally, 
disruption of claudin-5 expression has been implicated in numerous disorders 
including schizophrenia, depression and traumatic brain injury, yet its role in 
epilepsy has not been fully deciphered. Here we report that claudin-5 protein 
levels are significantly diminished in surgically resected brain tissue from 
patients with treatment-resistant epilepsy. Concomitantly, dynamic 
contrast-enhanced MRI in these patients showed widespread BBB disruption. We 
show that targeted disruption of claudin-5 in the hippocampus or genetic 
heterozygosity of claudin-5 in mice exacerbates kainic acid-induced seizures and 
BBB disruption. Additionally, inducible knockdown of claudin-5 in mice leads to 
spontaneous recurrent seizures, severe neuroinflammation, and mortality. 
Finally, we identify that RepSox, a regulator of claudin-5 expression, can 
prevent seizure activity in experimental epilepsy. Altogether, we propose that 
BBB stabilizing drugs could represent a new generation of agents to prevent 
seizure activity in epilepsy patients.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-29657-y
PMCID: PMC9010415
PMID: 35422069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Trinity College Dublin owns an intellectual 
property portfolio related to the regulation of claudin-5 to treat epilepsy. 
M.C., C.G., N.H. and C.D. are named inventors. All other authors declare no 
competing interest.