---
reference_id: "PMID:16225031"
title: Diagnosis and management of G6PD deficiency.
authors:
- Frank JE
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2005'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of G6PD deficiency.
**Authors:** Frank JE
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2005)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2005 Oct 1;72(7):1277-82.

Diagnosis and management of G6PD deficiency.

Frank JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Martin Army Community Hospital, Fort Benning, 
Georgia 31905, USA. Jennifer.Frank@se.amedd.army.mil

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, the most common enzyme deficiency 
worldwide, causes a spectrum of disease including neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, 
acute hemolysis, and chronic hemolysis. Persons with this condition also may be 
asymptomatic. This X-linked inherited disorder most commonly affects persons of 
African, Asian, Mediterranean, or Middle-Eastern descent. Approximately 400 
million people are affected worldwide. Homozygotes and heterozygotes can be 
symptomatic, although the disease typically is more severe in persons who are 
homozygous for the deficiency. The conversion of nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate to its reduced form in erythrocytes is the basis of 
diagnostic testing for the deficiency. This usually is done by fluorescent spot 
test. Different gene mutations cause different levels of enzyme deficiency, with 
classes assigned to various degrees of deficiency and disease manifestation. 
Because acute hemolysis is caused by exposure to an oxidative stressor in the 
form of an infection, oxidative drug, or fava beans, treatment is geared toward 
avoidance of these and other stressors. Acute hemolysis is self-limited, but in 
rare instances it can be severe enough to warrant a blood transfusion. Neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia may require treatment with phototherapy or exchange 
transfusion to prevent kernicterus. The variant that causes chronic hemolysis is 
uncommon because it is related to sporadic gene mutation rather than the more 
common inherited gene mutation.

PMID: 16225031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]