---
reference_id: "PMID:22915094"
title: "Klinefelter syndrome: an unusual diagnosis in pediatric patients."
authors:
- Tincani BJ
- Mascagni BR
- Pinto RD
- Guaragna-Filho G
- Castro CC
- Sewaybricker LE
- Viguetti-Campos NL
- Marques-de-Faria AP
- Maciel-Guerra AT
- Guerra-Júnior G
journal: J Pediatr (Rio J)
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2223/JPED.2208
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Klinefelter syndrome: an unusual diagnosis in pediatric patients.
**Authors:** Tincani BJ, Mascagni BR, Pinto RD, Guaragna-Filho G, Castro CC, Sewaybricker LE, Viguetti-Campos NL, Marques-de-Faria AP, Maciel-Guerra AT, Guerra-Júnior G
**Journal:** J Pediatr (Rio J) (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2223/JPED.2208](https://doi.org/10.2223/JPED.2208)

## Content

1. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2012 Jul;88(4):323-7. doi: 10.2223/JPED.2208.

Klinefelter syndrome: an unusual diagnosis in pediatric patients.

Tincani BJ(1), Mascagni BR, Pinto RD, Guaragna-Filho G, Castro CC, Sewaybricker 
LE, Viguetti-Campos NL, Marques-de-Faria AP, Maciel-Guerra AT, Guerra-Júnior G.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Pediatria, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade 
Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To identify clinical and laboratory data which differentiate 
Klinefelter syndrome (KS) patients according to age group.
METHODS: The study included all cases of hypogonadism, gynecomastia and/or 
infertility whose karyotype was performed at a university hospital from January 
1989 to December 2011, in a total of 105 subjects. The following data were 
retrospectively analyzed: age at first visit, ratio of arm span to height, pubic 
hair, gynecomastia, testicular volume, luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle 
stimulating hormone (FSH), total testosterone (T), and spermiogram.
RESULTS: During the study period, 33 patients were diagnosed with Klinefelter 
syndrome (KS+) and 72 were not (KS-). Out of all KS cases, only seven (21.2%) 
were diagnosed before 20 years old and two (6.1%) before 10 years old. Age at 
first consultation (in years) was similar in both groups (KS+ = 31.3±12.9 and 
KS- = 27.6±12.1), as were ratio of arm span to height and frequency of 
gynecomastia. However, in KS+ patients, pubic hair was less developed, 
testicular volume was smaller and testosterone levels were lower, while LH and 
FSH levels and frequency of azoospermia were higher.
CONCLUSIONS: Klinefelter syndrome is both an under and late diagnosed condition. 
The most important data for diagnosis are testicular volume, hormone levels and 
presence of azoospermia in spermiogram, especially in puberty and adult life.

DOI: 10.2223/JPED.2208
PMID: 22915094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]