---
reference_id: "PMID:37907148"
title: "The Cardiac Amyloidosis Registry Study (CARS): Rationale, Design and Methodology."
authors:
- Stern LK
- Grodin JL
- Maurer MS
- Ruberg FL
- Patel AR
- Khouri MG
- Roth LR
- Aras MA
- Bhardwaj A
- Bhattacharya P
- Brailovsky Y
- Drachman BM
- Ebong IA
- Fine NM
- Gaggin H
- Gopal D
- Griffin J
- Judge D
- Kim P
- Mitchell J
- Mitter SS
- Mohan RC
- Ramos H
- Reyentovich A
- Sheikh FH
- Sperry B
- Carter S
- Urey M
- Vaishnav J
- Vest AR
- Kittleson MM
- Patel JK
journal: J Card Fail
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2023.09.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Cardiac Amyloidosis Registry Study (CARS): Rationale, Design and Methodology.
**Authors:** Stern LK, Grodin JL, Maurer MS, Ruberg FL, Patel AR, Khouri MG, Roth LR, Aras MA, Bhardwaj A, Bhattacharya P, Brailovsky Y, Drachman BM, Ebong IA, Fine NM, Gaggin H, Gopal D, Griffin J, Judge D, Kim P, Mitchell J, Mitter SS, Mohan RC, Ramos H, Reyentovich A, Sheikh FH, Sperry B, Carter S, Urey M, Vaishnav J, Vest AR, Kittleson MM, Patel JK
**Journal:** J Card Fail (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cardfail.2023.09.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cardfail.2023.09.016)

## Content

1. J Card Fail. 2024 May;30(5):669-678. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2023.09.016. Epub
 2023 Oct 30.

The Cardiac Amyloidosis Registry Study (CARS): Rationale, Design and 
Methodology.

Stern LK(1), Grodin JL(2), Maurer MS(3), Ruberg FL(4), Patel AR(5), Khouri 
MG(6), Roth LR(2), Aras MA(7), Bhardwaj A(8), Bhattacharya P(3), Brailovsky 
Y(9), Drachman BM(10), Ebong IA(11), Fine NM(12), Gaggin H(13), Gopal D(4), 
Griffin J(14), Judge D(15), Kim P(16), Mitchell J(17), Mitter SS(18), Mohan 
RC(19), Ramos H(15), Reyentovich A(20), Sheikh FH(21), Sperry B(22), Carter 
S(23), Urey M(16), Vaishnav J(24), Vest AR(5), Kittleson MM(1), Patel JK(25).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Cedars-Sinai Smidt Heart Institute, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine and Amyloidosis 
Center, Boston University Chobanian & Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston 
Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Division of Cardiology, The CardioVascular Center, Tufts Medical Center, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Division of Cardiology, Duke University Hospital, Durham, NC, USA.
(7)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Advanced Cardiopulmonary Therapies and Transplantation, 
McGovern Medical School, University of Texas-Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(9)Division of Cardiology, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(10)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Penn Presbyterian Medical 
Center, University of Pennsylvania Health System, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(11)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, 
University of California, Davis, CA, USA.
(12)Libin Cardiovascular Institute of Alberta, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.
(13)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Division of Cardiology, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA; Division of Cardiology, Medical 
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(15)Division of Cardiology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
SC, USA.
(16)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of California, 
San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(17)Cardiovascular Division, John T. Milliken Department of Internal Medicine, 
Cardio-Oncology Center of Excellence, Washington University in St Louis, St 
Louis, MO, USA.
(18)Zena and Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(19)Division of Cardiology, Scripps Clinic, San Diego, CA, USA.
(20)The Leon H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, New York, 
New York, USA.
(21)Infiltrative Cardiomyopathy and Advanced Heart Failure Programs, MedStar 
Heart and Vascular Institute, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA.
(22)Saint Luke's Mid America Heart Institute and the University of Kansas 
City-Missouri, Kansas City, Missouri, USA.
(23)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(24)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(25)Department of Cardiology, Cedars-Sinai Smidt Heart Institute, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. Electronic address: Jignesh.Patel@cshs.org.

BACKGROUND: CARS (Cardiac Amyloidosis Registry Study) is a multicenter registry 
established in 2019 that includes patients with transthyretin (ATTR, wild-type 
and variant) and light chain (AL) cardiac amyloidosis (CA) evaluated at major 
amyloidosis centers between 1997 and 2025. CARS aims to describe the natural 
history of CA with attention to clinical and diagnostic variables at the time of 
diagnosis, real-world treatment patterns, and associated outcomes of patients in 
a diverse cohort that is more representative of the at-risk population than that 
described in CA clinical trials.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This article describes the design and methodology of CARS, 
including procedures for data collection and preliminary results. As of February 
2023, 20 centers in the United States enrolled 1415 patients, including 1155 
(82%) with ATTR and 260 (18%) with AL CA. Among those with ATTR, wild-type is 
the most common ATTR (71%), and most of the 305 patients with variant ATTR have 
the p.V142I mutation (68%). A quarter of the total population identifies as 
Black. More individuals with AL are female (39%) compared to those with ATTR 
(13%).
CONCLUSIONS: CARS will answer crucial clinical questions about CA natural 
history and permit comparison of different therapeutics not possible through 
current clinical trials. Future international collaboration will further 
strengthen the validity of observations of this increasingly recognized 
condition.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2023.09.016
PMID: 37907148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures JLG reports consulting fees from 
Pfizer, Eidos/BridgeBio, Alnlyam, Intellia, Sarepta, and AstraZeneca; Grant 
support from Pfizer 67656485, Eidos/BridgeBio, Texas Health Resources Clinical 
Scholarship, and NHLBI R01 HL160892-01A1. MSM reports consulting fees from 
AstraZeneca, Akcea, Intellia, and Novo-Nordisk; grant support from NIH 
R01HL139671, Alnylam, Pfizer, Eidos, Prothena, and Ionis. FLR reports consulting 
fees from Attralus and grant support from Pfizer, Alnylam, and Akcea/Ionis. ARP 
reports grant support from Pfizer. MGK reports consulting fees from and advisory 
board membership in Pfizer, Eidos, Alnylam; Grant support: Pfizer, Alnylam, 
Eidos, Ionis, and Moleculin Biotech and speaker's bureau with Alnylam. YB 
reports grant support from Pfizer. BMD reports consulting fees from Anylam and 
Eidos. NMF reports consulting/speaker's fees and bureau/honoraria from Pfizer, 
Akcea/Ionis, Sobi, Alnylam, Sanofi-Genzyme, AstraZeneca, and Takeda; grant 
support from Pfizer, Akcea/Ionis, Servier, Takeda, Novartis, and Eidos. HG 
reports consulting fees from Amgen, Bayer, Merck, Pfizer, and ExpertConnect and 
grant support from Roche Diagnostics, Jana Care, Ortho Clinical, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Alnylam, Akcea/Ionis, and Eidos/BridgeBio and stock ownership in Eko; 
research payments for clinical endpoint committees from Baim INstitute for 
Clinical Research for Abbott, Siemens and Beckman Coulter and from ACI Clinical 
for Abbott Laboratories. DJ reports consulting fees from Alexion, Alleviant, 
Cytokinetics, Novo-Nordisk, Pfizer, Renovacor/Rocket, and Tenaya. JM reports 
consultingfees from Myocardial Solutions, Abbott, Longer Life Foundation, 
Children's Discovery Institue, Pfizer, BridgeBio, and Altathera. SSM reports 
speaker's fees from and Bureau/Advisory Board member of Alnylam. RCM reports 
consulting fees/honoraria from Pfizer and AstraZeneca. FHS reports grant support 
from Alnylam and Ionis. BS reports consulting fees from Alnylam and 
BridgeBio/Eidos and speaker's bureau fees from Pfizer. MU reports grant support 
from Ionis; advisory board membership with Alnylam, Cytokinetics, 
BridgeBio/Eidos; speaker's bureau with Pfizer, Alnylam, Akcea. JKP reports grant 
support from Alexion, Alnylam, AstraZeneca, BridgeBio/Eidos, Novo-Nordisk, and 
Pfizer; advisory board/speaker's bureau membership with Alnylam, CareDx, Eidos, 
Ionis, Natera, and Pfizer. All other authors have no financial relationships to 
disclose.