---
reference_id: "PMID:26937547"
title: Kindler Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Youssefian L
- Vahidnezhad H
- Uitto J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kindler Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Youssefian L, Vahidnezhad H, Uitto J

## Content

1. Kindler Syndrome.

Youssefian L(1), Vahidnezhad H(1), Uitto J(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2016 Mar 3 [updated 2022 Jan 6].

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical 
College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Kindler syndrome (KS), a rare subtype of inherited 
epidermolysis bullosa, is characterized by skin fragility and acral blister 
formation beginning at birth, diffuse cutaneous atrophy, photosensitivity (most 
prominent during childhood and usually decreasing after adolescence), 
poikiloderma, diffuse palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, and pseudosyndactyly. Mucosal 
manifestations are also common and include hemorrhagic mucositis and gingivitis, 
periodontal disease, premature loss of teeth, and labial leukokeratosis. Other 
mucosal findings can include ectropion, urethral stenosis, and severe phimosis. 
Severe long-term complications of KS include periodontitis, mucosal strictures, 
and aggressive squamous cell carcinomas. Manifestations can range from mild to 
severe.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of KS is established in a proband with 
suggestive clinical findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in FERMT1 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: When possible, children with KS should 
be managed by a multidisciplinary team (dermatologist, pediatrician, 
ophthalmologist, dentist, gastroenterologist, urologist, nurse specialist, and 
dietitian) in a center experienced in caring for children with skin fragility. 
Skin care includes standard blister care, use of moisturizers, and protection 
from trauma and the sun. Mucosal involvement can require lubrication of the 
cornea, regular dental care to ensure optimal oral hygiene to reduce periodontal 
disease, and management of gastrointestinal and urethral complications. 
Surveillance: Screening for premalignant keratoses and early squamous cell 
carcinomas starting in adolescence and repeated annually. Screening for oral 
ulcerations, gingivitis, and periodontitis starting in adolescence with regular 
dental checkups. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Sun exposure. Pregnancy 
management: Planning for potential complications at delivery (e.g., vaginal 
stenosis, labial synechiae). Breast-feeding is not advised due to risk of 
blistering breasts.
GENETIC COUNSELING: KS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for an FERMT1 pathogenic variant, each sib 
of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 
50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the FERMT1 pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives 
and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 26937547