---
reference_id: "PMID:33138347"
title: Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor of the Central Nervous System in Children under the Age of 3 Years.
authors:
- Park M
- Han JW
- Hahn SM
- Lee JA
- Kim JY
- Shin SH
- Kim DS
- Yoon HI
- Hong KT
- Choi JY
- Kang HJ
- Shin HY
- Phi JH
- Kim SK
- Lee JW
- Yoo KH
- Sung KW
- Koo HH
- Lim DH
- Shin HJ
- Kim H
- Koh KN
- Im HJ
- Ahn SD
- Ra YS
- Baek HJ
- Kook H
- Jung TY
- Choi HS
- Kim CY
- Park HJ
- Lyu CJ
journal: Cancer Res Treat
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4143/crt.2020.756
keywords:
- "Central Nervous System Neoplasms/diagnosis, mortality, pathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Progression-Free Survival
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/diagnosis, mortality, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor of the Central Nervous System in Children under the Age of 3 Years.
**Authors:** Park M, Han JW, Hahn SM, Lee JA, Kim JY, Shin SH, Kim DS, Yoon HI, Hong KT, Choi JY, Kang HJ, Shin HY, Phi JH, Kim SK, Lee JW, Yoo KH, Sung KW, Koo HH, Lim DH, Shin HJ, Kim H, Koh KN, Im HJ, Ahn SD, Ra YS, Baek HJ, Kook H, Jung TY, Choi HS, Kim CY, Park HJ, Lyu CJ
**Journal:** Cancer Res Treat (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4143/crt.2020.756](https://doi.org/10.4143/crt.2020.756)

## Content

1. Cancer Res Treat. 2021 Apr;53(2):378-388. doi: 10.4143/crt.2020.756. Epub 2020
 Oct 28.

Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor of the Central Nervous System in Children under
the Age of 3 Years.

Park M(1), Han JW(2), Hahn SM(2), Lee JA(1), Kim JY(3), Shin SH(4), Kim DS(5),
Yoon HI(6), Hong KT(7), Choi JY(7), Kang HJ(7), Shin HY(7), Phi JH(8), Kim
SK(8), Lee JW(9), Yoo KH(9), Sung KW(9), Koo HH(9), Lim DH(10), Shin HJ(11), Kim
H(12), Koh KN(12), Im HJ(12), Ahn SD(13), Ra YS(14), Baek HJ(15), Kook H(15),
Jung TY(16), Choi HS(17), Kim CY(18), Park HJ(1), Lyu CJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatric Cancer, National Cancer
Center, Goyang, Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.
(4)Neuro-Oncology Clinic, Center for Pediatric Cancer, National Cancer Center,
Goyang, Korea.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul National University Cancer Research Institute, Seoul, Korea.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul National University Cancer Research Institute, Seoul, Korea.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(10)Department of Radiation Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(11)Department of Neurosurgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(13)Department of Radiation Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(14)Department of Neurosurgery, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital,
Chonnam National University Medical School, Hwasun, Korea.
(16)Department of Neurosurgery, Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital,
Chonnam National University Medical School, Hwasun, Korea.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, Korea.
(18)Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, Korea.

PURPOSE: Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (ATRT) is a highly aggressive
malignancy with peak incidence in children aged less than 3 years. Standard
treatment for central nervous system ATRT in children under the age of 3 years
have not been established yet. The objective of this study was to analyze
characteristics and clinical outcomes of ATRT in children aged less than 3
years.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A search of medical records from seven centers was
performed between January 2005 and December 2016.
RESULTS: Forty-three patients were enrolled. With a median follow-up of 90
months, 27 patients (64.3%) showed at least one episode of disease progression
(PD). The first date of PD was at 160 days after diagnosis. The 1- and 3-year
progression-free survivals (PFS) were 51.2% and 28.5%, respectively. The 1- and
3-year overall survivals were 61.9% and 38.1%, respectively. The 3-year PFS was
improved from 0% in pre-2011 to 47.4% in post-2011. Excluding one patient who
did not receive any further therapy after surgery, 27 patients died due to PD
(n=21), treatment-related toxicity (n=5), or unknown cause (n=1). In univariate
analysis, factors associated with higher 3-year PFS were no metastases,
diagnosis after 2011, early adjuvant radiotherapy, and high-dose chemotherapy
(HDCT). In multivariate analysis, the use of HDCT and adjuvant radiotherapy
remained significant prognostic factors for PFS (both p < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Aggressive therapy including early adjuvant radiotherapy and HDCT
could be considered to improve outcomes of ATRT in children under the age of 3
years.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2020.756
PMCID: PMC8053862
PMID: 33138347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Conflicts of interest
relevant to this article was not reported.
