---
reference_id: "PMID:37169781"
title: The impact of metabolic stressors on mitochondrial homeostasis in a renal epithelial cell model of methylmalonic aciduria.
authors:
- Schumann A
- Brutsche M
- Havermans M
- Grünert SC
- Kölker S
- Groß O
- Hannibal L
- Spiekerkoetter U
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-34373-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The impact of metabolic stressors on mitochondrial homeostasis in a renal epithelial cell model of methylmalonic aciduria.
**Authors:** Schumann A, Brutsche M, Havermans M, Grünert SC, Kölker S, Groß O, Hannibal L, Spiekerkoetter U
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-34373-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-34373-8)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 May 11;13(1):7677. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-34373-8.

The impact of metabolic stressors on mitochondrial homeostasis in a renal 
epithelial cell model of methylmalonic aciduria.

Schumann A(1), Brutsche M(2), Havermans M(3), Grünert SC(2), Kölker S(4), Groß 
O(3), Hannibal L(5), Spiekerkoetter U(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Paediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Mathildenstr. 1, 
79106, Freiburg, Germany. anke.schumann@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Department of General Paediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Mathildenstr. 1, 
79106, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Neuropathology, Faculty of Medicine, Medical Center, University 
of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Division of Neuropediatrics and Pediatric Metabolic Medicine, Center for 
Child and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(5)Department of General Paediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Laboratory of Clinical Biochemistry and Metabolism, Medical Center, University 
of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.

Methylmalonic aciduria (MMA-uria) is caused by deficiency of the mitochondrial 
enzyme methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT). MUT deficiency hampers energy generation 
from specific amino acids, odd-chain fatty acids and cholesterol. Chronic kidney 
disease (CKD) is a well-known long-term complication. We exposed human renal 
epithelial cells from healthy controls and MMA-uria patients to different 
culture conditions (normal treatment (NT), high protein (HP) and 
isoleucine/valine (I/V)) to test the effect of metabolic stressors on renal 
mitochondrial energy metabolism. Creatinine levels were increased and 
antioxidant stress defense was severely comprised in MMA-uria cells. Alterations 
in mitochondrial homeostasis were observed. Changes in tricarboxylic acid cycle 
metabolites and impaired energy generation from fatty acid oxidation were 
detected. Methylcitrate as potentially toxic, disease-specific metabolite was 
increased by HP and I/V load. Mitophagy was disabled in MMA-uria cells, while 
autophagy was highly active particularly under HP and I/V conditions. 
Mitochondrial dynamics were shifted towards fission. Sirtuin1, a 
stress-resistance protein, was down-regulated by HP and I/V exposure in MMA-uria 
cells. Taken together, both interventions aggravated metabolic fingerprints 
observed in MMA-uria cells at baseline. The results point to protein toxicity in 
MMA-uria and lead to a better understanding, how the accumulating, potentially 
toxic organic acids might trigger CKD.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-34373-8
PMCID: PMC10175303
PMID: 37169781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.