---
reference_id: "PMID:31760652"
title: Schwann Cell and the Pathogenesis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease.
authors:
- Murakami T
- Sunada Y
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9636-7_19
keywords:
- Axons/pathology
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/classification, physiopathology"
- Connexins/genetics
- "Demyelinating Diseases/classification, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Myelin Proteins/genetics
- Schwann Cells/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schwann Cell and the Pathogenesis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease.
**Authors:** Murakami T, Sunada Y
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-981-32-9636-7_19](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9636-7_19)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1190:301-321. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9636-7_19.

Schwann Cell and the Pathogenesis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease.

Murakami T(1), Sunada Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kawasaki Medical School, Kurashiki, Okayama, Japan. 
tatsum@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Neurology, Kawasaki Medical School, Kurashiki, Okayama, Japan.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is the most common hereditary neuropathy and 
genetically heterogeneous. CMT1 and CMTX are autosomal dominant and X-linked 
demyelinating neuropathies, respectively. CMT1A, CMT1B, and CMTX1 are the common 
forms of CMT, which are attributed to the genes encoding the myelin or gap 
junction proteins expressed in the myelinating Schwann cells. CMT4 is a rare 
autosomal recessive demyelinating neuropathy that usually shows an early-onset 
severe phenotype. Twelve genes have been described as CMT4, which encodes many 
kinds of proteins including mitochondrial proteins, phosphatases in the 
endosomal pathway, endocytic recycling proteins, and trafficking proteins. The 
genes responsible for CMT4 are expressed in Schwan cells and necessary for the 
development and maintenance in the peripheral nervous system. However, CMT1, 
CMT4, and CMTX1 are primarily demyelinating neuropathies, axonal degeneration is 
necessary for symptoms to develop. Schwann cell-axon interactions are impaired 
in the pathogenesis of demyelinating CMT.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-32-9636-7_19
PMID: 31760652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]