---
reference_id: "PMID:11005205"
title: "Establishment of a novel endothelial target mouse model of a typhus group rickettsiosis: evidence for critical roles for gamma interferon and CD8 T lymphocytes."
authors:
- Walker DH
- Popov VL
- Feng HM
journal: Lab Invest
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/labinvest.3780144
keywords:
- Animals
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/physiology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Endothelium, Vascular/microbiology"
- Immunohistochemistry
- Interferon-gamma/physiology
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C3H"
- "Rickettsia typhi/isolation & purification"
- "Typhus, Epidemic Louse-Borne/etiology, immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Establishment of a novel endothelial target mouse model of a typhus group rickettsiosis: evidence for critical roles for gamma interferon and CD8 T lymphocytes.
**Authors:** Walker DH, Popov VL, Feng HM
**Journal:** Lab Invest (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/labinvest.3780144](https://doi.org/10.1038/labinvest.3780144)

## Content

1. Lab Invest. 2000 Sep;80(9):1361-72. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.3780144.

Establishment of a novel endothelial target mouse model of a typhus group
rickettsiosis: evidence for critical roles for gamma interferon and CD8 T
lymphocytes.

Walker DH(1), Popov VL, Feng HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, USA.
dwalker@utmb.edu

A mouse model of typhus rickettsiosis that reproduces the hematogenous
dissemination to the critical target organs, including brain, lungs, heart, and
kidneys, primary endothelial and, to a lesser degree, macrophage intracellular
rickettsial infection, and typical vascular-based lesions of louse-borne typhus
and murine typhus was established. Intravenous inoculation of C3H/HeN mice with
Rickettsia typhi caused disease with a duration of the incubation period and
mortality rate that were dependent on the infective dose of rickettsiae. Lethal
infection was associated with high concentrations of R. typhi in the lungs and
brain, despite a brisker humoral immune response to the rickettsiae than in the
sublethal infection. Gamma interferon and CD8 T lymphocytes were demonstrated to
be crucial to clearance of the rickettsiae and recovery from infection in
experiments in which specific monoclonal antibodies were administered to deplete
these components. Death of animals depleted of gamma interferon or CD8 T
lymphocytes was associated with overwhelming rickettsial infection demonstrated
by titers of infectious rickettsiae and by immunohistochemistry. An effective
antirickettsial immune response was associated with elevated serum
concentrations of IL-12 on Day 5 and increased secretion of IL-12 by
concanavalin-A-stimulated spleen cells on Day 5. Evidence for transient
suppression of the immune response consisted of marked reduction in the
secretion of IL-2 and IL-12 by concanavalin-A-stimulated spleen cells on Days 10
and 15. This model offers excellent opportunities for study of attenuation and
pathogenetic mechanisms of typhus rickettsiae, which are established biologic
weapons of potential use in bioterrorism.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.3780144
PMID: 11005205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
