---
reference_id: "PMID:41120320"
title: Alpha-ketoglutarate mitigates insulin resistance and metabolic inflexibility in a mouse model of Ataxia-Telangiectasia.
authors:
- Sun JK
- Hart RP
- Herrup K
- Peng AZ
- Wong GC
- Wu D
- Kwan KM
- Chow KH
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-64360-8
keywords:
- Animals
- Insulin Resistance
- "Ketoglutaric Acids/pharmacology, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/metabolism, drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Glutamine/metabolism
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Hypoxia-Inducible Factor 1, alpha Subunit/metabolism, genetics"
- "Purkinje Cells/metabolism, drug effects, pathology"
- Glucose/metabolism
- Insulin/metabolism
- Energy Metabolism/drug effects
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Humans
- Male
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-ketoglutarate mitigates insulin resistance and metabolic inflexibility in a mouse model of Ataxia-Telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Sun JK, Hart RP, Herrup K, Peng AZ, Wong GC, Wu D, Kwan KM, Chow KH
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-025-64360-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64360-8)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2025 Oct 21;16(1):9312. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-64360-8.

Alpha-ketoglutarate mitigates insulin resistance and metabolic inflexibility in 
a mouse model of Ataxia-Telangiectasia.

Sun JK(1), Hart RP(2), Herrup K(3), Peng AZ(1), Wong GC(1), Wu D(1), Kwan 
KM(1)(4)(5), Chow KH(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Piscataway, 
NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Neurobiology, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(5)Centre of Cell and Developmental Biology, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(6)School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. heimanchow@cuhk.edu.hk.
(7)Gerald Choa Neuroscience Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong. heimanchow@cuhk.edu.hk.

The maintenance of metabolic homeostasis relies on the ability to flexibly 
transit between catabolic and anabolic states in response to insulin signaling. 
Here we show insulin-activated ATM is a critical mediator of this process, 
facilitating the swift transition between catabolic-and-anabolic fates of 
glucose by regulating the functional status of PKM2 and HIF1α. In 
Ataxia-Telangiectasia (A-T), these mechanisms are disrupted, resulting in 
intrinsic insulin resistance and glucose intolerance. Consequently, cells 
exhibit a compensatory dependence on glutamine as an alternative metabolite for 
energy metabolism. Cerebellar degeneration, a hallmark of A-T, is characterized 
by the pronounced vulnerability of Purkinje cells, attributed to their 
unexpected sensitivity to insulin. Supplementation with α-ketoglutarate, the 
α-keto acid backbone of glutamine, has demonstrated potentials in alleviating 
glutamine dependence and attenuating Purkinje cell degeneration. These findings 
suggest that peripheral metabolic deficiencies may contribute to sustained 
neurodegenerative changes in A-T, underscoring the importance of screening, 
monitoring and addressing these metabolic disruptions in patients.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-64360-8
PMCID: PMC12540671
PMID: 41120320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.