---
reference_id: "PMID:36453629"
title: Can 10 000 Healthy Steps a Day Slow Aortic Root Dilation in Pediatric Patients With Marfan Syndrome?
authors:
- Selamet Tierney ES
- Chung S
- Stauffer KJ
- Brabender J
- Collins RT 2nd
- Folk R
- Li W
- Murthy AK
- Murphy DJ
- Esfandiarei M
journal: J Am Heart Assoc
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.122.027598
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Can 10 000 Healthy Steps a Day Slow Aortic Root Dilation in Pediatric Patients With Marfan Syndrome?
**Authors:** Selamet Tierney ES, Chung S, Stauffer KJ, Brabender J, Collins RT 2nd, Folk R, Li W, Murthy AK, Murphy DJ, Esfandiarei M
**Journal:** J Am Heart Assoc (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1161/JAHA.122.027598](https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.122.027598)

## Content

1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022 Dec 6;11(23):e027598. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.122.027598.
Epub  2022 Dec 1.

Can 10 000 Healthy Steps a Day Slow Aortic Root Dilation in Pediatric Patients 
With Marfan Syndrome?

Selamet Tierney ES(1), Chung S(1), Stauffer KJ(1), Brabender J(1), Collins RT 
2nd(1), Folk R(2), Li W(3), Murthy AK(3), Murphy DJ(1), Esfandiarei M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics Stanford 
University Medical Center Palo Alto CA.
(2)Biomedical Sciences Program, Midwestern University Glendale AZ.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine Midwestern University Glendale AZ.

Background Stiffer aortas are associated with a faster rate of aortic root (AoR) 
dilation and higher risk of aortic dissection in patients with Marfan syndrome. 
We have previously shown that mild aerobic exercise reduces aortic stiffness and 
rate of AoR dilation in a Marfan mouse model. In this study, we investigated if 
these results could be translated to pediatric patients with Marfan syndrome. 
Methods and Results We enrolled 24 patients with Marfan syndrome aged 8 to 
19 years to participate in a 6-month physical activity intervention, excluding 
those with ventricular dysfunction or prior history of aortic surgery. We 
instructed patients to take 10 000 steps per day, tracked by an activity 
tracker. At baseline and 6 months, we measured AoR dimension, arterial 
stiffness, endothelial function, physical activity indices, inflammatory 
biomarkers, and coping scores. Controls consisted of 15 age-matched patients 
with Marfan syndrome. Twenty-four patients with Marfan syndrome (median age, 
14.4 years [interquartile range {IQR}, 12.2-16.8], 14 male patients) were 
enrolled. Baseline assessment demonstrated that the majority of these patients 
were sedentary and had abnormal arterial health. Twenty-two patients completed 
the intervention and took an average of 7709±2177 steps per day (median, 7627 
[IQR, 6344-9671]). Patients wore their Garmin trackers at a median of 92.8% 
(IQR, 84%-97%) of their intervention days. AoR Z score in the intervention group 
had a significantly lower rate of change per year compared with the controls 
(rate of change, -0.24 versus +0.008; P=0.01). Conclusions In this clinical 
intervention in pediatric patients with Marfan syndrome, we demonstrated that a 
simple physical activity intervention was feasible in this population and has 
the potential to decrease the AoR dilation rate. REGISTRATION URL: 
https://www.clinicaltrials.gov; Unique identifier: NCT03567460.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.122.027598
PMCID: PMC9851465
PMID: 36453629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]