---
reference_id: "PMID:34329586"
title: TRIM8 modulates the EWS/FLI oncoprotein to promote survival in Ewing sarcoma.
authors:
- Seong BKA
- Dharia NV
- Lin S
- Donovan KA
- Chong S
- Robichaud A
- Conway A
- Hamze A
- Ross L
- Alexe G
- Adane B
- Nabet B
- Ferguson FM
- Stolte B
- Wang EJ
- Sun J
- Darzacq X
- Piccioni F
- Gray NS
- Fischer ES
- Stegmaier K
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2021.07.003
keywords:
- "Bone Neoplasms/metabolism, mortality"
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation
- Cell Survival
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Microfilament Proteins/metabolism
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/chemistry, metabolism"
- Protein Stability
- Proteolysis
- "Proto-Oncogene Protein c-fli-1/chemistry, metabolism"
- "RNA-Binding Protein EWS/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/metabolism, mortality"
- Trans-Activators/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TRIM8 modulates the EWS/FLI oncoprotein to promote survival in Ewing sarcoma.
**Authors:** Seong BKA, Dharia NV, Lin S, Donovan KA, Chong S, Robichaud A, Conway A, Hamze A, Ross L, Alexe G, Adane B, Nabet B, Ferguson FM, Stolte B, Wang EJ, Sun J, Darzacq X, Piccioni F, Gray NS, Fischer ES, Stegmaier K
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2021.07.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2021.07.003)

## Content

1. Cancer Cell. 2021 Sep 13;39(9):1262-1278.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2021.07.003.
 Epub 2021 Jul 29.

TRIM8 modulates the EWS/FLI oncoprotein to promote survival in Ewing sarcoma.

Seong BKA(1), Dharia NV(2), Lin S(1), Donovan KA(3), Chong S(4), Robichaud A(5),
Conway A(5), Hamze A(5), Ross L(5), Alexe G(1), Adane B(1), Nabet B(3), Ferguson
FM(3), Stolte B(6), Wang EJ(5), Sun J(3), Darzacq X(7), Piccioni F(8), Gray
NS(3), Fischer ES(3), Stegmaier K(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA; The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA; The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA; Division of
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA;
Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
CA, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Berkeley,
CA, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA.
(6)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA; Dr.von Hauner Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, University
Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.
(7)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
CA, USA; CIRM Center of Excellence, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(8)The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA; The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA; Division of
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
Electronic address: kimberly_stegmaier@dfci.harvard.edu.

Fusion-transcription factors (fusion-TFs) represent a class of driver
oncoproteins that are difficult to therapeutically target. Recently, protein
degradation has emerged as a strategy to target these challenging oncoproteins.
The mechanisms that regulate fusion-TF stability, however, are generally
unknown. Using CRISPR-Cas9 screening, we discovered tripartite motif-containing
8 (TRIM8) as an E3 ubiquitin ligase that ubiquitinates and degrades EWS/FLI, a
driver fusion-TF in Ewing sarcoma. Moreover, we identified TRIM8 as a selective
dependency in Ewing sarcoma compared with >700 other cancer cell lines.
Mechanistically, TRIM8 knockout led to an increase in EWS/FLI protein levels
that was not tolerated. EWS/FLI acts as a neomorphic substrate for TRIM8,
defining the selective nature of the dependency. Our results demonstrate that
fusion-TF protein stability is tightly regulated and highlight fusion
oncoprotein-specific regulators as selective therapeutic targets. This study
provides a tractable strategy to therapeutically exploit oncogene overdose in
Ewing sarcoma and potentially other fusion-TF-driven cancers.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2021.07.003
PMCID: PMC8443273
PMID: 34329586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests K.S. has funding from
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, consults for and has stock options
in Auron Therapeutics and served as an advisor for Kronos Bio and AstraZeneca
all on topics unrelated to this manuscript. E.S.F. is a founder, scientific
advisory board (SAB) member, and equity holder of Civetta Therapeutics, Jengu
Therapeutics (board member), and Neomorph Inc., an equity holder in C4
Therapeutics, and is a consultant to Novartis, Sanofi, EcoR1 capital, Astellas,
and Deerfield. The Fischer lab receives or has received research funding from
Novartis, Ajax, Deerfield, and Astellas on topics unrelated to this manuscript.
B.N. is an inventor on patent applications related to the dTAG system
(WO/2017/024318, WO/2017/024319, WO/2018/148440, and WO/2018/148443). F.M.F.,
B.N., and N.S.G. are inventors on a patent related to the dTAG system and
molecules described in this manuscript (WO/2020/146250). F.M.F. is a consultant
to RA Capital and Santi Therapeutics. N.S.G. is a founder, SAB member and equity
holder in Syros, C4, Allorion, Jengu, B2S, Inception, EoCys, Larkspur (board
member), and Soltego (board member). The Gray lab receives or has received
research funding from Novartis, Takeda, Astellas, Taiho, Jansen, Kinogen,
Arbella, Deerfield, and Sanofi on topics unrelated to this manuscript. N.V.D. is
a current employee of Genentech, Inc., a member of the Roche Group. K.A.D. is a
consultant to Kronos Bio. Inclusion and diversity One or more of the authors of
this paper self-identifies as an underrepresented ethnic minority in science.
One or more of the authors of this paper self-identifies as a member of the
LGBTQ+ community. One or more of the authors of this paper received support from
a program designed to increase minority representation in science.
