---
reference_id: "PMID:28361097"
title: Independent variant analysis of TEAD1 and OCEL1 in 38 Aicardi syndrome patients.
authors:
- Wong BK
- Sutton VR
- Lewis RA
- Van den Veyver IB
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.250
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Independent variant analysis of TEAD1 and OCEL1 in 38 Aicardi syndrome patients.
**Authors:** Wong BK, Sutton VR, Lewis RA, Van den Veyver IB
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.250](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.250)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2017 Jan 25;5(2):117-121. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.250. 
eCollection 2017 Mar.

Independent variant analysis of TEAD1 and OCEL1 in 38 Aicardi syndrome patients.

Wong BK(1), Sutton VR(2), Lewis RA(3), Van den Veyver IB(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and GynecologyBaylor College of 
MedicineHoustonTexas; Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research InstituteTexas 
Children's HospitalHoustonTexas.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics Baylor College of Medicine Houston 
Texas.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human GeneticsBaylor College of 
MedicineHoustonTexas; Department of MedicineBaylor College of 
MedicineHoustonTexas; Department of PediatricsBaylor College of 
MedicineHoustonTexas; Department of OphthalmologyBaylor College of 
MedicineHoustonTexas.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and GynecologyBaylor College of 
MedicineHoustonTexas; Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research InstituteTexas 
Children's HospitalHoustonTexas; Department of Molecular and Human 
GeneticsBaylor College of MedicineHoustonTexas.

BACKGROUND: Aicardi syndrome is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder 
characterized by infantile spasms, typical chorioretinal lacunae, agenesis of 
the corpus callosum, and other neuronal migration defects. It has been reported 
recently that de novo variants in TEAD1 and OCEL1 each may cause Aicardi 
syndrome in a single individual of a small cohort of females with this clinical 
diagnosis. These data were interpreted to suggest that the clinical diagnosis of 
Aicardi syndrome may be genetically heterogeneous.
METHODS: To investigate this further, we sequenced TEAD1 and OCEL1 coding 
regions using DNA from 38 clinically well-characterized girls with Aicardi 
syndrome.
RESULTS: We did not detect the previously reported or any other deleterious 
variants in any of the analyzed samples.
CONCLUSIONS: This suggests that the published variants represent either an 
extremely rare cause of Aicardi syndrome or an incidental finding.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.250
PMCID: PMC5370232
PMID: 28361097