---
reference_id: "PMID:18628520"
title: Steroid biomarkers and genetic studies reveal inactivating mutations in hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in patients with cortisone reductase deficiency.
authors:
- Lavery GG
- Walker EA
- Tiganescu A
- Ride JP
- Shackleton CH
- Tomlinson JW
- Connell JM
- Ray DW
- Biason-Lauber A
- Malunowicz EM
- Arlt W
- Stewart PM
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-0743
keywords:
- Adult
- "Alopecia/complications, genetics, metabolism"
- "Biomarkers/analysis, metabolism"
- Carbohydrate Dehydrogenases/genetics
- Child
- "Cortisone Reductase/deficiency, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Hirsutism/complications, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- "Metabolic Diseases/complications, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- "Models, Biological"
- Mutation/physiology
- Pedigree
- "Puberty, Precocious/complications, genetics, metabolism"
- Steroids/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Steroid biomarkers and genetic studies reveal inactivating mutations in hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in patients with cortisone reductase deficiency.
**Authors:** Lavery GG, Walker EA, Tiganescu A, Ride JP, Shackleton CH, Tomlinson JW, Connell JM, Ray DW, Biason-Lauber A, Malunowicz EM, Arlt W, Stewart PM
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2008-0743](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2008-0743)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Oct;93(10):3827-32. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-0743.
Epub 2008 Jul 15.

Steroid biomarkers and genetic studies reveal inactivating mutations in
hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in patients with cortisone reductase
deficiency.

Lavery GG(1), Walker EA, Tiganescu A, Ride JP, Shackleton CH, Tomlinson JW,
Connell JM, Ray DW, Biason-Lauber A, Malunowicz EM, Arlt W, Stewart PM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT,
United Kingdom.

CONTEXT: Cortisone reductase deficiency (CRD) is characterized by a failure to
regenerate cortisol from cortisone via 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type
1 (11beta-HSD1), resulting in increased cortisol clearance, activation of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-axis (HPA) and ACTH-mediated adrenal androgen excess.
11beta-HSD1 oxoreductase activity requires the reduced nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate-generating enzyme hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(H6PDH) within the endoplasmic reticulum. CRD manifests with hyperandrogenism
resulting in hirsutism, oligo-amenorrhea, and infertility in females and
premature pseudopuberty in males. Recent association studies have failed to
corroborate findings that polymorphisms in the genes encoding H6PDH (R453Q) and
11beta-HSD1 (Intron 3 inserted adenine) interact to cause CRD.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to reevaluate the genetics and steroid biochemistry
of patients with CRD.
DESIGN: We analyzed 24-h urine collection for steroid biomarkers by gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry and sequenced the HSD11B1 and H6PD genes in our
CRD cohort.
PATIENTS: Patients included four cases presenting with hyperandrogenism and
biochemical features clearly indicative of CRD.
RESULTS: Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry identified steroid biomarkers that
correlated with CRD in each case. Three cases were identified as homozygous
(R109AfsX3, Y316X, and G359D) and one case identified as compound heterozygous
(c.960G-->A and D620fsX3) for mutations in H6PD. No mutations affecting enzyme
activity were identified in the HSD11B1 gene. Expression and activity assays
demonstrate loss of function for all reported H6PDH mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: CRD is caused by inactivating mutations in the H6PD gene, rendering
the 11beta-HSD1 enzyme unable to operate as an oxoreductase, preventing local
glucocorticoid regeneration. These data highlight the importance of the redox
control of cortisol metabolism and the 11beta-HSD1-H6PDH pathway in regulating
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2008-0743
PMCID: PMC2579651
PMID: 18628520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
