---
reference_id: "PMID:28913640"
title: "Case report of Kummell's disease with delayed onset myelopathy and the literature review."
authors:
- "D'Oria S"
- Delvecchio C
- Dibenedetto M
- Zizza F
- Somma C
journal: Eur J Orthop Surg Traumatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00590-017-2039-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report of Kummell's disease with delayed onset myelopathy and the literature review.
**Authors:** D'Oria S, Delvecchio C, Dibenedetto M, Zizza F, Somma C
**Journal:** Eur J Orthop Surg Traumatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00590-017-2039-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00590-017-2039-0)

## Content

1. Eur J Orthop Surg Traumatol. 2018 Feb;28(2):309-316. doi: 
10.1007/s00590-017-2039-0. Epub 2017 Sep 14.

Case report of Kummell's disease with delayed onset myelopathy and the 
literature review.

D'Oria S(1), Delvecchio C(2), Dibenedetto M(2), Zizza F(2), Somma C(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurosurgical Unit of Miulli Hospital, Acquaviva delle Fonti, Italy. 
asalvatoredoria@gmail.com.
(2)Neurosurgical Unit of Miulli Hospital, Acquaviva delle Fonti, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Kummell's disease is an avascular necrosis of the vertebral body, 
secondary to a vertebral compression fracture. This entity is characterised by 
the gradual development in time of a vertebral body collapse following a trivial 
spinal trauma, involving a worsening back pain associated with a progressive 
kyphosis.
PURPOSES: The aim of this article is to carry out an international literature 
review regarding Kummell's disease, addressing its physiopathology, 
histopathology, clinical presentation, radiological characteristics and 
treatment modalities; at the same time, the literature is updated through the 
description of a new and interesting case, symbol of the pathology long-term 
potential complications, if not diagnosed and therefore not suitably treated.
CASE REPORT: A patient with osteoporosis, following a slight spinal trauma, 
suffered a progressive necrosis of the D11 body; although the radiological exams 
showed a constant worsening of the thoracic-lumbar kyphosis and a restriction of 
the spinal canal, in another medical centre he was only treated with a corset 
and painkillers. A year after the injury, motor deficits concerning the lower 
limbs appeared. He was then sent to us and indication for posterior internal 
fixation was given. On the basis of both his medical history and radiological 
and histological findings, Kummell's disease was diagnosed.
CONCLUSION: It is necessary to have a complete knowledge of the clinical, 
pathological and radiological characteristics of Kummell's disease, so as to 
follow a correct diagnostic course enabling to prepare the most suitable 
therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00590-017-2039-0
PMID: 28913640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]