---
reference_id: "PMID:34894066"
title: Clinical and molecular response to dasatinib in an adult patient with Penttinen syndrome.
authors:
- Iznardo H
- Bredrup C
- Bernal S
- Gladkauskas T
- Mascaró JM Jr
- Roé E
- Baselga E
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62603
keywords:
- Acro-Osteolysis/genetics
- Dasatinib/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Imatinib Mesylate/therapeutic use
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital"
- Male
- Progeria
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor beta/genetics"
- Skin Abnormalities
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular response to dasatinib in an adult patient with Penttinen syndrome.
**Authors:** Iznardo H, Bredrup C, Bernal S, Gladkauskas T, Mascaró JM Jr, Roé E, Baselga E
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62603](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62603)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2022 Apr;188(4):1233-1238. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62603. Epub 
2021 Dec 11.

Clinical and molecular response to dasatinib in an adult patient with Penttinen 
syndrome.

Iznardo H(1), Bredrup C(2)(3), Bernal S(4)(5), Gladkauskas T(3), Mascaró JM 
Jr(6), Roé E(1), Baselga E(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Genetics Department and Sant Pau Biomedical Research Institute, Hospital de 
la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER, 
U705). IICS-Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Penttinen type of premature aging syndrome is an autosomal-dominant disorder 
that can be caused by the c.1994T>A pVal665Ala pathogenic variant in 
platelet-derived growth factor receptor-B (PDGFRB). Imatinib, a receptor 
tyrosine kinase (RTK) inhibitor, has been used in Penttinen syndrome (PS) 
patients with good results. A 21-year-old male presented shortly after birth 
with a prematurely aged appearance with distinctive facial features and 
cutaneous atrophy with hypertrophic scar-like lesions. Generalized brachydactyly 
with acro-osteolysis was observed. Flexion contractures limited his daily 
activities. Cognitive impairment was not present. Genetic testing found a 
heterozygous variant c.1994T>A pVal665Ala in exon 14 of PDGFRB. A diagnosis of 
PS was made and imatinib treatment was started with partial response. After lack 
of further improvement, in vitro molecular studies with imatinib and dasatinib 
showed that the Val665Ala variant had greater sensitivity to dasatinib than 
imatinib. This was seen examining levels of P-PDGFRB directly and on downstream 
ligands P-AKT and P-STAT. Improved clinical response was observed after 
treatment with dasatinib. We report a new case of PS with clinical and molecular 
response to dasatinib after incomplete response to imatinib. Our work provides 
further molecular and clinical evidence of RTK inhibitors' efficacy in this rare 
disorder.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62603
PMID: 34894066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]