---
reference_id: "PMID:29774890"
title: "Genetic and clinical aspects of Wolfram syndrome 1, a severe neurodegenerative disease."
authors:
- Rigoli L
- Bramanti P
- Di Bella C
- De Luca F
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/pr.2018.17
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Aging, Premature/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Interdisciplinary Communication
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- MicroRNAs/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics
- Mutation
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/genetics
- "Optic Atrophy/diagnosis, genetics"
- Wolfram Syndrome/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and clinical aspects of Wolfram syndrome 1, a severe neurodegenerative disease.
**Authors:** Rigoli L, Bramanti P, Di Bella C, De Luca F
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/pr.2018.17](https://doi.org/10.1038/pr.2018.17)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2018 May;83(5):921-929. doi: 10.1038/pr.2018.17. Epub 2018 Feb
28.

Genetic and clinical aspects of Wolfram syndrome 1, a severe neurodegenerative
disease.

Rigoli L(1), Bramanti P(2), Di Bella C(1), De Luca F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital, Messina, Italy.
(2)IRCCS Centro Neurolesi "Bonino-Pulejo", Messina, Italy.

Erratum in
    Pediatr Res. 2018 Nov;84(5):787. doi: 10.1038/s41390-018-0146-1.

Wolfram syndrome 1 (WS1) is a rare autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease
characterized by diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, deafness,
and other abnormalities. WS1 usually results in death before the age of 50
years. The pathogenesis of WS1 is ascribed to mutations of human WFS1 gene on
chromosome 4p encoding a transmembrane protein called wolframin, which has
physiological functions in membrane trafficking, secretion, processing, and/or
regulation of ER calcium homeostasis. Different types of WFS1 mutations have
been identified, and some of these have been associated with a dominant, severe
type of WS. Mutations of CISD2 gene cause autosomal recessive Wolfram syndrome 2
(WS2) characterized by the absence of diabetes insipidus and psychiatric
disorders, and by bleeding upper intestinal ulcer and defective platelet
aggregation. Other WFS1-related disorders such as DFNA6/14/38 nonsyndromic
low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss and Wolfram syndrome-like disease with
autosomal dominant transmission have been described. WS1 is a devastating
disease for the patients and their families. Thus, early diagnosis is imperative
to enable proper prognostication, prevent complications, and reduce the
transmission to further progeny. Although there is currently no effective
therapy, potential new drugs have been introduced, attempting to improve the
progression of this fatal disease.

DOI: 10.1038/pr.2018.17
PMID: 29774890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
