---
reference_id: "PMID:34463724"
title: "MultiInflammatory Syndrome in Children: A View into Immune Pathogenesis from a Laboratory Perspective."
authors:
- Bohn MK
- Yousef P
- Steele S
- Sepiashvili L
- Adeli K
journal: J Appl Lab Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/jalm/jfab114
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MultiInflammatory Syndrome in Children: A View into Immune Pathogenesis from a Laboratory Perspective.
**Authors:** Bohn MK, Yousef P, Steele S, Sepiashvili L, Adeli K
**Journal:** J Appl Lab Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jalm/jfab114](https://doi.org/10.1093/jalm/jfab114)

## Content

1. J Appl Lab Med. 2022 Jan 5;7(1):311-321. doi: 10.1093/jalm/jfab114.

MultiInflammatory Syndrome in Children: A View into Immune Pathogenesis from a 
Laboratory Perspective.

Bohn MK(1)(2), Yousef P(1), Steele S(1), Sepiashvili L(1)(2), Adeli K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Laboratory Medicine & Molecular Medicine, Research 
Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Multiinflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a novel and rare 
inflammatory disorder associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 infection in school-age children. Reports in the past year have 
suggested a multisystem pathophysiology characterized by hyperinflammation, 
gastrointestinal distress, and cardiovascular complications. Clinical laboratory 
investigations, including routine blood testing for inflammatory (e.g., 
C-reactive protein, ferritin) and cardiac (e.g., troponin, brain natriuretic 
peptides) markers have provided insight into potential drivers of disease 
pathogenesis, highlighting the role of the laboratory in the differential 
diagnosis of patients presenting with similar conditions (e.g., Kawasaki 
disease, macrophage activating syndrome).
CONTENT: While few studies have applied high-dimensional immune profiling to 
further characterize underlying MIS-C pathophysiology, much remains unknown 
regarding predisposing risk factors, etiology, and long-term impact of disease 
onset. The extent of autoimmune involvement is also unclear. In the current 
review, we summarize and critically evaluate available literature on potential 
pathogenic mechanisms underlying MIS-C onset and discuss the current and 
anticipated value of various laboratory testing paradigms in MIS-C diagnosis and 
monitoring.
SUMMARY: From initial reports, it is clear that MIS-C has unique inflammatory 
signatures involving both adaptive and innate systems. Certain cytokines, 
inflammatory markers, and cardiac markers assist in the differentiation of MIS-C 
from other hyperinflammatory conditions. However, there are still major gaps in 
our understanding of MIS-C pathogenesis, including T cell, B cell, and innate 
response. It is essential that researchers not only continue to decipher initial 
pathogenesis but also monitor long-term health outcomes, particularly given 
observed presence of circulating autoantibodies with unknown impact.

© American Association for Clinical Chemistry 2021. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jalm/jfab114
PMCID: PMC8499820
PMID: 34463724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]