---
reference_id: "PMID:20301349"
title: HAMP- and HJV-Related Hemochromatosis.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Mariani R
- Bertola F
- Piperno A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HAMP- and HJV-Related Hemochromatosis.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Mariani R, Bertola F, Piperno A

## Content

1. HAMP- and HJV-Related Hemochromatosis.

Mariani R(1), Bertola F(2), Piperno A(3)(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2005 Feb 17 [updated 2025 Dec 4].

Author information:
(1)Internal medicine specialist, SSD Malattie Rare, Fondazione IRCCS San Gerardo
dei Tintori, Monza, Italy
(2)Geneticist, Cytogenetics and Medical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS San
Gerardo dei Tintori, Monza, Italy
(3)Professor of Genetics,, Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of
Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
(4)Tettamanti Research Centre, Monza, Italy

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: HAMP- and HJV-related hemochromatosis (HC) are
characterized by onset of severe iron overload occurring typically in the first
to third decades of life. Males and females are equally affected. Prominent
clinical features include hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, glucose intolerance and
diabetes, liver fibrosis or cirrhosis, cardiomyopathy, and arthropathy.
Hepatocellular cancer has been reported occasionally. The main cause of death is
cardiac disease. If HAMP- or HJV-related HC is detected early enough and if
blood is removed regularly through the process of phlebotomy to achieve iron
depletion, morbidity and mortality are greatly reduced.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of HAMP- or HJV-related HC is established in a
proband with clinical and laboratory features of iron overload and biallelic
pathogenic variants in HAMP or HJV identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Phlebotomy for treatment of iron overload as for
HFE-related HC: phlebotomy of one unit of blood (~200 mg of iron) once a week as
necessary to reduce iron stores to desired levels (serum ferritin concentration
to ~50 ng/mL), followed by phlebotomies to maintain normal serum iron levels.
Iron chelators can be used when phlebotomies are contraindicated or in combined
therapy in individuals with severe iron overload. Treatment of manifestations:
Conventional treatment of secondary complications including hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism, glucose intolerance or diabetes mellitus, liver disease, cardiac
failure, arthropathy, and osteoporosis as indicated. Hypogonadism is treated
with testosterone replacement in males and cyclical estrogen and progesterone
therapy in fertile females. Glucose intolerance or diabetes may require oral
agents or insulin administration. Cardiac failure and arrhythmias require
treatment per cardiologist. Arthropathy is treated with analgesics and NSAIDs.
Hormone replacement therapy may prevent osteoporosis. Surveillance: Monitor
those at risk with annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration and
transferrin saturation starting in early childhood. For individuals undergoing
phlebotomy treatment: serum ferritin concentration every four to eight
phlebotomies during the induction phase and every two phlebotomies as ferritin
levels approach the target of 50 ng/mL; serum ferritin concentration and
transferrin saturation every six to 12 months during maintenance phase. Liver
function tests every six to 12 months according to severity of liver
dysfunction; abdominal ultrasound and serum alpha-fetoprotein concentration
every six months in those with severe fibrosis or cirrhosis to monitor for
hepatocellular cancer; abdominal ultrasound every 12-24 months in those on
maintenance therapy without cirrhosis; fibroelastography every 12-24 months to
monitor fibrosis evolution; serum follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing
hormone, and testosterone or estradiol every 12 months or as needed; fasting and
postprandial serum glucose and Hgb A1c every six to 12 months according to
needs; cardiac ultrasound and MR-based quantitation of iron according to the
severity of cardiac dysfunction; Holter EKG as needed to evaluate for
arrhythmias; vitamin D, parathyroid hormone, serum and urinary calcium and
phosphorus, C-terminal telopeptide every 12 months according to needs;
dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry every 24 months or as needed.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Alcohol consumption; ingestion of iron-containing
preparations and supplemental vitamin C; handling or eating uncooked shellfish
or marine fish because of risk of fatal septicemia from the marine bacterium V
vulnificus. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to clarify the
clinical/genetic status of at-risk sibs of an affected individual in order to
identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early monitoring for
the development of iron overload. If HAMP- or HJV-related HC is detected before
evidence of organ damage, treatment via phlebotomy can reverse or prevent many
of the secondary complications resulting from organ damage. Evaluations can
include serum iron indices, serum transaminases, C-reactive protein, and
molecular genetic testing. Pregnancy management: All pregnant women with HAMP-
and HJV-related HC should be under the care of a maternal-fetal medicine
specialist, an endocrinologist, and a cardiologist. Preferably, women with HAMP-
and HJV-related HC should be seen by these specialists prior to becoming
pregnant.
GENETIC COUNSELING: HAMP- and HJV-related HC is inherited in an autosomal
recessive manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a HAMP or HJV
pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25%
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being a carrier, and a 25% chance of
inheriting neither of the HAMP or HJV pathogenic variants. Once the HAMP or HJV
pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier
testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301349
