---
reference_id: "PMID:38326647"
title: "WT1-related disorders: more than Denys-Drash syndrome."
authors:
- Lopez-Gonzalez M
- Ariceta G
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-024-06302-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Denys-Drash Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis, therapy"
- WT1 Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Wilms Tumor/genetics, therapy, diagnosis"
- "Frasier Syndrome/genetics, therapy, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WT1-related disorders: more than Denys-Drash syndrome.
**Authors:** Lopez-Gonzalez M, Ariceta G
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-024-06302-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-024-06302-y)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2024 Sep;39(9):2601-2609. doi: 10.1007/s00467-024-06302-y.
Epub  2024 Feb 7.

WT1-related disorders: more than Denys-Drash syndrome.

Lopez-Gonzalez M(1), Ariceta G(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Hospital Vall d'Hebron, 
Barcelona, Spain. mercedes.lopgonz@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Hospital Vall d'Hebron, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)University Autonomous of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Historically, specific mutations in WT1 gene have been associated with distinct 
syndromes based on phenotypic characteristics, including Denys-Drash syndrome 
(DDS), Frasier syndrome (FS), Meacham syndrome, and WAGR syndrome. DDS is 
classically defined by the triad of steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) 
onset in the first year of life, disorders of sex development (DSD), and a 
predisposition to Wilms tumor (WT). Currently, a paradigm shift acknowledges a 
diverse spectrum of presentations beyond traditional syndromic definitions. 
Consequently, the concept of WT1-related disorders becomes more precise. A 
genotype-phenotype correlation has been established, emphasizing that the 
location and type of WT1 mutations significantly influence the clinical 
presentation, the condition severity, and the chronology of patient 
manifestations. Individuals presenting with persistent proteinuria, with or 
without nephrotic syndrome, and varying degrees of kidney dysfunction 
accompanied by genital malformations should prompt suspicion of WT1 mutations. 
Recent genetic advances enable a more accurate estimation of malignancy risk in 
these patients, facilitating a conservative nephron-sparing surgery (NSS) 
approach in select cases, with a focus on preserving residual kidney function 
and delaying nephrectomies. Other key management strategies include kidney 
transplantation and addressing DSD and gonadoblastoma. In summary, recent 
genetic insights underscore the imperative to implement individualized, 
integrated, and multidisciplinary management strategies for WT1-related 
disorders. This approach is pivotal in optimizing patient outcomes and 
addressing the complexities associated with these diverse clinical 
manifestations.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International Pediatric 
Nephrology Association.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-024-06302-y
PMID: 38326647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]