---
reference_id: "PMID:34686989"
title: "Contribution of HLA class II genes, DRB4*01:01, DRB1*07:01, and DQB1*03:03:2 to clinical features of Vitiligo disease in Iranian population."
authors:
- Ghaffarnia R
- Saffarian Z
- Shahbazi M
- Zamani M
journal: Mol Biol Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11033-021-06855-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contribution of HLA class II genes, DRB4*01:01, DRB1*07:01, and DQB1*03:03:2 to clinical features of Vitiligo disease in Iranian population.
**Authors:** Ghaffarnia R, Saffarian Z, Shahbazi M, Zamani M
**Journal:** Mol Biol Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11033-021-06855-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11033-021-06855-3)

## Content

1. Mol Biol Rep. 2022 Jan;49(1):171-178. doi: 10.1007/s11033-021-06855-3. Epub
2021  Oct 22.

Contribution of HLA class II genes, DRB4*01:01, DRB1*07:01, and DQB1*03:03:2 to 
clinical features of Vitiligo disease in Iranian population.

Ghaffarnia R(1), Saffarian Z(2), Shahbazi M(3), Zamani M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, No. Poursina Ave, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, Tehran University 
of Medical Science, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, School of Advanced Technologies in 
Medicine, Golestan University of Medical Sciences, Gorgān, Iran.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, No. Poursina Ave, Tehran, Iran. mzamani@tums.ac.ir.

BACKGROUND: Vitiligo is a multifactorial depigmentation condition, which is due 
to skin melanocyte destruction. Increased expression of HLA class II genes in 
patients with pre-lesions of Vitiligo suggests a crucial role for the 
participation of immune response in Vitiligo development. Recent studies 
progressively focused on HLA-DRB1 and DQB1 genes. In this study, we have 
evaluated the association and role of HLA-DRB4*01:01, -DRB1*07:01, and 
-DQB1*03:03:2 genes in different clinical subtypes of Vitiligo in the Iranian 
population.
METHODS: First, Genomic DNA from peripheral blood of 125 unrelated Vitiligo 
patients and 100 unrelated healthy controls were extracted through the 
salting-out method. Then, HLA class II genotyping was performed using the 
sequence-specific primer PCR method. Finally, the clinical relevance of the 
testing for these genotypes was evaluated by applying the PcPPV 
(prevalence-corrected positive predictive value) formula.
RESULTS: Our results indicated the positive associations of DRB4*01:01 and 
DRB1*07:01 allelic genes with early-onset Vitiligo (p = 0.024 and 0.022, 
respectively). DRB4*01:01 also showed strong protection against late-onset 
Vitiligo (p = 0.0016, RR = 0.360). Moreover, our data revealed that the 
DRB1*07:01 increases the susceptibility to Sporadic Vitiligo (p = 0.030, 
RR = 1.702). Furthermore, our findings proposed that elevated vulnerability of 
Vitiligo patients due to DRB4*01:01 and DRB1*07:01 alleles maybe is correlated 
with the presence of amino acid Arginine at position 71 at pocket 4 on the 
antigen-binding site of the HLA-DRB1 receptor.
CONCLUSION: Our findings on different subtypes of Vitiligo suggest that, despite 
a more apparent autoimmune involvement, a non-autoimmune nature for the etiology 
of Vitiligo should also be considered.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-021-06855-3
PMID: 34686989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]