---
reference_id: "PMID:39329760"
title: Current Landscape and Evolving Therapies for Primary Biliary Cholangitis.
authors:
- Fiorucci S
- Urbani G
- Di Giorgio C
- Biagioli M
- Distrutti E
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13181580
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current Landscape and Evolving Therapies for Primary Biliary Cholangitis.
**Authors:** Fiorucci S, Urbani G, Di Giorgio C, Biagioli M, Distrutti E
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13181580](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13181580)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 Sep 19;13(18):1580. doi: 10.3390/cells13181580.

Current Landscape and Evolving Therapies for Primary Biliary Cholangitis.

Fiorucci S(1), Urbani G(1), Di Giorgio C(1), Biagioli M(1), Distrutti E(2).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università di Perugia, 06123 Perugia, 
Italy.
(2)SC di Gastroenterologia ed Epatologia, Azienda Ospedaliera di Perugia, 06123 
Perugia, Italy.

Primary Biliary Cholangitis (PBC) is a chronic autoimmune liver disorder 
characterized by progressive cholestatic that, if untreated, can progress to 
liver fibrosis, cirrhosis and liver decompensation requiring liver transplant. 
Although the pathogenesis of the disease is multifactorial, there is a consensus 
that individuals with a genetic predisposition develop the disease in the 
presence of specific environmental triggers. A dysbiosis of intestinal 
microbiota is increasingly considered among the potential pathogenic factors. 
Cholangiocytes, the epithelial cells lining the bile ducts, are the main target 
of a dysregulated immune response, and cholangiocytes senescence has been 
recognized as a driving mechanism, leading to impaired bile duct function, in 
disease progression. Bile acids are also recognized as playing an important 
role, both in disease development and therapy. Thus, while bile acid-based 
therapies, specifically ursodeoxycholic acid and obeticholic acid, have been the 
cornerstone of therapy in PBC, novel therapeutic approaches have been developed 
in recent years. In this review, we will examine published and ongoing clinical 
trials in PBC, including the recently approved peroxisome-proliferator-activated 
receptor (PPAR) agonist, elafibranor and seladelpar. These novel second-line 
therapies are expected to improve therapy in PBC and the development of 
personalized approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13181580
PMCID: PMC11429758
PMID: 39329760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.