---
reference_id: "PMID:36960056"
title: Degradation of collagen I by activated C1s in periodontal Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
authors:
- Amberger A
- Pertoll J
- Traunfellner P
- Kapferer-Seebacher I
- Stoiber H
- Klimaschewski L
- Thielens N
- Gaboriaud C
- Zschocke J
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1157421
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Degradation of collagen I by activated C1s in periodontal Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
**Authors:** Amberger A, Pertoll J, Traunfellner P, Kapferer-Seebacher I, Stoiber H, Klimaschewski L, Thielens N, Gaboriaud C, Zschocke J
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1157421](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1157421)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Mar 7;14:1157421. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1157421. 
eCollection 2023.

Degradation of collagen I by activated C1s in periodontal Ehlers-Danlos 
Syndrome.

Amberger A(1), Pertoll J(1), Traunfellner P(1), Kapferer-Seebacher I(2), Stoiber 
H(3), Klimaschewski L(4), Thielens N(5), Gaboriaud C(5), Zschocke J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Med. Univ. Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Department of Conservative Dentistry and Periodontology, Med. Univ. 
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Institute of Virology, Med. Univ. Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(4)Institute of Neuroanatomie, Med. Univ. Innsbruck., Innsbruck, Austria.
(5)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Commissariat à l'énergie atomique et aux énergies 
alternatives (CEA), Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), 
Institut de Biologie Structurale (IBS), Grenoble, France.

Periodontal Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (pEDS) is an autosomal dominant disorder 
characterized by early-onset periodontitis leading to premature loss of teeth, 
lack of attached gingiva and thin and fragile gums leading to gingival 
recession. Connective tissue abnormalities of pEDS typically include easy 
bruising, pretibial plaques, distal joint hypermobility, hoarse voice, and less 
commonly manifestations such as organ or vessel rupture. pEDS is caused by 
heterozygous missense mutations in C1R and C1S genes of the classical complement 
C1 complex. Previously we showed that pEDS pathogenic variants trigger 
intracellular activation of C1r and/or C1s, leading to extracellular presence of 
activated C1s. However, the molecular link relating activated C1r and C1s 
proteases to the dysregulated connective tissue homeostasis in pEDS is unknown. 
Using cell- and molecular-biological assays, we identified activated C1s (aC1s) 
as an enzyme which degrades collagen I in cell culture and in in vitro assays. 
Matrix collagen turnover in cell culture was assessed using labelled hybridizing 
peptides, which revealed fast and comprehensive collagen protein remodeling in 
patient fibroblasts. Furthermore, collagen I was completely degraded by aC1s 
when assays were performed at 40°C, indicating that even moderate elevated 
temperature has a tremendous impact on collagen I integrity. This high turnover 
is expected to interfere with the formation of a stable ECM and result in 
tissues with loose compaction a hallmark of the EDS phenotype. Our results 
indicate that pathogenesis in pEDS is not solely mediated by activation of the 
complement cascade but by inadequate C1s-mediated degradation of matrix 
proteins, confirming pEDS as a primary connective tissue disorder.

Copyright © 2023 Amberger, Pertoll, Traunfellner, Kapferer-Seebacher, Stoiber, 
Klimaschewski, Thielens, Gaboriaud and Zschocke.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1157421
PMCID: PMC10028100
PMID: 36960056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.