---
reference_id: "PMID:34736503"
title: Hearing loss in Norwegian adults with achondroplasia.
authors:
- Fredwall SO
- Åberg B
- Berdal H
- Savarirayan R
- Solheim J
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-02095-7
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/complications, genetics"
- Acoustic Impedance Tests
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Audiometry, Pure-Tone"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Deafness
- Female
- Hearing Loss/etiology
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Norway
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hearing loss in Norwegian adults with achondroplasia.
**Authors:** Fredwall SO, Åberg B, Berdal H, Savarirayan R, Solheim J
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-021-02095-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-021-02095-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021 Nov 4;16(1):468. doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-02095-7.

Hearing loss in Norwegian adults with achondroplasia.

Fredwall SO(1)(2), Åberg B(3), Berdal H(3), Savarirayan R(4), Solheim J(3).

Author information:
(1)TRS National Resource Centre for Rare Disorders, Sunnaas Rehabilitation 
Hospital, 1450, Nesodden, Norway. svfred@sunnaas.no.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway. svfred@sunnaas.no.
(3)Department of Hearing, Lovisenberg Diaconal Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Achondroplasia is the most common form of disproportionate skeletal 
dysplasia. The condition is caused by a mutation in the FGFR3 gene, affecting 
endochondral bone growth, including the craniofacial anatomy. Recurrent otitis 
media infections, chronic middle ear effusion, and hearing loss are common in 
children with achondroplasia, but few studies have investigated hearing loss in 
adults with this condition.
OBJECTIVES: This population-based study investigated the prevalence, severity, 
and type of hearing loss in Norwegian adults with achondroplasia.
METHODS: We collected data on 45 adults with genetically confirmed 
achondroplasia: 23 men and 22 women, aged 16-70 years. All participants 
underwent a comprehensive audiologic assessment, including medical history, 
pure-tone audiometry, speech audiometry, and impedance audiometry. According to 
the Global Burden of Disease classification, pure-tone average ≥ 20 decibel 
hearing level (dB HL) was considered clinically significant hearing loss.
RESULTS: Insertion of ventilation tubes had been performed in 44% (20/45) of the 
participants, 49% (22/45) had a history of adenoidectomy, while 20% (9/45) used 
hearing aids. Hearing loss in at least one ear was found in 53% (24/45) of the 
participants; in 57% (13/23) of the men and 50% (11/22) of the women. In the 
youngest age group (age 16-44 years), 50% (14/28) had hearing loss, although 
predominantly mild (20-34 dB HL). An abnormal tympanometry (Type B or C) was 
found in 71% (32/45) of the participants. The majority (15/24) had conductive 
hearing loss, or a combination of conductive and sensorineural hearing loss 
(8/24).
CONCLUSIONS: Adults with achondroplasia are at increased risk of early hearing 
loss. Our findings underline the importance of a regular hearing assessment 
being part of standard care in achondroplasia, including adolescents and young 
adults. In adult patients diagnosed with hearing loss, an evaluation by an 
otolaryngologist should be considered, and the need for hearing aids, assistive 
listening devices, and workplace and educational accommodations should be 
discussed. Clinical trial registration ClinicalTrials.gov identifier 
NCT03780153.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-021-02095-7
PMCID: PMC8570016
PMID: 34736503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have completed the ICMJE form and 
declare that they have no competing interests.