---
reference_id: "PMID:32197105"
title: "Efficacy of a tetravalent dengue vaccine in healthy children aged 4-16 years: a randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Biswal S
- Borja-Tabora C
- Martinez Vargas L
- Velásquez H
- Theresa Alera M
- Sierra V
- Johana Rodriguez-Arenales E
- Yu D
- Wickramasinghe VP
- Duarte Moreira E Jr
- Fernando AD
- Gunasekera D
- Kosalaraksa P
- Espinoza F
- López-Medina E
- Bravo L
- Tuboi S
- Hutagalung Y
- Garbes P
- Escudero I
- Rauscher M
- Bizjajeva S
- LeFevre I
- Borkowski A
- Saez-Llorens X
- Wallace D
- TIDES study group
journal: Lancet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30414-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of a tetravalent dengue vaccine in healthy children aged 4-16 years: a randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Biswal S, Borja-Tabora C, Martinez Vargas L, Velásquez H, Theresa Alera M, Sierra V, Johana Rodriguez-Arenales E, Yu D, Wickramasinghe VP, Duarte Moreira E Jr, Fernando AD, Gunasekera D, Kosalaraksa P, Espinoza F, López-Medina E, Bravo L, Tuboi S, Hutagalung Y, Garbes P, Escudero I, Rauscher M, Bizjajeva S, LeFevre I, Borkowski A, Saez-Llorens X, Wallace D, TIDES study group
**Journal:** Lancet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30414-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30414-1)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2020 May 2;395(10234):1423-1433. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30414-1. 
Epub 2020 Mar 17.

Efficacy of a tetravalent dengue vaccine in healthy children aged 4-16 years: a 
randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.

Biswal S(1), Borja-Tabora C(2), Martinez Vargas L(3), Velásquez H(4), Theresa 
Alera M(5), Sierra V(6), Johana Rodriguez-Arenales E(7), Yu D(8), Wickramasinghe 
VP(9), Duarte Moreira E Jr(10), Fernando AD(11), Gunasekera D(12), Kosalaraksa 
P(13), Espinoza F(14), López-Medina E(15), Bravo L(16), Tuboi S(17), Hutagalung 
Y(18), Garbes P(19), Escudero I(18), Rauscher M(20), Bizjajeva S(20), LeFevre 
I(20), Borkowski A(20), Saez-Llorens X(21), Wallace D(19); TIDES study group.

Collaborators: Concepción A, Villarreal AC, Fernando A, Borja-Tabora C, 
Sirivichayakul C, Yu D, Gunasekera D, López-Medina E, Rodriguez-Arenales EJ, 
Moreira ED Jr, Espinoza F, Velásquez H, Reynales H, Luz K, Jimeno J, Fernando L, 
Bravo L, Vargas LM, Rivera L, Alera MT, Manacharoen O, Lopez P, Kosalaraksa P, 
Wickramasinghe VP, Dietze R, da Cunha RV, Watanaveeradej V, Sierra V, 
Saez-Llorens X, Biswal S, Brose M, Rauscher M, Bizjajeva S, LeFevre I, Borkowski 
A, Wallace D, Escudero I, Moss K, Garbes P, Meyer S, Hutagalung Y, Tuboi S, 
Tricou V.

Author information:
(1)Takeda Vaccines, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: 
shibadas.biswal@takeda.com.
(2)Research Institute For Tropical Medicine, Muntinlupa, Philippines.
(3)Centro de Atención e Investigación Médica, Dominicana, Santo Domingo, 
Dominican Republic.
(4)Centro de Atención e Investigación Médica, Acacias, Colombia.
(5)Philippines-Armed Forces Research Institute of Medical Sciences Virology 
Research Unit, Cebu City, Philippines.
(6)Centro de Atención e Investigación Médica, Yopal, Colombia.
(7)Centro de Atención e Investigación Médica, Aguazul, Colombia.
(8)De La Salle Medical and Health Sciences Institute, Dasmariñas, Philippines.
(9)University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(10)Associação Obras Sociais Irmã Dulce Hospital Santo Antônio and Oswaldo Cruz 
Foundation, Bahia, Brazil.
(11)Faculty of Medicine, University of Kelaniya, Kelaniya, Sri Lanka.
(12)Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Sri Jayawardenenpura, 
Gangodawila, Sri Lanka.
(13)Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(14)National Autonomous University of Nicaragua, León, Nicaragua.
(15)Centro de Estudios en Infectología Pediátrica, Universidad del Valle and 
Centro Médico Imbanaco, Cali, Colombia.
(16)University of the Philippines Manila, Ermita, Philippines.
(17)Takeda Pharmaceuticals, São Paulo, Brazil.
(18)Takeda Vaccines, Singapore.
(19)Takeda Vaccines, Boston, MA, USA.
(20)Takeda Pharmaceuticals International, Zurich, Switzerland.
(21)Hospital del Niño Dr José Renán Esquivel, Sistema Nacional de Investigación 
at Secretaría Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología, Centro de Vacunación 
Internacional (Cevaxin), Panama City, Panama.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2020 Apr 4;395(10230):1114. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30682-6.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2020 May 2;395(10234):1402-1404. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30603-6.

BACKGROUND: A substantial unmet need remains for safe and effective vaccines 
against dengue virus disease, particularly for individuals who are dengue-naive 
and those younger than 9 years. We aimed to assess the efficacy, safety, and 
immunogenicity of a live attenuated tetravalent dengue vaccine (TAK-003) in 
healthy children aged 4-16 years.
METHODS: We present data up to 18 months post-vaccination from an ongoing phase 
3, randomised, double-blind trial of TAK-003 in endemic regions of Asia and 
Latin America (26 medical and research centres across Brazil, Colombia, 
Dominican Republic, Nicaragua, Panama, Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Thailand). 
Healthy children aged 4-16 years were randomly assigned 2:1 (stratified by age 
and region) to receive two doses of TAK-003 or two doses of placebo, 3 months 
apart. Investigators, participants and their parents or guardians, and sponsor 
representatives advising on trial conduct were masked to trial group 
assignments. Participants presenting with febrile illness were tested for 
virologically confirmed dengue (VCD) by serotype-specific RT-PCR. In timeframes 
beginning 30 days post-second dose, the primary endpoint (overall vaccine 
efficacy) was assessed in the first 11 months, and the secondary endpoints 
(efficacy by baseline serostatus, serotype, hospitalised dengue, and severe 
dengue) in the first 17 months. This study is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02747927.
FINDINGS: 20 099 participants were randomly assigned and vaccinated between Sept 
7, 2016, and Aug 18, 2017; 19 021 (94·6%) were included in the per protocol 
analysis, and 20 071 (99·9%) in the safety set. The primary endpoint was 
achieved with an overall vaccine efficacy of 80·2% (95% CI 73·3 to 85·3; 61 
cases of VCD in the TAK-003 group vs 149 cases of VCD in the placebo group). In 
the secondary endpoint assessment timeframe, an overall vaccine efficacy of 
73·3% (95% CI 66·5 to 78·8) was observed. Analysis of secondary endpoints showed 
efficacies of 76·1% (95% CI 68·5 to 81·9) in individuals who were seropositive 
at baseline, 66·2% (49·1 to 77·5) in individuals who were seronegative at 
baseline, 90·4% (82·6 to 94·7) against hospitalised dengue, and 85·9% (31·9 to 
97·1) against dengue haemorrhagic fever. Efficacy varied by individual serotypes 
(DENV 1, 69·8% [95% CI 54·8 to 79·9]; DENV 2, 95·1% [89·9 to 97·6]; DENV 3, 
48·9% [27·2 to 64·1]; DENV 4, 51·0% [-69·4 to 85·8]). Cumulative rates of 
serious adverse events were similar in TAK-003 (4·0%) and placebo (4·8%) 
recipients, and were consistent with expected medical disorders in the study 
population. Infection was the most frequent reason leading to serious adverse 
events. 20 participants (<0·1% of the safety set) were withdrawn from the trial 
due to 21 adverse events by the end of part two; 14 of these participants 
received TAK-003 and six received placebo.
INTERPRETATION: TAK-003 was well tolerated and efficacious against symptomatic 
dengue in children regardless of serostatus before immunisation. Vaccine 
efficacy varied by serotype, warranting continued follow-up to assess 
longer-term vaccine performance.
FUNDING: Takeda Vaccines.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30414-1
PMID: 32197105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]