---
reference_id: "PMID:38828945"
title: Phase 3 Trial of Crinecerfont in Pediatric Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia.
authors:
- Sarafoglou K
- Kim MS
- Lodish M
- Felner EI
- Martinerie L
- Nokoff NJ
- Clemente M
- Fechner PY
- Vogiatzi MG
- Speiser PW
- Auchus RJ
- Rosales GBG
- Roberts E
- Jeha GS
- Farber RH
- Chan JL
- CAHtalyst Pediatric Trial Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2404655
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Adrenal Hyperplasia, Congenital/blood, complications, drug therapy"
- Androstenedione/blood
- Double-Blind Method
- "Glucocorticoids/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Hydrocortisone
- "Amines/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Thiazoles/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Receptors, Corticotropin-Releasing Hormone/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Headache/chemically induced, epidemiology"
- "Fever/chemically induced, epidemiology"
- "Vomiting/chemically induced, epidemiology"
- "CRF Receptor, Type 1"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase 3 Trial of Crinecerfont in Pediatric Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia.
**Authors:** Sarafoglou K, Kim MS, Lodish M, Felner EI, Martinerie L, Nokoff NJ, Clemente M, Fechner PY, Vogiatzi MG, Speiser PW, Auchus RJ, Rosales GBG, Roberts E, Jeha GS, Farber RH, Chan JL, CAHtalyst Pediatric Trial Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2404655](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2404655)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2024 Aug 8;391(6):493-503. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2404655. Epub 2024
 Jun 2.

Phase 3 Trial of Crinecerfont in Pediatric Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia.

Sarafoglou K(1), Kim MS(1), Lodish M(1), Felner EI(1), Martinerie L(1), Nokoff
NJ(1), Clemente M(1), Fechner PY(1), Vogiatzi MG(1), Speiser PW(1), Auchus
RJ(1), Rosales GBG(1), Roberts E(1), Jeha GS(1), Farber RH(1), Chan JL(1);
CAHtalyst Pediatric Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Cools M, Lysy P, Basak S, Chanoine JP, Girgis R, Manousaki D,
Bouvattier C, Coutant R, Martinerie L, Samara-Boustani D, Bettendorf M,
Charmandari E, Russo G, Salerno M, Birkholz-Walerzak D, Mazur A, Clemente Leon
M, Gómez Gila AL, Dattani MT, Auchus RJ, Chen M, Chalmers LJ, Clark A, Dauber
AN, Fechner PY, Felner EI, Lanpidhainy X, Gonzalez L, Garibaldi LR, Imel EA, Kim
MS, Krishna K, Lekarev O, Lodish M, Loechner KJ, Mick GJ, Newfield RS, Nokoff
NJ, Sarafoglou K, Bomberg E, Miller BS, Speiser PW, Hsu Y, Trinh LN, Vogiatzi
MG, White PC, Feldman Witchel S.

Author information:
(1)From the University of Minnesota Medical School and College of Pharmacy,
Minneapolis (K.S.); Children's Hospital Los Angeles and Keck School of Medicine
of USC, Los Angeles (M.S.K.), the University of California at San Francisco,
Benioff Children's Hospital, San Francisco (M.L.), and Neurocrine Biosciences,
San Diego (G.B.G.R., E.R., G.S.J., R.H.F., J.L.C.) - all in California; Emory
University School of Medicine and Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta
(E.I.F.); Endocrinologie Pédiatrique, Centre de Référence Maladies
Endocriniennes Rares de la Croissance et du Développement, Hôpital Universitaire
Robert-Debré, Groupe Hospitalo-Universitaire de l'Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux
de Paris Nord, and Université Paris Cité, Faculté de Santé, UFR de Médecine,
Paris, and Université Paris-Saclay, INSERM Physiologie et Physiopathologie
Endocriniennes, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre - all in France (L.M.); the University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora (N.J.N.);
Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario Vall d'Hebrón, Barcelona (M.C.);
the University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital,
Seattle (P.Y.F.); the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia
(M.G.V.); Cohen Children's Medical Center of NY, New Hyde Park, and the Donald
and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra-Northwell, Hempstead - both in
New York (P.W.S.); and the Departments of Pharmacology and Internal Medicine,
Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of Michigan
Medical School, and the Endocrinology and Metabolism Section, Medicine Services,
LTC Charles S. Kettles Veterans Affairs Medical Center - both in Ann Arbor
(R.J.A.).

BACKGROUND: Children with classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to
21-hydroxylase deficiency require treatment with glucocorticoids, usually at
supraphysiologic doses, to address cortisol insufficiency and reduce excess
adrenal androgens. However, such treatment confers a predisposition to
glucocorticoid-related complications. In 2-week phase 2 trials, patients with
CAH who received crinecerfont, a new oral corticotropin-releasing factor type 1
receptor antagonist, had decreases in androstenedione levels.
METHODS: In this phase 3, multinational, randomized trial, we assigned pediatric
participants with CAH, in a 2:1 ratio, to receive crinecerfont or placebo for 28
weeks. A stable glucocorticoid dose was maintained for 4 weeks, and the dose was
then adjusted to a target of 8.0 to 10.0 mg per square meter of body-surface
area per day (hydrocortisone dose equivalents), provided that the
androstenedione level was controlled (≤120% of the baseline level or within the
reference range). The primary efficacy end point was the change in the
androstenedione level from baseline to week 4. A key secondary end point was the
percent change in the glucocorticoid dose from baseline to week 28 while
androstenedione control was maintained.
RESULTS: A total of 103 participants underwent randomization, of whom 69 were
assigned to crinecerfont and 34 to placebo; 100 (97%) remained in the trial at
28 weeks. At baseline, the mean glucocorticoid dose was 16.4 mg per square meter
per day, and the mean androstenedione level was 431 ng per deciliter (15.0
nmol/liter). At week 4, androstenedione was substantially reduced in the
crinecerfont group (-197 ng per deciliter [-6.9 nmol/liter]) but increased in
the placebo group (71 ng per deciliter [2.5 nmol/liter]) (least-squares mean
difference [LSMD], -268 ng per deciliter [-9.3 nmol/liter]; P<0.001); the
observed mean androstenedione value, obtained before the morning glucocorticoid
dose, was 208 ng per deciliter (7.3 nmol/liter) in the crinecerfont group, as
compared with 545 ng per deciliter (19.0 nmol/liter) in the placebo group. At
week 28, the mean glucocorticoid dose had decreased (while androstenedione
control was maintained) by 18.0% with crinecerfont but increased by 5.6% with
placebo (LSMD, -23.5 percentage points; P<0.001). Headache, pyrexia, and
vomiting were the most common adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: In this phase 3 trial, crinecerfont was superior to placebo in
reducing elevated androstenedione levels in pediatric participants with CAH and
was also associated with a decrease in the glucocorticoid dose from
supraphysiologic to physiologic levels while androstenedione control was
maintained. (Funded by Neurocrine Biosciences; CAHtalyst Pediatric
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04806451.).

Copyright © 2024 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2404655
PMID: 38828945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
