---
reference_id: "PMID:34137174"
title: "Mechanism, specificity, and function of FANCD2-FANCI ubiquitination and deubiquitination."
authors:
- Lemonidis K
- Arkinson C
- Rennie ML
- Walden H
journal: FEBS J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/febs.16077
keywords:
- DNA/metabolism
- DNA Repair
- "Fanconi Anemia/genetics, metabolism"
- "Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group D2 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Ubiquitin-Conjugating Enzymes/genetics, metabolism"
- Ubiquitination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism, specificity, and function of FANCD2-FANCI ubiquitination and deubiquitination.
**Authors:** Lemonidis K, Arkinson C, Rennie ML, Walden H
**Journal:** FEBS J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.16077](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.16077)

## Content

1. FEBS J. 2022 Aug;289(16):4811-4829. doi: 10.1111/febs.16077. Epub 2021 Jun 29.

Mechanism, specificity, and function of FANCD2-FANCI ubiquitination and 
deubiquitination.

Lemonidis K(1), Arkinson C(1), Rennie ML(1), Walden H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical 
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, UK.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genetic disorder caused by mutations in any of the 
currently 22 known FA genes. The products of these genes, along with other 
FA-associated proteins, participate in a biochemical pathway, known as the FA 
pathway. This pathway is responsible for the repair of DNA interstrand 
cross-links (ICL) and the maintenance of genomic stability in response to 
replication stress. At the center of the pathway is the monoubiquitination of 
two FA proteins, FANCD2 and FANCI, on two specific lysine residues. This is 
achieved by the combined action of the UBE2T ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme and a 
large multicomponent E3 ligase, known as the FA-core complex. This E2-E3 pair 
specifically targets the FANCI-FANCD2 heterodimer (ID2 complex) for 
ubiquitination on DNA. Deubiquitination of both FANCD2 and FANCI, which is also 
critical for ICL repair, is achieved by the USP1-UAF1 complex. Recent work 
suggests that FANCD2 ubiquitination transforms the ID2 complex into a sliding 
DNA clamp. Further ubiquitination on FANCI does not alter this closed-on-DNA ID2 
conformation. However, the resulting dimonoubiquitinated complex is highly 
resistant to USP1-UAF1 deubiquitination. This review will provide an update on 
recent work focusing on how specificity in FANCD2 ubiquitination and 
deubiquitination is achieved. Recent findings shedding light to the mechanisms, 
molecular functions, and biological roles of FANCI/FANCD2 ubiquitination and 
deubiquitination will be also discussed. ENZYMES: UBA1 (6.2.1.45), UBE2T 
(2.3.2.23), FANCL (2.3.2.27), USP1 (3.4.19.12).

© 2021 The Authors. The FEBS Journal published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.16077
PMID: 34137174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]