---
reference_id: "PMID:32088294"
title: "Angelman Syndrome: From Mouse Models to Therapy."
authors:
- Rotaru DC
- Mientjes EJ
- Elgersma Y
journal: Neuroscience
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2020.02.017
keywords:
- Angelman Syndrome/genetics
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Neurons
- Phenotype
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angelman Syndrome: From Mouse Models to Therapy.
**Authors:** Rotaru DC, Mientjes EJ, Elgersma Y
**Journal:** Neuroscience (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuroscience.2020.02.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2020.02.017)

## Content

1. Neuroscience. 2020 Oct 1;445:172-189. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2020.02.017.
 Epub 2020 Feb 21.

Angelman Syndrome: From Mouse Models to Therapy.

Rotaru DC(1), Mientjes EJ(1), Elgersma Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The ENCORE Expertise Center for
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, The ENCORE Expertise Center for
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands. Electronic address: y.elgersma@erasmusmc.nl.

The UBE3A gene is part of the chromosome 15q11-q13 region that is frequently
deleted or duplicated, leading to several neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD).
Angelman syndrome (AS) is caused by the absence of functional maternally derived
UBE3A protein, while the paternal UBE3A gene is present but silenced
specifically in neurons. Patients with AS present with severe neurodevelopmental
delay, with pronounced motor deficits, absence of speech, intellectual
disability, epilepsy, and sleep problems. The pathophysiology of AS is still
unclear and a treatment is lacking. Animal models of AS recapitulate the
genotypic and phenotypic features observed in AS patients, and have been
invaluable for understanding the disease process as well as identifying
apropriate drug targets. Using these AS mouse models we have learned that loss
of UBE3A probably affects many areas of the brain, leading to increased neuronal
excitability and a loss of synaptic spines, along with changes in a number of
distinct behaviours. Inducible AS mouse models have helped to identify the
critical treatment windows for the behavioral and physiological phenotypes.
Additionally, AS mouse models indicate an important role for the predominantly
nuclear UBE3A isoform in generating the characteristic AS pathology. Last, but
not least, the AS mice have been crucial in guiding Ube3a gene reactivation
treatments, which present a very promising therapy to treat AS.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2020.02.017
PMID: 32088294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
