---
reference_id: "PMID:30254379"
title: The global prevalence of Wilson disease from next-generation sequencing data.
authors:
- Gao J
- Brackley S
- Mann JP
journal: Genet Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-018-0309-9
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Copper-Transporting ATPases/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Gene Frequency/genetics
- Genetic Variation/genetics
- Genotype
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/epidemiology, genetics"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Mutation
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The global prevalence of Wilson disease from next-generation sequencing data.
**Authors:** Gao J, Brackley S, Mann JP
**Journal:** Genet Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-018-0309-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-018-0309-9)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2019 May;21(5):1155-1163. doi: 10.1038/s41436-018-0309-9. Epub 2018
 Sep 26.

The global prevalence of Wilson disease from next-generation sequencing data.

Gao J(#)(1), Brackley S(#)(1), Mann JP(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Cambridge, School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
jm2032@cam.ac.uk.
(3)Institute of Metabolic Science-Metabolic Research Laboratories, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. jm2032@cam.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of copper 
metabolism, caused by pathogenic variants in ATP7B. We aimed to (1) perform a 
meta-analysis of previous WD prevalence estimates, (2) estimate the prevalence 
of WD from population sequencing data, and (3) generate an ATP7B gene variant 
database.
METHODS: MEDLINE and EMBASE were systematically searched. Previous prevalence 
estimates were subjected to meta-analysis. All previously reported pathogenic 
ATP7B variants were compiled and annotated with gnomAD allele frequencies. 
Pooled global and ethnicity-specific genetic prevalences for WD were generated 
using the Hardy-Weinberg equation.
RESULTS: Meta-analysis of genetic studies of WD prevalence gave an estimate 12.7 
per 100,000 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 6.3-23.0). We developed a referenced, 
searchable ATP7B database comprising 11,520 variants including 782 previously 
reported disease variants, which can be found at http://www.wilsondisease.tk/ ; 
216/782 of these were present in gnomAD, remained after filtering by allele 
frequency, and met American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics criteria. 
Based on these, the genetic prevalence of WD was 13.9 per 100,000 (95% CI: 
12.9-14.9), or 1 per 7194. Combining this with 60 predicted pathogenic variants 
gave a birth prevalence of 15.4 per 100,000 (95% CI: 14.4-16.5).
CONCLUSION: The genetic prevalence of Wilson disease may be greater than 
previous estimates.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-018-0309-9
PMID: 30254379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]