---
reference_id: "PMID:26299364"
title: Heterozygous Loss-of-Function Mutations in DLL4 Cause Adams-Oliver Syndrome.
authors:
- Meester JA
- Southgate L
- Stittrich AB
- Venselaar H
- Beekmans SJ
- den Hollander N
- Bijlsma EK
- Helderman-van den Enden A
- Verheij JB
- Glusman G
- Roach JC
- Lehman A
- Patel MS
- de Vries BB
- Ruivenkamp C
- Itin P
- Prescott K
- Clarke S
- Trembath R
- Zenker M
- Sukalo M
- Van Laer L
- Loeys B
- Wuyts W
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.07.015
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Calcium-Binding Proteins
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, pathology"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Receptors, Notch/genetics"
- "Scalp Dermatoses/congenital, genetics, pathology"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterozygous Loss-of-Function Mutations in DLL4 Cause Adams-Oliver Syndrome.
**Authors:** Meester JA, Southgate L, Stittrich AB, Venselaar H, Beekmans SJ, den Hollander N, Bijlsma EK, Helderman-van den Enden A, Verheij JB, Glusman G, Roach JC, Lehman A, Patel MS, de Vries BB, Ruivenkamp C, Itin P, Prescott K, Clarke S, Trembath R, Zenker M, Sukalo M, Van Laer L, Loeys B, Wuyts W
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.07.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.07.015)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Sep 3;97(3):475-82. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.07.015. Epub
 2015 Aug 20.

Heterozygous Loss-of-Function Mutations in DLL4 Cause Adams-Oliver Syndrome.

Meester JA(1), Southgate L(2), Stittrich AB(3), Venselaar H(4), Beekmans SJ(5), 
den Hollander N(6), Bijlsma EK(6), Helderman-van den Enden A(6), Verheij JB(7), 
Glusman G(3), Roach JC(3), Lehman A(8), Patel MS(8), de Vries BB(9), Ruivenkamp 
C(6), Itin P(10), Prescott K(11), Clarke S(12), Trembath R(2), Zenker M(13), 
Sukalo M(13), Van Laer L(1), Loeys B(14), Wuyts W(15).

Author information:
(1)Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, 2650, Belgium.
(2)Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University 
of London, Charterhouse Square, London, EC1M 6BQ, UK.
(3)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington, SA 98109, USA.
(4)Centre of Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for 
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, 
the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, VU Medical Center 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 1081 HZ, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
2333 ZA, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen and 
University of Groningen, Groningen, 9700 RB, the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, Child and Family Research Institute and 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6H 3N1, Canada.
(9)Department of Human Genetics and Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 6500 HB, the 
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Basel, Basel, 4031, 
Switzerland.
(11)Department of Clinical Genetics, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Leeds, LS7 4SA, 
UK.
(12)Department of Dermatology, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Leeds, LS7 4SA, UK.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg and 
University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg, 39120, Germany.
(14)Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, 2650, Belgium; 
Department of Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, 
the Netherlands. Electronic address: bart.loeys@uantwerpen.be.
(15)Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, 2650, Belgium. 
Electronic address: wim.wuyts@uantwerpen.be.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2015 Dec;88(6):532. doi: 10.1111/cge.12681.

Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare developmental disorder characterized by 
the presence of aplasia cutis congenita (ACC) of the scalp vertex and terminal 
limb-reduction defects. Cardiovascular anomalies are also frequently observed. 
Mutations in five genes have been identified as a cause for AOS prior to this 
report. Mutations in EOGT and DOCK6 cause autosomal-recessive AOS, whereas 
mutations in ARHGAP31, RBPJ, and NOTCH1 lead to autosomal-dominant AOS. Because 
RBPJ, NOTCH1, and EOGT are involved in NOTCH signaling, we hypothesized that 
mutations in other genes involved in this pathway might also be implicated in 
AOS pathogenesis. Using a candidate-gene-based approach, we prioritized DLL4, a 
critical NOTCH ligand, due to its essential role in vascular development in the 
context of cardiovascular features in AOS-affected individuals. Targeted 
resequencing of the DLL4 gene with a custom enrichment panel in 89 independent 
families resulted in the identification of seven mutations. A defect in DLL4 was 
also detected in two families via whole-exome or genome sequencing. In total, 
nine heterozygous mutations in DLL4 were identified, including two nonsense and 
seven missense variants, the latter encompassing four mutations that replace or 
create cysteine residues, which are most likely critical for maintaining 
structural integrity of the protein. Affected individuals with DLL4 mutations 
present with variable clinical expression with no emerging genotype-phenotype 
correlations. Our findings demonstrate that DLL4 mutations are an additional 
cause of autosomal-dominant AOS or isolated ACC and provide further evidence for 
a key role of NOTCH signaling in the etiology of this disorder.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.07.015
PMCID: PMC4564989
PMID: 26299364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]