---
reference_id: "PMID:23956915"
title: A patient with systemic lupus erythematosus complicated by neurological symptoms of toluene poisoning.
authors:
- Isoda K
- Takeuchi T
- Makino S
- Hanafusa T
journal: Case Rep Rheumatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1155/2013/390960
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A patient with systemic lupus erythematosus complicated by neurological symptoms of toluene poisoning.
**Authors:** Isoda K, Takeuchi T, Makino S, Hanafusa T
**Journal:** Case Rep Rheumatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2013/390960](https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/390960)

## Content

1. Case Rep Rheumatol. 2013;2013:390960. doi: 10.1155/2013/390960. Epub 2013 Jul
15.

A patient with systemic lupus erythematosus complicated by neurological symptoms
of toluene poisoning.

Isoda K(1), Takeuchi T, Makino S, Hanafusa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (I), Osaka Medical College, 2-7
Daigaku-machi, Takatsuki, Osaka 569-8686, Japan.

We report a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus complicated by toluene
poisoning. She had erythema, alopecia, arthralgia, and various neurological
symptoms. Laboratory findings showed leukocytopenia, low levels of complements,
and anti-dsDNA antibody. However, normal interleukin-6 level and IgG index of
cerebrospinal fluid and brain magnetic resonance imaging and single photon
emission computed tomography findings suggested that her neurological symptoms
were caused by metabolic disorder but not neuropsychiatric systemic lupus
erythematosus. Erythema, alopecia, and arthralgia improved rapidly after
administration of prednisolone and tacrolimus, whereas neurological symptoms
improved only gradually. Because of a history of exposure to toluene, her
neurological symptoms were considered to be due to toluene poisoning. The
differentiation of toluene poisoning from neuropsychiatric systemic lupus
erythematosus based on symptoms is difficult because both induce various
neuropsychiatric disorders. Laboratory findings of cerebrospinal fluid,
radiological findings, and medical interview were useful for differentiation of
toluene poisoning from neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/390960
PMCID: PMC3728548
PMID: 23956915
