---
reference_id: "PMID:29223388"
title: Transplantation in the Treatment of Primary Cutaneous Aggressive Epidermotropic Cytotoxic CD8-Positive T-Cell Lymphoma.
authors:
- Cyrenne BM
- Gibson JF
- Subtil A
- Girardi M
- Isufi I
- Seropian S
- Foss F
journal: Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.clml.2017.11.004
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/methods
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Cutaneous/pathology, therapy"
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Peripheral/pathology, therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Transplantation Conditioning/methods
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transplantation in the Treatment of Primary Cutaneous Aggressive Epidermotropic Cytotoxic CD8-Positive T-Cell Lymphoma.
**Authors:** Cyrenne BM, Gibson JF, Subtil A, Girardi M, Isufi I, Seropian S, Foss F
**Journal:** Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clml.2017.11.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clml.2017.11.004)

## Content

1. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2018 Jan;18(1):e85-e93. doi: 
10.1016/j.clml.2017.11.004. Epub 2017 Dec 6.

Transplantation in the Treatment of Primary Cutaneous Aggressive Epidermotropic 
Cytotoxic CD8-Positive T-Cell Lymphoma.

Cyrenne BM(1), Gibson JF(2), Subtil A(3), Girardi M(2), Isufi I(4), Seropian 
S(4), Foss F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT. 
Electronic address: benoit.cyrenne@yale.edu.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, CT.
(4)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT.

BACKGROUND: Primary cutaneous aggressive epidermotropic cytotoxic CD8 positive 
T-cell lymphoma (CD8+ PCAETL) is a rare subtype of peripheral T-cell lymphoma 
with poor outcomes and without a standardized treatment strategy. Allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has been suggested as a potential 
curative therapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a retrospective case series. We identified 8 
patients with the diagnosis of CD8+ PCAETL, 4 of whom also underwent allogeneic 
HSCT.
RESULTS: Eight patients were treated at our center with combination chemotherapy 
and several novel agents, including histone deacetylase inhibitors, brentuximab, 
and pralatrexate. Patients underwent a median of 8.5 treatments before HSCT. Six 
of the 8 patients examined, including all 4 who received an HSCT, were alive at 
their last follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Allogeneic HSCT is a promising treatment modality for CD8+ PCAETL. 
Because of the aggressive nature of this disease and lack of sustained remission 
with currently available therapies, HSCT should be considered early in the 
course of treatment. Two novel agents, brentuximab and pralatrexate, showed 
significant activity against CD8+ PCAETL, and may be incorporated earlier in the 
treatment course.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clml.2017.11.004
PMID: 29223388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]