---
reference_id: "PMID:15162166"
title: Neuregulin 1-erbB signaling and the molecular/cellular basis of schizophrenia.
authors:
- Corfas G
- Roy K
- Buxbaum JD
journal: Nat Neurosci
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/nn1258
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuregulin 1-erbB signaling and the molecular/cellular basis of schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Corfas G, Roy K, Buxbaum JD
**Journal:** Nat Neurosci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nn1258](https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1258)

## Content

1. Nat Neurosci. 2004 Jun;7(6):575-80. doi: 10.1038/nn1258.

Neuregulin 1-erbB signaling and the molecular/cellular basis of schizophrenia.

Corfas G(1), Roy K, Buxbaum JD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Children's Hospital, and Department of Neurology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. 
gabriel.corfas@tch.harvard.edu

Schizophrenia is a devastating psychiatric disease that affects 0.5-1% of the 
world's adult population. The hypothesis that this disease is a developmental 
disorder of the nervous system with late onset of its characteristic symptoms 
has been gaining acceptance in past years. However, the anatomical, cellular and 
molecular bases of schizophrenia remain unclear. Numerous studies point to 
alterations in different aspects of brain development as possible causes of 
schizophrenia, including defects in neuronal migration, neurotransmitter 
receptor expression and myelination. Recently, the gene that encodes 
neuregulin-1 (NRG1) has been identified as a potential susceptibility gene for 
schizophrenia, and defects in the expression of erbB3, one of the NRG1 
receptors, have been shown to occur in the prefrontal cortex of schizophrenic 
patients, suggesting that NRG1-erbB signaling is involved in the pathogenesis of 
schizophrenia. These findings open new approaches to defining the molecular and 
cellular basis of schizophrenia in more mechanistic terms.

DOI: 10.1038/nn1258
PMID: 15162166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]