---
reference_id: "PMID:35611426"
title: "Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 (SMARD1): a rare cause of hypotonia, diaphragmatic weakness, and respiratory failure in infants."
authors:
- Pekuz S
- Güzin Y
- Sarıtaş S
- Kırbıyık Ö
- Ünalp A
- Yılmaz Ü
journal: Turk J Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2020.2012
keywords:
- Child
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Muscle Hypotonia/genetics
- Muscle Weakness/genetics
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal"
- Premature Birth
- "Respiratory Distress Syndrome, Newborn/diagnosis, genetics"
- Respiratory Insufficiency/genetics
- Seizures
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Vocal Cord Paralysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 (SMARD1): a rare cause of hypotonia, diaphragmatic weakness, and respiratory failure in infants.
**Authors:** Pekuz S, Güzin Y, Sarıtaş S, Kırbıyık Ö, Ünalp A, Yılmaz Ü
**Journal:** Turk J Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.24953/turkjped.2020.2012](https://doi.org/10.24953/turkjped.2020.2012)

## Content

1. Turk J Pediatr. 2022;64(2):364-374. doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2020.2012.

Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 (SMARD1): a rare cause 
of hypotonia, diaphragmatic weakness, and respiratory failure in infants.

Pekuz S(1), Güzin Y(1), Sarıtaş S(1), Kırbıyık Ö(2), Ünalp A(1), Yılmaz Ü(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, University of Health Sciences, Dr. Behçet 
Uz Children's Education and Research Hospital, İzmir.
(2)Genetic Diagnostic Center, University of Health Sciences, Tepecik Training 
and Research Hospital, İzmir, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 (SMARD1) is 
a very rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the 
immunoglobulin μ-binding protein-2 (IGHMBP2) gene on chromosome 11q13.2-q13.4. 
The initial symptoms of patients with SMARD1 are respiratory distress and distal 
muscle weakness manifesting in the infantile period due to progressive 
degeneration of α-motor neurons. Preterm birth, intrauterine growth retardation, 
feet deformities, sensory and autonomic neuropathy are other main features.
CASE: Herein, we report the characteristics of a 6-year-old Turkish girl with a 
diagnosis of SMARD1 confirmed by homozygous c.1738G > A (p.Val580Ile) missense 
IGHMBP2 variant. She had unusual features such as vocal cord paralysis, 
nystagmus, and lack of congenital foot deformities besides typical findings 
including hypotonia, respiratory distress, and diaphragmatic weakness in the 
early infantile period. Epileptic seizures, cognitive impairment, and brain 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) abnormalities were other, unexpected, features 
which developed during the course of the disorder possibly due to several 
hypoxic episodes.
CONCLUSIONS: SMARD1 should be kept in mind in hypotonic infants with 
diaphragmatic weakness and respiratory failure during the early infantile 
period, even in the presence of unexpected findings including vocal cord 
paralysis, nystagmus, epileptic seizures, and brain MRI abnormalities.

DOI: 10.24953/turkjped.2020.2012
PMID: 35611426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]