---
reference_id: "PMID:25008820"
title: Serological diagnosis of dengue in laboratory practice in Kolkata.
authors:
- Bhattacharya N
- Mukherjee H
- Naskar R
- Talukdar S
- Das G
- Pramanik N
- Hati AK
journal: Indian J Med Microbiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.4103/0255-0857.136563
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serological diagnosis of dengue in laboratory practice in Kolkata.
**Authors:** Bhattacharya N, Mukherjee H, Naskar R, Talukdar S, Das G, Pramanik N, Hati AK
**Journal:** Indian J Med Microbiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0255-0857.136563](https://doi.org/10.4103/0255-0857.136563)

## Content

1. Indian J Med Microbiol. 2014 Jul-Sep;32(3):277-80. doi: 
10.4103/0255-0857.136563.

Serological diagnosis of dengue in laboratory practice in Kolkata.

Bhattacharya N, Mukherjee H, Naskar R, Talukdar S, Das G, Pramanik N, Hati 
AK(1).

Author information:
(1)Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, 
Kolkata, West Bengal, India.

PURPOSE: To find out the most suitable serological investigative procedures to 
diagnose dengue cases effectively in the laboratory practice identifying primary 
and secondary cases as well as period of suffering.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Dengue suspected cases sent to the laboratory in 2012 in 
central Kolkata by the local physicians were categorised into seven panels 
according to the investigations asked for such as (1) only dengue-specific NS1 
antigen (2) only IgM antibodies, (3) NS1+IgM+IgG antibodies, (4) only IgM and 
IgG, (5) NS1+IgM, (6) NS1+IgG and (7) only IgG.
RESULTS: Out of 1892 suspected cases, dengue was diagnosed in 725 (38.3%). 
Through panels I, II, III, IV, V, VI and VII, it was possible to diagnose dengue 
in (I) 35.98% (435/1209), (II) 37.5% (24/60), (III) 49% (173/354), (IV) 30.8% 
(68/221), (V) 60.5% (23/38), (VI) 40% (2/5) and (VII) 0 of cases respectively. 
Detail information such as confirmed diagnosis, duration of the disease (whether 
early or prolonged) and classification of primary and secondary dengue in such 
early or prolonged stages would only be possible in panel III, which information 
would be helpful for effective monitoring and treatment of dengue patients. In 
all other panels, merely fragmentary information would be obtained.
CONCLUSIONS: Serodiagnostic tests dengue-specific NS1 antigen and IgM and IgG 
antibodies when conducted simultaneously would be able to diagnose confirmed 
dengue cases categorising primary and secondary dengue along with the duration 
of the disease, whether early or prolonged.

DOI: 10.4103/0255-0857.136563
PMID: 25008820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]