---
reference_id: "PMID:10645517"
title: Staging of twin-twin transfusion syndrome.
authors:
- Quintero RA
- Morales WJ
- Allen MH
- Bornick PW
- Johnson PK
- Kruger M
journal: J Perinatol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1038/sj.jp.7200292
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Staging of twin-twin transfusion syndrome.
**Authors:** Quintero RA, Morales WJ, Allen MH, Bornick PW, Johnson PK, Kruger M
**Journal:** J Perinatol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.jp.7200292](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jp.7200292)

## Content

1. J Perinatol. 1999 Dec;19(8 Pt 1):550-5. doi: 10.1038/sj.jp.7200292.

Staging of twin-twin transfusion syndrome.

Quintero RA(1), Morales WJ, Allen MH, Bornick PW, Johnson PK, Kruger M.

Author information:
(1)Florida Institute for Fetal Diagnosis and Therapy, Tampa, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the prognostic value of 
sonographic and clinical parameters to develop a staging classification of 
twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS).
STUDY DESIGN: Severe TTTS was defined as the presence of polyhydramnios (maximum 
vertical pocket of > or = 8 cm) and oligohydramnios (maximum vertical pocket of 
< or = 2 cm). Nonvisualization of the bladder in the donor twin (-BDT) and 
absence of presence of hydrops was also noted. The middle cerebral artery, 
umbilical artery, ductus venosus, and umbilical vein in both fetuses were 
assessed with pulsed Doppler. Critically abnormal Doppler studies (CADs) were 
defined as absent/reverse end-diastolic velocity in the umbilical artery, 
reverse flow in the ductus venosus, or pulsatile flow in the umbilical vein. 
TTTS was staged as follows: stage I, BDT still visible; stage II, BDT no longer 
visible, no CADs; stage III, CADs; stage IV, hydrops; stage V, demise of one or 
both twins. Laser photocoagulation of communicating vessels (LPCV) or umbilical 
cord ligation was performed depending on the severity of the condition. The 
study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of St. Joseph's Hospital in 
Tampa and by the Fetal Therapy Board at Hutzel Hospital, Detroit, and all 
patients gave informed consent.
RESULTS: A total of 80 of 108 referred patients met criteria for surgery, but 
only 65 were treated surgically: 48 with LPCV and 17 with umbilical cord 
ligation. Complete Doppler data were obtainable in 41 of 48 LPCV patients. 
Survival rates by stage for one or two fetuses were statistically different 
(chi-squared analysis = 12.9, df = 6, p = 0.044). Neither percent size 
discordance nor gestational age at diagnosis were predictive of outcome.
CONCLUSION: Staging of TTTS using the proposed criteria has prognostic 
significance. This staging system may allow comparison of outcome data of TTTS 
with different treatment modalities.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.jp.7200292
PMID: 10645517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]