---
reference_id: "PMID:11479539"
title: Identification of the gene altered in Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy on chromosome 11q13.
authors:
- Magré J
- Delépine M
- Khallouf E
- Gedde-Dahl T Jr
- Van Maldergem L
- Sobel E
- Papp J
- Meier M
- Mégarbané A
- Bachy A
- Verloes A
- "d'Abronzo FH"
- Seemanova E
- Assan R
- Baudic N
- Bourut C
- Czernichow P
- Huet F
- Grigorescu F
- de Kerdanet M
- Lacombe D
- Labrune P
- Lanza M
- Loret H
- Matsuda F
- Navarro J
- Nivelon-Chevalier A
- Polak M
- Robert JJ
- Tric P
- Tubiana-Rufi N
- Vigouroux C
- Weissenbach J
- Savasta S
- Maassen JA
- Trygstad O
- Bogalho P
- Freitas P
- Medina JL
- Bonnicci F
- Joffe BI
- Loyson G
- Panz VR
- Raal FJ
- "O'Rahilly S"
- Stephenson T
- Kahn CR
- Lathrop M
- Capeau J
- BSCL Working Group
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/ng585
keywords:
- Acanthosis Nigricans/complications
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 11/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9/genetics"
- Cluster Analysis
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Diabetes Complications
- Female
- GTP-Binding Protein gamma Subunits
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Linkage
- Genetic Markers
- Genetic Testing
- Haplotypes
- Hepatomegaly/complications
- Heterotrimeric GTP-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Hyperandrogenism/complications
- Hypertriglyceridemia/complications
- Insulin Resistance/genetics
- Lebanon/epidemiology
- "Lipodystrophy/complications, congenital, epidemiology, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Norway/epidemiology
- Organ Specificity
- Pedigree
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of the gene altered in Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy on chromosome 11q13.
**Authors:** Magré J, Delépine M, Khallouf E, Gedde-Dahl T Jr, Van Maldergem L, Sobel E, Papp J, Meier M, Mégarbané A, Bachy A, Verloes A, d'Abronzo FH, Seemanova E, Assan R, Baudic N, Bourut C, Czernichow P, Huet F, Grigorescu F, de Kerdanet M, Lacombe D, Labrune P, Lanza M, Loret H, Matsuda F, Navarro J, Nivelon-Chevalier A, Polak M, Robert JJ, Tric P, Tubiana-Rufi N, Vigouroux C, Weissenbach J, Savasta S, Maassen JA, Trygstad O, Bogalho P, Freitas P, Medina JL, Bonnicci F, Joffe BI, Loyson G, Panz VR, Raal FJ, O'Rahilly S, Stephenson T, Kahn CR, Lathrop M, Capeau J, BSCL Working Group
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng585](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng585)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Aug;28(4):365-70. doi: 10.1038/ng585.

Identification of the gene altered in Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy 
on chromosome 11q13.

Magré J(1), Delépine M, Khallouf E, Gedde-Dahl T Jr, Van Maldergem L, Sobel E, 
Papp J, Meier M, Mégarbané A, Bachy A, Verloes A, d'Abronzo FH, Seemanova E, 
Assan R, Baudic N, Bourut C, Czernichow P, Huet F, Grigorescu F, de Kerdanet M, 
Lacombe D, Labrune P, Lanza M, Loret H, Matsuda F, Navarro J, Nivelon-Chevalier 
A, Polak M, Robert JJ, Tric P, Tubiana-Rufi N, Vigouroux C, Weissenbach J, 
Savasta S, Maassen JA, Trygstad O, Bogalho P, Freitas P, Medina JL, Bonnicci F, 
Joffe BI, Loyson G, Panz VR, Raal FJ, O'Rahilly S, Stephenson T, Kahn CR, 
Lathrop M, Capeau J; BSCL Working Group.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U.402, Faculté de Médecine Saint-Antoine, Université Pierre et Marie 
Curie, 27 rue Chaligny, 75012 Paris, France. magre@st-antoine.inserm.fr

Congenital generalized lipodystrophy, or Berardinelli-Seip syndrome (BSCL), is a 
rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by a near-absence of adipose 
tissue from birth or early infancy and severe insulin resistance. Other clinical 
and biological features include acanthosis nigricans, hyperandrogenism, muscular 
hypertrophy, hepatomegaly, altered glucose tolerance or diabetes mellitus, and 
hypertriglyceridemia. A locus (BSCL1) has been mapped to 9q34 with evidence of 
heterogeneity. Here, we report a genome screen of nine BSCL families from two 
geographical clusters (in Lebanon and Norway). We identified a new disease 
locus, designated BSCL2, within the 2.5-Mb interval flanked by markers D11S4076 
and D11S480 on chromosome 11q13. Analysis of 20 additional families of various 
ethnic origins led to the identification of 11 families in which the disease 
cosegregates with the 11q13 locus; the remaining families provide confirmation 
of linkage to 9q34. Sequence analysis of genes located in the 11q13 interval 
disclosed mutations in a gene homologous to the murine guanine 
nucleotide-binding protein (G protein), gamma3-linked gene (Gng3lg) in all 
BSCL2-linked families. BSCL2 is most highly expressed in brain and testis and 
encodes a protein (which we have called seipin) of unknown function. Most of the 
variants are null mutations and probably result in a severe disruption of the 
protein. These findings are of general importance for understanding the 
molecular mechanisms underlying regulation of body fat distribution and insulin 
resistance.

DOI: 10.1038/ng585
PMID: 11479539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]