---
reference_id: "PMID:20301292"
title: Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Terry SF
- Uitto J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Terry SF, Uitto J

## Content

1. Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum.

Terry SF(1), Uitto J(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2001 Jun 5 [updated 2020 Jun 4].

Author information:
(1)PXE International, Washington, DC
(2)Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a systemic disorder 
that affects the elastic tissue of the skin, the eye, and vascular system. 
Individuals most commonly present with angioid streaks of the retina found on 
routine eye examination or associated with retinal hemorrhage and/or 
characteristic papules in the skin. The most frequent cause of morbidity and 
disability in PXE is reduced vision due to complications of subretinal 
neovascularizations and macular atrophy. Other manifestations include premature 
gastrointestinal angina and/or bleeding, intermittent claudication of arm and 
leg muscles, stroke, renovascular hypertension, and cardiovascular complications 
(angina/myocardial infarction). Most affected individuals live a normal life 
span.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of PXE is established in a proband 
with characteristic skin lesions and at least one characteristic retinal 
finding. When eye findings are characteristic, but skin findings are equivocal, 
identification of calcified dystrophic elastic fibers using a von Kossa or 
similar stain on a biopsy of potentially lesional skin establishes the 
diagnosis. The molecular diagnosis of PXE is established in a proband by the 
presence of biallelic ABCC6 pathogenic variants identified on molecular genetic 
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management requires coordinated input 
from multidisciplinary specialists; care by a retina specialist including 
intraocular injection of anti-angiogenic drugs for the treatment of macular 
neovascularization when indicated; standard-of-care interventions for 
gastrointestinal bleeding, claudication, stroke, renovascular hypertension, and 
cardiovascular complications (angina and/or myocardial infarction). 
Surveillance: Routine examination by a retina specialist; follow up as 
recommended by treating physicians for vascular manifestations. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Contact sports or racquet sports without 
appropriate eye and head protection; aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
medications because of increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding; smoking 
because of its vasoconstrictive properties. Pregnancy management: Vaginal 
delivery appears safe for the retina of women with PXE if no active choroidal 
neovascularization (CNV) is present. Women with PXE should have a retinal 
examination to check for active CNV, as angioid streaks alone are not an 
indication for medical interventions during delivery.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PXE is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At 
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic heterozygote (carrier), and a 
25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. If both ABCC6 pathogenic 
variants have been identified in the family, carrier testing for at-risk family 
members, prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk, and preimplantation 
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301292