---
reference_id: "PMID:19381865"
title: "Early-onset hyperargininaemia: a severe disorder?"
authors:
- Schiff M
- Benoist JF
- Cardoso ML
- Elmaleh-Bergès M
- Forey P
- Santiago J
- Ogier de Baulny H
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-009-1137-5
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Delayed Diagnosis
- "Diet, Protein-Restricted"
- Early Diagnosis
- Female
- Humans
- "Hyperargininemia/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Psychomotor Disorders/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-onset hyperargininaemia: a severe disorder?
**Authors:** Schiff M, Benoist JF, Cardoso ML, Elmaleh-Bergès M, Forey P, Santiago J, Ogier de Baulny H
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-009-1137-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-009-1137-5)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2009 Dec;32 Suppl 1:S175-8. doi:
10.1007/s10545-009-1137-5.  Epub 2009 Apr 20.

Early-onset hyperargininaemia: a severe disorder?

Schiff M(1), Benoist JF, Cardoso ML, Elmaleh-Bergès M, Forey P, Santiago J,
Ogier de Baulny H.

Author information:
(1)Centre de référence Maladies Métaboliques, Hôpital Robert Debré, APHP, Paris,
France. manuel.schiff@rdb.aphp.fr

Hyperargininaemia is a rare inborn error of metabolism due to a defect in the
final step of the urea cycle. Infantile onset is the most common presentation
with recurrent vomiting and psychomotor delay associated with spastic
paraparesis; chronic hyperammonaemia is often overlooked. Neonatal and
early-onset presentations are very uncommon and their clinical course not
well-described. We report on a 3-week-old hyperargininaemic girl who presented
with neurological deterioration associated with liver failure and 47-day ammonia
intoxication before diagnosis could be made and treatment started. Despite
appropriate but delayed treatment, our patient exhibited severe psychomotor
delay at age 1 year.
CONCLUSION: Early identification and management of this rare but potentially
treatable affection is crucial as delayed management may result in poor
neurological outcome.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-009-1137-5
PMID: 19381865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
