---
reference_id: "PMID:32352694"
title: WT1 Disorder.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Lipska-Ziętkiewicz BS
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WT1 Disorder.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Lipska-Ziętkiewicz BS

## Content

1. WT1 Disorder.

Lipska-Ziętkiewicz BS(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2020 Apr 30 [updated 2025 May 15].

Author information:
(1)Centre for Rare Diseases, Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Biology and 
Genetics, Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: WT1 disorder is characterized by congenital/infantile 
or childhood onset of steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS), a progressive 
glomerulopathy that does not respond to standard steroid therapy. Additional 
common findings can include disorders of testicular development (with or without 
abnormalities of the external genitalia and/or müllerian structures) and Wilms 
tumor. Less common findings are congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary 
tract (CAKUT), gonadoblastoma, and 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis. In adulthood, most 
individuals are affected by early gonadal insufficiency of variable severity 
with potential impact on puberty and fertility. While various combinations of 
renal and other findings associated with a WT1 pathogenic variant were 
designated as certain syndromes in the past (the most common being Denys-Drash 
and Frasier syndromes), those designations are now recognized to be part of a 
phenotypic continuum and are no longer clinically helpful.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of WT1 disorder is established in a proband 
with suggestive clinical findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in WT1 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: SRNS: avoid immunosuppressants; 
consider renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibition. Disorders of 
testicular development and 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis: management is often by a 
multidisciplinary team (clinical geneticist, endocrinologist, urologist, and 
psychologist). Treat Wilms tumor with standard oncology protocols and, when 
applicable, nephron-sparing surgery. Treat CAKUT per standard care. Prevent 
whenever possible gonadoblastoma by prophylactic gonadectomy in those with a 
disorder of testicular development. Diaphragmatic hernia repair prior to the 
start of peritoneal dialysis. Surveillance: Monitor for first appearance of the 
following: proteinuria every six months until age ten years, yearly thereafter; 
Wilms tumor every three months until age seven years; early gonadal 
insufficiency yearly after puberty. For ongoing issues with disorders of 
testicular development and 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis, monitor per treating 
multidisciplinary team, and for CAKUT, monitor per treating nephrologist and/or 
urologist. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Avoid treating glomerulopathy with 
immunosuppressants, as they are not effective and potentially toxic. Evaluation 
of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of 
apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an individual 
with WT1 disorder in order to identify as early as possible those who would 
benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and surveillance for glomerulopathy 
and Wilms tumor.
GENETIC COUNSELING: WT1 disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. 
Most individuals diagnosed with WT1 disorder have the disorder as the result of 
an apparent de novo WT1 pathogenic variant; in rare instances, a parent of an 
individual with WT1 disorder is heterozygous for the pathogenic variant 
identified in the proband. If a parent of the proband is affected and/or is 
known to have the WT1 pathogenic variant identified in the proband, the risk to 
the sibs of inheriting the pathogenic variant is 50%. If the WT1 pathogenic 
variant identified in the proband cannot be detected in the leukocyte DNA of 
either parent, the recurrence risk to sibs is slightly greater than that of the 
general population because of the possibility of parental gonadal mosaicism. 
Once the WT1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family 
member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 32352694