---
reference_id: "PMID:11584045"
title: "An epidemiological study of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: life expectancy and cause of mortality."
authors:
- Shannon NL
- Maltby EL
- Rigby AS
- Quarrell OW
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.38.10.674
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/epidemiology, genetics, mortality"
- Adult
- Cause of Death
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Breakage/genetics
- Chromosome Deletion
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Karyotyping
- Life Expectancy
- Male
- Odds Ratio
- Phenotype
- "Respiratory Tract Infections/complications, genetics, mortality"
- "Seizures/complications, genetics, mortality"
- Survival Analysis
- Syndrome
- "Translocation, Genetic/genetics"
- United Kingdom
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An epidemiological study of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: life expectancy and cause of mortality.
**Authors:** Shannon NL, Maltby EL, Rigby AS, Quarrell OW
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.38.10.674](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.38.10.674)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2001 Oct;38(10):674-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.38.10.674.

An epidemiological study of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: life expectancy and cause
of mortality.

Shannon NL(1), Maltby EL, Rigby AS, Quarrell OW.

Author information:
(1)North Trent Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's Hospital, Western Bank,
Sheffield S10 2TH, UK. nora_shannon@postmaster.co.uk

OBJECTIVE: Early research into Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) described a high
mortality and no relationship between deletion size and phenotype. This may need
to be revised in the light of improved cytogenetic resolution and medical care.
We have collected epidemiological data to allow the calculation of birth
incidence and mortality figures. In addition, we have investigated the
possibility of a relationship between deletion size and mortality.
METHOD: Information relating to past and present cases diagnosed in the UK was
collected by multiple ascertainment.
RESULTS: A total of 159 cases were collected. The status (alive or dead) was
determined for 146, of whom 96 are alive, 37 had died, and 13 were detected on
prenatal diagnostic tests. A minimum birth incidence of 1 in 95 896 was
calculated. The crude infant mortality rate was 17% (23/132) and in the first
two years of life the mortality rate was 21% (28/132). Cases with large de novo
deletions (proximal to and including p15.2) were more likely to have died than
those with smaller deletions (odds ratio=5.7, 95% CI=1.7-19.9) after adjusting
for age. A comparison of survival curves for de novo deletions and
translocations did not show a statistically significant difference (p=0.11). The
median survival time for de novo deletions was 34+ years while for translocation
cases it was 18+ years.
CONCLUSIONS: The mortality rate is lower than previously reported. There is a
statistically significant relationship between deletion size and overall risk of
death in de novo deletion cases. The difference in survival curves between de
novo deletions and translocations is not statistically significant.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.38.10.674
PMCID: PMC1734744
PMID: 11584045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
