---
reference_id: "PMID:37239474"
title: Biallelic Variants in Seven Different Genes Associated with Clinically Suspected Bardet-Biedl Syndrome.
authors:
- Nawaz H
- Mujahid
- Khan SA
- Bibi F
- Waqas A
- Bari A
- Fardous
- Khan N
- Muhammad N
- Khan A
- Paracha SA
- Alam Q
- Kamal MA
- Rafeeq MM
- Muhammad N
- Haq FU
- Khan S
- Mahmood A
- Khan S
- Umair M
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14051113
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic Variants in Seven Different Genes Associated with Clinically Suspected Bardet-Biedl Syndrome.
**Authors:** Nawaz H, Mujahid, Khan SA, Bibi F, Waqas A, Bari A, Fardous, Khan N, Muhammad N, Khan A, Paracha SA, Alam Q, Kamal MA, Rafeeq MM, Muhammad N, Haq FU, Khan S, Mahmood A, Khan S, Umair M
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14051113](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14051113)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 May 19;14(5):1113. doi: 10.3390/genes14051113.

Biallelic Variants in Seven Different Genes Associated with Clinically Suspected 
Bardet-Biedl Syndrome.

Nawaz H(1), Mujahid(2), Khan SA(1), Bibi F(1), Waqas A(3), Bari A(1), 
Fardous(4), Khan N(1), Muhammad N(1), Khan A(5), Paracha SA(6), Alam Q(7), Kamal 
MA(8), Rafeeq MM(9), Muhammad N(1), Haq FU(10), Khan S(11)(12), Mahmood A(13), 
Khan S(1), Umair M(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Kohat University of 
Science & Technology (KUST), Kohat 26000, Pakistan.
(2)Center of Animal Nutrition, Directorate General of Livestock & Dairy 
Development, Peshawar 25000, Pakistan.
(3)Department Zoology, Division of Science and Technology, University of 
Education, Lahore 54782, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Medical Lab Technology (MLT), Kohat University of Science & 
Technology (KUST), Kohat 26000, Pakistan.
(5)Faculty of Science, Department of Biological Sciences (Zoology), University 
of Lakki Marwat, Lakki Marwat 28420, Pakistan.
(6)Department of Anatomy, KMU Institute of Medical Sciences (KIMS), Kohat 26000, 
Pakistan.
(7)Molecular Genomics and Precision Medicine, ExpressMed Laboratories, Block 
Zinj, Manama 359, Bahrain.
(8)Department of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, Prince Sattam Bin Abdulaziz 
University, Al-kharj 11942, Saudi Arabia.
(9)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Rabigh, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(10)Department of Radiological Sciences, College of Applied Medical Sciences, 
King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh 12271, Saudi 
Arabia.
(11)Hafeez Institute of Medical Sciences, Islamabad 44000, Pakistan.
(12)Department of Biological Sciences, International Islamic University 
Islamabad, H-10, Islamabad 44000, Pakistan.
(13)Center for Medical Genetics, Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, 
School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha 410078, China.
(14)Medical Genomics Research Department, King Abdullah International Medical 
Research Center (KAIMRC), King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health 
Sciences, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs (MNGH), Riyadh 12271, Saudi 
Arabia.
(15)Department of Life Sciences, School of Science, University of Management and 
Technology (UMT), Lahore 14611, Pakistan.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare clinically and genetically heterogeneous 
autosomal recessive multi-systemic disorder with 22 known genes. The primary 
clinical and diagnostic features include six different hallmarks, such as 
rod-cone dystrophy, learning difficulties, renal abnormalities, male 
hypogonadism, post-axial polydactyly, and obesity. Here, we report nine 
consanguineous families and a non-consanguineous family with several affected 
individuals presenting typical clinical features of BBS. In the present study, 
10 BBS Pakistani families were subjected to whole exome sequencing (WES), which 
revealed novel/recurrent gene variants, including a homozygous nonsense mutation 
(c.94C>T; p.Gln32Ter) in the IFT27 (NM_006860.5) gene in family A, a homozygous 
nonsense mutation (c.160A>T; p.Lys54Ter) in the BBIP1 (NM_001195306.1) gene in 
family B, a homozygous nonsense variant (c.720C>A; p.Cys240Ter) in the WDPCP 
(NM_015910.7) in family C, a homozygous nonsense variant (c.505A>T; p.Lys169Ter) 
in the LZTFL1 (NM_020347.4) in family D, pathogenic homozygous 1 bp deletion 
(c.775delA; p.Thr259Leufs*21) in the MKKS/BBS5 (NM_170784.3) gene in family E, a 
pathogenic homozygous missense variant (c.1339G>A; p.Ala447Thr) in BBS1 
(NM_024649.4) in families F and G, a pathogenic homozygous donor splice site 
variant (c.951+1G>A; p?) in BBS1 (NM_024649.4) in family H, a pathogenic 
bi-allelic nonsense variant in MKKS (NM_170784.3) (c.119C>G; p.Ser40*) in family 
I, and homozygous pathogenic frameshift variants (c.196delA; p.Arg66Glufs*12) in 
BBS5 (NM_152384.3) in family J. Our findings extend the mutation and phenotypic 
spectrum of four different types of ciliopathies causing BBS and also support 
the importance of these genes in the development of multi-systemic human genetic 
disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14051113
PMCID: PMC10217928
PMID: 37239474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest.