---
reference_id: "PMID:39894570"
title: A Cryptic CBFB Deletion-Inversion Expands the Mutational Spectrum of Variants Associated With Cleidocranial Dysplasia.
authors:
- Pagnamenta AT
- Hashim M
- Kennedy J
- Lawton B
- Offiah AC
- Taylor JC
- Smithson SF
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/cge.14709
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cleidocranial Dysplasia/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Female
- Core Binding Factor beta Subunit/genetics
- Male
- Sequence Deletion
- Pedigree
- Mutation
- Child
- Exons
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Core Binding Factor Alpha 1 Subunit/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Cryptic CBFB Deletion-Inversion Expands the Mutational Spectrum of Variants Associated With Cleidocranial Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Pagnamenta AT, Hashim M, Kennedy J, Lawton B, Offiah AC, Taylor JC, Smithson SF
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.14709](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.14709)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2025 Jul;108(1):86-91. doi: 10.1111/cge.14709. Epub 2025 Feb 2.

A Cryptic CBFB Deletion-Inversion Expands the Mutational Spectrum of Variants
Associated With Cleidocranial Dysplasia.

Pagnamenta AT(1), Hashim M(1), Kennedy J(2), Lawton B(1), Offiah AC(3), Taylor
JC(1), Smithson SF(2).

Author information:
(1)Oxford BRC, Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation
Trust, Bristol, UK.
(3)Division of Clinical Medicine, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.

CBFB encodes the core-binding factor β subunit, a small protein which
heterodimerises with RUNX1-3 and activates transcription of genes important in
bone development. Recently, five families with cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD)
were identified harbouring presumed loss of function variants in CBFB. Prompted
by a multidisciplinary team review of an affected mother and daughter from the
100 000 Genomes Project with genetically unsolved CCD, we inspected read
alignments and identified a deletion-inversion-deletion that removes the first
two exons of CBFB. This cryptic variant comprised interlinked deletions of
1310 bp and 1935 bp and had remained undetected by both array-CGH and the Canvas
algorithm. The rearrangement was likely mediated by a palindromic AluSx repeat
< 1 kb from the transcriptional start site. Due to high GC content and repeats,
reduced read depth is observed at one of the breakpoints. Although the clinical
presentation of CBFB-related CCD appears to be very similar to RUNX2-related
CCD, our patients were of normal stature. The mild developmental delay observed
in previously reported cases of CBFB-related CCD was not observed. In
conclusion, our data strengthens the evidence linking aberrations of the
core-binding factor complex to CCD and extends the mutational spectrum of
pathogenic variants.

© 2025 The Author(s). Clinical Genetics published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.14709
PMCID: PMC12136864
PMID: 39894570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
