---
reference_id: PMID:37258233
title: Role of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)-Mineral and Bone Disorder (MBD) in the Pathogenesis of Cardiovascular Disease in CKD.
authors:
- Yamada S
- Nakano T
journal: J Atheroscler Thromb
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5551/jat.RV22006
keywords:
- Humans
- Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder/complications
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/etiology, metabolism"
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications, metabolism"
- Parathyroid Hormone
- Phosphates
- Atherosclerosis/pathology
- Disease Progression
- Minerals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)-Mineral and Bone Disorder (MBD) in the Pathogenesis of Cardiovascular Disease in CKD.
**Authors:** Yamada S, Nakano T
**Journal:** J Atheroscler Thromb (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5551/jat.RV22006](https://doi.org/10.5551/jat.RV22006)

## Content

1. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2023 Aug 1;30(8):835-850. doi: 10.5551/jat.RV22006. Epub
 2023 May 30.

Role of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)-Mineral and Bone Disorder (MBD) in the 
Pathogenesis of Cardiovascular Disease in CKD.

Yamada S(1), Nakano T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kyushu University.
(2)Centers for Cohort Studies, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University.

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of death in patients with 
chronic kidney disease (CKD). Multiple factors account for the increased 
incidence of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in patients with CKD. 
Traditional risk factors for atherosclerosis and arteriosclerosis, including 
age, hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, and smoking, are also risk 
factors for CKD. Non-traditional risk factors specific for CKD are also involved 
in CVD pathogenesis in patients with CKD. Recently, CKD-mineral and bone 
disorder (CKD-MBD) has emerged as a key player in CVD pathogenesis in the 
context of CKD. CKD-MBD manifests as hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia in the 
later stages of CKD; however, it initially develops much earlier in disease 
course. The initial step in CKD-MBD involves decreased phosphate excretion in 
the urine, followed by increased circulating concentrations of fibroblast growth 
factor 23 (FGF23) and parathyroid hormone (PTH), which increase urinary 
phosphate excretion. Simultaneously, the serum calcitriol concentration 
decreases as a result of FGF23 elevation. Importantly, FGF23 and PTH cause left 
ventricular hypertrophy, arrhythmia, and cardiovascular calcification. More 
recently, calciprotein particles, which are nanoparticles composed of calcium, 
phosphate, and fetuin-A, among other components, have been reported to cause 
inflammation, cardiovascular calcification, and other clinically relevant 
outcomes. CKD-MBD has become one of the critical therapeutic targets for the 
prevention of cardiovascular events and is another link between cardiology and 
nephrology. In this review, we describe the role of CKD-MBD in the pathogenesis 
of cardiovascular disorders and present the current treatment strategies for 
CKD-MBD.

DOI: 10.5551/jat.RV22006
PMCID: PMC10406631
PMID: 37258233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SY and TN received lecture fees from the 
following pharmaceutical companies: Kyowa Kirin Co. Ltd., Kissei Pharmaceutical 
Co. Ltd., and Sanwa Kagaku Kenkyusho Co. Ltd.