---
reference_id: "PMID:19884331"
title: Burkholderia mallei cluster 1 type VI secretion mutants exhibit growth and actin polymerization defects in RAW 264.7 murine macrophages.
authors:
- Burtnick MN
- DeShazer D
- Nair V
- Gherardini FC
- Brett PJ
journal: Infect Immun
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1128/IAI.00985-09
keywords:
- Actins/metabolism
- Animals
- "Bacterial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Burkholderia mallei/cytology, genetics, growth & development"
- Cell Line
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Bacterial/physiology"
- Lysosomal Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Macrophages/microbiology
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Vacuoles/metabolism, microbiology"
- Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Burkholderia mallei cluster 1 type VI secretion mutants exhibit growth and actin polymerization defects in RAW 264.7 murine macrophages.
**Authors:** Burtnick MN, DeShazer D, Nair V, Gherardini FC, Brett PJ
**Journal:** Infect Immun (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1128/IAI.00985-09](https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.00985-09)

## Content

1. Infect Immun. 2010 Jan;78(1):88-99. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00985-09. Epub 2009 Nov
2.

Burkholderia mallei cluster 1 type VI secretion mutants exhibit growth and actin
polymerization defects in RAW 264.7 murine macrophages.

Burtnick MN(1), DeShazer D, Nair V, Gherardini FC, Brett PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of South Alabama,
Mobile, AL 36688, USA.

Burkholderia mallei is a facultative intracellular pathogen that causes severe
disease in animals and humans. Recent studies have shown that the cluster 1 type
VI secretion system (T6SS-1) expressed by this organism is essential for
survival in a hamster model of glanders. To better understand the role of T6SS-1
in the pathogenesis of disease, studies were initiated to examine the
interactions of B. mallei tssE mutants with RAW 264.7 murine macrophages.
Results obtained by utilizing modified gentamicin protection assays indicated
that although the tssE mutants were able to survive within RAW 264.7 cells,
significant growth defects were observed in comparison to controls. In addition,
analysis of infected monolayers by differential interference contrast and
fluorescence microscopy demonstrated that the tssE mutants lacked the ability to
induce multinucleated giant cell formation. Via the use of fluorescence
microscopy, tssE mutants were shown to undergo escape from lysosome-associated
membrane protein 1-positive vacuoles. Curiously, however, following entry into
the cytosol, the mutants exhibited actin polymerization defects resulting in
inefficient intra- and intercellular spread characteristics. Importantly, all
mutant phenotypes observed in this study could be restored by complementation.
Based upon these findings, it appears that T6SS-1 plays a critical role in
growth and actin-based motility following uptake of B. mallei by RAW 264.7
cells.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00985-09
PMCID: PMC2798217
PMID: 19884331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
