---
reference_id: "PMID:33812987"
title: "Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2: A review."
authors:
- Mathiesen JS
- Effraimidis G
- Rossing M
- Rasmussen ÅK
- Hoejberg L
- Bastholt L
- Godballe C
- Oturai P
- Feldt-Rasmussen U
journal: Semin Cancer Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2021.03.035
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Neuroendocrine/genetics, pathology"
- "Digestive System Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Ganglioneuroma/genetics, pathology"
- Genetic Counseling
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genetic Testing
- Genotype
- Germ-Line Mutation/genetics
- Humans
- "Hyperparathyroidism/genetics, pathology"
- "Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2a/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2b/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Risk Factors
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Thyroidectomy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2: A review.
**Authors:** Mathiesen JS, Effraimidis G, Rossing M, Rasmussen ÅK, Hoejberg L, Bastholt L, Godballe C, Oturai P, Feldt-Rasmussen U
**Journal:** Semin Cancer Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semcancer.2021.03.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcancer.2021.03.035)

## Content

1. Semin Cancer Biol. 2022 Feb;79:163-179. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2021.03.035.
Epub 2021 Apr 1.

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2: A review.

Mathiesen JS(1), Effraimidis G(2), Rossing M(3), Rasmussen ÅK(2), Hoejberg L(4),
Bastholt L(4), Godballe C(5), Oturai P(6), Feldt-Rasmussen U(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of ORL Head & Neck Surgery and Audiology, Odense University
Hospital, Odense, Denmark; Department of Clinical Research, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. Electronic address: jes_mathiesen@yahoo.dk.
(2)Department of Medical Endocrinology and Metabolism, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Center for Genomic Medicine, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Oncology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(5)Department of ORL Head & Neck Surgery and Audiology, Odense University
Hospital, Odense, Denmark; Department of Clinical Research, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(6)Department of Clinical Physiology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Department of Medical Endocrinology and Metabolism, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark; Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Multiple endocrine neoplasias are rare hereditary syndromes some of them with
malignant potential. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) is an autosomal
dominant hereditary cancer syndrome due to germline variants in the REarranged
during Transfection (RET) proto-oncogene. There are two distinct clinical
entities: MEN 2A and MEN 2B. MEN 2A is associated with medullary thyroid
carcinoma (MTC), phaeochromocytoma, primary hyperparathyroidism, cutaneous
lichen amyloidosis and Hirschprung's disease and MEN 2B with MTC,
phaeochromocytoma, ganglioneuromatosis of the aerodigestive tract,
musculoskeletal and ophthalmologic abnormalities. Germline RET variants causing
MEN 2 result in gain-of-function; since the discovery of the genetic variants a
thorough search for genotype-phenotype associations began in order to understand
the high variability both between families and within family members. These
studies have successfully led to improved risk classification of prognosis in
relation to the genotype, thus improving the management of the patients by
thorough genetic counseling. The present review summarizes the recent
developments in the knowledge of these hereditary syndromes as well as the
impact on clinical management, including genetic counseling, of both individual
patients and families. It furthermore points to future directions of research
for better clarification of timing of treatments of the various manifestations
of the syndromes in order to improve survival and morbidity in these patients.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2021.03.035
PMID: 33812987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
