---
reference_id: "PMID:35975334"
title: "Screening of undernutrition in children with Hirschsprung disease using preoperative anthropometric parameters: A multicenter cross-sectional study."
authors:
- Wang D
- Zhu T
- Zhu L
- Ji C
- Zhou B
- Zhang G
- Yin Q
- Yang H
- Feng J
journal: JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jpen.2440
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening of undernutrition in children with Hirschsprung disease using preoperative anthropometric parameters: A multicenter cross-sectional study.
**Authors:** Wang D, Zhu T, Zhu L, Ji C, Zhou B, Zhang G, Yin Q, Yang H, Feng J
**Journal:** JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jpen.2440](https://doi.org/10.1002/jpen.2440)

## Content

1. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2023 Jan;47(1):151-158. doi: 10.1002/jpen.2440. 
Epub 2022 Sep 5.

Screening of undernutrition in children with Hirschsprung disease using 
preoperative anthropometric parameters: A multicenter cross-sectional study.

Wang D(1)(2), Zhu T(1)(2), Zhu L(3), Ji C(4), Zhou B(1)(2), Zhang G(3), Yin 
Q(4), Yang H(3), Feng J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Hubei Clinical Center of Hirschsprung's Disease and Allied Disorders, Wuhan, 
China.
(3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Hunan Children's Hospital, Changsha, China.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of malnutrition is unknown in patients with 
Hirschsprung disease. Undernutrition is associated with poor clinical outcomes. 
This study aims to describe the nutrition status among patients with 
Hirschsprung disease at admission.
METHODS: We retrospectively used data from children with Hirschsprung disease 
admitted to three pediatric surgery centers in China from January 2016 to 
December 2020. The weight-for-age z scores (WAZ), height-for-age z scores (HAZ), 
and body mass index-for-age z scores (BAZ) were calculated as the reference for 
nutrition risk according to the World Health Organization child growth 
standards. The nutrition status of enrolled children was described and nutrition 
risk in each clinical characteristic was compared. The association between 
nutrition status and clinical outcomes was analyzed using univariate and 
multivariate logistic regression.
RESULTS: A total of 624 patients were included in this study. The mean WAZ, HAZ, 
and BAZ of all patients was -0.64 ± 1.40, -0.45 ± 1.78, and -0.43 ± 1.50, 
respectively. Moderate to severe overall undernutrition was 16.3% (102/624). We 
found that WAZ and BAZ were significantly reduced with the length of aganglionic 
segments (P = 0.001). Children who had a definitive surgery at 3 years of age or 
older had significantly lower HAZ (P = 0.001). A multivariate regression model 
assessing postoperative Hirschsprung-associated enterocolitis showed that the 
WAZ was one of the independent risk factors (P = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Undernutrition is prevalent among children with Hirschsprung 
disease. Nutrition assessment to identify individuals at risk of undernutrition 
for further intervention is necessary.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Parenteral and Enteral 
Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1002/jpen.2440
PMCID: PMC10087477
PMID: 35975334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.