---
reference_id: "PMID:20649375"
title: Roflumilast for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Rabe KF
journal: Expert Rev Respir Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1586/ers.10.56
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Roflumilast for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Rabe KF
**Journal:** Expert Rev Respir Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1586/ers.10.56](https://doi.org/10.1586/ers.10.56)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2010 Oct;4(5):543-55. doi: 10.1586/ers.10.56.

Roflumilast for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Rabe KF(1).

Author information:
(1)Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Pulmonology, Albinusdreef 2, 
2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. k.f.rabe@lumc.nl

Roflumilast is a new phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor that has recently completed 
Phase III trials for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Preclinical studies have shown that roflumilast targets inflammatory 
processes in COPD, with beneficial effects on tobacco-induced lung inflammation, 
lung fibrosis and remodeling, mucociliary malfunction and oxidative stress. Two 
recent, 1-year Phase III trials in COPD have shown that roflumilast reduces 
exacerbations and improves lung function in patients with COPD who have symptoms 
of chronic bronchitis and a history of exacerbations. Two other 6-month Phase 
III trials have demonstrated the beneficial effects of roflumilast in patients 
already receiving treatment with the long-acting &#x03B2;-agonist salmeterol or 
the long-acting muscarinic antagonist tiotropium. This article reviews the 
pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and preclinical pharmacology of roflumilast, the 
clinical studies supporting its use in COPD and its side-effect profile.

DOI: 10.1586/ers.10.56
PMID: 20649375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]