---
reference_id: PMID:38816192
title: "Retinopathy of prematurity in Germany over 13 years: incidences, treatment preferences and effects of national guideline changes."
authors:
- Krohne TU
- Camp AT
- Pfeil JM
- Müller A
- Stahl A
- Lagrèze WA
- Li JQ
- EU-ROP Registry Study Group
journal: Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2024-327133
keywords:
- Humans
- Germany/epidemiology
- "Retinopathy of Prematurity/epidemiology, therapy"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- Incidence
- Gestational Age
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Infant, Premature"
- Laser Coagulation
- Registries
- Female
- Male
- Angiogenesis Inhibitors/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinopathy of prematurity in Germany over 13 years: incidences, treatment preferences and effects of national guideline changes.
**Authors:** Krohne TU, Camp AT, Pfeil JM, Müller A, Stahl A, Lagrèze WA, Li JQ, EU-ROP Registry Study Group
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/archdischild-2024-327133](https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2024-327133)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2024 Dec 20;110(1):37-42. doi: 
10.1136/archdischild-2024-327133.

Retinopathy of prematurity in Germany over 13 years: incidences, treatment 
preferences and effects of national guideline changes.

Krohne TU(1), Camp AT(2), Pfeil JM(3), Müller A(4), Stahl A(3), Lagrèze WA(2), 
Li JQ(5); EU-ROP Registry Study Group.

Collaborators: Schernthaner P, Colvin J, Egger S, Reitsamer H, Oscar AH, 
Mladenov OM, Marinov V, Kondova-Atanassova Y, Svetoslavova G, Jüri P, Petraudze 
M, Pauklin M, Walter P, Michalewicz E, Buck V, Breuß H, Aisenbrey S, Liegl M, 
Retzlaff AK, Saßmannshausen M, Bulirsch LM, Chankiewitz E, Klose A, Engelmann K, 
Goldammer I, Fleischer U, Ader A, Tiez M, Wienigk A, Kakkassery V, Krestanova G, 
Smetana P, Krohne TU, Li JQ, Guthoff R, Khamees A, Kaya S, Benga J, Jansen S, 
Lagrèze WA, Molnár FE, Gross N, Joachimsen L, Reich M, Bleul T, Camp AT, Küchlin 
S, Farassat N, Schwietering A, Winterhalder S, Bartmann IR, Indraswari F, 
Khattab M, Bemme S, Lauermann P, Dieks JK, Meyer Y, Bründer MC, Spitzer M, 
Hufendiek K, Grundel B, Grundel M, Stahl A, Tayar A, Heckmann M, Bahlmann H, 
Linnemann K, Gniesmer S, Grisanti S, Prasuhn M, Piria R, Schiemenz C, Belousova 
V, Rotering JC, Spital G, Faatz H, Glitz B, Gabel-Pfisterer A, Ilski P, Caliman 
J, Möglich M, Pohlenz T, Barth T, Altmann M, Blüml B, Jägle H, Helbig H, 
Wellmann S, Keller-Wackerbauer A, Michel H, Langhammer F, Süsskind D, Partsch M, 
Völker M, Frank A, Hagemann U, Wolf A, Parlak M, Kouri A, Mourgela A, 
Papadopoulou M, Nika A, Gkouvas T, Kassandra T, Androudi S, Grivea I, 
Papageorgiou E, Goudesido M, Kaffe K, Tsani Ζ, Mataftsi A, Moutzouri S, 
Lithoxopoulou M, Tsakalidis C, Ziakas N, Gotz-Więckowska A, Mazela J, Szpecht D, 
Pawlak M, Dezor-Garus J, Chmielarz-Czarnocińska A, Czapla E, Szczapa T, 
Kaczmarek J, Thumann G, Kann G, Malcles A, Bouthour W, Munoz FB, Kropp M, Atilla 
H, Karanfil FÇ, Kızıltunç PB, Sezer B, Okulu E, Akkoyun I, Ince DA, Ecevit A, 
Gokgoz G, İsik P, Yildizdas HY, Kara C, Kavurt AS, Yenice E, Ortatatlı B, Baş 
AY, Özdek Ş, Koç E, Hirfanoğlu İM, Özdemir HB, Küçükbalcı T, Uzun A, Koksal N, 
Ozkan H, Yıldız M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany tim.krohne@uk-koeln.de.
(2)Eye Center, Medical Center, Medical Faculty, University of Freiburg, Freiburg 
im Breisgau, Germany.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University Medicine Greifswald, University of 
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(4)Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care, University Children's 
Hospital Bonn, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a leading yet avoidable cause of 
childhood blindness. Screening for ROP is highly effective in preventing 
blindness secondary to ROP. We provide epidemiological data on ROP screening and 
treatment in Germany since 2010 and evaluate the effects of recently adopted as 
well as potential future screening guideline adaptations.
METHODS: Data sets of the German Quality Assurance Procedure in Neonatology, the 
ROP screening programme of two German university hospitals, and the German 
section of the EU-ROP Registry were analysed.
RESULTS: Over the 13-year period from 2010 to 2022, 141 550 infants received ROP 
screening in Germany. Mean annual incidences of ROP were 3.5% (±0.2%) in 
premature infants and 19.6% (±2.3%) in screened infants. Of screened infants, 
2.0% (±0.3%) received treatment for ROP. Treatment preferences shifted from 
laser coagulation (46.2% in 2015) to anti-vascular endothelial growth factor 
therapy (83.7% in 2022). A revision of national screening criteria in 2020 with 
a reduction of the gestational age limit from <32 to <31 weeks resulted in a 
decrease of the annual number of infants requiring screening by 25.8% (p<0.001). 
Infants with a birth weight ≥1500 g accounted for 35.2% of the screening 
population but only for 0.4% of ROP stage 3-5 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Collection of epidemiological data on ROP in national and 
international registries enables the continuous surveillance and adaptation of 
ROP screening and treatment criteria. In Germany, infants with a birth weight 
≥1500 g have a very low risk of developing treatment-requiring ROP, supporting 
an upper birth weight limit for ROP screening.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2025. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2024-327133
PMID: 38816192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors disclose the 
following potential conflicts of interest (F, financial research support; C, 
consultant, R, recipient of lecture fees or travel reimbursements): TUK: AbbVie 
(R), Alimera (R, C), Astellas (C), Bayer (F, R, C), Novartis (F, R, C), Roche 
(R, C), Stada (C); ATC: none; JMP: none; AM: none; AS: AbbVie (R), Alimera (C), 
Bayer (C, F, R), Novartis (C, F, R), Roche (F, R); WAL: none; JQL: none.