---
reference_id: "PMID:17161316"
title: Andes Hantavirus as possible cause of disease in travellers to South America.
authors:
- Castillo C
- Nicklas C
- Mardones J
- Ossa G
journal: Travel Med Infect Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2006.02.002
keywords:
- Animals
- Chile/epidemiology
- Disease Reservoirs/veterinary
- Orthohantavirus/pathogenicity
- "Hantavirus Infections/epidemiology, transmission"
- "Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome/epidemiology, transmission"
- "Hemorrhagic Fever with Renal Syndrome/epidemiology, transmission"
- Humans
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Rodent Diseases/epidemiology, transmission"
- Rodentia
- Travel
- Zoonoses
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Andes Hantavirus as possible cause of disease in travellers to South America.
**Authors:** Castillo C, Nicklas C, Mardones J, Ossa G
**Journal:** Travel Med Infect Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tmaid.2006.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tmaid.2006.02.002)

## Content

1. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2007 Jan;5(1):30-4. doi: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2006.02.002. 
Epub 2006 May 15.

Andes Hantavirus as possible cause of disease in travellers to South America.

Castillo C(1), Nicklas C, Mardones J, Ossa G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de la 
Frontera, Manuel Montt 112, Temuco, Chile. eureka@telsur.cl

BACKGROUND: Hantaviruses in Europe and Asia cause haemorrhagic fever with renal 
syndrome and epidemic nephritis (mortality rate <1-15%). New strains of 
Hantaviruses cause Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) from Canada to South 
America. Andes virus mortality rate is about 30% in Chile.
METHOD: Clinical charts of 54 patients were reviewed.
RESULTS: Inhalation of aerosolized urine, faeces or saliva of rodents is the 
principal cause of infection. The incubation period is between 8 and 43 days. 
The main prodromal symptoms are: myalgias, fever, fatigue, gastrointestinal 
disorders, dyspnoea, petechiae and coughing. After the 4th day pulmonary oedema, 
hypotension and renal failure appear. Haemorrhagic disorders may occur. The 
first laboratory tests presenting alterations are: haemoconcentration, 
leukocytosis, low platelet count <150 micro/L, and presence of immunoblasts. The 
treatment is supportive: mechanical ventilation, vasopressor drugs, 
haemofiltration or haemodialysis, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. There 
is no specific treatment for HPS. Preventive measures must be empathised.
CONCLUSION: The principal risk factors for tourists are: accommodation in 
abandoned or closed up facilities; failure to use indicated pathways when 
walking in forests; camping outside recommended areas; drinking water from 
natural sources and fishing in risk areas. The risk of infection for foreign 
tourists in Chile is low.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2006.02.002
PMID: 17161316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]