---
reference_id: "PMID:35682590"
title: Expanding the Molecular Spectrum of ANKRD11 Gene Defects in 33 Patients with a Clinical Presentation of KBG Syndrome.
authors:
- Bestetti I
- Crippa M
- Sironi A
- Tumiatti F
- Masciadri M
- Smeland MF
- Naik S
- Murch O
- Bonati MT
- Spano A
- Cattaneo E
- Mariani M
- Gotta F
- Crosti F
- Cavalli P
- Pantaleoni C
- Natacci F
- Bedeschi MF
- Milani D
- Maitz S
- Selicorni A
- Spaccini L
- Peron A
- Russo S
- Larizza L
- Low K
- Finelli P
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23115912
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental"
- Chromosome Deletion
- Facies
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Phenotype
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- "Tooth Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the Molecular Spectrum of ANKRD11 Gene Defects in 33 Patients with a Clinical Presentation of KBG Syndrome.
**Authors:** Bestetti I, Crippa M, Sironi A, Tumiatti F, Masciadri M, Smeland MF, Naik S, Murch O, Bonati MT, Spano A, Cattaneo E, Mariani M, Gotta F, Crosti F, Cavalli P, Pantaleoni C, Natacci F, Bedeschi MF, Milani D, Maitz S, Selicorni A, Spaccini L, Peron A, Russo S, Larizza L, Low K, Finelli P
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23115912](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23115912)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 May 25;23(11):5912. doi: 10.3390/ijms23115912.

Expanding the Molecular Spectrum of ANKRD11 Gene Defects in 33 Patients with a 
Clinical Presentation of KBG Syndrome.

Bestetti I(1)(2), Crippa M(1)(2), Sironi A(1)(2), Tumiatti F(1), Masciadri M(1), 
Smeland MF(3), Naik S(4), Murch O(5), Bonati MT(6), Spano A(7), Cattaneo E(8), 
Mariani M(9), Gotta F(10), Crosti F(11), Cavalli P(10), Pantaleoni C(12), 
Natacci F(13), Bedeschi MF(13), Milani D(14), Maitz S(7)(15), Selicorni A(9), 
Spaccini L(8), Peron A(16)(17)(18), Russo S(1), Larizza L(1), Low K(19), Finelli 
P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Istituto 
Auxologico Italiano, 20142 Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of 
Milan, 20142 Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of North Norway, 9019 
Tromsø, Norway.
(4)Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women's Hospital, Birmingham B15 2TG, UK.
(5)All Wales Medical Genomics Service, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff 
CF14 4XW, UK.
(6)Clinic of Medical Genetics, San Luca Hospital, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico 
Italiano, 20142 Milan, Italy.
(7)Clinical Pediatric Genetic Unit, Pediatric Clinic, Fondazione MBBM, San 
Gerardo Hospital, 20900 Monza, Italy.
(8)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, "V. Buzzi" 
Children's Hospital, University of Milan, 20142 Milan, Italy.
(9)Pediatric Unit, ASST Lariana, 22100 Como, Italy.
(10)Clinical Genetics, ASST Cremona, Via Concordia 1, 26100 Cremona, Italy.
(11)Medical Genetics Laboratory, Clinical Pathology Department, S. Gerardo 
Hospital, 20900 Monza, Italy.
(12)Department of Pediatric Neuroscience, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico 
Carlo Besta, 20142 Milan, Italy.
(13)Medical Genetic Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, 20142 Milan, Italy.
(14)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, 20142 Milan, Italy.
(15)Service of Medical Genetics, Oncologic Institute of Southern Switzerland, 
EOC, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland.
(16)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit-Epilepsy Center, Department of Health Sciences, 
ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, San Paolo Hospital, Università Degli Studi di Milano, 
20142 Milan, Italy.
(17)Medical Genetics, ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, San Paolo Hospital, 20142 Milan, 
Italy.
(18)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.
(19)University Hospitals Bristol NHS Trust, University of Bristol, Bristol BS1 
3NU, UK.

KBG syndrome (KBGS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by the Ankyrin 
Repeat Domain 11 (ANKRD11) haploinsufficiency. Here, we report the molecular 
investigations performed on a cohort of 33 individuals with KBGS clinical 
suspicion. By using a multi-testing genomic approach, including gene sequencing, 
Chromosome Microarray Analysis (CMA), and RT-qPCR gene expression assay, we 
searched for pathogenic alterations in ANKRD11. A molecular diagnosis was 
obtained in 22 out of 33 patients (67%). ANKRD11 sequencing disclosed pathogenic 
or likely pathogenic variants in 18 out of 33 patients. CMA identified one full 
and one terminal ANKRD11 pathogenic deletions, and one partial duplication and 
one intronic microdeletion, with both possibly being pathogenic. The pathogenic 
effect was established by RT-qPCR, which confirmed ANKRD11 haploinsufficiency 
only for the three deletions. Moreover, RT-qPCR applied to six molecularly 
unsolved KBGS patients identified gene downregulation in a clinically typical 
patient with previous negative tests, and further molecular investigations 
revealed a cryptic deletion involving the gene promoter. In conclusion, ANKRD11 
pathogenic variants could also involve the regulatory regions of the gene. 
Moreover, the application of a multi-test approach along with the innovative use 
of RT-qPCR improved the diagnostic yield in KBGS suspected patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23115912
PMCID: PMC9180463
PMID: 35682590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.