---
reference_id: "PMID:17536048"
title: "Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy: IgG effects on ganglionic acetylcholine receptor current."
authors:
- Wang Z
- Low PA
- Jordan J
- Freeman R
- Gibbons CH
- Schroeder C
- Sandroni P
- Vernino S
journal: Neurology
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000263185.30294.61
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Animals
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Autoimmune Diseases/immunology
- Autonomic Nervous System Diseases/immunology
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Female
- "Ganglia, Autonomic/immunology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Male
- Membrane Potentials
- Middle Aged
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- Rabbits
- "Receptors, Cholinergic/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy: IgG effects on ganglionic acetylcholine receptor current.
**Authors:** Wang Z, Low PA, Jordan J, Freeman R, Gibbons CH, Schroeder C, Sandroni P, Vernino S
**Journal:** Neurology (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1212/01.wnl.0000263185.30294.61](https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000263185.30294.61)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2007 May 29;68(22):1917-21. doi:
10.1212/01.wnl.0000263185.30294.61.

Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy: IgG effects on ganglionic acetylcholine 
receptor current.

Wang Z(1), Low PA, Jordan J, Freeman R, Gibbons CH, Schroeder C, Sandroni P, 
Vernino S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX 75390-9036, USA.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy (AAG) is an acquired 
immune-mediated form of diffuse autonomic failure. Many patients have serum 
antibodies that bind to the ganglionic acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) that 
mediate fast synaptic transmission in autonomic ganglia. Previous clinical 
studies and observations in animal models suggest that AAG is an 
antibody-mediated neurologic disorder.
METHODS: Using whole-cell patch clamp techniques, we recorded ganglionic AChR 
currents in cultured human IMR-32 cells and examined the effects of bath 
application of IgG derived from patients with AAG.
RESULTS: IgG from seven patients with AAG all produced a progressive decline in 
whole-cell ganglionic AChR current, whereas IgG from control subjects had no 
effect. The effect was abolished at low temperature. Fab antibody fragments had 
no effect unless a secondary antibody was added concurrently. IgG from one 
patient also produced a more immediate reduction of ganglionic AChR current.
CONCLUSIONS: The characteristics of antibody-mediated inhibition of ganglionic 
acetylcholine receptor (AChR) current are consistent with modulation and 
blocking of the membrane AChR, analogous to the effects of muscle AChR 
antibodies in myasthenia gravis. Our observations demonstrate that antibodies in 
patients with autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy (AAG) cause physiologic 
changes in ganglionic AChR function and confirm that AAG is an antibody-mediated 
disorder.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000263185.30294.61
PMCID: PMC2615674
PMID: 17536048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]