---
reference_id: "PMID:34600539"
title: "Role of radiation therapy in primary tonsil large B cell lymphoma: a SEER-based analysis."
authors:
- Jia J
- Chen W
journal: Radiat Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s13014-021-01919-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of radiation therapy in primary tonsil large B cell lymphoma: a SEER-based analysis.
**Authors:** Jia J, Chen W
**Journal:** Radiat Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13014-021-01919-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13014-021-01919-x)

## Content

1. Radiat Oncol. 2021 Oct 2;16(1):193. doi: 10.1186/s13014-021-01919-x.

Role of radiation therapy in primary tonsil large B cell lymphoma: a SEER-based 
analysis.

Jia J(1), Chen W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100020, China.
(2)Department of Hematology, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100020, China. 13910107759@163.com.

BACKGROUD: Primary tonsil diffuse large B cell lymphoma (PT-DLBCL) is an 
uncommon disease entity. The role of radiation therapy (RT) in PT-DLBCL is 
debatable in both the pre- and post- rituximab era. The purpose of this study 
was to evaluate the treatment outcome and establish a prognostic model in 
PT-DLBCL based on the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) 
database.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data of 1214 PT-DLBCL patients diagnosed between 1975 and 
2016 were extracted from SEER 18. The effect of RT was assessed for the entire 
cohort and subgroups by stages using univariate, multivariate Cox regression 
analyses and propensity score matching (PSM).
RESULTS: The entire cohort included 1043 patients with early-stage (ES) PT-DLBCL 
and 171 patients with advanced-stage (AS) disease. A decreasing trend of RT 
utilization in the ES cohort after 2002 was observed. 47.4% of patients in ES 
received RT, whereas 25.1% in AS underwent RT. RT significantly improved overall 
survival in both univariate (P < 0.001) and multivariate (P = 0.002) analyses. 
PSM analysis further validated the survival advantage of RT (P = 0.002). A 
nomogram was established to predict the potential survival benefit. Subgroup 
analysis revealed RT was significantly associated with overall survival in ES 
patients of PT-DLBCL (P = 0.001) and in the rituximab era (P = 0.001) but not in 
those with AS disease (P = 0.241).
CONCLUSIONS: This population-based study encloses the largest sample of PT-DLBCL 
to date and demonstrates a favorable survival role of RT in early stages rather 
than advanced stages. The established nomogram helps to identify high risk 
patients to improve prognosis.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13014-021-01919-x
PMCID: PMC8487472
PMID: 34600539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.