---
reference_id: "PMID:12048463"
title: "Hirschsprung's disease: diagnosis and management in children."
authors:
- Rogers J
journal: Br J Nurs
year: '2001'
doi: 10.12968/bjon.2001.10.10.9983
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirschsprung's disease: diagnosis and management in children.
**Authors:** Rogers J
**Journal:** Br J Nurs (2001)
**DOI:** [10.12968/bjon.2001.10.10.9983](https://doi.org/10.12968/bjon.2001.10.10.9983)

## Content

1. Br J Nurs. 2001 May 24-Jun 13;10(10):640-9. doi:
10.12968/bjon.2001.10.10.9983.

Hirschsprung's disease: diagnosis and management in children.

Rogers J(1).

Author information:
(1)Continence Promotion/Stoma Care/Special Needs, St Helens and Knowsley 
Community Health NHS Trust, UK.

Hirschsprung's disease is a congenital abnormality of the bowel that results in 
loss of peristalsis, and is one of the main reasons why an infant may require a 
stoma soon after birth. Various stages of surgery may be required to resect the 
affected part of the bowel, including formation and closure of the stoma. 
Following surgery, the perception of many families is that their child is now 
"normal" and that all previous problems of managing their child are now 
resolved. However, there are a variety of postoperative complications and issues 
relating to bowel control which can affect the child in the long term. This 
article looks at how potential postoperative long-term problems can be 
identified early, and thus minimized, by healthcare staff being aware of 
possible problems, taking a proactive approach to management and advising 
families about the issues involved.

DOI: 10.12968/bjon.2001.10.10.9983
PMID: 12048463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]