---
reference_id: "PMID:23310926"
title: "Familial isolated pituitary adenomas: an emerging clinical entity."
authors:
- Martucci F
- Trivellin G
- Korbonits M
journal: J Endocrinol Invest
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/BF03346742
keywords:
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Growth Hormone-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma/genetics
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Pituitary Neoplasms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial isolated pituitary adenomas: an emerging clinical entity.
**Authors:** Martucci F, Trivellin G, Korbonits M
**Journal:** J Endocrinol Invest (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF03346742](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03346742)

## Content

1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2012 Dec;35(11):1003-14. doi: 10.1007/BF03346742.

Familial isolated pituitary adenomas: an emerging clinical entity.

Martucci F(1), Trivellin G, Korbonits M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Barts and the London School of Medicine, Queen
Mary University of London, London, UK.

Familial pituitary tumors are increasingly recognized. While some of these cases
are related to wellknown syndromic conditions such as multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) or Carney complex, others belong to the familial
isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) patient group. The discovery of heterozygous,
loss-of-function germline mutations in the gene encoding the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor interacting protein (AIP) in 2006 has subsequently enabled the
identification of a mutation in this gene in 20% of FIPA families and 20% of
childhood-onset simplex soma- totroph adenomas. The exact mechanism by which the
lack of AIP leads to pituitary adenomas is not clear. AIP mutations cause a low
penetrance autosomal dominant disease with often a distinct phenotype
characterized by young-onset, aggressive, large GH, mixed GH and PRL or
PRL-secreting adenomas. This review aims to summarize currently available
clinical data on AIP mutation-positive and negative FIPA patients.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03346742
PMID: 23310926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
