---
reference_id: "PMID:34090967"
title: Diabetes-related chronic complications in Brazilian adolescents with type 1 diabetes. A multicenter cross-sectional study.
authors:
- Gomes MB
- Calliari LE
- Conte D
- Correa CL
- Drummond KRG
- Mallmann F
- Pinheiro AA
- Muniz LH
- Leal FSL
- Morales PH
- Negrato CA
journal: Diabetes Res Clin Pract
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.diabres.2021.108895
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetes-related chronic complications in Brazilian adolescents with type 1 diabetes. A multicenter cross-sectional study.
**Authors:** Gomes MB, Calliari LE, Conte D, Correa CL, Drummond KRG, Mallmann F, Pinheiro AA, Muniz LH, Leal FSL, Morales PH, Negrato CA
**Journal:** Diabetes Res Clin Pract (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.diabres.2021.108895](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diabres.2021.108895)

## Content

1. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2021 Jul;177:108895. doi: 
10.1016/j.diabres.2021.108895. Epub 2021 Jun 4.

Diabetes-related chronic complications in Brazilian adolescents with type 1 
diabetes. A multicenter cross-sectional study.

Gomes MB(1), Calliari LE(2), Conte D(1), Correa CL(1), Drummond KRG(3), Mallmann 
F(4), Pinheiro AA(5), Muniz LH(1), Leal FSL(6), Morales PH(3), Negrato CA(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Diabetes Unit, State University of Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Diabetes Outpatient Clinic, Pediatric Endocrine Unit, Santa Casa School of 
Medical Sciences, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: 
luis.calliari@fcmsantacasasp.edu.br.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), 
Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Regional Hospital of Taguatinga, Brasília, 
Brazil.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(7)Medical Doctor Program, University of São Paulo- School of Dentistry, Bauru, 
São Paulo, Brazil.

AIMS: To investigate the prevalence of diabetes-related chronic complications 
(DRCCs) and its associated factors in Brazilian adolescents with type 1 diabetes 
(T1D).
METHODS: This nationwide study was conducted in 14 public clinics in 10 cities, 
with 1,760 patients, 367 adolescents, with 328 eligible for this study. 
Evaluated DRCCs were retinopathy (DR), chronic kidney disease (CKD), peripheral 
neuropathy (DPN) and cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy (CAN).
RESULTS: Among eligible patients, 184 were females (50.1%), age range 
13-19 years, HbA1c 9.6% ± 2.4, aged 8.9 ± 4.3 years at diagnosis and diabetes 
duration of 8.1 ± 4.3 years. 103 (31.4%) patients presented any type of DRCC. 
CKD was found in 46 (14.0%), CAN in 41(12.5%), DR in 28 (8.5%) and DPN in 16 
(4.9%) patients. One, two or three DRCCs were observed in 79 (24.1%), 19 (5.8%) 
and 5 (1.5%) patients, respectively, and were associated with longer diabetes 
duration, higher HbA1c and diastolic blood pressure levels (dBP), use of renin 
angiotensin inhibitors and lower adherence to diet.
CONCLUSIONS: A high percentage of patients presented some kind of DRCC, 
associated with diabetes duration, glycemic control, dBP, adherence to diet. 
Educational programs should start from the diagnosis to avoid DRCCs in this 
young population.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diabres.2021.108895
PMID: 34090967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.