---
reference_id: "PMID:38913022"
title: "Postnatal renal tubule development: roles of tubular flow and flux."
authors:
- Cheng YG
- Chen CC
- Cheng CJ
journal: Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000001007
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- "Kidney Tubules/metabolism, growth & development"
- "Bartter Syndrome/metabolism, physiopathology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postnatal renal tubule development: roles of tubular flow and flux.
**Authors:** Cheng YG, Chen CC, Cheng CJ
**Journal:** Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MNH.0000000000001007](https://doi.org/10.1097/MNH.0000000000001007)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2024 Sep 1;33(5):518-525. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0000000000001007. Epub 2024 Jun 24.

Postnatal renal tubule development: roles of tubular flow and flux.

Cheng YG(1), Chen CC(2), Cheng CJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Postnatal renal tubule development is critical to adult
kidney function. Several postnatal changes regulate the differentiation and
proliferation of renal tubular cells. Here, we review the literature and our
efforts on thick ascending limb (TAL) development in Bartter syndrome (BS).
RECENT FINDINGS: Glomerular filtrate quickly increases after birth, imposing
fluid shear stress and circumferential stretch on immature renal tubules. Recent
studies showed that kidney organoids under flow (superfusion) have better
development of tubular structures and the expression of cilia and solute
transporters. These effects are likely mediated by mechanosensors, such as cilia
and the piezo1 channel. Improved renal oxygenation and sodium pump-dependent
active transport can stimulate mitochondrial respiration and biogenesis. The
functional coupling between transport and mitochondria ensures ATP supply for
energy-demanding reactions in tubular cells, including cell cycle progression
and proliferation. We recently discovered that postnatal renal medulla
maturation and TAL elongation are impaired in Clc-k2-deficient BS mice. Primary
cultured Clc-k2-deficient TAL cells have G1-S transition and proliferation
delay. These developmental defects could be part of the early pathogenesis of BS
and worsen the phenotype.
SUMMARY: Understanding how tubular flow and transepithelial ion fluxes regulate
renal tubule development may improve the treatment of congenital renal
tubulopathies.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000001007
PMCID: PMC11290981
PMID: 38913022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts of
interest.
