---
reference_id: "PMID:21903433"
title: Novel features in the evolution of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency.
authors:
- Pérez-Dueñas B
- Sempere A
- Campistol J
- Alonso-Colmenero I
- Díez M
- González V
- Merinero B
- Desviat LR
- Artuch R
journal: Eur J Paediatr Neurol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2011.08.008
keywords:
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/deficiency, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Autistic Disorder
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- Child Behavior Disorders/etiology
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cognition Disorders/etiology
- "Education, Special"
- Epilepsy/etiology
- "Epilepsy, Reflex/etiology"
- Female
- Fever/etiology
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Movement Disorders/etiology
- Muscle Spasticity/etiology
- Neuropsychological Tests
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, pathology, psychology"
- Quadriplegia/etiology
- Ribose/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel features in the evolution of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency.
**Authors:** Pérez-Dueñas B, Sempere A, Campistol J, Alonso-Colmenero I, Díez M, González V, Merinero B, Desviat LR, Artuch R
**Journal:** Eur J Paediatr Neurol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejpn.2011.08.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpn.2011.08.008)

## Content

1. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2012 Jul;16(4):343-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2011.08.008.
Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Novel features in the evolution of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency.

Pérez-Dueñas B(1), Sempere A, Campistol J, Alonso-Colmenero I, Díez M, González
V, Merinero B, Desviat LR, Artuch R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Passeig Sant Joan de Dèu
2, 08950 Esplugues, Barcelona, Spain. bperez@hsjdbcn.org

BACKGROUND: Adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) deficiency is an autosomal recessive
disorder of the purine synthesis which results in accumulation of
succinylpurines (succinyladenosine (S-Ado) and succinylamino-imidazole
carboxamide riboside (SAICAr)) in body fluids. Patients present developmental
delay, often accompanied by epilepsy and autistic spectrum disorders.
OBJECTIVES: To describe atypical neurological features in the evolution of three
novel unrelated cases of ADSL deficiency.
PATIENTS: A 9-year-old boy with severe cognitive impairment and autistic
behaviour received d-ribose therapy for one year. Drug withdrawal was associated
with acute neurological deterioration, severe brain atrophy and demyelination on
MRI. The second patient is a 5.5-year-old girl with mild developmental delay who
presented a benign course with moderate cognitive impairment as the only feature
in her evolution. The final patient is a 14-year-old boy with severe cognitive
impairment who developed drug-resistant epilepsy and bathing reflex seizures,
progressive spasticity in the lower limbs and thoracic deformity.
METHODS: SAICAr and S-Ado in urine were analysed by HPLC with diode array
detection. Diagnosis was confirmed by molecular analysis of the ADSL gene.
RESULTS: An elevation of S-Ado and SAICAr excretion in urine was detected in all
three patients. The patients were homozygous for the missence change p.I369L and
for the novel change p.M389V.
CONCLUSION: Drug-resistant epilepsy and specific therapeutic interventions may
modify the neurological outcome in ADSL deficiency. d-ribose must be considered
with caution as, in our experience, it returns no clinical benefit and drug
withdrawal can precipitate status epilepticus and acute neurological
deterioration.

Copyright © 2011 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2011.08.008
PMID: 21903433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
