---
reference_id: "PMID:14566439"
title: "Recessive omodysplasia: five new cases and review of the literature."
authors:
- Elçioglu NH
- Gustavson KH
- Wilkie AO
- Yüksel-Apak M
- Spranger JW
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1007/s00247-003-1064-9
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive omodysplasia: five new cases and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Elçioglu NH, Gustavson KH, Wilkie AO, Yüksel-Apak M, Spranger JW
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00247-003-1064-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-003-1064-9)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2004 Jan;34(1):75-82. doi: 10.1007/s00247-003-1064-9. Epub
2003  Oct 18.

Recessive omodysplasia: five new cases and review of the literature.

Elçioglu NH(1), Gustavson KH, Wilkie AO, Yüksel-Apak M, Spranger JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University Hospital, Tophanelioglu 
cad 15, Altunizade, 34660 Istanbul, Turkey. nelcioglul@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Autosomal recessive omodysplasia (MIM 258315) is a rare skeletal 
dysplasia characterized by severe congenital micromelia with shortening and 
distal tapering of the humeri and femora to give a club-like appearance. Fewer 
than 20 cases have been reported in the literature so far.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to more clearly describe the clinical 
and radiographic phenotypes and their changes with age.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Five new patients, including two sibs, with autosomal 
recessive omodysplasia are presented.
RESULTS: Clinical features are rhizomelic dwarfism with limited extension of 
elbows and knees and a distinct face with a short nose, depressed nasal bridge, 
long philtrum, midline haemangiomas in infants and cryptorchidism in males. 
Radiological findings are distal hypoplasia of the short humerus and femur with 
characteristic radial dislocation and radioulnar diastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on a review of these and 16 previously reported patients, the 
regressive nature of the humerofemoral changes and the obvious male predominance 
are stressed. Phenotypic similarities with the atelosteogenesis group of 
disorders and with diastrophic dysplasia suggest common pathogenetic mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/s00247-003-1064-9
PMID: 14566439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]