---
reference_id: "PMID:35174869"
title: Intensive Circuit Class Therapy in Patients with Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis.
authors:
- Kocica J
- Kolcava J
- Sladeckova M
- Stourac P
- Vlckova E
- Dosbaba F
- Kratochvilova J
- Bednarik J
journal: J Rehabil Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2340/jrm.v54.2027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intensive Circuit Class Therapy in Patients with Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Kocica J, Kolcava J, Sladeckova M, Stourac P, Vlckova E, Dosbaba F, Kratochvilova J, Bednarik J
**Journal:** J Rehabil Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2340/jrm.v54.2027](https://doi.org/10.2340/jrm.v54.2027)

## Content

1. J Rehabil Med. 2022 Mar 29;54:jrm00267. doi: 10.2340/jrm.v54.2027.

Intensive Circuit Class Therapy in Patients with Relapsing-Remitting Multiple 
Sclerosis.

Kocica J, Kolcava J(1), Sladeckova M, Stourac P, Vlckova E, Dosbaba F, 
Kratochvilova J, Bednarik J.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic; Department of 
Neurology, The University Hospital Brno, Czech Republic. kolcava.jan@fnbrno.cz.

OBJECTIVE: Long-term physiotherapy is of considerable benefit to patients with 
multiple sclerosis (MS) who have motor dysfunction or gait impairment. The aim 
of this study was to determine the effectiveness of a 12-week intensive circuit 
class therapy for patients with MS, with a wider focus on fatigue and gait 
ability.
METHODS: A total of 46 patients with relapsing-remitting MS were divided 
randomly into 2 groups: 23 patients (mean Expanded Disability Status Scale 
(EDSS) 2.33 ± 0.74) participated in an intensive 12-week course of intensive 
circuit class therapy, and 23 patients (mean EDSS 2.04 ± 0.63) served as a 
control group. The EDSS, Timed Up and Go (TUG) test and Four-Stage Balance Test 
(FSBT) made up the physical testing part, supplemented by questionnaires such as 
the Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS), 12-Item Multiple Sclerosis Walking 
Scale (MSWS-12), Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) and 36-Item Short Form Survey 
(SF-36).
RESULTS: Significant improvements were found among intensive circuit class 
therapy-exercising patients in FSBT (p < 0.05), TUG test (p < 0.01), MFIS (p < 
0.01), BDI (p < 0.05), MSWS-12 (p < 0.05) and the 3 subscales of SF-36 after 12 
weeks of intensive circuit class therapy, while there were no significant 
changes in the control group.
CONCLUSION: Intensive circuit class therapy is an effective therapeutic approach 
for improving gait and balance problems in patients with MS. It has also proved 
to alleviate fatigue and symptoms of depression.

DOI: 10.2340/jrm.v54.2027
PMCID: PMC8963414
PMID: 35174869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.