---
reference_id: PMID:34507359
title: The Large Focal Isolated Chondral Lesion.
authors:
- Chahla J
- Williams BT
- Yanke AB
- Farr J
journal: J Knee Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1735278
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cartilage, Articular/surgery"
- Cartilage Diseases/surgery
- Knee Joint/surgery
- "Transplantation, Homologous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Large Focal Isolated Chondral Lesion.
**Authors:** Chahla J, Williams BT, Yanke AB, Farr J
**Journal:** J Knee Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0041-1735278](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0041-1735278)

## Content

1. J Knee Surg. 2023 Mar;36(4):368-381. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1735278. Epub 2021
Sep  10.

The Large Focal Isolated Chondral Lesion.

Chahla J(1), Williams BT(2), Yanke AB(1), Farr J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado.
(3)Knee Preservation and Cartilage Restoration Center, OrthoIndy, Indianapolis, 
Indiana.

Focal chondral defects (FCDs) of the knee can be a debilitating condition that 
can clinically translate into pain and dysfunction in young patients with high 
activity demands. Both the understanding of the etiology of FCDs and the 
surgical management of these chondral defects has exponentially grown in recent 
years. This is reflected by the number of surgical procedures performed for 
FCDs, which is now approximately 200,000 annually. This fact is also apparent in 
the wide variety of available surgical approaches to FCDs. Although simple 
arthroscopic debridement or microfracture are usually the first line of 
treatment for smaller lesions, chondral lesions that involve a larger area or 
depth require restorative procedures such as osteochondral allograft 
transplantation or other cell-based techniques. Given the prevalence of FCDs and 
the increased attention on treating these lesions, a comprehensive understanding 
of management from diagnosis to rehabilitation is imperative for the treating 
surgeon. This narrative review aims to describe current concepts in the 
treatment of large FCDs through providing an algorithmic approach to selecting 
interventions to address these lesions as well as the reported outcomes in the 
literature.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1735278
PMID: 34507359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.C. is a board or committee member of the 
American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine (AOSSM), Arthroscopy 
Association of North America (AANA), and the International Society of 
Arthroscopy, Knee Surgery, and Orthopaedic Sports Medicine (ISAKOS); and is a 
paid consultant for Arthrex, Inc, CONMED Linvatec, Ossur, and Smith & Nephew. 
A.B.Y. receives research support from Arthrex, Inc, Organogenesis, and Vericel; 
is an unpaid consultant for Patient IQ, Smith & Nephew, and Sparta Biomedical; 
is a paid consultant for CONMED Linvatec, JRF Ortho, and Olympus; and receives 
stock or stock options from Patient IQ. J.F. receives research support from 
Active Implants, Arthrex, Inc, Episurf, Fidia, JRF Ortho, Moximed, Novartis, 
Organogenesis, Samumed, Inc, Vericel, and ZimmerBiomet; is a paid consultant for 
Aesculap/B.Braun, Cartiheal, Cook Biotech, Exactech, Moximed, Inc, 
Organogenesis, Regentis, Samumed, Inc, and ZKR orthopedics; is on the editorial 
or governing board of the American Journal of Orthopedics, and Cartialge; is a 
paid presenter or speaker for Arthrex, Inc, Moximed, Inc, Organogenesis, and 
Vericel; receives IP royalties from Arthrex, Inc, Biopoly, LLC, and 
Organogenesis; receives stock or stock options from MedShape, Inc, and Ortho 
Regenerative Tech; and receives publishing royalties, financial or material 
support from Springer, and Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.