---
reference_id: "PMID:35579625"
title: Discovering a new part of the phenotypic spectrum of Coffin-Siris syndrome in a fetal cohort.
authors:
- van der Sluijs PJ
- Joosten M
- Alby C
- Attié-Bitach T
- Gilmore K
- Dubourg C
- Fradin M
- Wang T
- Kurtz-Nelson EC
- Ahlers KP
- Arts P
- Barnett CP
- Ashfaq M
- Baban A
- van den Born M
- Borrie S
- Busa T
- Byrne A
- Carriero M
- Cesario C
- Chong K
- Cueto-González AM
- Dempsey JC
- Diderich KEM
- Doherty D
- Farholt S
- Gerkes EH
- Gorokhova S
- Govaerts LCP
- Gregersen PA
- Hickey SE
- Lefebvre M
- Mari F
- Martinovic J
- Northrup H
- "O'Leary M"
- Parbhoo K
- Patrier S
- Popp B
- Santos-Simarro F
- Stoltenburg C
- Thauvin-Robinet C
- Thompson E
- Vulto-van Silfhout AT
- Zahir FR
- Scott HS
- Earl RK
- Eichler EE
- Vora NL
- Wilnai Y
- Giordano JL
- Wapner RJ
- Rosenfeld JA
- Haak MC
- Santen GWE
journal: Genet Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.04.010
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- Face/abnormalities
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Micrognathism/genetics
- Neck/abnormalities
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Discovering a new part of the phenotypic spectrum of Coffin-Siris syndrome in a fetal cohort.
**Authors:** van der Sluijs PJ, Joosten M, Alby C, Attié-Bitach T, Gilmore K, Dubourg C, Fradin M, Wang T, Kurtz-Nelson EC, Ahlers KP, Arts P, Barnett CP, Ashfaq M, Baban A, van den Born M, Borrie S, Busa T, Byrne A, Carriero M, Cesario C, Chong K, Cueto-González AM, Dempsey JC, Diderich KEM, Doherty D, Farholt S, Gerkes EH, Gorokhova S, Govaerts LCP, Gregersen PA, Hickey SE, Lefebvre M, Mari F, Martinovic J, Northrup H, O'Leary M, Parbhoo K, Patrier S, Popp B, Santos-Simarro F, Stoltenburg C, Thauvin-Robinet C, Thompson E, Vulto-van Silfhout AT, Zahir FR, Scott HS, Earl RK, Eichler EE, Vora NL, Wilnai Y, Giordano JL, Wapner RJ, Rosenfeld JA, Haak MC, Santen GWE
**Journal:** Genet Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gim.2022.04.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gim.2022.04.010)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2022 Aug;24(8):1753-1760. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.04.010. Epub 2022
 May 18.

Discovering a new part of the phenotypic spectrum of Coffin-Siris syndrome in a 
fetal cohort.

van der Sluijs PJ(1), Joosten M(2), Alby C(3), Attié-Bitach T(3), Gilmore K(4), 
Dubourg C(5), Fradin M(6), Wang T(7), Kurtz-Nelson EC(8), Ahlers KP(8), Arts 
P(9), Barnett CP(10), Ashfaq M(11), Baban A(12), van den Born M(2), Borrie 
S(11), Busa T(13), Byrne A(14), Carriero M(15), Cesario C(16), Chong K(17), 
Cueto-González AM(18), Dempsey JC(19), Diderich KEM(2), Doherty D(20), Farholt 
S(21), Gerkes EH(22), Gorokhova S(23), Govaerts LCP(2), Gregersen PA(24), Hickey 
SE(25), Lefebvre M(26), Mari F(15), Martinovic J(27), Northrup H(11), O'Leary 
M(28), Parbhoo K(29), Patrier S(30), Popp B(31), Santos-Simarro F(32), 
Stoltenburg C(33), Thauvin-Robinet C(34), Thompson E(10), Vulto-van Silfhout 
AT(35), Zahir FR(36), Scott HS(37), Earl RK(8), Eichler EE(38), Vora NL(4), 
Wilnai Y(39), Giordano JL(40), Wapner RJ(40), Rosenfeld JA(41), Haak MC(42), 
Santen GWE(43).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Histo-Embryology and Cytogenetics, Necker-Enfants Malades 
Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France; National Institute of Health and Medical 
Research (INSERM), University of Paris, Imagine Institute, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics and Genomics, Rennes University Hospital 
Center (CHU), Rennes, France.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares Anomalies 
du Développement, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France.
(7)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA.
(8)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA.
(9)Department of Genetics and Molecular Pathology, Centre for Cancer Biology, An 
Alliance Between SA Pathology and the University of South Australia, Adelaide, 
South Australia, Australia.
(10)Paediatric and Reproductive Genetics Unit, Women's and Children's Hospital, 
North Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; School of Medicine, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, McGovern Medical 
School, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX.
(12)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery, Bambino Gesù 
Children's Hospital and Research Institute, Scientific Institute for Research, 
Hospitalization and Healthcare, Rome, Italy.
(13)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de la Timone, APHM, Marseille, 
France; Department of Medical Genetics, Timone Hospital, APHM, Marseille, 
France.
(14)Department of Genetics and Molecular Pathology, Centre for Cancer Biology, 
An Alliance Between SA Pathology and the University of South Australia, 
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; Australian Genomics, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(15)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(16)Medical Genetics Lab, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital and Research 
Institute, Scientific Institute for Research, Hospitalization and Healthcare, 
Rome, Italy.
(17)The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada; Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of 
Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(18)Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Vall d'Hebron Barcelona 
Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA; Center for 
Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA.
(21)Department of Children and Adolescents, University Hospital Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(22)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(23)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de la Timone, APHM, Marseille, 
France; Department of Medical Genetics, Timone Hospital, APHM, Marseille, 
France; Aix Marseille University, INSERM, Marseille Medical Genetics, U 1251, 
Marseille, France.
(24)Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark; Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Centre for Rare Diseases, Aarhus 
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(25)Division of Genetic & Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children's Hospital, 
Columbus, OH; Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University College of 
Medicine, Columbus, OH.
(26)Inserm UMR 1231 GAD, Genetics of Developmental Anomalies, F21000 Dijon, 
France; Functional Unit of Fœtal Pathology, Pathological Anatomy Department, CHR 
Orleans, Orleans, France.
(27)Department of Histo-Embryology and Cytogenetics, Necker-Enfants Malades 
Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France; Unit of Fetal Pathology, Antoine Beclere 
Hospital, AP-HP, Clamart, France.
(28)Broad Center for Mendelian Genomics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA.
(29)Division of Genetic & Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children's Hospital, 
Columbus, OH.
(30)Department of Pathology, CHU Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France.
(31)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(32)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, 
Hospital La Paz Institute for Health Research, Centre for Biomedical Network 
Research on Rare Diseases, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(33)Department of Neuropaediatrics, Charité - Berlin University of Medicine, 
Berlin, Germany.
(34)Inserm UMR 1231 GAD, Genetics of Developmental Anomalies, F21000 Dijon, 
France; Reference Center for Rare Diseases, « Intellectual Disabilities from 
rare causes », CHU Dijon Bourgogne, F21000 Dijon, France.
(35)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(36)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Children's 
and Women's Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(37)Department of Genetics and Molecular Pathology, Centre for Cancer Biology, 
An Alliance Between SA Pathology and the University of South Australia, 
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; School of Medicine, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; Australian Genomics, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia; ACRF Cancer Genomics Facility, Centre for Cancer Biology, 
An Alliance Between SA Pathology and the University of South Australia, 
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(38)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA.
(39)Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(40)Institute for Genomic Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York, NY; Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Columbia University Vagelos Medical Center, New York, NY.
(41)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX; Baylor Genetics Laboratories, Houston, TX.
(42)Department of Obstetrics and Fetal Medicine, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(43)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands. Electronic address: santen@lumc.nl.

Erratum in
    Genet Med. 2023 Feb;25(2):100004. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.100004.

PURPOSE: Genome-wide sequencing is increasingly being performed during pregnancy 
to identify the genetic cause of congenital anomalies. The interpretation of 
prenatally identified variants can be challenging and is hampered by our often 
limited knowledge of prenatal phenotypes. To better delineate the prenatal 
phenotype of Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS), we collected clinical data from 
patients with a prenatal phenotype and a pathogenic variant in one of the 
CSS-associated genes.
METHODS: Clinical data was collected through an extensive web-based survey.
RESULTS: We included 44 patients with a variant in a CSS-associated gene and a 
prenatal phenotype; 9 of these patients have been reported before. Prenatal 
anomalies that were frequently observed in our cohort include hydrocephalus, 
agenesis of the corpus callosum, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, persistent 
left vena cava, diaphragmatic hernia, renal agenesis, and intrauterine growth 
restriction. Anal anomalies were frequently identified after birth in patients 
with ARID1A variants (6/14, 43%). Interestingly, pathogenic ARID1A variants were 
much more frequently identified in the current prenatal cohort (16/44, 36%) than 
in postnatal CSS cohorts (5%-9%).
CONCLUSION: Our data shed new light on the prenatal phenotype of patients with 
pathogenic variants in CSS genes.

Copyright © 2022 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.04.010
PMCID: PMC9378544
PMID: 35579625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest All authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.