---
reference_id: "PMID:30844538"
title: Structural perspectives of antibody-dependent enhancement of infection of dengue virus.
authors:
- Morrone SR
- Lok SM
journal: Curr Opin Virol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2019.02.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural perspectives of antibody-dependent enhancement of infection of dengue virus.
**Authors:** Morrone SR, Lok SM
**Journal:** Curr Opin Virol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.coviro.2019.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coviro.2019.02.002)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Virol. 2019 Jun;36:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2019.02.002. Epub 2019
 Mar 4.

Structural perspectives of antibody-dependent enhancement of infection of dengue 
virus.

Morrone SR(1), Lok SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 
KTP Building, 8 College Road, Singapore 169857, Singapore; Centre for BioImaging 
Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117557, Singapore.
(2)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 
KTP Building, 8 College Road, Singapore 169857, Singapore; Centre for BioImaging 
Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117557, Singapore. 
Electronic address: sheemei.lok@duke-nus.edu.sg.

Dengue virus (DENV) consists of four serotypes. Sequential serotype infections 
can cause increased disease severity, likely due to antibody-dependent 
enhancement (ADE) of infection. Here, we review two recent papers showing major 
advancements in the understanding of the ADE mechanism for both mature and 
immature DENV. The surface of both mature and immature DENV contains E and 
another protein - M in mature and prM in immature virus. On mature DENV, the 
orientation of anti-E antibody with respect to the virus surface determines the 
antibody enhancement properties. On the immature virus, binding of anti-prM 
antibody aids the dissociation of pr from the fusion loop of E protein allowing 
virus-endosomal membrane interaction, thus overcoming the hurdle in the early 
step of fusion.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coviro.2019.02.002
PMID: 30844538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]