---
reference_id: "PMID:33608638"
title: "Endothelial cell density in children with posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy: a longitudinal case-control study."
authors:
- Fung SSM
- Sami H
- El Hamouly A
- Jiandani D
- Williams S
- Mireskandari K
- Ali A
journal: Eye (Lond)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41433-021-01451-y
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Case-Control Studies
- Cell Count
- Child
- Cornea/pathology
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/metabolism"
- Endothelial Cells/pathology
- "Endothelium, Corneal/pathology"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endothelial cell density in children with posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy: a longitudinal case-control study.
**Authors:** Fung SSM, Sami H, El Hamouly A, Jiandani D, Williams S, Mireskandari K, Ali A
**Journal:** Eye (Lond) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41433-021-01451-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433-021-01451-y)

## Content

1. Eye (Lond). 2021 Dec;35(12):3397-3403. doi: 10.1038/s41433-021-01451-y. Epub 
2021 Feb 19.

Endothelial cell density in children with posterior polymorphous corneal 
dystrophy: a longitudinal case-control study.

Fung SSM(1), Sami H(2), El Hamouly A(2), Jiandani D(3), Williams S(3), 
Mireskandari K(3)(4), Ali A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA. simonfung@mednet.ucla.edu.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate longitudinal endothelial cell characteristics of children 
with posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD).
METHODS: In this prospective case-control study, children with PPCD were 
followed with slit-lamp photography and non-contact specular microscopy. 
Patient's eyes were subdivided according to the clinical subtypes of PPCD 
(vesicular, band, diffuse, and unaffected) and the number of lesions present on 
the posterior corneal surface. Findings were then compared with age-matched 
controls.
RESULTS: Thirty eyes of 15 patients with PPCD with a mean age 10.5 ± 3.1 years 
were analysed. Mean follow-up was 3.0 ± 1.0 years. PPCD morphology was vesicular 
in 40%, diffuse in 37%, band type in 10% and 13% had no detectable lesions 
despite contralateral involvement. Fourteen eyes (47%) had ≥5 endothelial 
lesions. Patients with PPCD had significantly lower endothelial cell densities 
(ECD) at recruitment (1918.9 ± 666.3 vs. 3340.1 ± 286.5 cells/mm2, p < 0.007) 
and at final follow-up (1793.1 ± 684.6 vs. 3265.2 ± 304.3 cells/mm2, p < 0.007) 
compared to age-matched controls. The lowest ECDs were found in eyes with 
diffuse type PPCD and those with ≥5 posterior corneal lesions, while clinically 
unaffected eyes in patients with confirmed PPCD in fellow eye had a normal ECD. 
However, the rates of annual ECD decline were not significantly different 
between eyes with PPCD in general, between the subgroups of PPCD and the 
normative groups.
CONCLUSION: Endothelial cell density is significantly reduced among children 
with PPCD and depends on the clinical subtype and the number of posterior 
corneal lesions present. However, annual ECD loss is similar between normal eyes 
and those with PPCD.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Royal College of 
Ophthalmologists.

DOI: 10.1038/s41433-021-01451-y
PMCID: PMC8602381
PMID: 33608638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.