---
reference_id: "PMID:37710322"
title: "Incidence and prevalence of neurofibromatosis type 1 and 2: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Lee TJ
- Chopra M
- Kim RH
- Parkin PC
- Barnett-Tapia C
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02911-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Incidence
- Neurofibromatosis 1/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Health Services Accessibility
- Medical Records
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and prevalence of neurofibromatosis type 1 and 2: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Lee TJ, Chopra M, Kim RH, Parkin PC, Barnett-Tapia C
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02911-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02911-2)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Sep 14;18(1):292. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02911-2.

Incidence and prevalence of neurofibromatosis type 1 and 2: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis.

Lee TJ(#)(1), Chopra M(#)(1), Kim RH(2)(3), Parkin PC(4)(5), Barnett-Tapia 
C(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Elisabeth Raab Neurofibromatosis Clinic, University Health Network, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, University Health Network and University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation. Dalla Lana School of 
Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of 
Toronto, 200 Elizabeth St, Toronto, ON, 5EC-334, Canada.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
c.barnetttapia@utoronto.ca.
(7)Elisabeth Raab Neurofibromatosis Clinic, University Health Network, Toronto, 
ON, Canada. c.barnetttapia@utoronto.ca.
(8)Department of Medicine, University Health Network and University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada. c.barnetttapia@utoronto.ca.
(9)Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation. Dalla Lana School of 
Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
c.barnetttapia@utoronto.ca.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: To obtain updated estimates of the incidence and prevalence of 
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and type 2 (NF2).
STUDY DESIGN: We conducted a systematic search of NF1 and NF2 incidence or 
prevalence studies, in OVID Medline, OVID Embase, Web of Science, and Cinahl. 
Studies were appraised with the Joanna Briggs Institute Prevalence Critical 
Appraisal tool. Pooled incidence and prevalence rates were estimated through 
random-effects meta-analysis.
RESULTS: From 1,939 abstracts, 20 studies were fully appraised and 12 were 
included in the final review. Pooled NF1 prevalence was 1 in 3,164 (95%CI: 1 in 
2,132-1 in 4,712). This was higher in studies that screened for NF1, compared to 
identification of NF1 through medical records (1 in 2,020 and 1 in 4,329, 
respectively). NF1 pooled birth incidence was 1 in 2,662 (95%CI: 1 in 1,968-1 in 
3,601). There were only 2 studies on NF2 prevalence, so data were not pooled. 
Pooled NF2 birth incidence was 1.08 per 50,000 births (95%CI: 1 in 32,829-1 in 
65,019).
CONCLUSION: We present updated estimates of the incidence and prevalence of NF1 
and NF2, to help plan for healthcare access and allocation. The prevalence of 
NF1 from screening studies is higher than from medical record studies, 
suggesting that the disease may be under recognized. More studies are needed 
regarding the prevalence of NF2.

© 2023. Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02911-2
PMCID: PMC10500831
PMID: 37710322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JL: has no competing interests. MC: has no 
competing interests. RK: has received grant support from the Children’s Tumor 
Foundation. PP: has received grant support from the Hospital for Sick Children 
Foundation and Canadian Institutes of Health Research. CB: has received grant 
support from US Department of Defense, MGNet, NIH, Muscular Dystrophy Canada, 
Grifols and Octapharma. She has received honoraria for consulting with Alexion, 
Sanofi, Argenx, CSL.