---
reference_id: "PMID:34884378"
title: Hypophosphatasia.
authors:
- Tournis S
- Yavropoulou MP
- Polyzos SA
- Doulgeraki A
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/jcm10235676
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypophosphatasia.
**Authors:** Tournis S, Yavropoulou MP, Polyzos SA, Doulgeraki A
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm10235676](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm10235676)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2021 Dec 1;10(23):5676. doi: 10.3390/jcm10235676.

Hypophosphatasia.

Tournis S(1), Yavropoulou MP(2), Polyzos SA(3), Doulgeraki A(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for the Research of Musculoskeletal System "Th. Garofalidis", 
School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, KAT General 
Hospital, 14561 Athens, Greece.
(2)Endocrinology Unit, 1st Department of Propaedeutic Internal Medicine, 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, School of Medicine, Laikon 
General Hospital, 14561 Athens, Greece.
(3)First Laboratory of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)Department of Bone and Mineral Metabolism, Institute of Child Health, 14561 
Athens, Greece.

Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is an inherited metabolic disease caused by 
loss-of-function mutations in the tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase 
(TNAP) gene. Reduced activity of TNAP leads to the accumulation of its 
substrates, mainly inorganic pyrophosphate and pyridoxal-5'-phosphate, metabolic 
aberrations that largely explain the musculoskeletal and systemic features of 
the disease. More than 400 ALPL mutations, mostly missense, are reported to 
date, transmitted by either autosomal dominant or recessive mode. Severe disease 
is rare, with incidence ranging from 1:100,000 to 1:300,000 live births, while 
the estimated prevalence of the less severe adult form is estimated to be 
between 1:3100 to 1:508, in different countries in Europe. Presentation largely 
varies, ranging from death in utero to asymptomatic adults. In infants and 
children, clinical features include skeletal, respiratory and neurologic 
complications, while recurrent, poorly healing fractures, muscle weakness and 
arthropathy are common in adults. Persistently low serum alkaline phosphatase is 
the cardinal biochemical feature of the disease. Management requires a dedicated 
multidisciplinary team. In mild cases, treatment is usually symptomatic. Severe 
cases, with life-threating or debilitating complications, can be successfully 
treated with enzyme replacement therapy with asfotase alfa.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10235676
PMCID: PMC8658462
PMID: 34884378

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.