---
reference_id: "PMID:18715755"
title: "Neurocognitive enhancement therapy with vocational services: work outcomes at two-year follow-up."
authors:
- Bell MD
- Zito W
- Greig T
- Wexler BE
journal: Schizophr Res
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.06.026
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurocognitive enhancement therapy with vocational services: work outcomes at two-year follow-up.
**Authors:** Bell MD, Zito W, Greig T, Wexler BE
**Journal:** Schizophr Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.schres.2008.06.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2008.06.026)

## Content

1. Schizophr Res. 2008 Oct;105(1-3):18-29. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.06.026.
Epub  2008 Aug 19.

Neurocognitive enhancement therapy with vocational services: work outcomes at 
two-year follow-up.

Bell MD(1), Zito W, Greig T, Wexler BE.

Author information:
(1)VA Connecticut Healthcare System, Department of Psychiatry, Yale University 
School of Medicine, West Haven, CT, USA. Bell.Morris_D+@West-Haven.VA.Gov

Neurocognitive enhancement therapy (NET) is a remediation program for the 
persistent and function-limiting cognitive impairments of schizophrenia. In a 
previous study in veterans, NET improved work therapy outcomes as well as 
executive function and working memory. The present study aimed to determine 
whether NET could enhance functional outcomes among schizophrenia and 
schizoaffective patients in a community mental health center receiving 
community-based vocational services.
METHOD: Patients (N=72) participated in a hybrid transitional and supported 
employment program (VOC) and were randomized to either NET+VOC or VOC only. 
NET+VOC included computer-based cognitive training, work feedback and a social 
information information-processing group. VOC only also included two weekly 
support groups. Active intervention was 12 months with 12 month follow-up. 
Follow-up rate was 100%.
RESULTS: NET+VOC patients worked significantly more hours during the 12 month 
follow-up period, reached a significantly higher cumulative rate of competitive 
employment by the sixth quarter, and maintained significantly higher rates of 
employment.
CONCLUSION: NET training improved vocational outcomes, suggesting the value of 
combining cognitive remediation with other rehabilitation methods to enhance 
functional outcomes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.06.026
PMID: 18715755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]