---
reference_id: "PMID:41499721"
title: "Relative Frequency and Distinctive Features of Anti-Ma2 Nonparaneoplastic Neurologic Disorders: A French Cohort Study."
authors:
- Vaisvilas M
- Lafuente-Gómez G
- Villagrán-García M
- Farina A
- Bonjour M
- Ciano-Petersen NL
- Comperat L
- Picard G
- Psimaras D
- Joubert B
- Honnorat J
journal: Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200538
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- France/epidemiology
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- "Autoantibodies/blood, immunology"
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/immunology"
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/immunology, epidemiology"
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Nervous System/immunology, epidemiology"
- Cohort Studies
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relative Frequency and Distinctive Features of Anti-Ma2 Nonparaneoplastic Neurologic Disorders: A French Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Vaisvilas M, Lafuente-Gómez G, Villagrán-García M, Farina A, Bonjour M, Ciano-Petersen NL, Comperat L, Picard G, Psimaras D, Joubert B, Honnorat J
**Journal:** Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXI.0000000000200538](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXI.0000000000200538)

## Content

1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2026 Mar;13(2):e200538. doi: 
10.1212/NXI.0000000000200538. Epub 2026 Jan 7.

Relative Frequency and Distinctive Features of Anti-Ma2 Nonparaneoplastic 
Neurologic Disorders: A French Cohort Study.

Vaisvilas M(1)(2)(3), Lafuente-Gómez G(1)(2), Villagrán-García M(1)(2), Farina 
A(1)(2), Bonjour M(4), Ciano-Petersen NL(1)(2)(5)(6), Comperat L(1)(2), Picard 
G(1)(2), Psimaras D(7)(8), Joubert B(1)(2), Honnorat J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)French Reference Center on Paraneoplastic Neurological Syndromes and 
Autoimmune Encephalitis, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Neurologique, Bron, 
France.
(2)SynatAc Team, Institute MeLiS INSERM U1314/CNRS UMR 5284, Université de Lyon, 
Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, France.
(3)Clinic of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty 
of Medicine, Vilnius University, Lithuania.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Laboratoire de 
Biométrie et Biologie Évolutive, UMR CNRS 5558, University Claude Bernard Lyon 
1, Villeurbanne, France.
(5)Neuroimmunology and Neuroinflammation Group. Institute of Biomedical Research 
of Málaga - IBIMA, Málaga, Spain.
(6)Red Andaluza de Investigación Clínica y Traslacional en Neurología 
(NeuroRECA), Málaga, Spain.
(7)AP-HP, Hospital Group Pitié-Salpêtrière, Neuro-oncology Department Paris, 
France; and.
(8)Inserm U1127, CNRS, Paris Brain Institute, Institut du Cerveau (ICM), France.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Although anti-Ma2 antibodies (Ma2-Abs) typically 
associate with paraneoplastic encephalitis, a subset of patients with Ma2-Abs 
does not have any detectable tumor. The clinical specificities of these 
idiopathic cases are unknown. The aim of this study was to describe clinical 
phenotypes and outcomes of patients with idiopathic Ma2-Abs (I-Ma2) compared 
with patients with paraneoplastic Ma2-Abs (PNS-Ma2).
METHODS: A retrospective review of the French Reference Center of Paraneoplastic 
Neurologic Syndromes and Autoimmune Encephalitis database was conducted to 
identify cases of Ma2-Abs-mediated syndromes diagnosed between January 2002 and 
December 2022. A systematic review of the existing literature was also performed 
to assess for reported I-Ma2 cases.
RESULTS: Seventy patients with neurologic syndromes harboring Ma2-Abs were 
identified (50/70 men, 71.4%; median age 60 years, interquartile range (IQR) 
47-67.5). Malignancies were detected in 46 of 70 (65.7%). When compared with the 
PNS-Ma2 cohort, the I-Ma2 cohort less frequently had an acute/subacute disease 
progression (5/20, 25%, vs 26/46, 56.5%; p = 0.037) and the time to diagnosis 
was longer (10 months, IQR 4-20, vs 3.5 months, IQR 1-6; p = 7.94 x 10-10). No 
differences were found in the subtype of clinical symptoms between patients with 
and without cancer. However, monofocal involvement, predominantly isolated 
limbic encephalitis, was more frequent in patients with I-Ma2 vs the PNS-Ma2 
cohort (13/20, 65%, vs 18/46, 39.1%; p = 0.05). The other discriminative 
paraclinical finding was EEG alteration, which was more frequently abnormal in 
patients with I-Ma2 (I-Ma2 11/20, 55%, vs PNS-Ma2 12/46, 26%; p = 0.047). There 
were no differences in brain MRI and CSF inflammation. Systematic review of the 
literature revealed a longer follow-up, a greater use of second-line 
immunotherapies, and a higher proportion of patients with I-Ma2 in the French 
cohort (proportion of French I-Ma2 20/66 (30.3%) vs 10/109 (10.9%) in the 
literature, p = 0.00325, respectively).
DISCUSSION: Patients with I-Ma2 are more common than anticipated and have 
insidious disease onset and a tendency for monofocal nervous system involvement. 
Recognition of patients with I-Ma2 is delayed and must be improved.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200538
PMCID: PMC12794543
PMID: 41499721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go 
to Neurology.org/NN for full disclosures.