---
reference_id: "PMID:39316320"
title: Recent Updates on the Pathogenesis of Inflammatory Myopathies.
authors:
- Musai J
- Mammen AL
- Pinal-Fernandez I
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11926-024-01164-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent Updates on the Pathogenesis of Inflammatory Myopathies.
**Authors:** Musai J, Mammen AL, Pinal-Fernandez I
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11926-024-01164-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-024-01164-7)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2024 Dec;26(12):421-430. doi: 10.1007/s11926-024-01164-7. 
Epub 2024 Sep 24.

Recent Updates on the Pathogenesis of Inflammatory Myopathies.

Musai J(1), Mammen AL(#)(2)(3), Pinal-Fernandez I(#)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Muscle Disease Section, National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal 
and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 50 South Drive, Room 1141, 
Building 50, MSC 8024, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(2)Muscle Disease Section, National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal 
and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 50 South Drive, Room 1141, 
Building 50, MSC 8024, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. andrew.mammen@nih.gov.
(3)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. andrew.mammen@nih.gov.
(4)Muscle Disease Section, National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal 
and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 50 South Drive, Room 1141, 
Building 50, MSC 8024, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. iago.pinalfernandez@nih.gov.
(5)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. iago.pinalfernandez@nih.gov.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review aims to provide a comprehensive and updated 
overview of autoimmune myopathies, with a special focus on the latest 
advancements in understanding the role of autoantibodies. We will begin by 
examining the risk factors and triggers associated with myositis. Next, we will 
delve into recent research on how autoantibodies contribute to disease 
pathogenesis. Finally, we will explore the latest innovations in treatment 
strategies and their implications for our understanding of myositis 
pathogenesis.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent research has revealed that myositis-specific 
autoantibodies can infiltrate muscle cells and disrupt the function of their 
target autoantigens, playing a crucial role in disease pathogenesis. Significant 
advances in treatment include CD19 CAR-T cell therapy, JAK-STAT inhibitors, and 
novel strategies targeting the type 1 interferon pathway in dermatomyositis. 
Additionally, the ineffectiveness of complement inhibitors in treating 
immune-mediated necrotizing myositis has challenged established views on disease 
mechanisms. Autoimmune myopathies are a collection of disorders significantly 
influenced by specific autoantibodies that drive disease pathogenesis. This 
review highlights the critical role of autoantibody research in deepening our 
understanding of these conditions and discusses recent therapeutic advancements 
targeting key pathogenic pathways.

© 2024. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-024-01164-7
PMCID: PMC11527972
PMID: 39316320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.