---
reference_id: "PMID:18644863"
title: "MBD3, a component of the NuRD complex, facilitates chromatin alteration and deposition of epigenetic marks."
authors:
- Morey L
- Brenner C
- Fazi F
- Villa R
- Gutierrez A
- Buschbeck M
- Nervi C
- Minucci S
- Fuks F
- Di Croce L
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00467-08
keywords:
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Chromatin Assembly and Disassembly
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Histone Deacetylases/metabolism
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/genetics"
- Mi-2 Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase Complex
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MBD3, a component of the NuRD complex, facilitates chromatin alteration and deposition of epigenetic marks.
**Authors:** Morey L, Brenner C, Fazi F, Villa R, Gutierrez A, Buschbeck M, Nervi C, Minucci S, Fuks F, Di Croce L
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00467-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00467-08)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Oct;28(19):5912-23. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00467-08. Epub 2008
Jul  21.

MBD3, a component of the NuRD complex, facilitates chromatin alteration and
deposition of epigenetic marks.

Morey L(1), Brenner C, Fazi F, Villa R, Gutierrez A, Buschbeck M, Nervi C,
Minucci S, Fuks F, Di Croce L.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Regulacio Genomica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

In plants, as in mammals, mutations in SNF2-like DNA helicases/ATPases were
shown to affect not only chromatin structure but also global methylation
patterns, suggesting a potential functional link between chromatin structure and
epigenetic marks. The SNF2-like ATPase containing nucleosome remodeling and
deacetylase corepressor complex (NuRD) is involved in gene transcriptional
repression and chromatin remodeling. We have previously shown that the
leukemogenic protein PML-RARa represses target genes through recruitment of DNA
methytransferases and Polycomb complex. Here, we demonstrate a direct role of
the NuRD complex in aberrant gene repression and transmission of epigenetic
repressive marks in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). We show that PML-RARa
binds and recruits NuRD to target genes, including to the tumor-suppressor gene
RARbeta2. In turn, the NuRD complex facilitates Polycomb binding and histone
methylation at lysine 27. Retinoic acid treatment, which is often used for
patients at the early phase of the disease, reduced the promoter occupancy of
the NuRD complex. Knockdown of the NuRD complex in leukemic cells not only
prevented histone deacetylation and chromatin compaction but also impaired DNA
and histone methylation, as well as stable silencing, thus favoring cellular
differentiation. These results unveil an important role for NuRD in the
establishment of altered epigenetic marks in APL, demonstrating an essential
link between chromatin structure and epigenetics in leukemogenesis that could be
exploited for therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00467-08
PMCID: PMC2546998
PMID: 18644863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
