---
reference_id: "PMID:31005404"
title: Clinical and biochemical footprints of inherited metabolic diseases. II. Metabolic liver diseases.
authors:
- Ferreira CR
- Cassiman D
- Blau N
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.04.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and biochemical footprints of inherited metabolic diseases. II. Metabolic liver diseases.
**Authors:** Ferreira CR, Cassiman D, Blau N
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.04.002)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2019 Jun;127(2):117-121. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.04.002.
Epub  2019 Apr 12.

Clinical and biochemical footprints of inherited metabolic diseases. II. 
Metabolic liver diseases.

Ferreira CR(1), Cassiman D(2), Blau N(3).

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: ferreiracr@mail.nih.gov.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology-Hepatology and Metabolic Center, University of 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: david.cassiman@kuleuven.be.
(3)Dietmar-Hopp Metabolic Center, University Children's Hospital, Heidelberg, 
Germany; Division of Metabolism, Children's Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: nenad.blau@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Inherited metabolic diseases account for about one third of pediatric patients 
with hepatomegaly, acute liver failure, cirrhosis or cholestasis. Specifically 
for pediatric acute liver failure, they account for 10-15% of cases, with a 
mortality of 22-65%. The percentage of acute liver failure caused by an 
inherited metabolic disease in children <2-3 years of age is even higher, 
ranging from a third to half of all cases. Metabolic liver disease accounts for 
8-13% of all pediatric liver transplantations. Despite this high burden of 
disease, underdiagnosis remains common. We reviewed and updated the list of 
known metabolic etiologies associated with various types of metabolic liver 
involvement, and found 142 relevant inborn errors of metabolism. This represents 
the second of a series of articles attempting to create and maintain a 
comprehensive list of clinical and metabolic differential diagnoses according to 
system involvement.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.04.002
PMCID: PMC10515611
PMID: 31005404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest: none