---
reference_id: "PMID:25246995"
title: "Kümmell's Disease: Clarifying the Mechanisms and Patients' Inclusion Criteria."
authors:
- Matzaroglou C
- Georgiou CS
- Panagopoulos A
- Assimakopoulos K
- Wilke HJ
- Habermann B
- Panos G
- Kafchitsas K
journal: Open Orthop J
year: '2014'
doi: 10.2174/1874325001408010288
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kümmell's Disease: Clarifying the Mechanisms and Patients' Inclusion Criteria.
**Authors:** Matzaroglou C, Georgiou CS, Panagopoulos A, Assimakopoulos K, Wilke HJ, Habermann B, Panos G, Kafchitsas K
**Journal:** Open Orthop J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1874325001408010288](https://doi.org/10.2174/1874325001408010288)

## Content

1. Open Orthop J. 2014 Sep 15;8:288-97. doi: 10.2174/1874325001408010288. 
eCollection 2014.

Kümmell's Disease: Clarifying the Mechanisms and Patients' Inclusion Criteria.

Matzaroglou C(1), Georgiou CS(1), Panagopoulos A(1), Assimakopoulos K(2), Wilke 
HJ(3), Habermann B(4), Panos G(5), Kafchitsas K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Patras, Greece.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Patras, Greece.
(3)Institute for Orthopedic Research and Biomechanics, University of Ulm, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Johannes Gutenberg University, 
Mainz, Germany.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Patras, Greece.

The three major causes of vertebral body collapse include infection, malignant 
neoplasia, and trauma and it may be difficult to distinguish between them, 
particularly in the presence of severe osteoporosis. In 1891, however, Dr 
Hermann Kümmell, further added another possibility of vertebral body crush; the 
delayed posttraumatic collapse. As originally described, this rare clinical 
entity includes patients, who after a trivial trauma and an asymptomatic 
clinical course they develop a progressive vertebral body collapse and a painful 
kyphosis. Although more than a century has passed from its initial description, 
only few cases have been reported in the literature, whereas the main pathologic 
eliciting event is still under investigation. As a consequence, great 
controversy exists regarding the discrete features of the clinical course, its 
radiographic appearance and the histopathological findings. To explain the time 
lag between the initial trauma and the occurrence of the vertebral collapse, the 
hypothesis of ischemic necrosis was advanced. Equation of Kümmell's disease with 
vertebral osteonecrosis, however, has wrongly led many authors to report cases 
of Kümmell's disease, even in the absence of history of spinal trauma. On the 
other hand, high coincidence of vertebral osteonecrosis and the pathognomonic 
radiographic finding of intravertebral vacuum cleft, has further added to the 
confusion. In this review we present an overview of the literature on Kümmell's 
disease, focusing on the different proposed eliciting mechanisms. We also 
highlight controversial subjects on clinical course, diagnosis and treatment of 
this entity, in an attempt to further clarify patients' inclusion criteria.

DOI: 10.2174/1874325001408010288
PMCID: PMC4168653
PMID: 25246995