---
reference_id: "PMID:18313359"
title: "Congenital muscle disorders with cores: the ryanodine receptor calcium channel paradigm."
authors:
- Treves S
- Jungbluth H
- Muntoni F
- Zorzato F
journal: Curr Opin Pharmacol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2008.01.005
keywords:
- Humans
- Malignant Hyperthermia/genetics
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Myopathies, Structural, Congenital/genetics"
- "Myopathy, Central Core/genetics"
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
- Selenoproteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital muscle disorders with cores: the ryanodine receptor calcium channel paradigm.
**Authors:** Treves S, Jungbluth H, Muntoni F, Zorzato F
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pharmacol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.coph.2008.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coph.2008.01.005)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2008 Jun;8(3):319-26. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2008.01.005.
Epub  2008 Mar 4.

Congenital muscle disorders with cores: the ryanodine receptor calcium channel 
paradigm.

Treves S(1), Jungbluth H, Muntoni F, Zorzato F.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Diagnostica, Universita' di Ferrara, 
44100 Ferrara, Italy.

Dysregulation of calcium signals because of defects of the skeletal muscle 
sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor; RyR1) is 
causative of several congenital muscle disorders including malignant 
hyperthermia (MH; MIM #145600), central core disease (CCD; MIM #11700), specific 
forms of multi-minicore disease (MmD; MIM # 255320) and centronuclear myopathy 
(CNM). Experimental data have shown that RYR1 mutations result mainly in four 
types of channel defects: one class of RYR1 mutations (MH) cause the channels to 
become hypersensitive to activation by electrical and pharmacological stimuli. 
The second class of RYR1 mutations (CCD) result in leaky channels leading to 
depletion of Ca(2+) from SR stores. A third class of RYR1 mutations linked to 
CCD causes excitation-contraction uncoupling, whereby activation of the voltage 
sensor Cav1.1 is unable to release calcium from the SR. The fourth class of 
mutations are unveiled by wild type allele silencing, and cause a decrease of 
mutant RyR1 channels expression on SR membranes. In this review, we discuss the 
classes of RYR1 mutations which have been associated with CCD, MmD and related 
neuromuscular phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coph.2008.01.005
PMID: 18313359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]