---
reference_id: "PMID:38186910"
title: "A Rare Case of Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome with Hirschsprung disorder: Dental characteristics and its Clinical Management"
authors:
- Khandelwal D
- Kulkarni SV
- Kalra N
- Tyagi R
- Khatri A
- Yangdol P
journal: J Clin Exp Dent
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4317/jced.60930
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Rare Case of Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome with Hirschsprung disorder: Dental characteristics and its Clinical Management
**Authors:** Khandelwal D, Kulkarni SV, Kalra N, Tyagi R, Khatri A, Yangdol P
**Journal:** J Clin Exp Dent (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4317/jced.60930](https://doi.org/10.4317/jced.60930)

## Content

1. J Clin Exp Dent. 2023 Dec 1;15(12):e1054-e1059.

A Rare Case of Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome with Hirschsprung disorder: Dental characteristics and its Clinical Management.

Khandelwal D, Kulkarni SV, Kalra N, Tyagi R, Khatri A, Yangdol P.

Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS) is an autosomal dominant syndrome caused by
de novo gene mutations. It is characterized by a number of congenital defects
such as craniofacial, skeletal, neurological, and connective tissue
abnormalities. It is characterized by craniosynostosis and marfanoid features.
To our knowledge, approximately 75 shprintzen-goldberg syndrome cases have been
documented since it was first described in 1982. Rare cases of
shprintzen-goldberg syndrome have been reported in which the mutated gene was
inherited from an unaffected parent through their germline cells i.e., egg or
sperm cells. This is a case report of a 6-year-old boy with clinically
diagnosed Shprintzen-Goldberg Syndrome with Hirschsprung disease. Patient
reported with multiple caries and malpositioned teeth. The treatment initiated
with awareness about cariogenic foods, oral hygiene instructions and diet
counselling. Subsequently, comprehensive rehabilitation was done.

DOI: 10.4317/jced.60930
PMID: 38186910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
