---
reference_id: "PMID:39650985"
title: "Loop Ileostomy With Colonic Lavage: Case Report of an Alternative to Total Colectomy in the Setting of Fulminant Clostridium difficile Colitis."
authors:
- Ina EA
- Ziton S
- Dourvetakis K
- Corallo JP
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.73141
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loop Ileostomy With Colonic Lavage: Case Report of an Alternative to Total Colectomy in the Setting of Fulminant Clostridium difficile Colitis.
**Authors:** Ina EA, Ziton S, Dourvetakis K, Corallo JP
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.73141](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.73141)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Nov 6;16(11):e73141. doi: 10.7759/cureus.73141. eCollection 2024 
Nov.

Loop Ileostomy With Colonic Lavage: Case Report of an Alternative to Total 
Colectomy in the Setting of Fulminant Clostridium difficile Colitis.

Ina EA(1), Ziton S(2), Dourvetakis K(3), Corallo JP(4).

Author information:
(1)Osteopathic Medical School, Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel 
College of Osteopathic Medicine, Fort Lauderdale, USA.
(2)General Surgery, Broward Health Medical Center, Fort Lauderdale, USA.
(3)General Surgery, Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of 
Osteopathic Medicine, Fort Lauderdale, USA.
(4)General Surgery, Broward Health and South Florida Surgical Specialists, Fort 
Lauderdale, USA.

Fulminant Clostridium difficile colitis is a severe and potentially 
life-threatening form of Clostridium difficile-associated bacterial disease 
leading to inflammation and damage to the colon. Complications such as toxic 
megacolon, sepsis, and multi-organ failure commonly occur in individuals with 
compromised immune systems and recent antibiotic use. Management of Clostridium 
difficile colitis involves optimization of fluid and electrolyte balance, 
and elimination of bacteria commonly by administering vancomycin or fidaxomicin. 
In cases where pharmacological management has been ineffective, fecal microbiota 
transplantation and surgical intervention demonstrated success. Historically, 
surgical intervention has involved a total abdominal colectomy with end 
ileostomy; however, other surgical options have shown increasing benefits with 
preservation of the colon.  This case report aims to provide an example of an 
alternative management strategy for fulminant Clostridium difficile infections, 
via the use of a loop ileostomy and colonic lavage. The combination of loop 
ileostomy and colonic lavage promotes bowel rest, removes toxins, and promotes 
healing while decreasing inflammation. As with all management modalities, it is 
essential to recognize the associated complications. The potential benefits 
should be carefully weighed against the risks on a case-by-case basis with the 
help of a multidisciplinary team as illustrated through this case report. 
Overall, early recognition and treatment of fulminant Clostridium difficile 
colitis using loop ileostomy and colonic lavage prevents further disease 
progression and improves patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2024, Ina et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.73141
PMCID: PMC11624037
PMID: 39650985

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. 
Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all 
authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared 
that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted 
work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no 
financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any 
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.