---
reference_id: "PMID:25402491"
title: Functional outcomes and efficiency of rehabilitation in a national cohort of patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome and other inflammatory polyneuropathies.
authors:
- Alexandrescu R
- Siegert RJ
- Turner-Stokes L
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110532
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Cost-Benefit Analysis
- Disability Evaluation
- England/epidemiology
- Female
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/epidemiology, rehabilitation"
- Health Impact Assessment
- Humans
- Inpatients
- Length of Stay
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- "Polyneuropathies/epidemiology, rehabilitation"
- Risk Factors
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional outcomes and efficiency of rehabilitation in a national cohort of patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome and other inflammatory polyneuropathies.
**Authors:** Alexandrescu R, Siegert RJ, Turner-Stokes L
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0110532](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0110532)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 17;9(11):e110532. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110532.
eCollection 2014.

Functional outcomes and efficiency of rehabilitation in a national cohort of
patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome and other inflammatory polyneuropathies.

Alexandrescu R(1), Siegert RJ(2), Turner-Stokes L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Palliative Care, Policy and Rehabilitation, School of Medicine,
King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Public Health and Psychosocial Studies and School of Rehabilitation
and Occupational Studies, Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New
Zealand.
(3)Department of Palliative Care, Policy and Rehabilitation, School of Medicine,
King's College London, London, United Kingdom; Regional Rehabilitation Unit,
Northwick Park Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVES: To describe functional outcomes, care needs and cost-efficiency of
hospital rehabilitation for a UK cohort of inpatients with complex
rehabilitation needs arising from inflammatory polyneuropathies.
SUBJECTS AND SETTING: 186 patients consecutively admitted to specialist
neurorehabilitation centres in England with Guillain-Barré Syndrome (n = 118
(63.4%)) or other inflammatory polyneuropathies, including chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy (n = 15 (8.1%) or critical illness neuropathy (n =
32 (17.2%)).
METHODS: Cohort analysis of data from the UK Rehabilitation Outcomes
Collaborative national clinical dataset. Outcome measures include the UK
Functional Assessment Measure, Northwick Park Dependency Score (NPDS) and Care
Needs Assessment (NPCNA). Patients were analysed in three groups of dependency
based on their admission NPDS score: 'low' (NPDS<10), 'medium' (NPDS 10-24) and
'high' (NPDS ≥ 25). Cost-efficiency was measured as the time taken to offset the
cost of rehabilitation by savings in NPCNA-estimated costs of on-going care in
the community.
RESULTS: The mean rehabilitation length of stay was 72.2 (sd = 66.6) days.
Significant differences were seen between the diagnostic groups on admission,
but all showed significant improvements between admission and discharge, in both
motor and cognitive function (p<0.0001). Patients who were highly dependent on
admission had the longest lengths of stay (mean 97.0 (SD 79.0) days), but also
showed the greatest reduction in on-going care costs (£1049 per week (SD £994)),
so that overall they were the most cost-efficient to treat.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with polyneuropathies have both physical and cognitive
disabilities that are amenable to change with rehabilitation, resulting in
significant reduction in on-going care-costs, especially for highly dependent
patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110532
PMCID: PMC4234218
PMID: 25402491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Outcome measurement is a
specific research interest of the authors’ centre. The UK FIM+FAM and the
NPDS/NPCNA were both developed through this department, but are disseminated
free of charge to trained users. None of the authors has any personal financial
interests in the work undertaken or the findings reported. This does not alter
the authors’ adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data.
