---
reference_id: "PMID:38522082"
title: "MCOLN1/TRPML1 in the lysosome: a promising target for autophagy modulation in diverse diseases."
authors:
- Qi J
- Li Q
- Xin T
- Lu Q
- Lin J
- Zhang Y
- Luo H
- Zhang F
- Xing Y
- Wang W
- Cui D
- Wang M
journal: Autophagy
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/15548627.2024.2333715
keywords:
- Humans
- Autophagy/physiology
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Animals
- Transient Receptor Potential Channels/metabolism
- "Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, drug therapy"
- "Myocardial Reperfusion Injury/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MCOLN1/TRPML1 in the lysosome: a promising target for autophagy modulation in diverse diseases.
**Authors:** Qi J, Li Q, Xin T, Lu Q, Lin J, Zhang Y, Luo H, Zhang F, Xing Y, Wang W, Cui D, Wang M
**Journal:** Autophagy (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15548627.2024.2333715](https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2024.2333715)

## Content

1. Autophagy. 2024 Aug;20(8):1712-1722. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2024.2333715. Epub 
2024 Mar 24.

MCOLN1/TRPML1 in the lysosome: a promising target for autophagy modulation in 
diverse diseases.

Qi J(1), Li Q(2), Xin T(2), Lu Q(2), Lin J(2), Zhang Y(2), Luo H(1), Zhang F(2), 
Xing Y(2), Wang W(2), Cui D(3), Wang M(4).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Autophagy and Major Chronic 
Non-Communicable Diseases, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical University, 
Zhanjiang, Guangdong, China.
(2)Jiangsu Province Key Laboratory of Anesthesiology, Jiangsu Province Key 
Laboratory of Anesthesia and Analgesia Application Technology, NMPA Key 
Laboratory for Research and Evaluation of Narcotic and Psychotropic Drugs, 
Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, The Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Shengjing Hospital, China 
of Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning China.

MCOLN1/TRPML1 is a nonselective cationic channel specifically localized to the 
late endosome and lysosome. With its property of mediating the release of 
several divalent cations such as Ca2+, Zn2+ and Fe2+ from the lysosome to the 
cytosol, MCOLN1 plays a pivotal role in regulating a variety of cellular events 
including endocytosis, exocytosis, lysosomal biogenesis, lysosome reformation, 
and especially in Macroautophagy/autophagy. Autophagy is a highly conserved 
catabolic process that maintains cytoplasmic integrity by removing superfluous 
proteins and damaged organelles. Acting as the terminal compartments, lysosomes 
are crucial for the completion of the autophagy process. This review delves into 
the emerging role of MCOLN1 in controlling the autophagic process by regulating 
lysosomal ionic homeostasis, thereby governing the fundamental functions of 
lysosomes. Furthermore, this review summarizes the physiological relevance as 
well as molecular mechanisms through which MCOLN1 orchestrates autophagy, 
consequently influencing mitochondria turnover, cell apoptosis and migration. In 
addition, we have illustrated the implications of MCOLN1-regulated autophagy in 
the pathological process of cancer and myocardial ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) 
injury. In summary, given the involvement of MCOLN1-mediated autophagy in the 
pathogenesis of cancer and myocardial I/R injury, targeting MCOLN1 May provide 
clues for developing new therapeutic strategies for the treatment of these 
diseases. Exploring the regulation of MCOLN1-mediated autophagy in diverse 
diseases contexts will surely broaden our understanding of this pathway and 
offer its potential as a promising drug target.Abbreviation: CCCP:carbonyl 
cyanide3-chlorophenylhydrazone; CQ:chloroquine; HCQ: hydroxychloroquine;I/R: 
ischemia-reperfusion; MAP1LC3/LC3:microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 
3; MCOLN1/TRPML1:mucolipin TRP cation channel 1; MLIV: mucolipidosis type IV; 
MTORC1:MTOR complex 1; ROS: reactive oxygenspecies; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2024.2333715
PMCID: PMC11262240
PMID: 38522082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).