---
reference_id: "PMID:40001143"
title: "Epidemiology of inherited metabolic disorders in newborn screening: insights from three years of experience in Southern Iran."
authors:
- Salarian L
- Ilkhanipoor H
- Amirhakimi A
- Afshar Z
- Nahid S
- Moradi Ardekani F
- Rahimi N
- Yazdani N
- Nikravesh A
- Beyzaei Z
- Moravej H
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03602-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- Iran/epidemiology
- Female
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/epidemiology, diagnosis"
- "Metabolic Diseases/epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of inherited metabolic disorders in newborn screening: insights from three years of experience in Southern Iran.
**Authors:** Salarian L, Ilkhanipoor H, Amirhakimi A, Afshar Z, Nahid S, Moradi Ardekani F, Rahimi N, Yazdani N, Nikravesh A, Beyzaei Z, Moravej H
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03602-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03602-w)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Feb 25;20(1):84. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03602-w.

Epidemiology of inherited metabolic disorders in newborn screening: insights
from three years of experience in Southern Iran.

Salarian L(1)(2), Ilkhanipoor H(2), Amirhakimi A(2), Afshar Z(2), Nahid S(3),
Moradi Ardekani F(4), Rahimi N(5), Yazdani N(6), Nikravesh A(7), Beyzaei Z(8),
Moravej H(9).

Author information:
(1)Neonatal Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz,
Iran.
(2)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, School of Medicine,
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Saman Lab, Shiraz, Iran.
(4)Head of Non-Communicable Diseases Group, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(5)Public Health expert Non-Communicable Diseases Group, Shiraz University of
Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(6)Department of Nursing, Community based Psychiatric Care Research Center,
School of Nursing and Midwifery, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz,
Iran.
(7)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology & Metabolism, Bushehr University of
Medical Sciences, Bushehr, Iran.
(8)Shiraz Transplant Research Center (STRC), Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(9)Neonatal Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz,
Iran. drmoravej@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Newborn screening is essential for the early detection of congenital
genetic and metabolic disorders, enabling timely intervention to prevent
morbidity, mortality, and disabilities associated with inherited metabolic
disorders (IMDs). The Iranian Neonatal Screening Program piloted in Fars
Province, screening nearly 100% of neonates for 20 disorders. This study aimed
to assess the epidemiology of these metabolic diseases. From March 2019 to
September 2021, 138,689 neonates were screened using tandem mass spectrometry
(MS/MS) on dried blood spots. Those with abnormal results were referred to
pediatric endocrinology and metabolism specialists for confirmatory testing per
American College of Medical Genetics guidelines.
RESULTS: Among the screened neonates, 139 patients of IMDs were identified,
yielding an estimated birth prevalence of 1:1000. The positive cases included 55
aminoacidopathies, 47 organic acidemias, 31 fatty acid oxidation disorders, and
6 urea cycle defects were detected. The most prevalent IMDs were phenylalanine
metabolism disorders, short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency,
3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency, and methylmalonic acidemia.
Notably, the prevalence of IMDs in Fars Province is significantly higher than
average global statistics. Additionally, we observed that certain disorders
previously deemed very rare exhibit a relatively high prevalence in this region.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data highlight the efficiency and robustness of neonatal
screening for IMD in Iran. It demonstrates the need for expanded screening
efforts across the entire country. One limitation of this study is that the
screening was conducted in only one state, which may not reflect the broader
population of Iran. Future research should involve nationwide implementation of
screening programs to validate our findings and assess the prevalence of IMDs in
diverse regions. Furthermore, exploring the applicability of our screening
methods in other Middle Eastern countries could help promote early and
life-changing diagnoses across the region.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03602-w
PMCID: PMC11853994
PMID: 40001143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: All procedures performed in studies involving human participants
were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or
national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its later
amendments or comparable ethical standards. The study was approved by the
Bioethics Committee of the Medical University of Shiraz, Iran (No. IR.SUMS.REC.
1400.291). Informed consent was obtained from legal guardians. Consent for
publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: The authors declare no
conflict of interests.
