---
reference_id: "PMID:29989318"
title: TIMP-1 association with collagen type I overproduction in hereditary gingival fibromatosis.
authors:
- Gawron K
- Ochała-Kłos A
- Nowakowska Z
- Bereta G
- Łazarz-Bartyzel K
- Grabiec AM
- Plakwicz P
- Górska R
- Fertala A
- Chomyszyn-Gajewska M
- Potempa J
journal: Oral Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/odi.12938
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- Collagen Type I/metabolism
- "Connective Tissue Growth Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Fibroblasts
- "Fibromatosis, Gingival/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Expression
- Gingiva/cytology
- "HSP47 Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- Matrix Metalloproteinase 1/metabolism
- Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinase-1/metabolism
- "Transforming Growth Factor beta1/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TIMP-1 association with collagen type I overproduction in hereditary gingival fibromatosis.
**Authors:** Gawron K, Ochała-Kłos A, Nowakowska Z, Bereta G, Łazarz-Bartyzel K, Grabiec AM, Plakwicz P, Górska R, Fertala A, Chomyszyn-Gajewska M, Potempa J
**Journal:** Oral Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/odi.12938](https://doi.org/10.1111/odi.12938)

## Content

1. Oral Dis. 2018 Nov;24(8):1581-1590. doi: 10.1111/odi.12938. Epub 2018 Aug 14.

TIMP-1 association with collagen type I overproduction in hereditary gingival 
fibromatosis.

Gawron K(1), Ochała-Kłos A(2), Nowakowska Z(1), Bereta G(1), Łazarz-Bartyzel 
K(3), Grabiec AM(1), Plakwicz P(4), Górska R(4), Fertala A(5), 
Chomyszyn-Gajewska M(3), Potempa J(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Medical College, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, 
Poland.
(3)Department of Periodontology and Oral Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(4)Department of Periodontology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Department of Oral Immunology and Infectious Diseases, School of Dentistry, 
University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the processes associated with the excessive 
production of collagen I in hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three HGF subjects and five controls were enrolled in the 
study. Histomorphological and immunohistological analyses were performed on 
gingival tissues. The expression of heat-shock protein 47 (HSP47), collagen I, 
transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1), connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), 
matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) and tissue inhibitor of matrix 
metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) by gingival fibroblasts isolated from HGF and 
controls was analysed using qRT-PCR, Western blotting and ELISA.
RESULTS: Considerable accumulation of fibrotic fibrils and increased synthesis 
of HSP47 were noted in HGF gingival tissues. The synthesis of collagen I, HSP47, 
TGF-β1, CTGF and TIMP-1 was significantly elevated in HGF gingival fibroblasts 
compared with controls, while the production of MMP-1 was decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: We report that fibrosis in HGF gingival tissues is associated with 
increased synthesis of HSP47. This finding was confirmed by an in vitro study, 
where excessive production of collagen I was associated with increased synthesis 
of HSP47, TGF-β1 and CTGF by HGF gingival fibroblasts. Moreover, the shift in 
the TIMP-1/MMP-1 ratio identifies increased synthesis of TIMP-1 as one of the 
processes associated with collagen I overproduction in HGF fibroblasts.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/odi.12938
PMID: 29989318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]