---
reference_id: "PMID:39541246"
title: "Improving Diagnosis of Acute Cholecystitis with US: New Paradigms."
authors:
- Patel R
- Tse JR
- Shen L
- Bingham DB
- Kamaya A
journal: Radiographics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1148/rg.240032
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cholecystitis, Acute/diagnostic imaging"
- Ultrasonography/methods
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Image Enhancement/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Improving Diagnosis of Acute Cholecystitis with US: New Paradigms.
**Authors:** Patel R, Tse JR, Shen L, Bingham DB, Kamaya A
**Journal:** Radiographics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1148/rg.240032](https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.240032)

## Content

1. Radiographics. 2024 Dec;44(12):e240032. doi: 10.1148/rg.240032.

Improving Diagnosis of Acute Cholecystitis with US: New Paradigms.

Patel R(1), Tse JR(1), Shen L(1), Bingham DB(1), Kamaya A(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Radiology (R.P., J.R.T., L.S., A.K.) and Pathology 
(D.B.B.), Stanford University, 300 Pasteur Dr, Palo Alto, CA 94304.

Acute cholecystitis is an inflammatory condition of the gallbladder typically 
incited by mechanical obstruction. Accurate diagnosis of this common clinical 
condition is challenging due to variable imaging appearances as well as 
overlapping clinical manifestations with biliary colic, acute hepatitis, 
pancreatitis, and cholangiopathies. In acute cholecystitis, increased dilatation 
and high intraluminal pressures lead to gallbladder inflammation and may 
progress to gangrenous changes, focal wall necrosis, and subsequent perforation. 
In acute calculous cholecystitis, gallstones are the cause of obstruction and 
are often impacted in the gallbladder neck or cystic duct, leading to 
gallbladder inflammation. In acalculous cholecystitis, patients are typically 
critically ill, often with hypotensive episodes and prolonged gallbladder 
stasis, which lead to obstruction, gallbladder ischemia, and inflammation. 
Helpful sonographic findings of acute cholecystitis include a dilated 
gallbladder; increased intraluminal pressures in the gallbladder, resulting in a 
bulging fundus (tensile fundus sign); intraluminal sludge in the setting of 
right upper quadrant pain; wall hyperemia, which may be quantified by elevated 
cystic artery velocities or hepatic artery velocities; mucosal ischemic changes, 
characterized by loss of mucosal echogenicity; pericholecystic inflammation, 
characterized by hyperechoic pericholecystic fat; and mucosal discontinuity. 
Extruded complex fluid next to a wall defect is definitive for gallbladder wall 
perforation, and further evaluation with CT or MRI allows evaluation of the full 
extent of perforation and other potential complications. The sonographic Murphy 
sign, while helpful if positive, is relatively insensitive for accurate 
diagnosis of acute cholecystitis. Thus, overreliance on the sonographic Murphy 
sign results in surprisingly low diagnostic accuracy in practice.

© RSNA, 2024.

DOI: 10.1148/rg.240032
PMID: 39541246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]