---
reference_id: PMID:8829958
title: Left ventricular remodelling after acute myocardial infarction--solved and unsolved issues.
authors:
- Bassand JP
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/16.suppl_i.58
keywords:
- Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/therapeutic use
- "Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- "Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular/etiology, physiopathology, prevention & control"
- "Myocardial Infarction/complications, drug therapy"
- Stroke Volume/drug effects
- Thrombolytic Therapy
- "Ventricular Dysfunction, Left/etiology, physiopathology, prevention & control"
- "Ventricular Function, Left/drug effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Left ventricular remodelling after acute myocardial infarction--solved and unsolved issues.
**Authors:** Bassand JP
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/16.suppl_i.58](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/16.suppl_i.58)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J. 1995 Aug;16 Suppl I:58-63. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/16.suppl_i.58.

Left ventricular remodelling after acute myocardial infarction--solved and 
unsolved issues.

Bassand JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de Cardiologie, Hospital Saint Jacques, Besancon, France.

Left ventricular remodelling after acute myocardial infarction, through 
long-term left ventricular chamber dilatation and increased wall stress can 
result in alteration of the contractile properties of the non-infarct zone, 
impairment of the systolic and diastolic performances of the left ventricle, and 
eventually congestive heart failure. Left ventricular remodelling is influenced 
by several factors, among which the role of systemic and tissue renin 
angiotensin systems is determinant. Pharmacological interventions on the renin 
angiotensin systems were shown to limit left ventricular remodelling and reduce 
mortality from acute myocardial infarction in rats and humans, although the 
results of some trials remain controversial. To date, the beneficial effects of 
ACE inhibitors have only been demonstrated in patients with a low residual 
ejection fraction. Recent observations of changes in left ventricular chamber 
dilatation and left ventricular wall hypertrophy occurring over the course of 
time after acute myocardial infarction allow better definition of the subset of 
patients who are at risk of progressive left ventricular dysfunction and 
congestive heart failure. An akinetic surface >20%, a left ventricular ejection 
fraction <0 x 40, an anterior location of the infarction, a stroke volume <31 
ml.m(-2) during the acute phase, and persistent occlusion of the infarct-related 
artery are the most powerful predictors of late left ventricular function 
impairment. Some issues remain controversial, such as the optimal time for 
introducing ACE inhibitors after the onset of symptoms, the potential additive 
effects of ACE inhibitors given in conjunction with thrombolytic therapy, and 
the role of systemic angioplasty of the infarct-related artery.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/16.suppl_i.58
PMID: 8829958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]