---
reference_id: "PMID:37988592"
title: Penetrance and expressivity of mitochondrial variants in a large clinically unselected population.
authors:
- Cannon SJ
- Hall T
- Hawkes G
- Colclough K
- Boggan RM
- Wright CF
- Pickett SJ
- Hattersley AT
- Weedon MN
- Patel KA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad194
keywords:
- Humans
- Penetrance
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/genetics"
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics
- Heart Failure
- Deafness/genetics
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Penetrance and expressivity of mitochondrial variants in a large clinically unselected population.
**Authors:** Cannon SJ, Hall T, Hawkes G, Colclough K, Boggan RM, Wright CF, Pickett SJ, Hattersley AT, Weedon MN, Patel KA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddad194](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddad194)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2024 Feb 18;33(5):465-474. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad194.

Penetrance and expressivity of mitochondrial variants in a large clinically 
unselected population.

Cannon SJ(1), Hall T(1), Hawkes G(1), Colclough K(2), Boggan RM(3), Wright 
CF(1), Pickett SJ(3), Hattersley AT(1), Weedon MN(1), Patel KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Biomedical Sciences, University of Exeter, 79 
Heavitree Road, Exeter, EX2 4TH, United Kingdom.
(2)Exeter Genomics Laboratory, RILD Building, Royal Devon University Healthcare 
NHS Foundation Trust, Barrack Road, Exeter, EX2 5DW, United Kingdom.
(3)Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Translational and Clinical 
Research Institute, Newcastle University, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.

Whole genome sequencing (WGS) from large clinically unselected cohorts provides 
a unique opportunity to assess the penetrance and expressivity of rare and/or 
known pathogenic mitochondrial variants in population. Using WGS from 179 862 
clinically unselected individuals from the UK Biobank, we performed extensive 
single and rare variant aggregation association analyses of 15 881 mtDNA 
variants and 73 known pathogenic variants with 15 mitochondrial disease-relevant 
phenotypes. We identified 12 homoplasmic and one heteroplasmic variant 
(m.3243A>G) with genome-wide significant associations in our clinically 
unselected cohort. Heteroplasmic m.3243A>G (MAF = 0.0002, a known pathogenic 
variant) was associated with diabetes, deafness and heart failure and 12 
homoplasmic variants increased aspartate aminotransferase levels including three 
low-frequency variants (MAF ~0.002 and beta~0.3 SD). Most pathogenic 
mitochondrial disease variants (n = 66/74) were rare in the population 
(<1:9000). Aggregated or single variant analysis of pathogenic variants showed 
low penetrance in unselected settings for the relevant phenotypes, except 
m.3243A>G. Multi-system disease risk and penetrance of diabetes, deafness and 
heart failure greatly increased with m.3243A>G level ≥ 10%. The odds ratio of 
these traits increased from 5.61, 12.3 and 10.1 to 25.1, 55.0 and 39.5, 
respectively. Diabetes risk with m.3243A>G was further influenced by type 2 
diabetes genetic risk. Our study of mitochondrial variation in a 
large-unselected population identified novel associations and demonstrated that 
pathogenic mitochondrial variants have lower penetrance in clinically unselected 
settings. m.3243A>G was an exception at higher heteroplasmy showing a 
significant impact on health making it a good candidate for incidental 
reporting.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddad194
PMCID: PMC10877468
PMID: 37988592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]