---
reference_id: "PMID:17142159"
title: Primary ciliary dyskinesia and newborn respiratory distress.
authors:
- Ferkol T
- Leigh M
journal: Semin Perinatol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1053/j.semperi.2005.11.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary ciliary dyskinesia and newborn respiratory distress.
**Authors:** Ferkol T, Leigh M
**Journal:** Semin Perinatol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.semperi.2005.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.semperi.2005.11.001)

## Content

1. Semin Perinatol. 2006 Dec;30(6):335-40. doi: 10.1053/j.semperi.2005.11.001.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia and newborn respiratory distress.

Ferkol T(1), Leigh M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. ferkol_t@kids.wustl.edu

Primary ciliary dyskinesia is an autosomal recessive genetic disease that 
results in impaired mucociliary clearance causing progressive involvement of the 
upper and lower respiratory tract, characterized by airway obstruction and 
recurrent infections of the lungs, middle ear and paranasal sinuses. Other 
clinical manifestations include situs inversus totalis and male infertility. 
Recently, neonatal respiratory distress has been found to be a common clinical 
presentation of patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia, indicating that this 
is an important symptom complex in early life for this condition. The diagnosis 
requires a high index of suspicion, but primary ciliary dyskinesia must be 
considered in any term neonate who develops respiratory distress or persistent 
hypoxemia and has situs inversus or an affected sibling. Moreover, further 
evaluation is warranted in children who had transient respiratory distress in 
newborn period and subsequently develop persistent cough or chronic otitis 
media.

DOI: 10.1053/j.semperi.2005.11.001
PMID: 17142159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]