---
reference_id: "PMID:24277745"
title: Identification of collagenase as a critical virulence factor for invasiveness and transmission of pathogenic Leptospira species.
authors:
- Kassegne K
- Hu W
- Ojcius DM
- Sun D
- Ge Y
- Zhao J
- Yang XF
- Li L
- Yan J
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jit659
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of collagenase as a critical virulence factor for invasiveness and transmission of pathogenic Leptospira species.
**Authors:** Kassegne K, Hu W, Ojcius DM, Sun D, Ge Y, Zhao J, Yang XF, Li L, Yan J
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jit659](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jit659)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2014 Apr 1;209(7):1105-15. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jit659. Epub 2013
 Nov 25.

Identification of collagenase as a critical virulence factor for invasiveness 
and transmission of pathogenic Leptospira species.

Kassegne K(1), Hu W, Ojcius DM, Sun D, Ge Y, Zhao J, Yang XF, Li L, Yan J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Medical Microbiology, State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis 
and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine.

BACKGROUND:  Leptospirosis is a global zoonotic disease. Transmission of 
Leptospira from animals to humans occurs through contact with water contaminated 
with leptospire-containing urine of infected animals. However, the molecular 
basis for the invasiveness of Leptospira and transmission of leptospirosis 
remains unknown.
METHODS:  Activity of Leptospira interrogans strain Lai colA gene product (ColA) 
to hydrolyze different collagenic substrates was determined by 
spectrophotometry. Expression and secretion of ColA during infection were 
detected by reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction and 
Western blot assay. The colA gene-deleted (ΔcolA) and colA gene-complemented 
(CΔcolA) mutants were generated to determine the roles of ColA in transcytosis 
in vitro and virulence in hamsters.
RESULTS:  Recombinant or native ColA hydrolyzed all the tested substrates in 
which type III collagen was the favorite substrate with 2.16 mg/mL Km and 35.6 
h(-)(1) Kcat values. Coincubation of the spirochete with HUVEC or HEK293 cells 
directly caused the significant elevation of ColA expression and secretion. 
Compared with wild-type strain, ΔcolA mutant displayed much-attenuated 
transcytosis through HEK293 and HUVEC monolayers, and less leptospires in blood, 
lung, liver, kidney and urine and 25-fold-decreased 50% lethal dose and milder 
histopathological injury in hamsters.
CONCLUSIONS:  The product of colA gene is a collagenase as a crucial virulence 
factor in the invasiveness and transmission of L. interrogans.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jit659
PMID: 24277745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]