---
reference_id: "PMID:36729806"
title: ANATOMICAL AND FUNCTIONAL OUTCOMES OF BEVACIZUMAB TREATMENT IN PEDIATRIC AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE BESTROPHINOPATHY.
authors:
- Jacobs M
- El-Rashedy M
- Fowler N
- Shirkey B
- Kitchens J
- Maldonado RS
journal: Retin Cases Brief Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000001390
keywords:
- Humans
- Bevacizumab/therapeutic use
- Angiogenesis Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Female
- Child
- Male
- "Retinal Diseases/drug therapy, genetics, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/drug therapy, genetics, diagnosis"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Intravitreal Injections
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Fluorescein Angiography
- "Choroidal Neovascularization/drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ANATOMICAL AND FUNCTIONAL OUTCOMES OF BEVACIZUMAB TREATMENT IN PEDIATRIC AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE BESTROPHINOPATHY.
**Authors:** Jacobs M, El-Rashedy M, Fowler N, Shirkey B, Kitchens J, Maldonado RS
**Journal:** Retin Cases Brief Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ICB.0000000000001390](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICB.0000000000001390)

## Content

1. Retin Cases Brief Rep. 2024 May 1;18(3):378-386. doi:
10.1097/ICB.0000000000001390. Epub 2023 Dec 7.

ANATOMICAL AND FUNCTIONAL OUTCOMES OF BEVACIZUMAB TREATMENT IN PEDIATRIC
AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE BESTROPHINOPATHY.

Jacobs M(1), El-Rashedy M(1), Fowler N(1), Shirkey B(2), Kitchens J(2),
Maldonado RS(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, Kentucky.
(2)Retina Associates of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky; and.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to report functional and anatomical
outcomes of anti-VEGF treatment in eyes with autosomal recessive
bestrophinopathy (ARB) presenting in the first decade of life.
METHODS: The study included case series of four eyes from two siblings with
compound heterozygous mutations in the BEST1 gene who were treated with eight
monthly intravitreal bevacizumab injections. Response to treatment was analyzed
using color fundus photography, fundus autofluorescence, optical coherence
tomography, OCT angiography, and microperimetry.
RESULTS: Patient 1 (male, age 9 years) had visual acuity of 20/20 in the right
eye and 20/50 in the left eye. Patient 2 (female, age 10 years) had visual
acuity of 20/25 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. All eyes had
multifocal subretinal deposition of lipofuscin and subretinal fluid, and three
eyes had choroidal neovascularization (CNV). Lipofuscin material reabsorbed in 2
of 4 eyes, the CNV regressed in 3 of 3 eyes, a bacillary detachment resolved in
1 of 1 eye, but the subretinal fluid did not change. Functional improvement in
visual acuity was noted, but MP showed scattered areas of reduced retinal
sensitivity. No ocular or systemic side effects were detected.
CONCLUSION: Anti-VEGF treatment of choroidal neovascularization in eyes with ARB
resulted in anatomical changes that were only clinically significant in the eye
with decreased visual acuity. The hyporeflective subretinal material remained
unchanged suggesting a nonexudative cause. These findings provide new insights
into the management of ARB, especially in pediatric subjects with CNV.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on
behalf of the Opthalmic Communications Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000001390
PMCID: PMC11027967
PMID: 36729806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors has any
financial/conflicting interests to disclose.
