---
reference_id: "PMID:12562304"
title: An evaluation of current cholera treatment.
authors:
- Bhattacharya SK
journal: Expert Opin Pharmacother
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1517/14656566.4.2.141
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An evaluation of current cholera treatment.
**Authors:** Bhattacharya SK
**Journal:** Expert Opin Pharmacother (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1517/14656566.4.2.141](https://doi.org/10.1517/14656566.4.2.141)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2003 Feb;4(2):141-6. doi: 10.1517/14656566.4.2.141.

An evaluation of current cholera treatment.

Bhattacharya SK(1).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases, P-33, C.I.T. Road, Scheme 
XM, Beliaghata, Kolkata - 700 010, India. bsandip@cal3.vsnl.net.in

Cholera, caused by Vibrio cholerae O1 and O139, is characterised by profuse 
purging of watery stools, and vomiting and dehydration. The mainstay of therapy 
of cholera patients is rehydration with oral rehydration salt solution or 
intravenous Ringer's lactate depending upon the degree of dehydration. 
Antibiotics such as tetracycline, doxycycline, norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin and 
furazolidone may be used as an adjunct to rehydration therapy for severely 
purging cholera patients to reduce the rate of stool output. This shortens the 
duration of hospital stay, stops excretion of vibrios in the stool and minimises 
the requirement of fluids. Resistance to many of these drugs has been observed 
and is a matter of concern. Other antidiarrhoeals are not recommended. Many 
antisecretory drugs have been tried as an adjunct therapy, unfortunately, until 
today, none has been found useful in the treatment of cholera. Feeding during 
and after cholera is emphasised.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.4.2.141
PMID: 12562304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]