---
reference_id: "PMID:39021742"
title: "Successful Treatment of Cutaneous Larva Migrans With Combined Albendazole and Ivermectin Therapy: A Report of Two Cases From Sudan."
authors:
- Shamad M
- Al-Mutairi N
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.64665
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful Treatment of Cutaneous Larva Migrans With Combined Albendazole and Ivermectin Therapy: A Report of Two Cases From Sudan.
**Authors:** Shamad M, Al-Mutairi N
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.64665](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.64665)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jul 16;16(7):e64665. doi: 10.7759/cureus.64665. eCollection 2024 
Jul.

Successful Treatment of Cutaneous Larva Migrans With Combined Albendazole and 
Ivermectin Therapy: A Report of Two Cases From Sudan.

Shamad M(1)(2), Al-Mutairi N(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, University of Bahri, Khartoum, SDN.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait City, KWT.

Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM), caused by third-stage filariform larvae of cat 
and dog hookworms, presents as pruritic, serpiginous tracks upon skin 
penetration by larvae from contaminated soil. Herein, we report the successful 
treatment of two CLM patients using albendazole and ivermectin combination 
therapy. A 42-year-old man from Kordofan and a 38-year-old man from White Nile 
State presented with characteristic lesions on their lower extremities, 
resolving completely within one week post-treatment without recurrence. This 
report highlights the potential of combined albendazole-ivermectin therapy in 
managing CLM amid emerging antihelminthic resistance, suggesting that its 
broader application warrants further investigation.

Copyright © 2024, Shamad et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.64665
PMCID: PMC11253558
PMID: 39021742

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived 
by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.