---
reference_id: "PMID:25156000"
title: "Genetic variation in arsenic (+3 oxidation state) methyltransferase (AS3MT), arsenic metabolism and risk of basal cell carcinoma in a European population."
authors:
- Engström KS
- Vahter M
- Fletcher T
- Leonardi G
- Goessler W
- Gurzau E
- Koppova K
- Rudnai P
- Kumar R
- Broberg K
journal: Environ Mol Mutagen
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/em.21896
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Arsenic/adverse effects, metabolism"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/chemically induced, epidemiology, genetics"
- Case-Control Studies
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genotype
- Haplotypes/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Methyltransferases/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Risk Factors
- White People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic variation in arsenic (+3 oxidation state) methyltransferase (AS3MT), arsenic metabolism and risk of basal cell carcinoma in a European population.
**Authors:** Engström KS, Vahter M, Fletcher T, Leonardi G, Goessler W, Gurzau E, Koppova K, Rudnai P, Kumar R, Broberg K
**Journal:** Environ Mol Mutagen (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/em.21896](https://doi.org/10.1002/em.21896)

## Content

1. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2015 Jan;56(1):60-9. doi: 10.1002/em.21896. Epub 2014 Aug
 25.

Genetic variation in arsenic (+3 oxidation state) methyltransferase (AS3MT),
arsenic metabolism and risk of basal cell carcinoma in a European population.

Engström KS(1), Vahter M, Fletcher T, Leonardi G, Goessler W, Gurzau E, Koppova
K, Rudnai P, Kumar R, Broberg K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden.

Exposure to inorganic arsenic increases the risk of basal cell carcinoma (BCC).
Arsenic metabolism is a susceptibility factor for arsenic toxicity, and specific
haplotypes in arsenic (+3 oxidation state) methyltransferase (AS3MT) have been
associated with increased urinary fractions of the most toxic arsenic
metabolite, methylarsonic acid (MMA). The aim of this study is to elucidate the
association of AS3MT haplotypes with arsenic metabolism and the risk of BCC.
Four AS3MT polymorphisms were genotyped in BCC cases (N = 529) and controls (N =
533) from Eastern Europe with low to moderate arsenic exposure (lifetime average
drinking water concentration: 1.3 µg/L, range 0.01-167 µg/L). Urinary
metabolites [inorganic arsenic (iAs), MMA, dimethylarsinic acid (DMA)] were
analyzed by HPLC-ICPMS. Five AS3MT haplotypes (based on rs3740400 A/C, rs3740393
G/C, rs11191439 T/C and rs1046778 T/C) had frequencies >5%. Individuals with the
CCTC haplotype had lower %iAs (P = 0.032) and %MMA (P = 0.020) in urine, and
higher %DMA (P = 0.033); individuals with the CGCT haplotype had higher %MMA (P
< 0.001) and lower %DMA (P < 0.001). All haplotypes showed increased risk of BCC
with increasing arsenic exposure through drinking water (ORs 1.1-1.4, P values
from <0.001 to 0.082), except for the CCTC haplotype (OR 1.0, CI 0.9-1.2, P
value 0.85). The results suggest that carriage of AS3MT haplotypes associated
with less-efficient arsenic methylation, or lack of AS3MT haplotypes associated
with a more-efficient arsenic methylation, results in higher risk of
arsenic-related BCC. The fact that AS3MT haplotype status modified arsenic
metabolism, and in turn the arsenic-related BCC risk, supports a causal
relationship between low-level arsenic exposure and BCC.

© 2014 The Authors. Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of Environmental Mutagen Society.

DOI: 10.1002/em.21896
PMCID: PMC4322484
PMID: 25156000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
