---
reference_id: "PMID:20157015"
title: Multi-system neurological disease is common in patients with OPA1 mutations.
authors:
- Yu-Wai-Man P
- Griffiths PG
- Gorman GS
- Lourenco CM
- Wright AF
- Auer-Grumbach M
- Toscano A
- Musumeci O
- Valentino ML
- Caporali L
- Lamperti C
- Tallaksen CM
- Duffey P
- Miller J
- Whittaker RG
- Baker MR
- Jackson MJ
- Clarke MP
- Dhillon B
- Czermin B
- Stewart JD
- Hudson G
- Reynier P
- Bonneau D
- Marques W Jr
- Lenaers G
- McFarland R
- Taylor RW
- Turnbull DM
- Votruba M
- Zeviani M
- Carelli V
- Bindoff LA
- Horvath R
- Amati-Bonneau P
- Chinnery PF
journal: Brain
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awq007
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/complications, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/analysis, genetics"
- Family
- Female
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Optic Atrophy, Autosomal Dominant/complications, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multi-system neurological disease is common in patients with OPA1 mutations.
**Authors:** Yu-Wai-Man P, Griffiths PG, Gorman GS, Lourenco CM, Wright AF, Auer-Grumbach M, Toscano A, Musumeci O, Valentino ML, Caporali L, Lamperti C, Tallaksen CM, Duffey P, Miller J, Whittaker RG, Baker MR, Jackson MJ, Clarke MP, Dhillon B, Czermin B, Stewart JD, Hudson G, Reynier P, Bonneau D, Marques W Jr, Lenaers G, McFarland R, Taylor RW, Turnbull DM, Votruba M, Zeviani M, Carelli V, Bindoff LA, Horvath R, Amati-Bonneau P, Chinnery PF
**Journal:** Brain (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awq007](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awq007)

## Content

1. Brain. 2010 Mar;133(Pt 3):771-86. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq007. Epub 2010 Feb 15.

Multi-system neurological disease is common in patients with OPA1 mutations.

Yu-Wai-Man P(1), Griffiths PG, Gorman GS, Lourenco CM, Wright AF, Auer-Grumbach 
M, Toscano A, Musumeci O, Valentino ML, Caporali L, Lamperti C, Tallaksen CM, 
Duffey P, Miller J, Whittaker RG, Baker MR, Jackson MJ, Clarke MP, Dhillon B, 
Czermin B, Stewart JD, Hudson G, Reynier P, Bonneau D, Marques W Jr, Lenaers G, 
McFarland R, Taylor RW, Turnbull DM, Votruba M, Zeviani M, Carelli V, Bindoff 
LA, Horvath R, Amati-Bonneau P, Chinnery PF.

Author information:
(1)Mitochondrial Research Group, The Medical School, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.

Comment in
    Brain. 2011 Apr;134(Pt 4):e169; author reply e170. doi: 
10.1093/brain/awq306.
    Brain. 2011 Nov;134(Pt 11):e195. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr101.
    Brain. 2013 Jul;136(Pt 7):e236. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws340.
    Brain. 2013 Jul;136(Pt 7):e237. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws341.
    Brain. 2015 Jan;138(Pt 1):e322. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu235.
    Brain. 2015 Jan;138(Pt 1):e321. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu234.

Additional neurological features have recently been described in seven families 
transmitting pathogenic mutations in OPA1, the most common cause of autosomal 
dominant optic atrophy. However, the frequency of these syndromal 'dominant 
optic atrophy plus' variants and the extent of neurological involvement have not 
been established. In this large multi-centre study of 104 patients from 45 
independent families, including 60 new cases, we show that extra-ocular 
neurological complications are common in OPA1 disease, and affect up to 20% of 
all mutational carriers. Bilateral sensorineural deafness beginning in late 
childhood and early adulthood was a prominent manifestation, followed by a 
combination of ataxia, myopathy, peripheral neuropathy and progressive external 
ophthalmoplegia from the third decade of life onwards. We also identified novel 
clinical presentations with spastic paraparesis mimicking hereditary spastic 
paraplegia, and a multiple sclerosis-like illness. In contrast to initial 
reports, multi-system neurological disease was associated with all mutational 
subtypes, although there was an increased risk with missense mutations [odds 
ratio = 3.06, 95% confidence interval = 1.44-6.49; P = 0.0027], and mutations 
located within the guanosine triphosphate-ase region (odds ratio = 2.29, 95% 
confidence interval = 1.08-4.82; P = 0.0271). Histochemical and molecular 
characterization of skeletal muscle biopsies revealed the presence of cytochrome 
c oxidase-deficient fibres and multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions in the 
majority of patients harbouring OPA1 mutations, even in those with isolated 
optic nerve involvement. However, the cytochrome c oxidase-deficient load was 
over four times higher in the dominant optic atrophy + group compared to the 
pure optic neuropathy group, implicating a causal role for these secondary 
mitochondrial DNA defects in disease pathophysiology. Individuals with dominant 
optic atrophy plus phenotypes also had significantly worse visual outcomes, and 
careful surveillance is therefore mandatory to optimize the detection and 
management of neurological disability in a group of patients who already have 
significant visual impairment.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awq007
PMCID: PMC2842512
PMID: 20157015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]