---
reference_id: "PMID:25299038"
title: PNPLA6 Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Synofzik M
- Hufnagel RB
- Züchner S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PNPLA6 Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Synofzik M, Hufnagel RB, Züchner S

## Content

1. PNPLA6 Disorders.

Synofzik M(1), Hufnagel RB(2), Züchner S(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2014 Oct 9 [updated 2021 Jun 10].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
(2)National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(3)Dr John T Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics, John P Hussman 
Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, Florida

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: PNPLA6 disorders span a phenotypic continuum 
characterized by variable combinations of cerebellar ataxia; upper motor neuron 
involvement manifesting as spasticity and/or brisk reflexes; chorioretinal 
dystrophy associated with variable degrees of reduced visual function; and 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (delayed puberty and lack of secondary sex 
characteristics). The hypogonadotropic hypogonadism occurs either in isolation 
or as part of anterior hypopituitarism (growth hormone, thyroid hormone, or 
gonadotropin deficiencies). Common but less frequent features are peripheral 
neuropathy (usually of axonal type manifesting as reduced distal reflexes, 
diminished vibratory sensation, and/or distal muscle wasting); hair anomalies 
(long eyelashes, bushy eyebrows, or scalp alopecia); short stature; and impaired 
cognitive functioning (learning disabilities in children; deficits in attention, 
visuospatial abilities, and recall in adults). Some of these features can occur 
in distinct clusters on the phenotypic continuum: Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome 
(cerebellar ataxia, chorioretinal dystrophy, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism); 
Gordon Holmes syndrome (cerebellar ataxia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and – 
to a variable degree – brisk reflexes); Oliver-McFarlane syndrome (trichomegaly, 
chorioretinal dystrophy, short stature, intellectual disability, and 
hypopituitarism); Laurence-Moon syndrome; and spastic paraplegia type 39 (SPG39) 
(upper motor neuron involvement, peripheral neuropathy, and sometimes reduced 
cognitive functioning and/or cerebellar ataxia).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a PNPLA6 disorder is established in a 
proband with suggestive findings and biallelic PNPLA6 pathogenic variants 
identified on homologous alleles by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management is symptomatic and 
individually tailored. Ataxia. Continuous training of speech and swallowing, 
fine-motor skills, gait, and balance. Spasticity. Interventions to improve 
strength and agility and to prevent contractures, such as physical therapy, 
assistive walking devices and/or ankle-foot orthotics, and drugs to reduce 
muscle spasticity. Chorioretinal dystrophy. Low vision aids when central acuity 
is reduced; involvement with agencies for the visually impaired, mobility 
training, and skills for independent living. Hypothyroidism. Hormone replacement 
therapy as soon as identified. Growth hormone deficiency. Hormone replacement 
therapy during childhood and/or adolescence as indicated. Hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism. Hormone replacement therapy at the expected time of puberty. 
Surveillance: Periodic multidisciplinary reevaluations to assess disease 
progression and modify treatment strategies. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Alcohol; obesity; inactive, sedentary lifestyle; exposure to medications or 
chemicals that exacerbate neuropathy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PNPLA6 disorders are inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a PNPLA6 pathogenic 
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of 
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance 
of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the PNPLA6 pathogenic variants in 
the family have been identified, carrier testing for at-risk relatives, prenatal 
testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing 
are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 25299038