---
reference_id: "PMID:23804581"
title: "Osteogenesis imperfecta type V: clinical and radiographic manifestations in mutation confirmed patients."
authors:
- Kim OH
- Jin DK
- Kosaki K
- Kim JW
- Cho SY
- Yoo WJ
- Choi IH
- Nishimura G
- Ikegawa S
- Cho TJ
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36024
keywords:
- Adult
- "Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "DNA/analysis, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/classification, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta type V: clinical and radiographic manifestations in mutation confirmed patients.
**Authors:** Kim OH, Jin DK, Kosaki K, Kim JW, Cho SY, Yoo WJ, Choi IH, Nishimura G, Ikegawa S, Cho TJ
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36024](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36024)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Aug;161A(8):1972-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36024. Epub
2013  Jun 26.

Osteogenesis imperfecta type V: clinical and radiographic manifestations in
mutation confirmed patients.

Kim OH(1), Jin DK, Kosaki K, Kim JW, Cho SY, Yoo WJ, Choi IH, Nishimura G,
Ikegawa S, Cho TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Ajou University Medical School, Suwon, Republic of
Korea.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type V is a specific OI phenotype with interosseous
membrane calcification of the forearm and hyperplastic callus formation as
typical features. The causative gene mutation for OI type V has been recently
discovered. The purpose of this report is to review the clinical and
radiographic characteristics of mutation confirmed OI type V in detail. Sixteen
(nine familial and seven sporadic) patients were enrolled in the study. Blue
sclera and dentinogenesis imperfecta were not evident in any patient. However,
hypodontia in the permanent teeth, ectopic eruption, and short roots in molars
were additionally observed in 11 patients. Of the radiographic abnormalities,
cortical thickening and bony excrescence of interosseous margin of the ulna was
the most common finding, followed by overgrowth of the olecranon and/or coronoid
process of the ulna. Slender ribs and sloping of the posterior ribs with or
without fractures were also a consistent finding. Hyperplastic callus was
detected in 75% of patients and was commonly encountered at the femur.
Heterotopic ossification in the muscles and tendon insertion sites were noted in
four patients, which resulted in bony ankylosis or contracture of joints. The
current study confirms common clinical and radiographic findings of OI type V
and reports additional phenotypic information. These observations provide clues
to recognize OI type V more promptly and guide to direct targeted molecular
study. © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36024
PMID: 23804581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
