---
reference_id: "PMID:37575808"
title: "Whipple's Disease Mimicking Sarcoidosis."
authors:
- Kc P
- Ayele FK
- Karki S
- Waleed MS
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.41839
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple's Disease Mimicking Sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Kc P, Ayele FK, Karki S, Waleed MS
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.41839](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.41839)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Jul 13;15(7):e41839. doi: 10.7759/cureus.41839. eCollection 2023 
Jul.

Whipple's Disease Mimicking Sarcoidosis.

Kc P(1), Ayele FK(1), Karki S(2), Waleed MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, Suburban Community Hospital (Lower Bucks Hospital), 
Bristol, USA.

Whipple's disease is a rare systemic disease caused by a Tropheryma 
whipplei infection. Although older literature reports a low rate of incidence, 
case reports continue to rise due to increased awareness of the disease. Classic 
Whipple's disease presents as weight loss, diarrhea, and arthralgia and may 
involve the heart, central nervous system (CNS), or any other organ system. Some 
patients with Whipple's disease do not have the classic signs and symptoms of 
the disease.  We present a case of Whipple's disease in a patient with poor 
appetite, weight loss, and granulomatous inflammation of various organs, 
including the kidneys and spleen, mimicking sarcoidosis. She had presented three 
years earlier with acute kidney injury (AKI) and hypercalcemia. The renal biopsy 
revealed diffuse granulomatous interstitial nephritis. Both AKI and 
hypercalcemia resolved with prednisone; however, her weight loss and decreased 
appetite continued. The initial positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed 
increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avidity in the spleen and large intestine, 
and the splenic biopsy revealed non-caseating granulomas. A diagnosis of 
sarcoidosis was made, and she was started on methotrexate with prednisone. 
Nevertheless, the weight loss and poor appetite were relentless. A repeat PET 
scan showed increased FDG avidity in loops of the small and large intestines. A 
small intestinal biopsy revealed positive periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and 
negative acid-fast bacilli (AFB) revealing the diagnosis of Whipple's disease. 
Whipple's disease should be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
sarcoidosis, especially in those patients worsening on standard 
immunosuppression.

Copyright © 2023, KC et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.41839
PMCID: PMC10423070
PMID: 37575808

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.