---
reference_id: "PMID:39694586"
title: "Cerebral oxidative stress, inflammation and apoptosis induced by intermittent hypoxia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of rodent data."
authors:
- El Amine B
- Fournier J
- Minoves M
- Baillieul S
- Roche F
- Perek N
- Pépin JL
- Tamisier R
- Khouri C
- Rome C
- Briançon-Marjollet A
journal: Eur Respir Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1183/16000617.0162-2024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebral oxidative stress, inflammation and apoptosis induced by intermittent hypoxia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of rodent data.
**Authors:** El Amine B, Fournier J, Minoves M, Baillieul S, Roche F, Perek N, Pépin JL, Tamisier R, Khouri C, Rome C, Briançon-Marjollet A
**Journal:** Eur Respir Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1183/16000617.0162-2024](https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0162-2024)

## Content

1. Eur Respir Rev. 2024 Dec 18;33(174):240162. doi: 10.1183/16000617.0162-2024. 
Print 2024 Oct.

Cerebral oxidative stress, inflammation and apoptosis induced by intermittent 
hypoxia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of rodent data.

El Amine B(1)(2), Fournier J(3), Minoves M(1), Baillieul S(1), Roche F(4)(5), 
Perek N(4), Pépin JL(1), Tamisier R(1), Khouri C(1)(3), Rome C(2), 
Briançon-Marjollet A(6).

Author information:
(1)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inserm U1300, CHU Grenoble Alpes, HP2 Laboratory, 
Grenoble, France.
(2)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inserm U1216, Grenoble Institut Neurosciences, 
Grenoble, France.
(3)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inserm CIC1406, CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble, France.
(4)Université Jean Monnet, Inserm U1059 Sainbiose, Saint Etienne, France.
(5)Physiologie Clinique et de l'Exercice, CHU, Saint Etienne, France.
(6)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inserm U1300, CHU Grenoble Alpes, HP2 Laboratory, 
Grenoble, France anne.briancon@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr.

Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) contributes to cerebrovascular diseases and 
cognitive decline. Preclinical studies support the deleterious impact on the 
brain of intermittent hypoxia (IH), one of the main components of OSA, but 
heterogeneity in rodent species and brain regions studied, or induced by IH 
paradigms, can challenge interpretation of the studies. Hence, we conducted a 
systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the impact of IH on rodent brain 
oxidative stress, inflammation, apoptosis and the expression of brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1). PubMed and 
Web of Science searches identified 663 articles related to IH exposure, of which 
60 were included. The examined outcomes were oxidative stress, inflammation, 
apoptosis, HIF-1 or BDNF in brains. Standardised mean difference was used to 
compare studies. Metaregressions were performed to clarify the impact of IH 
exposure parameters, rodent characteristics or cerebral localisation on these 
outcomes. IH-induced oxidative stress (increased malondialdehyde (MDA) and NADPH 
oxidase (NOX) and decreased superoxide dismutase), increased inflammation 
(tumour necrosis factor-α, NF-κB and inducible nitric oxide synthase), HIF-1 and 
apoptosis evaluated by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end 
labelling and cleaved caspase-3. In contrast, B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2) and BDNF 
expression were not significantly modified. Metaregressions showed that MDA, NOX 
and BDNF were associated with determinants of IH cycles (inspired oxygen 
fraction and duration of hypoxia) and some parameters depended on localisation. 
Rodent characteristics had little impact on the outcomes. Our meta-analysis 
robustly establishes that IH, independently of other confounders, has a strong 
effect on the brain by inducing oxidative stress, inflammation and apoptosis in 
rodent models. Our findings support the interest of considering and treating 
cerebral consequences of OSA in clinical practice.

Copyright ©The authors 2024.

DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0162-2024
PMCID: PMC11653198
PMID: 39694586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.