---
reference_id: "PMID:31562134"
title: Reproducing the molecular subclassification of peripheral T-cell lymphoma-NOS by immunohistochemistry.
authors:
- Amador C
- Greiner TC
- Heavican TB
- Smith LM
- Galvis KT
- Lone W
- Bouska A
- "D'Amore F"
- Pedersen MB
- Pileri S
- Agostinelli C
- Feldman AL
- Rosenwald A
- Ott G
- Mottok A
- Savage KJ
- de Leval L
- Gaulard P
- Lim ST
- Ong CK
- Ondrejka SL
- Song J
- Campo E
- Jaffe ES
- Staudt LM
- Rimsza LM
- Vose J
- Weisenburger DD
- Chan WC
- Iqbal J
journal: Blood
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2019000779
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Algorithms
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- Computational Biology/methods
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Immunophenotyping
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Peripheral/diagnosis, etiology, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- Reproducibility of Results
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reproducing the molecular subclassification of peripheral T-cell lymphoma-NOS by immunohistochemistry.
**Authors:** Amador C, Greiner TC, Heavican TB, Smith LM, Galvis KT, Lone W, Bouska A, D'Amore F, Pedersen MB, Pileri S, Agostinelli C, Feldman AL, Rosenwald A, Ott G, Mottok A, Savage KJ, de Leval L, Gaulard P, Lim ST, Ong CK, Ondrejka SL, Song J, Campo E, Jaffe ES, Staudt LM, Rimsza LM, Vose J, Weisenburger DD, Chan WC, Iqbal J
**Journal:** Blood (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2019000779](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2019000779)

## Content

1. Blood. 2019 Dec 12;134(24):2159-2170. doi: 10.1182/blood.2019000779.

Reproducing the molecular subclassification of peripheral T-cell lymphoma-NOS by
immunohistochemistry.

Amador C(1), Greiner TC(1), Heavican TB(1), Smith LM(2), Galvis KT(1)(3), Lone
W(1), Bouska A(1), D'Amore F(4), Pedersen MB(4), Pileri S(5)(6), Agostinelli
C(6), Feldman AL(7), Rosenwald A(8)(9), Ott G(10)(11), Mottok A(12)(13), Savage
KJ(12), de Leval L(14), Gaulard P(15), Lim ST(16), Ong CK(16), Ondrejka SL(17),
Song J(18), Campo E(19)(20), Jaffe ES(21), Staudt LM(22), Rimsza LM(23), Vose
J(24), Weisenburger DD(18), Chan WC(18), Iqbal J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology and.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
NE.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Fundacion Santa Fe de Bogota
University Hospital, Bogota, Colombia.
(4)Department of Hematology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)European Institute of Oncology, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico (IRCCS), Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Specialized, Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, University
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, College of Medicine, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(8)Institute of Pathology and.
(9)Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany.
(10)Department of Clinical Pathology and.
(11)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology,
Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus, Stuttgart, Germany.
(12)Center for Lymphoid Cancer, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm University/University Medical Centre, Ulm,
Germany.
(14)Institute of Pathology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(15)Département de Pathologie, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Université Paris-Est,
INSERM U955, Créteil, France.
(16)Division of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore/Duke-National
University of Singapore (NUS) Medical School, Singapore.
(17)Department of Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.
(18)Department of Pathology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA.
(19)Hematopathology Unit, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain.
(20)Institute of Biomedical Research August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(21)Laboratory of Pathology and.
(22)Metabolism Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(23)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale,
AZ; and.
(24)Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, NE.

Comment in
    Blood. 2019 Dec 12;134(24):2120-2121. doi: 10.1182/blood.2019003385.

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) is a heterogeneous group of mature T-cell
malignancies; approximately one-third of cases are designated as PTCL-not
otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS). Using gene-expression profiling (GEP), we have
previously defined 2 major molecular subtypes of PTCL-NOS, PTCL-GATA3 and
PTCL-TBX21, which have distinct biological differences in oncogenic pathways and
prognosis. In the current study, we generated an immunohistochemistry (IHC)
algorithm to identify the 2 subtypes in paraffin tissue using antibodies to key
transcriptional factors (GATA3 and TBX21) and their target proteins (CCR4 and
CXCR3). In a training cohort of 49 cases of PTCL-NOS with corresponding GEP
data, the 2 subtypes identified by the IHC algorithm matched the GEP results
with high sensitivity (85%) and showed a significant difference in overall
survival (OS) (P = .03). The IHC algorithm classification showed high
interobserver reproducibility among pathologists and was validated in a second
PTCL-NOS cohort (n = 124), where a significant difference in OS between the
PTCL-GATA3 and PTCL-TBX21 subtypes was confirmed (P = .003). In multivariate
analysis, a high International Prognostic Index score (3-5) and the PTCL-GATA3
subtype identified by IHC were independent adverse predictors of OS (P = .0015).
Additionally, the 2 IHC-defined subtypes were significantly associated with
distinct morphological features (P < .001), and there was a significant
enrichment of an activated CD8+ cytotoxic phenotype in the PTCL-TBX21 subtype (P
= .03). The IHC algorithm will aid in identifying the 2 subtypes in clinical
practice, which will aid the future clinical management of patients and
facilitate risk stratification in clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2019000779
PMCID: PMC6908831
PMID: 31562134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors
declare no competing financial interests.
