---
reference_id: "PMID:18181197"
title: Green tobacco sickness and skin integrity among migrant Latino farmworkers.
authors:
- Arcury TA
- Vallejos QM
- Schulz MR
- Feldman SR
- Fleischer AB Jr
- Verma A
- Quandt SA
journal: Am J Ind Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/ajim.20553
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Agricultural Workers' Diseases/epidemiology, etiology"
- Agriculture
- "Hispanic or Latino/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- Middle Aged
- "Nicotine/pharmacokinetics, poisoning"
- North Carolina/epidemiology
- Occupational Exposure/adverse effects
- Odds Ratio
- Prevalence
- Regression Analysis
- Risk Factors
- Skin Absorption
- "Skin Diseases/chemically induced, epidemiology, etiology"
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Nicotiana/poisoning
- "Transients and Migrants/statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Green tobacco sickness and skin integrity among migrant Latino farmworkers.
**Authors:** Arcury TA, Vallejos QM, Schulz MR, Feldman SR, Fleischer AB Jr, Verma A, Quandt SA
**Journal:** Am J Ind Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajim.20553](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajim.20553)

## Content

1. Am J Ind Med. 2008 Mar;51(3):195-203. doi: 10.1002/ajim.20553.

Green tobacco sickness and skin integrity among migrant Latino farmworkers.

Arcury TA(1), Vallejos QM, Schulz MR, Feldman SR, Fleischer AB Jr, Verma A, 
Quandt SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Wake Forest University School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157-1084, USA. tarcury@wfubmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Green tobacco sickness (GTS) affects approximately one-quarter of 
tobacco workers. The primary aim of this analysis is to expand existing 
knowledge of GTS risk factors by delineating the association of measures of skin 
integrity with the prevalence of GTS among Latino farmworkers.
METHODS: Data are from a longitudinal study of skin disease among 304 North 
Carolina Latino farmworkers conducted in 2005.
RESULTS: 18.4% of the farmworkers met the GTS case definition. Self-reported 
rash increased the odds of having GTS in the bivariate (OR 2.29, 95% CI 1.21, 
4.35), and multivariate analyses (OR 3.30, CI 2.17, 5.02). Self-reported itch 
(OR 3.54, CI 2.38, 5.24) and superficial wounds (OR 2.49, CI 1.15, 5.39) had a 
significant relationship to GTS in the bivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: These analyses extend current knowledge of GTS risk factors to 
include skin integrity. Farmworkers with rash and other skin conditions can 
protect these affected skin areas from exposure to the tobacco plant to reduce 
their risk of GTS.

DOI: 10.1002/ajim.20553
PMID: 18181197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]