---
reference_id: "PMID:39343469"
title: Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy (GACI).
authors:
- Baujat G
- Besançon A
journal: Arch Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00153-2
keywords:
- Humans
- "Vascular Calcification/genetics, diagnosis"
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- Infant
- "ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family C Proteins/genetics"
- "Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/genetics, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy (GACI).
**Authors:** Baujat G, Besançon A
**Journal:** Arch Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00153-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00153-2)

## Content

1. Arch Pediatr. 2024 Sep;31(4S1):4S21-4S26. doi: 10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00153-2.

Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy (GACI).

Baujat G(1), Besançon A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genomic Medicine for Rare Diseases, French Reference Center for 
Constitutional Bone Diseases, Necker-Enfants malades Hospital, Paris, France. 
Electronic address: genevieve.baujat@aphp.fr.
(2)Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetology, Gynecology Department, Necker-Enfants 
malades University Hospital, AP-HP Centre, Paris 75015, France.

Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is an ultra-rare autosomal 
recessive disorder associated with pathogenic variants in ENPP1, the major gene 
involved in this condition, and in ABCC6, which is involved in a small fraction 
of affected individuals. Loss-of-function pathogenic variants of ENPP1 and ABCC6 
lead to perturbations in the PPi/Pi ratio, thereby promoting hydroxyapatite 
mineralization in peripheral tissues. GACI is initially characterized by an 
abnormal ectopic mineralization process in arteries and soft tissue. Nearly half 
of the patients die within the first 6 months of life from cardiovascular 
complications, hence the poor prognosis associated with an early diagnosis. In 
recent years, progress has been made in our understanding of the long-term 
natural history of GACI, the intricate symptoms due to vascular calcifications, 
the overmineralization of soft tissues, of hypophosphatemia designated as ARHR2, 
and of the consequences such as undermineralization of the skeleton, but also of 
the features possibly seen in pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE). Indeed, GACI, PXE, 
and ARHR2 share common pathophysiological pathways and clinical features beyond 
the vascular calcifications. Treatment options for severe forms of GACI are 
mostly based on symptomatic management, including the option of starting 
bisphosphonates early after birth, such as etidronate and pamidronate, analogues 
of PPi. Follow-up within an expert and coordinated multidisciplinary team 
includes treatment of arterial hypertension, calcitriol and phosphorus 
adjustments, hearing aids, and early detection of possible angioid streaks. It 
is hoped that ongoing basic and clinical research will lead to the development 
of effective therapies that specifically target the abnormal PPi regulation and 
the other mechanisms involved in this disorder.

Copyright © 2024 French Society of Pediatrics. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. 
All rights reserved. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00153-2
PMID: 39343469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest G. Baujat 
declares competing interest for occasional advisory consultancy and for the 
occasional production of expert's reports for Biomarin, Inozyme, Ipsen, Sanofi 
and Alexion; for participations in scientific work and studies for Incyte, 
Ipsen, Qed, Ascendis, Biomarin, Alexion, Clementia and Therachon Pfizer; for 
writing articles and interventions in congresses, conferences, symposia, various 
public meetings for Elsevier, Biomarin, Ipsen and Alexion. A. Besançon declares 
no competing interest related to this article. This article is part of a 
supplement entitled Mineral metabolism disorders: what if it was ENPP1 
deficiency? published with institutional support from Inozyme.