---
reference_id: PMID:35615243
title: Acute liver failure following paracetamol overdose.
authors:
- Arshad MA
- Bangash MN
journal: J Intensive Care Soc
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/17511437211007777
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute liver failure following paracetamol overdose.
**Authors:** Arshad MA, Bangash MN
**Journal:** J Intensive Care Soc (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/17511437211007777](https://doi.org/10.1177/17511437211007777)

## Content

1. J Intensive Care Soc. 2022 May;23(2):244-251. doi: 10.1177/17511437211007777. 
Epub 2021 Apr 15.

Acute liver failure following paracetamol overdose.

Arshad MA(1), Bangash MN(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Anaesthetic Department, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, 
Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(2)Institute of Clinical Sciences, School of Medicine & Dentistry, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

Acute liver failure is a rare syndrome comprising a coagulopathy of liver 
origin, jaundice and encephalopathy in a patient with no prior history of liver 
disease. Paracetamol overdose is the leading cause of acute liver failure in the 
United Kingdom and often presents with extrahepatic organ dysfunction requiring 
critical care. Presentation: We present the case of a patient with hyper acute 
liver failure secondary to paracetamol overdose. Management and discussion: 
Management focused on ensuring the correct diagnosis had been made, 
administering N-acetyl cysteine, fluid resuscitation and broad spectrum 
antimicrobials. Early intubation and transfer to a transplant centre were 
undertaken following development of hepatic encephalopathy. Neuroprotective 
measures and hypertonic saline were instituted to reduce the risk of 
intracranial hypertension. High dose haemofiltration was also started to help 
reduce ammonia levels. Aggressive critical care therapies with specialised input 
results in good outcomes for patients admitted with paracetamol induced hyper 
acute liver failure. Liver transplant is reserved for those patients unlikely to 
survive with medical treatment alone.

© The Intensive Care Society 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/17511437211007777
PMCID: PMC9125438
PMID: 35615243

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.