---
reference_id: "PMID:37414337"
title: "Peripartum cardiomyopathy: A review."
authors:
- Bala R
- Mehta S
- Roy VC
- Kaur G
- de Marvao A
journal: Rev Port Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.repc.2023.01.029
keywords:
- Pregnancy
- Female
- Humans
- Peripartum Period
- "Cardiomyopathies/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- "Heart Failure/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Prognosis
- Echocardiography
- "Puerperal Disorders/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- "Pregnancy Complications, Cardiovascular/therapy, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peripartum cardiomyopathy: A review.
**Authors:** Bala R, Mehta S, Roy VC, Kaur G, de Marvao A
**Journal:** Rev Port Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.repc.2023.01.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.repc.2023.01.029)

## Content

1. Rev Port Cardiol. 2023 Nov;42(11):917-924. doi: 10.1016/j.repc.2023.01.029.
Epub  2023 Jul 4.

Peripartum cardiomyopathy: A review.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Bala R(1), Mehta S(2), Roy VC(3), Kaur G(4), de Marvao A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Punjabi University, Patiala, India; Adduct 
Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., Mohali, India.
(2)Adduct Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., Mohali, India; Department of Experimental 
Medicine and Biotechnology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address: samimehta18@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Global College of Pharmacy, Kahanpur, Punjab, India.
(4)Integrative Biosciences Center, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202, 
USA; Department of Ophthalmology, Visual and Anatomical Sciences, School of 
Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.
(5)Department of Women and Children's Health, King's College London, London, 
United Kingdom; British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, School 
of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, King's College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

Peripartum cardiomyopathy is a rare type of heart failure manifesting towards 
the end of pregnancy or in the months following delivery, in the absence of any 
other cause of heart failure. There is a wide range of incidence across 
countries reflecting different population demographics, uncertainty over 
definitions and under-reporting. Race, ethnicity, multiparity and advanced 
maternal age are considered important risk factors for the disease. Its 
etiopathogenesis is incompletely understood and is likely multifactorial, 
including hemodynamic stresses of pregnancy, vasculo-hormonal factors, 
inflammation, immunology and genetics. Affected women present with heart failure 
secondary to reduced left ventricular systolic function (LVEF <45%) and often 
with associated phenotypes such as LV dilatation, biatrial dilatation, reduced 
systolic function, impaired diastolic function, and increased pulmonary 
pressure. Electrocardiography, echocardiography, magnetic resonance imaging, 
endomyocardial biopsy, and certain blood biomarkers aid in diagnosis and 
management. Treatment for peripartum cardiomyopathy depends on the stage of 
pregnancy or postpartum, disease severity and whether the woman is 
breastfeeding. It includes standard pharmacological therapies for heart failure, 
within the safety restrictions for pregnancy and lactation. Targeted therapies 
such as bromocriptine have shown promise in early, small studies, with large 
definitive trials currently underway. Failure of medical interventions may 
require mechanical support and transplantation in severe cases. Peripartum 
cardiomyopathy carries a high mortality rate of up to 10% and a high risk of 
relapse in subsequent pregnancies, but over half of women present normalization 
of LV function within a year of diagnosis.

Copyright © 2023 Sociedade Portuguesa de Cardiologia. Publicado por Elsevier 
España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.repc.2023.01.029
PMID: 37414337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]