---
reference_id: "PMID:27742007"
title: Hepatitis B Virus Infection and Liver Decompensation.
authors:
- Luvisa BK
- Hassanein TI
journal: Clin Liver Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2016.07.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B Virus Infection and Liver Decompensation.
**Authors:** Luvisa BK, Hassanein TI
**Journal:** Clin Liver Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cld.2016.07.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cld.2016.07.002)

## Content

1. Clin Liver Dis. 2016 Nov;20(4):681-692. doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2016.07.002.

Hepatitis B Virus Infection and Liver Decompensation.

Luvisa BK(1), Hassanein TI(2).

Author information:
(1)Southern California Research Center, Coronado, CA 92118, USA.
(2)Southern California Research Center, Coronado, CA 92118, USA; University of 
California, San Diego School of Medicine, San Diego, CA, USA. Electronic 
address: thassanein@livercenters.com.

The goal in patients with immune active hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is to 
significantly suppress viral replication and prevent progression of fibrosis to 
cirrhosis and liver decompensation and decrease the incidence of hepatocellular 
carcinoma. This is achievable by the highly active antivirals, entecavir and 
tenofovir, which are considered first-line therapy in most patients with immune 
active hepatitis C virus and after liver transplantation to prevent HBV 
recurrence. Patients with decompensated cirrhosis should be referred for liver 
transplantation and treated with first-line antivirals as early as possible, 
with the goal of achieving complete viral suppression in the shortest time 
possible.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cld.2016.07.002
PMID: 27742007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]