---
reference_id: "PMID:30860739"
title: Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.
authors:
- Tripathy K
- Salini B
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.
**Authors:** Tripathy K, Salini B

## Content

1. Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.

Tripathy K(1), Salini B(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2024 Feb 12.

Author information:
(1)ASG Eye Hospital, BT Road, Kolkata, India
(2)Ahalia Foundation Eye Hospital

In 920, the German ophthalmologist Theodor Axenfeld made an important 
contribution to the field by describing a prominent and anteriorly displaced 
Schwalbe line (posterior embryotoxon) with the adhesion of peripheral iris 
strands. Later, these observations became known as the Axenfeld anomaly. Another 
significant advancement came from the Austrian ophthalmologist Herwigh Rieger, 
who described a distinct set of ocular abnormalities known as the "Rieger 
anomaly." This anomaly encompasses posterior embryotoxon, iris hypoplasia, 
polycoria, and corectopia.  The constellation of systemic findings in 
conjunction with Rieger anomaly, such as dental abnormalities, facial bone 
changes, umbilical abnormalities, hypospadias, and pituitary abnormalities, was 
called Rieger syndrome. In current medical terminology, the terms Axenfeld 
anomaly, Rieger anomaly, and Rieger syndrome are no longer used. Instead, these 
ocular findings and associated systemic manifestations are now recognized under 
a spectrum of disorders called Axenfeld-Riger syndrome (ARS).  ARS is a disease 
that encompasses anterior segment ocular dysgenesis and systemic abnormalities 
such as dental, cardiac, craniofacial, and abdominal wall defects. The mutations 
associated with ARS include PITX2 (chromosome 4q25), FOXC1 (chromosome 6p25), 
PAX6 (chromosome 11p13), FOXO1A (chromosome 13q14), and CYP1B1 (chromosome 
2p22.2).

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30860739

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Koushik Tripathy declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Baby 
Salini declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.