---
reference_id: "PMID:40668560"
title: MALDI-MSI reveals shared lipid signatures in sarcoid-like granulomas of mice and in a human case.
authors:
- Kim J
- Moodley Y
- Lan NSR
- Waters S
- Hicks D
- Yeung HS
- Gray N
- Wist J
- Lee F
- Allanson B
- Yagnik L
- Raja Mohamed F
- Lee S
- Dwivedi G
journal: Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00395.2025
keywords:
- Animals
- "Spectrometry, Mass, Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption-Ionization/methods"
- Humans
- "Sarcoidosis/metabolism, pathology"
- "Granuloma/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- Lipidomics/methods
- Lipids/analysis
- Male
- "Lymph Nodes/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Myocardium/metabolism, pathology"
- Lipid Metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MALDI-MSI reveals shared lipid signatures in sarcoid-like granulomas of mice and in a human case.
**Authors:** Kim J, Moodley Y, Lan NSR, Waters S, Hicks D, Yeung HS, Gray N, Wist J, Lee F, Allanson B, Yagnik L, Raja Mohamed F, Lee S, Dwivedi G
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpcell.00395.2025](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00395.2025)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2025 Sep 1;329(3):C768-C778. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00395.2025. Epub 2025 Jul 16.

MALDI-MSI reveals shared lipid signatures in sarcoid-like granulomas of mice and
in a human case.

Kim J(1)(2), Moodley Y(2)(3), Lan NSR(1)(2)(4), Waters S(1)(2), Hicks D(5)(6),
Yeung HS(5), Gray N(5)(6), Wist J(5)(6)(7)(8), Lee F(4), Allanson B(9), Yagnik
L(3), Raja Mohamed F(3), Lee S(1)(2), Dwivedi G(1)(2)(4)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Advanced Clinical and Translational Cardiovascular Imaging,
Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research, Perth, Western Australia,
Australia.
(2)School of Medicine, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Western
Australia, Australia.
(3)Department of Respiratory Internal Medicine, Fiona Stanley Hospital, Perth,
Western Australia, Australia.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Fiona Stanley Hospital, Perth, Western Australia,
Australia.
(5)Australian National Phenome Centre, Murdoch University, Perth, Western
Australia, Australia.
(6)Computational and Systems Medicine, Health Futures Institute, Murdoch
University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
(7)Department of Chemistry, Universidad del Valle, Cali, Colombia.
(8)Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Anatomical Pathology, PathWest Laboratory Medicine, Perth,
Western Australia, Australia.
(10)CardioInnovate Translational Lab, Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute,
Perth, Australia.

Sarcoidosis is a complex inflammatory disease of unknown cause, with diagnosis
often complicated by a lack of definitive biomarkers. This study used
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry imaging
(MALDI-MSI) to spatially profile lipids in sarcoid-like granulomatous tissues
from animal and human samples. ApoE-/- mice (n = 23) were fed a
cholate-containing high-fat diet for 16 wk, inducing sarcoid-like granulomas.
Granulomas were characterized through hematoxylin-eosin, Masson's trichrome, and
immunofluorescence staining, whereas lipidomic profiling of mouse hearts (n =
10) and lymph nodes (n = 10) was performed using MALDI-MSI. A comparative
analysis was performed using a human sarcoid-like granulomatous lymph node. The
mouse model exhibited granulomas, characterized by lipid-laden macrophages,
fibrosis, and perivascular lymphocyte clusters. Human lymph nodes with
sarcoid-like granulomas demonstrated hallmarks of sarcoidosis, including foamy
histiocytes, non-necrotizing granulomas, and Langhans giant cells containing
silicone and asteroid bodies. MALDI-MSI identified over 30 lipids that were
consistently detected in murine heart and lymph node tissues. Of these, eight
key lipids belong to the lysophosphatidylinositol, phosphatidic acid,
phosphatidylinositide, and phosphatidylserine classes, which were also detected
in human lymph nodes. To our knowledge, this is the first application of
MALDI-MSI in spatial lipidomic profiling in a sarcoid-like animal model and
human sarcoid-like granulomatous tissue. MALDI-MSI revealed distinct yet shared
lipidomic profiles in both sarcoid-like animal and human tissues. This finding
provides a new perspective on sarcoidosis pathogenesis and warrants future
mechanistic study and validation.NEW & NOTEWORTHY This is the first study to
apply MALDI-MSI to characterize the spatial lipidomic landscape of granulomatous
inflammation in both a murine sarcoid-like model and a rare human case. Our work
reveals distinct yet shared lipidomic profiles in both sarcoid-like animal and
human tissues, including region-specific lipid alterations within granulomas. By
integrating spatial imaging with lipidomics, this study bridges a critical gap
in our understanding of the metabolic and structural composition of
granulomatous inflammation.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00395.2025
PMID: 40668560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
