---
reference_id: "PMID:19064968"
title: BRCA germline mutations in Jewish patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Ferrone CR
- Levine DA
- Tang LH
- Allen PJ
- Jarnagin W
- Brennan MF
- Offit K
- Robson ME
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.18.5546
keywords:
- Adenocarcinoma/genetics
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- Founder Effect
- "Genes, BRCA1"
- "Genes, BRCA2"
- Humans
- Jews/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Pancreatic Neoplasms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRCA germline mutations in Jewish patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Ferrone CR, Levine DA, Tang LH, Allen PJ, Jarnagin W, Brennan MF, Offit K, Robson ME
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2008.18.5546](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2008.18.5546)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Jan 20;27(3):433-8. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.18.5546. Epub
2008  Dec 8.

BRCA germline mutations in Jewish patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Ferrone CR(1), Levine DA, Tang LH, Allen PJ, Jarnagin W, Brennan MF, Offit K,
Robson ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10021, USA.

PURPOSE: The prognostic significance of germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in
Jewish patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC) is unknown. Our objective
was to define the prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in an unselected group of Jewish
patients and to compare the clinical characteristics and overall survival (OS)
of patients with resected BRCA mutation-associated PAC to PAC patients without
mutations.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Jewish patients with PAC resected between January 1986 and
January 2004 were identified. DNA was extracted from the archived material,
anonymized, and genotyped for founder mutations in BRCA1 (185delAG, 5382insC)
and BRCA2 (6174delT). Standard two-sided statistical tests were utilized.
RESULTS: Of the 187 Jewish patients who underwent resection for PAC, tissue was
available for 145 patients. Eight subjects (5.5%) had a BRCA founder mutation
(two with BRCA1 [1.3%], six with BRCA2 [4.1%]). The BRCA2 founder mutation was
identified in 4.1% of patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma compared with only
1.1% of cancer-free Washington, DC,-area controls (4.1% v 1.1%; P = .007; odds
ratio, 3.85; 95% CI, 2.1 to 10.8). Patients with and without BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutations did not differ in age (mean, 66 v 73 years; P = .6) or other
clinicopathologic features. OS was not significantly different (median, 6 v 16
months; P = .35). A previous cancer was reported by 24% (35 of 145) of patients
with the most common sites being breast cancer (9 of 35; 74%) and prostate
cancer (8 of 35; 23%).
CONCLUSION: Founder mutations for BRCA1 and BRCA2 were identified in 5.5% of
Ashkenazi patients operated on for PAC. BRCA2 mutations were more prevalent than
documented by population studies. Consistent with previous reports, BRCA2
mutations are associated with an increased risk of PAC.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2008.18.5546
PMCID: PMC3657622
PMID: 19064968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
