---
reference_id: "PMID:34753370"
title: State-of-the-art beta-adrenoreceptor agonists for the treatment of asthma.
authors:
- Garzon-Siatoya WT
- Carrillo-Martin I
- Chiarella SE
- Gonzalez-Estrada A
journal: Expert Opin Pharmacother
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/14656566.2021.1988074
content_type: abstract_only
---

# State-of-the-art beta-adrenoreceptor agonists for the treatment of asthma.
**Authors:** Garzon-Siatoya WT, Carrillo-Martin I, Chiarella SE, Gonzalez-Estrada A
**Journal:** Expert Opin Pharmacother (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14656566.2021.1988074](https://doi.org/10.1080/14656566.2021.1988074)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2022 Feb;23(2):243-254. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2021.1988074. Epub 2021 Nov 9.

State-of-the-art beta-adrenoreceptor agonists for the treatment of asthma.

Garzon-Siatoya WT(1), Carrillo-Martin I(1), Chiarella SE(2), Gonzalez-Estrada 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Sleep Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, United States.
(2)Division of Allergic Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Asthma, a heterogeneous disease, is characterized by chronic 
airway inflammation and hyperreactivity. β2-adrenoreceptor agonists 
(β2-agonists) remain pivotal for asthma management. Short-acting β2-agonists 
(SABAs) result in rapid symptomatic alleviation and bronchospasm prevention. 
Patients experience significant clinical benefits from therapy with long-acting 
β2-agonists (LABAs) with efficacy to bronchodilate, and prolonged lung function 
betterment. Recently discovered β2-agonists with longer half-lives offer 
once-daily dosing.
AREAS COVERED: The authors provide a thorough review of the pharmacokinetics, 
pharmacodynamics, efficacy, tolerability, classification, and safety of 
β2-agonists through an in-depth review of current literature using these 
databases: U.S. National Institutes of Health's National Library of Medicine 
(NIH/NLM), PubMed Central, and NLM clinical trials.
EXPERT OPINION: β2- agonists act primarily on airway smooth muscle cells and are 
quintessential for adequate asthma management. Given their pharmacodynamic and 
pharmacokinetic properties, SABAs are used as rescue medication. Notably, the 
current Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) strategy document recommends using 
LABA/inhaled corticosteroid combinations both as a daily controller and as a 
rescue medication. Clinicians should assess this new treatment plan on a 
per-case basis, making sure to evaluate inhaler adherence and treat modifiable 
risk factors. The development of next-generation β2- agonists is an exciting 
research area that could significantly improve patients' adherence to treatment 
regimens and, consequently, asthma control and quality of life.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2021.1988074
PMID: 34753370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]