---
reference_id: "PMID:8651283"
title: A GLRA1 null mutation in recessive hyperekplexia challenges the functional role of glycine receptors.
authors:
- Brune W
- Weber RG
- Saul B
- von Knebel Doeberitz M
- Grond-Ginsbach C
- Kellerman K
- Meinck HM
- Becker CM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A GLRA1 null mutation in recessive hyperekplexia challenges the functional role of glycine receptors.
**Authors:** Brune W, Weber RG, Saul B, von Knebel Doeberitz M, Grond-Ginsbach C, Kellerman K, Meinck HM, Becker CM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1996)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 May;58(5):989-97.

A GLRA1 null mutation in recessive hyperekplexia challenges the functional role 
of glycine receptors.

Brune W(1), Weber RG, Saul B, von Knebel Doeberitz M, Grond-Ginsbach C, 
Kellerman K, Meinck HM, Becker CM.

Author information:
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie, Universität Heidelberg, Germany.

Dominant missense mutations in the human glycine receptor (GlyR) alpha 1 subunit 
gene (GLRA1) give rise to hereditary hyperekplexia. These mutations impair 
agonist affinities and change conductance states of expressed mutant channels, 
resulting in a partial loss of function. In a recessive case of hyperekplexia, 
we found a deletion of exons 1-6 of the GLRA1 gene. Born to consanguineous 
parents, the affected child is homozygous for this GLRA1(null) allele consistent 
with a complete loss of gene function. The child displayed exaggerated startle 
responses and pronounced head-retraction jerks reflecting a disinhibition of 
vestigial brain-stem reflexes. In contrast, proprio- and exteroceptive 
inhibition of muscle activity previously correlated to glycinergic mechanisms 
were not affected. This case demonstrates that, in contrast to the lethal effect 
of a null allele in the recessive mouse mutant oscillator (Glra1 spd-ot), the 
loss of the GlyR alpha 1 subunit is effectively compensated in man.

PMCID: PMC1914607
PMID: 8651283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]