---
reference_id: "PMID:31433956"
title: The Clinical Spectrum of PTEN Mutations.
authors:
- Yehia L
- Keel E
- Eng C
journal: Annu Rev Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-med-052218-125823
keywords:
- Early Detection of Cancer/methods
- Female
- "Genetic Predisposition to Disease/epidemiology, genetics"
- Germ-Line Mutation/genetics
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- "Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- Risk Assessment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Clinical Spectrum of PTEN Mutations.
**Authors:** Yehia L, Keel E, Eng C
**Journal:** Annu Rev Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-med-052218-125823](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-med-052218-125823)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Med. 2020 Jan 27;71:103-116. doi: 10.1146/annurev-med-052218-125823. 
Epub 2019 Aug 21.

The Clinical Spectrum of PTEN Mutations.

Yehia L(1), Keel E(1), Eng C(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA; email: yehial@ccf.org, keele@ccf.org, engc@ccf.org.
(2)Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.
(4)Germline High Risk Cancer Focus Group, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

PTEN is a tumor suppressor gene that classically dampens the PI3K/AKT/mTOR 
growth-promoting signaling cascade. PTEN dysfunction causes dysregulation of 
this and other pathways, resulting in overgrowth. Cowden syndrome, a hereditary 
cancer predisposition and overgrowth disorder, was the first Mendelian condition 
associated with germline PTEN mutations. Since then, significant advances by the 
research and medical communities have elucidated how clinical phenotypic 
manifestations result from the underlying germline PTEN mutations. With time, it 
became evident that PTEN mutations can result in a broad phenotypic spectrum, 
causing seemingly disparate disorders from cancer to autism. Hence, the umbrella 
term of PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) was coined. Timely diagnosis and 
understanding the natural history of PHTS are vital because early recognition 
enables gene-informed management, particularly as related to high-risk cancer 
surveillance and addressing the neurodevelopmental symptoms.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-med-052218-125823
PMID: 31433956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]