---
reference_id: "PMID:17101456"
title: Neuroferritinopathy.
authors:
- Burn J
- Chinnery PF
journal: Semin Pediatr Neurol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2006.08.006
keywords:
- Animals
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Ferritins/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Frequency
- Humans
- "Iron Metabolism Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroferritinopathy.
**Authors:** Burn J, Chinnery PF
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Neurol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.spen.2006.08.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spen.2006.08.006)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2006 Sep;13(3):176-81. doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2006.08.006.

Neuroferritinopathy.

Burn J(1), Chinnery PF.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Newcastle on Tyne, UK. 
John.burn@newcastle.ac.uk

Neuroferritinopathy (MIM 606159, also labeled hereditary ferritinopathy and 
neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation type 2, NBIA2) is an adult-onset 
progressive movement disorder caused by mutations in the ferritin light chain 
gene (FTL1). Four pathogenic mutations in FTL1 have been described to date; 
460insA was our original founder mutation in Cumbria, North West England, where 
it arose before 1800. The same mutation appears to have arisen separately in 
France. The resulting altered reading frame extends the peptide, disrupting the 
ferritin dodecahedron structure and causing accumulation of ferritin and iron, 
primarily in central neurons. A wide range of neurologic symptoms may occur; 50% 
present with chorea, 43% with limb dystonia, and 7% with Parkinsonian features. 
The disorder provides a direct link between disordered iron storage and a 
neurodegenerative disease, opening new avenues for treatment by altering brain 
iron stores in addition to symptomatic treatments such as local Botulinum toxin 
and oral anti oxidants.

DOI: 10.1016/j.spen.2006.08.006
PMID: 17101456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]