---
reference_id: "PMID:26452443"
title: "Ehlers-Danlos syndrome(s) mimicking child abuse: Is there an impact on clinical practice?"
authors:
- Castori M
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31460
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ehlers-Danlos syndrome(s) mimicking child abuse: Is there an impact on clinical practice?
**Authors:** Castori M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31460](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31460)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2015 Dec;169(4):289-92. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31460. Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome(s) mimicking child abuse: Is there an impact on clinical 
practice?

Castori M.

Erratum in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Jul;170(7):1947. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37733.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a heterogeneous group of heritable connective tissue 
disorders characterized by increased fragility of various non-ossified tissues. 
It is usually ascertained due to abnormal skin texture, scarring complications, 
vascular fragility, or chronic symptoms, such as fatigue and musculoskeletal 
pain. Sometimes, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome remains undetected until the patient, 
usually in the pediatric age, shows extensive or severe mucocutaneous injuries 
after only minor traumas. In this scenario, the misdiagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome with child abuse is a possibility, as occasionally reported in the 
literature. Recently, more attention was posed by lay people between the 
possible association of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and bone fragility. Literature 
and personal experience show a strong association between Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome, generalized joint hypermobility and reduced bone mass density in older 
children and adults, especially fertile women. The existence of a true increased 
risk of fracture in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is still a matter of debate in 
children and adults with little and conflicting evidence. In case of suspected 
child abuse, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is certainly on the differential for 
bruising, especially in EDS types with marked cutaneous and capillary 
involvement. In suspected child abuse cases, careful examination of the index 
case and her/his extended family is routine, as well as exclusion of other 
disorders such as osteogenesis imperfecta. The hypothesis of Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome as an alternative explanation for infantile fractures remains 
speculative.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31460
PMID: 26452443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]