---
reference_id: "PMID:30919937"
title: Heterogeneity and overlaps in nucleotide excision repair disorders.
authors:
- Ferri D
- Orioli D
- Botta E
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13545
keywords:
- "Cockayne Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA Repair/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Endonucleases/genetics
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Humans
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Radiation Tolerance
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Ultraviolet Rays
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/genetics, pathology"
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum Group D Protein/genetics
- DNA Excision Repair Protein ERCC-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterogeneity and overlaps in nucleotide excision repair disorders.
**Authors:** Ferri D, Orioli D, Botta E
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13545](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13545)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2020 Jan;97(1):12-24. doi: 10.1111/cge.13545. Epub 2019 Apr 22.

Heterogeneity and overlaps in nucleotide excision repair disorders.

Ferri D(1), Orioli D(1), Botta E(1).

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Genetica Molecolare (IGM), Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 
Pavia, Italy.

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is an essential DNA repair pathway devoted to 
the removal of bulky lesions such as photoproducts induced by the ultraviolet 
(UV) component of solar radiation. Deficiencies in NER typically result in a 
group of heterogeneous distinct disorders ranging from the mild UV sensitive 
syndrome to the cancer-prone xeroderma pigmentosum and the 
neurodevelopmental/progeroid conditions trichothiodystrophy, Cockayne syndrome 
and cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal-syndrome. A complicated genetic scenario 
underlines these disorders with the same gene linked to different clinical 
entities as well as different genes associated with the same disease. Overlap 
syndromes with combined hallmark features of different NER disorders can occur 
and sporadic presentations showing extra features of the hematological disorder 
Fanconi Anemia or neurological manifestations mimicking Hungtinton disease-like 
syndromes have been described. Here, we discuss the multiple functions of the 
five major pleiotropic NER genes (ERCC3/XPB, ERCC2/XPD, ERCC5/XPG, ERCC1 and 
ERCC4/XPF) and their relevance in phenotypic complexity. We provide an update of 
mutational spectra and examine genotype-phenotype relationships. Finally, the 
molecular defects that could explain the puzzling overlap syndromes are 
discussed.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13545
PMID: 30919937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]