---
reference_id: "PMID:12072049"
title: High prevalence and increasing incidence of Addison's disease in western Norway.
authors:
- Løvås K
- Husebye ES
journal: Clin Endocrinol (Oxf)
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2265.2002.t01-1-01552.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High prevalence and increasing incidence of Addison's disease in western Norway.
**Authors:** Løvås K, Husebye ES
**Journal:** Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2265.2002.t01-1-01552.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2265.2002.t01-1-01552.x)

## Content

1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2002 Jun;56(6):787-91. doi: 
10.1046/j.1365-2265.2002.t01-1-01552.x.

High prevalence and increasing incidence of Addison's disease in western Norway.

Løvås K(1), Husebye ES.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Institute of Medicine, Haukeland University 
Hospital, Bergen, Norway. kristian.lovas@haukeland.no

OBJECTIVE: Estimates of the prevalence of Addison's disease in Caucasians have 
varied from 39 to 117 per million. We have carried out an epidemiological study 
to obtain a confident point prevalence estimate in the Norwegian population for 
the end of 1999, and to find out whether the incidence is changing.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The patients were identified by a search through registers 
of 10 hospitals and consultant endocrinologists serving a population of 916 000. 
The completeness of the list was tested by a survey of general practitioners in 
one district, and by the member list of the local Addison Association in another 
district.
RESULTS: We identified 128 patients with Addison's disease (59 men and 69 
women), yielding a prevalence of 140 per million. Recorded mean incidence in the 
past decade was 0.62 per 100,000 per year. Fifty-one patients (40%) had 
concomitant endocrine diseases. The aetiology was almost exclusively idiopathic 
or autoimmune.
CONCLUSIONS: We found a higher prevalence of Addison's disease in western Norway 
than has previously been reported anywhere. Our findings support the hypothesis 
of a rising incidence of autoimmune adrenal insufficiency.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2265.2002.t01-1-01552.x
PMID: 12072049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]