---
reference_id: "PMID:39333921"
title: "Safety and efficacy of sparsentan versus irbesartan in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and IgA nephropathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials."
authors:
- Elnaga AAA
- Alsaied MA
- Elettreby AM
- Ramadan A
- Abouzid M
- Shetta R
- Al-Ajlouni YA
journal: BMC Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12882-024-03713-9
keywords:
- Humans
- "Angiotensin II Type 1 Receptor Blockers/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/complications, drug therapy, urine"
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/complications, drug therapy, urine"
- "Irbesartan/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Proteinuria/drug therapy, etiology"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and efficacy of sparsentan versus irbesartan in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and IgA nephropathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
**Authors:** Elnaga AAA, Alsaied MA, Elettreby AM, Ramadan A, Abouzid M, Shetta R, Al-Ajlouni YA
**Journal:** BMC Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12882-024-03713-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-024-03713-9)

## Content

1. BMC Nephrol. 2024 Sep 27;25(1):316. doi: 10.1186/s12882-024-03713-9.

Safety and efficacy of sparsentan versus irbesartan in focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis and IgA nephropathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials.

Elnaga AAA(1), Alsaied MA(1), Elettreby AM(1), Ramadan A(2), Abouzid M(3)(4), 
Shetta R(5), Al-Ajlouni YA(6).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University, Mansoura, AAA, Egypt.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, South Valley University, Qena, Egypt.
(3)Department of Physical Pharmacy and Pharmacokinetics, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Rokietnicka 3 St, Poznan, 60-806, Poland.
(4)Doctoral School, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, 60-812, 
Poland.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, UCF College of Medicine, HCA Florida Ocala, 
Ocala, USA.
(6)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Montefiore Medical 
Center, Wakefield Campus, NY, Montefiore, USA. alajlouni.yazan@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Sparsentan has shown positive effects on managing different subtypes 
of glomerulonephritis. The recent results of trials require a pooled analysis to 
validate these results.
AIM: We aim to assess the safety and efficacy of sparsentan versus irbesartan 
for patients with IgA nephropathy and focal glomerulosclerosis (FSGS).
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials retrieved by systematically searching PubMed, Web of Science, 
Scopus, and Cochrane through March 2024. We used Review Manager v.5.4 to pool 
dichotomous data using risk ratio (RR) and continuous data using mean difference 
(MD) with a 95% confidence interval (CI).
RESULTS: Three studies with a total of 884 patients were included. Sparsentan 
was superior to irbesartan in improving urine protein to creatinine ratio (UP/C) 
(ratio of percentage reduction 0.66, 95% CI [0.58 to 0.74], P < 0.001); as well 
as the proportion of patients achieved complete and partial remission of 
proteinuria (RR = 2.57, 95% CI [1.73 to 3.81], P < 0.001) and (RR = 1.63, 95% CI 
[1.4 to 1.91], P < 0.001) respectively. Regarding the effect on the glomerular 
filtration rate, the results estimate did not favor either sparsentan or 
irbesartan (MD = 1.98 ml/min per 1.73mm2, 95% CI [-1.05 to 5.01], P = 0.2). 
There were no significant differences in adverse events except for hypotension, 
which showed higher rates in the sparsentan group (RR = 2.02, 95% CI [1.3 to 
3.16], P = 0.002).
CONCLUSION: Sparsentan is effective and has a good safety profile for treating 
FSGS and patients with IgA nephropathy. However, more well-designed RCTs against 
ARBs, ACE inhibitors, and steroids with larger sample sizes are needed to get 
conclusive evidence.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-024-03713-9
PMCID: PMC11429118
PMID: 39333921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
authors declare no competing interests.