---
reference_id: "PMID:29476880"
title: Downregulation of estrogen-related receptor alpha inhibits human cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma cell proliferation and migration by regulating EMT via fibronectin and STAT3 signaling pathways.
authors:
- Chen H
- Pan J
- Zhang L
- Chen L
- Qi H
- Zhong M
- Shi X
- Du J
- Li Q
journal: Eur J Pharmacol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2018.02.025
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Movement/drug effects
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- Down-Regulation/drug effects
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition/drug effects
- Fibronectins/metabolism
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/drug effects"
- Humans
- Nitriles/pharmacology
- "Receptors, Estrogen/metabolism"
- STAT3 Transcription Factor/metabolism
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Thiazoles/pharmacology
- ERRalpha Estrogen-Related Receptor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Downregulation of estrogen-related receptor alpha inhibits human cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma cell proliferation and migration by regulating EMT via fibronectin and STAT3 signaling pathways.
**Authors:** Chen H, Pan J, Zhang L, Chen L, Qi H, Zhong M, Shi X, Du J, Li Q
**Journal:** Eur J Pharmacol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejphar.2018.02.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2018.02.025)

## Content

1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2018 Apr 15;825:133-142. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2018.02.025. 
Epub 2018 Feb 21.

Downregulation of estrogen-related receptor alpha inhibits human cutaneous 
squamous cell carcinoma cell proliferation and migration by regulating EMT via 
fibronectin and STAT3 signaling pathways.

Chen H(1), Pan J(2), Zhang L(1), Chen L(1), Qi H(1), Zhong M(3), Shi X(3), Du 
J(4), Li Q(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Huashan Hospital North, Fudan University, Shanghai 
201907, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 
200040, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Huashan Hospital North, Fudan University, Shanghai 
201907, China; Department of Pharmacy, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai 200040, China.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 
200040, China. Electronic address: dendritic_jj@163.com.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Huashan Hospital North, Fudan University, Shanghai 
201907, China; Department of Pharmacy, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai 200040, China. Electronic address: qyli1234@163.com.

Estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRα), one of orphan nuclear receptors, has 
been recently revealed as an oncogenic regulator in a variety of cancers. 
However, the linking gain of ERRα expression and cancer progression in cutaneous 
squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is largely unknown. Here, we showed that the mRNA 
and protein expression levels of ERRα were markedly higher in A431 cells 
compared with human keratinocyte cell line HaCaT, and targeted inhibition of 
ERRα by shRNA or its inverse agonist XCT790 significantly suppressed A431 cells 
proliferation and migration, while overexpression of ERRα promoted cell 
proliferation and migration. In addition, the data revealed that ERRα 
downregulation markedly inhibited the epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) of 
A431 cells with increasing the expression of E-cadherin and decreasing 
fibronectin (FN) and vimentin. Results from further experiments using Western 
blot suggested that ERRα suppression inhibited signal transducer and activator 
of transcription (STAT3) protein expression. In contrast, overexpression of ERRα 
promoted EMT and the activation of STAT3 pathway. Moreover, treatment with 
specific STAT3 inhibitor reversed EMT markers in ERRα-overexpressing A431 cells. 
In tumor xenografts of A431 cells, we further showed that ERRα depletion 
inhibited cSCC tumor growth in vivo. Taken together, these results demonstrate, 
for the first time, that ERRα may function as an oncoprotein in cSCC to 
accelerate tumor aggressiveness by promoting EMT via FN and STAT3 pathway, and 
it could be a novel target for cSCC therapy.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2018.02.025
PMID: 29476880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]