---
reference_id: "PMID:36881797"
title: Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.
authors:
- Acholonu C
- Cohen E
- Afzal SY
- Jani P
- Tesher M
journal: Pediatr Ann
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3928/19382359-20230119-03
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.
**Authors:** Acholonu C, Cohen E, Afzal SY, Jani P, Tesher M
**Journal:** Pediatr Ann (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3928/19382359-20230119-03](https://doi.org/10.3928/19382359-20230119-03)

## Content

1. Pediatr Ann. 2023 Mar;52(3):e114-e121. doi: 10.3928/19382359-20230119-03. Epub
 2023 Mar 1.

Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.

Acholonu C, Cohen E, Afzal SY, Jani P, Tesher M.

Multisystem inflammatory disease in children (MIS-C) is a condition typically 
seen 3 to 6 weeks after acute infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Believed to be a postinfection hyperinflammatory 
response, the clinical manifestation of this viral sequelae can vary 
significantly in severity and symptomatic presentation. Clinical prodrome 
includes persistent fever and dysfunction of at least two organ systems. Often 
developing after asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19) infection, MIS-C is a diagnosis of exclusion that requires evaluation 
for other infectious or noninfectious etiology for symptoms. Vital sign 
instability, including fever, tachycardia, and hypotension; laboratory studies 
demonstrating elevated inflammatory markers and elevated cardiac markers; and 
positive SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction, SARS-CoV-2 antibodies, or 
exposure to someone with confirmed COVID-19 infection 4 to 6 weeks before 
clinical presentation are used to diagnose this condition. Skin and mucosal 
involvement, gastrointestinal symptoms, and neurologic manifestations are also 
commonly seen. An echocardiogram is indicated to evaluate for cardiac 
dysfunction, including but not limited to coronary artery enlargement, left 
ventricular dysfunction, arrythmias, or atrioventricular block. [Pediatr Ann. 
2023;52(3):e114-e121.].

DOI: 10.3928/19382359-20230119-03
PMID: 36881797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]