---
reference_id: "PMID:12092043"
title: Thoracic and lung involvement in familial Mediterranean fever (FMF).
authors:
- Lidar M
- Pras M
- Langevitz P
- Livneh A
journal: Clin Chest Med
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0272-5231(01)00002-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thoracic and lung involvement in familial Mediterranean fever (FMF).
**Authors:** Lidar M, Pras M, Langevitz P, Livneh A
**Journal:** Clin Chest Med (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0272-5231(01)00002-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0272-5231(01)00002-8)

## Content

1. Clin Chest Med. 2002 Jun;23(2):505-11. doi: 10.1016/s0272-5231(01)00002-8.

Thoracic and lung involvement in familial Mediterranean fever (FMF).

Lidar M(1), Pras M, Langevitz P, Livneh A.

Author information:
(1)Heller Institute of Medical Research, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, 
Israel.

Lung involvement in FMF is limited mainly to transient pleuritis during acute 
attacks. Amyloidosis of the lung is rare and is associated with symptomatic 
involvement of other organs while remaining subclinical in itself. Vasculitis of 
the lung in FMF is possible because of the strong association between FMF and a 
variety of vasculitides. With the exception of one case of isolated pulmonary 
vasculitis, vasculitis of the lung in FMF has not been described. The claim that 
FMF protects against asthma has not been established, but this inverse 
association, if present, may be traced to linkage disequilibrium in which MEFV 
modifies the effect of asthma and atopic-related genes, or to eosinophil 
function. Mesothelioma has been reported in at least four patients with FMF and 
is related to chronic or recurrent stimulation of the serous membrane. Three 
patients had peritoneal mesothelioma, while one developed mesothelioma of the 
lung. Finally, thromboembolism should be considered, particularly in patients 
with FMF amyloidosis who present with respiratory distress.

DOI: 10.1016/s0272-5231(01)00002-8
PMID: 12092043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]