---
reference_id: "PMID:29057666"
title: "Granisetron: a review of pharmacokinetics and clinical experience in chemotherapy induced - nausea and vomiting."
authors:
- Spartinou A
- Nyktari V
- Papaioannou A
journal: Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/17425255.2017.1396317
keywords:
- "Antiemetics/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Dexamethasone/administration & dosage"
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- "Granisetron/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics"
- Humans
- "Nausea/chemically induced, drug therapy"
- Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Quality of Life
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Vomiting/chemically induced, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Granisetron: a review of pharmacokinetics and clinical experience in chemotherapy induced - nausea and vomiting.
**Authors:** Spartinou A, Nyktari V, Papaioannou A
**Journal:** Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17425255.2017.1396317](https://doi.org/10.1080/17425255.2017.1396317)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2017 Dec;13(12):1289-1297. doi:
10.1080/17425255.2017.1396317. Epub 2017 Oct 27.

Granisetron: a review of pharmacokinetics and clinical experience in
chemotherapy induced - nausea and vomiting.

Spartinou A(1), Nyktari V(1), Papaioannou A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Anesthesiology , University Hospital of Heraklion , Crete ,
Greece.
(2)b Faculty of Medicine , University of Crete Greece.

Chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) are major side effects of
chemotherapy and a great burden to patients' quality of life. Serotonin and
substance P are the major neurotransmitters involved in the pathophysiology of
CINV, but in spite of new antiemetics no completely effective regime exists for
its prevention or treatment. Areas covered: In this review the authors provide a
detailed description of granisetron's chemistry pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics, toxicity and a brief review of clinical trials involving
granisetron and the management of CINV. We searched reviews, meta-analysis and
randomized controlled trials (Medline, Embase and article reference lists).
Expert opinion: According to current literature, granisetron 2 mg orally or
0,01mg/kg (1 mg) intravenously per day, co-administered with dexamethasone and
NK-1 antagonists is the recommended regime for highly emetogenic chemotherapy.
In the future the role of transdermal and subcutaneous formulations against
delayed CINV will be clarified and probably enhance patients' convenience.

DOI: 10.1080/17425255.2017.1396317
PMID: 29057666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
