---
reference_id: "PMID:39518712"
title: A Patient Case of Malan Syndrome Involving 19p13.2 Deletion of NFIX with Longitudinal Follow-Up and Future Prospectives.
authors:
- Makker S
- Gagnon BR
- Trew I
- Mougios V
- Hanna A
- Cale JM
- McIntosh CS
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13216575
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Patient Case of Malan Syndrome Involving 19p13.2 Deletion of NFIX with Longitudinal Follow-Up and Future Prospectives.
**Authors:** Makker S, Gagnon BR, Trew I, Mougios V, Hanna A, Cale JM, McIntosh CS
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13216575](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13216575)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Nov 1;13(21):6575. doi: 10.3390/jcm13216575.

A Patient Case of Malan Syndrome Involving 19p13.2 Deletion of NFIX with 
Longitudinal Follow-Up and Future Prospectives.

Makker S(1), Gagnon BR(2), Trew I(3)(4), Mougios V(5), Hanna A(6), Cale 
JM(3)(4), McIntosh CS(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laurel Springs School, Ojai, CA 93023, USA.
(2)Edward D. Mysak Clinic for Communication Disorders, Teachers College, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA.
(3)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Innovative Therapeutics, Health Futures 
Institute, Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA 6150, Australia.
(4)Perron Institute for Neurological and Translational Science, Nedlands, WA 
6009, Australia.
(5)Action Potential Institute, 145 W 96th S, New York, NY 10025, USA.
(6)Gold Coast Optometric Vision Performance, Oyster Bay, NY 11771, USA.

Background and Objectives: Malan syndrome is a rare overgrowth syndrome 
resulting from NFIX haploinsufficiency due to heterozygous loss-of-function 
mutations or microdeletions of NFIX on chromosome 19 at p13.2. Phenotypic 
presentation can vary but is characterized by macrocephaly, long and slender 
body habitus, skeletal abnormalities, and intellectual disability. Methods: 
Here, we report on the presentation, management, and development of a patient 
with Malan syndrome, highlighting the clinical and behavioral aspects of this 
syndrome, therapeutic interventions employed, and the course of disease over a 
15-year period. We review medical records, cytogenetic analysis and 
neuropsychologic testing results, as well as speech pathology, optometric, and 
medical reports. In addition, we discuss personalized therapeutic strategies 
that could potentially be exploited in the future for such overgrowth syndromes. 
Results: To our knowledge, this is the first longitudinal follow-up report of a 
case of Malan syndrome to highlight the clinical course, interventions employed, 
and resulting improvements in neurocognitive function over time. Conclusions: 
This case highlights the importance of early diagnosis, intervention, and 
preventative care in overgrowth syndromes, as well as the potential for 
therapeutic intervention in the future.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13216575
PMCID: PMC11546576
PMID: 39518712

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.