---
reference_id: "PMID:39561927"
title: "A randomised, placebo-controlled, phase III trial of leniolisib in activated phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta (PI3Kδ) syndrome (APDS): Adolescent and adult subgroup analysis."
authors:
- Rao VK
- Šedivá A
- Dalm VASH
- Plebani A
- Schuetz C
- Shcherbina A
- Trizzino A
- Zharankova Y
- Orpia A
- Kulm E
- Webster S
- Körholz J
- Lougaris V
- Rodina Y
- Conlon N
- Coulter T
- Bradt J
- Relan A
- Uzel G
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2024.110400
keywords:
- Humans
- Adolescent
- Female
- Male
- Child
- "Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases/drug therapy, genetics"
- Adult
- "Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Young Adult
- "B-Lymphocytes/immunology, drug effects"
- Middle Aged
- Double-Blind Method
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A randomised, placebo-controlled, phase III trial of leniolisib in activated phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta (PI3Kδ) syndrome (APDS): Adolescent and adult subgroup analysis.
**Authors:** Rao VK, Šedivá A, Dalm VASH, Plebani A, Schuetz C, Shcherbina A, Trizzino A, Zharankova Y, Orpia A, Kulm E, Webster S, Körholz J, Lougaris V, Rodina Y, Conlon N, Coulter T, Bradt J, Relan A, Uzel G
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2024.110400](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2024.110400)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2025 Jan;270:110400. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2024.110400. Epub 2024 
Nov 17.

A randomised, placebo-controlled, phase III trial of leniolisib in activated 
phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta (PI3Kδ) syndrome (APDS): Adolescent and adult 
subgroup analysis.

Rao VK(1), Šedivá A(2), Dalm VASH(3), Plebani A(4), Schuetz C(5), Shcherbina 
A(6), Trizzino A(7), Zharankova Y(8), Orpia A(9), Kulm E(10), Webster S(9), 
Körholz J(5), Lougaris V(4), Rodina Y(6), Conlon N(11), Coulter T(12), Bradt 
J(13), Relan A(13), Uzel G(9).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. Electronic address: korao@niaid.nih.gov.
(2)Department of Immunology, Motol University Hospital, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology; 
Department of Immunology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(4)Pediatrics Clinic, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, 
University of Brescia, Azienda Socio Sanitaria Territoriale Spedali Civili di 
Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(5)Pediatric Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and 
University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Immunology, Dmitry Rogachev National Medical Research Center of 
Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russia.
(7)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, ARNAS Ospedali Civico Di 
Cristina Benfratelli Hospital, Palermo, Italy.
(8)Belarusian Research Center for Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, 
Minsk, Belarus.
(9)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(10)Clinical Research Directorate, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer 
Research, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(11)Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Facility, St. James's Hospital and School 
of Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.
(12)Regional Immunology Services of Northern Ireland, Belfast Health and Social 
Care Trust, United Kingdom.
(13)Pharming Healthcare Inc, Warren, NJ, United States.

Activated phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta (PI3Kδ) syndrome (APDS) is an 
ultra-rare, progressive genetic disease, characterised by immune deficiency and 
dysregulation, affecting individuals from birth. In a 12-week phase III 
randomised placebo-controlled trial, leniolisib, a selective PI3Kδ inhibitor, 
was well-tolerated and met both co-primary endpoints (change from Baseline in 
log10-transformed sum of product of diameters of index lymph nodes and 
percentage of naïve/total B cells at Day 85). Here, prespecified subgroup 
analyses are reported in adolescents aged 12-17 years (leniolisib, n = 8; 
placebo, n = 4) and adults aged ≥18 (leniolisib, n = 13; placebo, n = 6). In 
both subgroups, leniolisib reduced lymphadenopathy (least squares mean change 
versus placebo: adolescents, -0.4 versus -0.1; adults, -0.3 versus 0.1) and 
increased the percentage of naïve B cells (least squares mean change: 
adolescents, 44.5 versus -16.5; adults, 28.4 versus -1.1). Leniolisib was 
well-tolerated in both adolescents and adults. These results show leniolisib is 
an effective APDS treatment in both subpopulations. PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY: What 
is activated PI3Kδ syndrome (APDS)? APDS is an ultra-rare disease in which the 
immune system does not work correctly. People with APDS have a wide range of 
symptoms, including infections, certain organs associated with the immune system 
becoming larger, and worse quality of life. These symptoms generally start in 
childhood. Why was this study carried out? Current treatments only treat the 
symptoms of APDS, rather than correcting the cause of the problem. These 
treatments can also have significant side effects. A new medication for APDS 
called leniolisib aims to treat the underlying cause of the disease. This 
publication reports results from a clinical trial of leniolisib which compared 
patients who received leniolisib with patients who received a placebo. The aim 
of this report was to examine these clinical trial results to understand if 
leniolisib is effective and safe when treating both adolescents (12-17 years 
old) and adults (18 years and older) with APDS. What were the results of this 
study? Leniolisib improved the number of certain immune cells, compared to 
patients who did not receive leniolisib, in both adolescents and adults with 
APDS. Leniolisib also reduced the size of the enlarged immune system organs in 
both adolescents and adults with APDS. There were no major safety concerns for 
either age group who received leniolisib. What do these results mean? These 
results show that leniolisib can help the immune system to work in a way that is 
closer to those without APDS. This new treatment is effective and generally 
well-tolerated for both adolescents and adults. These results indicate that 
people with APDS are able to start treatment with leniolisib during adolescence, 
which may slow the build-up of symptoms and may also have a positive impact on 
the quality of their lives.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2024.110400
PMCID: PMC11631659
PMID: 39561927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest VKR: None; AŠ: 
Consultant and Lecturer to Takeda and Octapharma; Lecturer to CSL Behring; 
VASHD: Consultant for/honoraria from AstraZeneca, CSL Behring, GSK, Pharming 
Group, Takeda; AP: None; CS: None; AS: Honoraria from and is a consultant for 
Octapharma, CSL Behring, and Novartis; AT: None; YZ: None; AO: None; EK: None; 
SW: Consultant to Pharming Group; JK: Received travel expenses and honoraria 
from Pharming Group; VL: None; YR: None; NC: None; TC: None; JB: Current 
employee and stock options holder of Pharming Group; holds individual stock in 
Neoclone; AR: Current employee and stock options holder of Pharming Group; GU: 
None.