---
reference_id: "PMID:28515471"
title: "Clinical and molecular investigation of 14 Japanese patients with complete TFP deficiency: a comparison with Caucasian cases."
authors:
- Bo R
- Yamada K
- Kobayashi H
- Jamiyan P
- Hasegawa Y
- Taketani T
- Fukuda S
- Hata I
- Niida Y
- Shigematsu Y
- Iijima K
- Yamaguchi S
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/jhg.2017.52
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular investigation of 14 Japanese patients with complete TFP deficiency: a comparison with Caucasian cases.
**Authors:** Bo R, Yamada K, Kobayashi H, Jamiyan P, Hasegawa Y, Taketani T, Fukuda S, Hata I, Niida Y, Shigematsu Y, Iijima K, Yamaguchi S
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jhg.2017.52](https://doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2017.52)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2017 Sep;62(9):809-814. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2017.52. Epub 2017 May
18.

Clinical and molecular investigation of 14 Japanese patients with complete TFP 
deficiency: a comparison with Caucasian cases.

Bo R(1)(2), Yamada K(1), Kobayashi H(1), Jamiyan P(3), Hasegawa Y(1), Taketani 
T(1), Fukuda S(1), Hata I(4), Niida Y(5), Shigematsu Y(4), Iijima K(2), 
Yamaguchi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine, Shimane, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Hyogo, 
Japan.
(3)Medical Genetics Laboratory, National Center for Maternal and Child Health, 
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, 
Fukui, Japan.
(5)Division of Genomic Medicine, Department of Advanced Medicine, Medical 
Research Institute, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan.

Mitochondrial trifunctional protein (TFP) deficiency is an inherited metabolic 
disorder of mitochondrial fatty-acid oxidation. Isolated long-chain 
3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is often reported in Caucasian 
countries due to a common mutation. However, the molecular and clinical basis of 
complete TFP deficiency has not been extensively reported. In this study, 14 
Japanese cases (13 families) with complete TFP deficiency, including 9 
previously reported cases, were analyzed to clarify the clinical and molecular 
characteristics of TFP deficiency. The clinical types of the 14 patients were as 
follows: 12 cases of neonatal (n=7) or myopathic (n=5) types and 2 cases of 
intermediate type. Peripheral neuropathy was found in four cases and 
hypocalcemia due to hypoparathyroidism, which is rarely reported in Caucasian 
patients, had developed in four cases. Maternal hemolysis, elevated liver 
enzymes and low platelet count syndrome and acute fatty liver of pregnancy were 
noted in two and one mothers, respectively. Fourteen mutations were identified 
in 26 alleles in Japanese patients, including two novel mutations (HADHA: 
c.361C>T, and HADHA-HADHB: g.26233880_ 26248855del), although no common 
mutations were found. This study suggests that the molecular and clinical 
aspects of Japanese patients with TFP deficiencies differ from those of 
Caucasian patients.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2017.52
PMID: 28515471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]