---
reference_id: "PMID:35419902"
title: "The fibrillinopathies: New insights with focus on the paradigm of opposing phenotypes for both FBN1 and FBN2."
authors:
- Peeters S
- De Kinderen P
- Meester JAN
- Verstraeten A
- Loeys BL
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/humu.24383
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The fibrillinopathies: New insights with focus on the paradigm of opposing phenotypes for both FBN1 and FBN2.
**Authors:** Peeters S, De Kinderen P, Meester JAN, Verstraeten A, Loeys BL
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.24383](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24383)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2022 Jul;43(7):815-831. doi: 10.1002/humu.24383. Epub 2022 Apr 28.

The fibrillinopathies: New insights with focus on the paradigm of opposing 
phenotypes for both FBN1 and FBN2.

Peeters S(1), De Kinderen P(1), Meester JAN(1), Verstraeten A(1), Loeys 
BL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University 
Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.

Different pathogenic variants in the fibrillin-1 gene (FBN1) cause Marfan 
syndrome and acromelic dysplasias. Whereas the musculoskeletal features of 
Marfan syndrome involve tall stature, arachnodactyly, joint hypermobility, and 
muscle hypoplasia, acromelic dysplasia patients present with short stature, 
brachydactyly, stiff joints, and hypermuscularity. Similarly, pathogenic 
variants in the fibrillin-2 gene (FBN2) cause either a Marfanoid congenital 
contractural arachnodactyly or a FBN2-related acromelic dysplasia that most 
prominently presents with brachydactyly. The phenotypic and molecular 
resemblances between both the FBN1 and FBN2-related disorders suggest that 
reciprocal pathomechanistic lessons can be learned. In this review, we provide 
an updated overview and comparison of the phenotypic and mutational spectra of 
both the "tall" and "short" fibrillinopathies. The future parallel functional 
study of both FBN1/2-related disorders will reveal new insights into how 
pathogenic fibrillin variants differently affect the fibrillin microfibril 
network and/or growth factor homeostasis in clinically opposite syndromes. This 
knowledge may eventually be translated into new therapeutic approaches by 
targeting or modulating the fibrillin microfibril network and/or the signaling 
pathways under its control.

© 2022 The Authors. Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24383
PMCID: PMC9322447
PMID: 35419902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]