---
reference_id: "PMID:20301580"
title: X-Linked Lymphoproliferative Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Meyer L
- Hines M
- Zhang K
- Nichols KE
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-Linked Lymphoproliferative Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Meyer L, Hines M, Zhang K, Nichols KE

## Content

1. X-Linked Lymphoproliferative Disease.

Meyer L(1), Hines M(2), Zhang K(3), Nichols KE(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2004 Feb 27 [updated 2024 May 16].

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
(2)Division of Critical Care Medicine, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, Tennessee
(3)GoBroad Healthcare Group, Beijing, China
(4)Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: X-linked lymphoproliferative disease (XLP) in general 
is characterized by an inappropriate immune response to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) 
infection leading to hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) or severe 
mononucleosis, dysgammaglobulinemia, and lymphoproliferative disease (malignant 
lymphoma). The condition primarily affects males. XLP has two recognizable 
subtypes, XLP1 (due to pathogenic variants in SH2D1A) and XLP2 (due to 
pathogenic variants in XIAP). HLH / fulminant infectious mononucleosis is the 
most common presentation regardless of subtype. HLH is characterized as an acute 
illness with prolonged and high fever, bi- or trilineage cytopenias, and 
hepatosplenomegaly, which is often severe or fatal. Death is generally secondary 
to liver failure or multisystem organ dysfunction. In those with XLP1, dys- or 
hypogammaglobulinemia can lead to varying degrees of humoral immune dysfunction 
associated with bronchiectasis and recurrent respiratory infections that, if 
untreated, may result in death. Lymphoproliferative disease (malignant lymphoma) 
and other lymphoproliferative diseases are specific to XLP1 and often develop in 
childhood, usually following EBV exposure. Rarer findings in those with XLP1 can 
include aplastic anemia, vasculitis, and lymphoid granulomatosis. Males with 
XLP2 are more likely to have HLH without EBV infection, recurrent episodes of 
HLH (which is not typically seen in those with XLP1), splenomegaly, and 
gastrointestinal disease, including enterocolitis and perirectal abscesses or 
fistulae. Rarely, individuals with XLP2 and inflammatory bowel disease have been 
reported to develop inflammatory liver disease, which can progress to fatal 
liver failure. Transient hypogammaglobulinemia has been rarely observed in those 
with XLP2. To date, neither lymphoproliferative disease nor common variable 
immunodeficiency has been reported in males with XLP2. Heterozygous females 
rarely have symptoms. There are, however, increasing numbers of reports of 
affected females with unfavorable (skewed) X-chromosome inactivation favoring 
the X chromosome with the pathogenic variant who develop HLH, inflammatory bowel 
disease, and erythema nodosum.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of XLP1 or XLP2 can be established in a male 
proband who has a hemizygous germline pathogenic variant in SH2D1A (XLP1) or 
XIAP (XLP2) identified on molecular genetic testing. These males typically have 
low or absent SAP or XIAP protein expression, respectively, by flow cytometry. 
Female probands with a heterozygous pathogenic variant in SH2D1A or XIAP 
identified on molecular genetic testing and skewed X-chromosome inactivation 
toward expression of the chromosome with the pathogenic SH2DA1 or XIAP variant 
have been reported; such individuals may be symptomatic.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: The only known curative therapy for XLP1 is 
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT), which should be strongly 
considered in all males as early in life as is feasible, particularly in those 
who have not developed symptoms; HSCT is not recommended for asymptomatic 
heterozygous females. For individuals with XLP2, many manifestations of disease 
can be improved with HSCT; however, there are more complications in these 
individuals. Supportive care: Standard treatment for liver dysfunction/failure, 
hypogammaglobulinemia (IVIG or IgG), fulminant EBV infection / HLH (including 
etoposide and steroids and consideration of rituximab), lymphoma, colitis, 
aplastic anemia, and vasculitis. Surveillance: At each visit, obtain history of 
any neurologic changes; physical exam for evidence of hepatosplenomegaly, 
lymphadenopathy, and neurologic changes; monitor for signs and symptoms of 
colitis and cholangitis in those with XLP2. Based on clinical status / 
evaluation for early evidence of HLH, monitor for liver dysfunction with hepatic 
profiles and coagulation; measurement of complete blood count; measurement of 
serum inflammatory markers (ferritin, soluble IL2R). As needed, measurement of 
serum IgG levels based on phenotype or in those with recurrent respiratory 
infections; EBV-PCR in blood for evidence of EBV infection if a person has 
symptoms of infection or HLH develops. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Individuals with XLP who come into contact with EBV are at risk of developing 
HLH and/or lymphoproliferation. Individuals are also at risk of developing HLH 
or inflammatory problems secondary to other infections. Evaluation of relatives 
at risk: Evaluation of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk sibs 
and other maternal male relatives of an affected individual in order to identify 
as early as possible those who would benefit from medical management and 
consideration of presymptomatic bone marrow transplantation in males.
GENETIC COUNSELING: XLP is inherited in an X-linked manner. The risk to the sibs 
of a male proband depends on the genetic status of the mother: if the mother is 
heterozygous for an SH2D1A or XIAP pathogenic variant, the chance of 
transmitting the SH2D1A or XIAP pathogenic variant in each pregnancy is 50%. 
Male sibs who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected; female sibs who 
inherit the pathogenic variant will be heterozygotes and will typically not be 
affected (in rare cases, heterozygous females may be symptomatic due to skewed 
X-chromosome inactivation). Genetic testing of at-risk female relatives is most 
informative if the pathogenic variant has been identified in the proband. 
Prenatal testing is possible for a pregnancy at increased risk if the familial 
pathogenic variant is known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301580