---
reference_id: "PMID:37747813"
title: Clinico-Genomic Profiling of Conventional and Dedifferentiated Chondrosarcomas Reveals TP53 Mutation to Be Associated with Worse Outcomes.
authors:
- Denu RA
- Yang RK
- Lazar AJ
- Patel SS
- Lewis VO
- Roszik J
- Livingston JA
- Wang WL
- Shaw KR
- Ratan R
- Zarzour MA
- Bird J
- Raza S
- Akdemir KC
- Rodon Ahnert J
- Subbiah V
- Patel S
- Conley AP
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-1703
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Chondrosarcoma/genetics, pathology"
- "Bone Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Bone and Bones/pathology
- Genomics
- "Isocitrate Dehydrogenase/genetics, metabolism"
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinico-Genomic Profiling of Conventional and Dedifferentiated Chondrosarcomas Reveals TP53 Mutation to Be Associated with Worse Outcomes.
**Authors:** Denu RA, Yang RK, Lazar AJ, Patel SS, Lewis VO, Roszik J, Livingston JA, Wang WL, Shaw KR, Ratan R, Zarzour MA, Bird J, Raza S, Akdemir KC, Rodon Ahnert J, Subbiah V, Patel S, Conley AP
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-1703](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-1703)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2023 Dec 1;29(23):4844-4852. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-1703.

Clinico-Genomic Profiling of Conventional and Dedifferentiated Chondrosarcomas
Reveals TP53 Mutation to Be Associated with Worse Outcomes.

Denu RA(1), Yang RK(2), Lazar AJ(2)(3), Patel SS(4), Lewis VO(4), Roszik J(5),
Livingston JA(1), Wang WL(2), Shaw KR(6), Ratan R(1), Zarzour MA(1), Bird J(4),
Raza S(7), Akdemir KC(7), Rodon Ahnert J(8), Subbiah V(8), Patel S(1), Conley
AP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(2)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas.
(3)Department of Genomic Medicine, Division of Cancer Medicine, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Orthopaedic Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(5)Department of Melanoma Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(6)Institute for Personalized Cancer Therapy, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas.
(8)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.

PURPOSE: Chondrosarcomas are the most common primary bone tumor in adults.
Isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) and IDH2 mutations are prevalent. We aimed to
assess the clinico-genomic properties of IDH mutant versus IDH wild-type (WT)
chondrosarcomas as well as alterations in other genes.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We included 93 patients with conventional and
dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma for which there were available clinical
next-generation sequencing data. Clinical and genomic data were extracted and
compared between IDH mutant and IDH WT chondrosarcomas and between TP53 mutant
and TP53 WT chondrosarcomas.
RESULTS: IDH1 and IDH2 mutations are prevalent in chondrosarcoma (50.5%), more
common in chondrosarcomas arising in the extremities, associated with higher age
at diagnosis, and more common in dedifferentiated chondrosarcomas compared with
grades 1-3 conventional chondrosarcoma. There was no difference in survival
based on IDH mutation in univariate and multivariate analyses. TP53 mutation was
the next most prevalent (41.9%) and is associated with worse overall survival
and metastasis-free survival in both univariate and multivariate analyses. TP53
mutation was also associated with higher risk of recurrence following
curative-intent surgery and worse survival among patients that presented with de
novo metastatic disease.
CONCLUSIONS: IDH mutations are prevalent in chondrosarcoma though were not
associated with survival outcomes in this cohort. TP53 mutations were the next
most common alteration and were associated with worse outcomes.

©2023 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-1703
PMCID: PMC10835757
PMID: 37747813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RAD, RKY, SSP, VOL, JR, JAL, WLW, KRS, RR, MAZ,
JB, SR, KCA, JRA, and SP report no conflicts of interest. VS reports research
funding from Novartis to conduct clinical trials; other grant support for
clinical trials from AbbVie, Agensys, Inc, Alfasigma, Altum, Amgen, Bayer, BERG
Health, Blueprint Medicines Corporation, Boston Biomedical, Inc, Boston
Pharmaceuticals, Celgene Corporation, D3 Bio, Inc, Dragonfly Therapeutics, Inc,
Exelixis, Fujifilm, GlaxoSmithKline, Idera Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Incyte
Corporation, Inhibrx, Loxo Oncology/ Eli Lilly, MedImmune, MultiVir, Inc,
NanoCarrier, Co, National Comprehensive Cancer Network, NCI-CTEP, Novartis,
PharmaMar, Pfizer, Relay Therapeutics, Roche/Genentech, Takeda, Turning Point
Therapeutics, UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, and Vegenics Pty Ltd; travel support
from ASCO, ESMO, Helsinn Healthcare, Incyte Corporation, Novartis, and
PharmaMar; consultancy or advisory board participation for Helsinn Healthcare,
Incyte Corporation, Loxo Oncology/Eli Lilly, MedImmune, Novartis, QED
Therapeutics, Relay Therapeutics, Daiichi-Sankyo, and R-Pharm US; and other
relationship with Medscape. AJL reports consulting and/or advisory board
relationships with the following entities: AbbVie, Adaptimmune, AJCC,
Astra-Zeneca, Bain Capital, Bayer, Bio-AI Health, BMS, CAP, Caris, Deciphera,
Elsevier, Foghorn Therapeutics, Gothams, GSK, Illumina, Invitae / Archer DX,
Iterion Therapeutics, Merck, Novartis, Nucleai, OncoKB (MSKCC), Paige, Pfizer,
Regeneron, Roche / Genentech, SpringerNature, SpringWorks, Tempus, ThermoFisher,
USCAP. APC reports research funding from Eli Lilly, Epicentrx, Chordoma
Foundation, Inhibrx, NantPharma, NCI, and Roche; consultancy or advisory board
participation for Aadi Biosciences, Applied Clinical Intelligence (DSMB)
Deciphera, Inhibrx; other relationship with Medscape.
