---
reference_id: "PMID:36864429"
title: Comprehensive ABA-based interventions in the treatment of children with autism spectrum disorder - a meta-analysis.
authors:
- Eckes T
- Buhlmann U
- Holling HD
- Möllmann A
journal: BMC Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12888-022-04412-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Autism Spectrum Disorder/drug therapy
- "Adaptation, Psychological"
- Cognition
- Parents
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive ABA-based interventions in the treatment of children with autism spectrum disorder - a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Eckes T, Buhlmann U, Holling HD, Möllmann A
**Journal:** BMC Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12888-022-04412-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-022-04412-1)

## Content

1. BMC Psychiatry. 2023 Mar 2;23(1):133. doi: 10.1186/s12888-022-04412-1.

Comprehensive ABA-based interventions in the treatment of children with autism 
spectrum disorder - a meta-analysis.

Eckes T(1), Buhlmann U(1), Holling HD(1), Möllmann A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, University of Münster, Fliednerstr. 21, 48149, 
Münster, Germany.
(2)Institute of Psychology, University of Münster, Fliednerstr. 21, 48149, 
Münster, Germany. moellmann@uni-bremen.de.
(3)Institute of Psychology, Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, University of 
Bremen, Grazer Str. 6, 28359, Bremen, Germany. moellmann@uni-bremen.de.

BACKGROUND: Many studies display promising results for interventions that are 
based on Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) in the treatment of autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD).
METHODS: This meta-analysis assessed the effects of such treatments on 
developmental outcomes in children with ASD and on parental stress based on 11 
studies with 632 participants.
RESULTS: Compared to treatment as usual, minimal or no treatment, comprehensive 
ABA-based interventions showed medium effects for intellectual functioning 
(standardized mean difference SMD = 0.51, 95% CI [0.09; 0.92]) and adaptive 
behavior (SMD = 0.37, 95% CI [0.03; 0.70]). Language abilities, symptom severity 
or parental stress did not improve beyond the improvement in control groups. 
Moderator analyses indicate that language abilities at intake could influence 
the effect sizes and the influence of treatment intensity might decrease with 
older age.
CONCLUSIONS: Practical implications and limitations are discussed.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-022-04412-1
PMCID: PMC9983163
PMID: 36864429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.