---
reference_id: "PMID:30251955"
title: "Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome: Clinical Phenotype and Molecular Analysis in a Single Tertiary Center Cohort."
authors:
- Touzon MS
- Garrido NP
- Marino R
- Ramirez P
- Costanzo M
- Guercio G
- Berensztein E
- Rivarola MA
- Belgorosky A
journal: J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2018.2018.0185
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Androgen-Insensitivity Syndrome/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mosaicism
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, Androgen/genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Tertiary Care Centers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome: Clinical Phenotype and Molecular Analysis in a Single Tertiary Center Cohort.
**Authors:** Touzon MS, Garrido NP, Marino R, Ramirez P, Costanzo M, Guercio G, Berensztein E, Rivarola MA, Belgorosky A
**Journal:** J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2018.2018.0185](https://doi.org/10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2018.2018.0185)

## Content

1. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2019 Feb 20;11(1):24-33. doi:
10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2018.2018.0185. Epub 2018 Sep 25.

Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome: Clinical Phenotype and Molecular Analysis in a
Single Tertiary Center Cohort.

Touzon MS(1)(2), Garrido NP(1), Marino R(1), Ramirez P(1), Costanzo M(1),
Guercio G(1)(2), Berensztein E(1), Rivarola MA(1)(2), Belgorosky A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Hospital de Pediatria Garrahan, Endocrinology Service, Buenos Aires,
Argentina
(2)National Scientific and Technical Research Council (CONICET), Endocrinology
Service, Buenos Aires, Argentina

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was the molecular characterization of the AR
gene as the cause of 46,XY disorder in our population.
METHODS: We studied 41, non related, 46,XY disorder of sexual differentiation
index cases, having characteristics consistent with androgen insensivity
syndrome (AIS). Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes of all
patients and 25 family members from 17 non-related families.
RESULTS: The AR gene analysis revealed an abnormal sequence in 58.5% of the
index patients. All of the complete AIS (CAIS) cases were genetically confirmed,
while in the partial form (PAIS) a mutation in AR was detected in only 13
(43.3%). Molecular studies revealed other affected or carrier relatives in 87%
of the index cases. The AR mutations were found spread along the whole coding
sequence, with a higher prevalence in the ligand binding domain. Nine out of 23
(39%) AR mutations were novel. In 17% of patients with detected AR mutations,
somatic mosaicism was detected in leucocyte DNA. In our cohort, long-term follow
up gender dysphoria, raised as male or female, was not found. Finally, in
suspected PAIS, the identification of AR mutation occurred significantly less
than in CAIS patients.
CONCLUSION: Improved knowledge of the components of the AR complex and signaling
network might contribute to long term outcome and genetic counseling in AIS
patients.

DOI: 10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2018.2018.0185
PMCID: PMC6398199
PMID: 30251955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
