---
reference_id: "PMID:33135284"
title: "DICER1-associated embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and adenosarcoma of the gynecologic tract: Pathology, molecular genetics, and indications for molecular testing."
authors:
- Apellaniz-Ruiz M
- McCluggage WG
- Foulkes WD
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.22913
keywords:
- "Adenosarcoma/genetics, pathology"
- "DEAD-box RNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Genital Neoplasms, Female/genetics, metabolism"
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Humans
- MicroRNAs/genetics
- Molecular Diagnostic Techniques/methods
- Mutation
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma, Embryonal/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Ribonuclease III/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DICER1-associated embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and adenosarcoma of the gynecologic tract: Pathology, molecular genetics, and indications for molecular testing.
**Authors:** Apellaniz-Ruiz M, McCluggage WG, Foulkes WD
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.22913](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.22913)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2021 Mar;60(3):217-233. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22913. Epub
 2020 Nov 19.

DICER1-associated embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and adenosarcoma of the gynecologic 
tract: Pathology, molecular genetics, and indications for molecular testing.

Apellaniz-Ruiz M(1), McCluggage WG(2), Foulkes WD(3).

Author information:
(1)Genomics Medicine Unit, Navarrabiomed, Pamplona, Spain.
(2)Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, UK.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Gynecologic sarcomas are uncommon neoplasms, the majority occurring in the 
uterus. Due to the diverse nature of these, the description of "new" 
morphological types and the rarity of some of them, pathological diagnosis and 
treatment is often challenging. Finding genetic alterations specific to, and 
frequently occurring, in a certain type can aid in the diagnosis. DICER1 is a 
highly conserved ribonuclease crucial in the biogenesis of microRNAs and 
mutations in DICER1 (either somatic or germline) have been detected in a wide 
range of sarcomas including genitourinary embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas (ERMS) and 
adenosarcomas. Importantly, DICER1-associated sarcomas share morphological 
features irrespective of the site of origin such that the pathologist can 
strongly suspect a DICER1 association. A review of the literature shows that 
almost all gynecologic ERMS reported (outside of the vagina) harbor DICER1 
alterations, while approximately 20% of adenosarcomas also do so. These two 
tumor types exhibit significant morphological overlap and DICER1 tumor testing 
may be helpful in distinguishing between them, because a negative result makes 
ERMS unlikely. Given that germline pathogenic DICER1 variants are frequent in 
uterine (corpus and cervix) ERMS and pathogenic germline variants in this gene 
cause a hereditary cancer predisposition syndrome (DICER1 syndrome), patients 
diagnosed with these neoplasms should be referred to medical genetic services. 
Cooperation between pathologists and geneticists is crucial and will help in 
improving the diagnosis and management of these uncommon sarcomas.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.22913
PMID: 33135284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]