---
reference_id: "PMID:23139274"
title: The effect of cone opsin mutations on retinal structure and the integrity of the photoreceptor mosaic.
authors:
- Carroll J
- Dubra A
- Gardner JC
- Mizrahi-Meissonnier L
- Cooper RF
- Dubis AM
- Nordgren R
- Genead M
- Connor TB Jr
- Stepien KE
- Sharon D
- Hunt DM
- Banin E
- Hardcastle AJ
- Moore AT
- Williams DR
- Fishman G
- Neitz J
- Neitz M
- Michaelides M
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.12-11087
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Color Vision Defects/diagnosis, genetics"
- Cone Opsins/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Ophthalmoscopy
- Phenotype
- "Photoreceptor Cells, Vertebrate/pathology"
- "Retinal Degeneration/diagnosis, genetics"
- Rod Opsins/genetics
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effect of cone opsin mutations on retinal structure and the integrity of the photoreceptor mosaic.
**Authors:** Carroll J, Dubra A, Gardner JC, Mizrahi-Meissonnier L, Cooper RF, Dubis AM, Nordgren R, Genead M, Connor TB Jr, Stepien KE, Sharon D, Hunt DM, Banin E, Hardcastle AJ, Moore AT, Williams DR, Fishman G, Neitz J, Neitz M, Michaelides M
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.12-11087](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.12-11087)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Dec 5;53(13):8006-15. doi: 
10.1167/iovs.12-11087.

The effect of cone opsin mutations on retinal structure and the integrity of the 
photoreceptor mosaic.

Carroll J(1), Dubra A, Gardner JC, Mizrahi-Meissonnier L, Cooper RF, Dubis AM, 
Nordgren R, Genead M, Connor TB Jr, Stepien KE, Sharon D, Hunt DM, Banin E, 
Hardcastle AJ, Moore AT, Williams DR, Fishman G, Neitz J, Neitz M, Michaelides 
M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin 53226, USA. jcarroll@mcw.edu

PURPOSE: To evaluate retinal structure and photoreceptor mosaic integrity in 
subjects with OPN1LW and OPN1MW mutations.
METHODS: Eleven subjects were recruited, eight of whom have been previously 
described. Cone and rod density was measured using images of the photoreceptor 
mosaic obtained from an adaptive optics scanning light ophthalmoscope (AOSLO). 
Total retinal thickness, inner retinal thickness, and outer nuclear layer plus 
Henle fiber layer (ONL+HFL) thickness were measured using cross-sectional 
spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) images. Molecular genetic 
analyses were performed to characterize the OPN1LW/OPN1MW gene array.
RESULTS: While disruptions in retinal lamination and cone mosaic structure were 
observed in all subjects, genotype-specific differences were also observed. For 
example, subjects with "L/M interchange" mutations resulting from intermixing of 
ancestral OPN1LW and OPN1MW genes had significant residual cone structure in the 
parafovea (∼25% of normal), despite widespread retinal disruption that included 
a large foveal lesion and thinning of the parafoveal inner retina. These 
subjects also reported a later-onset, progressive loss of visual function. In 
contrast, subjects with the C203R missense mutation presented with congenital 
blue cone monochromacy, with retinal lamination defects being restricted to the 
ONL+HFL and the degree of residual cone structure (8% of normal) being 
consistent with that expected for the S-cone submosaic.
CONCLUSIONS: The photoreceptor phenotype associated with OPN1LW and OPN1MW 
mutations is highly variable. These findings have implications for the potential 
restoration of visual function in subjects with opsin mutations. Our study 
highlights the importance of high-resolution phenotyping to characterize 
cellular structure in inherited retinal disease; such information will be 
critical for selecting patients most likely to respond to therapeutic 
intervention and for establishing a baseline for evaluating treatment efficacy.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.12-11087
PMCID: PMC3816954
PMID: 23139274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: J. Carroll, Imagine Eyes, Inc. (S); 
A. Dubra, None; J.C. Gardner, None; L. Mizrahi-Meissonnier, None; R.F. Cooper, 
None; A.M. Dubis, None; R. Nordgren, None; M. Genead, None; T.B. Connor Jr, 
None; K.E. Stepien, None; D. Sharon, None; D.M. Hunt, None; E. Banin, None; A.J. 
Hardcastle, None; A.T. Moore, None; D.R. Williams, Canon (F), Polgenix (F), 
Pfizer (C), P, GlaxoSmithKline (C), P, Pfizer (R); G. Fishman, None; J. Neitz, 
None; M. Neitz, None; M. Michaelides, None