---
reference_id: "PMID:8340485"
title: "Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy. Donders Lecture: The Netherlands Ophthalmological Society, Maastricht, Holland, June 19, 1992."
authors:
- Gass JD
journal: J Clin Neuroophthalmol
year: '1993'
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Atrophy
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Fundus Oculi
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pigment Epithelium of Eye/pathology
- Retinal Diseases/pathology
- Scotoma/pathology
- Syndrome
- Vision Disorders/pathology
- Visual Acuity
- Visual Fields
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy. Donders Lecture: The Netherlands Ophthalmological Society, Maastricht, Holland, June 19, 1992.
**Authors:** Gass JD
**Journal:** J Clin Neuroophthalmol (1993)

## Content

1. J Clin Neuroophthalmol. 1993 Jun;13(2):79-97.

Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy. Donders Lecture: The Netherlands
Ophthalmological Society, Maastricht, Holland, June 19, 1992.

Gass JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami
School of Medicine, Florida.

PURPOSE: This report describes 13 patients, predominantly young women, with a
syndrome characterized by rapid loss of one or more large zones of outer retinal
function, photopsia, minimal funduscopic changes, and electroretinographic
abnormalities affecting one or both eyes. All patients on follow-up examination
had persistent visual field defects, and most had chronic photopsia and zones of
pigment epithelial atrophy. Evidence is presented that these patients probably
represent part of the spectrum of a single disorder that includes the multiple
evanescent white-dot syndrome (MEWDS), acute idiopathic blind-spot-enlargement
syndrome (AIBSES), acute macular neuroretinopathy (AMN), and the pseudo-presumed
ocular histoplasmosis syndrome (P-POHS).
METHODS: The medical records of these 13 patients and 2 additional patients, who
developed, in addition to the features of this syndrome, funduscopic changes
typical of MEWDS, AMN, and P-POHS, were reviewed and follow-up obtained.
RESULTS: These patients had extensive unrewarding medical and neurological
investigations because of suspected diagnoses, including central nervous system
disorders, cancer-associated retinopathy, retinal vasculitis, diffuse unilateral
subacute neuroretinitis, and tapetoretinal degenerations. Although most patients
retained good visual acuity, all had permanent visual field loss that in some
cases was severe. The cause of the disorder was not determined. No effective
treatment was found.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute visual loss and photopsia in these patients is probably
caused by damage to large zones of the outer retina that appears unaffected
ophthalmoscopically. Electroretinography is important in early diagnosis. Future
investigations probably will reveal further evidence linking this disorder to
MEWDS, AIBSES, AMN, and P-POHS.

PMID: 8340485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
