---
reference_id: "PMID:162820"
title: The pathology of Tangier disease. A light and electron microscopic study.
authors:
- Ferrans VJ
- Fredrickson DS
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '1975'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Biopsy
- "Blood Protein Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- Bone Marrow/ultrastructure
- Bone Marrow Cells
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- Female
- Histiocytes/ultrastructure
- Humans
- Inclusion Bodies/ultrastructure
- Jejunum/pathology
- "Lipoproteins, HDL/deficiency"
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Middle Aged
- Mononuclear Phagocyte System/metabolism
- "Muscle, Smooth/pathology"
- Myenteric Plexus/pathology
- Palatine Tonsil/pathology
- Peripheral Nerves/pathology
- Skin/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pathology of Tangier disease. A light and electron microscopic study.
**Authors:** Ferrans VJ, Fredrickson DS
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (1975)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 1975 Jan;78(1):101-58.

The pathology of Tangier disease. A light and electron microscopic study.

Ferrans VJ, Fredrickson DS.

Tangier disease (deficiency of high density plasma lipoproteins) is
characterized clinically by: low levels of plasma cholesterol; enlarged,
orange-yellow to yellow-gray tonsils and, frequently, peripheral neuropathy.
Histologic and ultrastructural studies were made of various tissues from 5
patients with Tangier disease, and comparisons were made of these findings with
those in the 12 other patients thus far known to have this disease. Deposits of
cholesteryl esters were found in: reticuloendothelial cells (foam cells) in
tonsils, bone marrow, skin and jejunal submucosa; Schwann cells in peripheral
nerves and myenteric plexus; and in nonvascular smooth muscle cells. These
deposits appeared electron lucent and intensely birefringent, varied from
spherical to crystalline in shape, often were extensively confluent throughout
large areas of cytoplasm, and were not limited by membranes. Certain foam cells
in bone marrow also contained membrane-limited clusters of lipid particles
resembling chylomicrons. The foam cells in Tangier disease differ
morphologically from those in numerous lysosomal enzyme deficiency states,
particularly Wolman's disease and cholesteryl ester stroage disease, and in
proliferative diseases of the reticuloendothelial system in which cholesteryl
esters also accumulate in abnormal histiocytes. Morphologic and biochemical data
suggest several hypotheses to explain the accumulation of cholesteryl esters in
tissues of patients with Tangier disease. Among these hypotheses, the most
likely are considered to be the presence in plasma of abnormal lipoprotein
particles that are subject to phagocytic removal by reticuloendothelial cells,
and the failure of a process that normally removes locally synthesized
cholesterol from cells to plasma. (Am J Pathol 78:101-158, 1975)

PMCID: PMC1915033
PMID: 162820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
