---
reference_id: "PMID:15163316"
title: Flow cytometric analysis of fetal hemoglobin in erythroid precursors of beta-thalassemia.
authors:
- Amoyal I
- Fibach E
journal: Clin Lab Haematol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2257.2004.00606.x
keywords:
- Case-Control Studies
- Erythrocyte Count
- "Erythrocytes/chemistry, pathology"
- "Erythroid Precursor Cells/chemistry, pathology"
- Fetal Hemoglobin/analysis
- Flow Cytometry/methods
- Humans
- Phenotype
- "Reticulocytes/chemistry, pathology"
- Splenectomy
- beta-Thalassemia/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Flow cytometric analysis of fetal hemoglobin in erythroid precursors of beta-thalassemia.
**Authors:** Amoyal I, Fibach E
**Journal:** Clin Lab Haematol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2257.2004.00606.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2257.2004.00606.x)

## Content

1. Clin Lab Haematol. 2004 Jun;26(3):187-93. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2257.2004.00606.x.

Flow cytometric analysis of fetal hemoglobin in erythroid precursors of
beta-thalassemia.

Amoyal I(1), Fibach E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel.

Fetal hemoglobin (HbF), the major hemoglobin species in fetal life, drops to <1%
in normal adults, where it is restricted to a few 'F-cells', which may increase
in various acquired and genetic conditions, including thalassemia. Using flow
cytometry, we studied the percentage of HbF-containing cells and their HbF
content in RBC, reticulocytes (retics) and normoblasts (NRBC) present in the
peripheral blood of patients with beta-thalassemia. Thiazol orange, a nucleic
acid-specific dye, and anti-CD45 antibodies identified the various blood cells
and antihuman HbF antibodies quantitated HbF. The results indicated that F-RBC
were more numerous in beta-thalassemic (both transfused and nontransfused)
patients than in normal donors, but, in most cases, their HbF content was
comparable, suggesting that increased HbF in thalassemia is mainly due to higher
%F-cells rather than an increased HbF per cell. Among the retics, the %F-cells
and their HbF content were highest in immature retics and decreased with
maturation to levels of RBC. This may reflect preferential maturation of
F-retics into RBC in the circulation. The NRBC population contained the lowest
%F-cells. This could be due to preferential maturation of F-NRBC, having more
normal phenotype than non-F-NRBC, in the bone marrow into F-retics, while
non-F-NRBC enter the circulation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2257.2004.00606.x
PMID: 15163316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
