---
reference_id: "PMID:31227795"
title: Hyaluronan and LYVE-1 and allograft function in lung transplantation recipients.
authors:
- Courtwright AM
- Lamattina AM
- Louis PH
- Trindade AJ
- Burkett P
- Imani J
- Shrestha S
- Divo M
- Keller S
- Rosas IO
- Goldberg HJ
- El-Chemaly S
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-45309-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyaluronan and LYVE-1 and allograft function in lung transplantation recipients.
**Authors:** Courtwright AM, Lamattina AM, Louis PH, Trindade AJ, Burkett P, Imani J, Shrestha S, Divo M, Keller S, Rosas IO, Goldberg HJ, El-Chemaly S
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-019-45309-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45309-6)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2019 Jun 21;9(1):9003. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-45309-6.

Hyaluronan and LYVE-1 and allograft function in lung transplantation recipients.

Courtwright AM(1), Lamattina AM(2), Louis PH(2), Trindade AJ(2), Burkett P(2), 
Imani J(2), Shrestha S(2), Divo M(2), Keller S(2), Rosas IO(2), Goldberg HJ(2), 
El-Chemaly S(3).

Author information:
(1)Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(2)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States.
(3)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States. 
sel-chemaly@bwh.harvard.edu.

Hyaluronan (HA) is associated with innate immune response activation and may be 
a marker of allograft dysfunction in lung transplant recipients. This was a 
prospective, single center study comparing levels of bronchioalveolar lavage 
(BAL) and serum HA and the HA immobilizer LYVE-1 in lung transplant recipients 
with and without acute cellular rejection (ACR). Chronic lung allograft 
dysfunction (CLAD)-free survival was also evaluated based on HA and LYVE-1 
levels. 78 recipients were enrolled with a total of 115 diagnostic biopsies and 
1.5 years of median follow-up. Serum HA was correlated with BAL HA (r = 0.25, 
p = 0.01) and with serum LYVE-1 (r = 0.32, p = 0.002). There was significant 
variation in HA and LYVE-1 over time, regardless of ACR status. Levels of serum 
HA (median 74.7 vs 82.7, p = 0.69), BAL HA (median 149.4 vs 134.5, p = 0.39), 
and LYVE-1 (mean 190.2 vs 183.8, p = 0.72) were not associated with ACR. 
CLAD-free survival was not different in recipients with any episode of elevated 
serum HA (HR = 1.5, 95% CI = 0.3-7.7, p = 0.61) or BAL HA (HR = 0.94, 95% 
CI = 0.2-3.6, p = 0.93). These results did not differ when stratified by 
bilateral transplant status. In this small cohort, serum HA, BAL HA, and LYVE-1 
levels are not associated with ACR or CLAD-free survival in lung transplant 
recipients.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-45309-6
PMCID: PMC6588572
PMID: 31227795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.