---
reference_id: "PMID:34948281"
title: Characterization of a Novel Splicing Variant in Acylglycerol Kinase (AGK) Associated with Fatal Sengers Syndrome.
authors:
- Barbosa-Gouveia S
- Vázquez-Mosquera ME
- Gonzalez-Vioque E
- Hermida-Ameijeiras Á
- Valverde LL
- Armstrong-Moron J
- Fons-Estupiña MDC
- Wintjes LT
- Kappen A
- Rodenburg RJ
- Couce ML
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms222413484
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of a Novel Splicing Variant in Acylglycerol Kinase (AGK) Associated with Fatal Sengers Syndrome.
**Authors:** Barbosa-Gouveia S, Vázquez-Mosquera ME, Gonzalez-Vioque E, Hermida-Ameijeiras Á, Valverde LL, Armstrong-Moron J, Fons-Estupiña MDC, Wintjes LT, Kappen A, Rodenburg RJ, Couce ML
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms222413484](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222413484)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Dec 15;22(24):13484. doi: 10.3390/ijms222413484.

Characterization of a Novel Splicing Variant in Acylglycerol Kinase (AGK) 
Associated with Fatal Sengers Syndrome.

Barbosa-Gouveia S(1)(2), Vázquez-Mosquera ME(1)(2), Gonzalez-Vioque E(3), 
Hermida-Ameijeiras Á(1)(2), Valverde LL(1)(2), Armstrong-Moron J(4)(5), 
Fons-Estupiña MDC(5)(6), Wintjes LT(7), Kappen A(7), Rodenburg RJ(8), Couce 
ML(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Diagnosis and Treatment of Congenital Metabolic Diseases, Department 
of Paediatrics, Santiago de Compostela University Clinical Hospital, 15706 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(2)Rare Diseases Networking Biomedical Research Centre (CIBERER), IDIS-Health 
Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela University 
Clinical Hospital, European Reference Network for Hereditary Metabolic Disorders 
(MetabERN), 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(3)Clinical Biochemistry Service, Puerta de Hierro-Majadahonda University 
Hospital, 28222 Majadahonda, Spain.
(4)Clinical Genetics, Molecular and Genetic Medicine Section, Hospital Sant Joan 
de Déu and Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, 08950 Esplugues de Llobregat, 
Spain.
(5)CIBER-ER (Biomedical Network Research Center for Rare Diseases), Instituto de 
Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(6)Pediatric Neurology Department, Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Sant 
Joan de Déu University Hospital, 08950 Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
Radboud University Medical Centre, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Radboud Centre for Mitochondrial Medicine, Radboud 
University Medical Centre, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Mitochondrial functional integrity depends on protein and lipid homeostasis in 
the mitochondrial membranes and disturbances in their accumulation can cause 
disease. AGK, a mitochondrial acylglycerol kinase, is not only involved in lipid 
signaling but is also a component of the TIM22 complex in the inner 
mitochondrial membrane, which mediates the import of a subset of membrane 
proteins. AGK mutations can alter both phospholipid metabolism and mitochondrial 
protein biogenesis, contributing to the pathogenesis of Sengers syndrome. We 
describe the case of an infant carrying a novel homozygous AGK variant, 
c.518+1G>A, who was born with congenital cataracts, pielic ectasia, critical 
congenital dilated myocardiopathy, and hyperlactacidemia and died 20 h after 
birth. Using the patient's DNA, we performed targeted sequencing of 314 nuclear 
genes encoding respiratory chain complex subunits and proteins implicated in 
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). A decrease of 96-bp in the 
length of the AGK cDNA sequence was detected. Decreases in the oxygen 
consumption rate (OCR) and the OCR:ECAR (extracellular acidification rate) ratio 
in the patient's fibroblasts indicated reduced electron flow through the 
respiratory chain, and spectrophotometry revealed decreased activity of OXPHOS 
complexes I and V. We demonstrate a clear defect in mitochondrial function in 
the patient's fibroblasts and describe the possible molecular mechanism 
underlying the pathogenicity of this novel AGK variant. Experimental validation 
using in vitro analysis allowed an accurate characterization of the 
disease-causing variant.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222413484
PMCID: PMC8708263
PMID: 34948281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.