---
reference_id: "PMID:19467180"
title: "[Clinical manifestation and influential factors in patients with acute arsenic poisoning]."
authors:
- Liu WW
- Yang ZQ
- Zhang C
- Zhang YL
- Jiang WZ
- Wu YX
- Liu YM
- Gu LC
journal: Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi
year: '2008'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Clinical manifestation and influential factors in patients with acute arsenic poisoning].
**Authors:** Liu WW, Yang ZQ, Zhang C, Zhang YL, Jiang WZ, Wu YX, Liu YM, Gu LC
**Journal:** Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi (2008)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2008 Nov;26(11):645-8.

[Clinical manifestation and influential factors in patients with acute arsenic 
poisoning].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu WW(1), Yang ZQ, Zhang C, Zhang YL, Jiang WZ, Wu YX, Liu YM, Gu LC.

Author information:
(1)Guangzhong No. 12 Hospital, Guangzhong 510620, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical characteristics of acute arsenic 
poisoning and its influential factors.
METHODS: Clinical data of 47 cases of arsenic poisoning were collected and 
analyzed. Two cases of observation, 40 cases of mild acute poisoning, and 5 
severe acute poisoning were investigated in this group.
RESULTS: Myocardial enzyme activity was correlated with age and urine arsenic 
concentrations. Myocardial enzyme, the liver ALT, total bilirubin (TBil) and 
indirect bilirubin (IBil) were negatively correlated with vomiting frequency, 
with statistical significance (P < 0.05). Urine arsenic concentration was 
correlated with vomiting frequency and amount of soup drunk, with statistically 
significant difference (P < 0.05). Despite no statistical significance in age 
and amount of soup drunk, the patients with more vomiting or diarrhea had less 
urine arsenic concentrations, cardiac enzymes and liver enzyme concentration.
CONCLUSION: Acute arsenic poisoning can lead to multiple organ damage. The 
damage is relevant with amount of arsenic intake, vomiting, diarrhea and urinary 
frequency arsenic concentration. So early use of gastric lavage, vomiting, 
poison discharges, and adequate application of effective antidote (Na-DMPS) as 
soon as possible, symptomatic treatment and the reinforced monitoring, are the 
rescue key for patients with acute arsenic poisoning.

PMID: 19467180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]