---
reference_id: "PMID:16567277"
title: Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy.
authors:
- Do P
- Ferrucci S
journal: Optometry
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.optm.2006.01.020
keywords:
- Aged
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Disease Progression
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Follow-Up Studies
- Fovea Centralis/pathology
- Fundus Oculi
- Humans
- "Macular Degeneration/pathology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pigment Epithelium of Eye/pathology
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy.
**Authors:** Do P, Ferrucci S
**Journal:** Optometry (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.optm.2006.01.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optm.2006.01.020)

## Content

1. Optometry. 2006 Apr;77(4):156-66. doi: 10.1016/j.optm.2006.01.020.

Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy.

Do P(1), Ferrucci S.

Author information:
(1)VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Sepulveda Ambulatory Care Center
and Nursing Home, California 91343, USA.

BACKGROUND: Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy (AOFVD) is a
condition that presents classically as bilateral, symmetrical, grayish-yellow,
round or oval-shaped lesions within the macular area. These lesions are mildly
elevated and are typically one third to one half disc diameter in size. The
onset of the disease is usually between 30 and 50 years of age with variable
genetic inheritance, although some have suggested an autosomal dominance
inheritance pattern. Patients with AOFVD typically present with symptoms of
blurred vision or mild metamorphopsia. Results of diagnostic testing show a
normal or mildly subnormal electro-oculogram (EOG). Fluorescein angiography
results (FA) typically show hypofluorescence in the area corresponding to the
vitelliform lesion and a surrounding ring of hyperfluorescence. Results of
optical coherence tomography (OCT) show the vitelliform lesion as being located
in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) layer or between the RPE and
photoreceptor layer.
CASE REPORTS: Two cases of AOFVD are presented with each patient having
different macular appearances owing to the different stage of the disease
process. In case 1, a 76-year-old white man presented with stage II AOFVD
characterized by typical vitelliform lesions. His best-corrected acuities were
20/70+ in the right eye (O.D.) and 20/80- in the left eye (O.S.). In case 2, a
54-year-old white man presented with stage V AOFVD with bilateral atrophic
maculae with best-corrected acuities of 10/60- O.D. and 10/160- O.S.
CONCLUSION: Patients with adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy
typically have slow progressive vision loss. However, patients can develop
dramatically decreased vision owing to subfoveal choroidal neovascularization
(CNV). Thus, it is important to establish the correct diagnosis and monitor this
condition. Furthermore, because there are reports of AOFVD having an autosomal
dominance inheritance pattern with variable penetrance, it is recommended that
the patient's family members have a comprehensive eye examination to rule out
any early signs of this rare eye condition.

DOI: 10.1016/j.optm.2006.01.020
PMID: 16567277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
