---
reference_id: "PMID:38847551"
title: Single-cell RNA sequencing of cystic fibrosis liver disease explants reveals endothelial complement activation.
authors:
- Declercq M
- Treps L
- Geldhof V
- Conchinha NV
- de Rooij LPMH
- Subramanian A
- Feyeux M
- Cotinat M
- Boeckx B
- Vinckier S
- Dupont L
- Vermeulen F
- Boon M
- Proesmans M
- Libbrecht L
- Pirenne J
- Monbaliu D
- Jochmans I
- Dewerchin M
- Eelen G
- Roskams T
- Verleden S
- Lambrechts D
- Carmeliet P
- Witters P
journal: Liver Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/liv.15963
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell RNA sequencing of cystic fibrosis liver disease explants reveals endothelial complement activation.
**Authors:** Declercq M, Treps L, Geldhof V, Conchinha NV, de Rooij LPMH, Subramanian A, Feyeux M, Cotinat M, Boeckx B, Vinckier S, Dupont L, Vermeulen F, Boon M, Proesmans M, Libbrecht L, Pirenne J, Monbaliu D, Jochmans I, Dewerchin M, Eelen G, Roskams T, Verleden S, Lambrechts D, Carmeliet P, Witters P
**Journal:** Liver Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/liv.15963](https://doi.org/10.1111/liv.15963)

## Content

1. Liver Int. 2024 Sep;44(9):2382-2395. doi: 10.1111/liv.15963. Epub 2024 Jun 7.

Single-cell RNA sequencing of cystic fibrosis liver disease explants reveals 
endothelial complement activation.

Declercq M(1)(2), Treps L(2)(3), Geldhof V(2), Conchinha NV(2)(4), de Rooij 
LPMH(2)(5), Subramanian A(2)(6), Feyeux M(7), Cotinat M(3), Boeckx B(8)(9), 
Vinckier S(2), Dupont L(10)(11), Vermeulen F(1)(12), Boon M(1)(12), Proesmans 
M(1)(12), Libbrecht L(13)(14)(15), Pirenne J(16)(17), Monbaliu D(16)(17), 
Jochmans I(16)(17), Dewerchin M(2), Eelen G(2), Roskams T(18), Verleden 
S(19)(20), Lambrechts D(8)(9), Carmeliet P(2)(21), Witters P(1)(22).

Author information:
(1)Department of Development and Regeneration, Woman and Child Unit, KU Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, Department of Oncology 
and Leuven Cancer Institute (LKI), KU Leuven, VIB Center for Cancer Biology, 
VIB, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Nantes Université, INSERM UMR 1307, CNRS UMR 6075, Université d'Angers, 
CRCI2NA, Nantes, France.
(4)Instituto de Medicina Molecular João Lobo Antunes, Faculdade de Medicina, 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(5)The CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of 
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India.
(7)Nantes Université, CHU Nantes, CNRS, Inserm, BioCore, US16, SFR Bonamy, 
Nantes, France.
(8)Laboratory for Translational Genetics, Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(9)Laboratory for Translational Genetics, Department of Human Genetics, KU 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(10)Department of Pneumology, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(11)Department of Chronic Diseases and Metabolism, Respiratory Diseases and 
Thoracic Surgery, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Pulmonology, University Hospital of 
Leuven, Leuven, Flanders, Belgium.
(13)Department of Pathology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(14)Department of Pathology, AZ Groeninge, Kortrijk, Belgium.
(15)Laboratory of Hepatology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(16)Transplantation Research Group, Department of Immunology, Microbiology and 
Transplantation, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(17)Department of Abdominal Transplant Surgery, University Hospitals Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(18)Department of Imaging and Pathology, Translational Cell and Tissue Research, 
KU Leuven and University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(19)Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases and Thoracic Surgery (BREATHE), 
Department CHROMETA, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(20)Department of ASTARC, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium.
(21)Center for Biotechnology, Khalifa University of Science and Technology, Abu 
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(22)Department of Paediatrics and Metabolic Center, University Hospitals Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is considered a multisystemic disorder 
in which CF-associated liver disease (CFLD) is the third most common cause of 
mortality. Currently, no effective treatment is available for CFLD because its 
pathophysiology is still unclear. Interestingly, CFLD exhibits identical 
vascular characteristics as non-cirrhotic portal hypertension, recently 
classified as porto-sinusoidal vascular disorders (PSVD).
METHODS: Since endothelial cells (ECs) are an important component in PSVD, we 
performed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) on four explant livers from 
CFLD patients to identify differential endothelial characteristics which could 
contribute to the disease. We comprehensively characterized the endothelial 
compartment and compared it with publicly available scRNA-seq datasets from 
cirrhotic and healthy livers. Key gene signatures were validated ex vivo on 
patient tissues.
RESULTS: We found that ECs from CF liver explants are more closely related to 
healthy than cirrhotic patients. In CF patients we also discovered a distinct 
population of liver sinusoidal ECs-coined CF LSECs-upregulating genes involved 
in the complement cascade and coagulation. Finally, our immunostainings further 
validated the predominant periportal location of CF LSECs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our work showed novel aspects of human liver ECs at the single-cell 
level thereby supporting endothelial involvement in CFLD, and reinforcing the 
hypothesis that ECs could be a driver of PSVD. Therefore, considering the 
vascular compartment in CF and CFLD may help developing new therapeutic 
approaches for these diseases.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.15963
PMID: 38847551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]