---
reference_id: "PMID:37763705"
title: "A \"Mix and Match\" in Hemochromatosis-A Case Report and Literature Focus on the Liver."
authors:
- Cobilinschi CO
- Săulescu I
- Caraiola S
- Nițu AF
- Dumitru RL
- Husar-Sburlan I
- Bălănescu AR
- Opriș-Belinski D
journal: Medicina (Kaunas)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/medicina59091586
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A "Mix and Match" in Hemochromatosis-A Case Report and Literature Focus on the Liver.
**Authors:** Cobilinschi CO, Săulescu I, Caraiola S, Nițu AF, Dumitru RL, Husar-Sburlan I, Bălănescu AR, Opriș-Belinski D
**Journal:** Medicina (Kaunas) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/medicina59091586](https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina59091586)

## Content

1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2023 Sep 1;59(9):1586. doi: 10.3390/medicina59091586.

A "Mix and Match" in Hemochromatosis-A Case Report and Literature Focus on the 
Liver.

Cobilinschi CO(1)(2), Săulescu I(1)(2), Caraiola S(1)(3), Nițu AF(4), Dumitru 
RL(1)(4), Husar-Sburlan I(5), Bălănescu AR(1)(2), Opriș-Belinski D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Internal Medicine, Carol Davila University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, 050474 Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Internal Medicine, Sfânta Maria Clinical 
Hospital Bucharest, 011172 Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Colentina Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, 
020125 Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Department of Radiology and Medical Imaging, Sf Maria Clinical Hospital 
Bucharest, 011172 Bucharest, Romania.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Sf Maria Clinical Hospital Bucharest, 011172 
Bucharest, Romania.

Hemochromatosis is a genetic disorder characterized by increased iron storage in 
various organs with progressive multisystemic damage. Despite the reports dating 
back to 1865, the diagnosis of hemochromatosis poses a challenge to clinicians 
due to its non-specific symptoms and indolent course causing significant delay 
in disease recognition. The key organ that is affected by iron overload is the 
liver, suffering from fibrosis, cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma, 
complications that can be prevented via early diagnosis and treatment. This 
review aims to draw attention to the pitfalls in diagnosing hemochromatosis. We 
present a case with multiorgan complaints, abnormal iron markers and a 
consistent genetic result. We then examine the relevant literature and discuss 
hemochromatosis subtypes and liver involvement, including transplant outcome and 
treatment options. In summary, hemochromatosis remains difficult to diagnose due 
to its symptom heterogeneity and rarity; thus, further education for 
practitioners of all disciplines is useful in facilitating its early recognition 
and management.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina59091586
PMCID: PMC10534457
PMID: 37763705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.