---
reference_id: "PMID:21850926"
title: "The immune system which adversely alter thyroid functions: a review on the concept of autoimmunity."
authors:
- Mansourian AR
journal: Pak J Biol Sci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.3923/pjbs.2010.765.774
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The immune system which adversely alter thyroid functions: a review on the concept of autoimmunity.
**Authors:** Mansourian AR
**Journal:** Pak J Biol Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.3923/pjbs.2010.765.774](https://doi.org/10.3923/pjbs.2010.765.774)

## Content

1. Pak J Biol Sci. 2010 Aug 15;13(16):765-74. doi: 10.3923/pjbs.2010.765.774.

The immune system which adversely alter thyroid functions: a review on the 
concept of autoimmunity.

Mansourian AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry and Metabolic Disorder Research Center, Gorgan Medical School, 
Gorgan, Iran.

The immune system protect individual from many pathogens exists within our 
environment and in human body, by destroying them through molecular and cellular 
mechanism of B and T cells of immune system. Autoimmunity is an adverse relation 
of immune system against non- foreign substances leaving behind either alters 
the normal function or destroying the tissue involved. Autoimmunity occur in 
genetically predispose persons with familial connections. The autoimmunity to 
the thyroid gland mainly consists of Hashimato thyroiditis and Grave's disease, 
the two end of spectrum in thyroid function of hypo and hyperactivity, 
respectively. The thyroid stimulating hormone receptor, thyroglobuline, enzymes 
of thyroid hormones synthesis are targeted by autoantibodies and cell- mediated 
reactions. The aim of this review is to explore the studies reported on the 
autoimmunity to the thyroid gland.

DOI: 10.3923/pjbs.2010.765.774
PMID: 21850926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]