---
reference_id: "PMID:37541740"
title: "Rheumatoid factor isotypes in rheumatoid arthritis diagnosis and prognosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Motta F
- Bizzaro N
- Giavarina D
- Franceschini F
- Infantino M
- Palterer B
- Sebastiani GD
- Selmi C
journal: RMD Open
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/rmdopen-2022-002817
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid factor isotypes in rheumatoid arthritis diagnosis and prognosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Motta F, Bizzaro N, Giavarina D, Franceschini F, Infantino M, Palterer B, Sebastiani GD, Selmi C
**Journal:** RMD Open (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/rmdopen-2022-002817](https://doi.org/10.1136/rmdopen-2022-002817)

## Content

1. RMD Open. 2023 Aug;9(3):e002817. doi: 10.1136/rmdopen-2022-002817.

Rheumatoid factor isotypes in rheumatoid arthritis diagnosis and prognosis: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Motta F(1)(2), Bizzaro N(3), Giavarina D(4), Franceschini F(5)(6), Infantino 
M(7), Palterer B(8), Sebastiani GD(9), Selmi C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, IRCCS Humanitas Research 
Hospital, Rozzano, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, 
Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Clinical Pathology, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Integrata, 
Udine, Italy nic.bizzaro@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, St Bortolo Hospital, Vicenza, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy.
(6)Unit of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, ASST Spedali Civili di Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy.
(7)Laboratory of Immunology and Allergology, Ospedale San Giovanni di Dio, 
Firenze, Italy.
(8)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Florence, 
Firenze, Italy.
(9)Rheumatology, Azienda Ospedaliera San Camillo Forlanini, Roma, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: The first biomarker associated with the rheumatoid arthritis is 
rheumatoid factor (RF) and since the earliest reports a role has been proposed 
in the diagnosis and in the prediction of clinical features and outcome. The 
study of RF isotypes has further attempted to improve diagnostic accuracy and 
identify specific subgroups of patients. The main objective of this study is to 
provide an analysis of the literature on the role of RF isotypes in the 
diagnosis and prognosis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: We performed a systematic literature review and meta-analysis on the 
role of RF isotypes in RA (only in English, from PubMed, search terms: 
"rheumatoid factor isotypes", "diagnosis", "prognosis" and "rheumatoid 
arthritis", last search 31 July 2022, two independent assessment of quality and 
biases, results included in tables and in the meta-analysis).
RESULTS: Thirty-six articles were examined (7517 patients). Testing all RF 
isotypes with latex test or nephelometry allows for the highest sensitivity 
(68.6%, 95% CI 66.2% to 71.0%); nonetheless, the determination of IgA isotype 
provides the highest specificity (91.4%, 95% CI 90.8% to 92.0%) and the highest 
positive likelihood ratio (7.7, 95% CI 5.7 to 10.4). When testing IgM isotype 
the highest diagnostic OR (21.7, 95% CI 16.1 to 29.3) is reached. When analysing 
anti-citrullinated protein antibodies, RF isotype determination increases 
diagnostic accuracy. On the other hand, these do not provide relevant prognostic 
information, as results are conflicting.
CONCLUSIONS: Testing RF allows the highest sensitivity, while IgA isotype the 
highest specificity and positive likelihood ratio for RA diagnosis. On the other 
hand, determination of RF isotypes dose not allow prognostic information, as 
data are limited and heterogeneous.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/rmdopen-2022-002817
PMCID: PMC10407415
PMID: 37541740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: FM has received 
grant/research support from ThermoFisher Diagnostics. NB has received speaker 
honoraria for lectures from Werfen and ThermoFisher Diagnostics. DG has received 
speaker honoraria for lectures from DASIT and support for attending meetings 
and/or travel from Abbott, Stago, DiaSorin, Medical Systems/Snibe, Siemens, 
Werfen and Roche. FF has acted as a consultant for ThermoFisher Diagnostics. GDS 
has acted as a consultant for ThermoFisher Diagnostics. CS has received 
grant/research support from AbbVie, Amgen and Pfizer Inc. CS has acted as a 
consultant for and has received lecture fees from AbbVie, Amgen, 
Alfa-Wassermann, Biogen, Eli-Lilly, Galapagos, Janssen, Novartis, Pfizer and 
SOBI.