---
reference_id: "PMID:33579320"
title: Predictors of cervical myelopathy and hydrocephalus in young children with achondroplasia.
authors:
- Shim Y
- Ko JM
- Cho TJ
- Kim SK
- Phi JH
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-01725-4
keywords:
- Achondroplasia/complications
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Foramen Magnum
- Humans
- Hydrocephalus
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Retrospective Studies
- Spinal Cord Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictors of cervical myelopathy and hydrocephalus in young children with achondroplasia.
**Authors:** Shim Y, Ko JM, Cho TJ, Kim SK, Phi JH
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-021-01725-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-021-01725-4)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021 Feb 12;16(1):81. doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-01725-4.

Predictors of cervical myelopathy and hydrocephalus in young children with 
achondroplasia.

Shim Y(#)(1), Ko JM(#)(2), Cho TJ(3)(4), Kim SK(1), Phi JH(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Children's 
Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 101 Daehak-ro, 
Jongno-gu, 03080, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Children's Hospital, 
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Pediatric Orthopaedics, Seoul National University Children's 
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Children's 
Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 101 Daehak-ro, 
Jongno-gu, 03080, Seoul, Republic of Korea. phijh@snu.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Cervical myelopathy and hydrocephalus occasionally occur in young 
children with achondroplasia. However, these conditions are not evaluated in a 
timely manner in many cases. The current study presents significant predictors 
for cervical myelopathy and hydrocephalus in young children with achondroplasia.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of 65 patients with achondroplasia who visited 
Seoul National University Children's Hospital since 2012 was performed. The 
patients were divided into groups according to the presence of cervical 
myelopathy and hydrocephalus, and differences in foramen magnum parameters and 
ventricular parameters by magnetic resonance imaging between groups were 
analyzed. Predictors for cervical myelopathy and hydrocephalus were analyzed, 
and the cut-off points for significant ones were calculated.
RESULTS: The group with cervical myelopathy showed foramen magnum parameters 
that indicated significantly lower cord thickness than in the group without 
cervical myelopathy, and the group with hydrocephalus showed significantly 
higher ventricular parameters and 'Posterior indentation' grade than the group 
without hydrocephalus. 'Cord constriction ratio' (OR 5199.90, p = 0.001) for 
cervical myelopathy and 'Frontal horn width' (OR 1.14, p = 0.001) and 'Posterior 
indentation' grade (grade 1: OR 9.25, p = 0.06; grade 2: OR 18.50, p = 0.01) for 
hydrocephalus were significant predictors. The cut-off points for cervical 
myelopathy were 'Cord constriction ratio' of 0.25 and 'FM AP' of 8 mm (AUC 0.821 
and 0.862, respectively) and 'Frontal horn width' of 50 mm and 'Posterior 
indentation' grade of 0 (AUC 0.788 and 0.758, respectively) for hydrocephalus.
CONCLUSION: 'Cord constriction ratio' for cervical myelopathy and 'Frontal horn 
width' and 'Posterior indentation' grade for hydrocephalus were significant 
predictors and may be used as useful parameters for management. 'Posterior 
indentation' grade may also be used to determine the treatment method for 
hydrocephalus.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-021-01725-4
PMCID: PMC7881633
PMID: 33579320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no competing 
interests.