---
reference_id: "PMID:33786855"
title: Porphyric neuropathy.
authors:
- Gandhi Mehta RK
- Caress JB
- Rudnick SR
- Bonkovsky HL
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/mus.27232
keywords:
- Aminolevulinic Acid/metabolism
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/mortality, pathology"
- Humans
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, mortality, pathology"
- "Polyneuropathies/mortality, pathology"
- Porphobilinogen Synthase/deficiency
- "Porphyrias, Hepatic/mortality, pathology"
- Radial Nerve/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Porphyric neuropathy.
**Authors:** Gandhi Mehta RK, Caress JB, Rudnick SR, Bonkovsky HL
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.27232](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.27232)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2021 Aug;64(2):140-152. doi: 10.1002/mus.27232. Epub 2021 Mar
31.

Porphyric neuropathy.

Gandhi Mehta RK(1), Caress JB(1), Rudnick SR(2), Bonkovsky HL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Wake Forest Baptist Health, Winston Salem, North
Carolina, USA.
(2)Section on Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Wake Forest Baptist health, Winston Salem, North Carolina, USA.

Acute hepatic porphyrias are inherited metabolic disorders that may present with
polyneuropathy, which if not diagnosed early can lead to quadriparesis,
respiratory weakness, and death. Porphyric neuropathy is an acute to subacute
motor predominant axonal neuropathy with a predilection for the upper
extremities and usually preceded by a predominantly parasympathetic autonomic
neuropathy. The rapid progression and associated dysautonomia mimic
Guillain-Barré syndrome but are distinguished by the absence of cerebrospinal
fluid albuminocytologic dissociation, progression beyond 4 wk, and associated
abdominal pain. Spot urine test to assess the porphyrin precursors
delta-aminolevulinic acid and porphobilinogen can provide a timely diagnosis
during an acute attack. Timely treatment with intravenous heme, carbohydrate
loading, and avoidance of porphyrinogenic medications can prevent further
neurological morbidity and mortality.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.27232
PMID: 33786855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
