---
reference_id: "PMID:30245899"
title: "Type IV Laryngotracheoesophageal Cleft Associated with Type III Esophageal Atresia in 1p36 Deletions Containing the RERE Gene: Is There a Causal Role for the Genetic Alteration?"
authors:
- Pelizzo G
- Puglisi A
- Lapi M
- Piccione M
- Matina F
- Busè M
- Mura GB
- Re G
- Calcaterra V
journal: Case Rep Pediatr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1155/2018/4060527
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type IV Laryngotracheoesophageal Cleft Associated with Type III Esophageal Atresia in 1p36 Deletions Containing the RERE Gene: Is There a Causal Role for the Genetic Alteration?
**Authors:** Pelizzo G, Puglisi A, Lapi M, Piccione M, Matina F, Busè M, Mura GB, Re G, Calcaterra V
**Journal:** Case Rep Pediatr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2018/4060527](https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/4060527)

## Content

1. Case Rep Pediatr. 2018 Aug 29;2018:4060527. doi: 10.1155/2018/4060527. 
eCollection 2018.

Type IV Laryngotracheoesophageal Cleft Associated with Type III Esophageal 
Atresia in 1p36 Deletions Containing the RERE Gene: Is There a Causal Role for 
the Genetic Alteration?

Pelizzo G(1), Puglisi A(2), Lapi M(2), Piccione M(3), Matina F(4), Busè M(3), 
Mura GB(1), Re G(2), Calcaterra V(5).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Surgery Unit, Pediatric Surgery Unit, Children's Hospital "G. Di 
Cristina", ARNAS "Civico-Di Cristina-Benfratelli", Palermo, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Unit, Pediatric Anesthesiology 
and Intensive Care Unit, Children's Hospital "G. Di Cristina", ARNAS "Civico-Di 
Cristina-Benfratelli", Palermo, Italy.
(3)Department of Sciences for Health Promotion and Mother and Child Care 
"Giuseppe D'Alessandro", University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(4)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, A.O.U.P. "P. Giaccone", Department of Sciences 
for Health Promotion and Mother and Child Care "G. D'Alessandro", Palermo, 
Italy.
(5)Pediatrics and Adolescentology Unit, Department of Internal Medicine 
University of Pavia and Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.

The causes of embryological developmental anomalies leading to 
laryngotracheoesophageal clefts (LTECs) are not known, but are proposed to be 
multifactorial, including genetic and environmental factors. Haploinsufficiency 
of the RERE gene might contribute to different phenotypes seen in individuals 
with 1p36 deletions. We describe a neonate of an obese mother, diagnosed with 
type IV LTEC and type III esophageal atresia (EA), in which a 1p36 deletion 
including the RERE gene was detected. On the second day of life, a right 
thoracotomy and extrapleural esophagus atresia repair were attempted. One week 
later, a right cervical approach was performed to separate the cervical 
esophagus from the trachea. Three months later, a thoracic termino-terminal 
anastomosis of the esophagus was performed. An anterior fundoplication was 
required at 8 months of age due to severe gastroesophageal reflux and failure to 
thrive. A causal role of 1p36 deletions including the RERE gene in the 
malformation is proposed. Moreover, additional parental factors must be 
considered. Future studies are mandatory to elucidate genomic and epigenomic 
susceptibility factors that underlie these congenital malformations. A multiteam 
approach is a crucial factor in the successful management of affected patients.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/4060527
PMCID: PMC6136558
PMID: 30245899