---
reference_id: "PMID:30303708"
title: "A direct effect of the autonomic nervous system on somatic stem cell proliferation?"
authors:
- Davis EA
- Dailey MJ
journal: Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00266.2018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A direct effect of the autonomic nervous system on somatic stem cell proliferation?
**Authors:** Davis EA, Dailey MJ
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpregu.00266.2018](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00266.2018)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2019 Jan 1;316(1):R1-R5. doi: 
10.1152/ajpregu.00266.2018. Epub 2018 Oct 10.

A direct effect of the autonomic nervous system on somatic stem cell 
proliferation?

Davis EA(1), Dailey MJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Program, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign , Urbana, 
Illinois.
(2)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign , 
Urbana, Illinois.

Regulation of somatic stem cell proliferation is critical for the maintenance of 
tissue and organ function throughout the body. Modulators of this process 
include nutrients and peptides, but the role of an autonomic neural influence on 
stem cell proliferation has been neglected. This article describes the 
literature in support of autonomic nervous system (ANS) influence on somatic 
stem cells, with emphasis on intestinal epithelial stem cells (IESCs) as a 
representative somatic stem cell. Based on the current available data, models 
for the direct influence of both branches of the ANS (the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic nervous systems) on IESCs are outlined. Finally, the prospect of 
treatments derived from ANS influence on somatic stem cells is explored.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.00266.2018
PMID: 30303708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]