---
reference_id: "PMID:29551632"
title: Clinical course of sporadic acute hepatitis E in a hepatitis B virus endemic region.
authors:
- Liu L
- Xiao D
- Yu JH
- Shen R
- Wang M
- Li Q
journal: Int J Infect Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2018.03.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical course of sporadic acute hepatitis E in a hepatitis B virus endemic region.
**Authors:** Liu L, Xiao D, Yu JH, Shen R, Wang M, Li Q
**Journal:** Int J Infect Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijid.2018.03.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2018.03.008)

## Content

1. Int J Infect Dis. 2018 May;70:107-114. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2018.03.008. Epub 
2018 Mar 15.

Clinical course of sporadic acute hepatitis E in a hepatitis B virus endemic 
region.

Liu L(1), Xiao D(1), Yu JH(1), Shen R(1), Wang M(2), Li Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Liver Diseases, Jinan Infectious Disease Hospital, Shandong 
University, Jinan, China.
(2)Division of Liver Diseases, Jinan Infectious Disease Hospital, Shandong 
University, Jinan, China; Division of Infectious Diseases, Jinan Central 
Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(3)Division of Liver Diseases, Jinan Infectious Disease Hospital, Shandong 
University, Jinan, China. Electronic address: doctorliqiang@aliyun.com.

OBJECTIVES: In China, the epidemic pattern of acute hepatitis E virus (HEV) 
infection has changed from waterborne outbreaks to foodborne sporadic cases. 
However, the clinical course of sporadic acute hepatitis E (AHE) has not been 
well defined.
METHODS: Consecutive patients with AHE who were admitted to the Jinan Infectious 
Disease Hospital, Jinan, Shandong Province between January 2003 and December 
2014 were evaluated and followed. Demographic data, clinical manifestations, 
results of laboratory tests, and outcomes were recorded. Risk factors for liver 
failure and death were analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 680 patients with AHE were identified during the study 
period. The incidence was highest in February, March, and April, accounting for 
about 41% of the cases. The male to female ratio was 5.1:1 (574/106). The 
average age was 50.9±12.8years. The prevalence rates of prodromal fever, 
fatigue, loss of appetite, and jaundice were 25.6%, 85.6%, 83.8%, and 92.8%, 
respectively. The median (range) serum alanine aminotransferase, aspartate 
aminotransferase, bilirubin, albumin, and platelet levels were 727 (8-6270) U/l, 
300 (17-6226) U/l, 196.8 (8.0-1083) μmol/l, 33.0 (15.2-45.8) g/l, and 162 
(10-589)×109/l, respectively. The prevalence of hepatitis B surface antigen 
(HBsAg) was 18.5% (126/680) and of liver cirrhosis was 9.4% (64/680). Thirteen 
percent (89/680) of the cases progressed to liver failure, including 4.1% 
(28/680) with acute liver failure (ALF) and 9.0% (61/680) with acute-on-chronic 
liver failure (ACLF). Among patients with HBsAg positivity or cirrhosis, 28.6% 
(36/126) and 36.0% (23/64), respectively, progressed to ACLF. Multiple logistic 
regression analysis indicated that age >53years, prodromal fever, HBsAg 
positivity, cirrhosis, and thrombocytopenia (platelet count <150×109/l) were 
independently associated with the development of liver failure, with an odds 
ratio (95% confidence interval) of 2.5 (1.5-4.3), 1.9 (1.1-3.2), 3.7 (2.0-6.7), 
2.1 (1.1-4.2), and 5.9 (3.3-10.4), respectively. The overall mortality was 5.6% 
(38/680), and the mortality rates in patients with and without underlying liver 
disease were 9.3% (22/237) and 3.6% (16/443), respectively. Multiple logistic 
regression analysis indicated that hepatic encephalopathy, bilirubin >500μmol/l, 
international normalized ratio (INR)>2, and severe thrombocytopenia (platelet 
count <100×109/l) were independently associated with death, with an odds ratio 
(95% confidence interval) of 7.2 (2.4-21.8), 5.8 (1.9-17.2), 24.1 (7.9-73.3), 
and 10.8 (3.6-32.9), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In areas that are dual endemic for hepatitis B virus and HEV, the 
HEV vaccine for patients with obvious liver diseases is of significance. 
Thrombocytopenia is an important predictor of liver failure and mortality in 
sporadic AHE.

Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2018.03.008
PMID: 29551632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]