---
reference_id: "PMID:31524848"
title: The Value of Serum Amyloid A Levels in Familial Mediterranean Fever to Identify Occult Inflammation During Asymptomatic Periods.
authors:
- Çakan M
- Karadağ ŞG
- Tanatar A
- Sönmez HE
- Ayaz NA
journal: J Clin Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001134
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Value of Serum Amyloid A Levels in Familial Mediterranean Fever to Identify Occult Inflammation During Asymptomatic Periods.
**Authors:** Çakan M, Karadağ ŞG, Tanatar A, Sönmez HE, Ayaz NA
**Journal:** J Clin Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RHU.0000000000001134](https://doi.org/10.1097/RHU.0000000000001134)

## Content

1. J Clin Rheumatol. 2021 Jan 1;27(1):1-4. doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001134.

The Value of Serum Amyloid A Levels in Familial Mediterranean Fever to Identify 
Occult Inflammation During Asymptomatic Periods.

Çakan M(1), Karadağ ŞG, Tanatar A, Sönmez HE, Ayaz NA.

Author information:
(1)From the Clinic of Pediatric Rheumatology, Istanbul Kanuni Sultan Süleyman 
Research and Training Hospital, Health Sciences University, Atakent, Istanbul, 
Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this observational study was to evaluate whether there was 
any correlation between the acute phase reactants in children with familial 
Mediterranean fever (FMF) during attack and attack-free periods.
METHODS: The study was conducted between June 2016 and January 2018. Clinical 
features and laboratory parameters of children with FMF during attack and 
attack-free periods were recorded longitudinally.
RESULTS: The cohort consisted of 168 children with FMF (84 boys, 84 girls). 
Median values of acute phase reactants during FMF attacks were 433.5 mg/L 
(34.0-1780.0 mg/L) for serum amyloid A (SAA), 56.7 mg/L (7.6-379.0 mg/L) for 
C-reactive protein (CRP), and 37.5 mm/h (5-100 mm/h) for erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR). Median values for the same tests in attack-free 
periods were 3.2 mg/L (0.1-25.0 mg/L), 1.7 mg/L (0.1-12.7 mg/L), and 8 mm/h 
(1-30 mm/h), respectively. Correlation analyses showed that SAA and CRP were 
highly correlated in FMF attack (r = 0.67, p < 0.01), but no correlation was 
found between SAA and ESR levels. C-reactive protein was elevated in 13.6%, ESR 
in 20.8%, and SAA in 28.5% of the patients during attack-free period. Age at 
onset, sex of the patients, and characteristics of attacks were found to be not 
associated with elevated SAA in attack-free period. On the other hand, having 
homozygous exon 10 mutation and having elevated CRP were found to be associated 
with high SAA in attack-free period.
CONCLUSIONS: C-reactive protein and SAA correlate well with FMF attacks. 
Therefore, checking for SAA during a FMF attack is not required. However, SAA 
seems to be the most sensitive method for demonstrating subclinical inflammation 
in attack-free period. Thus, checking SAA levels might be a valuable tool in 
selected FMF patients.

Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001134
PMID: 31524848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.