---
reference_id: "PMID:34524712"
title: "Epidemiological aspects of hereditary fructose intolerance: A database study."
authors:
- Pinheiro FC
- Sperb-Ludwig F
- Schwartz IVD
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/humu.24282
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Fructose Intolerance/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Fructose-Bisphosphate Aldolase/genetics
- Humans
- Liver/pathology
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiological aspects of hereditary fructose intolerance: A database study.
**Authors:** Pinheiro FC, Sperb-Ludwig F, Schwartz IVD
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.24282](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24282)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2021 Dec;42(12):1548-1566. doi: 10.1002/humu.24282. Epub 2021 Sep
24.

Epidemiological aspects of hereditary fructose intolerance: A database study.

Pinheiro FC(1)(2)(3), Sperb-Ludwig F(1)(2), Schwartz IVD(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Post-Graduate Program in Genetics and Molecular Biology, Federal University
of do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(2)BRAIN Laboratory, Center of Experimental Research, Hospital de Clínicas de
Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(3)Federal University of Pampa, Itaqui, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(4)Department of Genetics, Bioscience Institute, Federal University of do Rio
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(5)Medical Genetics Service, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre,
Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

Hereditary fructose intolerance (HFI) is an inborn error of fructose metabolism
of autosomal recessive inheritance caused by pathogenic variants in the ALDOB
gene that lead to aldolase B deficiency in the liver, kidneys, and intestine.
Patients manifest symptoms, such as ketotic hypoglycemia, vomiting, nausea, in
addition to hepatomegaly and other liver and kidney dysfunctions. The treatment
consists of a fructose-restricted diet, which results in a good prognosis. To
analyze the distribution of ALDOB variants described in patients and to estimate
the prevalence of HFI based on carrier frequency in the gnomAD
database, a systematic review was conducted to assess ALDOB gene variants among
patients with HFI. The prevalence of HFI was estimated from the carrier
frequency of variants described in patients, as well as rare variants predicted
as pathogenic by in silico tools. The p.(Ala150Pro) and p.(Ala175Asp) variants
are the most frequent and are distributed worldwide. However, these variants
have particular distribution patterns in Europe. The analysis of the prevalence
of HFI showed that the inclusion of rare alleles predicted as pathogenic is a
more informative approach for populations with few patients. The data show that
HFI has a wide distribution and an estimated prevalence of ~1:10,000.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24282
PMID: 34524712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
