---
reference_id: "PMID:38011452"
title: A comparative study on the effectiveness of topiramate and propranolol in patients with migraine with aura.
authors:
- Mohammadianinejad SE
- Rafie S
- Farashi S
journal: Curr J Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.18502/cjn.v21i1.9354
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A comparative study on the effectiveness of topiramate and propranolol in patients with migraine with aura.
**Authors:** Mohammadianinejad SE, Rafie S, Farashi S
**Journal:** Curr J Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.18502/cjn.v21i1.9354](https://doi.org/10.18502/cjn.v21i1.9354)

## Content

1. Curr J Neurol. 2022 Jan 5;21(1):7-11. doi: 10.18502/cjn.v21i1.9354.

A comparative study on the effectiveness of topiramate and propranolol in 
patients with migraine with aura.

Mohammadianinejad SE(1), Rafie S(2), Farashi S(2).

Author information:
(1)Iranian Center of Neurological Research, Neuroscience Institute, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of 
Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.

Background: Migraine is considered as one of the most common and disabling 
diseases of the nervous system that has a great impact on quality of life (QOL) 
and a little risk of neurologic complications such as stroke. Migraine aura is 
known to be the result of cortical spreading depression and is associated with 
higher risk of this complication. Thus, the present study was conducted with the 
aim to compare the effects of topiramate as an antiepileptic, and propranolol in 
patients with migraine with aura. Methods: The present randomized clinical trial 
was conducted on patients with migraine with aura referred to the neurology 
clinic of Golestan Hospital, Ahvaz, Iran, in the period of 2019-2020. The 
patients were randomized into two groups and received either topiramate or 
propranolol. The Migraine Disability Assessment Scale (MIDAS) score was 
evaluated before and at the end of three months after initiating the treatment. 
Results: Reduction in the MIDAS score in patients taking topiramate (-16.94) was 
greater than that in the propranolol group (-14.5), but this difference was not 
statistically significant (P > 0.005). No significant relationship was found 
between gender and changes in the MIDAS score after the treatment of both groups 
(P > 0.050). However, the changes in the MIDAS score were greater in younger 
patients, and this relationship was statistically significant (P < 0.050). 
Conclusion: There was no significant difference in the efficacy of topiramate 
and propranolol in patients with migraine with aura. No significant relationship 
was found between gender and changes in the MIDAS score after the treatment in 
both groups, but the reduction in the MIDAS scores was significantly higher in 
younger patients of both groups.

Copyright © 2022 Iranian Neurological Association, and Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences Published by Tehran University of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.18502/cjn.v21i1.9354
PMCID: PMC9527857
PMID: 38011452