---
reference_id: "PMID:22632372"
title: Prevention of Graves' ophthalmopathy.
authors:
- Bartalena L
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2011.09.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention of Graves' ophthalmopathy.
**Authors:** Bartalena L
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beem.2011.09.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2011.09.004)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jun;26(3):371-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.beem.2011.09.004.

Prevention of Graves' ophthalmopathy.

Bartalena L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Insubria, 
Endocrine Unit, Ospedale di Circolo, viale Borri, 57, 21100 Varese, Italy. 
luigi.bartalena@uninsubria.it.

Smoking is the most important risk factor for the occurrence/progression of 
Graves' ophthalmopathy (GO), as well as for its lower/slower response to 
immunosuppression. Accordingly, refrain from smoking should be urged, both as 
primary prevention (removal of risk factors in Graves' patients without GO), 
secondary prevention (early detection and treatment of asymptomatic/very mild 
GO) and tertiary prevention (reduction of complications/disability of overt GO). 
A 6-month course of 200 μg/day sodium selenite can prevent progression of mild 
GO to more severe GO and is, therefore, a form of secondary prevention and, 
probably, primary prevention. Correction of thyroid dysfunction and stable 
maintenance of euthyroidism are important preventive measures. The optimal 
treatment for hyperthyroidism in patients with GO is uncertain, because evidence 
demonstrating the superiority of antithyroid drugs over thyroid ablation 
(radioiodine, thyroidectomy, or both) is lacking. If radioiodine is used, 
low-dose steroid prophylaxis is recommended, particularly in smokers, to prevent 
radioiodine-associated GO progression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2011.09.004
PMID: 22632372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]