---
reference_id: "PMID:37910243"
title: Hypertension in children with congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract.
authors:
- Taha K
- Catapang M
- Becknell B
- Matsell DG
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-023-06207-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertension in children with congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract.
**Authors:** Taha K, Catapang M, Becknell B, Matsell DG
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-023-06207-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-023-06207-2)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2024 Apr;39(4):1185-1192. doi: 10.1007/s00467-023-06207-2.
Epub  2023 Nov 1.

Hypertension in children with congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary 
tract.

Taha K(1), Catapang M(1), Becknell B(2), Matsell DG(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Kidney and Urinary Tract Center, Abigail Wexner Research Institute at 
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. dmatsell@cw.bc.ca.

BACKGROUND: Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) are the 
most common cause of childhood chronic kidney disease (CKD). We hypothesized 
that hypertension varies across CAKUT categories and increases the risk of CKD.
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study and included cases with a 
multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK, n = 81), unilateral kidney agenesis (UKA, 
n = 47), kidney hypoplasia (KH, n = 130), and posterior urethral valves (PUV, 
n = 75). Hypertension was defined as systolic or diastolic blood pressure ≥ 95th 
percentile for age, sex and height, and CKD as an estimated glomerular 
filtration rate < 60 ml/min/1.73 m2, both at 2 consecutive clinic visits at 
least 3 months apart.
RESULTS: Sixty-two (19%) out of 333 cases developed hypertension, with 
significant difference according to CAKUT type. Patients with smaller kidney 
size (7.7 vs. 8.3, p = 0.045), kidney anomalies in addition to the primary 
diagnosis (aCAKUT) (53 vs. 38%, p = 0.03), proteinuria (46 vs. 12%, p < 0.001), 
and CKD (51 vs. 23%, p < 0.001) were more likely to develop hypertension. When 
adjusted for kidney size, the diagnoses of PUV (OR 10.9, 95%CI 3.0, 40.5), UKA 
(OR 6.4, 95%CI 1.6, 24.9) and KH (OR 4.2, 95%CI 1.1, 16.1), and aCAKUT (OR 2.1, 
95%CI 1.2, 3.9) were independent risk factors for hypertension. Hypertension 
increased the risk of developing CKD by twofold (HR 1.9, 95%CI 1.19, 2.94).
CONCLUSION: Hypertension is common in children with CAKUT and increases the risk 
of CKD. These findings will aid in the development of a standardized clinical 
pathway for the care of hypertensive children with CAKUT.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International Pediatric 
Nephrology Association.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-023-06207-2
PMCID: PMC10922869
PMID: 37910243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to disclose.