---
reference_id: "PMID:17403716"
title: COL10A1 nonsense and frame-shift mutations have a gain-of-function effect on the growth plate in human and mouse metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type Schmid.
authors:
- Ho MS
- Tsang KY
- Lo RL
- Susic M
- Mäkitie O
- Chan TW
- Ng VC
- Sillence DO
- Boot-Handford RP
- Gibson G
- Cheung KM
- Cole WG
- Cheah KS
- Chan D
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm067
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Chondrocytes/metabolism
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- "Collagen Type X/biosynthesis, genetics"
- DNA/genetics
- Frameshift Mutation
- Growth Plate/pathology
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COL10A1 nonsense and frame-shift mutations have a gain-of-function effect on the growth plate in human and mouse metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type Schmid.
**Authors:** Ho MS, Tsang KY, Lo RL, Susic M, Mäkitie O, Chan TW, Ng VC, Sillence DO, Boot-Handford RP, Gibson G, Cheung KM, Cole WG, Cheah KS, Chan D
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddm067](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddm067)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 May 15;16(10):1201-15. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm067. Epub 2007 
Apr 2.

COL10A1 nonsense and frame-shift mutations have a gain-of-function effect on the 
growth plate in human and mouse metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type Schmid.

Ho MS(1), Tsang KY, Lo RL, Susic M, Mäkitie O, Chan TW, Ng VC, Sillence DO, 
Boot-Handford RP, Gibson G, Cheung KM, Cole WG, Cheah KS, Chan D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, 
China.

Missense, nonsense and frame-shift mutations in the collagen X gene (COL10A1) 
result in metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type Schmid (MCDS). Complete degradation 
of mutant COL10A1 mRNA by nonsense-mediated decay in human MCDS cartilage 
implicates haploinsufficiency in the pathogenesis for nonsense mutations in 
vivo. However, the mechanism is unclear in situations where the mutant mRNA 
persist. We show that nonsense/frame-shift mutations can elicit a 
gain-of-function effect, affecting chondrocyte differentiation in the growth 
plate. In an MCDS proband, heterozygous for a p.Y663X nonsense mutation, the 
growth plate cartilage contained 64% wild-type and 36% mutant mRNA and the 
hypertrophic zone was disorganized and expanded. The in vitro translated mutant 
collagen X chains, which are truncated, were misfolded, unable to assemble into 
trimers and interfered with the assembly of normal alpha1(X) chains into 
trimers. Unlike Col10a1 null mutants, transgenic mice (FCdel) bearing the mouse 
equivalent of a human MCDS p.P620fsX621 mutation, displayed typical 
characteristics of MCDS with disproportionate shortening of limbs and early 
onset coxa vara. In FCdel mice, the degree of expansion of the hypertrophic 
zones was transgene-dosage dependent, being most severe in mice homozygous for 
the transgene. Chondrocytes in the lower region of the expanded hypertrophic 
zone expressed markers uncharacteristic of hypertrophic chondrocytes, indicating 
that differentiation was disrupted. Misfolded FCdel alpha1(X) chains were 
retained within the endoplasmic reticulum of hypertrophic chondrocytes, 
activating the unfolded protein response. Our findings provide strong in vivo 
evidence for a gain-of-function effect that is linked to the activation of 
endoplasmic reticulum-stress response and altered chondrocyte differentiation, 
as a possible molecular pathogenesis for MCDS.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm067
PMID: 17403716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]