---
reference_id: "PMID:29423299"
title: "Managing bowel and bladder impairments in sacral chordoma patients: a case-based approach."
authors:
- Knowlton SE
- Andrews C
- Bindler C
- Ruppert LM
journal: Spinal Cord Ser Cases
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/s41394-017-0016-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Managing bowel and bladder impairments in sacral chordoma patients: a case-based approach.
**Authors:** Knowlton SE, Andrews C, Bindler C, Ruppert LM
**Journal:** Spinal Cord Ser Cases (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41394-017-0016-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41394-017-0016-9)

## Content

1. Spinal Cord Ser Cases. 2017 Dec 12;3:17094. doi: 10.1038/s41394-017-0016-9. 
eCollection 2017.

Managing bowel and bladder impairments in sacral chordoma patients: a case-based 
approach.

Knowlton SE(1), Andrews C(1), Bindler C(1), Ruppert LM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1Rehabilitation Medicine Service, Department of Neurology, Memorial 
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY USA.
(2)2Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NY USA.

INTRODUCTION: Chordomas are primary bone tumors that occur in the axial spine 
and most commonly in the sacrum. Because of their location, chordomas can affect 
bowel and bladder continence resulting in either an upper or a lower motor 
neuron functional pattern.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present two cases describing chordoma's impact on bowel 
and bladder function and the management plan used for improvement.
DISCUSSION: The accurate identification of an upper or lower motor neuron 
pattern in the setting of chordoma aims to significantly improve management of 
bowel and bladder impairment.

DOI: 10.1038/s41394-017-0016-9
PMCID: PMC5798918
PMID: 29423299

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with ethical standardsThe authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.