---
reference_id: "PMID:38125748"
title: "Primary carnitine deficiency: Estimation of prevalence in Chinese population and insights into newborn screening."
authors:
- Ji X
- Ge Y
- Ni Q
- Xu S
- Xiong Z
- Yang L
- Hu L
- Cao Y
- Lu Y
- Wei Q
- Kang W
- Zhuang D
- Zhou W
- Dong X
journal: Front Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1304458
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary carnitine deficiency: Estimation of prevalence in Chinese population and insights into newborn screening.
**Authors:** Ji X, Ge Y, Ni Q, Xu S, Xiong Z, Yang L, Hu L, Cao Y, Lu Y, Wei Q, Kang W, Zhuang D, Zhou W, Dong X
**Journal:** Front Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2023.1304458](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1304458)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Dec 6;14:1304458. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1304458.
eCollection  2023.

Primary carnitine deficiency: Estimation of prevalence in Chinese population and 
insights into newborn screening.

Ji X(#)(1)(2), Ge Y(#)(1)(3), Ni Q(#)(1), Xu S(4), Xiong Z(1)(2), Yang L(1), Hu 
L(2), Cao Y(2), Lu Y(1), Wei Q(5), Kang W(6), Zhuang D(7), Zhou W(1)(2)(3)(8), 
Dong X(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 
National Children's Medical Center, Shanghai, China.
(2)Division of Neonatology, National Children's Medical Center, Children's 
Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Center for Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 
National Children's Medical Center, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Children's Hospital of Shanghai, Shanghai, China.
(5)Division of Neonatology, Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital of Guangxi 
Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning, China.
(6)Division of Neonatology, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(7)Division of Pediatrics, Xiamen Children's Hospital, Xiamen, China.
(8)Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Primary carnitine deficiency (PCD) caused by pathogenic variants in the solute 
carrier family 22 member 5 (SLC22A5) gene is a rare autosomal recessive disease 
that results in defective fatty acid oxidation. PCD can be detected through 
tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), but transplacental transport of free carnitine 
from mothers may cause false negatives or positives during newborn screening 
(NBS). This study aimed to analyze the genetic characteristics of SLC22A5 and 
estimate the prevalence of PCD in the Chinese population, providing useful 
information for NBS and genetic counseling. We manually curated SLC22A5 
pathogenic or likely pathogenic (P/LP) variants according to the American 
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines and identified 
128 P/LP variants. Based on the China Neonatal Genomes Project (CNGP), the 
estimated PCD prevalence was 1:17,456, which was higher than that in other 
populations. The genotype-phenotype association analysis showed that patients 
carrying homozygous c.760C>T and c.844C>T were more likely to present 
cardiomyopathy, whereas those carrying homozygous c.1400C>G were more likely to 
be asymptomatic (all p-values < 0.05). We found that there was no significant 
difference in initial C0 concentrations between patients and carriers, but there 
was a significant difference in the second-tier screening of C0 concentration 
between them (p-value < 0.05). We established a cost-effective variant panel 
containing 10 high-frequency sites and developed a screening algorithm 
incorporating gene panels with MS/MS, which could rescue one more patient who 
was undetected from MS/MS. In conclusion, the prevalence of PCD in the Chinese 
population is relatively high. The combination of conventional NBS with genetic 
sequencing is suggested for early diagnosis of PCD.

Copyright © 2023 Ji, Ge, Ni, Xu, Xiong, Yang, Hu, Cao, Lu, Wei, Kang, Zhuang, 
Zhou and Dong.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1304458
PMCID: PMC10730660
PMID: 38125748

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.