---
reference_id: "PMID:12164478"
title: Drugs that inhibit mycolic acid biosynthesis in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
authors:
- Schroeder EK
- de Souza N
- Santos DS
- Blanchard JS
- Basso LA
journal: Curr Pharm Biotechnol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.2174/1389201023378328
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drugs that inhibit mycolic acid biosynthesis in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Schroeder EK, de Souza N, Santos DS, Blanchard JS, Basso LA
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Biotechnol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1389201023378328](https://doi.org/10.2174/1389201023378328)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2002 Sep;3(3):197-225. doi: 10.2174/1389201023378328.

Drugs that inhibit mycolic acid biosynthesis in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Schroeder EK(1), de Souza N, Santos DS, Blanchard JS, Basso LA.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biologia Molecular e Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brasil.

Tuberculosis resurged in the late 1980s and now kills more than 2 million people 
a year. The reemergence of tuberculosis as a potential public health threat, the 
high susceptibility of human immunodeficiency virus-infected persons to the 
disease, and the proliferation of multi-drug-resistant (MDR) strains have 
created much scientific interest in developing new antimycobacterial agents to 
both treat Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains resistant to existing drugs, and 
shorten the duration of short-course treatment to improve patient compliance. 
Bacterial cell-wall biosynthesis is a proven target for new antibacterial drugs. 
Mycolic acids, which are key components of the mycobacterial cell wall, are 
alpha-alkyl, beta-hydroxy fatty acids, with a species-dependent saturated 
"short" arm of 20-26 carbon atoms and a "long" meromycolic acid arm of 50-60 
carbon atoms. The latter arm is functionalized at regular intervals by 
cyclopropyl, alpha-methyl ketone, or alpha-methyl methylethers groups. The 
mycolic acid biosynthetic pathway has been proposed to involve five distinct 
stages: (i) synthesis of C20 to C26 straight-chain saturated fatty acids to 
provide the alpha-alkyl branch; (ii) synthesis of the meromycolic acid chain to 
provide the main carbon backbone, (iii) modification of this backbone to 
introduce other functional groups; (iv) the final Claisen-type condensation step 
followed by reduction; and (v) various mycolyltransferase processes to cellular 
lipids. The drugs shown to inhibit mycolic acid biosynthesis are isoniazid, 
ethionamide, isoxyl, thiolactomycin, and triclosan. In addition, pyrazinamide 
was shown to inhibit fatty acid synthase type I which, in turn, provides 
precursors for fatty acid elongation to long-chain mycolic acids by fatty acid 
synthase II. Here we review the biosynthesis of mycolic acids and the mechanism 
of action of antimicrobial agents that act upon this pathway. In addition, we 
describe molecular modeling studies on InhA, the bona-fide target for isoniazid, 
which should improve our understanding of the amino acid residues involved in 
the enzyme's mechanism of action and, accordingly, provide a rational approach 
to the design of new drugs.

DOI: 10.2174/1389201023378328
PMID: 12164478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]