---
reference_id: "PMID:27206569"
title: Pathway-Specific Dopamine Abnormalities in Schizophrenia.
authors:
- Weinstein JJ
- Chohan MO
- Slifstein M
- Kegeles LS
- Moore H
- Abi-Dargham A
journal: Biol Psychiatry
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.03.2104
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathway-Specific Dopamine Abnormalities in Schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Weinstein JJ, Chohan MO, Slifstein M, Kegeles LS, Moore H, Abi-Dargham A
**Journal:** Biol Psychiatry (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.03.2104](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.03.2104)

## Content

1. Biol Psychiatry. 2017 Jan 1;81(1):31-42. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.03.2104.
 Epub 2016 Mar 31.

Pathway-Specific Dopamine Abnormalities in Schizophrenia.

Weinstein JJ(1), Chohan MO(2), Slifstein M(3), Kegeles LS(3), Moore H(4), 
Abi-Dargham A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York; Divisions of 
Translational Imaging, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York. 
Electronic address: jodi.j.weinstein@aya.yale.edu.
(2)Integrative Neuroscience, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New 
York.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York; Divisions of 
Translational Imaging, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York; Integrative 
Neuroscience, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York.

In light of the clinical evidence implicating dopamine in schizophrenia and the 
prominent hypotheses put forth regarding alterations in dopaminergic 
transmission in this disease, molecular imaging has been used to examine 
multiple aspects of the dopaminergic system. We review the imaging methods used 
and compare the findings across the different molecular targets. Findings have 
converged to suggest early dysregulation in the striatum, especially in the 
rostral caudate, manifesting as excess synthesis and release. Recent data showed 
deficit extending to most cortical regions and even to other extrastriatal 
subcortical regions not previously considered to be "hypodopaminergic" in 
schizophrenia. These findings yield a new topography for the dopaminergic 
dysregulation in schizophrenia. We discuss the dopaminergic innervation within 
the individual projection fields to provide a topographical map of this dual 
dysregulation and explore potential cellular and circuit-based mechanisms for 
brain region-dependent alterations in dopaminergic parameters. This refined 
knowledge is essential to better guide translational studies and efforts in 
early drug development.

Copyright © 2016 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.03.2104
PMCID: PMC5177794
PMID: 27206569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Kegeles has received research support from 
Amgen. Dr. Slifstein has received research support from Forest Laboratories, 
Pierre-Fabre, CHDI, and Otsuka and has provided consultation for Amgen. Dr. 
Abi-Dargham has received research support from Takeda and Forest Pharmaceuticals 
and has served on advisory boards for Roche, Forum, and Otsuka. Drs. Moore, 
Chohan, and Weinstein report no biomedical financial interests or potential 
conflicts of interest.