---
reference_id: "PMID:39696717"
title: Structural variant allelic heterogeneity in MECP2 duplication syndrome provides insight into clinical severity and variability of disease expression.
authors:
- Pehlivan D
- Bengtsson JD
- Bajikar SS
- Grochowski CM
- Lun MY
- Gandhi M
- Jolly A
- Trostle AJ
- Harris HK
- Suter B
- Aras S
- Ramocki MB
- Du H
- Mehaffey MG
- Park K
- Wilkey E
- Karakas C
- Eisfeldt JJ
- Pettersson M
- Liu L
- Shinawi MS
- Kimonis VE
- Wiszniewski W
- Mckenzie K
- Roser T
- Vianna-Morgante AM
- Cornier AS
- Abdelmoity A
- Hwang JP
- Jhangiani SN
- Muzny DM
- Mitani T
- Muramatsu K
- Nabatame S
- Glaze DG
- Fatih JM
- Gibbs RA
- Liu Z
- Lindstrand A
- Sedlazeck FJ
- Lupski JR
- Zoghbi HY
- Carvalho CMB
journal: Genome Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13073-024-01411-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2/genetics
- X-Linked Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Phenotype
- Male
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Female
- Alleles
- Gene Duplication
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural variant allelic heterogeneity in MECP2 duplication syndrome provides insight into clinical severity and variability of disease expression.
**Authors:** Pehlivan D, Bengtsson JD, Bajikar SS, Grochowski CM, Lun MY, Gandhi M, Jolly A, Trostle AJ, Harris HK, Suter B, Aras S, Ramocki MB, Du H, Mehaffey MG, Park K, Wilkey E, Karakas C, Eisfeldt JJ, Pettersson M, Liu L, Shinawi MS, Kimonis VE, Wiszniewski W, Mckenzie K, Roser T, Vianna-Morgante AM, Cornier AS, Abdelmoity A, Hwang JP, Jhangiani SN, Muzny DM, Mitani T, Muramatsu K, Nabatame S, Glaze DG, Fatih JM, Gibbs RA, Liu Z, Lindstrand A, Sedlazeck FJ, Lupski JR, Zoghbi HY, Carvalho CMB
**Journal:** Genome Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13073-024-01411-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-024-01411-7)

## Content

1. Genome Med. 2024 Dec 18;16(1):146. doi: 10.1186/s13073-024-01411-7.

Structural variant allelic heterogeneity in MECP2 duplication syndrome provides 
insight into clinical severity and variability of disease expression.

Pehlivan D(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), Bengtsson JD(#)(5), Bajikar SS(#)(6)(7), Grochowski 
CM(6)(8), Lun MY(5), Gandhi M(5), Jolly A(6), Trostle AJ(9)(7), Harris 
HK(9)(10), Suter B(11)(9), Aras S(7), Ramocki MB(11)(12), Du H(6), Mehaffey 
MG(5), Park K(5), Wilkey E(5), Karakas C(13), Eisfeldt JJ(14), Pettersson M(14), 
Liu L(15), Shinawi MS(16), Kimonis VE(17), Wiszniewski W(18), Mckenzie K(19), 
Roser T(20), Vianna-Morgante AM(21), Cornier AS(22), Abdelmoity A(23), Hwang 
JP(8), Jhangiani SN(8), Muzny DM(8), Mitani T(24), Muramatsu K(24), Nabatame 
S(25), Glaze DG(11)(9), Fatih JM(6), Gibbs RA(6)(8), Liu Z(9)(7), Lindstrand 
A(14), Sedlazeck FJ(8), Lupski JR(6)(9)(8)(26), Zoghbi HY(27)(28)(29)(30)(31), 
Carvalho CMB(32)(33).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Neurology and Developmental 
Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. 
pehlivan@bcm.edu.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, 77030, USA. pehlivan@bcm.edu.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, 
USA. pehlivan@bcm.edu.
(4)Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute at Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. pehlivan@bcm.edu.
(5)Pacific Northwest Research Institute, Seattle, WA, 98122, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(7)Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute at Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(8)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
77030, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, 
USA.
(10)The Meyer Center for Developmental Pediatrics and Autism, 8080 North Stadium 
Drive, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Neurology and Developmental 
Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(12)University Otolaryngology, East Greenwich, RI, 02818, USA.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neurology, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.
(14)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(15)Department of Neurology, Division of Epilepsy, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, 
University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA.
(18)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, OR, 97239, USA.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, Division of General and Community Pediatrics, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2R7, Canada.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Developmental 
Medicine and Social Pediatrics, Dr. Von Haunersches Children's Hospital, Ludwig 
Maximilian University of Munich, Munich, 80337, Germany.
(21)Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Institute of Biosciences, 
São Paulo - SP, 05508-090, Brazil.
(22)Department of Genetics, San Jorge Children's Hospital, San Juan, 00771, 
Puerto Rico.
(23)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Mercy Kansas 
City, Kansas City, MO, 64108, USA.
(24)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke-City, 
Tochigi, 329-0498, Japan.
(25)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
(26)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(27)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Neurology and Developmental 
Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. 
hzoghbi@bcm.edu.
(28)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, 77030, USA. hzoghbi@bcm.edu.
(29)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, 
USA. hzoghbi@bcm.edu.
(30)Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute at Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. hzoghbi@bcm.edu.
(31)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research 
Institute, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. hzoghbi@bcm.edu.
(32)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, 77030, USA. ccarvalho@pnri.org.
(33)Pacific Northwest Research Institute, Seattle, WA, 98122, USA. 
ccarvalho@pnri.org.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: MECP2 Duplication Syndrome, also known as X-linked intellectual 
developmental disorder Lubs type (MRXSL; MIM: 300260), is a neurodevelopmental 
disorder caused by copy number gains spanning MECP2. Despite varying genomic 
rearrangement structures, including duplications and triplications, and a wide 
range of duplication sizes, no clear correlation exists between DNA 
rearrangement and clinical features. We had previously demonstrated that up to 
38% of MRXSL families are characterized by complex genomic rearrangements (CGRs) 
of intermediate complexity (2 ≤ copy number variant breakpoints < 5), yet the 
impact of these genomic structures on regulation of gene expression and 
phenotypic manifestations have not been investigated.
METHODS: To study the role of the genomic rearrangement structures on an 
individual's clinical phenotypic variability, we employed a comprehensive 
genomics, transcriptomics, and deep phenotyping analysis approach on 137 
individuals affected by MRXSL. Genomic structural information was correlated 
with transcriptomic and quantitative phenotypic analysis using Human Phenotype 
Ontology (HPO) semantic similarity scores.
RESULTS: Duplication sizes in the cohort ranging from 64.6 kb to 16.5 Mb were 
classified into four categories comprising of tandem duplications (48%), 
terminal duplications (22%), inverted triplications (20%), and other CGRs (10%). 
Most of the terminal duplication structures consist of translocations (65%) 
followed by recombinant chromosomes (23%). Notably, 65% of de novo events 
occurred in the Terminal duplication group in contrast with 17% observed in 
Tandem duplications. RNA-seq data from lymphoblastoid cell lines indicated that 
the MECP2 transcript quantity in MECP2 triplications is statistically different 
from all duplications, but not between other classes of genomic structures. We 
also observed a significant (p < 0.05) correlation (Pearson R = 0.6, Spearman 
p = 0.63) between the log-transformed MECP2 RNA levels and MECP2 protein levels, 
demonstrating that genomic aberrations spanning MECP2 lead to altered MECP2 RNA 
and MECP2 protein levels. Genotype-phenotype analyses indicated a gradual 
worsening of phenotypic features, including overall survival, developmental 
levels, microcephaly, epilepsy, and genitourinary/eye abnormalities in the 
following order: Tandem duplications, Other complex duplications, Terminal 
duplications/Translocations, and Triplications encompassing MECP2.
CONCLUSION: In aggregate, this combined analysis uncovers an interplay between 
MECP2 dosage, genomic rearrangement structure and phenotypic traits. Whereas the 
level of MECP2 is a key determinant of the phenotype, the DNA rearrangement 
structure can contribute to clinical severity and disease expression 
variability. Employing this type of analytical approach will advance our 
understanding of the impact of genomic rearrangements on genomic disorders and 
may help guide more targeted therapeutic approaches.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-024-01411-7
PMCID: PMC11658439
PMID: 39696717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This study is approved by Baylor College of Medicine (BCM) and 
Pacific Northwest Research Institute (PNRI). For patients who were evaluated at 
TCH-BBC Rett Center, clinical information was obtained by retrospective chart 
review using H-46044 protocol approved by Baylor College of Medicine’s (BCM) 
Institutional Review Board (IRB). We used BCM IRB approved H-32407 and 
H-47281/PNRI WIRB #20202158 protocols to clinically examine patients on a 
research basis. For genomic studies, participants were consented according to 
the IRB at BCM approved protocols: H-29697, H-20268, H-18122, and H-26667 or 
H-47281/Pacific Northwest Research Institute WIRB #20202158. The research was 
conducted in compliance with the principles of Helsinki Declaration. Consent for 
publication: All subjects gave consent for participation into our study and 
publication of genomic and clinical information. Competing interests: BCM and 
Miraca Holdings have formed a joint venture with shared ownership and governance 
of BG, which performs clinical microarray analysis (CMA), clinical ES (cES), and 
clinical biochemical studies. J.R.L. serves on the Scientific Advisory Board of 
the BG. J.R.L. has stock ownership in 23andMe, is a paid consultant for Genomics 
International, and is a coinventor on multiple United States and European 
patents related to molecular diagnostics for inherited neuropathies, eye 
diseases, genomic disorders and bacterial genomic fingerprinting. D.P. and 
M.B.R. provide consulting service for Ionis Pharmaceuticals. The remaining 
authors declare that they have no competing interests.