---
reference_id: "PMID:39581960"
title: "Global incidence of osteonecrosis of the femoral head after femoral neck fracture surgery in adolescents: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Gu B
- Yao F
- Peng P
- Zeng Z
- He W
- Wei Q
journal: J Orthop Surg Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13018-024-05275-w
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Femoral Neck Fractures/surgery
- "Femur Head Necrosis/epidemiology, surgery, etiology"
- Global Health
- Incidence
- "Postoperative Complications/epidemiology, etiology"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global incidence of osteonecrosis of the femoral head after femoral neck fracture surgery in adolescents: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Gu B, Yao F, Peng P, Zeng Z, He W, Wei Q
**Journal:** J Orthop Surg Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13018-024-05275-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13018-024-05275-w)

## Content

1. J Orthop Surg Res. 2024 Nov 24;19(1):791. doi: 10.1186/s13018-024-05275-w.

Global incidence of osteonecrosis of the femoral head after femoral neck 
fracture surgery in adolescents: a meta-analysis.

Gu B(1), Yao F(1), Peng P(1), Zeng Z(1), He W(2)(3), Wei Q(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)The Third School of Clinical Medicine, Guangzhou University of Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Research Institute for Orthopedics and Traumatology of Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou, China. hw13802516062@163.com.
(3)The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, 
Guangzhou, China. hw13802516062@163.com.
(4)Guangdong Research Institute for Orthopedics and Traumatology of Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou, China. weiqshi@126.com.
(5)The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, 
Guangzhou, China. weiqshi@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH) is a significant 
postoperative complication following femoral neck fractures (FNFs) in 
adolescents, that has garnered considerable attention from researchers. Despite 
this interest, the incidence of ONFH in adolescents post-FNF surgery has not 
been extensively evaluated. To contribute to the body of research, we performed 
a meta-analysis utilizing articles sourced from multiple databases, with an 
emphasis on the rate of ONFH occurrence in young adolescents following FNF 
surgery.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the incidence of ONFH 
after FNFs in adolescents worldwide and analyse potential risk factors affecting 
its occurrence to provide guidance for the treatment and rehabilitation after 
FNFs in adolescents and reduce the incidence of ONFH.
METHODS: A comprehensive search of medical literature databases, including 
MEDLINE, Web of Science, the Cochrane Library, and Embase, was conducted to 
identify relevant studies on ONFH and its associated risk factors after surgical 
treatment for FNFs in adolescents, covering the period from the establishment of 
the database to April 2024. Studies that did not meet the inclusion criteria 
were excluded. The study was conducted based on the preferred reporting items 
for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA). Literature extraction, 
management, and data entry were performed using Zotero 6.0 and Excel 2016. The 
meta-analysis was conducted using R Studio 4.2.2. Subgroup analysis, sensitivity 
analysis, and assessment of publication bias were performed to explore sources 
of heterogeneity and evaluate the reliability of the results. This study has 
been registered on Prospero. (registration number: CRD4202452794; date of 
registration: 03/04/2024) RESULTS: A total of 17 publications involving 862 
patients with FNFs were included in this meta-analysis. The findings revealed 
that the incidence of ONFH after FNF surgery in adolescents was 24.02% [95% CI 
(0.2118, 0.2712)]. The included studies demonstrated good consistency, and no 
publication bias was observed.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed that the incidence of ONFH after FNFs in 
adolescents is high (24.02%). Early screening and effective treatment of 
postoperative patients are crucial.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13018-024-05275-w
PMCID: PMC11587670
PMID: 39581960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval: Not applicable. 
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.