---
reference_id: "PMID:36190396"
title: Risk Factors for Death and Severe Neurological Sequelae in Childhood Bacterial Meningitis.
authors:
- Lovera D
- Amarilla S
- Araya S
- Galeano F
- González N
- Martínez de Cuellar C
- Apodaca S
- Arbo A
journal: Pediatr Emerg Care
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000002651
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk Factors for Death and Severe Neurological Sequelae in Childhood Bacterial Meningitis.
**Authors:** Lovera D, Amarilla S, Araya S, Galeano F, González N, Martínez de Cuellar C, Apodaca S, Arbo A
**Journal:** Pediatr Emerg Care (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PEC.0000000000002651](https://doi.org/10.1097/PEC.0000000000002651)

## Content

1. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2022 Dec 1;38(12):637-643. doi: 
10.1097/PEC.0000000000002651. Epub 2022 Oct 3.

Risk Factors for Death and Severe Neurological Sequelae in Childhood Bacterial 
Meningitis.

Lovera D(1), Amarilla S, Araya S, Galeano F, González N, Martínez de Cuellar C, 
Apodaca S, Arbo A.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatrics. Institute of Tropical Medicine, Asunción, 
Paraguay.

INTRODUCTION: Acute bacterial meningitis (ABM) continues to be a challenge from 
a diagnostic and therapeutic point of view. Identifying severity risk factors 
and predictive scores may guide interventions to reduce poor outcome.
METHODS: Data from a retrospective study for ABM in children admitted to the 
Institute of Tropical Medicine in Paraguay was analyzed. ABM was defined as 
positive cerebrospinal fluid culture, positive latex agglutination, or 
identification of microorganism by real time-polymerase chain reaction. 
Univariate and multivariate analyses of risk factors at hospital admission that 
predicted major morbidity or death during hospitalization were performed. A 
point-based scoring system that included variables, which were clearly different 
among those who passed away, was constructed.
RESULTS: One hundred fourteen children hospitalized with ABM were eligible for 
the study. The mean age was 46 ± 57 months (range, 1-192 months). The observed 
mortality was 33% (38/114 patients). When a point-based scoring system was used, 
for score of 0 (n = 29) and 1 (n = 12), no death was observed. Among patients 
with a score of 2 (n = 14), 3 (n = 10 patients), 4 (n = 12 patients), and 5 (n = 
13 patients), the mortality rate was 14.3%, 40%, 50%, and 53.8%, respectively. 
When the score was 6 or higher, the mortality rate was at least 63.6%.
CONCLUSIONS: The present score accurately discriminated the probability of death 
in children hospitalized with ABM, and it could be a useful tool to select 
candidates for admission to the intensive care unit and for adjunctive therapy 
in clinical trials.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000002651
PMID: 36190396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors declare no conflict of 
interest.