---
reference_id: "PMID:32618442"
title: "Blau Syndrome: NOD2-related systemic autoinflammatory granulomatosis."
authors:
- Takada S
- Saito MK
- Kambe N
journal: G Ital Dermatol Venereol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.23736/S0392-0488.19.06524-6
keywords:
- "Arthritis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Nod2 Signaling Adaptor Protein/genetics
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Synovitis/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Uveitis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blau Syndrome: NOD2-related systemic autoinflammatory granulomatosis.
**Authors:** Takada S, Saito MK, Kambe N
**Journal:** G Ital Dermatol Venereol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S0392-0488.19.06524-6](https://doi.org/10.23736/S0392-0488.19.06524-6)

## Content

1. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2020 Oct;155(5):537-541. doi:
10.23736/S0392-0488.19.06524-6. Epub 2020 Jul 2.

Blau Syndrome: NOD2-related systemic autoinflammatory granulomatosis.

Takada S(1), Saito MK(2), Kambe N(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Application, Center for iPS cell Research and
Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto, Japan - nkambe@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Blau Syndrome, or early-onset sarcoidosis, is hereditary juvenile-onset systemic
granulomatosis. Clinical symptoms appear before the age of four years and mainly
affect the skin, joints, and eyes. The symptoms are progressive and cause severe
complications, such as joint destruction and blindness. Although tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNFα) antagonists are effective for controlling some of the
symptoms of Blau Syndrome, there is no specific curative treatment. Heterozygous
mutations in nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2) were identified
as the cause of Blau Syndrome onset. NOD2 is an intracellular pathogen
recognition receptor, the ligand of which is muramyl dipeptide (MDP) found in
bacterial cell walls. Upon binding to MDP, NOD2 activates the NF-κB pathway,
which leads to upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines. However, the detailed
molecular mechanisms by which disease associated NOD2 mutations lead to
autoinflammation and granuloma formation are still unclear. To clarify the
relationship between disease associated NOD2 mutations and the inflammatory
response, we established induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells from Blau Syndrome
patients. Functional analyses using these iPS cells suggested that IFNγ is a
critical mediator of the inflammatory manifestations in this disease. This
experimental finding is supported by the clinical observation that bacillus
Calmette-Guesrin (BCG) vaccination is sometimes associated with disease onset,
since IFNγ is a major cytokine associated with BCG-mediated immune responses.
Further investigation of NOD2 signaling and accumulation of clinical cases are
essential to elucidate the mechanisms of Blau Syndrome and develop an effective
treatment for patients.

DOI: 10.23736/S0392-0488.19.06524-6
PMID: 32618442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
