---
reference_id: "PMID:31266615"
title: Global Perspective on Hepatitis B Virus Infections in the Era of Effective Vaccines.
authors:
- Gomes C
- Wong RJ
- Gish RG
journal: Clin Liver Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2019.04.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global Perspective on Hepatitis B Virus Infections in the Era of Effective Vaccines.
**Authors:** Gomes C, Wong RJ, Gish RG
**Journal:** Clin Liver Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cld.2019.04.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cld.2019.04.001)

## Content

1. Clin Liver Dis. 2019 Aug;23(3):383-399. doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2019.04.001. Epub 
2019 May 23.

Global Perspective on Hepatitis B Virus Infections in the Era of Effective 
Vaccines.

Gomes C(1), Wong RJ(2), Gish RG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
Endoscopy Unit, Alameda Health System, Highland Hospital, Highland Hospital 
Campus, Highland Care Pavilion 5th Floor, 1411 East 31st Street, Oakland, CA 
94602, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
Endoscopy Unit, Alameda Health System, Highland Hospital, Highland Hospital 
Campus, Highland Care Pavilion 5th Floor, 1411 East 31st Street, Oakland, CA 
94602, USA. Electronic address: Rowong@alamedahealthsystem.org.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Stanford Health Care, 300 
Pasteur Drive, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a global health burden. The chronicity of 
this infection leads to complication such as cirrhosis and hepatocellular 
carcinoma, making it a leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. 
Chronic infection commonly develops among those who acquire infection during 
childhood, hence the importance of effective implementation of HBV vaccination 
policies designed to eradicate chronic HBV. This article provides updated 
estimates of worldwide HBV disease prevalence and discusses how implementation 
of vaccination policies has affected HBV epidemiology.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cld.2019.04.001
PMID: 31266615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]