---
reference_id: "PMID:8934932"
title: "Type I insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: a model for autoimmune polygenic disorders."
authors:
- Winter WE
journal: Adv Dent Res
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1177/08959374960100011701
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type I insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: a model for autoimmune polygenic disorders.
**Authors:** Winter WE
**Journal:** Adv Dent Res (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1177/08959374960100011701](https://doi.org/10.1177/08959374960100011701)

## Content

1. Adv Dent Res. 1996 Apr;10(1):81-7. doi: 10.1177/08959374960100011701.

Type I insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: a model for autoimmune polygenic 
disorders.

Winter WE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Florida, 
Gainesville 32610-0275, USA.

Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDD) affects between one in 250 and one in 
500 Americans. The inheritance of IDD is non-Mendelian and polygenic. Genetic 
susceptibility predominantly results from specific alleles in the HLA complex 
and insulin gene region. Autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells leads 
to profound insulinopenia (Atkinson and Maclaren, 1990). Without insulin 
treatment, fatal diabetic ketoacidosis results. Even with insulin treatment, 
after 10 to 20 years of IDD, devastating micro- and macrovascular complications 
lead to significant morbidity and premature mortality (Rosenbloom, 1983). In 
order to prevent this catastrophic disease and its consequences, we must 
understand the pathogenesis and immunogenetics of insulitis (the histologic 
lesion characteristic of IDD), whose ultimate expression is beta cell necrosis 
(Cudworth, 1978; Cahill and McDevitt, 1981; Eisenbarth, 1986). Current advances 
include recognition of new IDD-autoantigens (e.g., glutamic acid decarboxylase), 
susceptibility genes (e.g., HLA-DQB1*0201 and 0302), and the development of 
trials to prevent IDD through tolerization to IDD-autoantigens (e.g., insulin) 
(Maclaren, 1993; Winter et al., 1993). Unlocking the genetic mechanisms 
responsible for IDD can also reveal more general mechanisms involved in other 
organ-specific autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1177/08959374960100011701
PMID: 8934932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]