---
reference_id: "PMID:28916367"
title: "Rucaparib maintenance treatment for recurrent ovarian carcinoma after response to platinum therapy (ARIEL3): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Coleman RL
- Oza AM
- Lorusso D
- Aghajanian C
- Oaknin A
- Dean A
- Colombo N
- Weberpals JI
- Clamp A
- Scambia G
- Leary A
- Holloway RW
- Gancedo MA
- Fong PC
- Goh JC
- "O'Malley DM"
- Armstrong DK
- Garcia-Donas J
- Swisher EM
- Floquet A
- Konecny GE
- McNeish IA
- Scott CL
- Cameron T
- Maloney L
- Isaacson J
- Goble S
- Grace C
- Harding TC
- Raponi M
- Sun J
- Lin KK
- Giordano H
- Ledermann JA
- ARIEL3 investigators
journal: Lancet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32440-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rucaparib maintenance treatment for recurrent ovarian carcinoma after response to platinum therapy (ARIEL3): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Coleman RL, Oza AM, Lorusso D, Aghajanian C, Oaknin A, Dean A, Colombo N, Weberpals JI, Clamp A, Scambia G, Leary A, Holloway RW, Gancedo MA, Fong PC, Goh JC, O'Malley DM, Armstrong DK, Garcia-Donas J, Swisher EM, Floquet A, Konecny GE, McNeish IA, Scott CL, Cameron T, Maloney L, Isaacson J, Goble S, Grace C, Harding TC, Raponi M, Sun J, Lin KK, Giordano H, Ledermann JA, ARIEL3 investigators
**Journal:** Lancet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32440-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32440-6)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2017 Oct 28;390(10106):1949-1961. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32440-6. 
Epub 2017 Sep 12.

Rucaparib maintenance treatment for recurrent ovarian carcinoma after response 
to platinum therapy (ARIEL3): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
phase 3 trial.

Coleman RL(1), Oza AM(2), Lorusso D(3), Aghajanian C(4), Oaknin A(5), Dean A(6), 
Colombo N(7), Weberpals JI(8), Clamp A(9), Scambia G(10), Leary A(11), Holloway 
RW(12), Gancedo MA(13), Fong PC(14), Goh JC(15), O'Malley DM(16), Armstrong 
DK(17), Garcia-Donas J(18), Swisher EM(19), Floquet A(20), Konecny GE(21), 
McNeish IA(22), Scott CL(23), Cameron T(24), Maloney L(24), Isaacson J(24), 
Goble S(24), Grace C(24), Harding TC(24), Raponi M(24), Sun J(25), Lin KK(24), 
Giordano H(24), Ledermann JA(26); ARIEL3 investigators.

Collaborators: Buck M, Dean A, Friedlander ML, Goh JC, Harnett P, Kichenadasse 
G, Scott CL, Denys H, Dirix L, Vergote I, Elit L, Ghatage P, Oza AM, Plante M, 
Provencher D, Weberpals JI, Welch S, Floquet A, Gladieff L, Joly F, Leary A, 
Lortholary A, Lotz J, Medioni J, Tredan O, You B, El-Balat A, Hänle C, Krabisch 
P, Neunhöffer T, Pölcher M, Wimberger P, Amit A, Kovel S, Leviov M, Safra T, 
Shapira-Frommer R, Stemmer S, Bologna A, Colombo N, Lorusso D, Pignata S, 
Sabbatini RF, Scambia G, Tamberi S, Zamagni C, Fong PC, O'Donnell A, Gancedo MA, 
Herraez AC, Garcia-Donas J, Guerra EM, Oaknin A, Palacio I, Romero I, Sanchez A, 
Banerjee SN, Clamp A, Drew Y, Gabra HG, Jackson D, Ledermann JA, McNeish IA, 
Parkinson C, Powell M, Aghajanian C, Armstrong DK, Birrer MJ, Buss MK, Chambers 
SK, Chen LM, Coleman RL, Holloway RW, Konecny GE, Ma L, Morgan MA, Morris RT, 
Mutch DG, O'Malley DM, Slomovitz BM, Swisher EM, Vanderkwaak T, Vulfovich M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: 
rcoleman@mdanderson.org.
(2)Department of Medicine, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health 
Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Multicentre Italian Trials in Ovarian Cancer and Gynecologic Malignancies and 
Gynecologic Oncology Unit, Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere 
Scientifico, Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA.
(5)Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Oncology, St John of God Subiaco Hospital, Subiaco, WA, 
Australia.
(7)Gynecologic Cancer Program, European Institute of Oncology and University of 
Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.
(8)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, Christie National Health Service Foundation 
Trust and University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(10)Gynecologic Oncology, Università Cattolica Roma, Rome, Italy.
(11)Group d'Investigateurs Nationaux pour l'Étude des Cancers Ovariens et du 
sein and Gynecological Unit, Department of Medicine, Gustave Roussy Cancer 
Center and Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U981, 
Villejuif, France.
(12)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Florida Hospital Cancer Institute, 
Orlando, FL, USA.
(13)Medical Oncology Department, Oncology Center of Galicia, La Coruña, Spain.
(14)Medical Oncology Department, Auckland City Hospital, Grafton, Auckland, New 
Zealand.
(15)Department of Oncology, Cancer Care Services, Royal Brisbane and Women's 
Hospital, Herston, QLD, Australia.
(16)Gynecologic Oncology, Ohio State University, James Cancer Center, Columbus, 
OH, USA.
(17)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.
(18)HM Hospitales-Centro Integral Oncológico Hospital de Madrid Clara Campal, 
Madrid, Spain.
(19)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA.
(20)Groupe d'Investigateurs Nationaux pour l'Étude des Cancers Ovariens et du 
sein and Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France.
(21)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(22)Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(23)Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(24)Clovis Oncology, Boulder, CO, USA.
(25)Foundation Medicine, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(26)University College London Cancer Institute and University College London 
Hospitals, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2017 Oct 28;390(10106):1948. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32702-2.

BACKGROUND: Rucaparib, a poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor, has anticancer 
activity in recurrent ovarian carcinoma harbouring a BRCA mutation or high 
percentage of genome-wide loss of heterozygosity. In this trial we assessed 
rucaparib versus placebo after response to second-line or later platinum-based 
chemotherapy in patients with high-grade, recurrent, platinum-sensitive ovarian 
carcinoma.
METHODS: In this randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial, we 
recruited patients from 87 hospitals and cancer centres across 11 countries. 
Eligible patients were aged 18 years or older, had a platinum-sensitive, 
high-grade serous or endometrioid ovarian, primary peritoneal, or fallopian tube 
carcinoma, had received at least two previous platinum-based chemotherapy 
regimens, had achieved complete or partial response to their last platinum-based 
regimen, had a cancer antigen 125 concentration of less than the upper limit of 
normal, had a performance status of 0-1, and had adequate organ function. 
Patients were ineligible if they had symptomatic or untreated central nervous 
system metastases, had received anticancer therapy 14 days or fewer before 
starting the study, or had received previous treatment with a poly(ADP-ribose) 
polymerase inhibitor. We randomly allocated patients 2:1 to receive oral 
rucaparib 600 mg twice daily or placebo in 28 day cycles using a 
computer-generated sequence (block size of six, stratified by homologous 
recombination repair gene mutation status, progression-free interval after the 
penultimate platinum-based regimen, and best response to the most recent 
platinum-based regimen). Patients, investigators, site staff, assessors, and the 
funder were masked to assignments. The primary outcome was investigator-assessed 
progression-free survival evaluated with use of an ordered step-down procedure 
for three nested cohorts: patients with BRCA mutations (carcinoma associated 
with deleterious germline or somatic BRCA mutations), patients with homologous 
recombination deficiencies (BRCA mutant or BRCA wild-type and high loss of 
heterozygosity), and the intention-to-treat population, assessed at screening 
and every 12 weeks thereafter. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, 
number NCT01968213; enrolment is complete.
FINDINGS: Between April 7, 2014, and July 19, 2016, we randomly allocated 564 
patients: 375 (66%) to rucaparib and 189 (34%) to placebo. Median 
progression-free survival in patients with a BRCA-mutant carcinoma was 16·6 
months (95% CI 13·4-22·9; 130 [35%] patients) in the rucaparib group versus 5·4 
months (3·4-6·7; 66 [35%] patients) in the placebo group (hazard ratio 0·23 [95% 
CI 0·16-0·34]; p<0·0001). In patients with a homologous recombination deficient 
carcinoma (236 [63%] vs 118 [62%]), it was 13·6 months (10·9-16·2) versus 5·4 
months (5·1-5·6; 0·32 [0·24-0·42]; p<0·0001). In the intention-to-treat 
population, it was 10·8 months (8·3-11·4) versus 5·4 months (5·3-5·5; 0·36 
[0·30-0·45]; p<0·0001). Treatment-emergent adverse events of grade 3 or higher 
in the safety population (372 [99%] patients in the rucaparib group vs 189 
[100%] in the placebo group) were reported in 209 (56%) patients in the 
rucaparib group versus 28 (15%) in the placebo group, the most common of which 
were anaemia or decreased haemoglobin concentration (70 [19%] vs one [1%]) and 
increased alanine or aspartate aminotransferase concentration (39 [10%] vs 
none).
INTERPRETATION: Across all primary analysis groups, rucaparib significantly 
improved progression-free survival in patients with platinum-sensitive ovarian 
cancer who had achieved a response to platinum-based chemotherapy. ARIEL3 
provides further evidence that use of a poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor in 
the maintenance treatment setting versus placebo could be considered a new 
standard of care for women with platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer following a 
complete or partial response to second-line or later platinum-based 
chemotherapy.
FUNDING: Clovis Oncology.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32440-6
PMCID: PMC5901715
PMID: 28916367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests RLC reports grants from 
AstraZeneca, Roche/Genentech, Janssen, OncoMed, Millennium, Merck, Clovis 
Oncology, Esperance, and AbbVie and reports serving as an advisor to 
AstraZeneca, Roche/Genentech, Janssen, OncoMed, Millennium, Merck, Clovis 
Oncology, Esperance, Tesaro, GamaMabs, Pfizer, Genmab, Gradalis, Bayer, and 
AbbVie. AMO has served on advisory boards for Amgen, Verastem, Clovis Oncology, 
and Immunovaccine; received support for travel or accommodation from 
AstraZeneca; and received honoraria from WebRx. DL has served in a consulting or 
advisory role for AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology, Roche, Tesaro, and PharmaMar and 
received support for travel or accommodation from Roche and PharmaMar. CA served 
on a steering committee for Mateon Therapeutics and has served on advisory 
boards for Clovis Oncology, Cerulean Pharma, Bayer, VentiRx, and AstraZeneca. AO 
has served on advisory boards for Roche, AstraZeneca, PharmaMar, Clovis 
Oncology, and Tesaro and received support for travel or accommodation from 
Roche, AstraZeneca, and PharmaMar. NC has served in a consulting or advisory 
role for Roche, AstraZeneca, Tesaro, PharmaMar, Clovis Oncology, and Advaxis. 
JIW has received research support from AbbVie and AstraZeneca and served on 
advisory boards for AstraZeneca. AC has served on advisory boards for 
AstraZeneca and Roche and received research support from AstraZeneca. AL has 
served on an advisory board for Clovis Oncology, Pfizer, and PharmaMar; reports 
institutional research grant support from GamaMabs and Merus; and reports 
boarding and travel expenses for congress activities from AstraZeneca. RWH has 
served on a speakers bureau for AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology, and Tesaro. PCF 
has served on advisory boards for Clovis Oncology and AstraZeneca and received 
honoraria from AstraZeneca. JCG has served on advisory boards for Roche, 
AstraZeneca, Janssen, Merck, and Bristol-Myers Squibb and received support for 
travel or accommodation from Roche, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Astellas. DMO 
received research funding from Clovis Oncology; received institutional research 
support from Amgen, VentiRx, Regeneron, Immunogen, Array Biopharma, Janssen, 
Clovis Oncology, EMD Serono, Ergomed, Ajinomoto, and Genentech/Roche; served on 
an advisory board for Clovis Oncology, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Genentech/Roche, 
Eisai, Tesaro, and Novocure; served on steering committees for Amgen, Tesaro, 
and Novocure; and served as a consultant to Tesaro and Novocure. JG-D has 
received research funding from AstraZeneca and served on advisory boards for 
Janssen, Clovis Oncology, and Genentech/Roche. AF has served on advisory boards 
for AstraZeneca, Roche, and Tesaro. IAM has served on advisory boards for Clovis 
Oncology, Tesaro, and AstraZeneca. CLS has served in a consulting or advisory 
role for AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology, Roche, and Eisai Australia; received 
support for travel or accommodation from AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology, and 
Roche; and received drugs for research from Eisai Australia; and her institution 
received in kind research support for parallel laboratory work using rucaparib. 
TC, LM, JI, SG, CG, TCH, KKL, and HG are employees of Clovis Oncology and MR was 
employed at Clovis Oncology at the time of the study and owns stock in the 
company. JS is an employee of Foundation Medicine, the developer of the 
homologous recombination deficiency assay used in this trial. JAL has served in 
an advisory role for Clovis Oncology and AstraZeneca and served on a speakers 
bureau for and received research grants from AstraZeneca. All other authors 
declare no competing interests.