---
reference_id: "PMID:32318202"
title: "Foster Care Alumni Achievement in Higher Education: the Role of Trauma."
authors:
- Bishop JD
- Prock K
- Seon J
- Woodward AT
- Hughes AK
- MacLean SM
journal: J Child Adolesc Trauma
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s40653-018-0225-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Foster Care Alumni Achievement in Higher Education: the Role of Trauma.
**Authors:** Bishop JD, Prock K, Seon J, Woodward AT, Hughes AK, MacLean SM
**Journal:** J Child Adolesc Trauma (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40653-018-0225-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40653-018-0225-9)

## Content

1. J Child Adolesc Trauma. 2018 Aug 11;12(3):323-330. doi: 
10.1007/s40653-018-0225-9. eCollection 2019 Sep.

Foster Care Alumni Achievement in Higher Education: the Role of Trauma.

Bishop JD(1), Prock K(1), Seon J(1), Woodward AT(1), Hughes AK(1), MacLean 
SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI USA.

Foster care alumni lag behind the general population in post-secondary academic 
achievement. This cross-sectional study uses a random sample of forty-six foster 
care alumni from a Midwestern public university to explore the relationship 
between exposure to trauma and post-secondary academic achievement (14.5% 
response rate; age range 17-24). While no significant relationship was found 
between trauma exposure and GPA or failing classes, participants who experienced 
increased exposure to trauma were more likely to have withdrawn from a class 
because it was too difficult or the semester was too overwhelming. More research 
is needed to further understand these findings.

© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018.

DOI: 10.1007/s40653-018-0225-9
PMCID: PMC7163848
PMID: 32318202

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestThe authors declare they 
have no conflict of interest.