---
reference_id: "PMID:38940753"
title: "The Association between Lymphocytic Thyroiditis and Papillary Thyroid Cancer Harboring Mutant BRAF: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Perampalam S
- Wu K
- Gild M
- Tacon L
- Bullock M
- Clifton-Bligh R
journal: Thyroid
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1089/thy.2024.0142
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hashimoto Disease/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/complications, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/complications, genetics, mortality, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Association between Lymphocytic Thyroiditis and Papillary Thyroid Cancer Harboring Mutant BRAF: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Perampalam S, Wu K, Gild M, Tacon L, Bullock M, Clifton-Bligh R
**Journal:** Thyroid (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1089/thy.2024.0142](https://doi.org/10.1089/thy.2024.0142)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 2024 Sep;34(9):1082-1093. doi: 10.1089/thy.2024.0142. Epub 2024 Jul
18.

The Association between Lymphocytic Thyroiditis and Papillary Thyroid Cancer
Harboring Mutant BRAF: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Perampalam S(1)(2)(3), Wu K(4), Gild M(3)(4), Tacon L(3)(4), Bullock M(3)(4),
Clifton-Bligh R(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Canberra Hospital, Garran,
Australia.
(2)School of Medicine and Psychology, Australian National University, Garran,
Australia.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Kolling Institute, St
Leonards, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Royal North Shore
Hospital, St Leonards, Sydney, Australia.

Background: Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) and lymphocytic thyroiditis (LT)
co-occur with a prevalence of about 30%. PTC harboring BRAFV600E (PTC-BRAF)
confers a worse prognosis, but it is unclear if LT alters prognostic features
and recurrence of PTC. Objective: We compared the prevalence of PTC-BRAF with
and without LT. The risk of adverse pathological features in (i) PTC in the
presence and absence of BRAF mutation, irrespective of LT status, was compared
to (ii) PTC in the presence and absence of LT, irrespective of BRAF status.
Methods: We searched PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science Core Collection for
observational studies published from 2010 to June 2023 on adult patients with
PTC. The search strategy yielded 47 studies with relevant data. Data of baseline
characteristics, clinicopathological features, and the quality assessment tool
were extracted by two reviewers. The study was registered with PROSPERO
(CRD42023437492). Results: Of the 47 studies, 39 studies with a total cohort of
28 143, demonstrated that the odds of PTC-BRAF were significantly lower in the
presence of LT compared to its absence (odds ratio [OR] 0.53, 95% confidence
interval [CI]: 0.48-0.58, p < 0.00001). In PTC-BRAF patients, there was a
positive association of central neck nodal disease (CNND), PTC > 1 cm,
extra-thyroidal extension, American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Stage 3-4,
and multifocality with pooled ORs of 1.54 (95% CI: 1.16-2.04), 1.14 (95% CI:
0.82-1.58), 1.66 (95% CI: 1.40-1.97), 1.53 (95% CI: 1.35-1.75), and 1.24 (95%
CI: 1.11-1.40) respectively, compared to wild-type PTC, irrespective of LT
status. In the same studies, PTC with LT patients had lower pooled ORs of 0.64
(95% CI: 0.51-0.81) for CNND, 0.83 (95% CI: 0.73-0.95) for PTC > 1 cm, 0.71 (95%
CI: 0.58-0.86) for ETE, 0.84 (95% CI: 0.75-0.94) for AJCC Stage 3-4 compared to
PTC without LT, irrespective of BRAF status. PTC recurrence was not affected by
BRAF or LT, with pooled ORs of 1.12 (95% CI: 0.66-1.90, p = 0.67) and 0.60 (95%
CI: 0.28-1.30, p = 0.20) respectively. Similar results were seen with recurrence
expressed as hazard ratio in this limited data-set. Conclusion: The odds of
PTC-BRAF are significantly lower in the presence of LT than without. PTC with
LT, irrespective of BRAF status, was significantly associated with better
prognostic factors. Further studies are required to evaluate if LT inhibits
PTC-BRAF, and whether this is relevant to the role of immunotherapy in advanced
thyroid cancer.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2024.0142
PMID: 38940753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
