---
reference_id: "PMID:24144945"
title: "Severe, fatal multisystem manifestations in a patient with dolichol kinase-congenital disorder of glycosylation."
authors:
- Lieu MT
- Ng BG
- Rush JS
- Wood T
- Basehore MJ
- Hegde M
- Chang RC
- Abdenur JE
- Freeze HH
- Wang RY
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.09.016
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/complications, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Dolichols/metabolism
- Fatal Outcome
- Glycosylation
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Lipid Metabolism/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- "Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Severe, fatal multisystem manifestations in a patient with dolichol kinase-congenital disorder of glycosylation.
**Authors:** Lieu MT, Ng BG, Rush JS, Wood T, Basehore MJ, Hegde M, Chang RC, Abdenur JE, Freeze HH, Wang RY
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.09.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.09.016)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2013 Dec;110(4):484-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.09.016. Epub
 2013 Oct 4.

Severe, fatal multisystem manifestations in a patient with dolichol 
kinase-congenital disorder of glycosylation.

Lieu MT(1), Ng BG, Rush JS, Wood T, Basehore MJ, Hegde M, Chang RC, Abdenur JE, 
Freeze HH, Wang RY.

Author information:
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation are a group of metabolic disorders with an 
expansive and highly variable clinical presentation caused by abnormal 
glycosylation of proteins and lipids. Dolichol kinase (DOLK) catalyzes the final 
step in biosynthesis of dolichol phosphate (Dol-P), which is the oligosaccharide 
carrier required for protein N-glycosylation. Human DOLK deficiency, also known 
as DOLK-CDG or CDG-Im, results in a syndrome that has been reported to manifest 
with dilated cardiomyopathy of variable severity. A male neonate born to 
non-consanguineous parents of Palestinian origin presented with dysmorphic 
features, genital abnormalities, talipes equinovarus, and severe, refractory 
generalized seizures. Additional multi-systemic manifestations developed 
including dilated cardiomyopathy, hepatomegaly, severe insulin-resistant 
hyperglycemia, and renal failure, which were ultimately fatal at age 9months. 
Electrospray ionization mass spectrometric (ESI-MS) analysis of transferrin 
identified a type I congenital disorder of glycosylation; next-generation 
sequencing demonstrated homozygous p.Q483K DOLK mutations that were confirmed in 
patient fibroblasts to result in severely reduced substrate binding and 
catalytic activity. This patient expands the phenotype of DOLK-CDG to include 
anatomic malformations and multi-systemic dysfunction.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.09.016
PMCID: PMC3909743
PMID: 24144945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs) are a group of metabolic disorders caused by abnormal protein and lipid glycosylation, a co- and post-translational addition of carbohydrate moieties essential for protein folding, stability, and cell-cell adhesion [1]. N-linked glycosylation involves transfer of pre-assembled oligosaccharides from dolichol-pyrophosphate to an asparagine residue of a protein in the endoplasmic reticulum [1]. Isoelectric focusing (IEF), electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS), high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and capillary electrophoresis (CE) are used to search for patterns of underglycosylated serum transferrin seen in N-linked CDGs [2]. Because glycosylation is a fundamental process essential to protein and lipid function, CDGs have pleiotropic effects that often have severe or fatal manifestations in affected individuals. Symptoms generally associated with CDGs include profound global delay, epilepsy, polyneuropathy, ataxia, endocrine abnormalities, ichthyosis, visual and hearing loss, cardiac, liver, renal, and gastrointestinal involvement [3].

In 2007, a CDG involving a defect in dolichol kinase [DOLK, E.C. 2.7.1.108], the enzyme catalyzing the final step in the biosynthesis of dolichol phosphate (Dol-P), was discovered [4]. Dolichol phosphate is essential for N-glycosylation due to its role as the oligosaccharide carrier upon which the lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO) precursor is assembled [5]. Dol-P, in the form of Dol-P-Mannose, also acts as a mannose donor for LLO synthesis, O-, C-mannosylation, and glycerol phosphatidylinositol anchor synthesis [5]. The clinical spectrum of previously reported patients with DOLK-CDG (refer to Table 1 for a summary of their symptoms and DOLK mutations), also known as CDG-Im (OMIM #610768), includes seizure disorder and developmental delay [6], progressive dilated cardiomyopathy, severe hypotonia, and ichthyosis [5]. We report a patient with DOLK-CDG sharing symptoms with those patients, but also presenting novel clinical manifestations that expand the DOLK-CDG phenotype.

The male patient was born following an uncomplicated pregnancy except for an instance of first trimester bleeding, to a 23-year-old primagravida and a 26-year-old father of nonconsanguineous Palestinian origin. He was delivered full-term by Caesarean due to nonreassuring fetal heart rate and meconium-stained amniotic fluid. Physical examination showed systolic heart murmur, hypotonia, bilateral talipes equinovarus, sacral dimple with hairy tuft, localized lower extremity hypertrichosis, and penoscrotal fusion. No other skin abnormalities or optic atrophy were noted. Echocardiogram showed no evidence of cardiac dilatation or abnormal function. He had good initial respiratory effort; however, shortly thereafter manifested repeated episodes of apnea, cyanosis, and bradycardia. The events were found to be caused by partial or generalized seizures, as an electroencephalogram revealed non-specific encephalopathy and generalized multifocal seizures. The apneic episodes occurred so frequently that he was intubated and mechanically ventilated. Brain imaging demonstrated diffuse cortical atrophy and delayed myelination, particularly in the cerebellar hemispheres. He had gastroesophageal reflux and dysphagia, failed to thrive, and eventually required a gastrostomy tube for enteral feeding. N-linked CDG was suspected when ESI-MS of transferrin (Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN) demonstrated elevated mono-oligosaccharide:di-oligosaccharide transferrin ratio of 0.707 (reference range < 0.100) and a-oligosaccharide:di-oligosaccharide transferrin ratio of 0.216 (reference range < 0.050). These ratios are indicative of Type I CDG, resulting in impaired synthesis or transfer of the LLO precursor that subsequently generates proteins with unoccupied glycosylation sites [2]. This is in comparison to Type II CDGs, which are caused by impaired processing, such as trimming and remodeling, of the protein-bound oligosaccharide, creating proteins that have fully occupied glycosylation sites but with abnormal glycans [2].

At age 3 months, the patient developed sinus tachycardia, hypertension, unexplained hypokalemia (K+ 3.0 mEq/L, reference range 3.6–6.0 mEq/L), and hyperglycemia (glucose 461 mg/dL, reference range 65–110 mg/dL) despite low glucose infusion rate of 2 mg/kg/minute. While potassium levels eventually stabilized, his glucose remained markedly elevated without ketoacidosis. Even high continuous insulin infusion (1.3 units/kg/hour) did not stabilize the glucose. He developed hepatomegaly with elevated aspartate aminotransferase (174 units/L, reference range 22–58 units/L), alanine aminotransferase (121 units/L, reference range 11–39 units/L), and alkaline phosphatase (1,310 units/L, reference range 100–302 units/L). Prothrombin international normalized ratio was 1.1 (reference range 0.8 – 1.2 seconds) and partial thromboplastin time was 30.3 (reference range 23 – 40 seconds). Creatine phosphokinase was not elevated at 66 (reference range 41 – 277 units/L). Clinical deterioration was evidenced by absent response to stimulation or primitive reflexes, sluggish pupils, hypotonia, and bilateral ankle clonus.

During his last four days of life, he developed wide-complex tachycardia with atrioventricular dissociation, and his cardiac function rapidly deteriorated with decline in contractile function (20.3%, reference range > 28%) and ejection fraction (43.6%, reference range > 55%). Borderline cardiac dilatation, concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, and decreased left ventricular function were noted. He developed renal failure and marked abdominal distension secondary to hepatomegaly and ascites (albumin 2.5 g/dL, reference range 2.7–4.8 g/dL). He was noted to have dysconjugate gaze, sluggishly reactive pupillary light reflex, and became non-responsive and hypotonic with occasional spontaneous four-extremity clonus. He expired at 4 months from combined cardiac, renal, and liver failure.

The study was granted exempt status by the institutional review board of Children’s Hospital of Orange County as IRB study #130657.

Patient DNA was analyzed using a targeted 47 gene next generation sequencing panel specific for disorders of glycosylation [7]. This panel utilized RainDance Technologies™ microdroplet enrichment of the targeted region, which included all exons for each of the 47 genes and at least 25 nucleotides upstream and downstream of each exon. After enrichment, samples were run on a SOLiD™ 3 Plus system (LifeTechnologies, Carlsbad, CA), and the average coverage for this sample was 1200x with 87% of the nucleotides having 100x coverage or greater. Bioinformatic filtering for the known SNPs assisted with the identification of changes that were most likely novel and therefore warranted further consideration and confirmation by Sanger sequencing.

Human cells from primary cultures were incubated in PBS containing 10 mM EDTA, collected by centrifugation (1,000×g, 10 min), resuspended in ice-cold 10 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.4, 0.25 M sucrose, 1 mM dithiothreitol, and lysed by probe sonication with a Kontes Micro Ultrasonic Cell Disruptor (40% full power, 15 sec, 2 pulses). Homogenates were sedimented at 1,000×g, 10 min, to remove unbroken cells, and microsomes were recovered from the supernatant by centrifugation at 100,000×g, 20 min in a Beckman TL-100 Ultracentrifuge. Microsomes were washed with lysis buffer one time, resuspended to ~10 mg/ml protein in lysis buffer and stored at −20°C until analysis.

Reaction mixtures for dolichol kinase activity contained 50 millimolar (mM) Tris-Cl (pH 8.0), 10 mM CaCl2, 5 mM NaF, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 5 mM dithiothreitol, 10 mM UTP, 0.025% Nonidet P-40, 100 micromolar (µM) dolichol (dispersed in 0.5% Nonidet P-40 by probe sonication), microsomal fraction from cultured CDG cells (50 micrograms of membrane protein, prepared as described previously), 0.125 molar sucrose and the indicated concentration of [γ-32P]CTP (5 to 40 µM, 745 counts per minute/picomole) in a total volume of 0.01 mL. Following incubation at 37°C for 10 min, the enzymatic products were extracted into CHCl3/CH3OH and assayed as described previously [8].

Next-generation sequencing identified homozygous c.1447C>A (p.Q483K) DOLK mutations; both parents were heterozygous carriers. Functional studies showed that the mutant DOLK enzyme demonstrated reduced Vmax (100 pmol/min, controls 238 and 417 pmol/min) and increased Km (36 µM, controls 10.2 and 10.4 µM), confirming that the DOLK p.Q483K mutation encodes a form of dolichol kinase with severely deficient enzymatic activity (Figure 1).

Our case adds to the existing clinical phenotype of DOLK-CDG patients with a different spectrum of multisystemic involvement compared to other cases. Previously reported DOLKCDG patients who died suffered mainly from dilated cardiomyopathy [5] or seizure disorder [6]. While our patient developed heart failure and seizures, he also had multiple major malformations such as talipes equinovarus and penoscrotal fusion, which have not yet been reported in DOLK-CDG patients. In addition, he had severe insulin-resistant hyperglycemia, which is different from the hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia typically seen in the type I CDGs [2]. He also developed renal failure and hepatic synthetic dysfunction as evidenced by electrolyte disturbances, anuria, hepatomegaly, elevated transaminases, and ascites.

In comparison to the 17 other DOLK-CDG patients listed in Table 1, our patient presents with traits that are both common and novel to the DOLK-CDG phenotype. Common DOLK-CDG symptoms that were seen in our patient include dilated cardiomyopathy (seen in 15 of 18 DOLKCDG patients), seizures (seen in 7 of 18 DOLK-CDG patients), and muscular hypotonia (seen in 7 of 18 DOLK-CDG patients) mostly without creatine kinase elevation. Symptoms that our patient had that are novel to the DOLK-CDG phenotype include renal failure, insulin-resistant hyperglycemia, and dysmorphic features.

It is worthwhile to consider the symptoms of DOLK-CDG in comparison to the CDGs involving the enzymatic steps immediately prior to, and following, dolichol phosphorylation: SRD5A3-CDG and the three DPM-CDGs, respectively. These dolichol-phosphate-associated type I CDGs have distinct presentations that overlap considerably. Mutations in the steroid 5- alpha reductase gene SRD5A3 result in deficient reduction of polyprenol to dolichol. The clinical presentation of patients with SRD5A3-CDG (OMIM#612379) includes facial dysmorphism, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, iris and retina colobomas, optic atrophy, nystagmus, visual loss, transient microcytic anemia, elevated transaminases, coagulation abnormalities, and ichthyosis [5]. One male from the index SRD5A3-CDG kindred had micropenis and cryptorchidism due to hypopituitarism [9]. Dol-P-Mannose is synthesized from Dol-P and mannose by the DPMsynthase complex, a heterotrimer of dolichyl-phosphate mannosyltransferase polypeptides 1, 2, and 3 encoded by the corresponding DPM1-3 genes [5]. Patients with deficiencies of the DPM complex (OMIM#s608799, 615042, and 612937) present with symptoms of both type I N-linked CDG and deficient O-mannosylation of α-dystroglycan. With the exception of the single DPM3- CDG patient with normal cognition, adult-onset dilated cardiomyopathy and stroke-like episode [11], other reported DPM-CDGs presented early in life with hypotonia, congenital contractures, severe delays in development, refractory seizure disorder, and reduced or absent vision [12,13]. Many also demonstrated elevations in creatine kinase due to α-dystroglycan-related muscular dystrophy, and reduced activity of proteins C, S, and antithrombin III. Comparing DOLK-CDG to SRD5A3 and DPM-CDGs, developmental and ophthalmologic abnormalities, transaminase elevation, abnormal coagulation factors, and anemia have been reported in all. Cardiomyopathy, absent in SRD5A3-CDG due to a presumed alternative dolichol synthetic pathway [5], has been linked to abnormal O-mannosylation of α-dystroglycan in DOLK- and DPM-CDGs [10–13], yet 78% of DOLK-CDG patients had normal creatine kinase. This pattern of severe cardiac and milder skeletal involvement has been observed in FKRP-related congenital muscular dystrophy, another α-dystroglycanopathy [14]. With no known secondary pathway of Dol-P synthesis [5], such discordance is possibly explained by a higher tolerance for α-dystroglycan hypoglycosylation in skeletal muscle compared to cardiac muscle. However, given the finding of camptodactyly in a DPM1-CDG patient [12], our patient’s equinovarus deformity may be a consequence of fetal hypokinesia arising from muscular dystrophy.

Our patient’s severe, neonatal-onset constellation of symptoms may be explained by the relatively high levels of DOLK expression in the brain, heart, liver, and kidney [10] and the severe effects of the p.Q483K DOLK mutation upon enzymatic function, verifying in silico predictions of this mutation as “damaging” by SIFT (score 0.003) and “probably damaging” by Polyphen-2 (score 0.975) [15,16]. However, in silico analysis should be verified by expression, evidenced by the “damaging” predictions made by SIFT and Polyphen-2 for the DOLK p.W304C and p.H408D, in contrast with the ability of both mutant enzymes to partially rescue glycosylation in a DOLK-ortholog deficient yeast strain, and the later-onset dilated cardiomyopathy human phenotypes observed for both mutations [10]. This DOLK-CDG case emphasizes the importance of testing with transferrin IEF, ESI-MS, HPLC, or CE methods to evaluate patients with dysmorphic features, multiple organ system dysfunction, or combined symptoms of deficient N-linked and O-linked glycosylation for CDGs, especially those involving dolichol metabolism.