---
reference_id: "PMID:32930885"
title: Retrospective investigation of hereditary syndromes in patients with medulloblastoma in a single institution.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Wu J
- Li W
- Li J
- Liu R
- Yang B
- Li C
- Jiang T
journal: Childs Nerv Syst
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00381-020-04885-z
keywords:
- Cerebellar Neoplasms/genetics
- Hedgehog Proteins
- Humans
- Medulloblastoma/genetics
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- Repressor Proteins
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrospective investigation of hereditary syndromes in patients with medulloblastoma in a single institution.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Wu J, Li W, Li J, Liu R, Yang B, Li C, Jiang T
**Journal:** Childs Nerv Syst (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00381-020-04885-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00381-020-04885-z)

## Content

1. Childs Nerv Syst. 2021 Feb;37(2):411-417. doi: 10.1007/s00381-020-04885-z.
Epub  2020 Sep 15.

Retrospective investigation of hereditary syndromes in patients with
medulloblastoma in a single institution.

Wang Y(1), Wu J(2), Li W(3), Li J(4), Liu R(5)(6), Yang B(5)(6), Li C(7)(8)(9),
Jiang T(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 100020,
People's Republic of China. littletony2004@163.com.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, General Hospital of The YangTze River Shipping,
Wuhan Brain Hospital, Wuhan, 430014, Hubei, China. 435205012@qq.com.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, 518083, China.
(4)Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee
Ave, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
(5)Department of neurosurgery, Beijing TianTan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, 100050, People's Republic of China.
(6)Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 100050,
People's Republic of China.
(7)Department of neurosurgery, Beijing TianTan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, 100050, People's Republic of China. lichundelicd@163.com.
(8)Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 100050,
People's Republic of China. lichundelicd@163.com.
(9), Beijing, China. lichundelicd@163.com.
(10)Department of neurosurgery, Beijing TianTan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, 100050, People's Republic of China.
zacharytaojiang@163.com.
(11)Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, Capital Medical University, Beijing,
100050, People's Republic of China. zacharytaojiang@163.com.
(12), Beijing, China. zacharytaojiang@163.com.

PURPOSE: To investigate the incidence rate of hereditary disease in patients
with medulloblastoma.
METHODS: The genetic reports of 129 patients with medulloblastoma from January
2016 to December 2019 were retrospectively analyzed. A panel sequence of 39
genes (Genetron Health) were used for all patients to evaluate the tumor
subgroup. Four genes (TP53, APC, PTCH1, SUFU) were screened to routinely rule
out germline mutation.
RESULTS: Five patients (3.9%) were found with hereditary disease, and all
belonged to the sonic hedgehog (SHH) subgroup. Two patients were retrospectively
diagnosed with Gorlin-Goltz disease with germline PTCH1 and SUFU mutations. One
patient (PTCH1 mutation) accepted whole craniospinal irradiation and had scalp
nevoid basal cell carcinoma 5 years later. The other patient (SUFU mutation)
accepted chemotherapy and had local tumor relapse 1 year later. Three patients
were diagnosed with Li-Fraumeni syndrome and carried the TP53 mutation; all
three patients died. One of the patients had bone osteosarcoma, while all three
had early tumor relapse.
CONCLUSION: Patients with SHH medulloblastoma should routinely undergo genetic
testing. We propose that whole genome, whole exome sequence, or custom-designed
panel-targeted exome sequencing should be performed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00381-020-04885-z
PMID: 32930885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
