---
reference_id: "PMID:36830740"
title: Transcriptomic Effects on the Mouse Heart Following 30 Days on the International Space Station.
authors:
- Veliz AL
- Mamoun L
- Hughes L
- Vega R
- Holmes B
- Monteon A
- Bray J
- Pecaut MJ
- Kearns-Jonker M
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biom13020371
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- Transcriptome
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Space Flight
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptomic Effects on the Mouse Heart Following 30 Days on the International Space Station.
**Authors:** Veliz AL, Mamoun L, Hughes L, Vega R, Holmes B, Monteon A, Bray J, Pecaut MJ, Kearns-Jonker M
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom13020371](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom13020371)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2023 Feb 15;13(2):371. doi: 10.3390/biom13020371.

Transcriptomic Effects on the Mouse Heart Following 30 Days on the International 
Space Station.

Veliz AL(1), Mamoun L(1), Hughes L(1), Vega R(1), Holmes B(1), Monteon A(1), 
Bray J(1), Pecaut MJ(2), Kearns-Jonker M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Human Anatomy, Loma Linda University School of 
Medicine, Loma Linda, CA 92350, USA.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma 
Linda, CA 92350, USA.

Efforts to understand the impact of spaceflight on the human body stem from 
growing interest in long-term space travel. Multiple organ systems are affected 
by microgravity and radiation, including the cardiovascular system. Previous 
transcriptomic studies have sought to reveal the changes in gene expression 
after spaceflight. However, little is known about the impact of long-term 
spaceflight on the mouse heart in vivo. This study focuses on the transcriptomic 
changes in the hearts of female C57BL/6J mice flown on the International Space 
Station (ISS) for 30 days. RNA was isolated from the hearts of three flight and 
three comparable ground control mice and RNA sequencing was performed. Our 
analyses showed that 1147 transcripts were significantly regulated after 
spaceflight. The MAPK, PI3K-Akt, and GPCR signaling pathways were predicted to 
be activated. Transcripts related to cytoskeleton breakdown and organization 
were upregulated, but no significant change in the expression of extracellular 
matrix (ECM) components or oxidative stress pathway-associated transcripts 
occurred. Our results indicate an absence of cellular senescence, and a 
significant upregulation of transcripts associated with the cell cycle. 
Transcripts related to cellular maintenance and survival were most affected by 
spaceflight, suggesting that cardiovascular transcriptome initiates an adaptive 
response to long-term spaceflight.

DOI: 10.3390/biom13020371
PMCID: PMC9953463
PMID: 36830740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.