---
reference_id: "PMID:11837465"
title: Significance of haematological manifestations in patients with tuberculosis.
authors:
- Singh KJ
- Ahluwalia G
- Sharma SK
- Saxena R
- Chaudhary VP
- Anant M
journal: J Assoc Physicians India
year: '2001'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Significance of haematological manifestations in patients with tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Singh KJ, Ahluwalia G, Sharma SK, Saxena R, Chaudhary VP, Anant M
**Journal:** J Assoc Physicians India (2001)

## Content

1. J Assoc Physicians India. 2001 Aug;49:788, 790-4.

Significance of haematological manifestations in patients with tuberculosis.

Singh KJ(1), Ahluwalia G, Sharma SK, Saxena R, Chaudhary VP, Anant M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.

OBJECTIVE: Tuberculosis is a major public health problem in India. 
Haematological changes associated with tuberculosis have been incompletely 
investigated. To the best of our knowledge, there is no comprehensive study 
assessing the haematological abnormalities in these patients from the Indian 
subcontinent. In the present study, we have compared peripheral blood and bone 
marrow findings in patients with disseminated/miliary tuberculosis (DTB/MTB) as 
well as pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB). An attempt has also been made to assess 
the effect of antituberculosis therapy on the haematologic abnormalities.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Thirty two patients with disseminated/miliary tuberculosis 
and 23 patients with pulmonary tuberculosis were prospectively studied to 
determine the various haematological manifestations in tuberculosis and the 
effect of antituberculosis therapy. All patients received standard 
antituberculosis treatment. They were subjected to a detailed haemogram 
including peripheral blood examination, which was repeated on completion of 
antituberculosis therapy. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy was also done in all 
patients before starting antituberculosis treatment.
RESULTS: Normocytic normochromic anaemia was the most common abnormality 
observed in all the groups and subgroups (DTB/MTB 84%, PTB 86%). Other 
haematological abnormalities of the white blood cells include leucopenia 
(DTB/MTB 25%, PTB 0%; p < 0.02), neutropenia (DTB/MTB 22%, PTB 0%; p < 0.04), 
lymphocytopenia, monocytopenia, leukocytosis, neutrophilia, lymphocytosis and 
monocytosis. Pancytopenia was observed only in patients with 
disseminated/miliary tuberculosis (p < 0.05). Thrombocytopenia was more common 
in patients with disseminated/miliary tuberculosis (p < 0.007), whereas 
thrombocytosis was more common in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis (p < 
0.04). The patients of disseminated/miliary tuberculosis with granulomas in the 
bone marrow had certain significant differences as compared to patients without 
granulomas. These patients showed severe anaemia, peripheral monocytopenia and 
bone marrow histiomonocytosis. The haemogram reverted to normal with 
antituberculosis therapy in these patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In view of the varied haematological abnormalities observed in 
patients with tuberculosis in this part of the world, it is concluded that the 
differential diagnosis of tuberculosis should be entertained in patients with 
varied haematological disorders.

PMID: 11837465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]