---
reference_id: "PMID:21732829"
title: "Wnt signaling and Dupuytren's disease."
authors:
- Dolmans GH
- Werker PM
- Hennies HC
- Furniss D
- Festen EA
- Franke L
- Becker K
- van der Vlies P
- Wolffenbuttel BH
- Tinschert S
- Toliat MR
- Nothnagel M
- Franke A
- Klopp N
- Wichmann HE
- Nürnberg P
- Giele H
- Ophoff RA
- Wijmenga C
- Dutch Dupuytren Study Group
- German Dupuytren Study Group
- LifeLines Cohort Study
- BSSH-GODD Consortium
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1101029
keywords:
- Case-Control Studies
- Dupuytren Contracture/genetics
- Europe
- Genetic Loci
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Wnt Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wnt signaling and Dupuytren's disease.
**Authors:** Dolmans GH, Werker PM, Hennies HC, Furniss D, Festen EA, Franke L, Becker K, van der Vlies P, Wolffenbuttel BH, Tinschert S, Toliat MR, Nothnagel M, Franke A, Klopp N, Wichmann HE, Nürnberg P, Giele H, Ophoff RA, Wijmenga C, Dutch Dupuytren Study Group, German Dupuytren Study Group, LifeLines Cohort Study, BSSH-GODD Consortium
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1101029](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1101029)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2011 Jul 28;365(4):307-17. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1101029. Epub 2011
 Jul 6.

Wnt signaling and Dupuytren's disease.

Dolmans GH(1), Werker PM, Hennies HC, Furniss D, Festen EA, Franke L, Becker K, 
van der Vlies P, Wolffenbuttel BH, Tinschert S, Toliat MR, Nothnagel M, Franke 
A, Klopp N, Wichmann HE, Nürnberg P, Giele H, Ophoff RA, Wijmenga C; Dutch 
Dupuytren Study Group; German Dupuytren Study Group; LifeLines Cohort Study; 
BSSH-GODD Consortium.

Collaborators: de Boer A, van der Sluis CK, ter Linden H, Knepper AB, Zöphel OT, 
de Boer HL, Bauer HJ, Spicher R, Bleuler P, Hoffmann R, Langer M, Frank W, Lenze 
W, Meinel A, Nick HE, Rössler J, Staub F, Burge P, McNab I, Little C, Critchley 
P, Cogswell L, Teoh V, Fleming A, Cerovac S, Colville J, Fullilove S, 
Chakrabarti I, Broadbent M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, University Medical Center Groningen and 
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Nov 3;365(18):1740; author reply 1740. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1110094.

BACKGROUND: Dupuytren's disease is a benign fibromatosis of the hands and 
fingers that leads to flexion contractures. We hypothesized that multiple 
genetic and environmental factors influence susceptibility to this disease and 
sought to identify susceptibility genes to better understand its pathogenesis.
METHODS: We conducted a genomewide association study of 960 Dutch persons with 
Dupuytren's disease and 3117 controls (the discovery set) to test for 
association between the disease and genetic markers. We tested the 35 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) most strongly associated with Dupuytren's 
disease (P<1×10(-4)) in the discovery set in three additional, independent case 
series comprising a total of 1365 affected persons and 8445 controls from 
Germany, the United Kingdom, and The Netherlands.
RESULTS: Initially, we observed a significant genomewide association between 
Dupuytren's disease and 8 SNPs at three loci. Tests of replication and joint 
analysis of all data from 2325 patients with Dupuytren's disease and 11,562 
controls yielded an association with 11 SNPs from nine different loci 
(P<5.0×10(-8)). Six of these loci contain genes known to be involved in the 
Wnt-signaling pathway: WNT4 (rs7524102) (P=2.8×10(-9); odds ratio, 1.28), SFRP4 
(rs16879765) (P=5.6×10(-39); odds ratio, 1.98), WNT2 (rs4730775) (P=3.0×10(-8); 
odds ratio, 0.83), RSPO2 (rs611744) (P=7.9×10(-15); odds ratio, 0.75), SULF1 
(rs2912522) (P=2.0×10(-13); odds ratio, 0.72), and WNT7B (rs6519955) 
(P=3.2×10(-33); odds ratio, 1.54).
CONCLUSIONS: This study implicates nine different loci involved in genetic 
susceptibility to Dupuytren's disease. The fact that six of these nine loci 
harbor genes encoding proteins in the Wnt-signaling pathway suggests that 
aberrations in this pathway are key to the process of fibromatosis in 
Dupuytren's disease.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1101029
PMID: 21732829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]