---
reference_id: "PMID:38450054"
title: Study on the microbial diversity of ear canal secretions from patients with otomycosis.
authors:
- Chen Z
- Zhao Z
journal: Front Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fsurg.2024.1277799
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Study on the microbial diversity of ear canal secretions from patients with otomycosis.
**Authors:** Chen Z, Zhao Z
**Journal:** Front Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fsurg.2024.1277799](https://doi.org/10.3389/fsurg.2024.1277799)

## Content

1. Front Surg. 2024 Feb 9;11:1277799. doi: 10.3389/fsurg.2024.1277799.
eCollection  2024.

Study on the microbial diversity of ear canal secretions from patients with 
otomycosis.

Chen Z(1), Zhao Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hubei NO.3 People's Hospital of Jianghan 
University, Wuhan, China.

Otomycosis is caused by fungi, which usually cause discharge and additional 
discomfort. The highest incidence of otomycosis occurs in summer. To better 
treat this disease, it is necessary to study the microbial diversity of 
otomycosis secretions. In this regard, this study used high-throughput 
sequencing technology to determine the microbial diversity of the ear canal 
secretions of six typical patients with otomycosis in Wuhan via internal 
transcribed spacer (ITS) and 16S rRNA analyses and proposed a reasonable 
clinical treatment plan. Six patients with otomycosis in the Department of 
Otorhinolaryngology, Hubei Third People's Hospital Affiliated with Jianghan 
University, were selected from June 2022 to August 2022. The results showed that 
Staphylococcus spp. (average abundance 29.05%) was the dominant bacteria and 
Aspergillus spp. (average abundance 90.68%) was the dominant fungus involved in 
otomycosis secretion. Aspergillus spp. can cause inflammation of the external 
auditory canal combined with bacterial infections such as Staphylococcus spp., 
which can cause discharge in the ear canal. High-throughput sequencing provides 
comprehensive information on the microbial community involved in otomycosis 
discharge and will aid in evaluating the efficacy of clinical treatment and 
medication.

© 2024 Chen and Zhao.

DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2024.1277799
PMCID: PMC10916698
PMID: 38450054

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.