---
reference_id: "PMID:28884922"
title: Congenital heart defects in molecularly proven Kabuki syndrome patients.
authors:
- Digilio MC
- Gnazzo M
- Lepri F
- Dentici ML
- Pisaneschi E
- Baban A
- Passarelli C
- Capolino R
- Angioni A
- Novelli A
- Marino B
- Dallapiccola B
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38417
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Aortic Coarctation/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Aortic Valve/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- "Aortic Valve Stenosis/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Bicuspid Aortic Valve Disease
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Face/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Heart Septal Defects, Atrial/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Heart Septal Defects, Ventricular/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Heart Valve Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Hematologic Diseases/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Histone Demethylases/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- "Vestibular Diseases/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital heart defects in molecularly proven Kabuki syndrome patients.
**Authors:** Digilio MC, Gnazzo M, Lepri F, Dentici ML, Pisaneschi E, Baban A, Passarelli C, Capolino R, Angioni A, Novelli A, Marino B, Dallapiccola B
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38417](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38417)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 Nov;173(11):2912-2922. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38417. Epub 
2017 Sep 8.

Congenital heart defects in molecularly proven Kabuki syndrome patients.

Digilio MC(1), Gnazzo M(1), Lepri F(1), Dentici ML(1), Pisaneschi E(1), Baban 
A(1), Passarelli C(1), Capolino R(1), Angioni A(1), Novelli A(1), Marino B(2), 
Dallapiccola B(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Medical Genetics Laboratory, Pediatric Cardiology, 
Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Cardiology, Sapienza University, Rome, 
Italy.

The prevalence of congenital heart defects (CHD) in Kabuki syndrome ranges from 
28% to 80%. Between January 2012 and December 2015, 28 patients had a 
molecularly proven diagnosis of Kabuki syndrome. Pathogenic variants in KMT2D 
(MLL2) were detected in 27 patients, and in KDM6A gene in one. CHD was diagnosed 
in 19/27 (70%) patients with KMT2D (MLL2) variant, while the single patient with 
KDM6A change had a normal heart. The anatomic types among patients with CHD 
included aortic coarctation (4/19 = 21%) alone or associated with an additional 
CHD, bicuspid aortic valve (4/19 = 21%) alone or associated with an additional 
CHD, perimembranous subaortic ventricular septal defect (3/19 = 16%), atrial 
septal defect ostium secundum type (3/19 = 16%), conotruncal heart defects 
(3/19 = 16%). Additional CHDs diagnosed in single patients included aortic 
dilatation with mitral anomaly and hypoplastic left heart syndrome. We also 
reviewed CHDs in patients with a molecular diagnosis of Kabuki syndrome reported 
in the literature. In conclusion, a CHD is detected in 70% of patients with 
KMT2D (MLL2) pathogenic variants, most commonly left-sided obstructive lesions, 
including multiple left-sided obstructions similar to those observed in the 
spectrum of the Shone complex, and septal defects. Clinical management of Kabuki 
syndrome should include echocardiogram at the time of diagnosis, with particular 
attention to left-sided obstructive lesions and mitral anomalies, and annual 
monitoring for aortic arch dilatation.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38417
PMID: 28884922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]