---
reference_id: "PMID:10332520"
title: "Ultrastructural analysis of folliculogenesis in the ovary of the yellow spotted stingray, Urolophus jamaicensis."
authors:
- Hamlett WC
- Jezior M
- Spieler R
journal: Ann Anat
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/S0940-9602(99)80003-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ultrastructural analysis of folliculogenesis in the ovary of the yellow spotted stingray, Urolophus jamaicensis.
**Authors:** Hamlett WC, Jezior M, Spieler R
**Journal:** Ann Anat (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0940-9602(99)80003-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0940-9602(99)80003-X)

## Content

1. Ann Anat. 1999 Mar;181(2):159-72. doi: 10.1016/S0940-9602(99)80003-X.

Ultrastructural analysis of folliculogenesis in the ovary of the yellow spotted 
stingray, Urolophus jamaicensis.

Hamlett WC(1), Jezior M, Spieler R.

Author information:
(1)South Bend Center for Medical Education, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Notre Dame, USA.

The ovary of the yellow spotted ray, Urolophus jamaicensis, is embedded in the 
epigonal gland, a lymphomyeloid organ. The covering of the ovary is composed of 
a germinal epithelium that is cuboidal and dome-shaped with microvilli. Adjacent 
cells have elaborate intercellular folds that create dilated intercellular 
spaces. In previtellogenic follicles, the follicle cells are simple cuboidal and 
contain modest amounts of synthetic or transport organelles. As vitellogenesis 
proceeds, the epithelium becomes multilaminar. Follicle cells are columnar as 
yolk precursors are transported from the maternal circulation, through the 
follicle cell cytoplasm, to the oocyte. Large, round cells occur in the follicle 
wall that contain lipid-like substances. These cells decrease in size and number 
as folliculogenesis proceeds and eventually disappear prior to ovulation. 
Columnar follicular cells and the oocyte have cellular extensions that impinge 
upon the zona pellucida. Transosomes are follicle cell extensions that indent 
the oocyte membrane. Tips of transosmes become enclosed by a layer of oocyte 
plasmalemma. The tips of transosomes pinch off and become resident in the 
ooplasm. Dense staining material occurs on the inner surface of the transosome 
membrane derived from the follicle cell. In Other animals, this material has 
been described as ribosome-like. This study is the first to document the 
presence of transosomes in a group other than Aves or reptiles. Follicle cells 
are supported by an extremely thick basal lamina. Subjacent to the lamina is the 
vascularized theca with fibroblasts embedded in a collagenous network. There is 
no differentiation into definitive theca interna and externa. In vitellogenic 
eggs, extensive inward folding of the follicular epithelium occur thereby 
generating more surface area for the transport of yolk precursors to the oocyte. 
Atretic follicles are common.

DOI: 10.1016/S0940-9602(99)80003-X
PMID: 10332520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]