---
reference_id: "PMID:24143172"
title: "Recombinant AAV-mediated BEST1 transfer to the retinal pigment epithelium: analysis of serotype-dependent retinal effects."
authors:
- Guziewicz KE
- Zangerl B
- Komáromy AM
- Iwabe S
- Chiodo VA
- Boye SL
- Hauswirth WW
- Beltran WA
- Aguirre GD
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075666
keywords:
- Animals
- Bestrophins
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- "DNA, Recombinant/genetics"
- Dependovirus/genetics
- Dogs
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Genetic Vectors/genetics
- Humans
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/metabolism
- Safety
- Serotyping
- Species Specificity
- "Transduction, Genetic/methods"
- Transgenes/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recombinant AAV-mediated BEST1 transfer to the retinal pigment epithelium: analysis of serotype-dependent retinal effects.
**Authors:** Guziewicz KE, Zangerl B, Komáromy AM, Iwabe S, Chiodo VA, Boye SL, Hauswirth WW, Beltran WA, Aguirre GD
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0075666](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0075666)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 15;8(10):e75666. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075666.
eCollection 2013.

Recombinant AAV-mediated BEST1 transfer to the retinal pigment epithelium:
analysis of serotype-dependent retinal effects.

Guziewicz KE(1), Zangerl B, Komáromy AM, Iwabe S, Chiodo VA, Boye SL, Hauswirth
WW, Beltran WA, Aguirre GD.

Author information:
(1)Section of Ophthalmology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Mutations in the BEST1 gene constitute an underlying cause of juvenile macular
dystrophies, a group of retinal disorders commonly referred to as
bestrophinopathies and usually diagnosed in early childhood or adolescence. The
disease primarily affects macular and paramacular regions of the eye leading to
major declines in central vision later in life. Currently, there is no cure or
surgical management for BEST1-associated disorders. The recently characterized
human disease counterpart, canine multifocal retinopathy (cmr), recapitulates a
full spectrum of clinical and molecular features observed in human
bestrophinopathies and offers a valuable model system for development and
testing of therapeutic strategies. In this study, the specificity, efficiency
and safety of rAAV-mediated transgene expression driven by the human VMD2
promoter were assessed in wild-type canine retinae. While the subretinal
delivery of rAAV2/1 vector serotype was associated with cone damage in the
retina when BEST1 and GFP were co-expressed, the rAAV2/2 vector serotype
carrying either GFP reporter or BEST1 transgene under control of human VMD2
promoter was safe, and enabled specific transduction of the RPE cell monolayer
that was stable for up to 6 months post injection. These encouraging studies
with the rAAV2/2 vector lay the groundwork for development of gene augmentation
therapy for human bestrophinopathies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075666
PMCID: PMC3797066
PMID: 24143172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the
journal's policy and have the following conflict: W.W.H. and the University of
Florida have a financial interest in the use of adeno-associated virus therapies
and has equity in a company (AGTC Inc.) that might, in the future, commercialize
some aspects of this work. This conflict does not alter their adherence to all
the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. All remaining authors
declare no conflict of interest.
