---
reference_id: "PMID:26333654"
title: "New patients with Temple syndrome caused by 14q32 deletion: Genotype-phenotype correlations and risk of thyroid cancer."
authors:
- Severi G
- Bernardini L
- Briuglia S
- Bigoni S
- Buldrini B
- Magini P
- Dentici ML
- Cordelli DM
- Arrigo T
- Franzoni E
- Fini S
- Italyankina E
- Loddo I
- Novelli A
- Graziano C
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37346
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New patients with Temple syndrome caused by 14q32 deletion: Genotype-phenotype correlations and risk of thyroid cancer.
**Authors:** Severi G, Bernardini L, Briuglia S, Bigoni S, Buldrini B, Magini P, Dentici ML, Cordelli DM, Arrigo T, Franzoni E, Fini S, Italyankina E, Loddo I, Novelli A, Graziano C
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37346](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37346)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Jan;170A(1):162-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37346. Epub 2015
 Sep 3.

New patients with Temple syndrome caused by 14q32 deletion: Genotype-phenotype 
correlations and risk of thyroid cancer.

Severi G(1), Bernardini L(2), Briuglia S(3), Bigoni S(4), Buldrini B(4), Magini 
P(1), Dentici ML(5), Cordelli DM(6), Arrigo T(3), Franzoni E(6), Fini S(4), 
Italyankina E(4), Loddo I(3), Novelli A(5), Graziano C(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.
(2)IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(4)Medical Genetics Unit, Ferrara University Hospital, Ferrara, Italy.
(5)Medical Genetics Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(6)Child Neurology Unit, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Temple syndrome (TS) is caused by abnormal expression of genes at the imprinted 
locus 14q32. A subset of TS patients carry 14q32 deletions of paternal origin. 
We aimed to define possible genotype-phenotype correlations and to highlight the 
prevalence of thyroid dysfunction, which is a previously unreported feature of 
TS. We described four new patients who carry deletions of paternal origin at 
14q32 detected by array-CGH and reviewed nine patients reported in the medical 
literature. We compared clinical features with respect to deletion size and 
position. Expression of DLK1 is altered in all the patients with TS, but 
intellectual disability (ID) is present only in patients with larger deletions 
extending proximally to the imprinted locus. This study led to the 
identification of an ID "critical region" containing four annotated genes 
including YY1 as the strongest candidate. Furthermore, we described three 
patients with thyroid dysfunction, which progressed to papillary carcinoma at a 
very young age in two of them. We conclude that DLK1 loss of function is likely 
to be responsible for the core features of TS, while haploinsufficiency of a 
gene outside the imprinted region causes ID. Thyroid cancer may be an 
unrecognized feature and monitoring for thyroid dysfunction should thus be 
considered in TS patients.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37346
PMID: 26333654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]