---
reference_id: "PMID:37961651"
title: Inferring the proportion of undetected cholera infections from serological and clinical surveillance in an immunologically naive population.
authors:
- Finger F
- Lemaitre J
- Juin S
- Jackson B
- Funk S
- Lessler J
- Mintz E
- Dely P
- Boncy J
- Azman AS
journal: medRxiv
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1101/2023.11.01.23297461
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inferring the proportion of undetected cholera infections from serological and clinical surveillance in an immunologically naive population.
**Authors:** Finger F, Lemaitre J, Juin S, Jackson B, Funk S, Lessler J, Mintz E, Dely P, Boncy J, Azman AS
**Journal:** medRxiv (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2023.11.01.23297461](https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.11.01.23297461)

## Content

1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Nov 1:2023.11.01.23297461. doi: 
10.1101/2023.11.01.23297461.

Inferring the proportion of undetected cholera infections from serological and 
clinical surveillance in an immunologically naive population.

Finger F(1)(2), Lemaitre J(3), Juin S(4), Jackson B(5), Funk S(1), Lessler 
J(3)(6)(7), Mintz E(5), Dely P(8), Boncy J(8), Azman AS(7)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Centre for the Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases, London School 
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(2)Epicentre, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Center for Global Health, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, 
USA.
(6)Carolina Population Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(7)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(8)Ministère de la Santé Publique et de la Population, Port au Prince, Haiti.
(9)Division of Tropical and Humanitarian Medicine, Geneva University Hospitals, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
(10)Center for Emerging Viral Diseases, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, 
Switzerland.

Update in
    Epidemiol Infect. 2024 Dec 02;152:e149. doi: 10.1017/S0950268824000888.

Most infections with pandemic Vibrio cholerae are thought to result in 
subclinical disease and are not captured by surveillance. Previous estimates of 
the ratio of infections to clinical cases have varied widely (2 to 100). 
Understanding cholera epidemiology and immunity relies on the ability to 
translate between numbers of clinical cases and the underlying number of 
infections in the population. We estimated the infection incidence during the 
first months of an outbreak in a cholera-naive population using a Bayesian 
vibriocidal antibody titer decay model combining measurements from a 
representative serosurvey and clinical surveillance data. 3,880 suspected cases 
were reported in Grande Saline, Haiti, between 20 October 2010 and 6 April 2011 
(clinical attack rate 18.4%). We found that more than 52.6% (95% Credible 
Interval (CrI) 49.4-55.7) of the population ≥2 years showed serologic evidence 
of infection, with a lower infection rate among children aged 2-4 years (35.5%; 
95%CrI 24.2-51.6) compared with people ≥5 years (53.1%; 95%CrI 49.4-56.4). This 
estimated infection rate, nearly three times the clinical attack rate, with 
underdetection mainly seen in those ≥5 years, has likely impacted subsequent 
outbreak dynamics. Our findings show how seroincidence estimates improve 
understanding of links between cholera burden, transmission dynamics and 
immunity.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.11.01.23297461
PMCID: PMC10635253
PMID: 37961651

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.