---
reference_id: "PMID:29199951"
title: Dephosphorylation of the NPR2 guanylyl cyclase contributes to inhibition of bone growth by fibroblast growth factor.
authors:
- Shuhaibar LC
- Robinson JW
- Vigone G
- Shuhaibar NP
- Egbert JR
- Baena V
- Uliasz TF
- Kaback D
- Yee SP
- Feil R
- Fisher MC
- Dealy CN
- Potter LR
- Jaffe LA
journal: Elife
year: '2017'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.31343
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Development
- Cyclic GMP/metabolism
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/metabolism
- Mice
- Phosphorylation
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- "Receptors, Atrial Natriuretic Factor/metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Atrial Natriuretic Factor Receptor B
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dephosphorylation of the NPR2 guanylyl cyclase contributes to inhibition of bone growth by fibroblast growth factor.
**Authors:** Shuhaibar LC, Robinson JW, Vigone G, Shuhaibar NP, Egbert JR, Baena V, Uliasz TF, Kaback D, Yee SP, Feil R, Fisher MC, Dealy CN, Potter LR, Jaffe LA
**Journal:** Elife (2017)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.31343](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.31343)

## Content

1. Elife. 2017 Dec 4;6:e31343. doi: 10.7554/eLife.31343.

Dephosphorylation of the NPR2 guanylyl cyclase contributes to inhibition of bone 
growth by fibroblast growth factor.

Shuhaibar LC(1), Robinson JW(#)(2), Vigone G(#)(1), Shuhaibar NP(1), Egbert 
JR(1), Baena V(1), Uliasz TF(1), Kaback D(1), Yee SP(1), Feil R(3), Fisher 
MC(4), Dealy CN(4), Potter LR(2), Jaffe LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Connecticut Health Center, 
Farmington, United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, United States.
(3)Interfakultäres Institut für Biochemie, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(4)Center for Regenerative Medicine and Skeletal Development, University of 
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Activating mutations in fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor 3 and 
inactivating mutations in the NPR2 guanylyl cyclase both cause severe short 
stature, but how these two signaling systems interact to regulate bone growth is 
poorly understood. Here, we show that bone elongation is increased when NPR2 
cannot be dephosphorylated and thus produces more cyclic GMP. By developing an 
in vivo imaging system to measure cyclic GMP production in intact tibia, we show 
that FGF-induced dephosphorylation of NPR2 decreases its guanylyl cyclase 
activity in growth plate chondrocytes in living bone. The dephosphorylation 
requires a PPP-family phosphatase. Thus FGF signaling lowers cyclic GMP 
production in the growth plate, which counteracts bone elongation. These results 
define a new component of the signaling network by which activating mutations in 
the FGF receptor inhibit bone growth.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.31343
PMCID: PMC5745078
PMID: 29199951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests declared.