---
reference_id: "PMID:40918094"
title: Integrative scRNA-seq and transcriptomic analysis initially reveals monocyte/macrophage activation drives EV-A71-induced immune dysregulation and neural injury in severe HFMD.
authors:
- Wang M
- Zhang M
- Deng H
- Zhang Y
- Liu C
- Chen Y
- Zhang C
- Zhang W
- Jia X
- Dang S
- Li Y
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1620633
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/immunology, virology, genetics"
- "Enterovirus A, Human/immunology"
- "Monocytes/immunology, metabolism, virology"
- "Macrophages/immunology, virology, metabolism"
- "Macrophage Activation/immunology, genetics"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Single-Cell Analysis
- Transcriptome
- RNA-Seq
- "Neurons/immunology, virology"
- Single-Cell Gene Expression Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrative scRNA-seq and transcriptomic analysis initially reveals monocyte/macrophage activation drives EV-A71-induced immune dysregulation and neural injury in severe HFMD.
**Authors:** Wang M, Zhang M, Deng H, Zhang Y, Liu C, Chen Y, Zhang C, Zhang W, Jia X, Dang S, Li Y
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2025.1620633](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2025.1620633)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2025 Aug 21;16:1620633. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1620633. 
eCollection 2025.

Integrative scRNA-seq and transcriptomic analysis initially reveals 
monocyte/macrophage activation drives EV-A71-induced immune dysregulation and 
neural injury in severe HFMD.

Wang M(#)(1), Zhang M(#)(1), Deng H(2), Zhang Y(2), Liu C(1), Chen Y(2), Zhang 
C(1), Zhang W(3), Jia X(1), Dang S(1), Li Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Xi'an Jiaotong University Second 
Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Xi 'an Children's Hospital, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University Second 
Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an, China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Enterovirus 71 (EV-A71) is a major pathogen of severe hand, foot and 
mouth disease (HFMD) in children, but the mechanism by which it develops into 
severe HFMD remains unclear, especially the role of macrophage-mediated immune 
dysregulation.
METHODS: Bioinformatics tools were utilized to analyze the transcriptome 
sequencing results of peripheral blood monocytes (PBMCs) infected with different 
titers of EV-A71 at various time points. Single-cell sequencing technology was 
used to sequence obtained PBMCs from a severe HFMD patient due to EV-A71 and a 
healthy control. Macrophages infected with EV-A71 were collected for 
transcriptomic analysis, and were indirectly co-cultured with nerve cells to 
observe their inhibitory effects on nerve cells.
RESULTS: Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) revealed that EV-A71 infected 
severe HFMD patient had higher monocyte and macrophage ratio (18.50% vs. 8.85%), 
especially classical (64.59% vs. 57.24%) and non-classical (32.23% vs. 23.90%) 
monocytes, and a lower pDC (1.19% vs. 12.01%) and monoDC (1.98% vs. 6.80%) in 
EV-A71 infected severe HFMD patient. Dynamic analysis of PBMCs infected with 
EV-A71 isolates (mild, moderate and severe) and cell trajectory analysis 
indicated during infection, monocyte/macrophages were initially activated, 
followed by three groups of T cells and NK and B cells, M1 macrophage. High 
concentration of EV-A71 infected macrophage supernatant inhibited SH-SY5Y cell 
proliferation. ENSG00000285779, TICAM2, RPL13AP26 and HNF4G are significantly 
different in EV-A71 or inactivated EV-A71 infected macrophages than in control. 
ENSG00000264324, ENSG00000260643, ISLR2, CCR7, TENM4, INO80B-WBP1, 
BLOC1S5-TXNDC5 are potential genes about direct virus damage or viral RNA 
recognition in macrophages. GO annotation and KEGG analysis indicate that EV-A71 
infection cause the changes of neural receptor-ligand binding pathway, 
activation of specific immunity, calcium signaling pathway, and cell 
aggregation.
CONCLUSIONS: Macrophages are activated early during EV-A71 infection, thus 
initiating specific immunity, which is closely related to the severe HFMD. The 
nerve damage pathway and calcium signaling pathway caused by EV-A71 virus 
infection of macrophages deserve to more attention.

Copyright © 2025 Wang, Zhang, Deng, Zhang, Liu, Chen, Zhang, Zhang, Jia, Dang 
and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1620633
PMCID: PMC12408647
PMID: 40918094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.