---
reference_id: "PMID:27169608"
title: "Clinical Scenarios in Chronic Kidney Disease: Chronic Tubulointerstitial Diseases."
authors:
- Meola M
- Samoni S
- Petrucci I
journal: Contrib Nephrol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000445473
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Scenarios in Chronic Kidney Disease: Chronic Tubulointerstitial Diseases.
**Authors:** Meola M, Samoni S, Petrucci I
**Journal:** Contrib Nephrol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000445473](https://doi.org/10.1159/000445473)

## Content

1. Contrib Nephrol. 2016;188:108-19. doi: 10.1159/000445473. Epub 2016 May 12.

Clinical Scenarios in Chronic Kidney Disease: Chronic Tubulointerstitial 
Diseases.

Meola M, Samoni S, Petrucci I.

Chronic tubulointerstitial diseases are a common final pathway toward chronic 
renal failure regardless the primary damage (glomerular, vascular or directly 
the tubulointerstitium). Chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis (CTN) is 
characterized by interstitial scarring, fibrosis and tubule atrophy, resulting 
in progressive chronic kidney disease. Most frequent causes of CTN are drugs, 
heavy metals, obstructive uropathy, nephrolithiasis, reflux disease, immunologic 
diseases, neoplasia, ischemia, metabolic diseases, genetics and miscellaneous. 
At ultrasound (US), kidneys' morphological aspect is similar in all forms of 
chronic interstitial nephropathy and only chronic pyelonephritis with or without 
reflux shows distinguishing characteristics. In interstitial nephropathy, 
kidneys' profiles are finely irregular and corticomedullary differentiation is 
altered because of a diffused hyperechogenicity. The only indirect sign of 
chronic interstitial damage can be derived from the value of intrarenal 
resistive indexes that hardly overcome 0.75. US is mandatory in clinical chronic 
pyelonephritis work-up because it provides information on kidney's diameter and 
on growth nomogram in children. Renal profiles can be more or less altered 
depending on the number of cortical scars and the presence of pseudonodular 
areas of segmental compensatory hypertrophy. In the early stages, US diagnosis 
of renal tuberculosis is difficult because parenchymal lesions are non-specific. 
US sensitivity in the diagnosis of hydronephrosis is very high, close to 100% 
and, finally, US is the first choice imaging technique in the diagnosis of 
urinary lithiasis.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000445473
PMID: 27169608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]