---
reference_id: "PMID:24944248"
title: Biphasic changes in fetal heart rate variability in preterm fetal sheep developing hypotension after acute on chronic lipopolysaccharide exposure.
authors:
- Lear CA
- Davidson JO
- Booth LC
- Wassink G
- Galinsky R
- Drury PP
- Fraser M
- Bennet L
- Gunn AJ
journal: Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00110.2014
keywords:
- Animals
- Arterial Pressure
- Biomarkers/blood
- Blood Gas Analysis
- Blood Glucose/metabolism
- "Bradycardia/chemically induced, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Circadian Rhythm
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electrocardiography
- Electroencephalography
- Electromyography
- Female
- Fetal Blood/metabolism
- Fetal Heart/physiopathology
- Fetal Monitoring/methods
- Gestational Age
- "Heart Rate, Fetal"
- Hydrogen-Ion Concentration
- "Hypotension/chemically induced, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Lactic Acid/blood
- Lipopolysaccharides
- Pregnancy
- "Sepsis/chemically induced, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Sheep
- "Tachycardia/chemically induced, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biphasic changes in fetal heart rate variability in preterm fetal sheep developing hypotension after acute on chronic lipopolysaccharide exposure.
**Authors:** Lear CA, Davidson JO, Booth LC, Wassink G, Galinsky R, Drury PP, Fraser M, Bennet L, Gunn AJ
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpregu.00110.2014](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00110.2014)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2014 Aug 15;307(4):R387-95. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00110.2014. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Biphasic changes in fetal heart rate variability in preterm fetal sheep
developing hypotension after acute on chronic lipopolysaccharide exposure.

Lear CA(1), Davidson JO(1), Booth LC(1), Wassink G(1), Galinsky R(1), Drury
PP(1), Fraser M(2), Bennet L(1), Gunn AJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, and.
(2)Department of Physiology, and The Liggins Institute, University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)Department of Physiology, and aj.gunn@auckland.ac.nz.

Perinatal exposure to infection is highly associated with adverse outcomes.
Experimentally, acute, severe exposure to gram-negative bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is associated with increased fetal heart rate
variability (FHRV). It is unknown whether FHRV is affected by subclinical
infection with or without acute exacerbations. We therefore tested the
hypothesis that FHRV would be associated with hypotension after acute on chronic
exposure to LPS. Chronically instrumented fetal sheep at 0.7 gestation were
exposed to a continuous low-dose LPS infusion (n = 12, 100 ng/kg over 24 h,
followed by 250 ng·kg(-1)·24 h(-1) for a further 96 h) or the same volume of
saline (n = 10). Boluses of either 1 μg LPS or saline were given at 48, 72, and
96 h. Low-dose infusion was not associated with hemodynamic or FHRV changes. The
first LPS bolus was associated with tachycardia and suppression of nuchal
electromyographic activity in all fetuses. Seven of twelve fetuses developed
hypotension (a fall in mean arterial blood pressure ≥5 mmHg). FHRV was
transiently increased only at the onset of hypotension, in association with
increased cytokine induction and electroencephalogram suppression. FHRV then
fell before the nadir of hypotension, with transient suppression of short-term
FHRV. After the second LPS bolus, the hypotension group showed a biphasic
pattern of a transient increase in FHRV followed by more prolonged suppression.
These findings suggest that infection-related hypotension in the preterm fetus
mediates the transient increase in FHRV and that repeated exposure to LPS leads
to progressive loss of FHRV.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.00110.2014
PMID: 24944248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
