---
reference_id: "PMID:20301461"
title: MECP2 Duplication Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Van Esch H
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MECP2 Duplication Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Van Esch H

## Content

1. MECP2 Duplication Syndrome.

Van Esch H(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2008 Jan 18 [updated 2020 May 21].

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: MECP2 duplication syndrome is a severe 
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by early-onset hypotonia, feeding 
difficulty, gastrointestinal manifestations including gastroesophageal reflux 
and constipation, delayed psychomotor development leading to severe intellectual 
disability, poor speech development, progressive spasticity, recurrent 
respiratory infections (in ~75% of affected individuals), and seizures (in 
~50%). MECP2 duplication syndrome is 100% penetrant in males. Occasionally 
females have been described with a MECP2 duplication and a range of findings 
from mild intellectual disability to a phenotype similar to that seen in males. 
In addition to the core features, autistic behaviors, nonspecific 
neuroradiologic findings on brain MRI, mottled skin, and urogenital anomalies 
have been observed in several affected boys.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of MECP2 duplication syndrome is established in 
an individual by identification of a heterozygous whole-gene duplication of 
MECP2 on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Routine management of feeding 
difficulties, constipation, developmental and speech delays, spasticity, and 
seizures. Physical therapy to maintain range of motion to reduce likelihood of 
contractures. Prompt antibiotic treatment for respiratory infections; all 
vaccines should be given; consider gastrostomy tube if aspiration is present. 
Social work and care coordination as indicated. Surveillance: Routine monitoring 
for growth, feeding issues, constipation, reflux, loss of speech, progressive 
spasticity, seizure disorder and response to anti-seizure medication, 
infections, and autistic-like features.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MECP2 duplication syndrome is inherited in an X-linked 
manner. The majority of affected males have inherited the MECP2 duplication from 
a heterozygous mother; however, de novo genetic alterations have been reported. 
If the mother of the proband has a MECP2 duplication, the chance of transmitting 
it in each pregnancy is 50%. Males who inherit the MECP2 duplication will be 
affected; females who inherit the MECP2 duplication are typically asymptomatic 
but may exhibit clinical manifestations ranging from mild nonspecific 
intellectual disability to a severe phenotype similar to that observed in males. 
If the mother of the proband has a balanced structural chromosome rearrangement 
involving the Xq28 region, the risk to sibs depends on the specific chromosome 
rearrangement. Once the MECP2 duplication has been identified in an affected 
family member (and/or the mother of the proband is found to be a carrier of a 
balanced translocation), prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301461