---
reference_id: "PMID:41188353"
title: Cadmium exposure during adolescence and young adulthood induces signatures of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease.
authors:
- Dameris L
- Hartsell J
- Chappel J
- Liu X
- Cowley M
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-22462-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cadmium exposure during adolescence and young adulthood induces signatures of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease.
**Authors:** Dameris L, Hartsell J, Chappel J, Liu X, Cowley M
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-025-22462-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-22462-9)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2025 Nov 4;15(1):38589. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-22462-9.

Cadmium exposure during adolescence and young adulthood induces signatures of 
metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease.

Dameris L(1)(2), Hartsell J(3), Chappel J(1)(4), Liu X(3), Cowley M(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC, 27695, USA.
(2)Toxicology Program, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 27695, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh, NC, 27695, USA.
(4)Bioinformatics Research Center, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 
27606, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC, 27695, USA. macowley@ncsu.edu.
(6)Toxicology Program, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 27695, USA. 
macowley@ncsu.edu.
(7)Center for Human Health and the Environment, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, NC, 27695, USA. macowley@ncsu.edu.

Due to its pervasiveness in the environment, its long biological half-life in 
tissues, and its association with adverse health effects in nearly all organ 
systems, the heavy metal cadmium (Cd) has been designated a top ten chemical of 
major public health concern by the World Health Organization. We have 
demonstrated that exposure to Cd during perinatal development programs metabolic 
dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD), the most prevalent 
chronic liver disease in the world. Adolescence presents another critical window 
of susceptibility to environmental stressors; however, the impacts of Cd 
exposure during this period on the health of the liver are not known. To help 
bridge this knowledge gap, we exposed juvenile C57BL/6 J mice to Cd via their 
drinking water for 14 weeks. We performed histological, biochemical, and 
molecular analyses on liver tissue to determine if exposure to Cd during 
adolescence and young adulthood also induces MASLD. We found that Cd exposure 
altered hepatic lipid homeostasis via the perturbation of steatosis gene 
expression and lipid species abundances. Additionally, Cd exposure triggered a 
hepatic antioxidant response and activated an imprinted gene network (IGN) which 
we have previously implicated in MASLD. Our results show that adolescence, 
albeit to a lesser degree than the perinatal period, is a critical window of 
susceptibility to Cd-induced changes in hepatic metabolic homeostasis.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-22462-9
PMCID: PMC12586551
PMID: 41188353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.