---
reference_id: "PMID:39931731"
title: The role of SPINK5 mutation distribution in phenotypes of Netherton syndrome.
authors:
- Xu M
- Shi Y
- Lin L
- Wang L
- Zhu X
- Xiong J
- Yin J
- Qi Q
- Yang W
journal: Front Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2025.1475054
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of SPINK5 mutation distribution in phenotypes of Netherton syndrome.
**Authors:** Xu M, Shi Y, Lin L, Wang L, Zhu X, Xiong J, Yin J, Qi Q, Yang W
**Journal:** Front Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2025.1475054](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2025.1475054)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2025 Jan 27;16:1475054. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2025.1475054. 
eCollection 2025.

The role of SPINK5 mutation distribution in phenotypes of Netherton syndrome.

Xu M(1), Shi Y(1), Lin L(1), Wang L(2), Zhu X(1), Xiong J(1), Yin J(1), Qi Q(1), 
Yang W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: Netherton syndrome (NS) is a rare hereditary dermatosis, and the 
correlation between genotype and phenotype in this disease warrants further 
investigation. This study aimed to explore the genotype-phenotype correlation in 
NS.
METHODS: We collect cases from our clinic and relevant literature. After 
rigorous screening, we included 162 patients with NS-associated symptoms and 
SPINK5 mutations. We characterized the distribution and mutation types of allele 
variants. Logistic regression was employed to analyze the correlation between 
the location of these variants and phenotypes. Additionally, the association 
between the homozygous condition of variants and death during infancy was 
analyzed using the Chi-square test.
RESULTS: Among 162 patients, we identified 324 allele variants, comprising 75 
different mutations. Of these, 73 patients carried heterozygous variants, while 
89 patients had homozygous variants. We observed that patients with variants or 
homozygous variants located in the 5' half of the gene were more likely to 
experience failure to thrive (P < 0.05). Similarly, variants or homozygous 
variants located outside DomainR-5 were also associated with an increased risk 
of failure to thrive (P < 0.05). Furthermore, variants in domain regions were 
significantly correlated with the presence of ichthyosis linearis circumflexa (P 
< 0.01). Patients with homozygous fatal variants (c.153delT, c.1431-12G>A, 
c.1111C>T, c. 1887 + 1G>A, and c. 995delT) had a higher likelihood of mortality 
during infancy (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Our study provides valuable insights into the genotype-phenotype 
correlation in Netherton syndrome, enhancing our understanding of the disease 
and potentially informing the development of future therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2025 Xu, Shi, Lin, Wang, Zhu, Xiong, Yin, Qi and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2025.1475054
PMCID: PMC11808037
PMID: 39931731

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.