---
reference_id: "PMID:40100572"
title: "Hypertension and Cushing's syndrome: hunt for the red flag."
authors:
- Martino M C D
- Canu L
- Bonaventura I
- Vitiello C
- Sparano C
- Cozzolino A
journal: J Endocrinol Invest
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s40618-024-02453-9
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cushing Syndrome/epidemiology, diagnosis, complications"
- "Hypertension/epidemiology, etiology, diagnosis"
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertension and Cushing's syndrome: hunt for the red flag.
**Authors:** Martino M C D, Canu L, Bonaventura I, Vitiello C, Sparano C, Cozzolino A
**Journal:** J Endocrinol Invest (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40618-024-02453-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40618-024-02453-9)

## Content

1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2025 Aug;48(8):1909-1918. doi:
10.1007/s40618-024-02453-9.  Epub 2025 Mar 18.

Hypertension and Cushing's syndrome: hunt for the red flag.

Martino M C D(#)(1), Canu L(#)(2), Bonaventura I(3), Vitiello C(1), Sparano 
C(2), Cozzolino A(4).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di 
Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of 
Florence, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale 
Regina Elena 324, Rome, 00161, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale 
Regina Elena 324, Rome, 00161, Italy. alessia.cozzolino@hotmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: The prevalence of secondary hypertension is reported to be 5-15% 
of people with hypertension. Causes of secondary hypertension include Cushing's 
syndrome (CS), a rare but serious clinical condition characterized by chronic 
endogenous hypercortisolism associated with increased morbidity and mortality, 
especially for cardiovascular complications. The challenge for the clinician is 
thus to identify the phenotype of hypertensive patients who should be screened 
for endogenous hypercortisolism.
METHODS: This study was performed according to the PRISMA statement. The search 
was last updated in June 2023, and only English language studies were 
considered. Titles and abstracts have been screened for articles selection, 
identifying only those that dealt with prevalence of Cushing's syndrome in 
hypertensive patients. Finally, eight papers were included in the review. Data 
regarding year of publication, populations' characteristics, inclusion criteria, 
screening test and cut-off used, and CS prevalence have been extracted.
RESULTS: The study search identified eight studies, from 1977 to 2020, including 
a total number of 11,504 patients, ranging from 80 to 4429 patients for each 
study. The prevalence of CS reported was variable among the studies, ranging 
from 0 to 7.7%, having Cushing's disease (CD) a prevalence range of 0-1.2%. The 
highest prevalence has been found in selected populations of hypertensive 
patients younger than 40 years (6.2%) or harbouring an adrenal lesion (7.7%). 
The most used screening test was 1 mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test 
(1 mg DST), with different cut-off.
CONCLUSION: The most fitting CS profile encompasses younger age (i.e., < 40 
years old), rapidly evolving hypertension and the presence of adrenal adenomas, 
along with subjects with pituitary lesions, who should still be prioritized in 
the diagnostic pathway. Overall, in the case of hypertensive patients presenting 
a clinical picture highly suggestive of CS, it is advisable to perform one of 
the available screening tests (UFC, 1 mg DST, LNSC). LNSC is likely the most 
discriminatory test and may be preferred, depending on its availability. 
Conversely, for hypertensive patients with an adrenal incidentaloma, the 1 mg 
DST is recommended as the screening test to exclude CS.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40618-024-02453-9
PMCID: PMC12313784
PMID: 40100572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval: No approval 
needed. Research involving human participants and/or animals: No patient/animal 
was involved in the present research. Consent to participate: Not applicable. 
Consent for publication: All Authors give consent for publication. Conflict of 
interest: The authors have no conflicts of interest relevant to this article to 
disclose.