---
reference_id: "PMID:34611695"
title: A Simplified Protocol for Microsatellite Instability Evaluation in Iranian Patients at Risk for Lynch Syndrome.
authors:
- Abdollahi Z
- Tabatabaiefar MA
- Noruzi M
- Miar P
- Kazemi M
- Naimi A
- Emami MH
- Zeinalian M
journal: Lab Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/labmed/lmab064
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Simplified Protocol for Microsatellite Instability Evaluation in Iranian Patients at Risk for Lynch Syndrome.
**Authors:** Abdollahi Z, Tabatabaiefar MA, Noruzi M, Miar P, Kazemi M, Naimi A, Emami MH, Zeinalian M
**Journal:** Lab Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/labmed/lmab064](https://doi.org/10.1093/labmed/lmab064)

## Content

1. Lab Med. 2022 May 5;53(3):235-241. doi: 10.1093/labmed/lmab064.

A Simplified Protocol for Microsatellite Instability Evaluation in Iranian 
Patients at Risk for Lynch Syndrome.

Abdollahi Z(1), Tabatabaiefar MA(1)(2), Noruzi M(3), Miar P(1), Kazemi M(1), 
Naimi A(4), Emami MH(5), Zeinalian M(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Isfahan 
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(2)Pediatric Inherited Disease Research Center, Research Institute for 
Primordial Prevention of Non-communicable Disease, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Shahid Chamran University, Ahvaz, 
Iran.
(4)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(5)Poursina Hakim Digestive Diseases Research Center, Isfahan, Iran.
(6)Ala Cancer Prevention and Control Center, Isfahan, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: The most important tumor characteristic of Lynch syndrome (LS) is 
microsatellite instability (MSI). In the current study, BAT34c4 and BAT26 
mononucleotide markers were evaluated as part of efforts to test a 
cost-effective panel for MSI testing in Iranian patients, comparing it with the 
Promega kit.
METHODS: Amsterdam II clinical criteria were used to identify patients at risk 
for LS. The MSI status of these patients was determined using BAT34c4 and BAT26 
markers, as well as the Promega kit. The results of both methods were compared, 
and the sensitivity and specificity of new short tandem repeat (STR) markers 
were estimated using statistical formulas.
RESULTS: Of the 37 patients we studied who were at risk for LS, 27% showed 
MSI-high results, via the Promega kit. The same results were achieved for 
BAT34c4 and BAT26 separately.
CONCLUSIONS: The novel 2-marker kit for MSI testing has similar accuracy as the 
Promega kit at a lower cost, due to fewer markers and a more economical labeling 
method.

© American Society for Clinical Pathology, 2021. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/labmed/lmab064
PMID: 34611695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]