---
reference_id: "PMID:24073921"
title: "Bacterial meningitis: new therapeutic approaches."
authors:
- Nau R
- Djukic M
- Spreer A
- Eiffert H
journal: Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1586/14787210.2013.839381
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial meningitis: new therapeutic approaches.
**Authors:** Nau R, Djukic M, Spreer A, Eiffert H
**Journal:** Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1586/14787210.2013.839381](https://doi.org/10.1586/14787210.2013.839381)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2013 Oct;11(10):1079-95. doi: 
10.1586/14787210.2013.839381. Epub 2013 Sep 27.

Bacterial meningitis: new therapeutic approaches.

Nau R(1), Djukic M, Spreer A, Eiffert H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Evangelisches Krankenhaus Göttingen-Weende, An der 
Lutter 24, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.

Bacterial meningitis remains a disease with high mortality and long-term 
morbidity. Outcome critically depends on the rapid initiation of effective 
antibiotic therapy. Since a further increase of the incidence of pathogens 
resistant to antibacterials can be expected both in community-acquired and 
nosocomial bacterial meningitis, the choice of an optimum initial empirical 
antibiotic regimen will gain significance. In this context, the use of 
antibiotics which are bactericidal but do not lyse bacteria, may emerge as a 
therapeutic option. Conversely, the role of corticosteroids, which decrease the 
entry of hydrophilic antibacterials into the cerebrospinal fluid, as adjunctive 
therapy will probably decline as a consequence of the increasing antibiotic 
resistance of bacteria causing meningitis. Consequent vaccination of all 
children at present is the most efficient manner to reduce disease burden.

DOI: 10.1586/14787210.2013.839381
PMID: 24073921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]