---
reference_id: "PMID:11474477"
title: "Pycnodysostosis: clinical, radiologic, and endocrine evaluation and linear growth after growth hormone therapy."
authors:
- Soliman AT
- Ramadan MA
- Sherif A
- Aziz Bedair ES
- Rizk MM
journal: Metabolism
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1053/meta.2001.24924
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- "Growth Hormone/physiology, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/physiology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Osteosclerosis/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, pathology"
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pycnodysostosis: clinical, radiologic, and endocrine evaluation and linear growth after growth hormone therapy.
**Authors:** Soliman AT, Ramadan MA, Sherif A, Aziz Bedair ES, Rizk MM
**Journal:** Metabolism (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1053/meta.2001.24924](https://doi.org/10.1053/meta.2001.24924)

## Content

1. Metabolism. 2001 Aug;50(8):905-11. doi: 10.1053/meta.2001.24924.

Pycnodysostosis: clinical, radiologic, and endocrine evaluation and linear 
growth after growth hormone therapy.

Soliman AT(1), Ramadan MA, Sherif A, Aziz Bedair ES, Rizk MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt.

Pycnodysostosis is a rare hereditary bone abnormality with an autosomal 
recessive mode of inheritance. We report the clinical, radiologic, and endocrine 
status of 8 children with this rare disease. All patients had the characteristic 
phenotype of the disorder including short stature (8 of 8), increased bone 
density (7 of 8), separated cranial sutures (8 of 8), large fontanel with 
delayed closure (8 of 8), obtuse mandibular angle (8 of 8), delayed teeth 
eruption (8 of 8), enamel hypoplasia (7 of 8), dysplastic acromial ends of the 
clavicles (6 of 8), frontal bossing (6 of 8), ocular proptosis (8 of 8), and 
dysplastic nails (8 of 8). Developmental evaluation according to the revised 
Denever developmental screening showed normal motor, fine motor-adaptive 
language, and personal social abilities in all the children. All had normal 
hepatic and renal functions. Serum calcium and phosphorus concentrations were 
normal. Two children had low serum alkaline phosphatase concentration. Short 
stature is a characteristic feature of pycnodysostosis. Seven of the 8 children 
were born short (length standard deviation score [SDS] = -3 to -1.5). 
Deceleration of linear growth was significant during the first 3 years of life. 
All the children had height SDS below -3 at the end of their third year of life. 
Although short stature is a feature of this genetic disorder, defective growth 
hormone (GH) secretion in response to provocation with clonidine and glucagon 
was found in 4 of the 8 patients. These 4 patients had pituitary hypoplasia on 
the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of their brain. In addition, 3 of these 4 
patients had demyelination of the cerebrum. Patients with pycnodysostosis (n = 
8) had low circulating concentrations of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) 
compared with normal age-matched short children with constitutional short 
stature (CSS). IGF-I increased significantly after injecting GH for 3 days in 
these patients. Physiologic replacement with GH (18 U/m(2)/week) divided in 
daily evening doses subcutaneously increased IGF-1 concentration and improved 
linear growth velocity and height standard deviation scores (HtSDS) in the 4 
children with GH deficiency. These data ruled out GH resistance and proved the 
usefulness of GH therapy in the management of short stature in these patients. 
In summary, some patients with pycnodysostosis have partial GH deficiency and 
low IGF-1 concentration. GH therapy markedly increases IGF-I secretion and 
improves their linear growth. MRI study of the brain including the 
hypothalamic-pituitary area is recommended in these children because of the high 
incidence of pituitary hypoplasia and cerebral demyelination.

Copyright 2001 by W.B. Saunders Company

DOI: 10.1053/meta.2001.24924
PMID: 11474477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]