---
reference_id: "PMID:17301523"
title: "[Ewing sarcoma]."
authors:
- Hamanoue S
- Makimoto A
journal: Gan To Kagaku Ryoho
year: '2007'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Antineoplastic Protocols
- "Bone Neoplasms/drug therapy, mortality, radiotherapy, surgery"
- Child
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Humans
- Radiotherapy Dosage
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/drug therapy, mortality, radiotherapy, surgery"
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Ewing sarcoma].
**Authors:** Hamanoue S, Makimoto A
**Journal:** Gan To Kagaku Ryoho (2007)

## Content

1. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2007 Feb;34(2):175-80.

[Ewing sarcoma].

[Article in Japanese]

Hamanoue S(1), Makimoto A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatrics, National Cancer Center Hospital.

Ewing sarcoma is the second most frequent primary bone cancer affecting children
or young adults. Advances in molecular biology have revealed common chromosomal
translocations such as EWS-FLI 1 among Ewing sarcoma and related diseases such
as primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET), so these are considered as Ewing
sarcoma family tumor (ESFT). Although fewer than 10% of patients with ESFT
survived before establishment of modern multiagent chemotherapy, the multimodal
therapeutic regimens including combination chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and
surgery can cure 60% of patients with localized disease, due to the
collaborative research in European-American or the international trials. The
standard chemotherapy for localized ESFT now comprises vincristine, actinomycin
D, cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin (VACD) in Europe or vincristine,
doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide and etoposide (VDC-IE) in North
America. Meanwhile, those with metastatic disease have a much worse outcome with
an approximately 10-30% 5-year event-free survival rate. New American-European
collaborative trials such as EURO-E.W.I.N.G.99 are in progress for further
improvement of the cure rate in localized and metastatic ESFT. In Japan, Japan
Ewing Sarcoma Study Group (JESS) phase II clinical trial for localized ESFT, and
some clinical trials including new drugs are ongoing and waiting for results.

PMID: 17301523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
