---
reference_id: "PMID:12699870"
title: "Transient nonketotic hyperglycinemia: two case reports and literature review."
authors:
- Aliefendioğlu D
- Tana Aslan Ay
- Coşkun T
- Dursun A
- Cakmak FN
- Kesimer M
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0887-8994(02)00501-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transient nonketotic hyperglycinemia: two case reports and literature review.
**Authors:** Aliefendioğlu D, Tana Aslan Ay, Coşkun T, Dursun A, Cakmak FN, Kesimer M
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0887-8994(02)00501-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0887-8994(02)00501-5)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2003 Feb;28(2):151-5. doi: 10.1016/s0887-8994(02)00501-5.

Transient nonketotic hyperglycinemia: two case reports and literature review.

Aliefendioğlu D(1), Tana Aslan Ay, Coşkun T, Dursun A, Cakmak FN, Kesimer M.

Author information:
(1)Social Security Children's Hospital, Neonatology Unit, Ankara, Turkey.

Transient nonketotic hyperglycinemia is characterized by clinical and 
biochemical findings similar to those seen in classic nonketotic 
hyperglycinemia. Abnormalities in amino acids are partially or completely 
resolved in a period ranging from days to months. Almost all patients with the 
classic form of nonketotic hyperglycinemia survive with severe neurologic 
sequela, whereas most of the patients with the transient form exhibit normal 
development. Therefore, distinguishing the transient form of nonketotic 
hyperglycinemia from classic nonketotic hyperglycinemia is important to predict 
outcome of the patients. Transient nonketotic hyperglycinemia has been reported 
in only seven neonates. This article adds two cases to the transient nonketotic 
hyperglycinemia and reviews the relevant literature. Common clinical features 
were determined, and presence of miotic pupils was stressed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0887-8994(02)00501-5
PMID: 12699870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]