---
reference_id: "PMID:34860352"
title: "Achromatopsia: Genetics and Gene Therapy."
authors:
- Michalakis S
- Gerhardt M
- Rudolph G
- Priglinger S
- Priglinger C
journal: Mol Diagn Ther
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s40291-021-00565-z
keywords:
- Animals
- "Color Vision Defects/genetics, therapy"
- Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated Cation Channels/genetics
- Genetic Therapy
- Humans
- Mutation
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Achromatopsia: Genetics and Gene Therapy.
**Authors:** Michalakis S, Gerhardt M, Rudolph G, Priglinger S, Priglinger C
**Journal:** Mol Diagn Ther (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40291-021-00565-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40291-021-00565-z)

## Content

1. Mol Diagn Ther. 2022 Jan;26(1):51-59. doi: 10.1007/s40291-021-00565-z. Epub
2021  Dec 3.

Achromatopsia: Genetics and Gene Therapy.

Michalakis S(1), Gerhardt M(2), Rudolph G(2), Priglinger S(2), Priglinger C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital, LMU Munich, Mathildenstr. 
8, 80336, Munich, Germany. michalakis@lmu.de.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital, LMU Munich, Mathildenstr. 
8, 80336, Munich, Germany.

Achromatopsia (ACHM), also known as rod monochromatism or total color blindness, 
is an autosomal recessively inherited retinal disorder that affects the cones of 
the retina, the type of photoreceptors responsible for high-acuity daylight 
vision. ACHM is caused by pathogenic variants in one of six cone 
photoreceptor-expressed genes. These mutations result in a functional loss and a 
slow progressive degeneration of cone photoreceptors. The loss of cone 
photoreceptor function manifests at birth or early in childhood and results in 
decreased visual acuity, lack of color discrimination, abnormal intolerance to 
light (photophobia), and rapid involuntary eye movement (nystagmus). Up to 90% 
of patients with ACHM carry mutations in CNGA3 or CNGB3, which are the genes 
encoding the alpha and beta subunits of the cone cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) 
channel, respectively. No authorized therapy for ACHM exists, but research 
activities have intensified over the past decade and have led to several 
preclinical gene therapy studies that have shown functional and morphological 
improvements in animal models of ACHM. These encouraging preclinical data helped 
advance multiple gene therapy programs for CNGA3- and CNGB3-linked ACHM into the 
clinical phase. Here, we provide an overview of the genetic and molecular basis 
of ACHM, summarize the gene therapy-related research activities, and provide an 
outlook for their clinical application.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40291-021-00565-z
PMCID: PMC8766373
PMID: 34860352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SM is co-founder and shareholder of ViGeneron 
GmbH, a gene therapy company. MG, GR, SP, and CP have no conflicts of interest 
that are directly relevant to the content of this article.