---
reference_id: "PMID:25062452"
title: Exome sequencing reveals SYCE1 mutation associated with autosomal recessive primary ovarian insufficiency.
authors:
- de Vries L
- Behar DM
- Smirin-Yosef P
- Lagovsky I
- Tzur S
- Basel-Vanagaite L
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1268
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- Arabs/genetics
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Consanguinity
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Exome/genetics
- Family Health
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- "Menopause, Premature/genetics"
- Mice
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Oogenesis/genetics
- Pedigree
- Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/genetics
- Puberty/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome sequencing reveals SYCE1 mutation associated with autosomal recessive primary ovarian insufficiency.
**Authors:** de Vries L, Behar DM, Smirin-Yosef P, Lagovsky I, Tzur S, Basel-Vanagaite L
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2014-1268](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2014-1268)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Oct;99(10):E2129-32. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1268. 
Epub 2014 Jul 25.

Exome sequencing reveals SYCE1 mutation associated with autosomal recessive 
primary ovarian insufficiency.

de Vries L(1), Behar DM, Smirin-Yosef P, Lagovsky I, Tzur S, Basel-Vanagaite L.

Author information:
(1)The Jesse Z. and Sara Lea Shafer Institute for Endocrinology and Diabetes 
(L.d.V.), Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, Petach Tikva, Israel; 
Sackler Faculty of Medicine (L.d.V., P.S.-Y., I.L., L.B.-V.), Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel; Molecular Medicine Laboratory (D.M.B., S.T.), 
Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel; Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute 
(D.M.B., L.B.-V.), Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva, Israel; Felsenstein 
Medical Research Center (P.S.-Y., I.L.), Petach Tikva, Israel; and Pediatric 
Genetics (L.B.-V.), Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, Petach Tikva; 
Israel.

CONTEXT: Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is caused by ovarian follicle 
depletion or follicle dysfunction. The phenotypic spectrum ranges from absence 
of pubertal maturation to early menopause. Genes involved in essential steps in 
chromosome synapsis and recombination during meiosis, such as synaptonemal 
complex central element 1 (SYCE1), have been shown to cause POI in animal 
models. We describe for the first time a homozygous mutation in SYCE1 in humans.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the genetic cause of POI in an Israeli Arab family with a 
consanguineous pedigree.
SETTING AND DESIGN: A family-based genetic study conducted at a tertiary medical 
center.
PATIENTS: Two daughters of consanguineous parents (first cousins) from a 
13-member family were diagnosed with POI. Genotyping was performed in the index 
patients, their parents, and four unaffected siblings.
INTERVENTION: DNA from the affected sisters was subjected to whole-exome 
sequencing. The genotypes of interest were confirmed and genotypes of the 
additional family members were determined by Sanger sequencing. Genotyping was 
also performed in 90 ethnically matched control individuals.
RESULTS: A nonsense homozygous mutation (c.613C>T) was identified in the SYCE1 
gene in both affected sisters. The parents and three brothers were heterozygous 
for the mutation, and an unaffected sister did not carry the mutation. The 
mutation was not identified in the DNA samples from the 90 control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Given the known function of the SYCE1 gene, we suggest that the 
nonsense mutation identified accounts for the POI phenotype. These results 
highlight the importance of the synaptonemal complex and meiosis in ovarian 
function.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2014-1268
PMID: 25062452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]