---
reference_id: "PMID:22510145"
title: "Natural history of chronic hepatitis B: what exactly has REVEAL revealed?"
authors:
- Iloeje UH
- Yang HI
- Chen CJ
journal: Liver Int
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2012.02805.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of chronic hepatitis B: what exactly has REVEAL revealed?
**Authors:** Iloeje UH, Yang HI, Chen CJ
**Journal:** Liver Int (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1478-3231.2012.02805.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1478-3231.2012.02805.x)

## Content

1. Liver Int. 2012 Oct;32(9):1333-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2012.02805.x. Epub
 2012 Apr 17.

Natural history of chronic hepatitis B: what exactly has REVEAL revealed?

Iloeje UH(1), Yang HI, Chen CJ.

Author information:
(1)Global Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Bristol-Myers Squibb Co, 
Wallingford, CT, USA.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a serious public health problem 
because of its worldwide prevalence and potential to cause adverse consequences. 
The Risk Evaluation of Viral Load Elevation and Associated Liver 
Disease/Cancer-Hepatitis B Virus (REVEAL-HBV) study carried out in Taiwan was 
used to investigate the natural history of chronic hepatitis B. The REVEAL-HBV 
study has established an HBV viral load paradigm in the natural history of 
chronic hepatitis B (CHB). Serum HBV DNA level has been shown to be 
significantly and independently associated with incidence of hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) and cirrhosis and liver-related mortality across a biological 
gradient. It is also a major predictor of HBsAg seroclearance. Genetic features 
including HBV genotype and basal core promoter A1762T/G1764A mutant, and precore 
G1896A mutant were documented as predictors of HCC risk. Inactive HBV carriers 
still had an increased risk on HCC development and liver-related mortality 
compared with HBsAg -seronegatives. Nomograms focusing on facilitating risk 
communication between patients and clinicians were developed incorporating 
non-invasive clinical parameters to predict long-term HCC risk. These will 
hopefully contribute to evidence-based decisions in the clinical management of 
CHB patients. A somewhat provocative and novel finding from the REVEAL-HBV study 
is the association of chronic HBV infection in active replication with an 
increased pancreatic cancer risk especially in women less than 50 years old. 
This finding will hopefully spur further research in this area seeking 
confirmatory evidence. Finally, we hope that the REVEAL-HBV study will continue 
to be a source of data to answer other important questions in chronic hepatitis 
B research going forward.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2012.02805.x
PMID: 22510145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]