---
reference_id: "PMID:24497979"
title: Identification of STAT5A and STAT5B target genes in human T cells.
authors:
- Kanai T
- Seki S
- Jenks JA
- Kohli A
- Kawli T
- Martin DP
- Snyder M
- Bacchetta R
- Nadeau KC
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086790
keywords:
- "Active Transport, Cell Nucleus"
- Base Sequence
- Binding Sites
- CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/physiology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Consensus Sequence
- Humans
- Protein Multimerization
- STAT5 Transcription Factor/physiology
- Transcriptional Activation
- Transcriptome
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of STAT5A and STAT5B target genes in human T cells.
**Authors:** Kanai T, Seki S, Jenks JA, Kohli A, Kawli T, Martin DP, Snyder M, Bacchetta R, Nadeau KC
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0086790](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0086790)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 30;9(1):e86790. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086790.
eCollection 2014.

Identification of STAT5A and STAT5B target genes in human T cells.

Kanai T(1), Seki S(1), Jenks JA(1), Kohli A(1), Kawli T(2), Martin DP(2), Snyder
M(2), Bacchetta R(3), Nadeau KC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, School of
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, United States of America.
(3)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, School of
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of America ;
San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (HSR-TIGET), San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) comprises a family of
universal transcription factors that help cells sense and respond to
environmental signals. STAT5 refers to two highly related proteins, STAT5A and
STAT5B, with critical function: their complete deficiency is lethal in mice; in
humans, STAT5B deficiency alone leads to endocrine and immunological problems,
while STAT5A deficiency has not been reported. STAT5A and STAT5B show peptide
sequence similarities greater than 90%, but subtle structural differences
suggest possible non-redundant roles in gene regulation. However, these roles
remain unclear in humans. We applied chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
DNA sequencing using human CD4(+) T cells to detect candidate genes regulated by
STAT5A and/or STAT5B, and quantitative-PCR in STAT5A or STAT5B knock-down (KD)
human CD4(+) T cells to validate the findings. Our data show STAT5A and STAT5B
play redundant roles in cell proliferation and apoptosis via SGK1 interaction.
Interestingly, we found a novel, unique role for STAT5A in binding to genes
involved in neural development and function (NDRG1, DNAJC6, and SSH2), while
STAT5B appears to play a distinct role in T cell development and function via
DOCK8, SNX9, FOXP3 and IL2RA binding. Our results also suggest that one or more
co-activators for STAT5A and/or STAT5B may play important roles in establishing
different binding abilities and gene regulation behaviors. The new
identification of these genes regulated by STAT5A and/or STAT5B has major
implications for understanding the pathophysiology of cancer progression, neural
disorders, and immune abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086790
PMCID: PMC3907443
PMID: 24497979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors declare no
conflict of interest.
