---
reference_id: "PMID:37322965"
title: Dynamic modeling and analysis of Hepatitis B epidemic with general incidence.
authors:
- Xue T
- Zhang L
- Fan X
journal: Math Biosci Eng
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3934/mbe.2023483
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dynamic modeling and analysis of Hepatitis B epidemic with general incidence.
**Authors:** Xue T, Zhang L, Fan X
**Journal:** Math Biosci Eng (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3934/mbe.2023483](https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2023483)

## Content

1. Math Biosci Eng. 2023 Apr 20;20(6):10883-10908. doi: 10.3934/mbe.2023483.

Dynamic modeling and analysis of Hepatitis B epidemic with general incidence.

Xue T(1), Zhang L(1), Fan X(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Mathematics and Physics, Xinjiang Institute of Engineering, Urumqi, 
Xinjiang, China.

New stochastic and deterministic Hepatitis B epidemic models with general 
incidence are established to study the dynamics of Hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
epidemic transmission. Optimal control strategies are developed to control the 
spread of HBV in the population. In this regard, we first calculate the basic 
reproduction number and the equilibrium points of the deterministic Hepatitis B 
model. And then the local asymptotic stability at the equilibrium point is 
studied. Secondly, the basic reproduction number of the stochastic Hepatitis B 
model is calculated. Appropriate Lyapunov functions are constructed, and the 
unique global positive solution of the stochastic model is verified by Itô 
formula. By applying a series of stochastic inequalities and strong number 
theorems, the moment exponential stability, the extinction and persistence of 
HBV at the equilibrium point are obtained. Finally, using the optimal control 
theory, the optimal control strategy to eliminate the spread of HBV is 
developed. To reduce Hepatitis B infection rates and to promote vaccination 
rates, three control variables are used, for instance, isolation of patients, 
treatment of patients, and vaccine inoculation. For the purpose of verifying the 
rationality of our main theoretical conclusions, the Runge-Kutta method is 
applied to numerical simulation.

DOI: 10.3934/mbe.2023483
PMID: 37322965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]