---
reference_id: "PMID:30710256"
title: Hypotrichosis with cone-rod dystrophy in a patient with cadherin 3 (CDH3) mutation.
authors:
- Nasser F
- Mulahasanovic L
- Alkhateeb M
- Biskup S
- Stingl K
- Zrenner E
journal: Doc Ophthalmol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s10633-019-09675-w
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Cadherins/genetics
- "Cone-Rod Dystrophies/genetics, physiopathology"
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/congenital, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Macular Degeneration/genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutation
- Retina/physiopathology
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypotrichosis with cone-rod dystrophy in a patient with cadherin 3 (CDH3) mutation.
**Authors:** Nasser F, Mulahasanovic L, Alkhateeb M, Biskup S, Stingl K, Zrenner E
**Journal:** Doc Ophthalmol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10633-019-09675-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10633-019-09675-w)

## Content

1. Doc Ophthalmol. 2019 Apr;138(2):153-160. doi: 10.1007/s10633-019-09675-w. Epub
 2019 Feb 1.

Hypotrichosis with cone-rod dystrophy in a patient with cadherin 3 (CDH3) 
mutation.

Nasser F(1), Mulahasanovic L(2)(3), Alkhateeb M(4), Biskup S(2)(3), Stingl K(5), 
Zrenner E(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Centre for Ophthalmology, University of 
Tuebingen, Elfriede-Aulhorn Strasse 7, 72076, Tübingen, Germany. 
fadi.nasser@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(2)Praxis for Human Genetics, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Eye and Ear Specialty Hospital, Damascus, Syria.
(5)Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Centre for Ophthalmology, University of 
Tuebingen, Elfriede-Aulhorn Strasse 7, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Werner Reichardt Center for Integrative Neuroscience (CIN), University of 
Tuebingen, Tübingen, Germany.

PURPOSE: To investigate a very rare case of hypotrichosis with cone-rod 
dystrophy caused by a P-cadherin CDH3 mutation.
METHODS: A 16-year-old Syrian girl was examined at age 9 and 14 years with an 
ophthalmological examination, fundus imaging, OCT and electrophysiological 
recordings (ERG and PERG). A disease-targeted gene panel sequencing was 
performed.
RESULTS: Fundus images showed pigmentations at the posterior eye pole to the mid 
periphery, as well as vessel tortuosity. OCT images revealed a loss of the outer 
retinal segments and IS/OS in the central macula. The scotopic and photopic ERGs 
showed moderately reduced amplitudes at age 9 years that became severely reduced 
at age of 14 years. The PERG was undetectable at age 9 years. In color vision 
testing, protan-deutan confusion errors occurred. Gene panel analysis revealed 
one homozygous mutation in CDH3 (c.1508G>A; p.Arg503His).
CONCLUSION: This case shows that a CDH3 mutation besides macula dystrophy can 
cause widespread cone-rod dystrophy with hypotrichosis without any other 
pathology besides hypoplastic nails. This points to a common pathway of hair 
growth and photoreceptor development that can be disturbed by a CDH3 mutation 
(c.1508G>A; p.Arg503His) located in the EC4 repeat region of the gene.

DOI: 10.1007/s10633-019-09675-w
PMID: 30710256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]