---
reference_id: "PMID:25182137"
title: "Meckel-Gruber Syndrome: a population-based study on prevalence, prenatal diagnosis, clinical features, and survival in Europe."
authors:
- Barisic I
- Boban L
- Loane M
- Garne E
- Wellesley D
- Calzolari E
- Dolk H
- Addor MC
- Bergman JE
- Braz P
- Draper ES
- Haeusler M
- Khoshnood B
- Klungsoyr K
- Pierini A
- Queisser-Luft A
- Rankin J
- Rissmann A
- Verellen-Dumoulin C
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.174
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meckel-Gruber Syndrome: a population-based study on prevalence, prenatal diagnosis, clinical features, and survival in Europe.
**Authors:** Barisic I, Boban L, Loane M, Garne E, Wellesley D, Calzolari E, Dolk H, Addor MC, Bergman JE, Braz P, Draper ES, Haeusler M, Khoshnood B, Klungsoyr K, Pierini A, Queisser-Luft A, Rankin J, Rissmann A, Verellen-Dumoulin C
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2014.174](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2014.174)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Jun;23(6):746-52. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.174. Epub 2014 
Sep 3.

Meckel-Gruber Syndrome: a population-based study on prevalence, prenatal 
diagnosis, clinical features, and survival in Europe.

Barisic I(1), Boban L(1), Loane M(2), Garne E(3), Wellesley D(4), Calzolari 
E(5), Dolk H(2), Addor MC(6), Bergman JE(7), Braz P(8), Draper ES(9), Haeusler 
M(10), Khoshnood B(11), Klungsoyr K(12), Pierini A(13), Queisser-Luft A(14), 
Rankin J(15), Rissmann A(16), Verellen-Dumoulin C(17).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital Zagreb, University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, 
Croatia.
(2)EUROCAT Central Registry, University of Ulster, Ulster, Northern Ireland.
(3)Pediatric Department, Hospital Lillebaelt, Kolding, Denmark.
(4)Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Anne Hospital, Southampton, UK.
(5)Registro IMER, Unita di Terapia Intensiva Neonatale e Neonatologia, Azienda 
Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(6)Registre vaudois des anomalies congénitales, Service de génétique médicale, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(8)Departamento de Epidemiologia, Instituto Nacional de Saude Doutor Ricardo 
Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal.
(9)Department of Epidemiology Public Health, University of Leicester, Leicester, 
UK.
(10)Styrian Malformation Registry, University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(11)Paris Registry of Congenital Malformations, INSERM U953, Maternite de 
Port-Royal, Paris, France.
(12)Department of Public Global Health and Primary Health Care, Medical Birth 
Registry of Norway, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway.
(13)CNR Institute of Clinical Physiology, Pisa, Italy.
(14)Universitätskinderklinik Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(15)Institute of Health & Society, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK.
(16)Malformation Monitoring Centre Saxony-Anhalt, Otto-von-Guericke University, 
Magdeburg, Germany.
(17)Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Charleroi, Belgium.

Meckel-Gruber Syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive lethal ciliopathy 
characterized by the triad of cystic renal dysplasia, occipital encephalocele 
and postaxial polydactyly. We present the largest population-based 
epidemiological study to date using data provided by the European Surveillance 
of Congenital Anomalies (EUROCAT) network. The study population consisted of 191 
cases of MKS identified between January 1990 and December 2011 in 34 European 
registries. The mean prevalence was 2.6 per 100,000 births in a subset of 
registries with good ascertainment. The prevalence was stable over time, but 
regional differences were observed. There were 145 (75.9%) terminations of 
pregnancy after prenatal diagnosis, 13 (6.8%) fetal deaths, 33 (17.3%) live 
births. In addition to cystic kidneys (97.7%), encephalocele (83.8%) and 
polydactyly (87.3%), frequent features include other central nervous system 
anomalies (51.4%), fibrotic/cystic changes of the liver (65.5% of cases with 
post mortem examination) and orofacial clefts (31.8%). Various other anomalies 
were present in 64 (37%) patients. As nowadays most patients are detected very 
early in pregnancy when liver or kidney changes may not yet be developed or may 
be difficult to assess, none of the anomalies should be considered obligatory 
for the diagnosis. Most cases (90.2%) are diagnosed prenatally at 14.3 ± 2.6 
(range 11-36) gestational weeks and pregnancies are mainly terminated, reducing 
the number of LB to one-fifth of the total prevalence rate. Early diagnosis is 
important for timely counseling of affected couples regarding the option of 
pregnancy termination and prenatal genetic testing in future pregnancies.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.174
PMCID: PMC4795048
PMID: 25182137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]