---
reference_id: "PMID:25187577"
title: Modeling type II collagenopathy skeletal dysplasia by directed conversion and induced pluripotent stem cells.
authors:
- Okada M
- Ikegawa S
- Morioka M
- Yamashita A
- Saito A
- Sawai H
- Murotsuki J
- Ohashi H
- Okamoto T
- Nishimura G
- Imaizumi K
- Tsumaki N
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu444
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling type II collagenopathy skeletal dysplasia by directed conversion and induced pluripotent stem cells.
**Authors:** Okada M, Ikegawa S, Morioka M, Yamashita A, Saito A, Sawai H, Murotsuki J, Ohashi H, Okamoto T, Nishimura G, Imaizumi K, Tsumaki N
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddu444](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddu444)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jan 15;24(2):299-313. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu444. Epub 2014
Sep  3.

Modeling type II collagenopathy skeletal dysplasia by directed conversion and 
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Okada M(1), Ikegawa S(2), Morioka M(1), Yamashita A(1), Saito A(3), Sawai H(4), 
Murotsuki J(5), Ohashi H(6), Okamoto T(7), Nishimura G(8), Imaizumi K(3), 
Tsumaki N(9).

Author information:
(1)Cell Induction and Regulation Field, Department of Cell Growth and 
Differentiation, Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, 
Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Bone and Joint Diseases, Center for Integrated Medicinal 
Sciences, RIKEN, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical & Health Sciences, 
University of Hiroshima, Japan.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hyogo College of Medicine, Japan.
(5)Maternal and Fetal Medicine, Miyagi Children's Hospital, Tohoku University 
School of Medicine, Japan.
(6)Division of Medical Genetics, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Asahikawa Medical University, Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatric Imaging, Tokyo Metropolitan Children's Medical 
Center, Japan and.
(9)Cell Induction and Regulation Field, Department of Cell Growth and 
Differentiation, Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, 
Japan Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Tokyo, Japan 
ntsumaki@cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Type II collagen is a major component of cartilage. Heterozygous mutations in 
the type II collagen gene (COL2A1) result in a group of skeletal dysplasias 
known as Type II collagenopathy (COL2pathy). The understanding of COL2pathy is 
limited by difficulties in obtaining live chondrocytes. In the present study, we 
converted COL2pathy patients' fibroblasts directly into induced chondrogenic 
(iChon) cells. The COL2pathy-iChon cells showed suppressed expression of COL2A1 
and significant apoptosis. A distended endoplasmic reticulum (ER) was detected, 
thus suggesting the adaptation of gene expression and cell death caused by 
excess ER stress. Chondrogenic supplementation adversely affected the 
chondrogenesis due to forced elevation of COL2A1 expression, suggesting that the 
application of chondrogenic drugs would worsen the disease condition. The 
application of a chemical chaperone increased the secretion of type II collagen, 
and partially rescued COL2pathy-iChon cells from apoptosis, suggesting that 
molecular chaperons serve as therapeutic drug candidates. We next generated 
induced pluripotent stem cells from COL2pathy fibroblasts. Chondrogenically 
differentiated COL2pathy-iPS cells showed apoptosis and increased expression of 
ER stress-markers. Finally, we generated teratomas by transplanting COL2pathy 
iPS cells into immunodeficient mice. The cartilage in the teratomas showed 
accumulation of type II collagen within cells, a distended ER, and sparse 
matrix, recapitulating the patient's cartilage. These COL2pathy models will be 
useful for pathophysiological studies and drug screening.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu444
PMID: 25187577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]