---
reference_id: "PMID:28338682"
title: Simple peptides derived from the ribosomal core potentiate RNA polymerase ribozyme function.
authors:
- Tagami S
- Attwater J
- Holliger P
journal: Nat Chem
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nchem.2739
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Simple peptides derived from the ribosomal core potentiate RNA polymerase ribozyme function.
**Authors:** Tagami S, Attwater J, Holliger P
**Journal:** Nat Chem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nchem.2739](https://doi.org/10.1038/nchem.2739)

## Content

1. Nat Chem. 2017 Apr;9(4):325-332. doi: 10.1038/nchem.2739. Epub 2017 Mar 6.

Simple peptides derived from the ribosomal core potentiate RNA polymerase 
ribozyme function.

Tagami S(1), Attwater J(1), Holliger P(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge 
Biomedical Campus, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.

The emergence of functional interactions between nucleic acids and polypeptides 
was a key transition in the origin of life and remains at the heart of all 
biology. However, how and why simple non-coded peptides could have become 
critical for RNA function is unclear. Here, we show that putative ancient 
peptide segments from the cores of both ribosomal subunits enhance RNA 
polymerase ribozyme (RPR) function, as do derived homopolymeric peptides 
comprising lysine or the non-proteinogenic lysine analogues ornithine or, to a 
lesser extent, diaminobutyric acid, irrespective of chirality or chiral purity. 
Lysine decapeptides enhance RPR function by promoting holoenzyme assembly 
through primer-template docking, accelerate RPR evolution, and allow 
RPR-catalysed RNA synthesis at near physiological (≥1 mM) Mg2+ concentrations, 
enabling templated RNA synthesis within membranous protocells. Our results 
outline how compositionally simple, mixed-chirality peptides may have augmented 
the functional potential of early RNAs and promoted the emergence of the first 
protocells.

DOI: 10.1038/nchem.2739
PMCID: PMC5458135
PMID: 28338682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.