---
reference_id: "PMID:26523971"
title: An AKT3-FOXG1-reelin network underlies defective migration in human focal malformations of cortical development.
authors:
- Baek ST
- Copeland B
- Yun EJ
- Kwon SK
- Guemez-Gamboa A
- Schaffer AE
- Kim S
- Kang HC
- Song S
- Mathern GW
- Gleeson JG
journal: Nat Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/nm.3982
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Cell Adhesion Molecules, Neuronal/metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Movement/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Enzyme Activation
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Forkhead Transcription Factors/metabolism
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Gene Regulatory Networks
- Green Fluorescent Proteins/metabolism
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/enzymology, metabolism, pathology, surgery"
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mosaicism
- Mutation/genetics
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
- Neural Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/metabolism
- "RNA, Small Interfering/metabolism"
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Recombination, Genetic/genetics"
- Reelin Protein
- Serine Endopeptidases/metabolism
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An AKT3-FOXG1-reelin network underlies defective migration in human focal malformations of cortical development.
**Authors:** Baek ST, Copeland B, Yun EJ, Kwon SK, Guemez-Gamboa A, Schaffer AE, Kim S, Kang HC, Song S, Mathern GW, Gleeson JG
**Journal:** Nat Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.3982](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3982)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2015 Dec;21(12):1445-54. doi: 10.1038/nm.3982. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

An AKT3-FOXG1-reelin network underlies defective migration in human focal
malformations of cortical development.

Baek ST(1)(2), Copeland B(1), Yun EJ(3), Kwon SK(4), Guemez-Gamboa A(1),
Schaffer AE(2), Kim S(5), Kang HC(1)(6)(7), Song S(1), Mathern GW(8)(9), Gleeson
JG(1)(2)(10).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pediatric Brain Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, New
York, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego (UCSD), La
Jolla, California, USA.
(3)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Severance Biomedical Science Institute, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Pediatric Epilepsy
Clinics, Severance Children's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(7)Epilepsy Research Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South
Korea.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, Mattel Children's Hospital, David Geffen School
of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(9)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Mattel Children's
Hospital, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California, USA.
(10)Neurogenetics Laboratory, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase,
Maryland, USA.

Focal malformations of cortical development (FMCDs) account for the majority of
drug-resistant pediatric epilepsy. Postzygotic somatic mutations activating the
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate-3-kinase (PI3K)-protein kinase B
(AKT)-mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway are found in a wide range of
brain diseases, including FMCDs. It remains unclear how a mutation in a small
fraction of cells disrupts the architecture of the entire hemisphere. Within
human FMCD-affected brain, we found that cells showing activation of the
PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway were enriched for the AKT3(E17K) mutation. Introducing the
FMCD-causing mutation into mouse brain resulted in electrographic seizures and
impaired hemispheric architecture. Mutation-expressing neural progenitors showed
misexpression of reelin, which led to a non-cell autonomous migration defect in
neighboring cells, due at least in part to derepression of reelin transcription
in a manner dependent on the forkhead box (FOX) transcription factor FOXG1.
Treatments aimed at either blocking downstream AKT signaling or inactivating
reelin restored migration. These findings suggest a central AKT-FOXG1-reelin
signaling pathway in FMCD and support pathway inhibitors as potential treatments
or therapies for some forms of focal epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.3982
PMCID: PMC4955611
PMID: 26523971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
