---
reference_id: "PMID:31270375"
title: Hemorrhagic stroke and renovascular hypertension with Grange syndrome arising from a novel pathogenic variant in YY1AP1.
authors:
- Saida K
- Kim CA
- Ceroni JRM
- Bertola DR
- Honjo RS
- Mitsuhashi S
- Takata A
- Mizuguchi T
- Miyatake S
- Miyake N
- Matsumoto N
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-019-0626-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemorrhagic stroke and renovascular hypertension with Grange syndrome arising from a novel pathogenic variant in YY1AP1.
**Authors:** Saida K, Kim CA, Ceroni JRM, Bertola DR, Honjo RS, Mitsuhashi S, Takata A, Mizuguchi T, Miyatake S, Miyake N, Matsumoto N
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-019-0626-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-019-0626-0)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2019 Sep;64(9):885-890. doi: 10.1038/s10038-019-0626-0. Epub 2019
 Jul 4.

Hemorrhagic stroke and renovascular hypertension with Grange syndrome arising 
from a novel pathogenic variant in YY1AP1.

Saida K(1), Kim CA(2), Ceroni JRM(2), Bertola DR(2), Honjo RS(2), Mitsuhashi 
S(1), Takata A(1), Mizuguchi T(1), Miyatake S(1), Miyake N(3), Matsumoto N(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama City 
University, Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Genetics Unit, Instituto da Crianca, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de 
Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama City 
University, Yokohama, Japan. nmiyake@yokohama-cu.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama City 
University, Yokohama, Japan. naomat@yokohama-cu.ac.jp.

Pediatric hypertension can cause hypertensive emergencies, including hemorrhagic 
stroke, contributing to rare but serious childhood morbidity and mortality. 
Renovascular hypertension (RVH) is one of the major causes of secondary 
hypertension in children. Grange syndrome (MIM#602531) is a rare disease 
characterized by multiple stenosis or occlusion of the renal, abdominal, 
coronary, and cerebral arteries, which can cause phenotypes of RVH and 
fibromuscular dysplasia (MIM#135580). We report the case of a 7-year-old girl 
with Grange syndrome who showed RVH and multiple seizure episodes. At 1 year of 
age, she experienced seizures and sequential hemiparesis caused by a left 
thalamic hemorrhage without cerebral vascular anomalies. Chronic hypertension 
was observed, and abdominal computed tomography angiography showed 
characteristic bilateral renal artery stenosis. Whole-exome sequencing revealed 
a novel homozygous pathogenic variant in the YY1AP1 gene (NM_001198903.1: 
c.1169del: p.Lys390Argfs*12). Biallelic YY1AP1 mutations are known to cause 
Grange syndrome. Unlike previously reported patients, our patient presented with 
intracerebral hemorrhagic stroke without anomalous brain artery or bone 
fragility. The phenotype in our patient may help better understand this 
ultra-rare syndrome. Grange syndrome should be considered in patients presenting 
with childhood-onset hypertension and/or hemorrhagic stroke for early clinical 
intervention.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-019-0626-0
PMID: 31270375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]