---
reference_id: "PMID:24387789"
title: A de novo convergence of autism genetics and molecular neuroscience.
authors:
- Krumm N
- "O'Roak BJ"
- Shendure J
- Eichler EE
journal: Trends Neurosci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2013.11.005
keywords:
- Autistic Disorder/genetics
- Exome/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Neurosciences/trends
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A de novo convergence of autism genetics and molecular neuroscience.
**Authors:** Krumm N, O'Roak BJ, Shendure J, Eichler EE
**Journal:** Trends Neurosci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tins.2013.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2013.11.005)

## Content

1. Trends Neurosci. 2014 Feb;37(2):95-105. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2013.11.005. Epub 
2013 Dec 30.

A de novo convergence of autism genetics and molecular neuroscience.

Krumm N(1), O'Roak BJ(1), Shendure J(1), Eichler EE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address: eee@gs.washington.edu.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability (ID) are 
neurodevelopmental disorders with large genetic components, but identification 
of pathogenic genes has proceeded slowly because hundreds of loci are involved. 
New exome sequencing technology has identified novel rare variants and has found 
that sporadic cases of ASD/ID are enriched for disruptive de novo mutations. 
Targeted large-scale resequencing studies have confirmed the significance of 
specific loci, including chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 8 (CHD8), 
sodium channel, voltage-gated, type II, alpha subunit (SCN2A), dual specificity 
tyrosine-phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A (DYRK1A), and catenin 
(cadherin-associated protein), beta 1, 88 kDa (CTNNB1, beta-catenin). We review 
recent studies and suggest that they have led to a convergence on three 
functional pathways: (i) chromatin remodeling; (ii) wnt signaling during 
development; and (iii) synaptic function. These pathways and genes significantly 
expand the neurobiological targets for study, and suggest a path for future 
genetic and functional studies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tins.2013.11.005
PMCID: PMC4077788
PMID: 24387789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]