---
reference_id: "PMID:36829172"
title: "A novel de novo nonsense mutation in SALL4 causing duane radial ray syndrome: a case report and expanding the phenotypic spectrum."
authors:
- Ajam-Hosseini M
- Parvini F
- Angaji A
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-023-01467-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Duane Retraction Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Iran
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel de novo nonsense mutation in SALL4 causing duane radial ray syndrome: a case report and expanding the phenotypic spectrum.
**Authors:** Ajam-Hosseini M, Parvini F, Angaji A
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-023-01467-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-023-01467-1)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2023 Feb 24;16(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s12920-023-01467-1.

A novel de novo nonsense mutation in SALL4 causing duane radial ray syndrome: a
case report and expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

Ajam-Hosseini M(1), Parvini F(2), Angaji A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
Kharazmi University, Karaj, Iran.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Semnan University, Semnan,
Iran. f.parvini@semnan.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
Kharazmi University, Karaj, Iran. Angaji@khu.ac.ir.

BACKGROUND: SALL4, a member of the SALL genes family, encodes a zinc-finger
transcriptional factor that either activates or represses gene transcription
depending on cell type during embryonic development. SALL4 mutations cause
extremely variable conditions including Duane-radial ray (DRR), Okihiro,
Holt-oram, Acro-renal ocular and IVIC syndromes, all with autosomal dominant
inheritance pattern. However, all these syndromes with different terminologies
are actually the same entity termed SALL4 related disorders.
CASE PRESENTATION: Herein, we examine an Iranian patient suspected to DRR
syndrome which has not been previously described in the population. Whole-exome
sequencing (WES) was performed to examine pathogenic genes in the proband.
Subsequently, Sanger sequencing was used to confirm the mutation found. To
elucidate the effects of the identified mutation, clinical data of patient was
collected. Morever, the possible impact of the mutation found on the
corresponding protein was evaluated using bioinformatics tools. WES identifed a
novel de novo heterozygous nonsense mutation in exon 2 of SALL4 gene
(c.712 C > T:p.Q238X). Subsequently, segregation and phenotype-genotype
correlation analysis as well as in-silico approaches confirmed the autosomal
dominance inheritance and disease-causing nature of the identified mutation. In
addition, studied patient had features not described previously, including
kyphoscoliosis, dimple presacral sinus, barrel chest and artric disc (C6-C7).
These manifestations could be additional characteristics of the growing
phenotypic spectrum of SALL4 related disorders.
CONCLUSION: Our findings could extend the pathogenic mutations and phenotypic
spectrum of SALL4 related disorders. Such reports can also aid to conduct
genetic counseling, prenatal diagnosis and clinical management for individuals
at high risk of SALL4 related disorders.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-023-01467-1
PMCID: PMC9951407
PMID: 36829172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
