---
reference_id: "PMID:27188576"
title: Non-small-cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Gridelli C
- Rossi A
- Carbone DP
- Guarize J
- Karachaliou N
- Mok T
- Petrella F
- Spaggiari L
- Rosell R
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-small-cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Gridelli C, Rossi A, Carbone DP, Guarize J, Karachaliou N, Mok T, Petrella F, Spaggiari L, Rosell R
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2015.9](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2015.9)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2015 May 21;1:15009. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.9.

Non-small-cell lung cancer.

Gridelli C(1), Rossi A(1), Carbone DP(2), Guarize J(3), Karachaliou N(4), Mok 
T(5), Petrella F(3), Spaggiari L(3), Rosell R(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, S.G. Moscati Hospital, Avellino, Italy.
(2)James Thoracic Center, Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio, 
USA.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy.
(4)Catalan Institute of Oncology, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Clinical Oncology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, 
Hong Kong.

Lung cancer is one of the most frequently diagnosed cancers and is the leading 
cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), a 
heterogeneous class of tumours, represents approximately 85% of all new lung 
cancer diagnoses. Tobacco smoking remains the main risk factor for developing 
this disease, but radon exposure and air pollution also have a role. Most 
patients are diagnosed with advanced-stage disease owing to inadequate screening 
programmes and late onset of clinical symptoms; consequently, patients have a 
very poor prognosis. Several diagnostic approaches can be used for NSCLC, 
including X-ray, CT and PET imaging, and histological examination of tumour 
biopsies. Accurate staging of the cancer is required to determine the optimal 
management strategy, which includes surgery, radiochemotherapy, immunotherapy 
and targeted approaches with anti-angiogenic monoclonal antibodies or tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors if tumours harbour oncogene mutations. Several of these driver 
mutations have been identified (for example, in epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)), and therapy continues to advance 
to tackle acquired resistance problems. Also, palliative care has a central role 
in patient management and greatly improves quality of life. For an illustrated 
summary of this Primer, visit: http://go.nature.com/rWYFgg.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.9
PMID: 27188576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]