---
reference_id: "PMID:20176257"
title: Environmental and occupational allergies.
authors:
- Peden D
- Reed CE
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.10.073
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental and occupational allergies.
**Authors:** Peden D, Reed CE
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2009.10.073](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2009.10.073)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 Feb;125(2 Suppl 2):S150-60. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.10.073.

Environmental and occupational allergies.

Peden D(1), Reed CE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, USA.

Airborne allergens are the major cause of allergic rhinitis and asthma. Daily 
exposure comes from indoor sources, chiefly at home but occasionally at schools 
or offices. Seasonal exposure to outdoor allergens, pollens, and molds is 
another important source. Exposure to unusual substances at work causes 
occupational asthma, accounting for about 5% of asthma in adults. Indoor and 
outdoor air pollutants trigger airway inflammation and increase the severity of 
asthma. Diesel exhaust particles increase the production of IgE antibodies. 
Identification and reduction of exposure to allergens is a very important part 
of the management of respiratory allergic diseases. The first section of this 
chapter discusses domestic allergens, arthropods (mites and cockroaches), molds, 
and mammals (pets and mice). Indoor humidity and water damage are important 
factors in the production of mite and mold allergens, and discarded human food 
items are important sources of proliferation of cockroaches and mice. Means of 
identifying and reducing exposure are presented. The second section discusses 
outdoor allergens: pollens and molds. The particular plants or molds and the 
amount of exposure to these allergens is determined by the local climate, and 
local pollen and mold counts are available to determine the time and amount of 
exposure. Climate change is already having an important effect on the 
distribution and amount of outdoor allergens. The third section discusses indoor 
and outdoor air pollution and methods that individuals can take to reduce indoor 
pollution in addition to eliminating cigarette smoking. The fourth section 
discusses the diagnosis and management of occupational asthma.

Copyright 2010 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.10.073
PMID: 20176257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]