---
reference_id: "PMID:39285418"
title: "An algorithm for discontinuing mechanical ventilation in boys with x-linked myotubular myopathy after positive response to gene therapy: the ASPIRO experience."
authors:
- Graham RJ
- Amin R
- Demirel N
- Edel L
- Lilien C
- MacBean V
- Rafferty GF
- Sawnani H
- Schön C
- Smith BK
- Syed F
- Sarazen M
- Prasad S
- Rico S
- Perez GF
journal: Respir Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12931-024-02966-0
keywords:
- Humans
- "Myopathies, Structural, Congenital/therapy, genetics, diagnosis"
- Male
- "Respiration, Artificial/methods"
- "Genetic Therapy/methods, trends"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Algorithms
- Infant
- Ventilator Weaning/methods
- Treatment Outcome
- "Respiratory Insufficiency/therapy, diagnosis"
- Adolescent
- Withholding Treatment/trends
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An algorithm for discontinuing mechanical ventilation in boys with x-linked myotubular myopathy after positive response to gene therapy: the ASPIRO experience.
**Authors:** Graham RJ, Amin R, Demirel N, Edel L, Lilien C, MacBean V, Rafferty GF, Sawnani H, Schön C, Smith BK, Syed F, Sarazen M, Prasad S, Rico S, Perez GF
**Journal:** Respir Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12931-024-02966-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12931-024-02966-0)

## Content

1. Respir Res. 2024 Sep 16;25(1):342. doi: 10.1186/s12931-024-02966-0.

An algorithm for discontinuing mechanical ventilation in boys with x-linked 
myotubular myopathy after positive response to gene therapy: the ASPIRO 
experience.

Graham RJ(1), Amin R(2), Demirel N(3), Edel L(4), Lilien C(5)(6), MacBean V(7), 
Rafferty GF(8), Sawnani H(9)(10), Schön C(11), Smith BK(12), Syed F(2), Sarazen 
M(13), Prasad S(13), Rico S(13), Perez GF(14).

Author information:
(1)Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children London, London, UK.
(5)MDUK Oxford Neuromuscular Centre, Oxford, UK.
(6)Institute I-Motion, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France.
(7)Brunel University London, London, UK.
(8)King's College London, London, UK.
(9)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(10)University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, 
USA.
(11)Hauner's Children's Hospital, University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(12)University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(13)Formerly of Astellas Gene Therapies, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(14)Oishei Children's Hospital, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical 
Sciences, Oishei Children's Hospital University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA. 
gperez@upa.chob.edu.

X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a rare, life-threatening congenital 
myopathy. Most (80%) children with XLMTM have profound muscle weakness and 
hypotonia at birth resulting in severe respiratory insufficiency, the inability 
to sit up, stand or walk, and early mortality. At birth, 85-90% of children with 
XLMTM require mechanical ventilation, with more than half requiring invasive 
ventilator support. Historically, ventilator-dependent children with 
neuromuscular-derived respiratory failure of this degree and nature, static or 
progressive, are not expected to achieve complete independence from mechanical 
ventilator support. In the ASPIRO clinical trial (NCT03199469), participants 
receiving a single intravenous dose of an investigational gene therapy 
(resamirigene bilparvovec) started showing significant improvements in daily 
hours of ventilation support compared with controls by 24 weeks post-dosing, and 
16 of 24 dosed participants achieved ventilator independence between 14 and 97 
weeks after dosing. At the time, there was no precedent or published guidance 
for weaning chronically ventilated children with congenital neuromuscular 
diseases off mechanical ventilation. When the first ASPIRO participants started 
showing dramatically improved respiratory function, the investigators initiated 
efforts to safely wean them off ventilator support, in parallel with primary 
protocol respiratory outcome measures. A group of experts in respiratory care 
and physiology and management of children with XLMTM developed an algorithm to 
safely wean children in the ASPIRO trial off mechanical ventilation as their 
respiratory muscle strength increased. The algorithm developed for this trial 
provides recommendations for assessing weaning readiness, a stepwise approach to 
weaning, and monitoring of children during and after the weaning process.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-024-02966-0
PMCID: PMC11406763
PMID: 39285418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Robert J. Graham reports consulting fees for 
trial design, outcomes assessments, and advisory board participation from 
Astellas Gene Therapies (formerly Audentes Therapeutics). Reshma Amin reports 
grant support from Canadian Institute of Health Research, Muscular Dystrophy 
Canada, Baxter Foundation, Boehringer-Ingelheim, VHS HomeHealthCare, Medigas, 
and Proresp; steering committee membership for Home Ventilation and Sleep 
Network: CHEST; and Scientific Officer for the Ontario Lung Health Foundation. 
Nadir Demirel reports travel reimbursement from Astellas Gene Therapies 
(formerly Audentes Therapeutics). Lisa Edel reports consulting fees from Roche, 
Biogen and Novartis; payment or honoraria from Sanofi, Roche and Neurology 
Academy; and travel reimbursement from Roche. Charlotte Lilien reports 
consulting fees, honoraria, funding for meeting-related travel, and/or advisory 
board participation from Astellas Gene Therapies (formerly Audentes 
Therapeutics), Roche, Biogen, Novartis, Sysnav, AFEHM, ATOM, Aparito and Scholar 
Rock. Victoria MacBean reports study funding, a research grant, and consulting 
fees to herself and to her institution from Astellas Gene Therapies (formerly 
Audentes Therapeutics). Gerrard F. Rafferty, Carola Schön and Faiza Syed report 
no competing interests relevant to this paper. Hemant Sawnani reports consulting 
fees for trial design, outcomes assessments, and advisory board participation 
from Astellas Gene Therapies (formerly Audentes Therapeutics). Barbara K. Smith 
reports prior research grant support from Astellas Gene Therapies (formerly 
Audentes Therapeutics). Micaela Sarazen is an employee of Astellas Gene 
Therapies (formerly Audentes Therapeutics). Suyash Prasad and Salvador Rico were 
employees and stockholders at Astellas Gene Therapies (formerly Audentes 
Therapeutics) at the time of this research. Geovanny F. Perez reports consulting 
fees and funding for meeting-related travel from Astellas Gene Therapies 
(formerly Audentes Therapeutics).