---
reference_id: "PMID:22132097"
title: "A novel mutation in the HSD17B10 gene of a 10-year-old boy with refractory epilepsy, choreoathetosis and learning disability."
authors:
- Seaver LH
- He XY
- Abe K
- Cowan T
- Enns GM
- Sweetman L
- Philipp M
- Lee S
- Malik M
- Yang SY
journal: PLoS One
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027348
keywords:
- "3-Hydroxyacyl CoA Dehydrogenases/chemistry, genetics"
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Athetosis/complications, enzymology, genetics, urine"
- Base Sequence
- Carboxylic Acids/urine
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chorea/complications, enzymology, genetics, urine"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electroencephalography
- Electron Transport
- "Epilepsy/complications, enzymology, genetics, urine"
- Female
- Fibroblasts/enzymology
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Learning Disabilities/complications, enzymology, genetics, urine"
- Male
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways
- Mitochondria/enzymology
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length"
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation in the HSD17B10 gene of a 10-year-old boy with refractory epilepsy, choreoathetosis and learning disability.
**Authors:** Seaver LH, He XY, Abe K, Cowan T, Enns GM, Sweetman L, Philipp M, Lee S, Malik M, Yang SY
**Journal:** PLoS One (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0027348](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0027348)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27348. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027348. Epub 2011 Nov 
22.

A novel mutation in the HSD17B10 gene of a 10-year-old boy with refractory 
epilepsy, choreoathetosis and learning disability.

Seaver LH(1), He XY, Abe K, Cowan T, Enns GM, Sweetman L, Philipp M, Lee S, 
Malik M, Yang SY.

Author information:
(1)Hawai'i Community Genetics, Kapi'olani Medical Specialists, Honolulu, Hawaii, 
United States of America.

Hydroxysteroid (17beta) dehydrogenase 10 (HSD10) is a mitochondrial 
multifunctional enzyme encoded by the HSD17B10 gene. Missense mutations in this 
gene result in HSD10 deficiency, whereas a silent mutation results in mental 
retardation, X-linked, syndromic 10 (MRXS10). Here we report a novel missense 
mutation found in the HSD17B10 gene, namely c.194T>C transition (rs104886492), 
brought about by the loss of two forked methyl groups of valine 65 in the HSD10 
active site. The affected boy, who possesses mutant HSD10 (p.V65A), has a 
neurological syndrome with metabolic derangements, choreoathetosis, refractory 
epilepsy and learning disability. He has no history of acute decompensation or 
metabolic acidosis whereas his urine organic acid profile, showing elevated 
levels of 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyrate and tiglylglycine, is characteristic of 
HSD10 deficiency. His HSD10 activity was much lower than the normal control 
level, with normal β-ketothiolase activity. The c.194T>C mutation in HSD17B10 
can be identified by the restriction fragment polymorphism analysis, thereby 
facilitating the screening of this novel mutation in individuals with 
intellectual disability of unknown etiology and their family members much 
easier. The patient's mother is an asymptomatic carrier, and has a mixed 
ancestry (Hawaiian, Japanese and Chinese). This demonstrates that HSD10 
deficiency patients are not confined to a particular ethnicity although 
previously reported cases were either Spanish or German descendants.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027348
PMCID: PMC3222643
PMID: 22132097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.