---
reference_id: "PMID:16513531"
title: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase variants associated with favism in Thai children.
authors:
- Laosombat V
- Sattayasevana B
- Chotsampancharoen T
- Wongchanchailert M
journal: Int J Hematol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1532/IJH97.A20513
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase variants associated with favism in Thai children.
**Authors:** Laosombat V, Sattayasevana B, Chotsampancharoen T, Wongchanchailert M
**Journal:** Int J Hematol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1532/IJH97.A20513](https://doi.org/10.1532/IJH97.A20513)

## Content

1. Int J Hematol. 2006 Feb;83(2):139-43. doi: 10.1532/IJH97.A20513.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase variants associated with favism in Thai 
children.

Laosombat V(1), Sattayasevana B, Chotsampancharoen T, Wongchanchailert M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai, Songkla, Thailand. 
vichai.l@psu.ac.th

In a study conducted at Songklanagarind Hospital in the south of Thailand, the 
subjects were 225 patients (210 boys and 15 girls) with glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. Favism was found in 3.6% of the G6PD-deficient 
children. Approximately one half of the G6PD-deficient patients with favism were 
younger than 2 years. Sudden onset of anemia was found within 1 to 3 days after 
ingestion of dried fava beans. The classic features of favism, which are pallor, 
hemoglobinuria, and jaundice, were detected in all cases. To characterize the 
known G6PD mutations in Thai children, molecular analysis was performed for 8 
G6PD-deficient children with favism by a combination of polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and amplification 
refractory mutation system analysis. The G6PD variants in these children were 
G6PD Kaiping 1388,G-->A; G6PD Mahidol 487,G-->A; G6PD Viangchan 871,G-->A; and 
uncharacterized mutation with silent mutation 1311,C-->T.

DOI: 10.1532/IJH97.A20513
PMID: 16513531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]