---
reference_id: "PMID:38499966"
title: The continuously evolving phenotype of succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency.
authors:
- Julia-Palacios NA
- Kuseyri Hübschmann O
- Olivella M
- Pons R
- Horvath G
- Lücke T
- Fung CW
- Wong SN
- Cortès-Saladelafont E
- Rovira-Remisa MM
- Yıldız Y
- Mercimek-Andrews S
- Assmann B
- Stevanović G
- Manti F
- Brennenstuhl H
- Jung-Klawitter S
- Jeltsch K
- Sivri HS
- Garbade SF
- García-Cazorla À
- Opladen T
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12723
keywords:
- Humans
- "Succinate-Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics"
- Child
- Male
- Phenotype
- Female
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adult
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics"
- Infant
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Movement Disorders/genetics
- Mutation
- Muscle Hypotonia/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The continuously evolving phenotype of succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency.
**Authors:** Julia-Palacios NA, Kuseyri Hübschmann O, Olivella M, Pons R, Horvath G, Lücke T, Fung CW, Wong SN, Cortès-Saladelafont E, Rovira-Remisa MM, Yıldız Y, Mercimek-Andrews S, Assmann B, Stevanović G, Manti F, Brennenstuhl H, Jung-Klawitter S, Jeltsch K, Sivri HS, Garbade SF, García-Cazorla À, Opladen T
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12723](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12723)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2024 May;47(3):447-462. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12723. Epub
2024  Mar 18.

The continuously evolving phenotype of succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase
deficiency.

Julia-Palacios NA(1), Kuseyri Hübschmann O(2), Olivella M(3), Pons R(4), Horvath
G(5), Lücke T(6), Fung CW(7), Wong SN(7), Cortès-Saladelafont E(1)(8),
Rovira-Remisa MM(8), Yıldız Y(9), Mercimek-Andrews S(10)(11), Assmann B(2),
Stevanović G(12), Manti F(13), Brennenstuhl H(2)(14), Jung-Klawitter S(2),
Jeltsch K(2), Sivri HS(9), Garbade SF(2), García-Cazorla À(1), Opladen T(2).

Author information:
(1)Inborn Errors of Metabolism Unit, Department of Neurology, Institut de
Recerca Sant Joan de Déu and CIBERER-ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Center for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine Department I, Division of
Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Heidelberg University, Medical
Faculty Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Bioinfomatics and Medical Statistics Group, University of Vic-Central
University of Catalonia, Vic, Spain.
(4)First Department of Pediatrics, Aghia Sofia Hospital, University of Athens,
Athens, Greece.
(5)Division of Biochemical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, BC Children's
Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(6)St. Josef-Hospital, University Children's Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum,
Bochum, Germany.
(7)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, The Hong Kong Children's
Hospital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(8)Unit of Inherited Metabolic Diseases and Child Neurology, Department of
Pediatrics, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona and Faculty of Medicine,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Division of Pediatric Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of
Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(10)The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(11)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Women and
Children's Health Research Institute, Stollery Children's Hospital, University
of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(12)Clinic of Neurology and Psychiatry for Children and Youth, School of
Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(13)Unit of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Department of Human Neuroscience,
Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.
(14)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

The objective of the study is to evaluate the evolving phenotype and genetic
spectrum of patients with succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency
(SSADHD) in long-term follow-up. Longitudinal clinical and biochemical data of
22 pediatric and 9 adult individuals with SSADHD from the patient registry of
the International Working Group on Neurotransmitter related Disorders (iNTD)
were studied with in silico analyses, pathogenicity scores and molecular
modeling of ALDH5A1 variants. Leading initial symptoms, with onset in infancy,
were developmental delay and hypotonia. Year of birth and specific initial
symptoms influenced the diagnostic delay. Clinical phenotype of 26 individuals
(median 12 years, range 1.8-33.4 years) showed a diversifying course in
follow-up: 77% behavioral problems, 76% coordination problems, 73% speech
disorders, 58% epileptic seizures and 40% movement disorders. After ataxia,
dystonia (19%), chorea (11%) and hypokinesia (15%) were the most frequent
movement disorders. Involvement of the dentate nucleus in brain imaging was
observed together with movement disorders or coordination problems. Short
attention span (78.6%) and distractibility (71.4%) were the most frequently
behavior traits mentioned by parents while impulsiveness, problems communicating
wishes or needs and compulsive behavior were addressed as strongly interfering
with family life. Treatment was mainly aimed to control epileptic seizures and
psychiatric symptoms. Four new pathogenic variants were identified. In silico
scoring system, protein activity and pathogenicity score revealed a high
correlation. A genotype/phenotype correlation was not observed, even in
siblings. This study presents the diversifying characteristics of disease
phenotype during the disease course, highlighting movement disorders, widens the
knowledge on the genotypic spectrum of SSADHD and emphasizes a reliable
application of in silico approaches.

© 2024 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12723
PMID: 38499966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
