---
reference_id: "PMID:35471728"
title: "Is Liver Transplant Curative in Homozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia? A Review of Nine Global Cases."
authors:
- Al Dubayee M
- Kayikcioglu M
- van Lennep JR
- Hergli N
- Mata P
journal: Adv Ther
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s12325-022-02131-3
keywords:
- Anticholesteremic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Cholesterol, LDL/genetics"
- Homozygote
- Homozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia
- Humans
- "Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II/drug therapy, surgery"
- Liver Transplantation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is Liver Transplant Curative in Homozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia? A Review of Nine Global Cases.
**Authors:** Al Dubayee M, Kayikcioglu M, van Lennep JR, Hergli N, Mata P
**Journal:** Adv Ther (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12325-022-02131-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-022-02131-3)

## Content

1. Adv Ther. 2022 Jun;39(6):3042-3057. doi: 10.1007/s12325-022-02131-3. Epub 2022
 Apr 26.

Is Liver Transplant Curative in Homozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia? A 
Review of Nine Global Cases.

Al Dubayee M(1), Kayikcioglu M(2), van Lennep JR(3), Hergli N(4), Mata P(5).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, 
Riyadh, 11426, Saudi Arabia. aldubayeemo@NGHA.MED.SA.
(2)Department of Cardiology Izmir, School of Medicine, Ege University, Bornova, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Amryt Pharmaceuticals DAC, Dublin, Ireland.
(5)Fundación Hipercolesterolemia Familiar, Madrid, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HoFH) is a rare, 
life-threatening, inherited condition characterized by extremely elevated levels 
of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C). Patients are at high risk of 
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, adverse cardiovascular events, and 
associated early mortality. Liver transplant is sometimes used with curative 
intent. The objective of the current case series was to evaluate the follow-up 
of a range of patients who have undergone liver transplant for the treatment of 
HoFH.
METHODS: Patients with clinical and/or genetic diagnoses of HoFH were treated 
according to local practices in four units in Europe and the Middle East. All 
patients underwent liver transplantation. Baseline and long-term follow-up data 
were collected, including LDL-C levels, DNA mutations, lipid-lowering 
medications, and complications due to surgery and immunosuppressive therapy.
RESULTS: Nine patients were included with up to 22 years' follow-up (mean ± SD 
11.7 ± 11.7 years; range 0.5-28 years). Three of the patients died as a result 
of complications of transplant surgery (mortality rate 33%). Among the surviving 
six patients, four required continued lipid-lowering therapy (LLT) to maintain 
LDL-C levels and two patients show signs of increasing LDL-C levels that require 
management. One case (11%) required two consecutive transplants to achieve a 
viable graft and is awaiting a third transplant because of graft failure.
CONCLUSIONS: Liver transplant did not enable attainment of recommended LDL-C 
targets in most patients with HoFH, and the majority of patients still required 
post-transplant LLT. Liver transplant was not curative in most of the patients 
with HoFH followed. Guidelines suggest that transplant is a treatment of last 
resort if contemporary treatments are not available or possible.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-022-02131-3
PMCID: PMC9122866
PMID: 35471728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]