---
reference_id: "PMID:17893996"
title: Citrullination by peptidylarginine deiminase in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Suzuki A
- Yamada R
- Yamamoto K
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1196/annals.1422.034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Citrullination by peptidylarginine deiminase in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Suzuki A, Yamada R, Yamamoto K
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1196/annals.1422.034](https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1422.034)

## Content

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Jun;1108:323-39. doi: 10.1196/annals.1422.034.

Citrullination by peptidylarginine deiminase in rheumatoid arthritis.

Suzuki A(1), Yamada R, Yamamoto K.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Rheumatic Diseases, SNP Research Center, The Institute of 
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), 1-7-22, Suehirocho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 
City, Kanagawa, Japan. akaris@src.riken.jp

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a complex, multifactorial disease with genetic and 
immunological aspects. Because RA is an autoimmune condition, dysregulation of 
the immune system is implied. Many linkage and association studies have also 
indicated that multiple genetic factors are associated with RA. Although the 
contribution of each genetic factor is small, the combination of these factors 
affects RA development. Previous studies have suggested that genetic changes 
affect the internal immunological environment, which results in autoimmune 
diseases. More recent genetic studies indicate that the HLA-DRB gene is the 
predominant cause of RA and that other non-HLA genes are also involved. We 
reported that peptidylarginine deiminase (gene name abbreviated to PADI, protein 
name abbreviated to PAD) type 4 is the one of the non-HLA genetic factors 
involved in RA via citrullination. Antibodies against citrullinated 
proteins/peptides are highly specific to RA, but the physiological roles of PADI 
gene, PAD proteins as their products and citrullinated proteins/peptides are 
obscure. However, levels of anticitrullinated protein antibodies are apparently 
also increased and were involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune arthritis in 
mice with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). These data suggested that 
citrullinated protein and anticitrullinated protein antibodies play important 
roles in the development of RA. This review summarizes the relationship between 
RA and citrullination, as well as the role of PADI4 genetics.

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1422.034
PMID: 17893996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]