---
reference_id: "PMID:40330852"
title: The First Colombian Patient with CDH3-Related Hypotrichosis with Juvenile Macular Dystrophy.
authors:
- Prieto LE
- Vasquez-Forero DM
- Pachajoa H
journal: Skin Appendage Disord
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1159/000545293
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The First Colombian Patient with CDH3-Related Hypotrichosis with Juvenile Macular Dystrophy.
**Authors:** Prieto LE, Vasquez-Forero DM, Pachajoa H
**Journal:** Skin Appendage Disord (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000545293](https://doi.org/10.1159/000545293)

## Content

1. Skin Appendage Disord. 2025 Mar 28:1-7. doi: 10.1159/000545293. Online ahead
of  print.

The First Colombian Patient with CDH3-Related Hypotrichosis with Juvenile 
Macular Dystrophy.

Prieto LE(1), Vasquez-Forero DM(2), Pachajoa H(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Fundación Valle del Lili, Centro de Investigaciones Clínicas, Cali, Colombia.
(2)Fundación Valle del Lili, Departamento de Genética Clínica, Cali, Colombia.
(3)Centro de Investigaciones en Anomalías Congénitas y Enfermedades Raras 
(CIACER), Universidad Icesi, Cali, Colombia.

INTRODUCTION: Ectodermal dysplasias (ED) encompass a broad group of hereditary 
disorders, within which both the structure and functionality of various 
ectoderm-derived tissues can be affected depending on the involved gene. 
Congenital hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy is one of the entities 
included in ED, which is associated with an alteration in the CDH3 gene encoding 
P-cadherin.
CASE PRESENTATION: We describe a 6-year-old patient with history of atopic 
dermatitis, amblyopia, and reduced vision acuity. Physical examination revealed 
hypotrichosis on the scalp with alopecia patches, microretrognathia, dental 
enamel abnormalities, dry skin, keratosis pilaris. Molecular analysis identified 
a homozygous variant in the CDH3 gene (NM_001793.6) c.1508G>A p.Arg503His.
CONCLUSION: We present the first Colombian case of clinical and molecular 
diagnosis of hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy associated with CDH3.

© 2025 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000545293
PMCID: PMC12052343
PMID: 40330852

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.