---
reference_id: "PMID:32966000"
title: Rifaximin.
authors:
- Robertson KD
- Nagalli S
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rifaximin.
**Authors:** Robertson KD, Nagalli S

## Content

1. Rifaximin.

Robertson KD(1), Nagalli S(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2023 May 22.

Author information:
(1)McLaren Greater Lansing
(2)Yuma Regional Medical Center

Rifaximin is an antibiotic used to treat irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea, 
reduce the risk of overt hepatic encephalopathy recurrence in adults, and treat 
travelers’ diarrhea caused by noninvasive strains of Escherichia coli. Rifaximin 
has a broad spectrum of activity against both gram-negative and gram-positive 
anaerobic and aerobic bacteria. This antibiotic is used primarily in diseases 
since it is specific to the gastrointestinal tract due to its nonabsorbable 
profile. This activity will review the indications, mechanism of action, 
administration, safety profile, and contraindications for rifaximin. In 
addition, this activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event 
profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, 
pharmacokinetics, monitoring, and relevant interactions) pertinent to the 
interprofessional team members.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32966000

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Kyle Robertson declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Shivaraj Nagalli 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.