---
reference_id: "PMID:32380069"
title: "Efficacy and safety of azithromycin maintenance therapy in primary ciliary dyskinesia (BESTCILIA): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Kobbernagel HE
- Buchvald FF
- Haarman EG
- Casaulta C
- Collins SA
- Hogg C
- Kuehni CE
- Lucas JS
- Moser CE
- Quittner AL
- Raidt J
- Rosthøj S
- Sørensen AL
- Thomsen K
- Werner C
- Omran H
- Nielsen KG
journal: Lancet Respir Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30058-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Airway Resistance
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Audiometry, Pure-Tone"
- "Azithromycin/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Blood Cell Count
- C-Reactive Protein/analysis
- Child
- Ciliary Motility Disorders/drug therapy
- Cytokines/blood
- Diarrhea/chemically induced
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Double-Blind Method
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Quality of Life
- Respiratory Function Tests
- Sputum/microbiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of azithromycin maintenance therapy in primary ciliary dyskinesia (BESTCILIA): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Kobbernagel HE, Buchvald FF, Haarman EG, Casaulta C, Collins SA, Hogg C, Kuehni CE, Lucas JS, Moser CE, Quittner AL, Raidt J, Rosthøj S, Sørensen AL, Thomsen K, Werner C, Omran H, Nielsen KG
**Journal:** Lancet Respir Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30058-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30058-8)

## Content

1. Lancet Respir Med. 2020 May;8(5):493-505. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30058-8.

Efficacy and safety of azithromycin maintenance therapy in primary ciliary 
dyskinesia (BESTCILIA): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised, 
placebo-controlled phase 3 trial.

Kobbernagel HE(1), Buchvald FF(1), Haarman EG(2), Casaulta C(3), Collins SA(4), 
Hogg C(5), Kuehni CE(6), Lucas JS(4), Moser CE(7), Quittner AL(8), Raidt J(9), 
Rosthøj S(10), Sørensen AL(10), Thomsen K(7), Werner C(11), Omran H(9), Nielsen 
KG(12).

Author information:
(1)Danish Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Centre, Paediatric Pulmonary Service, 
Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam 
University Medical Center, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Inselspital and 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Centre, National Institute for Health Research 
Biomedical Research Centre, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(5)Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Centre, Paediatric Respiratory Department, Royal 
Brompton Hospital, London, UK.
(6)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Inselspital and 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; Institute of Social and Preventive 
Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)Nicklaus Children's Research Institute, Miami, FL, USA.
(9)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital Muenster, 
Muenster, Germany.
(10)Section of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(11)Helios Children's Hospital Schwerin, Schwerin, Germany; Department of 
General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
(12)Danish Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Centre, Paediatric Pulmonary Service, 
Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: 
kim.g.nielsen@regionh.dk.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2020 May;8(5):429-430. doi: 
10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30100-4.

BACKGROUND: Use of maintenance antibiotic therapy with the macrolide 
azithromycin is increasing in a number of chronic respiratory disorders 
including primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD). However, evidence for its efficacy 
in PCD is lacking. We aimed to determine the efficacy and safety of azithromycin 
maintenance therapy for 6 months in patients with PCD.
METHODS: The Better Experimental Screening and Treatment for Primary Ciliary 
Dyskinesia (BESTCILIA) trial was a multicentre, double-blind, parallel group, 
randomised, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial done at 6 European PCD clinics 
(tertiary paediatric care centres and university hospitals in Denmark, Germany, 
Netherlands, Switzerland, and UK). Patients with a confirmed diagnosis of PCD, 
aged 7-50 years old, and predicted FEV1 greater than 40% were recruited. 
Participants were randomly assigned (1:1), stratified by age and study site, via 
a web-based randomisation system to azithromycin 250 mg or 500 mg as tablets 
according to bodyweight (</≥ 40 kg) or identical placebo, three times a week for 
6 months. The random allocation sequence was a permuted block randomisation, 
with a block size of four, generated by an external consultancy. Participants, 
investigators, and care providers were masked to treatment allocation. The 
primary endpoint was the number of respiratory exacerbations over 6 months. 
Analysis was by intention to treat. This study is registered in the EU Clinical 
Trials Register, EudraCT number 2013-004664-58.
FINDINGS: Between June 24, 2014, and Aug 23, 2016, 102 patients were screened, 
of whom 90 were randomly assigned to either azithromycin (n=49) or placebo 
(n=41). The study was ended without having included the planned number of 
participants due to recruitment difficulties. The mean number of respiratory 
exacerbations over 6 months was 0·75 (SD 1·12) in the azithromycin group 
compared with 1·62 (1·64) in the placebo group, and participants receiving 
azithromycin had significantly lower rate of exacerbations during the individual 
treatment periods (rate ratio 0·45 [95% CI 0·26-0·78]; p=0·004). Four serious 
adverse events were reported, occurring in one (2%) of 47 participants in the 
azithromycin group and in three (7%) of 41 participants in the placebo group. 
Loose stools or diarrhoea were more common in the azithromycin group than in the 
placebo group (11 [23%] vs two [5%]).
INTERPRETATION: This first multinational randomised controlled trial on 
pharmacotherapy in PCD showed that azithromycin maintenance therapy for 6 months 
was well tolerated and halved the rate of respiratory exacerbations. 
Azithromycin maintenance therapy is an option for patients with PCD with 
frequent exacerbations potentially leading to reduced need for additional 
antibiotic treatments and preventing irreversible lung damage.
FUNDING: European Commission Seventh Framework Programme and Children's Lung 
Foundation (Denmark).

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30058-8
PMID: 32380069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]