---
reference_id: "PMID:35390609"
title: "Schizophrenia: A developmental disorder with a risk of non-specific but avoidable decline."
authors:
- Murray RM
- Bora E
- Modinos G
- Vernon A
journal: Schizophr Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2022.03.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schizophrenia: A developmental disorder with a risk of non-specific but avoidable decline.
**Authors:** Murray RM, Bora E, Modinos G, Vernon A
**Journal:** Schizophr Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.schres.2022.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2022.03.005)

## Content

1. Schizophr Res. 2022 May;243:181-186. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2022.03.005. Epub 
2022 Apr 4.

Schizophrenia: A developmental disorder with a risk of non-specific but 
avoidable decline.

Murray RM(1), Bora E(2), Modinos G(3), Vernon A(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, 
United Kingdom. Electronic address: robin.murray@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Dokuz Eylül Üniversitesi, Izmir, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, 
United Kingdom.

The onset of schizophrenia is determined by biological and social risk factors 
operating predominantly during development. These result in subtle deviations in 
brain structure and cognitive function. Striatal dopamine dysregulation follows, 
causing abnormal salience and resultant psychotic symptoms. Most people 
diagnosed as having schizophrenia do not progressively deteriorate; many improve 
or recover. However, poor care can allow a cycle of deterioration to be 
established, stress increasing dopamine dysregulation, leading to more stress 
consequent on continuing psychotic experiences, and so further dopamine release. 
Additionally, long-term antipsychotics can induce dopamine supersensitivity with 
resultant relapse and eventually treatment resistance. Some patients suffer loss 
of social and cognitive function, but this is a consequence of the hazards that 
afflict the person with schizophrenia, not a direct consequence of genetic 
predisposition. Thus, brain health and cognition can be further impaired by 
chronic medication effects, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events, obesity, 
poor diet, and lack of exercise; drug use, especially of tobacco and cannabis, 
are likely to contribute. Poverty, homelessness and poor nutrition which become 
the lot of some people with schizophrenia, can also affect cognition. 
Regrettably, the model of progressive deterioration provides psychiatry and its 
funders with an alibi for the effects of poor care.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2022.03.005
PMID: 35390609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]