---
reference_id: "PMID:33830849"
title: Elevated serum calprotectin (S100A8/A9) in patients with severe asthma.
authors:
- Decaesteker T
- Bos S
- Lorent N
- Everaerts S
- Vanoirbeek J
- Bullens D
- Dupont LJ
journal: J Asthma
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/02770903.2021.1914649
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated serum calprotectin (S100A8/A9) in patients with severe asthma.
**Authors:** Decaesteker T, Bos S, Lorent N, Everaerts S, Vanoirbeek J, Bullens D, Dupont LJ
**Journal:** J Asthma (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/02770903.2021.1914649](https://doi.org/10.1080/02770903.2021.1914649)

## Content

1. J Asthma. 2022 Jun;59(6):1110-1115. doi: 10.1080/02770903.2021.1914649. Epub 
2021 Apr 19.

Elevated serum calprotectin (S100A8/A9) in patients with severe asthma.

Decaesteker T(1), Bos S(2), Lorent N(2), Everaerts S(2), Vanoirbeek J(3), 
Bullens D(4)(5), Dupont LJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases and Thoracic Surgery (BREATHE), Department 
of Chronic Diseases, Metabolism and Ageing (CHROMETA), KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(2)Respiratory Diseases, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Centre for Environment and Health, Department of Public Health and Primary 
Care, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Allergy and Clinical Immunology Research Group, Department of Immunology, 
Microbiology and Transplantation, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

OBJECTIVE: Asthma is a heterogeneous disease consisting of several inflammatory 
phenotypes of which neutrophilic asthma is associated with poorer responses to 
classic therapies, namely (inhaled) corticosteroids. The development of targeted 
therapies requires the identification of biomarkers to distinguish these 
phenotypes. Currently, we lack validated biomarkers for non-eosinophilic asthma. 
The aim of this study is to examine serum calprotectin (SC) in asthmatics and 
its potential as biomarker for neutrophilic asthma.
METHODS: Hundred-seventeen severe asthmatics were referred for sputum induction 
and data were obtained from their medical records. To evaluate the association 
between SC and asthma phenotypes, patients were divided into subgroups based on 
sputum cell count (3% eosinophils and 61% neutrophils). Additionally, SC levels 
of asthmatics were compared with these of patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis and healthy controls.
RESULTS: Asthmatics (n = 45) had significantly higher levels of SC than healthy 
controls. No significant differences were found between the different asthma 
phenotypes and in comparison with COPD patients. SC was significantly higher in 
asthmatics with a lower FEV1/FVC ratio (<70) and non-significantly elevated SC 
levels were seen in asthmatics with frequent exacerbations (>2 in the last 
year).
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, there was no difference in SC levels between the 
different inflammatory subtypes in asthmatics. Nevertheless, severe asthmatics 
seemed to have higher SC levels suggesting that SC may be a marker of disease 
severity rather than a marker for specific inflammatory subtypes in asthmatics. 
Further research in larger cohorts is necessary to validate SC as biomarker in 
severe asthmatics.

DOI: 10.1080/02770903.2021.1914649
PMID: 33830849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]