---
reference_id: "PMID:20729400"
title: "Defining new insight into atypical arrhythmia: a computational model of ankyrin-B syndrome."
authors:
- Wolf RM
- Mitchell CC
- Christensen MD
- Mohler PJ
- Hund TJ
journal: Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00503.2010
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ankyrins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Calcium/metabolism
- Computer Simulation
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Models, Theoretical"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism, pathology"
- "Sick Sinus Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Sodium-Calcium Exchanger/metabolism
- Sodium-Potassium-Exchanging ATPase/metabolism
- Syndrome
- "Ventricular Fibrillation/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defining new insight into atypical arrhythmia: a computational model of ankyrin-B syndrome.
**Authors:** Wolf RM, Mitchell CC, Christensen MD, Mohler PJ, Hund TJ
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpheart.00503.2010](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00503.2010)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2010 Nov;299(5):H1505-14. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00503.2010. Epub 2010 Aug 20.

Defining new insight into atypical arrhythmia: a computational model of
ankyrin-B syndrome.

Wolf RM(1), Mitchell CC, Christensen MD, Mohler PJ, Hund TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Normal cardiac excitability depends on the coordinated activity of specific ion
channels and transporters within specialized domains at the plasma membrane and
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Ion channel dysfunction due to congenital or acquired
defects has been linked to human cardiac arrhythmia. More recently, defects in
ion channel-associated proteins have been associated with arrhythmia. Ankyrin-B
is a multifunctional adapter protein responsible for targeting select ion
channels, transporters, cytoskeletal proteins, and signaling molecules in
excitable cells, including neurons, pancreatic β-cells, and cardiomyocytes.
Ankyrin-B dysfunction has been linked to cardiac arrhythmia in human patients
and ankyrin-B heterozygous (ankyrin-B(+/-)) mice with a phenotype characterized
by sinus node dysfunction, susceptibility to ventricular arrhythmias, and sudden
death ("ankyrin-B syndrome"). At the cellular level, ankyrin-B(+/-) cells have
defects in the expression and membrane localization of the Na(+)/Ca(2+)
exchanger and Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase, Ca(2+) overload, and frequent
afterdepolarizations, which likely serve as triggers for lethal cardiac
arrhythmias. Despite knowledge gathered from mouse models and human patients,
the molecular mechanism responsible for cardiac arrhythmias in the setting of
ankyrin-B dysfunction remains unclear. Here, we use mathematical modeling to
provide new insights into the cellular pathways responsible for Ca(2+) overload
and afterdepolarizations in ankyrin-B(+/-) cells. We show that the Na(+)/Ca(2+)
exchanger and Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase play related, yet distinct, roles in
intracellular Ca(2+) accumulation, sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) overload, and
afterdepolarization generation in ankyrin-B(+/-) cells. These findings provide
important insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying a human disease and
are relevant for acquired human arrhythmia, where ankyrin-B dysfunction has
recently been identified.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00503.2010
PMCID: PMC2993217
PMID: 20729400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
