---
reference_id: "PMID:41173493"
title: Sustained remission with eculizumab in refractory lupus nephritis with atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome.
authors:
- Thomson B
- Nicholls K
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2025-266485
keywords:
- Humans
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- Female
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/complications, drug therapy"
- Adult
- "Lupus Nephritis/drug therapy, complications"
- Remission Induction
- Complement Inactivating Agents/therapeutic use
- COVID-19/complications
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sustained remission with eculizumab in refractory lupus nephritis with atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome.
**Authors:** Thomson B, Nicholls K
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2025-266485](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2025-266485)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2025 Oct 31;18(10):e266485. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2025-266485.

Sustained remission with eculizumab in refractory lupus nephritis with atypical
haemolytic uraemic syndrome.

Thomson B(1), Nicholls K(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia brady.thomson8@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Nephrology, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.
(3)Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

Lupus nephritis (LN) is a severe manifestation of systemic lupus erythematosus
with approximately 50% of patients having renal involvement. Patients who fail
to respond to appropriate induction immunosuppression are considered to have
refractory disease. Refractory LN is associated with increased risk of
progression to end-stage chronic kidney disease and mortality. Despite the
development of modern therapeutics, refractory LN remains challenging in
clinical practice and continues to be associated with treatment failure.
Complement has a well-described role in the pathogenesis of LN; however,
complement inhibition is not routinely used for refractory disease. We present
the case of a woman in her 30s with refractory LN who presented with atypical
haemolytic uraemic syndrome, macrophage activation syndrome and low-severity
COVID-19 infection. She was treated with eculizumab with rapid clinical and
biochemical improvement. The patient achieved complete remission of her
refractory LN after eculizumab and remains in remission 2 years post eculizumab.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2025. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2025-266485
PMCID: PMC12580851
PMID: 41173493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
