---
reference_id: "PMID:25809546"
title: Imputation of class I and II HLA loci using high-density SNPs from ImmunoChip and their associations with Kawasaki disease in family-based study.
authors:
- Shrestha S
- Wiener HW
- Aissani B
- Shendre A
- Tang J
- Portman MA
journal: Int J Immunogenet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/iji.12190
keywords:
- Alleles
- Family
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Histocompatibility Antigens Class I/genetics, immunology"
- "Histocompatibility Antigens Class II/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- Male
- "Mucocutaneous Lymph Node Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, immunology"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imputation of class I and II HLA loci using high-density SNPs from ImmunoChip and their associations with Kawasaki disease in family-based study.
**Authors:** Shrestha S, Wiener HW, Aissani B, Shendre A, Tang J, Portman MA
**Journal:** Int J Immunogenet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/iji.12190](https://doi.org/10.1111/iji.12190)

## Content

1. Int J Immunogenet. 2015 Jun;42(3):140-6. doi: 10.1111/iji.12190. Epub 2015 Mar
 24.

Imputation of class I and II HLA loci using high-density SNPs from ImmunoChip 
and their associations with Kawasaki disease in family-based study.

Shrestha S(1), Wiener HW(1), Aissani B(1), Shendre A(1), Tang J(2), Portman 
MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle Children's 
Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.

Kawasaki disease (KD) is the leading cause of acquired heart disease in children 
in most developed countries including the United States. The etiology of KD is 
not known; however, epidemiological and immunological data suggest infectious or 
immune-related factors in the manifestation of the disease. Further, KD has 
several hereditary features that strongly suggest a genetic component to disease 
pathogenesis. Human leucocyte antigen (HLA) loci have also been reported to be 
associated with KD, but results have been inconsistent, in part, because of 
small study samples and varying linkage disequilibrium (LD) patterns observed 
across different ethnic groups. To maximize the informativeness of single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotypes in the major histocompatibility (MHC) 
region, we imputed classical HLA I (A, B, C) and HLA II (DRB1, DQA1, DQB1) 
alleles using SNP2HLA method from genotypes of 6700 SNPs within the extended MHC 
region contained in the ImmunoChip among 112 White patients with KD and their 
biological parents from North America and tested their association with KD 
susceptibility using the transmission disequilibrium test. Mendelian consistency 
in the trios suggested high accuracy and reliability of the imputed alleles 
(class I = 97.5%, class II = 96.6%). While several SNPs in the MHC region were 
individually associated with KD susceptibility, we report over-transmission of 
HLA-C*15 (z = +2.19, P = 0.03) and under-transmission of HLA-B*44 (z = -2.49, P 
= 0.01) alleles from parents to patients with KD. HLA-B*44 has been associated 
with KD in other smaller studies, and both HLA-C*15 and HLA-B*44 have biological 
mechanisms that could potentially be involved in KD pathogenesis. Overall, 
inferring HLA loci within the same ethnic group, using family-based information 
is a powerful approach. However, studies with larger sample sizes are warranted 
to evaluate the correlations of the strength and directions between the SNPs in 
MHC region and the imputed HLA alleles with KD.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/iji.12190
PMCID: PMC4430380
PMID: 25809546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.