---
reference_id: "PMID:27784885"
title: Tuberculosis.
authors:
- Pai M
- Behr MA
- Dowdy D
- Dheda K
- Divangahi M
- Boehme CC
- Ginsberg A
- Swaminathan S
- Spigelman M
- Getahun H
- Menzies D
- Raviglione M
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.76
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Pai M, Behr MA, Dowdy D, Dheda K, Divangahi M, Boehme CC, Ginsberg A, Swaminathan S, Spigelman M, Getahun H, Menzies D, Raviglione M
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2016.76](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2016.76)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016 Oct 27;2:16076. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.76.

Tuberculosis.

Pai M(1)(2), Behr MA(1), Dowdy D(3), Dheda K(4), Divangahi M(1), Boehme CC(5), 
Ginsberg A(6), Swaminathan S(7), Spigelman M(8), Getahun H(9), Menzies D(1), 
Raviglione M(9).

Author information:
(1)McGill International TB Centre, McGill University, 1020 Pine Avenue West, 
Montréal, Québec, Québec H3A 1A2, Canada.
(2)Manipal McGill Center for Infectious Diseases, Manipal University, Manipal, 
India.
(3)Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Division of Pulmonology and UCT Lung Institute, Department of Medicine, 
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND), Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)Aeras, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(7)Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi, India.
(8)Global Alliance for TB Drug Development, New York, New York, USA.
(9)Global TB Programme, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017 Mar 09;3:17015. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.15.

Tuberculosis (TB) is an airborne infectious disease caused by organisms of the 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex. Although primarily a pulmonary pathogen, M. 
tuberculosis can cause disease in almost any part of the body. Infection with M. 
tuberculosis can evolve from containment in the host, in which the bacteria are 
isolated within granulomas (latent TB infection), to a contagious state, in 
which the patient will show symptoms that can include cough, fever, night sweats 
and weight loss. Only active pulmonary TB is contagious. In many low-income and 
middle-income countries, TB continues to be a major cause of morbidity and 
mortality, and drug-resistant TB is a major concern in many settings. Although 
several new TB diagnostics have been developed, including rapid molecular tests, 
there is a need for simpler point-of-care tests. Treatment usually requires a 
prolonged course of multiple antimicrobials, stimulating efforts to develop 
shorter drug regimens. Although the Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine is 
used worldwide, mainly to prevent life-threatening TB in infants and young 
children, it has been ineffective in controlling the global TB epidemic. Thus, 
efforts are underway to develop newer vaccines with improved efficacy. New tools 
as well as improved programme implementation and financing are necessary to end 
the global TB epidemic by 2035.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.76
PMID: 27784885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]