---
reference_id: "PMID:35511400"
title: Comparison of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome (MIS-C) and Dengue in Hospitalized Children.
authors:
- Randhawa MS
- Angurana SK
- Nallasamy K
- Kumar M
- Ravikumar N
- Awasthi P
- Ghosh A
- Ratho RK
- Minz RW
- Kumar RM
- Bansal A
- Jayashree M
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12098-022-04184-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome (MIS-C) and Dengue in Hospitalized Children.
**Authors:** Randhawa MS, Angurana SK, Nallasamy K, Kumar M, Ravikumar N, Awasthi P, Ghosh A, Ratho RK, Minz RW, Kumar RM, Bansal A, Jayashree M
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12098-022-04184-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-022-04184-2)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 2023 Jul;90(7):654-659. doi: 10.1007/s12098-022-04184-2.
Epub  2022 May 5.

Comparison of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome (MIS-C) and Dengue in 
Hospitalized Children.

Randhawa MS(#)(1), Angurana SK(#)(1), Nallasamy K(2), Kumar M(3), Ravikumar 
N(1), Awasthi P(1), Ghosh A(4), Ratho RK(4), Minz RW(3), Kumar RM(5), Bansal 
A(1), Jayashree M(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Emergency and Intensive Care Units, Department of Pediatrics, 
Advanced Pediatrics Center, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh 160012, India.
(2)Pediatric Emergency and Intensive Care Units, Department of Pediatrics, 
Advanced Pediatrics Center, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh 160012, India. ny.karthi@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Immunopathology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education 
and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.
(4)Department of Virology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C) in children is a febrile 
illness that has overlapping presentation with other locally prevalent 
illnesses. Clinicolaboratory profile of children admitted with MIS-C and dengue 
were compared to understand their presentation at the outset.
METHODS: This was a retrospective study of children ≤ 12 y admitted with MIS-C 
(WHO definition) or laboratory-confirmed dengue between August 2020 and January 
2021 at a tertiary center in North India.
RESULTS: A total of 84 children (MIS-C - 40; dengue - 44) were included. The 
mean (SD) age [83.5 (39) vs. 91.6 (35) mo] was comparable. Rash (72.5% vs. 
22.7%), conjunctival injection (60% vs. 2.3%), oral mucocutaneous changes (27.5% 
vs. 0) and gallop rhythm (15% vs. 0) were seen more frequently with MIS-C, while 
petechiae [29.5% vs. 7.5%], myalgia (38.6% vs. 10%), headache (22.7% vs. 2.5%), 
and hepatomegaly (68.2% vs. 27.5%) were more common with dengue. Children with 
MIS-C had significantly higher C-reactive protein (124 vs. 3.2 mg/L) and 
interleukin 6 (95.3 vs. 20.7 ng/mL), while those with dengue had higher 
hemoglobin (12 vs. 10.2 g/dL) lower mean platelet count (26 vs. 140 × 109/L), 
and greater elevation in aspartate (607 vs. 44 IU/L) and alanine (235.5 vs. 
56 IU/L) aminotransferases. The hospital stay was longer with MIS-C; however, 
PICU stay and mortality were comparable.
CONCLUSION: In hospitalized children with acute febrile illness, the presence of 
mucocutaneous features and highly elevated CRP could distinguish MIS-C from 
dengue. The presence of petechiae, hepatomegaly, and hemoconcentration may favor 
a diagnosis of dengue.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Dr. K C Chaudhuri Foundation.

DOI: 10.1007/s12098-022-04184-2
PMCID: PMC9068862
PMID: 35511400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.