---
reference_id: "PMID:39314548"
title: Romosuzumab used to treat a 29-year-old patient with anorexia nervosa related osteoporosis - A case report.
authors:
- Demolli P
- Frey D
journal: Bone Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.bonr.2024.101803
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Romosuzumab used to treat a 29-year-old patient with anorexia nervosa related osteoporosis - A case report.
**Authors:** Demolli P, Frey D
**Journal:** Bone Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bonr.2024.101803](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bonr.2024.101803)

## Content

1. Bone Rep. 2024 Sep 11;22:101803. doi: 10.1016/j.bonr.2024.101803. eCollection
2024 Sep.

Romosuzumab used to treat a 29-year-old patient with anorexia nervosa related
osteoporosis - A case report.

Demolli P(1), Frey D(1).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital Zurich (USZ), Department of Rheumatology, Switzerland.

Osteoporosis and decreased bone density is a frequent complication of anorexia
nervosa (AN). As of yet, there have been no studies of accomplished treatment of
AN-related osteoporosis with romosuzumab, a monoclonal antibody to sclerostin.
We report the first case of a premenopausal, 29-year old patient in Switzerland
with decreased bone density and osteoporotic fractures due to anorexia nervosa,
who completed the treatment with romosuzumab. There was a significant increase
in bone mineral density (BMD) after 12 months of therapy. No serious side
effects were reported. To date, only bisphosphonates, denosumab and teriparatide
have been evaluated in treatment of AN-related osteoporosis in adolescents and
premenopausal individuals respectively. Our report demonstrates that romosuzumab
might be an alternative treatment option in patients with anorexia nervosa who
are at high risk for osteoporotic fractures. To assess the efficacy and safety
of romosuzumab in individuals with AN further studies are needed.

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bonr.2024.101803
PMCID: PMC11417517
PMID: 39314548

Conflict of interest statement: The authors certify that they have NO
affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with any
financial interest (such as honoraria; educational grants; participation in
speakers’ bureaus; membership, employment, consultancies, stock ownership, or
other equity interest; and expert testimony or patent-licensing arrangements),
or non-financial interest (such as personal or professional relationships,
affiliations, knowledge or beliefs) in the subject matter or materials discussed
in this manuscript.
