---
reference_id: "PMID:31167810"
title: "ABCA1- and ABCG1-mediated cholesterol efflux capacity of cerebrospinal fluid is impaired in Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- Marchi C
- Adorni MP
- Caffarra P
- Ronda N
- Spallazzi M
- Barocco F
- Galimberti D
- Bernini F
- Zimetti F
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1194/jlr.P091033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ABCA1- and ABCG1-mediated cholesterol efflux capacity of cerebrospinal fluid is impaired in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Marchi C, Adorni MP, Caffarra P, Ronda N, Spallazzi M, Barocco F, Galimberti D, Bernini F, Zimetti F
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1194/jlr.P091033](https://doi.org/10.1194/jlr.P091033)

## Content

1. J Lipid Res. 2019 Aug;60(8):1449-1456. doi: 10.1194/jlr.P091033. Epub 2019 Jun
 5.

ABCA1- and ABCG1-mediated cholesterol efflux capacity of cerebrospinal fluid is 
impaired in Alzheimer's disease.

Marchi C(1), Adorni MP(1), Caffarra P(2)(3), Ronda N(4), Spallazzi M(2), Barocco 
F(2), Galimberti D(5)(6), Bernini F(4), Zimetti F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food and Drug University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine and Surgery, Section of Neurology University of Parma, 
Parma, Italy.
(3)Alzheimer Center Briolini Hospital, Gazzaniga, Bergamo, Italy.
(4)Department of Food and Drug University of Parma, Parma, Italy 
fbernini@unipr.it nicoletta.ronda@unipr.it.
(5)Department of Biomedical, Surgical and Dental Sciences, Dino Ferrari Center, 
University of Milano, Milano, Italy.
(6)Neurodegenerative Diseases Unit Fondazione Cà Granda, IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Milano, Italy.

HDL-like particles in human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) promote the efflux of 
cholesterol from astrocytes toward the neurons that rely on this supply for 
their functions. We evaluated whether cell cholesterol efflux capacity of CSF 
(CSF-CEC) is impaired in Alzheimer's disease (AD) by analyzing AD (n = 37) 
patients, non-AD dementia (non-AD DEM; n = 16) patients, and control subjects (n 
= 39). As expected, AD patients showed reduced CSF Aβ 1-42, increased total and 
phosphorylated tau, and a higher frequency of the apoε4 genotype. ABCA1- and 
ABCG1-mediated CSF-CEC was markedly reduced in AD (-73% and -33%, respectively) 
but not in non-AD DEM patients, in which a reduced passive diffusion CEC (-40%) 
was observed. Non-AD DEM patients displayed lower CSF apoE concentrations (-24%) 
compared with controls, while apoA-I levels were similar among groups. No 
differences in CSF-CEC were found by stratifying subjects for apoε4 status. 
ABCG1 CSF-CEC positively correlated with Aβ 1-42 (r = 0.305, P = 0.025), while 
ABCA1 CSF-CEC inversely correlated with total and phosphorylated tau (r = 
-0.348, P = 0.018 and r = -0.294, P = 0.048, respectively). The CSF-CEC 
impairment and the correlation with the neurobiochemical markers suggest a 
pathophysiological link between CSF HDL-like particle dysfunction and 
neurodegeneration in AD.

Copyright © 2019 Marchi et al.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.P091033
PMCID: PMC6672040
PMID: 31167810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]