---
reference_id: "PMID:34911128"
title: Genetic Counseling for Bladder Exstrophy-Epispadias Complex.
authors:
- Reutter H
- Holmdahl G
journal: Eur J Pediatr Surg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1740336
keywords:
- "Bladder Exstrophy/genetics, surgery"
- Child
- "Epispadias/genetics, surgery"
- Genetic Counseling
- Health Status
- Humans
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Counseling for Bladder Exstrophy-Epispadias Complex.
**Authors:** Reutter H, Holmdahl G
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr Surg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0041-1740336](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0041-1740336)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2021 Dec;31(6):468-471. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1740336. Epub 
2021 Dec 15.

Genetic Counseling for Bladder Exstrophy-Epispadias Complex.

Reutter H(1), Holmdahl G(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care Medicine, Department of 
Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Friedrich-Alexander-University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Unit of Pediatric Oncology and Pediatric Surgery, Department of Women's and 
Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Karolinska University Hospital, Astrid 
Lindgren Children's Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Bladder exstrophy-epispadias complex (BEEC) represents the severe end of the 
uro-rectal malformation spectrum and has profound impact on continence, sexual, 
and renal function. Treatment of BEEC is primarily surgical, and the main goals 
are safe closure of the abdominal wall, urinary continence while preserving 
renal function, and adequate cosmetic and functional genital reconstruction. 
Psychosocial and psychosexual outcomes and adequate health-related quality of 
life depend on long-term multidisciplinary care. The overall outcome is now 
considered very positive and affected individuals usually lead self-determined 
and independent lives with the desire to start their own families later in life. 
Certainty about the risk of recurrence and the provision of information about 
the current state of knowledge about the identified genetic causes with high 
penetrance will have an impact on family planning for healthy parents with an 
affected child and for affected individuals themselves. This review addresses 
this information and presents the current state of knowledge.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1740336
PMID: 34911128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.