---
reference_id: "PMID:26966880"
title: Evaluation of Planar-Cell-Polarity Phenotypes in Ciliopathy Mouse Mutant Cochlea.
authors:
- May-Simera H
journal: J Vis Exp
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3791/53559
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Polarity/physiology
- Ciliopathies/physiopathology
- "Cochlea/cytology, metabolism"
- "Cochlear Duct/cytology, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Embryo, Mammalian/cytology"
- "Hair Cells, Auditory"
- Immunohistochemistry
- Mice
- "Microscopy, Electron, Scanning"
- Phenotype
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Stereocilia/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of Planar-Cell-Polarity Phenotypes in Ciliopathy Mouse Mutant Cochlea.
**Authors:** May-Simera H
**Journal:** J Vis Exp (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3791/53559](https://doi.org/10.3791/53559)

## Content

1. J Vis Exp. 2016 Feb 21;(108):53559. doi: 10.3791/53559.

Evaluation of Planar-Cell-Polarity Phenotypes in Ciliopathy Mouse Mutant 
Cochlea.

May-Simera H(1).

Author information:
(1)Cell and Matrix Biology, Institute of Zoology, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität 
Mainz; hmaysime@uni-mainz.de.

In recent years, primary cilia have emerged as key regulators in development and 
disease by influencing numerous signaling pathways. One of the earliest 
signaling pathways shown to be associated with ciliary function was the 
non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway, also referred to as planar cell polarity 
(PCP) signaling. One of the best places in which to study the effects of planar 
cell polarity (PCP) signaling during vertebrate development is the mammalian 
cochlea. PCP signaling disruption in the mouse cochlea disrupts cochlear 
outgrowth, cellular patterning and hair cell orientation, all of which are 
affected by cilia dysfunction. The goal of this protocol is to describe the 
analysis of PCP signaling in the developing mammalian cochlea via phenotypic 
analysis, immunohistochemistry and scanning electron microscopy. Defects in 
convergence and extension are manifested as a shortening of the cochlear duct 
and/or changes in cellular patterning, which can be quantified following 
dissection from developing mouse mutants. Changes in stereociliary bundle 
orientation and kinocilia length or positioning can be observed and quantitated 
using either immunofluorescence or scanning electron microscopy (SEM). A deeper 
insight into the role of ciliary proteins in cellular signaling pathways and 
other biological phenomena is crucial for our understanding of cellular and 
developmental biology, as well as for the development of targeted treatment 
strategies.

DOI: 10.3791/53559
PMCID: PMC4828173
PMID: 26966880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]