---
reference_id: "PMID:24260721"
title: "Clinical and Radiological Findings of Autosomal Dominant Osteopetrosis Type II: A Case Report."
authors:
- Kant P
- Sharda N
- Bhowate RR
journal: Case Rep Dent
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1155/2013/707343
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Radiological Findings of Autosomal Dominant Osteopetrosis Type II: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Kant P, Sharda N, Bhowate RR
**Journal:** Case Rep Dent (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2013/707343](https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/707343)

## Content

1. Case Rep Dent. 2013;2013:707343. doi: 10.1155/2013/707343. Epub 2013 Oct 24.

Clinical and Radiological Findings of Autosomal Dominant Osteopetrosis Type II:
A Case Report.

Kant P(1), Sharda N, Bhowate RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Radiology, Manav Rachna Dental College,
Sector 43, Aravalli Hills, Delhi-Surajkund Road, Faridabad, Haryana 121001,
India.

Osteopetrosis is a rare inherited genetic disease characterized by sclerosis of
the skeleton caused by the absence or malfunction of osteoclasts. Three distinct
forms of the disease have been recognized, autosomal dominant osteopetrosis
being the most common. Autosomal dominant osteopetrosis exhibits a heterogeneous
trait with milder symptoms, often at later childhood or adulthood. The aim of
this case report is to present the clinical and radiographic features of a
35-year-old female patient with autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type II who
exhibited features of chronic generalised periodontitis, and the radiographs
revealed generalised osteosclerosis and hallmark radiographic features of ADO
type II, that is, "bone-within-bone appearance" and "Erlenmeyer-flask
deformity."

DOI: 10.1155/2013/707343
PMCID: PMC3821930
PMID: 24260721
