---
reference_id: "PMID:38964204"
title: "Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes in Belgium: Genetic and Clinical Characterization of Pediatric and Adult Patients."
authors:
- Smeets N
- Gheldof A
- Dequeker B
- Poleur M
- Maldonado Slootjes S
- Van Parijs V
- Deconinck N
- Dontaine P
- Alonso-Jimenez A
- De Bleecker J
- De Ridder W
- Herdewyn S
- Paquay S
- Vanlander A
- De Waele L
- Peirens G
- Beysen D
- Claeys KG
- Dubuisson N
- Hansen I
- Remiche G
- Seneca S
- Bissay V
- Régal L
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.06.002
keywords:
- Humans
- "Myasthenic Syndromes, Congenital/genetics, physiopathology, diagnosis"
- Belgium/epidemiology
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Child
- Retrospective Studies
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes in Belgium: Genetic and Clinical Characterization of Pediatric and Adult Patients.
**Authors:** Smeets N, Gheldof A, Dequeker B, Poleur M, Maldonado Slootjes S, Van Parijs V, Deconinck N, Dontaine P, Alonso-Jimenez A, De Bleecker J, De Ridder W, Herdewyn S, Paquay S, Vanlander A, De Waele L, Peirens G, Beysen D, Claeys KG, Dubuisson N, Hansen I, Remiche G, Seneca S, Bissay V, Régal L
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.06.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.06.002)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2024 Sep;158:57-65. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.06.002. 
Epub 2024 Jun 11.

Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes in Belgium: Genetic and Clinical 
Characterization of Pediatric and Adult Patients.

Smeets N(1), Gheldof A(2), Dequeker B(2), Poleur M(3), Maldonado Slootjes S(4), 
Van Parijs V(4), Deconinck N(5), Dontaine P(5), Alonso-Jimenez A(6), De Bleecker 
J(7), De Ridder W(6), Herdewyn S(7), Paquay S(8), Vanlander A(9), De Waele 
L(10), Peirens G(10), Beysen D(11), Claeys KG(12), Dubuisson N(4), Hansen I(13), 
Remiche G(14), Seneca S(2), Bissay V(15), Régal L(16).

Author information:
(1)Child Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 
Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: 
Nathalie.smeets@uzbrussel.be.
(2)Center of Medical Genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Universitair 
Ziekenhuis Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)University Department of Neurology, Citadelle Hospital of Liège, Liège, 
Belgium.
(4)Department of Neurology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(5)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Queen Fabiola Children's University 
Hospital, Université Libre De Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp University Hospital, 
Antwerp, Belgium.
(7)Department of Neurology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(8)Department of Neuropediatrics, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(9)Department of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Diseases, Ghent University 
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(10)Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Department of Pediatric Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(11)Department of Pediatric Neurology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp University 
Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(12)Department of Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Laboratory for Muscle Diseases and Neuropathies, Department of Neurosciences, KU 
Leuven, Leuven Brain Institute (LBI), Leuven, Belgium.
(13)Department of Neurology, University of Liège, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(14)Department of Neurology, Hôpital Universitaire de Bruxelles - Hôpital 
Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(15)NEUR Research Group and Department of Neurology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 
Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
(16)Child Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 
Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a group of genetic 
disorders characterized by impaired neuromuscular transmission. CMS typically 
present at a young age with fatigable muscle weakness, often with an abnormal 
response after repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS). Pharmacologic treatment can 
improve symptoms, depending on the underlying defect. Prevalence is likely 
underestimated. This study reports on patients with CMS followed in Belgium in 
2022.
METHODS: Data were gathered retrospectively from the medical charts. Only likely 
pathogenic and pathogenic variants were included in the analysis.
RESULTS: We identified 37 patients, resulting in an estimated prevalence of 3.19 
per 1,000,000. The patients harbored pathogenic variants in CHRNE, RAPSN, DOK7, 
PREPL, CHRNB1, CHRNG, COLQ, MUSK, CHRND, GFPT1, and GMPPB. CHRNE was the most 
commonly affected gene. Most patients showed disease onset at birth, during 
infancy, or during childhood. Symptom onset was at adult age in seven patients, 
caused by variants in CHRNE, DOK7, MUSK, CHRND, and GMPPB. Severity and 
distribution of weakness varied, as did the presence of respiratory involvement, 
feeding problems, and extraneuromuscular manifestations. RNS was performed in 23 
patients of whom 18 demonstrated a pathologic decrement. Most treatment 
responses were predictable based on the genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first pooled characterization of patients with CMS in 
Belgium. We broaden the phenotypical spectrum of pathogenic variants in CHRNE 
with adult-onset CMS. Systematically documenting larger cohorts of patients with 
CMS can aid in better clinical characterization and earlier recognition of this 
rare disease. We emphasize the importance of establishing a molecular genetic 
diagnosis to tailor treatment choices.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.06.002
PMID: 38964204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest There has been 
no commercial involvement in the study design or manuscript preparation, and 
none of the authors report any other conflicts of interest.