---
reference_id: "PMID:29800551"
title: "Advances in the Genetics of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: Clinical Implications."
authors:
- Horani A
- Ferkol TW
journal: Chest
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.05.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in the Genetics of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: Clinical Implications.
**Authors:** Horani A, Ferkol TW
**Journal:** Chest (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chest.2018.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2018.05.007)

## Content

1. Chest. 2018 Sep;154(3):645-652. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.05.007. Epub 2018
May  22.

Advances in the Genetics of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: Clinical Implications.

Horani A(1), Ferkol TW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO; Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, MO. Electronic address: ferkol_t@wustl.edu.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia is a rare genetic disease of the motile cilia and is 
one of a rapidly expanding collection of disorders known as ciliopathies. 
Patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia have diverse clinical manifestations, 
including chronic upper and lower respiratory tract disease, left-right 
laterality defects, and infertility. In recent years, our understanding of the 
genetics of primary ciliary dyskinesia has rapidly advanced. A growing number of 
disease-associated genes and pathogenic mutations have been identified, which 
encode axonemal, cytoplasmic, and regulatory proteins involved in the assembly, 
structure, and function of motile cilia. Our knowledge of cilia genetics and the 
function of the proteins encoded has led to a greater understanding of the 
clinical manifestations of motile ciliopathies. These advances have changed our 
approach toward diagnostic testing for primary ciliary dyskinesia. In this 
review, we will describe how new insights into genetics have allowed us to 
define the clinical features of primary ciliary dyskinesia, revolutionize 
diagnostics, and reveal previously unrecognized genotype-phenotype relationships 
in primary ciliary dyskinesia.

Copyright © 2018 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.05.007
PMCID: PMC6130327
PMID: 29800551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]