---
reference_id: "PMID:15843401"
title: Sustained ERK1/2 but not STAT1 or 3 activation is required for thanatophoric dysplasia phenotypes in PC12 cells.
authors:
- Nowroozi N
- Raffioni S
- Wang T
- Apostol BL
- Bradshaw RA
- Thompson LM
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi161
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Blotting, Northern"
- DNA Primers
- Enzyme Activation
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 1/metabolism
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 3/metabolism
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- PC12 Cells
- Phenotype
- Phosphorylation
- Rats
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sustained ERK1/2 but not STAT1 or 3 activation is required for thanatophoric dysplasia phenotypes in PC12 cells.
**Authors:** Nowroozi N, Raffioni S, Wang T, Apostol BL, Bradshaw RA, Thompson LM
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddi161](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddi161)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Jun 1;14(11):1529-38. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi161. Epub 2005
Apr  20.

Sustained ERK1/2 but not STAT1 or 3 activation is required for thanatophoric 
dysplasia phenotypes in PC12 cells.

Nowroozi N(1), Raffioni S, Wang T, Apostol BL, Bradshaw RA, Thompson LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, 2121 Gillespie, University of 
California at Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) cause the most common 
genetic form of short-limbed dwarfism, achondroplasia (ACH), as well as neonatal 
lethal forms, thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) I and II. The causative mutations 
induce graded levels of constitutive activation of the receptor that correspond 
to the severity of the disorder, resulting in premature entry into hypertrophic 
differentiation and reduced proliferation of chondrocytes in developing 
cartilage. Although FGFR3 promotes growth in most tissues, it is a negative 
regulator of endochondral bone growth. Several signaling pathways have been 
implicated in these skeletal disorders including the Ras/MEK/ERK pathway and the 
JAK/STAT, the latter in the most severe phenotypes, however their functional 
relevance remains incompletely understood. Using PC12 cell lines stably 
expressing inducible mutant receptors containing the TDII mutation, K650E, 
sustained activation of ERK1/2 and activation of STAT1 and STAT3, but not STAT5, 
is observed in the absence of ligand. This activation leads to neurite 
outgrowth, a phenotypic readout of constitutive receptor activity, and sustained 
ERK1/2 activity is required for this ligand-independent differentiation. To 
assess the functional relevance of STAT activation induced by the mutant 
receptor, STATs were specifically downregulated using RNA-interference. 
Silencing of STAT1 or 3 independently or in combination had no significant 
effect on ligand-independent neurite outgrowth, ERK1/2 activation or 
p21(WAF1/CIP1) protein levels. These results support a model in which sustained 
activation of ERK1/2 is a key regulator of the increased transition to 
hypertrophic differentiation of the growth plate, whereas activation of STATs 1 
and 3 is not required.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi161
PMID: 15843401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]