---
reference_id: "PMID:12851870"
title: "Crohn's disease and the NOD2 gene: a role for paneth cells."
authors:
- Lala S
- Ogura Y
- Osborne C
- Hor SY
- Bromfield A
- Davies S
- Ogunbiyi O
- Nuñez G
- Keshav S
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0016-5085(03)00661-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crohn's disease and the NOD2 gene: a role for paneth cells.
**Authors:** Lala S, Ogura Y, Osborne C, Hor SY, Bromfield A, Davies S, Ogunbiyi O, Nuñez G, Keshav S
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0016-5085(03)00661-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0016-5085(03)00661-9)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2003 Jul;125(1):47-57. doi: 10.1016/s0016-5085(03)00661-9.

Crohn's disease and the NOD2 gene: a role for paneth cells.

Lala S(1), Ogura Y, Osborne C, Hor SY, Bromfield A, Davies S, Ogunbiyi O, Nuñez 
G, Keshav S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Royal Free & University College Medical School, 
London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The NOD2 gene, which is strongly associated with 
susceptibility to Crohn's disease (CD) of the terminal ileum, interacts with 
bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS), inducing cellular activation. However, the 
mechanisms by which NOD2 mutations cause terminal ileitis are unknown, and NOD2 
is expressed most highly by peripheral blood monocytes, which are distributed 
ubiquitously and readily respond to LPS via cell-surface receptors. Paneth cells 
on the other hand, are most numerous in the terminal ileum, are critically 
important in enteric antibacterial defense, and respond to LPS through as yet 
undefined pathways. We therefore determined if these specialized intestinal 
epithelial cells also expressed the NOD2 gene.
METHODS: In situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, and laser-capture 
microdissection were used to determine RNA and protein expression in tissue 
sections, and real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
was used to quantitate gene expression in intestinal epithelial cells and 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
RESULTS: NOD2 was detected readily in monocytes, but not in mature macrophages 
in the lamina propria or within granulomas, and levels declined as monocytes 
differentiated into macrophages in vitro, so that Caco-2 cells expressed more 
NOD2 mRNA than macrophages. NOD2 mRNA was enriched in crypts compared with 
villi, and in situ, Paneth cells were the most prominent cells expressing NOD2 
in normal and CD-affected intestinal tissue, where they also strongly expressed 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) RNA.
CONCLUSIONS: The NOD2 gene product is most abundant in Paneth cells in the 
terminal ileum, which could therefore play a critical and hitherto unrecognized 
role in the pathogenesis of NOD2-associated CD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0016-5085(03)00661-9
PMID: 12851870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]