---
reference_id: "PMID:40116126"
title: Age-Related Trajectories of Autistic Traits in Children With Angelman Syndrome.
authors:
- Hagenaar DA
- Mous SE
- Ten Hoopen LW
- Rietman AB
- Hiralal KR
- Bindels-de Heus KGCB
- de Nijs PFA
- Mohr TC
- Lens EJ
- Hillegers MHJ
- Moll HA
- de Wit MY
- Dieleman GC
journal: Autism Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/aur.70017
keywords:
- Humans
- "Angelman Syndrome/genetics, complications, epidemiology, psychology"
- Male
- Female
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Longitudinal Studies
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Age Factors
- Genotype
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
- Autistic Disorder
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Age-Related Trajectories of Autistic Traits in Children With Angelman Syndrome.
**Authors:** Hagenaar DA, Mous SE, Ten Hoopen LW, Rietman AB, Hiralal KR, Bindels-de Heus KGCB, de Nijs PFA, Mohr TC, Lens EJ, Hillegers MHJ, Moll HA, de Wit MY, Dieleman GC
**Journal:** Autism Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/aur.70017](https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.70017)

## Content

1. Autism Res. 2025 Apr;18(4):870-880. doi: 10.1002/aur.70017. Epub 2025 Mar 21.

Age-Related Trajectories of Autistic Traits in Children With Angelman Syndrome.

Hagenaar DA(1)(2)(3), Mous SE(1)(2), Ten Hoopen LW(1)(2), Rietman AB(1)(2),
Hiralal KR(1)(2), Bindels-de Heus KGCB(1)(3), de Nijs PFA(1)(2), Mohr TC(1)(2),
Lens EJ(1)(2), Hillegers MHJ(2), Moll HA(1)(3), de Wit MY(1)(4), Dieleman
GC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)ENCORE Expertise Centre for Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Child- and Adolescent Psychiatry/Psychology, Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurology and Pediatric Neurology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare neurogenetic disorder. Previous studies
indicate a high prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) with considerable
variability. Little is known regarding the longitudinal trajectory of autistic
traits. We aim to investigate autistic traits, the effect of age on these
traits, and associated features in AS children. This (partly) longitudinal
clinical record study at the ENCORE Expertise Center involved 107 AS children
aged 2-18 with one (N = 107), two (N = 49), or three (N = 14) measurements.
Autistic traits and sensory processing issues were assessed using various
instruments, and DSM classifications were used descriptively. Covariates were
genotype, gender, and epilepsy. Results indicate a high prevalence of autistic
traits and sensory processing issues. Children with the deletion genotype
exhibited more autistic traits. Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS)
classifications indicated higher rates of ASD compared to clinician DSM
classifications. Autistic traits generally remained stable over time, except
that ADOS scores significantly decreased for children with the UBE3A mutation
genotype, and in the social affect domain for the entire group. In conclusion,
incorporating the assessment of autistic traits and sensory processing into
clinical practice for AS is important to inform adaptations of the environment
to meet the child's needs. Additionally, clinicians and researchers should be
mindful of the potential for overestimating ASD traits in AS when relying on the
ADOS. ASD diagnosis in AS should integrate multiple diagnostic instruments,
diverse hetero-anamnestic sources, and multidisciplinary expert opinions.

© 2025 The Author(s). Autism Research published by International Society for
Autism Research and Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/aur.70017
PMCID: PMC12015797
PMID: 40116126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Marie‐Claire de Wit is the Erasmus MC study site
leader for the Roche Tangelo study, for which the hospital received funding. The
hospital also received compensation from Roche and Jazz Pharmaceuticals for
giving advice. All other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
