---
reference_id: "PMID:40721902"
title: "Diagnosis and management of cerebral amyloid angiopathy: a scientific statement from the International CAA Association and the World Stroke Organization."
authors:
- Cordonnier C
- Klijn C
- Smith EE
- Al-Shahi Salman R
- Chwalisz BK
- van Etten E
- Muir RT
- Piazza F
- Schreiber S
- Schreuder FH
- Selim M
- Shoamanesh A
- Viswanathan A
- Wermer M
- Zandi M
- Charidimou A
- Greenberg SM
- Werring D
journal: Int J Stroke
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/17474930251365861
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy/diagnosis, therapy, complications"
- "Cerebral Hemorrhage/etiology, therapy, diagnosis"
- Disease Management
- Fibrinolytic Agents/therapeutic use
- Risk Factors
- "Societies, Medical"
- "Stroke/therapy, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of cerebral amyloid angiopathy: a scientific statement from the International CAA Association and the World Stroke Organization.
**Authors:** Cordonnier C, Klijn C, Smith EE, Al-Shahi Salman R, Chwalisz BK, van Etten E, Muir RT, Piazza F, Schreiber S, Schreuder FH, Selim M, Shoamanesh A, Viswanathan A, Wermer M, Zandi M, Charidimou A, Greenberg SM, Werring D
**Journal:** Int J Stroke (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/17474930251365861](https://doi.org/10.1177/17474930251365861)

## Content

1. Int J Stroke. 2025 Oct;20(8):949-967. doi: 10.1177/17474930251365861. Epub
2025  Jul 28.

Diagnosis and management of cerebral amyloid angiopathy: a scientific statement 
from the International CAA Association and the World Stroke Organization.

Cordonnier C(1), Klijn C(2), Smith EE(3), Al-Shahi Salman R(4), Chwalisz BK(5), 
van Etten E(6), Muir RT(7), Piazza F(8), Schreiber S(9)(10), Schreuder FH(2), 
Selim M(11), Shoamanesh A(12), Viswanathan A(5), Wermer M(13), Zandi M(14), 
Charidimou A(15), Greenberg SM(5), Werring D(16).

Author information:
(1)Univ. Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U1172-LilNCog-Lille Neuroscience & Cognition, 
Lille, France.
(2)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Neurosciences and Hotchkiss Brain Institute, 
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(4)Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
UK.
(5)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(7)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine and Sunnybrook Research 
Institute, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(8)CAA and AD Translational Research and Biomarkers Laboratory, iCAB 
International Network, School of Medicine and Surgery, University of 
Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy.
(9)Department of Neurology, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany.
(10)German Research Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Magdeburg, 
Germany.
(11)Department of Neurology, Stroke Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Department of Medicine (Neurology), McMaster University/Population Health 
Research Institute, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(13)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(14)UCL Department of Neuroinflammation, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology 
and National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(15)Department of Neurology, Boston University Medical Center, Boston University 
Chobanian & Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(16)UCL Stroke Research Centre, Department of Translational Neuroscience and 
Stroke, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology and National Hospital for 
Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK.

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is a well-recognized and challenging disease 
for neurologists and other clinicians caring for the rapidly aging worldwide 
population. CAA is a major cause of spontaneous lobar intracerebral hemorrhage 
(ICH), and can also cause transient focal neurological episodes, and convexity 
subarachnoid hemorrhage, CAA-associated ICH has a high mortality, morbidity, and 
recurrence rate. CAA can affect a wide range of clinical decisions including use 
of antithrombotic medications, safety for anti-β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) 
immunotherapy, and need for anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressive treatment. We 
present guidelines, intended to inform the approach to individuals with 
suspected CAA, written on behalf of the International CAA Association and the 
World Stroke Organization (WSO). We cover five areas selected for their 
relevance to practice: (1) diagnosis, testing, and prediction of intracerebral 
hemorrhage risk; (2) antithrombotic agents and vascular interventions; (3) 
vascular risk factors and concomitant medications; (4) treatment of CAA 
manifestations; and (5) diagnosis and treatment of CAA-related inflammation and 
vasculitis. The statement has been reviewed and approved by the Executive 
Committee of the WSO, and the International CAA Association.

DOI: 10.1177/17474930251365861
PMID: 40721902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe 
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Dr Cordonnier: 
None declared.Dr Klijn: steering committee of the cAPPricorn trial under a 
consulting services agreement between Alnylam Pharmaceuticals and Radboud 
university medical center.Dr Smith: research funding from Alnylam 
Pharmaceuticals, paid to the University of Calgary, to serve as a site for a 
clinical trial for cerebral amyloid angiopathy.Dr Al-Shahi Salman: None 
declaredDr Chwalisz: None declaredDr van Etten: local investigator for the 
cAPPricorn trial in CAA and member of the steering committee of the cAPPricorn 
trial for Alnylam Pharmaceuticals Inc.Dr Muir: None declared.Dr Piazza: 
Consulting services and educational activities, paid to the University of Milano 
Bicocca, with Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Roche, Biogen, Alector, Lilly, Araclon. 
Inventor, without ownership, of the amyloid Ab antibody assay.Dr Schreiber: None 
declaredDr Schreuder: Local investigator for the cAPPricorn trial in CAA. Grant 
from Dutch Research Council (NWO ZonMw VENI grant; 09150162310154).Dr Selim: 
grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH)/National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke and National Institute of Aging; consulting 
services with Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, AegisCN, LLC and MedRhythms, Inc; stock 
holdings in NeuGel, Inc; and royalties Up-To-Date.Dr Shoamanesh: Steering 
Committees of the ASPIRE, ASPIRING and SATURN trials, Data Safety Monitoring 
Committee of the cAPPricorn trial (Alnylam Pharmaceuticals Inc.), (Co-)PI of the 
ENRICH-AF, SATURN-MRI and CoVasc-ICH trials, Steering Committee Co-Chair of the 
ANNEXa-I trial (AstraZeneca), consulting honoraria from Astrazeneca, Bayer AG, 
Bioxodes, Daiichi Sankyo, and VarmX.Dr Viswanathan: consultant Alnylam, 
Biogen.Dr Wermer: member of TRACK-D-CAA consortium funded by Alnylam 
Pharmaceuticals with payment to Leiden University Medical Center.Dr Zandi: 
honoraria for one lecture each for each of the four mentioned in the last 
3 years: Norwegian Neurological Society; Copenhagen Neuropsychological Society, 
Rigshospitalet; Cygnet Healthcare, and GSK.Dr Charidimou: Consulting services 
with Alnylam Pharmaceuticals. Consulting services with Imperative Care.Dr 
Greenberg: steering committee of the cAPPricorn trial under a consulting 
services agreement between Alnylam Pharmaceuticals and Massachusetts General 
Hospital; royalties Up-To-Date.Dr Werring: local investigator for the cAPPricorn 
trial in CAA; has received honoraria for consulting and speaking from Alnylam. 
Professor Werring’s work is supported by the National Institute for Health and 
Care Research University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Center.