---
reference_id: "PMID:33493959"
title: "Ebola: A review and focus on neurologic manifestations."
authors:
- Adekanmbi O
- Ilesanmi O
- Lakoh S
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2021.117311
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola: A review and focus on neurologic manifestations.
**Authors:** Adekanmbi O, Ilesanmi O, Lakoh S
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2021.117311](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2021.117311)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2021 Feb 15;421:117311. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2021.117311. Epub
2021  Jan 7.

Ebola: A review and focus on neurologic manifestations.

Adekanmbi O(1), Ilesanmi O(2), Lakoh S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria; Department of 
Medicine, University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Community Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria; 
Department of Community Medicine, University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria. 
Electronic address: ileolasteve@yahoo.co.uk.
(3)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine and Allied Health Sciences, 
University of Sierra Leone, Sierra Leone; Department of Medicine, University of 
Sierra Leone Teaching Hospitals Complex, Sierra Leone.

Ebolavirus disease (EVD) is a severe, highly contagious, and often fatal 
systemic disease in human and non-human primates. Zoonotic and human-to-human 
transmission have been well documented. Ebolaviruses are endemic to Equatorial 
and West Africa and there have been over 20 outbreaks in sub-Saharan Africa 
since 1976. The largest known outbreak of EVD occurred between 2013 and 2016 
across several West African countries. It resulted in 28,646 suspected and 
confirmed cases and 11,323 deaths. There are 5 species within the genus 
Ebolavirus with 4 of them being clinically significant. In patients with EVD, 
neurologic manifestations range from mild symptoms such as confusion to severe 
neurologic diseases such as meningitis and encephalitis. Altered mental status, 
from mild confusion to delirium with hallucinations, may also occur. Rare 
neuropsychiatric manifestations of EVD include psychological or cognitive 
symptoms, including short-term memory loss, insomnia, and depression or anxiety. 
Although Ebolavirus RNA has been detected in cerebrospinal fluid, the body of 
knowledge around the pathogenic mechanisms of neurological disease is not yet 
fully understood. Studies are needed to understand the acute and chronic 
neuronal pathologic as well as biochemical cerebrospinal fluid changes in 
Ebolavirus infection.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2021.117311
PMID: 33493959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]