---
reference_id: "PMID:38505790"
title: "Decoding hepatorenal tyrosinemia type 1: Unraveling the impact of early detection, NTBC, and the role of liver transplantation."
authors:
- Kehar M
- Sen Sarma M
- Seetharaman J
- Jimenez Rivera C
- Chakraborty P
journal: Can Liver J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3138/canlivj-2023-0018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Decoding hepatorenal tyrosinemia type 1: Unraveling the impact of early detection, NTBC, and the role of liver transplantation.
**Authors:** Kehar M, Sen Sarma M, Seetharaman J, Jimenez Rivera C, Chakraborty P
**Journal:** Can Liver J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3138/canlivj-2023-0018](https://doi.org/10.3138/canlivj-2023-0018)

## Content

1. Can Liver J. 2024 Feb 26;7(1):54-63. doi: 10.3138/canlivj-2023-0018.
eCollection  2024 Feb.

Decoding hepatorenal tyrosinemia type 1: Unraveling the impact of early 
detection, NTBC, and the role of liver transplantation.

Kehar M(1), Sen Sarma M(2), Seetharaman J(3), Jimenez Rivera C(1), Chakraborty 
P(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department 
of Pediatrics, Children Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India.
(3)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Christian Medical 
College, Vellore, India.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario and 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Newborn Screening Ontario, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Hepatorenal tyrosinemia type 1 (HT-1) is a rare autosomal recessive disease that 
results from a deficiency of fumaryl acetoacetate hydrolase (FAH), a critical 
enzyme in the catabolic pathway for tyrosine. This leads to the accumulation of 
toxic metabolites such as fumaryl and maleylacetoacetate, which can damage the 
liver, kidneys, and nervous system. The discovery of 
2-[2-nitro-4-trifluoromethylbenzoyl]-1,3-cyclohexanedione (NTBC or nitisinone) 
has significantly improved the management of HT-1, particularly when initiated 
before the onset of symptoms. Therefore, newborn screening for HT-1 is essential 
for timely diagnosis and prompt treatment. The analysis of succinyl acetone (SA) 
in dried blood spots of newborns followed by quantification of SA in blood or 
urine for high-risk neonates has excellent sensitivity and specificity for the 
diagnosis of HT-1. NTBC combined with dietary therapy, if initiated early, can 
provide liver transplant (LT) free survival and reduce the risk of 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Patients failing medical treatment (eg, due to 
non-adherence), and who develop acute liver failure (ALF), have HCC or evidence 
of histologically proven dysplastic liver nodule(s), or experience poor quality 
of life secondary to severe dietary restrictions are currently indicated for LT. 
Children with HT-1 require frequent monitoring of liver and renal function to 
assess disease progression and treatment compliance. They are also at risk of 
long-term neurocognitive impairment, which highlights the need for 
neurocognitive assessment and therapy.

© Canadian Association for the Study of the Liver, 2024.

DOI: 10.3138/canlivj-2023-0018
PMCID: PMC10946188
PMID: 38505790

Conflict of interest statement: N/A