---
reference_id: "PMID:37091648"
title: "Spontaneous coronary artery dissection: an unpredictable event."
authors:
- Smirnova A
- Aliberti F
- Cavaliere C
- Gatti I
- Vilardo V
- Giorgianni C
- Cassani C
- Repetto A
- Narula N
- Giuliani L
- Urtis M
- Ozaki Y
- Prati F
- Arbustini E
- Ferrari M
journal: Eur Heart J Suppl
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartjsupp/suad059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spontaneous coronary artery dissection: an unpredictable event.
**Authors:** Smirnova A, Aliberti F, Cavaliere C, Gatti I, Vilardo V, Giorgianni C, Cassani C, Repetto A, Narula N, Giuliani L, Urtis M, Ozaki Y, Prati F, Arbustini E, Ferrari M
**Journal:** Eur Heart J Suppl (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartjsupp/suad059](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartjsupp/suad059)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J Suppl. 2023 Apr 21;25(Suppl B):B7-B11. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartjsupp/suad059. eCollection 2023 Apr.

Spontaneous coronary artery dissection: an unpredictable event.

Smirnova A(1), Aliberti F(1), Cavaliere C(1), Gatti I(1), Vilardo V(1), 
Giorgianni C(1), Cassani C(2)(3), Repetto A(4), Narula N(5), Giuliani L(1), 
Urtis M(1), Ozaki Y(6), Prati F(7)(8), Arbustini E(1), Ferrari M(1).

Author information:
(1)Transplant Research Area and Centre for Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases, 
Scientific Department, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical, Surgical, Diagnostic and Pediatric Sciences, 
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(3)Unit of Obstetrics and Gynecology, IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo Foundation, 
Pavia, Italy.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical 
College, New York, USA.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Fujita Health University Hospital, Toyoake, Japan.
(7)UniCamillus, Saint Camillus International University of Health Sciences, 
Rome, Italy.
(8)Centro per la Lotta Contro L'Infarto-CLI Foundation, Rome, Italy.

Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) is an under-recognized cause of 
acute coronary syndrome that predominantly affects women in adulthood and is the 
leading cause of acute myocardial infarction in pregnancy. The most common 
clinical presentation is ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) or 
non-STEMI, followed by cardiogenic shock (∼2%), sudden cardiac death (0.8% in 
autopsy series), cardiac arrest, ventricular arrhythmias (∼5%), and Takotsubo 
syndrome. The prevalence of SCAD in the general population is largely uncertain 
due to underdiagnosis. Oral contraceptives, post-menopausal therapy, and 
infertility treatments are recognized associated factors. The pathological 
substrates (fibromuscular dysplasia) and triggers (especially emotional stress) 
are commonly present in affected women. The few cases with a precise genetic 
aetiology occur in the context of syndromic and non-syndromic connective tissue 
diseases. The only true certainty in SCAD is the overwhelming prevalence in 
women. The first event as well as the recurrence (up to 30%, which varies 
depending on the definition) is largely unpredictable. The treatment strategy is 
highly individualized and requires extensive additional study in order to 
optimize outcomes and prevent major adverse cardiovascular events in affected 
individuals. We have known about SCAD for nearly a century, but we still do not 
know how best to prevent, diagnose, and treat it, making SCAD a highly important 
and unmet clinical need.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartjsupp/suad059
PMCID: PMC10120938
PMID: 37091648

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared.