---
reference_id: "PMID:31357056"
title: "Ribavirin for the treatment of Lassa fever: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Eberhardt KA
- Mischlinger J
- Jordan S
- Groger M
- Günther S
- Ramharter M
journal: Int J Infect Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2019.07.015
keywords:
- Aspartate Aminotransferases/metabolism
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Humans
- "Lassa Fever/drug therapy, enzymology, mortality, virology"
- "Lassa virus/drug effects, physiology"
- Prospective Studies
- Retrospective Studies
- Ribavirin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ribavirin for the treatment of Lassa fever: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Eberhardt KA, Mischlinger J, Jordan S, Groger M, Günther S, Ramharter M
**Journal:** Int J Infect Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijid.2019.07.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2019.07.015)

## Content

1. Int J Infect Dis. 2019 Oct;87:15-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2019.07.015. Epub
2019  Jul 26.

Ribavirin for the treatment of Lassa fever: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Eberhardt KA(1), Mischlinger J(1), Jordan S(1), Groger M(1), Günther S(2), 
Ramharter M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical 
Medicine and I. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Virology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Tropical Medicine, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical 
Medicine and I. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. Electronic address: ramharter@bnitm.de.

OBJECTIVES: Lassa fever (LF) causes annual outbreaks in endemic regions with 
high mortality of symptomatic patients. Ribavirin is recommended as standard 
treatment for LF in national and international guidelines but the evidence base 
for this recommendation has been questioned recently.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review and included 6 studies providing 
efficacy data of ribavirin treatment for LF (PROSPERO protocol CRD42018103994).
RESULTS: Besides retrospective case series, the evidence mostly relies on a 
single prospective clinical trial with critical risk of bias. In this trial, LF 
associated mortality is reduced for patients with elevated aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST) when treated with ribavirin (OR 0.41, 95% CI 0.23-0.73), 
while mortality is higher for patients without elevated AST (OR 2.37, 95% CI 
1.07-5.25).
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the available data, current treatment guidelines may 
therefore put patients with mild LF at increased risk of death. The role of 
ribavirin in the treatment of LF requires urgent reassessment.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2019.07.015
PMID: 31357056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]