---
reference_id: "PMID:9536089"
title: "Acyl-CoA:dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase: cloning of the human cDNA and resolution of the molecular basis in rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 2."
authors:
- Ofman R
- Hettema EH
- Hogenhout EM
- Caruso U
- Muijsers AO
- Wanders RJ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.5.847
keywords:
- "Acyltransferases/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Chondrodysplasia Punctata, Rhizomelic/enzymology, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "DNA, Complementary/isolation & purification"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/enzymology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acyl-CoA:dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase: cloning of the human cDNA and resolution of the molecular basis in rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 2.
**Authors:** Ofman R, Hettema EH, Hogenhout EM, Caruso U, Muijsers AO, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/7.5.847](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/7.5.847)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 May;7(5):847-53. doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.5.847.

Acyl-CoA:dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase: cloning of the human cDNA 
and resolution of the molecular basis in rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata 
type 2.

Ofman R(1), Hettema EH, Hogenhout EM, Caruso U, Muijsers AO, Wanders RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Academic Medical Centre, University of 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) is a genetic disorder which is 
clinically characterized by rhizomelic shortening of the upper extremities, 
typical dysmorphic facial appearance, congenital contractures and severe growth 
and mental retardation. Patients with RCDP can be subdivided into three 
subgroups based on biochemical analyses and complementation studies. The largest 
subgroup contains patients with mutations in the PEX7 gene encoding the PTS2 
receptor. This results in multiple peroxisomal abnormalities which includes a 
deficiency of acyl-CoA:dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase (DHAPAT), 
alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase (alkyl-DHAP synthase), peroxisomal 
3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase and phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase, although there are 
differences in the extent of the deficiencies observed. Patients in the two 
other subgroups have been reported to be either deficient in the activity of 
DHAPAT (RCDP type 2) or alkyl-DHAP synthase (RCDP type 3) while no other 
abnormalities could be observed. To examine whether the gene encoding DHAPAT is 
mutated in patients with RCDP type 2, we determined the N-terminal amino acid 
sequence of the enzyme isolated from human placenta. Using this sequence as a 
query, we identified a 2040 bp open reading frame (ORF) in the human database of 
expressed sequence tags. Expression of this ORF in the yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae showed that we have identified the DHAPAT cDNA. The deduced amino 
acid sequence revealed no PTS2 consensus sequence. In contrast DHAPAT appears to 
contain a putative PTS1 at the extreme C-terminus. All RCDP type 2 patients 
analyzed were found to contain mutations in their DHAPAT cDNA. This demonstrates 
that RCDP type 2 is the result of mutations in DHAPAT.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/7.5.847
PMID: 9536089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]