---
reference_id: "PMID:9622170"
title: Prenatal diagnosis of osteogenesis imperfecta type II.
authors:
- Tongsong T
- Wanapirak C
- Siriangkul S
journal: Int J Gynaecol Obstet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0020-7292(98)00015-0
keywords:
- Female
- Fetal Diseases/diagnosis
- Humans
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnosis
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Trimester, Second"
- "Pregnancy Trimester, Third"
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal diagnosis of osteogenesis imperfecta type II.
**Authors:** Tongsong T, Wanapirak C, Siriangkul S
**Journal:** Int J Gynaecol Obstet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0020-7292(98)00015-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0020-7292(98)00015-0)

## Content

1. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 1998 Apr;61(1):33-8. doi:
10.1016/s0020-7292(98)00015-0.

Prenatal diagnosis of osteogenesis imperfecta type II.

Tongsong T(1), Wanapirak C, Siriangkul S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai 
University, Thailand.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the prenatal sonographic features of osteogenesis 
imperfecta (OI) type II.
DESIGN: Descriptive (case series).
SETTING: Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Maharaj 
Nakorn Chiang Mai Hospital, Chiang Mai University.
SUBJECTS: Six fetuses with prenatal diagnosis of OI were evaluated.
RESULTS: Six fetuses were prenatally diagnosed as OI type II in five mothers 
without familial history of the disease. One mother had two consecutive 
pregnancies complicated with this condition. The first five cases were 
classified as OI type IIA, while the last one was OI type IIB. All of subtype A 
exhibited typical triad of bone shortening, diffuse hypomineralization and 
multiple fractures of long bones including beaded ribs whereas the subtype B 
showed shortening of only femurs, normal bone echodensity and isolated fractures 
of long bones. The postnatal radiography and autopsy confirmed the prenatal 
diagnosis in all cases. Other findings may occasionally be found, including 
polyhydramnios, oligohydramnios, hydrop fetalis and small for gestational age.
CONCLUSION: The triad of bone shortening, decreased bone density and numerous 
fractures including beaded ribs permits a confident diagnosis of OI type IIA. 
Furthermore, sonographic features may differentiate the subtype of OI type II, 
depending on degree of bone shortening and echodensity.

DOI: 10.1016/s0020-7292(98)00015-0
PMID: 9622170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]