---
reference_id: "PMID:39190470"
title: "Pediatric Cancer Screening in Hereditary Gastrointestinal Cancer Risk Syndromes: An Update from the AACR Childhood Cancer Predisposition Working Group."
authors:
- MacFarland SP
- Becktell K
- Schneider KW
- Kuiper RP
- Lesmana H
- Meade J
- Nichols KE
- Porter CC
- Savage SA
- Schultz KA
- Scott H
- States L
- Tabori U
- Tamura C
- Tomlinson G
- Zelley K
- Durno C
- Bauer A
- Plon SE
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0953
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Adenomatous Polyposis Coli/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Early Detection of Cancer/methods, standards"
- "Gastrointestinal Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing/methods
- "Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis, complications"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Risk Assessment/methods, standards"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Cancer Screening in Hereditary Gastrointestinal Cancer Risk Syndromes: An Update from the AACR Childhood Cancer Predisposition Working Group.
**Authors:** MacFarland SP, Becktell K, Schneider KW, Kuiper RP, Lesmana H, Meade J, Nichols KE, Porter CC, Savage SA, Schultz KA, Scott H, States L, Tabori U, Tamura C, Tomlinson G, Zelley K, Durno C, Bauer A, Plon SE
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0953](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0953)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2024 Oct 15;30(20):4566-4571. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0953.

Pediatric Cancer Screening in Hereditary Gastrointestinal Cancer Risk Syndromes: 
An Update from the AACR Childhood Cancer Predisposition Working Group.

MacFarland SP(1)(2), Becktell K(3), Schneider KW(4), Kuiper RP(5), Lesmana 
H(6)(7), Meade J(8), Nichols KE(9), Porter CC(10), Savage SA(11), Schultz 
KA(12), Scott H(13), States L(1)(2), Tabori U(14)(15), Tamura C(16), Tomlinson 
G(17), Zelley K(1), Durno C(14), Bauer A(1)(2), Plon SE(18).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, Colorado.
(5)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology and Department of Genetics, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and BMT, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(7)Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(8)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(9)St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee.
(10)Emory University & Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia.
(11)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, 
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
(12)Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(13)University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia.
(14)The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(15)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(16)FMC Tokyo Clinic, Tokyo, Japan.
(17)UT Health San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas.
(18)Texas Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.

Gastrointestinal (GI) polyposis and cancer in pediatric patients is frequently 
due to an underlying hereditary cancer risk syndrome requiring ongoing cancer 
screening. Identification of at-risk patients through family history, clinical 
features of a syndrome, or symptom onset ensures appropriate cancer risk 
assessment and management in childhood and beyond. In this 2024 perspective, we 
outline updates to the hereditary GI cancer screening guidelines first published 
by the American Association of Cancer Research Pediatric Cancer Predisposition 
Workshop in 2017. These guidelines consider existing recommendations by 
pediatric and adult gastroenterology consortia to ensure alignment with 
gastroenterology practices in managing polyposis conditions. We specifically 
address the recommendations for pediatric screening in familial adenomatous 
polyposis, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, and juvenile polyposis syndrome. Further, we 
emphasize the importance of multidisciplinary care and partnership with 
gastroenterology, as it is crucial in management of children and families with 
these conditions.

©2024 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0953
PMCID: PMC12826535
PMID: 39190470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: SEP is a member of the 
Scientific Advisory Panel of Baylor Genetics.