---
reference_id: "PMID:38129775"
title: "Memory support training and lifestyle modifications to promote healthy aging in persons at risk for Alzheimer's disease: a digital application supported intervention (Brain Boosters)."
authors:
- Tomaszewski Farias S
- Fox J
- Dulaney H
- Chan M
- Namboodiri S
- Harvey DJ
- Weakley A
- Rahman S
- Luna C
- Beech BF
- Campbell L
- Schmitter-Edgecombe M
journal: BMC Geriatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12877-023-04574-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Memory support training and lifestyle modifications to promote healthy aging in persons at risk for Alzheimer's disease: a digital application supported intervention (Brain Boosters).
**Authors:** Tomaszewski Farias S, Fox J, Dulaney H, Chan M, Namboodiri S, Harvey DJ, Weakley A, Rahman S, Luna C, Beech BF, Campbell L, Schmitter-Edgecombe M
**Journal:** BMC Geriatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12877-023-04574-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12877-023-04574-x)

## Content

1. BMC Geriatr. 2023 Dec 21;23(1):881. doi: 10.1186/s12877-023-04574-x.

Memory support training and lifestyle modifications to promote healthy aging in 
persons at risk for Alzheimer's disease: a digital application supported 
intervention (Brain Boosters).

Tomaszewski Farias S(1), Fox J(2), Dulaney H(2), Chan M(2), Namboodiri S(2), 
Harvey DJ(3), Weakley A(2), Rahman S(4), Luna C(4), Beech BF(4), Campbell L(2), 
Schmitter-Edgecombe M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, USA. 
farias@ucdavis.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, University of California, Davis, Davis, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Washington State University, Pullman, USA.

BACKGROUND: Evidence-based interventions to protect against cognitive decline 
among older adults at risk for Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD) 
are urgently needed. Rehabilitation approaches to support memory and 
behavioral/lifestyle interventions are recognized as promising strategies for 
preserving or improving cognitive health, although few previous interventions 
have combined both approaches. This paper describes the protocol of the Brain 
Boosters intervention, which synergistically combines training in compensatory 
and healthy lifestyle behaviors and supports implementation and tracking of new 
behaviors with a digital application.
METHODS: The study utilizes a single-site, single-blinded, randomized controlled 
design to compare a structured lifestyle and compensatory aid intervention to an 
education-only self-guided intervention. We plan to enroll 225 
community-dwelling adults (25% from underrepresented groups) aged 65 + who 
endorse subjective cognitive decline (SCD) and low baseline levels of healthy 
lifestyle behaviors. Both interventions will be administered in group format, 
consisting of 15 two-hour classes that occur weekly for ten weeks and taper to 
bi-monthly and monthly, for an intervention duration of 6 months. Participants 
in both interventions will receive education about a variety of memory support 
strategies and healthy lifestyle behaviors, focusing on physical and cognitive 
activity and stress management. The structured intervention will also receive 
support in adopting new behaviors and tracking set goals aided by the Electronic 
Memory and Management Aid (EMMA) digital application. Primary outcomes include 
global cognition (composite of memory, attention, and executive function tests) 
and everyday function (Everyday Cognition Questionnaire). Data will be collected 
at baseline and outcome visits, at approximately 6, 12, and 18 months. 
Qualitative interviews, self-report surveys (e.g., indicators of 
self-determination, health literacy) and EMMA data metrics will also be used to 
identify what components of the intervention are most effective and for whom 
they work.
DISCUSSION: Successful project completion will provide valuable information 
about how individuals with SCD respond to a compensation and preventative 
lifestyle intervention assisted by a digital application, including an 
understanding of factors that may impact outcomes, treatment uptake, and 
adherence. The work will also inform development, scaling, and personalization 
of future interventions that can delay disability in individuals at risk for 
ADRD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov. (NCT05027789, posted 8/30/2021).

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-023-04574-x
PMCID: PMC10740219
PMID: 38129775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.