---
reference_id: "PMID:39298531"
title: Purified CDT toxins and a clean deletion within the CDT locus provide novel insights into the contribution of binary toxin in cellular inflammation and Clostridioides difficile infection.
authors:
- Nabukhotna K
- Kordus SL
- Shupe JA
- Cano Rodríguez R
- Smith A
- Bohannon JK
- Washington MK
- Lacy DB
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012568
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Purified CDT toxins and a clean deletion within the CDT locus provide novel insights into the contribution of binary toxin in cellular inflammation and Clostridioides difficile infection.
**Authors:** Nabukhotna K, Kordus SL, Shupe JA, Cano Rodríguez R, Smith A, Bohannon JK, Washington MK, Lacy DB
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1012568](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1012568)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2024 Sep 19;20(9):e1012568. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012568. 
eCollection 2024 Sep.

Purified CDT toxins and a clean deletion within the CDT locus provide novel 
insights into the contribution of binary toxin in cellular inflammation and 
Clostridioides difficile infection.

Nabukhotna K(1), Kordus SL(2), Shupe JA(2), Cano Rodríguez R(2), Smith A(2), 
Bohannon JK(2)(3), Washington MK(2), Lacy DB(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.
(4)Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

Clostridioides difficile is a spore-forming pathogen and the most common cause 
of healthcare-associated diarrhea and colitis in the United States. Besides 
producing the main virulence factors, toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB), many of 
the common clinical strains encode the C. difficile transferase (CDT) binary 
toxin. The role of CDT in the context of C. difficile infection (CDI) is poorly 
understood. Inflammation is a hallmark of CDI and multiple mechanisms of 
inflammasome activation have been reported for TcdA, TcdB, and the organism. 
Some studies have suggested that CDT contributes to this inflammation through a 
TLR2-dependent priming mechanism that leads to the suppression of protective 
eosinophils. Here, we show that CDT does not prime but instead activates the 
inflammasome in bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs). In bone 
marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs), the cell binding and pore-forming component 
of the toxin, CDTb, alone activates the inflammasome and is dependent on K+ 
efflux. The activation is not observed in the presence of CDTa and is not 
observed in BMDMs derived from Nlrp3-/- mice suggesting the involvement of the 
NLRP3 inflammasome. However, we did not observe evidence of CDT-dependent 
inflammasome priming or activation in vivo. Mice were infected with R20291 and 
an isogenic CRISPR/Cas9-generated R20291 ΔcdtB strain of C. difficile. While CDT 
contributes to increased weight loss and cecal edema at 2 days post infection, 
the relative levels of inflammasome-associated cytokines, IL-1β and IL-18, in 
the cecum and distal colon are unchanged. We also saw CDT-dependent weightloss 
in Nlrp3-/- mice, suggesting that the increased weightloss associated with the 
presence of CDT is not a result of NLRP3-dependent inflammasome activation. This 
study highlights the importance of studying gene deletions in the context of 
otherwise fully isogenic strains and the challenge of translating toxin-specific 
cellular responses into a physiological context, especially when multiple toxins 
are acting at the same time.

Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be 
freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise 
used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the 
Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012568
PMCID: PMC11444381
PMID: 39298531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.