---
reference_id: "PMID:37997196"
title: "Albuminuria in transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis: Prevalence, progression and prognostic importance."
authors:
- Ioannou A
- Rauf MU
- Patel RK
- Razvi Y
- Porcari A
- Martinez-Naharro A
- Venneri L
- Bandera F
- Virsinskaite R
- Kotecha T
- Knight D
- Petrie A
- Whelan C
- Wechalekar A
- Lachmann H
- Hawkins PN
- Solomon SD
- Gillmore JD
- Fontana M
journal: Eur J Heart Fail
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ejhf.3094
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Albuminuria in transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis: Prevalence, progression and prognostic importance.
**Authors:** Ioannou A, Rauf MU, Patel RK, Razvi Y, Porcari A, Martinez-Naharro A, Venneri L, Bandera F, Virsinskaite R, Kotecha T, Knight D, Petrie A, Whelan C, Wechalekar A, Lachmann H, Hawkins PN, Solomon SD, Gillmore JD, Fontana M
**Journal:** Eur J Heart Fail (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ejhf.3094](https://doi.org/10.1002/ejhf.3094)

## Content

1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2024 Jan;26(1):65-73. doi: 10.1002/ejhf.3094. Epub 2023 Dec 
18.

Albuminuria in transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis: Prevalence, progression and 
prognostic importance.

Ioannou A(1), Rauf MU(1), Patel RK(1), Razvi Y(1), Porcari A(1)(2), 
Martinez-Naharro A(1), Venneri L(1), Bandera F(3), Virsinskaite R(1), Kotecha 
T(1), Knight D(1), Petrie A(4), Whelan C(1), Wechalekar A(1), Lachmann H(1), 
Hawkins PN(1), Solomon SD(5), Gillmore JD(#)(1), Fontana M(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)National Amyloidosis Centre, University College London, Royal Free Campus, 
London, UK.
(2)Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Cardiomyopathies, Cardiovascular 
Department, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Giuliano-Isontina (ASUGI), 
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
(3)Cardiology University Department, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, Milan, Italy.
(4)University College London, London, UK.
(5)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

AIMS: Transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis (ATTR-CA) is an infiltrative 
cardiomyopathy that commonly presents with concomitant chronic kidney disease. 
Albuminuria is common in heart failure and associated with worse outcomes, but 
its prevalence and relationship to outcome in ATTR-CA remains unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A total of 1181 patients with ATTR-CA were studied (mean 
age 78.1 ± 7.9 years; 1022 [86.5%] male; median estimated glomerular filtration 
rate 59 ml/min/1.73m2 [interquartile range: 47-74]). Albuminuria was present in 
563 (47.7%) patients (499 [88.6%] with microalbuminuria and 64 [11.4%] with 
macroalbuminuria). Patients with albuminuria had a more severe cardiac phenotype 
evidenced by higher serum cardiac biomarkers (median N-terminal pro-B-type 
natriuretic peptide [NT-proBNP]: 4027 ng/L [2173-6889] vs. 1851 ng/L [997-3209], 
p < 0.001; median troponin T: 69 ng/L [46-101] vs. 48 ng/L [34-68], p < 0.001) 
and worse echocardiographic indices of systolic (longitudinal strain: 
-10.0 ± 3.6% vs. -11.6 ± 3.8%, p < 0.001) and diastolic function (E/e': 
17.5 ± 6.4 vs. 16.4 ± 6.7, p < 0.001) than those with a normal urinary albumin 
to creatinine ratio (UACR). Microalbuminuria and macroalbuminuria were 
independently associated with mortality in the overall population (hazard ratio 
[HR] 1.47, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.13-1.92, p = 0.005 and HR 1.87, 95% CI 
1.15-3.05, p = 0.012, respectively). In a subgroup of patients (n = 349) without 
concomitant hypertension, diabetes mellitus or chronic kidney disease, 
albuminuria was also associated with mortality (HR 2.98, 95% CI 1.72-5.17, 
p < 0.001). At 12 months, 330 patients had a repeat UACR measurement; those in 
whom UACR increased by 30% or more (n = 148, 44.8%) had an increased risk of 
mortality (HR 1.84, 95% CI 1.06-3.19, p = 0.030).
CONCLUSIONS: Albuminuria is common in patients with ATTR-CA, and more prevalent 
in those with a more severe cardiac phenotype. Albuminuria at diagnosis and a 
significant increase in UACR during follow-up are associated with mortality.

© 2023 The Authors. European Journal of Heart Failure published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1002/ejhf.3094
PMID: 37997196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]