---
reference_id: "PMID:32965936"
title: Corneal Endothelial Transplantation.
authors:
- Moshirfar M
- Thomson AC
- Ronquillo Y
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Corneal Endothelial Transplantation.
**Authors:** Moshirfar M, Thomson AC, Ronquillo Y

## Content

1. Corneal Endothelial Transplantation.

Moshirfar M(1), Thomson AC(2), Ronquillo Y(3).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026
Jan–.
2023 Jul 24.

Author information:
(1)University of Utah/John Moran Eye Center; Hoopes Vision/HDR Research Center;
Utah Lions Eye Bank
(2)McGovern Medical School
(3)Hoopes Vision Research Center

The cornea is a five-layered structure that provides the majority of the total
refractive power of the eye (Fig. 1). In the past, penetrating keratoplasty (PK)
had been the gold standard surgical treatment of corneal diseases for any layer,
including diseases of the endothelium. With the improvement in technology and
innovation over the last two decades, endothelial keratoplasty (EK) techniques
involving transplantation of corneal components have been deployed to treat
these diseases (Table 1). When compared to PK, EK introduces less foreign
antigens, has improved visual recovery and outcomes, minimizes astigmatism, has
less risk of dehiscence, and results in better globe stability. History of
Endothelial Keratoplasty Techniques The first endothelial transplant was
developed by Dr. Tillett in 1956. The technique required a large incision and
used a partial thickness graft created by the trephination of half of the
posterior donor cornea. During the 1960s, Dr. Barraquer developed a method of EK
using a microkeratome for an anterior approach similar to a laser-assisted in
situ keratomileusis (LASIK) flap followed by posterior trephination and suturing
of the graft. These techniques were complex, challenging to replicate, and
unable to address the issues posed by PK. In 1998, Melles et al. made a
significant advancement in the field by dissecting out a posterior stromal
pocket using an intrastromal approach and securing the graft with air instead of
the typical suturing that produced tension likely to pull the graft out of
place. Some refinements of this technique were made by Dr. Terry, who coined the
term deep lamellar endothelial keratoplasty (DLEK) (Fig. 2A). However, this
procedure was technically challenging and not universally adopted. Next, in
2004, Melles et al. revolutionized the field with what is now called Descemet
stripping endothelial keratoplasty (DSEK), after a few modifications made by
Price et al. DSEK utilizes a novel technique, "descemetorhexis," via an internal
approach to remove the pathologic host Descemet membrane and endothelium. This
procedure creates a smooth surface for graft application and removes the source
of disease while sparing posterior stroma (Fig. 2B). The use of a microkeratome
to remove anterior stroma of the donor cornea was described by Dr. Gorovoy and
is now referred to as Descemet stripping automated endothelial keratoplasty
(DSAEK). However, DSAEK is commonly referred to as DSEK as well. DSAEK has shown
to have better visual outcomes compared to the original DSEK, and the technique
continued to be refined, such as the addition of venting incisions in the cornea
after graft application enhances graft adherence. DSAEK had become widely
adopted, and eye bank produced precut tissue has proven to be reliable; thus,
replacing the need for preparation by surgeons. A study by Neff et al. found
that thinner grafts, specifically those ≤ 131 μm, were associated with improved
visual outcomes; although the correlation between graft thickness and clinical
outcomes has been disputed. Another iteration using thinner grafts with less
stroma, Ultrathin DSAEK (UT-DSAEK) developed by Busin et al. in 2013, was shown
to have the same or better outcomes with faster recovery and similar
complications as DSEK. Comparing thicknesses, UT-DSAEK grafts are around 100 μm,
whereas DSEK and DSAEK grafts are closer to 200 μm. Melles et al., however,
continued to innovate with the development of Descemet membrane endothelial
keratoplasty (DMEK). DMEK uses a graft consisting of endothelium and DM without
any stroma (Fig. 2C). The graft is around 10-15 μm in thickness and prepared via
a descemetorhexis performed on the donor eye. A similar technique, pre-Descemet
Endothelial Keratoplasty (PDEK), is prepared using pneumodissection to include
the pre-Descemet layer in the graft, which helps with graft handling. Compared
to DSAEK, DMEK has better visual outcomes, faster recovery time, and lower
immune rejection rate. However, it was not widely adopted due to the increased
surgical skill required and higher rates of complications such as graft
detachment and the need to rebubble. Although short-lived, DMEK technique with a
stromal rim (DMEK-S) was an attempt to hybridize the ease of handling inside the
eye from DSEAK and retain visual benefits of DMEK developed by Studeny et al.
(Fig. 2D). Refinement of DMEK techniques continued, such as the development of
pre- and intraoperative manipulations to better identify DMEK graft orientation,
use of gas bubble tamponade that decreases chances of detachment, and eye bank
technicians becoming proficient at producing preloaded DMEK grafts. The
femtosecond laser has also been used to assist in EK procedures. Femtosecond
laser-assisted DSEK (FS-DSEK) has been used to produce successful DSEK grafts
consistently. However, a visual improvement from FS-DSEK appears limited when
compared to DSAEK or PK. Femtosecond and excimer laser-assisted EK (FELEK) uses
a Femtosecond laser to dissect a thin graft that is smoothened with excimer
photoablation. FELEK has shown some success on a small cohort of patients and
may provide similar results to DMEK with less of a learning curve. Femtosecond
laser-enabled descemetorhexis DMEK (FE-DMEK) or Femtosecond laser-assisted DMEK
(F-DMEK) has been used to perform the descemetorhexis for DMEK, resulting in
fewer graft detachments and need for rebubbling when compared to manual
descemetorhexis. In settings with a scarcity of donor tissue, some modified or
newer techniques may offer a solution. Hemi-DMEK and quarter-DMEK are variations
involving grafts with smaller, modified shapes prepared by surgeons, and they
appear to have similar visual outcomes, although with lower endothelial cell
density. Mini-DMEK is another technique where a graft is shaped and sized to fit
a patient's particular endothelial defect. It has been used to treat acute
corneal hydrops secondary to keratoconus in a small cohort of patients. The
observation of corneal clearing despite nonattachment of grafts in some cases
has led to investigating techniques that do not use transplants, and instead,
rely on primary intention healing of the endothelium (Fig. 2E). These techniques
have been termed Descemetorhexis without endothelial keratoplasty (DWEK) coined
by Kaufman et al. or, increasingly becoming the norm, Descemet stripping only
(DSO) proposed by Dr. Gorovoy. ROCK inhibitors have also been used with DSO to
salvage failing cases, speed up the recovery, and improve endothelial cell
density in patients with Fuchs endothelial dystrophy. Further comparison studies
are warranted, but DSO may provide similar visual outcomes to DMEK after a
longer recovery time without the risk of rejection, detachment, or need for
immunosuppression. Corneal clearance, despite subtotal detachment of grafts, has
also inspired a purposed technique, Descemet membrane endothelial transfer
(DMET), involving a focally attached free-floating graft to serve as a source of
endothelial cells (Fig. 2F). However, retrospective studies of DMEK cases with
subtotal detachment do not always have satisfying results, and it is not
entirely clear whether corneal clearance is due to endothelial cell transfer or
simply primary intention healing of host endothelium.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32965936

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Majid Moshirfar declares no relevant
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Andrew Thomson
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
Disclosure: Yasmyne Ronquillo declares no relevant financial relationships with
ineligible companies.
