---
reference_id: "PMID:10592134"
title: Clinical management of six cases of low-risk primary tonsillar non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
authors:
- Colleoni GW
- Oliveira JS
- Alves AC
- Borducchi DM
- Segreto RA
- Cervantes O
- Kerbauy J
journal: Sao Paulo Med J
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1590/s1516-31801999000500006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical management of six cases of low-risk primary tonsillar non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
**Authors:** Colleoni GW, Oliveira JS, Alves AC, Borducchi DM, Segreto RA, Cervantes O, Kerbauy J
**Journal:** Sao Paulo Med J (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1590/s1516-31801999000500006](https://doi.org/10.1590/s1516-31801999000500006)

## Content

1. Sao Paulo Med J. 1999 Sep 2;117(5):215-7. doi:
10.1590/s1516-31801999000500006.

Clinical management of six cases of low-risk primary tonsillar non-Hodgkin's 
lymphoma.

Colleoni GW(1), Oliveira JS, Alves AC, Borducchi DM, Segreto RA, Cervantes O, 
Kerbauy J.

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Hematology and Hemotherapy, Universidade Federal de São 
Paulo/Escola Paulista de Medicina, Brazil.

CONTEXT: There have been many reports that favor aggressive systemic treatment 
with chemotherapy and radiotherapy, even for well-localized lymphomas, avoiding 
the need for tonsillectomy of the normal tonsil.
CASE REPORT: We report six cases of primary tonsillar lymphoma with a median 
patient age of 42 years. There were two lymphoma cases with diffuse large cells, 
two cases with mixed small and large cells, one with small cells and one 
indeterminate. They were treated with six cycles of chemotherapy and cervical 
radiotherapy. All patients achieved durable complete remission. Our data agree 
with previous reports that suggested that primary tonsillar high-grade B-cell 
NHL has a good prognosis if aggressively treated.

DOI: 10.1590/s1516-31801999000500006
PMID: 10592134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]