---
reference_id: "PMID:26437752"
title: "[Noma/Cancrum oris: a neglected disease]."
authors:
- García-Moro M
- García-Merino E
- Martín-Del-Rey A
- García-Sánchez E
- García-Sánchez JE
journal: Rev Esp Quimioter
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Noma/Cancrum oris: a neglected disease].
**Authors:** García-Moro M, García-Merino E, Martín-Del-Rey A, García-Sánchez E, García-Sánchez JE
**Journal:** Rev Esp Quimioter (2015)

## Content

1. Rev Esp Quimioter. 2015 Oct;28(5):225-34.

[Noma/Cancrum oris: a neglected disease].

[Article in Spanish]

García-Moro M(1), García-Merino E, Martín-Del-Rey A, García-Sánchez E, 
García-Sánchez JE.

Author information:
(1)María García Moro, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad de Salamanca, Spain. 
mgarciam@usal.es.

Noma is an aggressive orofacial gangrenous pathology that damages hard and soft 
tissues of the mouth and the face. Throughout the centuries it has been present 
around the globe, but nowadays it has practically disappeared from developed 
countries and mainly affects children from the most disadvantaged places, 
especially in Africa. Noma disease is a multifactorial process; malnutrition, 
debilitating diseases (bacterial or viral systemic diseases, HIV-associated 
immunosuppression, etc.) and intraoral infections are some of the factors 
implied. The characteristic tissue necrosis is produced by a polymicrobial 
infection. Fusobacterium necrophorum, Prevotella intermedia, Prevotella 
melaninogenica, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Bacteroides fragilis, Bacillus cereus, 
Trueperella pyogenes, spyrochetes, etc, are some of the species that have been 
isolated from the affected areas. Without treatment, noma is lethal in a short 
period of time, and the patients that survive show severe sequelae that hinder 
their life and interpersonal relationships. The aim of this paper is to unify 
the existing information and to promote wider knowledge and awareness among the 
population.

PMID: 26437752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]