---
reference_id: "PMID:26437159"
title: "Vesicular erythema migrans: an atypical and easily misdiagnosed form of Lyme disease."
authors:
- Mazori DR
- Orme CM
- Mir A
- Meehan SA
- Neimann AL
journal: Dermatol Online J
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vesicular erythema migrans: an atypical and easily misdiagnosed form of Lyme disease.
**Authors:** Mazori DR, Orme CM, Mir A, Meehan SA, Neimann AL
**Journal:** Dermatol Online J (2015)

## Content

1. Dermatol Online J. 2015 Aug 15;21(8):13030/qt9cs1x7r5.

Vesicular erythema migrans: an atypical and easily misdiagnosed form of Lyme 
disease.

Mazori DR(1), Orme CM, Mir A, Meehan SA, Neimann AL.

Author information:
(1)The Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University School 
of Medicine. daniel.mazori@med.nyu.edu.

Erythema migrans is the initial sign in the majority of patients infected with 
Borrelia, the genus of spirochetes that causes Lyme disease. Early 
identification and treatment decrease the risk of progression to later stages of 
disease. Although a "bull's eye" appearance owing to lesional clearing is 
considered classic for erythema migrans, this feature is surprisingly often 
lacking among patients in the United States. Furthermore, cutaneous Lyme disease 
can exhibit a wide range of morphologic variability in a minority of patients. 
Herein, we describe the case of a patient with Lyme disease in which the 
presence of atypical vesicular features, in conjunction with the initial absence 
of clearing, resulted in multiple misdiagnoses and delayed treatment. We also 
review the literature on the epidemiology and management of erythema migrans for 
cases in which the diagnosis may pose a challenge.

PMID: 26437159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]