---
reference_id: "PMID:21811239"
title: Relative comparisons of call parameters enable auditory grouping in frogs.
authors:
- Farris HE
- Ryan MJ
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/ncomms1417
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relative comparisons of call parameters enable auditory grouping in frogs.
**Authors:** Farris HE, Ryan MJ
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncomms1417](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms1417)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2011 Aug 2;2:410. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1417.

Relative comparisons of call parameters enable auditory grouping in frogs.

Farris HE(1), Ryan MJ.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Center and Kresge Hearing Labs, Louisiana State University 
Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, USA. hfarri@lsuhsc.edu

Whereas many studies on mate choice have measured the relative attractiveness of 
acoustic sexual signals, there is little understanding of another critical 
process: grouping and assigning the signals to their sources. For female túngara 
frogs, assigning the distinct components of male calls to the correct source is 
a challenge because males sing in aggregations, producing overlapping calls that 
lead to perceptual errors analogous to those of the 'cocktail party problem'. 
Here we show that for presentation of >2 call components, however, subjects are 
more likely to group the two components with the smallest relative differences 
in call parameters, including relative spatial separation (a primitive acoustic 
cue) and relative similarity to the species-specific call sequence (a 
schema-based cue). Thus, like humans, the cognitive rules for the perception of 
auditory groups amidst multiple sound sources include the use of relative 
comparisons, a flexible strategy for dynamic acoustic environments.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms1417
PMCID: PMC10035542
PMID: 21811239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.