---
reference_id: "PMID:15149499"
title: Striate palmoplantar keratoderma arising from desmoplakin and desmoglein 1 mutations is associated with contrasting perturbations of desmosomes and the keratin filament network.
authors:
- Wan H
- Dopping-Hepenstal PJ
- Gratian MJ
- Stone MG
- Zhu G
- Purkis PE
- South AP
- Keane F
- Armstrong DK
- Buxton RS
- McGrath JA
- Eady RA
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2004.05996.x
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Cadherins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Adhesion/genetics
- Cell Differentiation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Desmoglein 1
- Desmogleins
- Desmoplakins
- "Desmosomes/genetics, ultrastructure"
- "Epidermis/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Humans
- Keratins/metabolism
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Middle Aged
- Protein Precursors/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Striate palmoplantar keratoderma arising from desmoplakin and desmoglein 1 mutations is associated with contrasting perturbations of desmosomes and the keratin filament network.
**Authors:** Wan H, Dopping-Hepenstal PJ, Gratian MJ, Stone MG, Zhu G, Purkis PE, South AP, Keane F, Armstrong DK, Buxton RS, McGrath JA, Eady RA
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.2004.05996.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.2004.05996.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2004 May;150(5):878-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2004.05996.x.

Striate palmoplantar keratoderma arising from desmoplakin and desmoglein 1
mutations is associated with contrasting perturbations of desmosomes and the
keratin filament network.

Wan H(1), Dopping-Hepenstal PJ, Gratian MJ, Stone MG, Zhu G, Purkis PE, South
AP, Keane F, Armstrong DK, Buxton RS, McGrath JA, Eady RA.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Skin Disease Group, Divison of Skin Scinces, The Rayne Institute,
Guy's, King's and St Thomas' School of Medicine, St Thomas' Hospital, Lambeth
Palace Road, London SE1 7EH, UK.

BACKGROUND: Several hereditary human diseases are now known to be caused by
distinct mutations in genes encoding various desmosome components. Although the
effects of some of these mutant genes have been analysed by targeted disruption
experiments in mouse models, little is known about the cell and tissue changes
in affected human patients.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effects of heterozygous nonsense mutations in
desmoplakin (Dp) and desmoglein (Dsg) 1 which cause the autosomal dominant
disorder striate palmoplantar keratoderma (SPPK), focusing on changes in
desmosome structure and composition and the associated keratin intermediate
filament (KIF) network in palm skin, and in cultured keratinocytes generated
from the same site.
METHODS: We analysed palm and nonpalm skin sections from four SPPK patients with
Dp mutations and one patient with a Dsg1 mutation with respect to tissue and
subcellular morphologies, and correlated the in vivo and in vitro findings.
RESULTS: Using electron microscopy, we found abnormalities of desmosomes and
cell-cell adhesion in the suprabasal layers in the epidermis from patients with
both Dsg1- and Dp-associated SPPK. These changes were more advanced in skin from
patients with Dp mutations. Both Dp and Dsg1 mutations were accompanied by
significantly reduced numbers of desmosomes in the suprabasal layers, while
decreased desmosome size was evident only in Dsg1-associated SPPK. Confocal
microscopy analysis showed marked differences in the expression of keratins and
of desmosome components, both between the two types of SPPK, and between SPPK
and normal skin. The expression of keratins K5, K14 and K10 was reduced in
Dsg1-associated SPPK skin, whereas perinuclear aggregation of keratin filaments
was more evident in Dp-associated SPPK. In both types of SPPK upregulation of
K16 was pronounced and involucrin labelling was abnormal.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in Dp and Dsg1 genes causing SPPK may be associated with
perturbations in epidermal differentiation accompanied by a marked disruption of
several components of the epidermal scaffold including desmosomes and the KIF
network.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2004.05996.x
PMID: 15149499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
