---
reference_id: "PMID:34778136"
title: "Diagnostic Approach to Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated With Streptococcal Infections (PANDAS): A Narrative Review of Literature Data."
authors:
- Prato A
- Gulisano M
- Scerbo M
- Barone R
- Vicario CM
- Rizzo R
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.746639
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic Approach to Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated With Streptococcal Infections (PANDAS): A Narrative Review of Literature Data.
**Authors:** Prato A, Gulisano M, Scerbo M, Barone R, Vicario CM, Rizzo R
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2021.746639](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2021.746639)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Oct 27;9:746639. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.746639.
eCollection  2021.

Diagnostic Approach to Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders 
Associated With Streptococcal Infections (PANDAS): A Narrative Review of 
Literature Data.

Prato A(1)(2), Gulisano M(2), Scerbo M(2), Barone R(2), Vicario CM(1), Rizzo 
R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Sciences, Psychology, Education and Cultural Studies, 
University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(2)Child and Adolescent Neurology and Psychiatric Section, Department of 
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Catania University, Catania, Italy.

Pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal 
infections (PANDAS) are clinical conditions characterized by the sudden onset of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder and/or tics, often accompanied by other behavioral 
symptoms in a group of children with streptococcal infection. PANDAS-related 
disorders, including pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome (PANS), 
childhood acute neuropsychiatric symptoms (CANS), and pediatric infection 
triggered autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders (PITANDs), have also been 
described. Since first defined in 1998, PANDAS has been considered a 
controversial diagnosis. A comprehensive review of the literature was performed 
on PubMed and Scopus databases, searching for diagnostic criteria and diagnostic 
procedures of PANDAS and related disorders. We propose a test panel to support 
clinicians in the workout of PANDAS/PANS patients establishing an appropriate 
treatment. However, further studies are needed to improve our knowledge on these 
acute-onset neuropsychiatric conditions.

Copyright © 2021 Prato, Gulisano, Scerbo, Barone, Vicario and Rizzo.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.746639
PMCID: PMC8580040
PMID: 34778136

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.