---
reference_id: "PMID:26800456"
title: "TTR kinetic stabilizers and TTR gene silencing: a new era in therapy for familial amyloidotic polyneuropathies."
authors:
- Adams D
- Cauquil C
- Labeyrie C
- Beaudonnet G
- Algalarrondo V
- Théaudin M
journal: Expert Opin Pharmacother
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1517/14656566.2016.1145664
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TTR kinetic stabilizers and TTR gene silencing: a new era in therapy for familial amyloidotic polyneuropathies.
**Authors:** Adams D, Cauquil C, Labeyrie C, Beaudonnet G, Algalarrondo V, Théaudin M
**Journal:** Expert Opin Pharmacother (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1517/14656566.2016.1145664](https://doi.org/10.1517/14656566.2016.1145664)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2016;17(6):791-802. doi: 
10.1517/14656566.2016.1145664. Epub 2016 Mar 10.

TTR kinetic stabilizers and TTR gene silencing: a new era in therapy for 
familial amyloidotic polyneuropathies.

Adams D(1)(2)(3), Cauquil C(1)(2)(3), Labeyrie C(1)(2)(3), Beaudonnet 
G(2)(3)(4), Algalarrondo V(2)(3)(5), Théaudin M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)a Neurology , CHU Bicêtre, APHP , Le Kremlin Bicêtre , France.
(2)b National reference Center for FAP (NNERF) , Le Kremlin Bicêtre , France.
(3)c FILNEMUS Filière nationale des maladies neuromusculaires , Marseille , 
France.
(4)d Neurophysiology , CHU Bicêtre, APHP , Le Kremlin Bicêtre , France.
(5)e Cardiology , CHU A Beclere, APHP , Clamart , France.

INTRODUCTION: Transthyretin Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy (TTR-FAP) is a rare 
disease with autosomal dominant transmission due to a point mutation of the TTR 
gene. By removing the main source of systemic mutant TTR, liver transplantation 
(LT) has become the reference therapy of this severe and fatal polyneuropathy of 
adult-onset, stopping disease progression in subgroup of patients. Recently, new 
therapeutic strategies have emerged, which intend to stabilize TTR or to silence 
the TTR gene. Amongst them, the TTR kinetic stabilizer tafamidis is the first 
drug approved in the EU.
AREAS COVERED: We shall review the natural history of TTR-FAP and the best 
indications for LT. Data on the efficacy, safety and tolerability of the TTR 
kinetic stabilizers, tafamidis and diflunisal, have been reviewed, from the 
pivotal Phase III clinical trials published in PubMed medical journals or 
presented at international meetings. We will review the ongoing phase III 
clinical trials of TTR gene silencing with RNAi therapeutics and ASO published 
in clinicaltrialgov.
EXPERT OPINION: Due to the data on efficacy, tolerability, safety, tafamidis and 
diflunisal became the first line anti-amyloid treatment in stage 1 TTR-FAP. Both 
drugs slow progression of the disease. Only tafamidis got marketing 
authorization. We are waiting for results of the 2 phase III clinical trials of 
TTR gene silencing in varied stages of the disease.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2016.1145664
PMID: 26800456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]