---
reference_id: "PMID:33596325"
title: Compound Heterozygous Frameshift Mutations in MESD Cause a Lethal Syndrome Suggestive of Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type XX.
authors:
- Stürznickel J
- Jähn-Rickert K
- Zustin J
- Hennig F
- Delsmann MM
- Schoner K
- Rehder H
- Kreczy A
- Schinke T
- Amling M
- Kornak U
- Oheim R
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4277
keywords:
- Bone Density/genetics
- Child
- Frameshift Mutation
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Molecular Chaperones
- Mutation/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compound Heterozygous Frameshift Mutations in MESD Cause a Lethal Syndrome Suggestive of Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type XX.
**Authors:** Stürznickel J, Jähn-Rickert K, Zustin J, Hennig F, Delsmann MM, Schoner K, Rehder H, Kreczy A, Schinke T, Amling M, Kornak U, Oheim R
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.4277](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.4277)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2021 Jun;36(6):1077-1087. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4277. Epub 2021 
Mar 19.

Compound Heterozygous Frameshift Mutations in MESD Cause a Lethal Syndrome 
Suggestive of Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type XX.

Stürznickel J(#)(1), Jähn-Rickert K(#)(1), Zustin J(1), Hennig F(2)(3), Delsmann 
MM(1), Schoner K(4), Rehder H(5), Kreczy A(6), Schinke T(1), Amling M(1), Kornak 
U(2)(3)(7), Oheim R(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Institute of Pathology, Fetal Pathology, Philipps-University Marburg, 
Marburg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department of Pathology, REGIOMED Klinikum Coburg, Coburg, Germany.
(7)BIH Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(8)Martin Zeitz Center for Rare Diseases, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Multiple genes are known to be associated with osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), a 
phenotypically and genetically heterogenous bone disorder, marked predominantly 
by low bone mineral density and increased risk of fractures. Recently, mutations 
affecting MESD, which encodes for a chaperone required for trafficking of the 
low-density lipoprotein receptors LRP5 and LRP6 in the endoplasmic reticulum, 
were described to cause autosomal-recessive OI XX in homozygous children. In the 
present study, whole-exome sequencing of three stillbirths in one family was 
performed to evaluate the presence of a hereditary disorder. To further 
characterize the skeletal phenotype, fetal autopsy, bone histology, and 
quantitative backscattered electron imaging (qBEI) were performed, and the 
results were compared with those from an age-matched control with regular 
skeletal phenotype. In each of the affected individuals, compound heterozygous 
mutations in MESD exon 2 and exon 3 were detected. Based on the skeletal 
phenotype, which was characterized by multiple intrauterine fractures and severe 
skeletal deformity, OI XX was diagnosed in these individuals. Histological 
evaluation of MESD specimens revealed an impaired osseous development with an 
altered osteocyte morphology and reduced canalicular connectivity. Moreover, 
analysis of bone mineral density distribution by qBEI indicated an impaired and 
more heterogeneous matrix mineralization in individuals with MESD mutations than 
in controls. In contrast to the previously reported phenotypes of individuals 
with OI XX, the more severe phenotype in the present study is likely explained 
by a mutation in exon 2, located within the chaperone domain of MESD, that leads 
to a complete loss of function, which indicates the relevance of MESD in early 
skeletal development. © 2021 The Authors. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research 
published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Bone and 
Mineral Research (ASBMR)..

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 
(ASBMR).

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4277
PMID: 33596325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]