---
reference_id: "PMID:25339210"
title: Clinical spectrum of 4H leukodystrophy caused by POLR3A and POLR3B mutations.
authors:
- Wolf NI
- Vanderver A
- van Spaendonk RM
- Schiffmann R
- Brais B
- Bugiani M
- Sistermans E
- Catsman-Berrevoets C
- Kros JM
- Pinto PS
- Pohl D
- Tirupathi S
- Strømme P
- de Grauw T
- Fribourg S
- Demos M
- Pizzino A
- Naidu S
- Guerrero K
- van der Knaap MS
- Bernard G
- 4H Research Group
journal: Neurology
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001002
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- "Hereditary Central Nervous System Demyelinating Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- RNA Polymerase III/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical spectrum of 4H leukodystrophy caused by POLR3A and POLR3B mutations.
**Authors:** Wolf NI, Vanderver A, van Spaendonk RM, Schiffmann R, Brais B, Bugiani M, Sistermans E, Catsman-Berrevoets C, Kros JM, Pinto PS, Pohl D, Tirupathi S, Strømme P, de Grauw T, Fribourg S, Demos M, Pizzino A, Naidu S, Guerrero K, van der Knaap MS, Bernard G, 4H Research Group
**Journal:** Neurology (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000001002](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000001002)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2014 Nov 18;83(21):1898-905. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001002.
Epub  2014 Oct 22.

Clinical spectrum of 4H leukodystrophy caused by POLR3A and POLR3B mutations.

Wolf NI(1), Vanderver A(2), van Spaendonk RM(2), Schiffmann R(2), Brais B(2), 
Bugiani M(2), Sistermans E(2), Catsman-Berrevoets C(2), Kros JM(2), Pinto PS(2), 
Pohl D(2), Tirupathi S(2), Strømme P(2), de Grauw T(2), Fribourg S(2), Demos 
M(2), Pizzino A(2), Naidu S(2), Guerrero K(2), van der Knaap MS(2), Bernard 
G(2); 4H Research Group.

Collaborators: Benko W, Boltshauser E, Bonkowsky J, Brouwer OF, Brozova K, 
Champaigne NL, Cimas I, Clough C, Cohen A, Collins A, Corenblum B, Dai L, Dolan 
G, Faletra F, Fernandez R, Eugenia Garcia Garcia M, Gasparini P, Gburek-Augustat 
J, Gibson W, Gonzalez Moron D, Guo Y, Hakonarson H, Hamati A, Harms N, Harting 
I, Hertzberg C, Hill A, Hobson G, Innes M, Kauffman M, Keating BJ, Kluger G, 
Kolditz P, Kotzaeridou U, Krägeloh-Mann I, La Piana R, Liu X, Marques Lourenço 
C, Martos-Moreno GÁ, Matalon R, Mazzeo R, McClintock W, McKenzie F, Mierzewska 
H, Mohnish S, Muschke P, Nickel M, Orcesi S, Padiath QS, Patzer S, Pedro H, 
Pineda Marfa M, Plecko B, Poll-Thé BT, Potic A, Rating D, Rankin J, Raymond G, 
Ronan A, Rosendahl Østergaard J, Rossignol E, Sanchez-Carpintero R, Schossig A, 
Sébire G, Senbil N, Swisher CN, Synofzik M, Sønderberg Roos LK, Stevens C, 
Sylvain M, Tibussek D, Tonduti D, Tran L, van Hove JL, Vázquez López M, Wang F, 
Wang J, Wasling P, Wassmer E, Wiegand G, Wolff A, Zhang J.

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Child Neurology (N.I.F., M.B., M.S.v.d.K.), Clinical 
Genetics (R.M.L.v.S., E.S.), and Pathology (M.B.), Neuroscience Campus (N.I.F., 
M.B., M.S.v.d.K.), and the Department of Functional Genomics, Center for 
Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research (M.S.v.d.K.), VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands; the Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Department 
of Neurology (A.V., A.P.), Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC; 
the Institute of Metabolic Disease (R.S.), Baylor Research Institute, Dallas, 
TX; the Departments of Neurology and Neurosurgery and Human Genetics (B.B.), 
Montreal Neurological Institute, Canada; the Department of Paediatric Neurology 
(C.C.-B.), Erasmus University Hospital-Sophia Children's Hospital; the 
Department of Pathology (J.M.K.), Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands; the Neuroradiology Department (P.S.P.), Centro Hospitalar do Porto, 
Portugal; the Division of Neurology (D.P.), Children's Hospital of Eastern 
Ontario, University of Ottawa, Canada; the Department of Paediatric Neurology 
(S.T.), Royal Belfast Hospital for Sick Children, UK; the Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences for Children (P.S.), Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål; University 
of Oslo (P.S.), Norway; the Department of Neurology (T.d.G.), Cincinnati School 
of Medicine and Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH; INSERM-IECB 
(S.F.), Pessac, France; the Department of Pediatric Neurology (M.D.), University 
of British Columbia and British Columbia Children's Hospital, Vancouver, Canada; 
Kennedy Krieger Institute/Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions (S.N.), Baltimore, 
MD; and the Departments of Pediatrics, Neurology, and Neurosurgery, Division of 
Pediatric Neurology (K.G., G.B.), Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill 
University Health Center, Montreal, Canada. n.wolf@vumc.nl.
(2)From the Departments of Child Neurology (N.I.F., M.B., M.S.v.d.K.), Clinical 
Genetics (R.M.L.v.S., E.S.), and Pathology (M.B.), Neuroscience Campus (N.I.F., 
M.B., M.S.v.d.K.), and the Department of Functional Genomics, Center for 
Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research (M.S.v.d.K.), VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands; the Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Department 
of Neurology (A.V., A.P.), Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC; 
the Institute of Metabolic Disease (R.S.), Baylor Research Institute, Dallas, 
TX; the Departments of Neurology and Neurosurgery and Human Genetics (B.B.), 
Montreal Neurological Institute, Canada; the Department of Paediatric Neurology 
(C.C.-B.), Erasmus University Hospital-Sophia Children's Hospital; the 
Department of Pathology (J.M.K.), Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands; the Neuroradiology Department (P.S.P.), Centro Hospitalar do Porto, 
Portugal; the Division of Neurology (D.P.), Children's Hospital of Eastern 
Ontario, University of Ottawa, Canada; the Department of Paediatric Neurology 
(S.T.), Royal Belfast Hospital for Sick Children, UK; the Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences for Children (P.S.), Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål; University 
of Oslo (P.S.), Norway; the Department of Neurology (T.d.G.), Cincinnati School 
of Medicine and Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH; INSERM-IECB 
(S.F.), Pessac, France; the Department of Pediatric Neurology (M.D.), University 
of British Columbia and British Columbia Children's Hospital, Vancouver, Canada; 
Kennedy Krieger Institute/Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions (S.N.), Baltimore, 
MD; and the Departments of Pediatrics, Neurology, and Neurosurgery, Division of 
Pediatric Neurology (K.G., G.B.), Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill 
University Health Center, Montreal, Canada.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2014 Nov 18;83(21):1884-5. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001010.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinical and radiologic spectrum and genotype-phenotype 
correlation of 4H (hypomyelination, hypodontia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism) 
leukodystrophy caused by mutations in POLR3A or POLR3B.
METHODS: We performed a multinational cross-sectional observational study of the 
clinical, radiologic, and molecular characteristics of 105 mutation-proven 
cases.
RESULTS: The majority of patients presented before 6 years with gross motor 
delay or regression. Ten percent had an onset beyond 10 years. The disease 
course was milder in patients with POLR3B than in patients with POLR3A 
mutations. Other than the typical neurologic, dental, and endocrine features, 
myopia was seen in almost all and short stature in 50%. Dental and hormonal 
findings were not invariably present. Mutations in POLR3A and POLR3B were 
distributed throughout the genes. Except for French Canadian patients, patients 
from European backgrounds were more likely to have POLR3B mutations than other 
populations. Most patients carried the common c.1568T>A POLR3B mutation on one 
allele, homozygosity for which causes a mild phenotype. Systematic MRI review 
revealed that the combination of hypomyelination with relative T2 hypointensity 
of the ventrolateral thalamus, optic radiation, globus pallidus, and dentate 
nucleus, cerebellar atrophy, and thinning of the corpus callosum suggests the 
diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: 4H is a well-recognizable clinical entity if all features are 
present. Mutations in POLR3A are associated with a more severe clinical course. 
MRI characteristics are helpful in addressing the diagnosis, especially if 
patients lack the cardinal non-neurologic features.

© 2014 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001002
PMCID: PMC4248461
PMID: 25339210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N. Wolf serves as communicating editor of the 
Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease and as editor for Neuropediatrics, both 
without payment. A. Vanderver has acted on an advisory board for Shire 
Pharmaceuticals as well as an unpaid consultant for Stem Cells Inc. R. van 
Spaendonk reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. R. Schiffmann has 
received honoraria and grant support from Shire and Amicus Therapeutics. B. 
Brais, M. Bugiani, E. Sistermans, C. Catsman-Berrevoets, J. Kros, and P.S. Pinto 
report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. D. Pohl has received 
compensation from Biogen Idec, Merck Serono, Bayer Schering, Teva, and 
Sanofi-Aventis (speaker's honoraria and for serving on scientific advisory 
boards). S. Tirupathi, P. Strømme, T. de Grauw, S. Fribourg, M. Demos, A. 
Pizzino, S. Naidu, K. Guerrero, and M. van der Knaap report no disclosures 
relevant to the manuscript. G. Bernard has received compensation from Actelion 
Pharmaceuticals, Genzyme, Shire, and Santhera Pharmaceuticals (speaker's 
honoraria and for serving on scientific advisory boards). Go to Neurology.org 
for full disclosures.