---
reference_id: "PMID:37070112"
title: "Collagenous sprue: a rare cause of watery diarrhea and villous atrophy - case report."
authors:
- Fernandes L
- Machado B
- José Cruz A
- Sarmento G
- Quelhas Costa R
- Pereira T
- Scigliano H
- Cerqueira R
journal: Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench
year: '2023'
doi: 10.22037/ghfbb.v16i1.2671
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Collagenous sprue: a rare cause of watery diarrhea and villous atrophy - case report.
**Authors:** Fernandes L, Machado B, José Cruz A, Sarmento G, Quelhas Costa R, Pereira T, Scigliano H, Cerqueira R
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench (2023)
**DOI:** [10.22037/ghfbb.v16i1.2671](https://doi.org/10.22037/ghfbb.v16i1.2671)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench. 2023;16(1):532-538. doi: 
10.22037/ghfbb.v16i1.2671.

Collagenous sprue: a rare cause of watery diarrhea and villous atrophy - case 
report.

Fernandes L(1), Machado B(1), José Cruz A(1), Sarmento G(1), Quelhas Costa R(1), 
Pereira T(1), Scigliano H(1), Cerqueira R(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro Hospitalar de Entre o Douro e Vouga, Santa Maria da Feira, Portugal.

Collagenous sprue is a rare and unrecognized cause of diarrhea and weight loss, 
mainly affecting the duodenum and small bowel. The clinical picture often 
resembles that of coeliac sprue, the main differential diagnosis, albeit, being 
refractory to a gluten-free diet. The histological features are fundamentally 
characterized by the deposition of collagen beneath the basement membrane of gut 
mucosa. Treatment should be initiated as soon as the diagnosis is established, 
so as to prevent the progression of fibrosis. We will describe the case of a 
76-year-old woman with collagenous sprue, her diagnostic workup, 
histopathological examination, and response to treatment.

DOI: 10.22037/ghfbb.v16i1.2671
PMCID: PMC10105505
PMID: 37070112

Conflict of interest statement: Authors have no conflicts of interest or 
financial ties to disclose.