---
reference_id: "PMID:40437208"
title: Detection of actionable mutations in circulating tumor DNA for non-small cell lung cancer patients.
authors:
- van der Leest P
- Rozendal P
- Rifaela N
- van der Wekken AJ
- Kievit H
- de Jager VD
- Sidorenkov G
- van Kempen LC
- Hiltermann TJN
- Schuuring E
journal: Commun Med (Lond)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s43856-025-00921-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of actionable mutations in circulating tumor DNA for non-small cell lung cancer patients.
**Authors:** van der Leest P, Rozendal P, Rifaela N, van der Wekken AJ, Kievit H, de Jager VD, Sidorenkov G, van Kempen LC, Hiltermann TJN, Schuuring E
**Journal:** Commun Med (Lond) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s43856-025-00921-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-025-00921-8)

## Content

1. Commun Med (Lond). 2025 May 28;5(1):204. doi: 10.1038/s43856-025-00921-8.

Detection of actionable mutations in circulating tumor DNA for non-small cell
lung cancer patients.

van der Leest P(#)(1)(2), Rozendal P(#)(1), Rifaela N(1), van der Wekken AJ(3),
Kievit H(3), de Jager VD(1), Sidorenkov G(4), van Kempen LC(1)(5), Hiltermann
TJN(3), Schuuring E(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, University of Groningen, University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, University of Groningen, University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp University Hospital,
Edegem, Belgium.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. e.schuuring@umcg.nl.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Liquid biopsy approaches, especially the detection of circulating
tumor DNA (ctDNA), are emerging as sensitive and reliable surrogates for tumor
tissue-based routine diagnostic testing. Here, we retrospectively analyzed
serially collected plasma samples of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients
obtained at first diagnosis to evaluate the added value of ctDNA analysis for
detecting therapeutically relevant variants and determining the consequent
clinical implications.
METHODS: One hundred eighty plasma samples from consecutively recruited NSCLC
patients were included. Circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) was extracted and
analyzed with the UltraSEEK Lung Panel v2 on the MassARRAY System. Tumor tissue
next-generation sequencing (NGS) data, performed as routine molecular testing in
the clinical setting, were retrieved from the national pathology registry for
132 patients.
RESULTS: Here we show that in 82% of the patients, mutations are concordantly
detected in tumor tissue and plasma. More mutations are reported with tumor
tissue-based NGS in nineteen patients, while in four patients additional
mutations are detected in plasma. Tissue-based molecular tumor profiling
identifies 60 patients eligible for targeted treatment including fifteen (8%)
harboring fusions currently not covered by UltraSEEK. Based on ctDNA analysis,
41 patients (23%) are identified as eligible for BRAFV600-, EGFR-, or
KRASG12C-targeted therapies. In the absence of tumor tissue NGS data (n = 48),
five therapeutically relevant mutations are detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular tumor profiling of ctDNA identifies therapeutically
relevant mutations at a comparable rate to tumor tissue-based NGS and might
therefore serve as an alternative or complementary test for the detection of
actionable variants in plasma.

Plain Language Summary: Being able to identify cancer mutations to direct
treatment strategies has become very important in improving outcomes of patients
with non-small cell lung cancer. With the detection of cancer DNA in the blood,
referred to as liquid biopsy, an alternative to invasive tissue-based
diagnostics now exists. We tested how sensitive the UltraSEEK Lung Panel (a
method which evaluates a panel of genes) was in the detection of mutations in
blood affecting treatment decisions for patients with non-small cell lung
cancer. The same mutations were detected using tissue and this blood-based
method in 82% of the patients. Moreover, in a similar number of patients, the
most favorable treatment advice was based on tissue and blood information. This
study showed that blood testing is suitable for the detection of mutations and
has the potential to improve diagnostics for lung cancer patients.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s43856-025-00921-8
PMCID: PMC12120126
PMID: 40437208

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare the
following competing interests: Anthonie J. van der Wekken has a leadership role
in the oncology section of NVALT, the guideline committee NSCLC and CUP, and the
dure geneesmiddelen committee of NVALT and FMS; is a consultant on advisory
boards for AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, Janssen-Cilag, Roche, and Takeda; has
performed lectures for AstraZeneca, BMS, Eli Lilly, Pfizer, and Roche; and has
received research grants form AstraZeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, and Pfizer.
Léon C. van Kempen has a leadership role in the EORTC Melanoma Group and the
Commission Personalized Medicine – Belgium; is a consultant on advisory boards
for Cyclomics, Janssen-Cilag, LOGEX, Merck Serono, Protyon, and Roche; and has
received grants and non-financial support from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, BMS,
Eli Lilly, Janssen-Cilag, LOGEX, Lynxcare, Merck Serono, nanoString, Novartis,
Pfizer, and Roche. T. Jeroen N. Hiltermann has a leadership role in the CieBOM;
is a consultant on advisory boards for BMS, MSD, Pfizer, and Roche; has received
research grants from AstraZeneca, BMS, and Roche; and is involved in clinical
studies in collaboration with Amgen, AstraZeneca, BMS, GSK, Merck Serono,
Novartis, and Roche. Ed Schuuring has a leadership role in the Dutch Society of
Pathology, the European Society of Pathology, the European Liquid Biopsy
Society, the CieBOD, and the national guideline committee; is a consultant on
advisory boards for Agena Bioscience, Amgen, Astellas Pharma, AstraZeneca,
Bayer, BMS, CC Diagnostics, Eli Lilly, GSK, Illumina, Janssen-Cilag, Merck
Serono, Novartis, Roche, SinnoVision Lab, and Sysmex; has performed lectures for
Agena Bioscience, Biocartis, Bio-Rad, Eli Lilly, Illumina, Roche, and SeraCare
Life Sciences; and has received grants and non-financial support from Abbott,
Agena Bioscience, ArcherDX, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Biocartis, Bio-Rad, Boehringer
Ingelheim, CC Diagnostics, Eli Lilly, Illumina Merck Serono, Roche, and SeraCare
Life Sciences. Other authors declare no competing interests.
