---
reference_id: "PMID:30246406"
title: A frameshift variant in the COL5A1 gene in a cat with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Spycher M
- Bauer A
- Jagannathan V
- Frizzi M
- De Lucia M
- Leeb T
journal: Anim Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/age.12727
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A frameshift variant in the COL5A1 gene in a cat with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Spycher M, Bauer A, Jagannathan V, Frizzi M, De Lucia M, Leeb T
**Journal:** Anim Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/age.12727](https://doi.org/10.1111/age.12727)

## Content

1. Anim Genet. 2018 Dec;49(6):641-644. doi: 10.1111/age.12727. Epub 2018 Sep 23.

A frameshift variant in the COL5A1 gene in a cat with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Spycher M(1)(2), Bauer A(1)(2), Jagannathan V(1)(2), Frizzi M(3), De Lucia 
M(3)(4), Leeb T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetics, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, 3001, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(2)DermFocus, University of Bern, 3001, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)San Marco Veterinary Clinic, Via Sorio 114/C, 35141, Padova, Italy.
(4)San Marco Veterinary Laboratory, Via Sorio 114/C, 35141, Padova, Italy.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a group of heritable connective tissue disorders 
caused by defective collagen synthesis or incorrect assembly of the collagen 
triple helical structure. EDS is characterised by joint hypermobility, skin 
hyperextensibility, abnormal scarring, poor wound healing and tissue friability. 
Human EDS may be caused by variants in several different genes including COL5A1, 
which encodes the collagen type V alpha 1 chain. For the present study we 
investigated a 1.5-year-old, spayed female, domestic shorthair cat with EDS. The 
affected cat showed multiple recurrent skin tears, hyperextensibility of the 
skin and joint abnormalities. We obtained whole genome sequencing data from the 
affected cat and searched for variants in candidate genes known to cause EDS. We 
detected a heterozygous single base-pair deletion in exon 43 of the COL5A1 gene, 
namely c.3420delG. The deletion was predicted to result in a frameshift and 
premature stop codon: p.(Leu1141SerfsTer134). Sanger sequencing confirmed that 
the variant was present in the affected cat and absent from 103 unaffected cats 
from different breeds. The variant was also absent from a Burmese cat with EDS. 
Based on knowledge about the functional impact of COL5A1 variants in other 
species, COL5A1:c.3420delG represents a compelling candidate causative variant 
for the observed EDS in the affected cat.

© 2018 Stichting International Foundation for Animal Genetics.

DOI: 10.1111/age.12727
PMID: 30246406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]