---
reference_id: "PMID:27259655"
title: "Biomarkers for Wilms Tumor: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Cone EB
- Dalton SS
- Van Noord M
- Tracy ET
- Rice HE
- Routh JC
journal: J Urol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2016.05.100
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/blood"
- Child
- Humans
- "Kidney Neoplasms/blood, diagnosis"
- Prognosis
- "Wilms Tumor/blood, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarkers for Wilms Tumor: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Cone EB, Dalton SS, Van Noord M, Tracy ET, Rice HE, Routh JC
**Journal:** J Urol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.juro.2016.05.100](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.juro.2016.05.100)

## Content

1. J Urol. 2016 Nov;196(5):1530-1535. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2016.05.100. Epub 2016 
May 31.

Biomarkers for Wilms Tumor: A Systematic Review.

Cone EB(1), Dalton SS(2), Van Noord M(3), Tracy ET(4), Rice HE(4), Routh JC(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Urologic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina.
(2)University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida.
(3)Duke University Medical Library, Durham, North Carolina.
(4)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina.
(5)Division of Urologic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina. Electronic address: Jonathan.Routh@duke.edu.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2016 Nov;196(5):1337-1338. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2016.08.076.

PURPOSE: Wilms tumor is the most common childhood renal malignancy and the 
fourth most common childhood cancer. Many biomarkers have been studied but there 
has been no comprehensive summary. We systematically reviewed the literature on 
biomarkers in Wilms tumor to quantify the prognostic implications of the 
presence of individual tumor markers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We searched for English language studies from 1980 to 
2015 performed in patients younger than 18 years with Wilms tumor and prognostic 
data. The protocol was conducted per PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines. Two reviewers abstracted data 
in duplicate using a standard evaluation form. We performed descriptive 
statistics, then calculated relative risks and 95% confidence intervals for 
markers appearing in multiple level II or III studies.
RESULTS: A total of 40 studies were included examining 32 biomarkers in 7,381 
patients with Wilms tumor. Studies had a median of 61 patients, 24 biomarker 
positive patients per series and a median followup of 68.4 months. Median 
percentages of patients with stages 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 tumors were 28.5%, 26.4%, 
24.5%, 14.1% and 1.7%, respectively, and 10.2% had anaplasia. The strongest 
negative prognostic association was loss of heterozygosity at 11p15, with a risk 
of recurrence of 5.00, although loss of heterozygosity at 1p and gain of 
function at 1q were also strongly linked to increased recurrence (2.93 and 2.86, 
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Several tumor markers are associated with an increased risk of 
recurrence or a decreased risk of overall survival in patients with Wilms tumor. 
These data suggest targets for development of diagnostic tests and potential 
therapies.

Copyright © 2016 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.juro.2016.05.100
PMCID: PMC5069120
PMID: 27259655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial 
relationships to the article to disclose.