---
reference_id: "PMID:38248755"
title: Clinical and Molecular Characterization of a Patient with Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy Caused by Rare ABCC6 Mutation.
authors:
- Yao R
- Yang F
- Zhang Q
- Yu T
- Yu Y
- Chang G
- Wang X
journal: J Pers Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jpm14010054
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Molecular Characterization of a Patient with Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy Caused by Rare ABCC6 Mutation.
**Authors:** Yao R, Yang F, Zhang Q, Yu T, Yu Y, Chang G, Wang X
**Journal:** J Pers Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jpm14010054](https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm14010054)

## Content

1. J Pers Med. 2023 Dec 30;14(1):54. doi: 10.3390/jpm14010054.

Clinical and Molecular Characterization of a Patient with Generalized Arterial 
Calcification of Infancy Caused by Rare ABCC6 Mutation.

Yao R(1)(2), Yang F(3), Zhang Q(4), Yu T(2), Yu Y(1), Chang G(3)(4), Wang 
X(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Antenatal Diagnostic Center, Hainan 
Branch, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, Sanya 572022, China.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Shanghai 
Children's Medical Center, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai 200127, China.
(3)Clinical Research Ward, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, School of 
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200127, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Children's Medical 
Center, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200127, 
China.

Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is a rare 
autosomal-recessive disease characterized by extensive arterial calcification in 
infancy, with clinical manifestations such as arterial stenoses and heart 
failure. The ENPP1 inactivation mutation has been identified as a potential 
defect in most of the cases of GACI, while mutations in ABCC6 are demonstrated 
in patients who are genotyped as pseudoxanthoma elasticum and only limited cases 
of GACI are reported. Whole-exome sequencing was applied for the detection of 
pathogenic variants. Copy-number variants of pathogenic genes were also 
evaluated through a bioinformatic process and were further validated by 
real-time quantitative PCR. In this report, we described the clinical 
information and treatment of a patient with extensive arterial calcification. We 
have identified the underlying cause as biallelic mutations in ABCC6 (NM_00117: 
exon30, c.4223_4227dupAGCTC p.(Leu1410Serfs*56)) and a unique exonic deletion 
that spans from the first to the fourth exons of ABCC6 
(chr16:16313388-16330869)). This discovery was made by utilizing a combined 
genetic testing approach. With the review of previously reported GACI patients 
with ABCC6 mutation, our work contributed to enriching the mutation spectrum of 
GACI and providing further information on this rare form of inherited disorder.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm14010054
PMCID: PMC10817667
PMID: 38248755

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.