---
reference_id: "PMID:22213089"
title: "Presence of ATM protein and residual kinase activity correlates with the phenotype in ataxia-telangiectasia: a genotype-phenotype study."
authors:
- Verhagen MM
- Last JI
- Hogervorst FB
- Smeets DF
- Roeleveld N
- Verheijen F
- Catsman-Berrevoets CE
- Wulffraat NM
- Cobben JM
- Hiel J
- Brunt ER
- Peeters EA
- Gómez Garcia EB
- van der Knaap MS
- Lincke CR
- Laan LA
- Tijssen MA
- van Rijn MA
- Majoor-Krakauer D
- Visser M
- "van 't Veer LJ"
- Kleijer WJ
- van de Warrenburg BP
- Warris A
- de Groot IJ
- de Groot R
- Broeks A
- Preijers F
- Kremer BH
- Weemaes CM
- Taylor MA
- van Deuren M
- Willemsen MA
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22016
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Presence of ATM protein and residual kinase activity correlates with the phenotype in ataxia-telangiectasia: a genotype-phenotype study.
**Authors:** Verhagen MM, Last JI, Hogervorst FB, Smeets DF, Roeleveld N, Verheijen F, Catsman-Berrevoets CE, Wulffraat NM, Cobben JM, Hiel J, Brunt ER, Peeters EA, Gómez Garcia EB, van der Knaap MS, Lincke CR, Laan LA, Tijssen MA, van Rijn MA, Majoor-Krakauer D, Visser M, van 't Veer LJ, Kleijer WJ, van de Warrenburg BP, Warris A, de Groot IJ, de Groot R, Broeks A, Preijers F, Kremer BH, Weemaes CM, Taylor MA, van Deuren M, Willemsen MA
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22016](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22016)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2012 Mar;33(3):561-71. doi: 10.1002/humu.22016. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

Presence of ATM protein and residual kinase activity correlates with the
phenotype in ataxia-telangiectasia: a genotype-phenotype study.

Verhagen MM(1), Last JI, Hogervorst FB, Smeets DF, Roeleveld N, Verheijen F,
Catsman-Berrevoets CE, Wulffraat NM, Cobben JM, Hiel J, Brunt ER, Peeters EA,
Gómez Garcia EB, van der Knaap MS, Lincke CR, Laan LA, Tijssen MA, van Rijn MA,
Majoor-Krakauer D, Visser M, van 't Veer LJ, Kleijer WJ, van de Warrenburg BP,
Warris A, de Groot IJ, de Groot R, Broeks A, Preijers F, Kremer BH, Weemaes CM,
Taylor MA, van Deuren M, Willemsen MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical
Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder
with multisystem involvement and cancer predisposition, caused by mutations in
the A-T mutated (ATM) gene. To study genotype-phenotype correlations, we
evaluated the clinical and laboratory data of 51 genetically proven A-T
patients, and additionally measured ATM protein expression and kinase activity.
Patients without ATM kinase activity showed the classical phenotype. The
presence of ATM protein, correlated with slightly better immunological function.
Residual kinase activity correlated with a milder and essentially different
neurological phenotype, absence of telangiectasia, normal endocrine and
pulmonary function, normal immunoglobulins, significantly lower X-ray
hypersensitivity in lymphocytes, and extended lifespan. In these patients,
cancer occurred later in life and generally consisted of solid instead of
lymphoid malignancies. The genotypes of severely affected patients generally
included truncating mutations resulting in total absence of ATM kinase activity,
while patients with milder phenotypes harbored at least one missense or splice
site mutation resulting in expression of ATM with some kinase activity. Overall,
the phenotypic manifestations in A-T show a continuous spectrum from severe
classical childhood-onset A-T to a relatively mild adult-onset disorder,
depending on the presence of ATM protein and kinase activity. Each patient is
left with a tremendously increased cancer risk.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22016
PMID: 22213089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
