---
reference_id: "PMID:40642698"
title: Acute Inflammatory Ascites Complicating Clostridium difficile Colitis.
authors:
- Zacharia GS
- Jani S
- Doda M
- Mahaju S
- Pandey N
- Patel H
journal: Cureus
year: '2025'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.85685
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Inflammatory Ascites Complicating Clostridium difficile Colitis.
**Authors:** Zacharia GS, Jani S, Doda M, Mahaju S, Pandey N, Patel H
**Journal:** Cureus (2025)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.85685](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.85685)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2025 Jun 10;17(6):e85685. doi: 10.7759/cureus.85685. eCollection 2025 
Jun.

Acute Inflammatory Ascites Complicating Clostridium difficile Colitis.

Zacharia GS(1), Jani S(1), Doda M(1), Mahaju S(1), Pandey N(1), Patel H(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, BronxCare Health System, New York, USA.
(2)Gastroenterology, BronxCare Health System, New York, USA.

Clostridium difficile (CD) is a spore-forming, Gram-positive anaerobic bacillus 
that causes toxin-mediated mucosal injury leading to pseudomembranous colitis, 
clinically characterized by diarrheal disease. Ascites is an infrequent 
manifestation in severe or fulminant CD colitis. The pathogenesis of ascites in 
CD colitis is poorly understood but includes hypoalbuminemia due to 
protein-losing enteropathy, transmural inflammation, toxin-mediated capillary 
leak, colonic perforation, and concomitant diseases. We report the case of a 
middle-aged woman who presented with an opioid overdose and subsequently 
developed severe CD colitis. The infection was complicated with low 
serum-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG), high protein, culture-negative, 
neutrophil-predominant ascites, devoid of visceral perforation, or an 
alternative etiology for ascites. Treatment with oral vancomycin and intravenous 
metronidazole led to the complete resolution of symptoms and ascites. This case 
highlights an uncommon presentation of a common healthcare-associated infection 
and reinforces the importance of recognizing atypical manifestations of CD. 
While there are no specific management guidelines for this subset, treating the 
underlying colitis appears sufficient to resolve the ascites in most cases.

Copyright © 2025, Zacharia et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.85685
PMCID: PMC12244793
PMID: 40642698

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. 
Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all 
authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared 
that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted 
work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no 
financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any 
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.