---
reference_id: "PMID:34671804"
title: The Japan Society for Neuro-Oncology guideline on the diagnosis and treatment of central nervous system germ cell tumors.
authors:
- Nakamura H
- Takami H
- Yanagisawa T
- Kumabe T
- Fujimaki T
- Arakawa Y
- Karasawa K
- Terashima K
- Yokoo H
- Fukuoka K
- Sonoda Y
- Sakurada K
- Mineharu Y
- Soejima T
- Fujii M
- Shinojima N
- Hara J
- Yamasaki K
- Fujimura J
- Yamasaki F
- Takahashi M
- Suzuki T
- Sato I
- Nishikawa R
- Sugiyama K
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab242
keywords:
- Central Nervous System/pathology
- "Central Nervous System Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Child
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Humans
- Japan/epidemiology
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/diagnosis, therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Japan Society for Neuro-Oncology guideline on the diagnosis and treatment of central nervous system germ cell tumors.
**Authors:** Nakamura H, Takami H, Yanagisawa T, Kumabe T, Fujimaki T, Arakawa Y, Karasawa K, Terashima K, Yokoo H, Fukuoka K, Sonoda Y, Sakurada K, Mineharu Y, Soejima T, Fujii M, Shinojima N, Hara J, Yamasaki K, Fujimura J, Yamasaki F, Takahashi M, Suzuki T, Sato I, Nishikawa R, Sugiyama K
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/noab242](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noab242)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2022 Apr 1;24(4):503-515. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab242.

The Japan Society for Neuro-Oncology guideline on the diagnosis and treatment of 
central nervous system germ cell tumors.

Nakamura H(1), Takami H(2), Yanagisawa T(3), Kumabe T(4), Fujimaki T(5), Arakawa 
Y(6), Karasawa K(7), Terashima K(8), Yokoo H(9), Fukuoka K(10), Sonoda Y(11), 
Sakurada K(11), Mineharu Y(6), Soejima T(12), Fujii M(13), Shinojima N(14), Hara 
J(15), Yamasaki K(15), Fujimura J(16), Yamasaki F(17), Takahashi M(18), Suzuki 
T(19), Sato I(20), Nishikawa R(19), Sugiyama K(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kurume University School of Medicine, Fukuoka, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Saitama Medical University Hospital, Saitama, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(7)Division of Radiation Oncology, Department of Radiology, Tokyo Metropolitan 
Cancer and Infectious Disease Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Division of Neuro-Oncology, National Center for Child Health and Development, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Human Pathology, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Gunma, Japan.
(10)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Saitama Children's Medical Center, 
Saitama, Japan.
(11)Department of Neurosurgery, Yamagata University Hospital, Yamagata, Japan.
(12)Department of Radiation Oncology, Kobe Proton Center, Kobe, Japan.
(13)Department of Radiation Therapy, Mitsui Memorial Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(14)Department of Neurosurgery, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, 
Kumamoto, Japan.
(15)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Osaka City General 
Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(17)Department of Neurosurgery, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
(18)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, Fukuoka, Japan.
(19)Department of Neuro-Oncology/Neurosurgery, Saitama Medical University 
International Medical Center, Saitama, Japan.
(20)Department of Family Nursing, School of Health Sciences and Nursing, 
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(21)Department of Clinical Oncology and Neuro-Oncology Program, Hiroshima 
University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.

Primary CNS germ cell tumors (GCTs) are rare neoplasms predominantly observed in 
the pediatric and young adult populations. In line with the hypothesis that the 
primordial germ cell is the cell-of-origin, histopathological examinations for 
this pathology involve a diverse range of components mirroring the embryogenic 
developmental dimensions. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy are the mainstays of 
treatment, with surgery having a limited role for diagnosis and debulking of 
residual tissue after treatment. While better management has been achieved over 
recent decades by modifying radiation coverage and selecting appropriate 
chemotherapy, standardization of treatment remains challenging, partly due to 
the low volume of cases encountered in each institution. As the incidence is 
higher in East Asia, including Japan, the Japan Society for Neuro-Oncology 
established a multidisciplinary task force to create an evidence-based guideline 
for CNS GCTs. This guideline provides recommendations for multiple dimensions of 
clinical management for CNS GCTs, with particular focus on diagnostic measures 
including serum markers, treatment algorithms including surgery, radiotherapy, 
and chemotherapy, and under-investigated but important areas such as treatment 
for recurrent cases, long-term follow-up protocols, and long-term sequelae. This 
guideline serves the purpose of helping healthcare professionals keep up to date 
with current knowledge and standards of management for patients with this rare 
disease in daily clinical practice, as well as driving future translational and 
clinical research by recognizing unmet needs concerning this tumor.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noab242
PMCID: PMC8972225
PMID: 34671804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]