---
reference_id: "PMID:28635659"
title: "dIvergEnt: How IgE Axis Contributes to the Continuum of Allergic Asthma and Anti-IgE Therapies."
authors:
- Palomares Ó
- Sánchez-Ramón S
- Dávila I
- Prieto L
- Pérez de Llano L
- Lleonart M
- Domingo C
- Nieto A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3390/ijms18061328
content_type: abstract_only
---

# dIvergEnt: How IgE Axis Contributes to the Continuum of Allergic Asthma and Anti-IgE Therapies.
**Authors:** Palomares Ó, Sánchez-Ramón S, Dávila I, Prieto L, Pérez de Llano L, Lleonart M, Domingo C, Nieto A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms18061328](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms18061328)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Jun 21;18(6):1328. doi: 10.3390/ijms18061328.

dIvergEnt: How IgE Axis Contributes to the Continuum of Allergic Asthma and 
Anti-IgE Therapies.

Palomares Ó(1), Sánchez-Ramón S(2)(3), Dávila I(4), Prieto L(5), Pérez de Llano 
L(6), Lleonart M(7), Domingo C(8), Nieto A(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Chemistry, 
Complutense University of Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain. 
oscar.palomares@quim.ucm.es.
(2)Department of Clinical Immunology and Health Research Institute of the 
Hospital Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC), Hospital Clínico San Carlos, 28040 Madrid, 
Spain. ssramon@salud.madrid.org.
(3)Department of Microbiology I, Complutense University School of Medicine, 
28040 Madrid, Spain. ssramon@salud.madrid.org.
(4)Allergy Service, University Hospital of Salamanca and Institute for 
Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Biomedical and Diagnosis Science 
Department, Salamanca University School of Medicine, 37008 Salamanca, Spain. 
idg@usal.es.
(5)Department of Allergy and Immunology, University of Valencia and Dr. Peset 
University Hospital, 46017 Valencia, Spain. prieto_jes@gva.es.
(6)Neumology Service, Hospital Universitario Lucus Augusti, 27003 Lugo, Spain. 
eremos26@hotmail.com.
(7)Novartis Farmacéutica, 08013 Barcelona, Spain. marta.lleonart@novartis.com.
(8)Pulmonary Service, Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Department of Medicine, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), 08193 Barcelona, Spain. 
CDomingo@tauli.cat.
(9)Pediatric Pulmonology & Allergy Unit, Children's Hospital La Fe, 46026 
Valencia, Spain. nieto_ant@gva.es.

Asthma is an airway disease characterised by chronic inflammation with 
intermittent or permanent symptoms including wheezing, shortness of breath, 
chest tightness, and cough, which vary in terms of their occurrence, frequency, 
and intensity. The most common associated feature in the airways of patients 
with asthma is airway inflammation. In recent decades, efforts have been made to 
characterise the heterogeneous clinical nature of asthma. The interest in 
improving the definitions of asthma phenotypes and endotypes is growing, 
although these classifications do not always correlate with prognosis nor are 
always appropriate therapeutic approaches. Attempts have been made to identify 
the most relevant molecular and cellular biomarkers underlying the 
immunopathophysiological mechanisms of the disease. For almost 50 years, 
immunoglobulin E (IgE) has been identified as a central factor in allergic 
asthma, due to its allergen-specific nature. Many of the mechanisms of the 
inflammatory cascade underlying allergic asthma have already been elucidated, 
and IgE has been shown to play a fundamental role in the triggering, 
development, and chronicity of the inflammatory responses within the disease. 
Blocking IgE with monoclonal antibodies such as omalizumab have demonstrated 
their efficacy, effectiveness, and safety in treating allergic asthma. A better 
understanding of the multiple contributions of IgE to the inflammatory continuum 
of asthma could contribute to the development of novel therapeutic strategies 
for the disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms18061328
PMCID: PMC5486149
PMID: 28635659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Silvia Sánchez-Ramón, Ignacio Dávila and Oscar 
Palomares have received speaker fees from Novartis Farmacéutica and participate 
in the ExIgE group sponsored by Novartis Farmacéutica. Ignacio Dávila has 
additionally participated in advisory boards from Novartis Farmacéutica. Marta 
Lleonart is employee of Novartis Farmacéutica. The rest of authors do not have 
any competing interest regarding this manuscript.