---
reference_id: "PMID:33625499"
title: "Association of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Childhood and Adolescence With the Risk of Subsequent Psychotic Disorder: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Nourredine M
- Gering A
- Fourneret P
- Rolland B
- Falissard B
- Cucherat M
- Geoffray MM
- Jurek L
journal: JAMA Psychiatry
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2020.4799
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/epidemiology
- Child
- Comorbidity
- Humans
- Psychotic Disorders/epidemiology
- Risk
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Childhood and Adolescence With the Risk of Subsequent Psychotic Disorder: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Nourredine M, Gering A, Fourneret P, Rolland B, Falissard B, Cucherat M, Geoffray MM, Jurek L
**Journal:** JAMA Psychiatry (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2020.4799](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2020.4799)

## Content

1. JAMA Psychiatry. 2021 May 1;78(5):519-529. doi:
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2020.4799.

Association of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Childhood and
Adolescence With the Risk of Subsequent Psychotic Disorder: A Systematic Review
and Meta-analysis.

Nourredine M(1)(2), Gering A(3), Fourneret P(4), Rolland B(2)(5), Falissard
B(6), Cucherat M(7), Geoffray MM(3)(8), Jurek L(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Service Hospitalo-Universitaire de Pharmacotoxicologie de Lyon, Hospices
Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(2)Service Universitaire d'Addictologie de Lyon, Centre Hospitalier Le Vinatier,
Bron, France.
(3)Centre d'Evaluation et de Diagnostic de l'Autisme et Autres Troubles du
Neurodéveloppement, Centre Hospitalier Le Vinatier, Bron, France.
(4)Service de Psychopathologie de l'Enfant et du Développement, Hospices Civils
de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(5)Université de Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon, Centre de Recherche en
Neurosciences de Lyon, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
(INSERM) U1028, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) Unité Mixte
de Recherche (UMR) 5292, Psychiatric Disorders: Neuroscience Research And
Clinical Research 2, Lyon, France.
(6)Centre de Recherche en Epidémiologie et en Santé des Populations, INSERM
U1018, Université Paris-Saclay, Paris, France.
(7)Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive, Service de Pharmacologie
Clinique, UMR CNRS 5558, Lyon, France.
(8)Health Services and Performance Research EA7425, Université Lyon 1, Lyon,
France.

IMPORTANCE: Growing evidence supports an association between
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in childhood and subsequent
psychotic disorders. Both disorders share physiopathological features such as
attention deficits, dopaminergic imbalance, and genetic susceptibility. However,
the results of epidemiologic studies have been conflicting.
OBJECTIVE: To provide a quantitative synthesis of studies exploring the
association between ADHD and the risk of subsequent psychotic disorder.
DATA SOURCES: A systematic literature search of the MEDLINE, Scopus, PsycInfo,
and Web of Science databases was performed from inception until the final
analysis on July 7, 2020. No restriction of language was applied.
STUDY SELECTION: Cohort and case-control studies examining the relative risk of
developing a psychotic disorder in people diagnosed with ADHD at younger than 18
years compared with control individuals without ADHD.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews
and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) and Meta-analysis of Observational Studies in
Epidemiology (MOOSE) guidelines were followed in reporting results. Two
independent reviewers extracted the data and assessed the risk of bias of
individual studies using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. Preferably adjusted odds
ratios (aORs) or hazard ratios from the identified studies were extracted, and
ORs were computed when they were not adjusted. A random-effects model was used
to calculate the pooled relative effect using the meta package in R.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: An association between ADHD (exposure) and psychotic
disorder (outcomes); both diagnoses were based on international classification.
RESULTS: A total of 15 studies were included in the review. Twelve studies were
pooled in the meta-analysis, representing 1.85 million participants. A diagnosis
of ADHD in childhood was associated with a significant increase in the risk of
subsequent psychotic disorder, with a pooled relative effect of 4.74 (95% CI,
4.11-5.46; I2 = 43% [95% CI, 0%-70%]). No significant between-group differences
were found for subgroup analyses according to psychotic disorder (odds ratio
[OR], 5.04; 95% CI, 4.36-5.83) or schizophrenia (OR, 4.59; 95% CI, 3.83-5.50)
outcomes, cohort (OR, 4.64; 95% CI, 4.04-5.34) or case-control (OR, 6.81; 95%
CI, 4.21-11.03) study design, and adjusted (OR, 4.72; 95% CI, 4.11-5.46) or
unadjusted (OR, 3.81; 95% CI, 1.39-10.49) estimates. Meta-regressions were not
significant when sex and bias score were used as covariates. No evidence of
publication bias was found.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These findings suggest that childhood ADHD is
associated with an increased risk of a subsequent psychotic disorder. Further
studies are required to determine the mechanisms linking these common conditions
and whether early intervention for ADHD might reduce the risk of subsequent
psychotic disorder.

DOI: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2020.4799
PMCID: PMC7905700
PMID: 33625499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Nourredine
reported receiving nonfinancial support from HAC Pharma and Janssen-Cilag Ltd
outside the submitted work. Dr Rolland reported receiving personal fees from
Shire plc and nonfinancial support from HAC Pharma during the conduct of the
study and personal fees from Indivior plc, Ethypharm, Grünenthal, Jansen Global
Services, LLC, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co, Ltd, Gilead Sciences, Inc, and AbbVie,
grants from Camurus AB, Gilead Sciences, Inc, and Merck Sharp & Dohme, and
nonfinancial support from Recordati SpA outside the submitted work. Dr Falissard
reported receiving personal fees from Eli Lilly and Company, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Servier Laboratories, GlaxoSmithKline, HRA Pharma, F. Hoffmann-La Roche
AG, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bayer AG, Almirall, SA, Allergan Plc, Stallergenes
Greer, Sanofi Genzyme, Pierre Fabre Group, AstraZeneca, Novartis AG, Janssen
Global Services, LLC, Astellas Pharma US, Inc, Biotronik, Daiichi Sankyo Company
Limited, Gilead Sciences, Inc, Merck Sharp & Dohme, H Lundbeck A/S, Actelion
Pharmaceuticals US, Inc, AbbVie, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Amgen, Inc,
Biocodex, Biogen, BioSpec, Bioprojet, Biotronik, Celgène Corporation, Chiesi
USA, Inc, D&A Pharma, Eisai Co, Ltd, Ethypharm, Laboratoires Genevrier,
Grünenthal, IDM Pharma Inc, Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Indivior PLC, LÉO
Pharma A/S, The Menarini Group, Novo Nordisk A/S, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co, Ltd,
Pfizer, Inc, Recordati SpA, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, and UCB SA
outside the submitted work. Dr Jurek reported receiving personal fees from
Servier Laboratories outside the submitted work. No other disclosures were
reported.
