---
reference_id: "PMID:11853334"
title: "Thyroid dysfunction in children with Down's syndrome."
authors:
- Tüysüz B
- Beker DB
journal: Acta Paediatr
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1080/08035250152708770
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thyroid dysfunction in children with Down's syndrome.
**Authors:** Tüysüz B, Beker DB
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08035250152708770](https://doi.org/10.1080/08035250152708770)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr. 2001 Dec;90(12):1389-93. doi: 10.1080/08035250152708770.

Thyroid dysfunction in children with Down's syndrome.

Tüysüz B(1), Beker DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Cerrahpaşa Medical Faculty, University of 
Istanbul, Turkey. beyhantuysuz@yahoo.com

Thyroid function tests were carried out on 320 children with Down's syndrome 
aged between 5 d and 10 y. Thyroid function was normal in 230 patients (71.9%) 
and abnormal in 90 (28.1%). Six patients (1.8%) had primary congenital 
hypothyroidism, one patient had acquired hypothyroidism and two had transient 
hyperthyrotropinaemia of the newborn. Sixteen of the remaining 81 patients 
(25.3%) had compensated hypothyroidism with increased thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) levels (11-20 mU l(-1)). Their T4 levels were found to be either 
normal or close to the lower limit of normal. These cases were started on 
thyroxine therapy. Sixty-five of the 81 patients had a mild compensated 
hypothyroidism with mild TSH elevation (6-10 mU l(-1)). None of the patients had 
hyperthyroidism. The antithyroid antibodies were positive in the acquired 
hypothyroidism case.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of congenital hypothyroidism was 1.8% in children 
with Down's syndrome while 25.3% of them had compensated hypothyroidism. It is 
suggested that Down's syndrome patients with normal thyroid functions and those 
with compensated hypothyroidism should be followed annually and every 3 mo, 
respectively. Besides congenital hypothyroidism cases, those with TSH levels 
between 11 and 20 mU l(-1) may benefit from treatment with low-dose thyroxine.

DOI: 10.1080/08035250152708770
PMID: 11853334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]