---
reference_id: "PMID:17805524"
title: Prenatal diagnosis of chondrodysplasia punctata tibia-metacarpal type using multidetector CT and three-dimensional reconstruction.
authors:
- Miyazaki O
- Nishimura G
- Sago H
- Watanabe N
- Ebina S
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1007/s00247-007-0568-0
keywords:
- Adult
- "Chondrodysplasia Punctata/congenital, diagnostic imaging"
- Female
- Humans
- "Metacarpal Bones/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis/methods
- "Radiographic Image Interpretation, Computer-Assisted/methods"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal diagnosis of chondrodysplasia punctata tibia-metacarpal type using multidetector CT and three-dimensional reconstruction.
**Authors:** Miyazaki O, Nishimura G, Sago H, Watanabe N, Ebina S
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00247-007-0568-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-007-0568-0)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2007 Nov;37(11):1151-4. doi: 10.1007/s00247-007-0568-0. Epub 
2007 Sep 6.

Prenatal diagnosis of chondrodysplasia punctata tibia-metacarpal type using 
multidetector CT and three-dimensional reconstruction.

Miyazaki O(1), Nishimura G, Sago H, Watanabe N, Ebina S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, National Centre for Child Health and Development, 
2-10-1 Okura, Seatagaya-ku, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan. osamu-m@rc4.so-net.ne.jp

We report a case of chondrodysplasia punctata tibia-metacarpal type (CDP-TM) 
that was diagnosed prenatally using multidetector CT (MDCT) with 
three-dimensional (3-D) CT reconstructions. Prenatal US had shown severe 
thoracic hypoplasia and rhizomelic shortening of the limbs, raising the 
suspicion of thanatophoric dysplasia. However, MDCT showed punctate 
calcifications in the epiphyseal cartilage of the humeri and femora, carpal 
bones, and paravertebral region. On 3-D CT, the tibiae were much shorter than 
the fibulae, the humeri were very short and bowed, and severe platyspondyly was 
evident. These findings led to the diagnosis of CDP-TM. The diagnosis was 
confirmed on postnatal radiographs. Prenatal MDCT with 3-D images may make a 
useful contribution to prenatal diagnosis in selected fetuses with severe 
skeletal dysplasia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00247-007-0568-0
PMID: 17805524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]