---
reference_id: "PMID:9382977"
title: Splenic artery aneurysms in liver transplant patients. Liver Transplant Group.
authors:
- Kóbori L
- van der Kolk MJ
- de Jong KP
- Peeters PM
- Klompmaker IJ
- Kok T
- Haagsma EB
- Slooff MJ
journal: J Hepatol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0168-8278(97)80327-3
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aneurysm/epidemiology, pathology"
- Angiography
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Liver Diseases/complications
- "Liver Transplantation/adverse effects, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Postoperative Complications/epidemiology, pathology"
- Risk Factors
- Sex Factors
- Splenic Artery/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Splenic artery aneurysms in liver transplant patients. Liver Transplant Group.
**Authors:** Kóbori L, van der Kolk MJ, de Jong KP, Peeters PM, Klompmaker IJ, Kok T, Haagsma EB, Slooff MJ
**Journal:** J Hepatol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0168-8278(97)80327-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0168-8278(97)80327-3)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 1997 Nov;27(5):890-3. doi: 10.1016/s0168-8278(97)80327-3.

Splenic artery aneurysms in liver transplant patients. Liver Transplant Group.

Kóbori L(1), van der Kolk MJ, de Jong KP, Peeters PM, Klompmaker IJ, Kok T, 
Haagsma EB, Slooff MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The purpose of the study was to investigate the incidence of 
and risk factors for splenic artery aneurysms in liver transplant patients.
METHODS: Medical records and the pre- and 1-year postoperative angiograms of 337 
liver transplant patients were reviewed to assess the presence and 
characteristics of these aneurysms.
RESULTS: Forty-five patients with aneurysms were identified (13%): 41 cases in 
242 adult patients (17%) and four (4%) in 95 children (p<0.01). The 
female-to-male ratio was 2:1. The majority of the aneurysms (87%) were located 
in the distal third of the splenic artery and the majority (87%) of the patients 
presented multiple aneurysms. In patients without portal hypertension no 
aneurysms were identified, whereas in 16% of the patients with portal 
hypertension aneurysms were found (p<0.001). In adult patients the incidence of 
splenic artery aneurysms was significantly higher in patients with parenchymal 
diseases than in patients with cholestatic diseases (p<0.0001). Two patients 
(4%) died due to rupture of the aneurysms. Control angiographies, 1 year after 
liver transplantation, showed no changes in size and number of the aneurysms, 
and no new aneurysms were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of splenic artery aneurysms in liver transplant 
patients is 13%. They are generally multiple and located in the distal third of 
the splenic artery. The incidence is higher in women and in patients with 
parenchymal liver disease and portal hypertension. The incidence of rupture was 
4%.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-8278(97)80327-3
PMID: 9382977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]