---
reference_id: "PMID:8977557"
title: Radiation therapy for malignant melanoma.
authors:
- Geara FB
- Ang KK
journal: Surg Clin North Am
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1016/s0039-6109(05)70521-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radiation therapy for malignant melanoma.
**Authors:** Geara FB, Ang KK
**Journal:** Surg Clin North Am (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0039-6109(05)70521-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0039-6109(05)70521-1)

## Content

1. Surg Clin North Am. 1996 Dec;76(6):1383-98. doi:
10.1016/s0039-6109(05)70521-1.

Radiation therapy for malignant melanoma.

Geara FB(1), Ang KK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas, M. D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, USA.

Sufficient biologic and clinical evidence now exists to refute the longstanding 
dogma that melanomas are uniformly radiation resistant and hence radiation 
therapy has little role in the management of this disease. Although surgery 
remains the treatment of choice for the vast majority of localized melanomas, 
available data indicate that radiation therapy is a viable alternative for a few 
subsets of patients in whom surgery would result in cosmetic or functional 
deformity, such as patients with large facial lentigo maligna melanomas or small 
or intermediate-sized uveal melanomas. Retrospective and Phase II prospective 
studies have revealed that elective/adjunctive radiation therapy improves the 
local-regional control rate in patients with thick primary lesions, nodal 
involvement, or mucosal melanomas. However, the impact of elective/adjunctive 
radiation therapy on the survival rate has yet to be determined. Radiation 
therapy has been established as a simple and cost-effective treatment modality 
for palliation of patients with symptomatic metastatic spread. The response of 
metastatic deposits to radiation varies with the tumor volume, total dose, and 
dose per fraction. The choice of optimal fractionation depends on tumor site and 
the patient's survival expectation. New data indicate that hyperthermia enhances 
the response of metastatic lesions to radiation. Ongoing research with a variety 
of experimental strategies may offer the possibility of further increasing the 
utility of radiation therapy in the management of this disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0039-6109(05)70521-1
PMID: 8977557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]