---
reference_id: "PMID:40967215"
title: "Creeping fat-derived mechanosensitive fibroblasts drive intestinal fibrosis in Crohn's disease strictures."
authors:
- Bauer-Rowe KE
- Pham B
- Griffin M
- Liang NE
- Kim A
- Lu JM
- Januszyk M
- Guo JL
- De Santis S
- Xing Y
- Prystupa A
- Sidhu I
- Suh EJ
- Foster DS
- Korah M
- Goyal A
- Wan DC
- Norton JA
- Delitto D
- Pizarro TT
- Naik SL
- Hyun JS
- Longaker MT
journal: Cell
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2025.08.029
keywords:
- Fibroblasts
- Humans
- "Crohn Disease/metabolism, pathology"
- "Intestines/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Mice
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Adipose Tissue/metabolism, pathology"
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Gene Regulatory Networks
- Signal Transduction
- Male
- Female
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Creeping fat-derived mechanosensitive fibroblasts drive intestinal fibrosis in Crohn's disease strictures.
**Authors:** Bauer-Rowe KE, Pham B, Griffin M, Liang NE, Kim A, Lu JM, Januszyk M, Guo JL, De Santis S, Xing Y, Prystupa A, Sidhu I, Suh EJ, Foster DS, Korah M, Goyal A, Wan DC, Norton JA, Delitto D, Pizarro TT, Naik SL, Hyun JS, Longaker MT
**Journal:** Cell (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2025.08.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.08.029)

## Content

1. Cell. 2025 Nov 13;188(23):6536-6553.e26. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2025.08.029. Epub
 2025 Sep 17.

Creeping fat-derived mechanosensitive fibroblasts drive intestinal fibrosis in
Crohn's disease strictures.

Bauer-Rowe KE(1), Pham B(2), Griffin M(2), Liang NE(2), Kim A(2), Lu JM(1),
Januszyk M(2), Guo JL(2), De Santis S(3), Xing Y(4), Prystupa A(4), Sidhu I(4),
Suh EJ(2), Foster DS(2), Korah M(1), Goyal A(5), Wan DC(2), Norton JA(2),
Delitto D(2), Pizarro TT(3), Naik SL(4), Hyun JS(6), Longaker MT(7).

Author information:
(1)Hagey Laboratory for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Division of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA; Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(2)Hagey Laboratory for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Division of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA; Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Department of Dermatology, Icahn
School of Medicine, Mt. Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA 94305, USA.
(6)Hagey Laboratory for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Division of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA; Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic address: jhyun1@stanford.edu.
(7)Hagey Laboratory for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Division of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA; Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
Electronic address: longaker@stanford.edu.

A significant complication of Crohn's disease (CD) is intestinal fibrosis, which
narrows the bowel lumen to form a stricture. Creeping fat (CF) is the wrapping
of mesenteric adipose tissue around diseased bowel, of which the role in CD
stricture progression is unclear. By constructing a human single-cell CD
fibroblast atlas, we identified CF-derived, CTHRC1+ fibroblasts enriched for
Yes-associated protein (YAP)/transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif
(TAZ) signatures and localized to a fibrotic CF-bowel wall interface within the
stricture. We further showed that analogous Cthrc1+ mouse fibroblasts derive
from mesenteric adipose tissue stromal cells, infiltrate fibrotic bowel, and
deposit extracellular matrix in a YAP/TAZ-dependent manner in a mouse model of
intestinal fibrosis. Our findings identify CF as a key source of pro-fibrotic
fibroblasts and raise the possibility of improving future clinical management of
stricture progression by targeting not only the bowel but also CF.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2025.08.029
PMCID: PMC12453597
PMID: 40967215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests S.L.N. is on the SAB of
Seed Inc. and is a co-founder of Stara Biosciences. Stanford Provisional patent:
“YAP Inhibition for Intestinal Fibrosis,” serial number 63/818,707 (M.T.L.,
J.S.H., A.K., B.P., N.E.L., and K.E.B.-R.).
