---
reference_id: "PMID:29745893"
title: Cell therapies for refractory rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Liu R
- Zhao P
- Tan W
- Zhang M
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2018'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cell therapies for refractory rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Liu R, Zhao P, Tan W, Zhang M
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2018)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2018 Sep-Oct;36(5):911-919. Epub 2018 May 8.

Cell therapies for refractory rheumatoid arthritis.

Liu R(1), Zhao P(1), Tan W(1), Zhang M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China. miaojia_zhang@163.com.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), an autoimmune disease, is characterised by a 
persistent synovitis in the joints and systemic inflammation. Non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), corticosteroids and disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) are widely used to treat RA patients. However, a 
portion of patients still have inadequate response to traditional medications. 
Recently, cell-based therapies have become the focus, attracting more attention 
due to their potential for remission induction. Several immune-regulatory cell 
types, such as haematopoietic stem cells, mesenchymal stem cells and regulatory 
T cells have been defined as novel targets. In this paper, we have summarised 
and reviewed current clinical trials using cell-based therapeutic approaches for 
the treatment of RA.

PMID: 29745893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]