---
reference_id: "PMID:11343317"
title: Congenital heart defects in Kabuki syndrome.
authors:
- Digilio MC
- Marino B
- Toscano A
- Giannotti A
- Dallapiccola B
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1265
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cytogenetic Analysis
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- Intellectual Disability
- Male
- Sex Characteristics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital heart defects in Kabuki syndrome.
**Authors:** Digilio MC, Marino B, Toscano A, Giannotti A, Dallapiccola B
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1265](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1265)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 2001 May 15;100(4):269-74. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1265.

Congenital heart defects in Kabuki syndrome.

Digilio MC(1), Marino B, Toscano A, Giannotti A, Dallapiccola B.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medical Genetics and Pediatric Cardiology, Bambino Gesù 
Hospital, Rome, Italy.

Kabuki makeup (Niikawa-Kuroki) syndrome (KS) is characterized by distinct facial 
anomalies, mental retardation, congenital heart defect (CHD), and skeletal 
malformations. In the present study we analyze cardiac characteristics and 
differences in sex prevalence of specific CHDs in our series of patients with KS 
and review published reports from the literature. Between January 1992 and 
February 2000, 60 patients (37 males and 23 females) with KS underwent 
phenotypic and cardiac evaluations at our hospital. CHD was diagnosed in 35 
(58%) of our patients. Aortic coarctation (COA) (23%), atrial septal defect 
(ASD) (20%), and ventricular septal defect (VSD) (17%) were the most frequent 
CHDs in our series and in previous reports from the literature. Male 
preponderance was noted in patients with COA. In conclusion, CHD is a cardinal 
feature of KS. There is an overlap between cardiac malformations of KS and those 
of Turner syndrome. Male preponderance in patients with KS and COA supports the 
hypothesis that genes located on the X chromosome may be involved in determining 
KS in some patients. The high prevalence of CHD prompts accurate re-examination 
of patients evaluated by pediatric cardiologists in order to identify mild and 
still unrecognized cases of KS.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1265
PMID: 11343317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]