---
reference_id: "PMID:37207471"
title: An expert consensus on the recommendations for the use of biomarkers in Fabry disease.
authors:
- Burlina A
- Brand E
- Hughes D
- Kantola I
- Krӓmer J
- Nowak A
- Tøndel C
- Wanner C
- Spada M
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107585
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An expert consensus on the recommendations for the use of biomarkers in Fabry disease.
**Authors:** Burlina A, Brand E, Hughes D, Kantola I, Krӓmer J, Nowak A, Tøndel C, Wanner C, Spada M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107585](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107585)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2023 Jun;139(2):107585. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107585.
Epub  2023 Apr 17.

An expert consensus on the recommendations for the use of biomarkers in Fabry 
disease.

Burlina A(1), Brand E(2), Hughes D(3), Kantola I(4), Krӓmer J(5), Nowak A(6), 
Tøndel C(7), Wanner C(8), Spada M(9).

Author information:
(1)Neurological Unit, St. Bassiano Hospital, Via dei Lotti 40, I-36061 Bassano 
del Grappa, Italy. Electronic address: alessandro.burlina@aulss7.veneto.it.
(2)Internal Medicine, Department of Nephrology, Hypertension and Rheumatology; 
Interdisciplinary Fabry Center Münster (IFAZ), University Hospital Münster, 
Münster, Germany.
(3)Lysosomal Storage Disorders Unit, Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust, 
University College London, United Kingdom.
(4)Division of Medicine, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(5)Pediatric Neurology and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(6)Department of Endocrinology and Clinical Nutrition, University Hospital of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen and Department of 
Paediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Fabry Center for 
Interdisciplinary Therapy (FAZIT), University Hospital of Würzburg, Würzburg, 
Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.

Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by the 
accumulation of glycosphingolipids in various tissues and body fluids, leading 
to progressive organ damage and life-threatening complications. Phenotypic 
classification is based on disease progression and severity and can be used to 
predict outcomes. Patients with a classic Fabry phenotype have little to no 
residual α-Gal A activity and have widespread organ involvement, whereas 
patients with a later-onset phenotype have residual α-Gal A activity and disease 
progression can be limited to a single organ, often the heart. Diagnosis and 
monitoring of patients with Fabry disease should therefore be individualized, 
and biomarkers are available to support with this. Disease-specific biomarkers 
are useful in the diagnosis of Fabry disease; non-disease-specific biomarkers 
may be useful to assess organ damage. For most biomarkers it can be challenging 
to prove they translate to differences in the risk of clinical events associated 
with Fabry disease. Therefore, careful monitoring of treatment outcomes and 
collection of prospective data in patients are needed. As we deepen our 
understanding of Fabry disease, it is important to regularly re-evaluate and 
appraise published evidence relating to biomarkers. In this article, we present 
the results of a literature review of evidence published between February 2017 
and July 2020 on the impact of disease-specific treatment on biomarkers and 
provide an expert consensus on clinical recommendations for the use of those 
biomarkers.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107585
PMID: 37207471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest