---
reference_id: "PMID:35332438"
title: "Effect of GBA gene variants on clinical characteristics of dementia with Lewy bodies: a review and meta-analyses."
authors:
- Liu L
- Li J
- Quan W
- Qin Y
- Zhang Q
- Pei X
- Su H
- Xu J
- Chen J
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-022-06031-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of GBA gene variants on clinical characteristics of dementia with Lewy bodies: a review and meta-analyses.
**Authors:** Liu L, Li J, Quan W, Qin Y, Zhang Q, Pei X, Su H, Xu J, Chen J
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-022-06031-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-022-06031-w)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2022 Jun;43(6):3541-3550. doi: 10.1007/s10072-022-06031-w. Epub
2022  Mar 24.

Effect of GBA gene variants on clinical characteristics of dementia with Lewy 
bodies: a review and meta-analyses.

Liu L(1), Li J(1), Quan W(1), Qin Y(1), Zhang Q(1), Pei X(1), Su H(1), Xu J(1), 
Chen J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, 130000, Jilin, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, 130000, Jilin, China. cjj@jlu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: Glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene may be a risk factor for dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB). However, due to the small number of existing studies and the 
small sample size of previous investigations, it is necessary to conduct 
objective and quantitative analyses of the association between GBA variants and 
DLB. There is no consensus regarding the relationship between GBA and the 
clinical characteristics of DLB. Therefore, we conducted multiple systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses with a particular focus on the age of onset, sex, and 
cognitive impairment.
METHODS: PubMed, Cochrane, and EMBASE databases were searched to retrieve 
related studies. The odds ratios and 95% confidence interval were calculated to 
determine the association between GBA and DLB and between GBA and the clinical 
characteristics of DLB.
RESULTS: Our meta-analysis confirmed that the GBA variant rate was significantly 
higher in the DLB group than in the control group, as were the variant rates of 
L444P, N370S, and E326K, whereas the variant rate of T369M showed no significant 
difference between the groups. Furthermore, the relevant literature was 
summarised again for meta-analyses. The GBA variant group had a younger age of 
onset and lower Montreal Cognitive Assessment score than the GBA non-variant 
group in DLB patients. GBA variants do not differ between sexes in DLB patients.
CONCLUSIONS: GBA variants increased the risk of DLB, especially N370S, E326K, 
and L444P which are strongly associated with DLB, but T369M was not. Patients 
harbouring GBA variants have an earlier age of onset, more severe cognitive 
impairment, and rapid symptom progression; however, sex is irrelevant in DLB.

© 2022. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-022-06031-w
PMID: 35332438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]