---
reference_id: "PMID:25881272"
title: Estimating dengue transmission intensity from sero-prevalence surveys in multiple countries.
authors:
- Imai N
- Dorigatti I
- Cauchemez S
- Ferguson NM
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003719
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimating dengue transmission intensity from sero-prevalence surveys in multiple countries.
**Authors:** Imai N, Dorigatti I, Cauchemez S, Ferguson NM
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0003719](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0003719)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Apr 16;9(4):e0003719. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0003719. eCollection 2015 Apr.

Estimating dengue transmission intensity from sero-prevalence surveys in 
multiple countries.

Imai N(1), Dorigatti I(1), Cauchemez S(2), Ferguson NM(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Outbreak Analysis and Modelling, Department of Infectious 
Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France.

BACKGROUND: Estimates of dengue transmission intensity remain ambiguous. Since 
the majority of infections are asymptomatic, surveillance systems substantially 
underestimate true rates of infection. With advances in the development of novel 
control measures, obtaining robust estimates of average dengue transmission 
intensity is key for assessing both the burden of disease from dengue and the 
likely impact of interventions.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The force of infection (λ) and corresponding 
basic reproduction numbers (R0) for dengue were estimated from non-serotype 
(IgG) and serotype-specific (PRNT) age-stratified seroprevalence surveys 
identified from the literature. The majority of R0 estimates ranged from 1-4. 
Assuming that two heterologous infections result in complete immunity produced 
up to two-fold higher estimates of R0 than when tertiary and quaternary 
infections were included. λ estimated from IgG data were comparable to the sum 
of serotype-specific forces of infection derived from PRNT data, particularly 
when inter-serotype interactions were allowed for.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our analysis highlights the highly heterogeneous 
nature of dengue transmission. How underlying assumptions about serotype 
interactions and immunity affect the relationship between the force of infection 
and R0 will have implications for control planning. While PRNT data provides the 
maximum information, our study shows that even the much cheaper ELISA-based 
assays would provide comparable baseline estimates of overall transmission 
intensity which will be an important consideration in resource-constrained 
settings.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003719
PMCID: PMC4400108
PMID: 25881272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.