---
reference_id: "PMID:40522768"
title: "Prevalence of genetic alterations in basal cell carcinoma patients resistant to Hedgehog pathway inhibitors: a systematic review."
authors:
- Untaaveesup S
- Srichana P
- Techataweewan G
- Pongphaew C
- Dendumrongsup W
- Ponvilawan B
- Nampipat N
- Limwongse C
journal: Ann Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/07853890.2025.2516701
keywords:
- Humans
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/genetics, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Hedgehog Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- "Anilides/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Mutation
- "Signal Transduction/genetics, drug effects"
- Smoothened Receptor/genetics
- Patched-1 Receptor/genetics
- Pyridines/therapeutic use
- "Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Prevalence
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of genetic alterations in basal cell carcinoma patients resistant to Hedgehog pathway inhibitors: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Untaaveesup S, Srichana P, Techataweewan G, Pongphaew C, Dendumrongsup W, Ponvilawan B, Nampipat N, Limwongse C
**Journal:** Ann Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/07853890.2025.2516701](https://doi.org/10.1080/07853890.2025.2516701)

## Content

1. Ann Med. 2025 Dec;57(1):2516701. doi: 10.1080/07853890.2025.2516701. Epub 2025
 Jun 16.

Prevalence of genetic alterations in basal cell carcinoma patients resistant to
Hedgehog pathway inhibitors: a systematic review.

Untaaveesup S(1), Srichana P(2), Techataweewan G(3), Pongphaew C(4),
Dendumrongsup W(5), Ponvilawan B(6), Nampipat N(7), Limwongse C(8).

Author information:
(1)Chao Khun Paiboon Hospital, Kanchanaburi, Thailand.
(2)Detudom Crown Prince Hospital, Ubon Ratchathani, Thailand.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Burapha University Hospital, Burapha University,
Chonburi, Thailand.
(4)Princess Srisavangavadhana College of Medicine, Chulabhorn Royal Academy,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Missouri-Kansas City School of
Medicine, Kansas City, MO, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Medical Oncology Unit, Maha Vajiralongkorn Thanyaburi
Hospital, Pathum Thani, Thailand.
(8)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

INTRODUCTION: Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is a prevalent form of skin cancer that
can be localized or metastatic. Current evidence supports the use of Hedgehog
(Hh) pathway inhibitors for locally advanced or metastatic BCC with resistance
due to genetic alterations in the Hh pathway. This systematic review evaluated
the prevalence of genetic alterations in Hh pathway genes in BCC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive search across four
databases: PubMed, EMBASE, SCOPUS and the Cochrane Library. We included articles
reporting genetic alterations in patients with locally advanced or metastatic
BCC resistant to Hh pathway inhibitors.
RESULTS: We included three prospective cohort studies encompassing 27 samples,
all of which were resistant to vismodegib treatment. The most prevalent genetic
mutations in the Hh pathway were in PTCH1, SMO and TP53, with a pooled
prevalence of 44.44%.
CONCLUSIONS: This systematic review highlights the prevalence of genetic
alterations in the Hh pathway in BCC and offers insights into the mechanisms
involved in treatment resistance. Understanding the high resistance rates of
these genes may facilitate the development of more effective targeted therapies
for BCC.

Plain Language Summary: The recent literature found no study established the
prevalence and genetic alterations which related systemic treatments in treating
advanced basal cell carcinoma. This study found that PTCH1, SMO and TP53 were
the most prevalent genetic mutations in the Hedgehog pathway. As a result, our
results may influence further therapeutic strategies, resulting in disruption of
the resistance mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1080/07853890.2025.2516701
PMCID: PMC12172076
PMID: 40522768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported
by the author(s).
