---
reference_id: "PMID:32877502"
title: Direct activation of the alternative complement pathway by SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins is blocked by factor D inhibition.
authors:
- Yu J
- Yuan X
- Chen H
- Chaturvedi S
- Braunstein EM
- Brodsky RA
journal: Blood
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2020008248
keywords:
- Betacoronavirus
- Cell Line
- Complement Activation/drug effects
- Complement C3/metabolism
- "Complement C5/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Complement Factor D/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Complement Factor H/metabolism
- Complement Inactivating Agents/pharmacology
- Complement Membrane Attack Complex/metabolism
- "Complement Pathway, Alternative/drug effects"
- Humans
- SARS-CoV-2
- "Spike Glycoprotein, Coronavirus/pharmacology, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Direct activation of the alternative complement pathway by SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins is blocked by factor D inhibition.
**Authors:** Yu J, Yuan X, Chen H, Chaturvedi S, Braunstein EM, Brodsky RA
**Journal:** Blood (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2020008248](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2020008248)

## Content

1. Blood. 2020 Oct 29;136(18):2080-2089. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020008248.

Direct activation of the alternative complement pathway by SARS-CoV-2 spike
proteins is blocked by factor D inhibition.

Yu J(1), Yuan X(1), Chen H(1), Chaturvedi S(1), Braunstein EM(1), Brodsky RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.

Comment in
    Blood. 2020 Oct 29;136(18):2000-2001. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020008925.
    Therapie. 2021 Jul-Aug;76(4):367-369. doi: 10.1016/j.therap.2021.04.003.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a highly
contagious respiratory virus that can lead to venous/arterial thrombosis,
stroke, renal failure, myocardial infarction, thrombocytopenia, and other
end-organ damage. Animal models demonstrating end-organ protection in
C3-deficient mice and evidence of complement activation in humans have led to
the hypothesis that SARS-CoV-2 triggers complement-mediated endothelial damage,
but the mechanism is unclear. Here, we demonstrate that the SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein (subunit 1 and 2), but not the N protein, directly activates the
alternative pathway of complement (APC). Complement-dependent killing using the
modified Ham test is blocked by either C5 or factor D inhibition. C3 fragments
and C5b-9 are deposited on TF1PIGAnull target cells, and complement factor Bb is
increased in the supernatant from spike protein-treated cells. C5 inhibition
prevents the accumulation of C5b-9 on cells, but not C3c; however, factor D
inhibition prevents both C3c and C5b-9 accumulation. Addition of factor H
mitigates the complement attack. In conclusion, SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins
convert nonactivator surfaces to activator surfaces by preventing the
inactivation of the cell-surface APC convertase. APC activation may explain many
of the clinical manifestations (microangiopathy, thrombocytopenia, renal injury,
and thrombophilia) of COVID-19 that are also observed in other complement-driven
diseases such as atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome and catastrophic
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. C5 inhibition prevents accumulation of C5b-9
in vitro but does not prevent upstream complement activation in response to
SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins.

© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020008248
PMCID: PMC7596849
PMID: 32877502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: R.A.B. has
served on advisory board for Alexion Pharmaceutical Inc. The remaining authors
declare no competing financial interests.
