---
reference_id: "PMID:20301555"
title: Aicardi Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Sutton VR
- Van den Veyver IB
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aicardi Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Sutton VR, Van den Veyver IB

## Content

1. Aicardi Syndrome.

Sutton VR(1), Van den Veyver IB(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2006 Jun 30 [updated 2020 Nov 12].

Author information:
(1)Professor, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine & Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas
(2)Professor, Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Aicardi syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder that
affects primarily females. Initially it was characterized by a typical triad of
agenesis of the corpus callosum, central chorioretinal lacunae, and infantile
spasms. As more affected individuals have been ascertained, it has become clear
that not all affected girls have all three features of the classic triad and
that other neurologic and systemic defects are common, including other brain
malformations, optic nerve abnormalities, other seizure types, intellectual
disability of varying severity, and scoliosis.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Aicardi syndrome is based exclusively on
clinical findings. Modified diagnostic criteria include either presence of the
classic triad or the presence of two of the classic triad plus at least two
other major or supporting features. A gene for Aicardi syndrome has not been
identified, but several observations support a hypothesis that Aicardi syndrome
is caused by de novo pathogenic variants in a gene on the X chromosome that is
subject to X-chromosome inactivation.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is individualized and
long-term management by a pediatric neurologist with expertise in management of
infantile spasms and medically refractory epilepsy is essential. Physical
therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy should begin at the time of
diagnosis. Appropriate musculoskeletal support and treatment for prevention of
scoliosis-related complications is indicated. Surveillance: Includes routine
monitoring of growth, nutritional status and safety of oral intake, seizure
control, developmental progress and educational needs, respiratory function and
aspiration risk, and the spine and degree of scoliosis.
GENETIC COUNSELING: With the exception of affected monozygotic twin girls, all
individuals with Aicardi syndrome reported to date have represented simplex
cases (i.e., a single affected family member). Parent-to-child transmission of
Aicardi syndrome has not been reported, and the recurrence risk to sibs is
thought to be less than 1%. While prenatal ultrasound or intrauterine MRI
findings of corpus callosum agenesis and neuronal migration abnormalities may be
suggestive of Aicardi syndrome, no findings are diagnostic.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301555
