---
reference_id: "PMID:24755997"
title: Current and emerging therapies for Addison's disease.
authors:
- Napier C
- Pearce SH
journal: Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000067
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current and emerging therapies for Addison's disease.
**Authors:** Napier C, Pearce SH
**Journal:** Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MED.0000000000000067](https://doi.org/10.1097/MED.0000000000000067)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2014 Jun;21(3):147-53. doi: 
10.1097/MED.0000000000000067.

Current and emerging therapies for Addison's disease.

Napier C(1), Pearce SH.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, and Endocrine Unit, 
Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this article is to review the current therapy 
of Addison's disease and to highlight recent developments in this field.
RECENT FINDINGS: Conventional steroid replacement for Addison's disease consists 
of twice or three-times daily oral hydrocortisone and once-daily 
fludrocortisone; however, new treatment modalities such as modified-released 
hydrocortisone and continuous subcutaneous hydrocortisone infusion have recently 
been developed. These offer the potential for closer simulation of the 
physiological serum cortisol rhythm. Two studies have also looked at modifying 
the natural history of adrenal failure using adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 
stimulation and immunomodulatory therapies, leading to the concept of residual 
adrenal function in some Addison's disease patients.
SUMMARY: Following more than 60 years with no significant innovation in the 
management of Addison's disease, these new approaches hold promise for improved 
patient health and better quality of life in the future.

DOI: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000067
PMID: 24755997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]