---
reference_id: "PMID:34574829"
title: Effects of Air Pollutants on Airway Diseases.
authors:
- Lee YG
- Lee PH
- Choi SM
- An MH
- Jang AS
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph18189905
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of Air Pollutants on Airway Diseases.
**Authors:** Lee YG, Lee PH, Choi SM, An MH, Jang AS
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph18189905](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18189905)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Sep 20;18(18):9905. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18189905.

Effects of Air Pollutants on Airway Diseases.

Lee YG(1), Lee PH(1), Choi SM(1), An MH(1), Jang AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital, 
170 Jomaru-ro, Wonmi-gu, Bucheon 14584, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.

Air pollutants include toxic particles and gases emitted in large quantities 
from many different combustible materials. They also include particulate matter 
(PM) and ozone, and biological contaminants, such as viruses and bacteria, which 
can penetrate the human airway and reach the bloodstream, triggering airway 
inflammation, dysfunction, and fibrosis. Pollutants that accumulate in the lungs 
exacerbate symptoms of respiratory diseases such as asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Asthma, a heterogeneous disease with 
complex pathological mechanisms, is characterized by particular symptoms such as 
shortness of breath, a tight chest, coughing, and wheezing. Patients with COPD 
often experience exacerbations and worsening of symptoms, which may result in 
hospitalization and disease progression. PM varies in terms of composition, and 
can include solid and liquid particles of various sizes. PM concentrations are 
higher in urban areas. Ozone is one of the most toxic photochemical air 
pollutants. In general, air pollution decreases quality of life and life 
expectancy. It exacerbates acute and chronic respiratory symptoms in patients 
with chronic airway diseases, and increases the morbidity and risk of 
hospitalization associated with respiratory diseases. However, the mechanisms 
underlying these effects remain unclear. Therefore, we reviewed the impact of 
air pollutants on airway diseases such as asthma and COPD, focusing on their 
underlying mechanisms.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18189905
PMCID: PMC8465980
PMID: 34574829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.