---
reference_id: "PMID:29507942"
title: "Effect of Treating Acute Optic Neuritis With Bioequivalent Oral vs Intravenous Corticosteroids: A Randomized Clinical Trial."
authors:
- Morrow SA
- Fraser JA
- Day C
- Bowman D
- Rosehart H
- Kremenchutzky M
- Nicolle M
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.0024
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- "Administration, Intravenous"
- "Administration, Oral"
- "Adrenal Cortex Hormones/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics"
- Adult
- "Evoked Potentials, Visual/drug effects, physiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Methylprednisolone Hemisuccinate/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics"
- Middle Aged
- "Optic Neuritis/diagnosis, drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Prednisone/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics"
- Single-Blind Method
- Therapeutic Equivalency
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Treating Acute Optic Neuritis With Bioequivalent Oral vs Intravenous Corticosteroids: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
**Authors:** Morrow SA, Fraser JA, Day C, Bowman D, Rosehart H, Kremenchutzky M, Nicolle M
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.0024](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.0024)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2018 Jun 1;75(6):690-696. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.0024.

Effect of Treating Acute Optic Neuritis With Bioequivalent Oral vs Intravenous 
Corticosteroids: A Randomized Clinical Trial.

Morrow SA(1)(2), Fraser JA(1)(2)(3), Day C(2), Bowman D(2), Rosehart H(2), 
Kremenchutzky M(1)(2), Nicolle M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurological Sciences, Western University, London, 
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Clinical Neurological Sciences, London Health Sciences Centre, 
London, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.

IMPORTANCE: Intravenous (IV) administration of corticosteroids is the standard 
of care in the treatment of acute optic neuritis. However, it is uncertain 
whether a bioequivalent dose of corticosteroid administered orally, which may be 
more cost-efficient and convenient for patients, is as effective as IV 
administration in the treatment of acute optic neuritis.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether recovery of vision following treatment of acute 
optic neuritis with a high-dose IV corticosteroid is superior to that with a 
bioequivalent dose of an oral corticosteroid.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This single-blind (participants unblinded) 
randomized clinical trial with 6-month follow-up was conducted at a single 
tertiary care center in London, Ontario, Canada. Participants were enrolled from 
March 2012 to May 2015, with the last participant's final visit occurring 
November 2015. Patients 18 to 64 years of age presenting within 14 days of acute 
optic neuritis onset, without any recovery at time of randomization and without 
history of optic neuritis in the same eye, were screened. Inclusion criteria 
included best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/40 or worse and 
corticosteroids deemed required by treating physician. In total, 89 participants 
were screened; 64 were eligible, but 9 declined to participate. Thus, 55 
participants were enrolled and randomized. Primary analysis was unadjusted and 
according to the intention-to-treat principle.
INTERVENTIONS: Participants were randomized 1:1 to the IV methylprednisolone 
sodium succinate (1000-mg) or oral prednisone (1250-mg) group.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Primary outcome was recovery of the latency of the 
P100 component of the visual evoked potential at 6 months. Secondary outcomes 
were the P100 latency at 1 month and BCVA as assessed with Early Treatment 
Diabetic Retinopathy Study letter scores on the alphabet chart and scores on 
low-contrast letters at 1 and 6 months.
RESULTS: Of 55 randomized participants, the final analyzed cohort comprised 23 
participants in the IV and 22 in the oral treatment groups. The mean (SD) age of 
the cohort was 34.6 (9.5) years, and there were 28 women (62.2%). At 6 months' 
recovery, P100 latency in the IV group improved by 62.9 milliseconds (from a 
mean [SD] of 181.9 [53.6] to 119.0 [16.5] milliseconds), and the oral group 
improved by 66.7 milliseconds (from a mean [SD] of 200.5 [67.2] to 133.8 [31.5] 
milliseconds), with no significant difference between groups (P = .07). 
Similarly, no significant group difference was found in the mean P100 latency 
recovery at 1 month. For BCVA, recovery between the groups did not reach 
statistical significance at 1 month or 6 months. In addition, improvements in 
low-contrast (1.25% and 2.5%) BCVA were not significantly different between 
treatment groups at 1 or 6 months' recovery.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study finds that bioequivalent doses of oral 
corticosteroids may be used as an alternative to IV corticosteroids to treat 
acute optic neuritis.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01524250.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.0024
PMCID: PMC5885218
PMID: 29507942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Morrow 
reported receiving honoraria for speaking, consulting, and participating on 
advisory boards from Biogen Idec, EMD Serono Inc, Genzyme, Novartis, and Roche. 
She has acted as site principal investigator for clinical trials for Novartis, 
Genzyme, and Roche and has received investigator initiated trial funding from 
Genzyme. Dr Kremenchutzky reported receiving research grants and support from 
Biogen, Novartis, Sanofi, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd, and Wellesley 
Therapeutics. He is also a paid consultant for Biogen, Genzyme, and Novartis. No 
other disclosures were reported.