---
reference_id: "PMID:10964945"
title: The polyglutamine expansion in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 causes a beta subunit-specific enhanced activation of P/Q-type calcium channels in Xenopus oocytes.
authors:
- Restituito S
- Thompson RM
- Eliet J
- Raike RS
- Riedl M
- Charnet P
- Gomez CM
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-17-06394.2000
keywords:
- Alternative Splicing
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Antibodies
- "Calcium Channels/chemistry, genetics, physiology"
- "Calcium Channels, P-Type/genetics, physiology"
- "Calcium Channels, Q-Type/genetics, physiology"
- Exons
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Potentials
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Neurons/physiology
- Oocytes/physiology
- Peptide Fragments/immunology
- Peptides/genetics
- Rabbits
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/biosynthesis
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
- Xenopus laevis
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The polyglutamine expansion in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 causes a beta subunit-specific enhanced activation of P/Q-type calcium channels in Xenopus oocytes.
**Authors:** Restituito S, Thompson RM, Eliet J, Raike RS, Riedl M, Charnet P, Gomez CM
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-17-06394.2000](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-17-06394.2000)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2000 Sep 1;20(17):6394-403. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-17-06394.2000.

The polyglutamine expansion in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 causes a beta
subunit-specific enhanced activation of P/Q-type calcium channels in Xenopus
oocytes.

Restituito S(1), Thompson RM, Eliet J, Raike RS, Riedl M, Charnet P, Gomez CM.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherches de Biochimie Macromoléculaire, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique Unité Propre de Recherche 1086, Montpellier, France.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) is a dominantly inherited degenerative
disorder of the cerebellum characterized by nearly selective and progressive
death of Purkinje cells. The underlying mutation in SCA6 consists of an
expansion of a trinucleotide CAG repeat in the 3' region of the gene, CACNA1A,
encoding the alpha(1A) subunit of the neuronal P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium
channel. Although it is known that this mutation results in an expanded tract of
glutamine residues in some alpha(1A) splice forms, the distribution of these
splice forms and the role of this mutation in the highly selective Purkinje cell
degeneration seen in SCA6 have yet to be elucidated. Using specific antisera we
demonstrate that the pathological expansion in SCA6 can potentially be expressed
in multiple isoforms of the alpha(1A) subunit, and that these isoforms are
abundantly expressed in the cerebellum, particularly in the Purkinje cell bodies
and dendrites. Using alpha(1A) subunit chimeras expressing SCA6 mutations, we
show that the SCA6 polyglutamine expansion shifts the voltage dependence of
channel activation and rate of inactivation only when expressed with beta(4)
subunits and impairs normal G-protein regulation of P/Q channels. These findings
suggest the possibility that SCA6 is a channelopathy, and that the underlying
mutation in SCA6 causes Purkinje cell degeneration through excessive entry of
calcium ions.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-17-06394.2000
PMCID: PMC6772973
PMID: 10964945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
