---
reference_id: "PMID:36945042"
title: Chromatin remodeler Activity-Dependent Neuroprotective Protein (ADNP) contributes to syndromic autism.
authors:
- "D'Incal CP"
- Van Rossem KE
- De Man K
- Konings A
- Van Dijck A
- Rizzuti L
- Vitriolo A
- Testa G
- Gozes I
- Vanden Berghe W
- Kooy RF
journal: Clin Epigenetics
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13148-023-01450-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- Autistic Disorder/genetics
- Chromatin
- DNA Methylation
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chromatin remodeler Activity-Dependent Neuroprotective Protein (ADNP) contributes to syndromic autism.
**Authors:** D'Incal CP, Van Rossem KE, De Man K, Konings A, Van Dijck A, Rizzuti L, Vitriolo A, Testa G, Gozes I, Vanden Berghe W, Kooy RF
**Journal:** Clin Epigenetics (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13148-023-01450-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13148-023-01450-8)

## Content

1. Clin Epigenetics. 2023 Mar 21;15(1):45. doi: 10.1186/s13148-023-01450-8.

Chromatin remodeler Activity-Dependent Neuroprotective Protein (ADNP) 
contributes to syndromic autism.

D'Incal CP(#)(1)(2), Van Rossem KE(#)(1), De Man K(2), Konings A(2), Van Dijck 
A(1), Rizzuti L(3)(4)(5), Vitriolo A(3)(4)(5), Testa G(3)(4)(5), Gozes I(6), 
Vanden Berghe W(7), Kooy RF(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Prins Boudewijnlaan 
43/6, 2650, Edegem, Belgium.
(2)Protein Chemistry, Proteomics and Epigenetic Signaling (PPES), Epigenetic 
Signaling Lab (PPES), Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, 
Universiteitsplein 1, 2610, Wilrijk, Belgium.
(3)High Definition Disease Modelling Lab, Stem Cell and Organoid Epigenetics, 
IEO, European Institute of Oncology, IRCCS, 20141, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milan, 20122, 
Milan, Italy.
(5)Human Technopole, V. Le Rita Levi-Montalcini, 1, 20157, Milan, Italy.
(6)Elton Laboratory for Molecular Neuroendocrinology, Department of Human 
Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Adams Super Center for 
Brain Studies and Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Sackler 
School of Medicine, 727, 69978, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(7)Protein Chemistry, Proteomics and Epigenetic Signaling (PPES), Epigenetic 
Signaling Lab (PPES), Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, 
Universiteitsplein 1, 2610, Wilrijk, Belgium. wim.vandenberghe@uantwerpen.be.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Prins Boudewijnlaan 
43/6, 2650, Edegem, Belgium. Frank.Kooy@uantwerpen.be.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Individuals affected with autism often suffer additional 
co-morbidities such as intellectual disability. The genes contributing to autism 
cluster on a relatively limited number of cellular pathways, including chromatin 
remodeling. However, limited information is available on how mutations in single 
genes can result in such pleiotropic clinical features in affected individuals. 
In this review, we summarize available information on one of the most frequently 
mutated genes in syndromic autism the Activity-Dependent Neuroprotective Protein 
(ADNP).
RESULTS: Heterozygous and predicted loss-of-function ADNP mutations in 
individuals inevitably result in the clinical presentation with the 
Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome, a frequent form of syndromic autism. ADNP, a 
zinc finger DNA-binding protein has a role in chromatin remodeling: The protein 
is associated with the pericentromeric protein HP1, the SWI/SNF core complex 
protein BRG1, and other members of this chromatin remodeling complex and, in 
murine stem cells, with the chromodomain helicase CHD4 in a ChAHP complex. ADNP 
has recently been shown to possess R-loop processing activity. In addition, many 
additional functions, for instance, in association with cytoskeletal proteins 
have been linked to ADNP.
CONCLUSIONS: We here present an integrated evaluation of all current aspects of 
gene function and evaluate how abnormalities in chromatin remodeling might 
relate to the pleiotropic clinical presentation in individual"s" with 
Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13148-023-01450-8
PMCID: PMC10031977
PMID: 36945042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
Professor Illana Gozes is a Co-Founder, Chief Scientific Officer and a Director 
at ATED Therapeutics, clinically developing davunetide.