---
reference_id: "PMID:37389385"
title: "Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome: Lessons to be Learned in the Clinical Diagnosis."
authors:
- Shukla RM
- Tiwari P
- Dariya S
- Jain S
- Sharma SS
- Laddha A
- Lahoti BK
- Thanna H
journal: J Indian Assoc Pediatr Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4103/jiaps.jiaps_197_21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome: Lessons to be Learned in the Clinical Diagnosis.
**Authors:** Shukla RM, Tiwari P, Dariya S, Jain S, Sharma SS, Laddha A, Lahoti BK, Thanna H
**Journal:** J Indian Assoc Pediatr Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4103/jiaps.jiaps_197_21](https://doi.org/10.4103/jiaps.jiaps_197_21)

## Content

1. J Indian Assoc Pediatr Surg. 2023 May-Jun;28(3):218-222. doi: 
10.4103/jiaps.jiaps_197_21. Epub 2023 Mar 21.

Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome: Lessons to be Learned in the Clinical Diagnosis.

Shukla RM(1), Tiwari P(1), Dariya S(1), Jain S(1), Sharma SS(1), Laddha A(1), 
Lahoti BK(1), Thanna H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, M. G. M. Medical College and M. Y. Hospital, 
Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India.

INTRODUCTION: Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominant disease 
presenting with hamartomatous polyps in the gastrointestinal tract and 
hyperpigmented macules on lips and oral mucosa. The incidence of this syndrome 
is approximately 1 in 1,20,000 births.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this article, we are presenting 11 cases of PJS which 
were misdiagnosed and patients were compelled to visit hospital repeatedly. All 
these cases were diagnosed based on clinical suspicion, family history, and 
histopathological examination of specimens. Most of the cases presented with 
intussusception and required emergency surgical management.
RESULTS: PJS can be diagnosed by the presence of microscopically confirmed 
hamartomatous polyps and a minimum of two of the following clinical criteria: 
Family history, mucocutaneous melanotic spots, and small bowel polyps with 
bleeding per rectally. The diagnosis can be missed if the melanotic spots on the 
face are missed. Routine investigations, imaging, and endoscopy were done in all 
cases. PJS patients need regular follow-up due to chance of recurrence of 
symptoms and susceptibility to cancer.
CONCLUSION: PJS needs a high index of suspicion for diagnosis in cases of 
recurrent abdominal pain with bleeding per rectum. Proper family history and 
meticulous clinical examination for melanosis are very important to prevent the 
misdiagnosis of these cases.

Copyright: © 2023 Journal of Indian Association of Pediatric Surgeons.

DOI: 10.4103/jiaps.jiaps_197_21
PMCID: PMC10305958
PMID: 37389385

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.