---
reference_id: "PMID:17803458"
title: Dengue virus-mosquito interactions.
authors:
- Halstead SB
journal: Annu Rev Entomol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1146/annurev.ento.53.103106.093326
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue virus-mosquito interactions.
**Authors:** Halstead SB
**Journal:** Annu Rev Entomol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.ento.53.103106.093326](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ento.53.103106.093326)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Entomol. 2008;53:273-91. doi: 10.1146/annurev.ento.53.103106.093326.

Dengue virus-mosquito interactions.

Halstead SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Dengue Vaccine Initiative, Bethesda, MD 20852, USA. 
halsteads@erols.com

The mosquito Aedes aegypti is more widely dispersed now than at any time in the 
past, placing billions of humans at risk of infection with one or more of the 
four dengue viruses. This review presents and discusses information on 
mosquito-dengue infection dynamics and describes the prominent role that 
temperature and rainfall play in controlling dengue viral transmission including 
discussions of the effect of interannual climate variations and the predicted 
effect of global warming. Complementary human determinants of dengue 
epidemiology include viremia titer, variation in viremic period, enhanced 
viremias, and threshold viremia. Topics covered include epidemiological 
phenomena such as traveling waves, the generation of genetic diversity of dengue 
viruses following virgin soil introductions and in hyperendemic settings, and 
evidence for and against viral virulence as a determinant of the severity of 
dengue infections. Also described is the crucial role of monotypic and 
heterotypic herd immunity in shaping dengue epidemic behavior.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.ento.53.103106.093326
PMID: 17803458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]