---
reference_id: "PMID:8393091"
title: "Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies: a clinical, electroneurophysiological and morphological study."
authors:
- Verhagen WI
- Gabreëls-Festen AA
- van Wensen PJ
- Joosten EM
- Vingerhoets HM
- Gabreëls FJ
- de Graaf R
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1016/0022-510x(93)90323-q
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- Electromyography
- Electrophysiology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Middle Aged
- "Nerve Fibers, Myelinated/ultrastructure"
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Sural Nerve/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies: a clinical, electroneurophysiological and morphological study.
**Authors:** Verhagen WI, Gabreëls-Festen AA, van Wensen PJ, Joosten EM, Vingerhoets HM, Gabreëls FJ, de Graaf R
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0022-510x(93)90323-q](https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-510x(93)90323-q)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 1993 Jun;116(2):176-84. doi: 10.1016/0022-510x(93)90323-q.

Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies: a clinical,
electroneurophysiological and morphological study.

Verhagen WI(1), Gabreëls-Festen AA, van Wensen PJ, Joosten EM, Vingerhoets HM,
Gabreëls FJ, de Graaf R.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurology, St. Radboud University Hospital, University of
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Clinical, electroneurographic and myographic studies were performed on 99
patients of 13 families having hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure
palsies (HNPP) and on 116 relatives. Diagnosis was confirmed in all families by
a nerve biopsy of the index case. Large focal myelin thickenings (tomacula) were
found in nerve biopsies of affected persons, whether or not pressure palsies had
occurred. By using three electroneurographical parameters it was possible to
discriminate between asymptomatic patients and unaffected relatives. Complaints
sometimes mentioned in literature as being associated with HNPP such as low back
pain, brachialgia and short lasting paraesthesia are not related to HNPP. The
hereditary transmission is autosomal dominant with total penetration but
variable expression.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-510x(93)90323-q
PMID: 8393091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
