---
reference_id: "PMID:37721175"
title: Clinical and genetic characterisation of a large Indian congenital myasthenic syndrome cohort.
authors:
- Polavarapu K
- Sunitha B
- Töpf A
- Preethish-Kumar V
- Thompson R
- Vengalil S
- Nashi S
- Bardhan M
- Sanka SB
- Huddar A
- Unnikrishnan G
- Arunachal G
- Girija MS
- Porter A
- Azuma Y
- Lorenzoni PJ
- Baskar D
- Anjanappa RM
- Keertipriya M
- Padmanabh H
- Harikrishna GV
- Laurie S
- Matalonga L
- Horvath R
- Nalini A
- Lochmüller H
journal: Brain
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awad315
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- Humans
- Child
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Adult
- "Myasthenic Syndromes, Congenital/diagnosis"
- Acetylcholinesterase
- Delayed Diagnosis
- Neuromuscular Junction/genetics
- Genetic Testing
- Mutation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic characterisation of a large Indian congenital myasthenic syndrome cohort.
**Authors:** Polavarapu K, Sunitha B, Töpf A, Preethish-Kumar V, Thompson R, Vengalil S, Nashi S, Bardhan M, Sanka SB, Huddar A, Unnikrishnan G, Arunachal G, Girija MS, Porter A, Azuma Y, Lorenzoni PJ, Baskar D, Anjanappa RM, Keertipriya M, Padmanabh H, Harikrishna GV, Laurie S, Matalonga L, Horvath R, Nalini A, Lochmüller H
**Journal:** Brain (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awad315](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awad315)

## Content

1. Brain. 2024 Jan 4;147(1):281-296. doi: 10.1093/brain/awad315.

Clinical and genetic characterisation of a large Indian congenital myasthenic 
syndrome cohort.

Polavarapu K(1)(2), Sunitha B(3)(4)(5), Töpf A(3), Preethish-Kumar V(1)(6), 
Thompson R(2), Vengalil S(1), Nashi S(1), Bardhan M(1), Sanka SB(1), Huddar 
A(1)(7), Unnikrishnan G(1)(8), Arunachal G(9), Girija MS(1), Porter A(3), Azuma 
Y(3), Lorenzoni PJ(10), Baskar D(1), Anjanappa RM(1), Keertipriya M(1), 
Padmanabh H(1), Harikrishna GV(1), Laurie S(11), Matalonga L(11), Horvath R(4), 
Nalini A(1), Lochmüller H(2)(11)(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences, Bangalore 560029, India.
(2)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON K1H 
8L1, Canada.
(3)John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Institute of Genetic 
Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge School of 
Clinical Medicine, Cambridge CB2 0SP, UK.
(5)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(6)Department of Neurology, Neurofoundation, Salem, Tamil Nadu 636009, India.
(7)Department of Neurology, St Johns Medical College Hospital, Bangalore 560034, 
India.
(8)Department of Neurology, Amruta Institute of Medical Sciences, Kochi 682041, 
India.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences, Bengaluru 560029, India.
(10)Neuromuscular Disorders Division, Service of Neurology, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Hospital de Clínicas, Universidade Federal do Paraná, Rua 
General Carneiro, Curitiba - PR 80060-900, Brazil.
(11)Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG-CRG), Center for Genomic 
Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, 
Catalonia 08028, Spain.
(12)Brain and Mind Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, 
Canada.
(13)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, 
ON K1H 8M5, Canada.
(14)Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, Medical 
Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg 79110, Germany.

Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a rare group of inherited disorders 
caused by gene defects associated with the neuromuscular junction and 
potentially treatable with commonly available medications such as 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and β2 adrenergic receptor agonists. In this 
study, we identified and genetically characterized the largest cohort of CMS 
patients from India to date. Genetic testing of clinically suspected patients 
evaluated in a South Indian hospital during the period 2014-19 was carried out 
by standard diagnostic gene panel testing or using a two-step method that 
included hotspot screening followed by whole-exome sequencing. In total, 156 
genetically diagnosed patients (141 families) were characterized and the 
mutational spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlation described. Overall, 87 
males and 69 females were evaluated, with the age of onset ranging from 
congenital to fourth decade (mean 6.6 ± 9.8 years). The mean age at diagnosis 
was 19 ± 12.8 (1-56 years), with a mean diagnostic delay of 12.5 ± 9.9 (0-49 
years). Disease-causing variants in 17 CMS-associated genes were identified in 
132 families (93.6%), while in nine families (6.4%), variants in genes not 
associated with CMS were found. Overall, postsynaptic defects were most common 
(62.4%), followed by glycosylation defects (21.3%), synaptic basal lamina genes 
(4.3%) and presynaptic defects (2.8%). Other genes found to cause neuromuscular 
junction defects (DES, TEFM) in our cohort accounted for 2.8%. Among the 
individual CMS genes, the most commonly affected gene was CHRNE (39.4%), 
followed by DOK7 (14.4%), DPAGT1 (9.8%), GFPT1 (7.6%), MUSK (6.1%), GMPPB (5.3%) 
and COLQ (4.5%). We identified 22 recurrent variants in this study, out of which 
eight were found to be geographically specific to the Indian subcontinent. Apart 
from the known common CHRNE variants p.E443Kfs*64 (11.4%) and DOK7 p.A378Sfs*30 
(9.3%), we identified seven novel recurrent variants specific to this cohort, 
including DPAGT1 p.T380I and DES c.1023+5G>A, for which founder haplotypes are 
suspected. This study highlights the geographic differences in the frequencies 
of various causative CMS genes and underlines the increasing significance of 
glycosylation genes (DPAGT1, GFPT1 and GMPPB) as a cause of neuromuscular 
junction defects. Myopathy and muscular dystrophy genes such as GMPPB and DES, 
presenting as gradually progressive limb girdle CMS, expand the phenotypic 
spectrum. The novel genes MACF1 and TEFM identified in this cohort add to the 
expanding list of genes with new mechanisms causing neuromuscular junction 
defects.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awad315
PMCID: PMC10766255
PMID: 37721175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.