---
reference_id: "PMID:33110001"
title: Neuro-Ophthalmic Manifestations of Sarcoidosis.
authors:
- Henderson AD
- Tian J
- Carey AR
journal: J Neuroophthalmol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/WNO.0000000000001108
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/complications, diagnosis"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Optic Nerve Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Sarcoidosis/complications, diagnosis"
- Vision Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuro-Ophthalmic Manifestations of Sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Henderson AD, Tian J, Carey AR
**Journal:** J Neuroophthalmol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WNO.0000000000001108](https://doi.org/10.1097/WNO.0000000000001108)

## Content

1. J Neuroophthalmol. 2021 Dec 1;41(4):e591-e597. doi: 
10.1097/WNO.0000000000001108.

Neuro-Ophthalmic Manifestations of Sarcoidosis.

Henderson AD(1), Tian J, Carey AR.

Author information:
(1)Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland.

BACKGROUND: Sarcoidosis is an idiopathic, multisystem, inflammatory disease that 
has central nervous system involvement in 5%-15% of cases. The presentation of 
neurosarcoidosis is highly variable, and the MRI findings often mimic the 
appearance of other central nervous system diseases. Therefore, the diagnosis 
can be challenging. About one-third of neurosarcoidosis cases have 
neuro-ophthalmic manifestations and, thus, may be evaluated by a 
neuro-ophthalmologist early in the disease course.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective review of 22 cases of biopsy-proven 
sarcoidosis with neuro-ophthalmic manifestations, seen at the Wilmer Eye 
Institute from January 2013 to September 2019, in which we described the 
demographic information, clinical presentations, neuroimaging findings, and 
diagnostic evaluations.
RESULTS: Twenty-two patients were included. Fifteen patients identified as black 
and 7 as white. Fifteen were women, and 7 men. Mean age at sarcoidosis diagnosis 
was 45.9 years (range 26-66). Neuro-ophthalmic findings included optic 
neuropathy in 11 (50%); proptosis/orbital inflammation in 5 (23%); abducens 
palsy in 5 (23%); trochlear palsy, trigeminal distribution numbness, and 
bitemporal hemianopia in 2 each (9%); and oculomotor palsy, facial palsy, optic 
perineuritis, dorsal midbrain syndrome, central vestibular nystagmus, and 
papilledema in 1 each (5%). Eight (36%) had a pre-existing diagnosis of 
sarcoidosis; however, in 14 (64%), the neuro-ophthalmic presentation led to the 
sarcoidosis diagnosis. Patients with a pre-existing sarcoidosis diagnosis were 
younger than those without this diagnosis (38.5 vs 50.1 years, P = 0.035). Brain 
MRI was abnormal in all but 1 case (95%). In patients without a pre-existing 
sarcoidosis diagnosis, all 7 tested for angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) had 
normal values, and 75% of the 12 who had computed tomography (CT) chest had 
findings suggestive of sarcoidosis (86% of black patients vs 50% of white 
patients).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with neurosarcoidosis may present initially with a 
neuro-ophthalmic manifestation, and this presentation may be more common in 
older patients. MRI usually is abnormal, although findings may be nonspecific. 
Serum testing for ACE is not helpful. Normal CT chest does not rule out 
underlying sarcoidosis, particularly in white patients.

Copyright © 2020 by North American Neuro-Ophthalmology Society.

DOI: 10.1097/WNO.0000000000001108
PMID: 33110001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.