---
reference_id: "PMID:21509508"
title: "Tau mediated neurodegeneration: an insight into Alzheimer's disease pathology."
authors:
- Obulesu M
- Venu R
- Somashekhar R
journal: Neurochem Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s11064-011-0475-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tau mediated neurodegeneration: an insight into Alzheimer's disease pathology.
**Authors:** Obulesu M, Venu R, Somashekhar R
**Journal:** Neurochem Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11064-011-0475-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-011-0475-5)

## Content

1. Neurochem Res. 2011 Aug;36(8):1329-35. doi: 10.1007/s11064-011-0475-5. Epub
2011  Apr 21.

Tau mediated neurodegeneration: an insight into Alzheimer's disease pathology.

Obulesu M(1), Venu R, Somashekhar R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Rayalaseema University, Kurnool, India. 
mobulesu@gmail.com

Extracellular accumulations of Aβ, hyperphosphorylation of tau and intracellular 
neurofibrillary tangle formation have been the hallmarks of Alzheimer's Disease 
(AD). Although tau and its phosphorylation play a pivotal role in the normal 
physiology yet its hyperphosphorylation has been a pathological manifestation in 
neurodegenerative disorders like AD. In this review physiology of tau, its 
phosphorylation, hyperphosphorylation with the intervention of various kinases, 
aggregation and formation of paired helical filaments has been discussed. A 
brief account of various animal models employed to study the pathological 
manifestation of tau in AD and therapeutic strategies streamlined to counter the 
tau induced pathology has been given. The reasons for the failure to have 
suitable animal model to study AD pathology and recent success in achieving this 
has been included. The role of caspase cascade in tau cleavage has been 
emphasized. The summary of current studies on tau and the need for future 
studies has been accentuated.

DOI: 10.1007/s11064-011-0475-5
PMID: 21509508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]