---
reference_id: "PMID:36522781"
title: Co-development of an evidence-based personalised smoking cessation intervention for use in a lung cancer screening context.
authors:
- Quinn-Scoggins HD
- Murray RL
- Quaife SL
- Smith P
- Brain KE
- Callister MEJ
- Baldwin DR
- Britton J
- Crosbie PAJ
- Thorley R
- McCutchan GM
journal: BMC Pulm Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12890-022-02263-w
keywords:
- Humans
- Smoking Cessation/methods
- Early Detection of Cancer
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, prevention & control"
- Smokers
- "Smoking/adverse effects, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Co-development of an evidence-based personalised smoking cessation intervention for use in a lung cancer screening context.
**Authors:** Quinn-Scoggins HD, Murray RL, Quaife SL, Smith P, Brain KE, Callister MEJ, Baldwin DR, Britton J, Crosbie PAJ, Thorley R, McCutchan GM
**Journal:** BMC Pulm Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12890-022-02263-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12890-022-02263-w)

## Content

1. BMC Pulm Med. 2022 Dec 15;22(1):478. doi: 10.1186/s12890-022-02263-w.

Co-development of an evidence-based personalised smoking cessation intervention
for use in a lung cancer screening context.

Quinn-Scoggins HD(1), Murray RL(2), Quaife SL(3), Smith P(4), Brain KE(4),
Callister MEJ(5), Baldwin DR(6), Britton J(2), Crosbie PAJ(7), Thorley R(2),
McCutchan GM(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Population Medicine, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, 8th
Floor Neuadd Meirionnydd, Heath Park, Cardiff, CF14 4YS, UK.
Quinn-ScogginsHD@Cardiff.ac.uk.
(2)Academic Unit of Lifespan and Population Health, School of Medicine,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(3)Wolfson Institute of Population Health, Queen Mary University of London,
London, UK.
(4)Division of Population Medicine, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, 8th
Floor Neuadd Meirionnydd, Heath Park, Cardiff, CF14 4YS, UK.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, St
James's University Hospital, Leeds, UK.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nottingham University Hospital,
Nottingham, UK.
(7)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Biology,
Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

BACKGROUND: Optimising smoking cessation services within a low radiation-dose
computed tomography (LDCT) lung cancer screening programme has the potential to
improve cost-effectiveness and overall efficacy of the programme. However,
evidence on the optimal design and integration of cessation services is limited.
We co-developed a personalised cessation and relapse prevention intervention
incorporating medical imaging collected during lung cancer screening. The
intervention is designed to initiate and support quit attempts among smokers
attending screening as part of the Yorkshire Enhanced Stop Smoking study (YESS:
ISRCTN63825779). Patients and public were involved in the development of an
intervention designed to meet the needs of the target population.
METHODS: An iterative co-development approach was used. Eight members of the
public with a history of smoking completed an online survey to inform the visual
presentation of risk information in subsequent focus groups for acceptability
testing. Three focus groups (n = 13) were conducted in deprived areas of
Yorkshire and South Wales with members of the public who were current smokers or
recent quitters (within the last year). Exemplar images of the heart and lungs
acquired by LDCT, absolute and relative lung cancer risk, and lung age were
shown. Data were analysed thematically, and discussed in stakeholder workshops.
Draft versions of the intervention were developed, underpinned by the Extended
Parallel Processing Model to increase self-efficacy and response-efficacy. The
intervention was further refined in a second stakeholder workshop with a patient
panel.
RESULTS: Individual LDCT scan images of the lungs and heart, in conjunction with
artistic impressions to facilitate interpretation, were considered by public
participants to be most impactful in prompting cessation. Public participants
thought it important to have a trained practitioner guiding them through the
intervention and emphasising the short-term benefits of quitting. Presentation
of absolute and relative risk of lung cancer and lung age were considered highly
demotivating due to reinforcement of fatalistic beliefs.
CONCLUSION: An acceptable personalised intervention booklet utilising LDCT scan
images has been developed for delivery by a trained smoking cessation
practitioner. Our findings highlight the benefit of co-development during
intervention development and the need for further evaluation of effectiveness.

Plain Language Summary: Supporting patients to stop smoking when they attend
lung cancer screening will improve the overall benefit and value for money of
the service. This study developed a booklet containing pictures of a person’s
own lungs and heart taken during a lung cancer screening scan. The booklet shows
areas of damage to the heart and lungs caused by smoking, delivered alongside
positive messages to build confidence to stop smoking and let patients know
about the benefits of stopping smoking. To develop the booklet, we worked with
members of public who currently or used to smoke. Eight members of public
completed a survey asking about the best ways to present information about risk.
Thirteen members of the public took part in focus groups to co-develop the
booklet. One workshop with academic and healthcare professionals and one
workshop with a public involvement panel were held to develop and finalise the
booklet. Members of the public said they wanted information about the short-term
benefits of quitting smoking, and that coloured drawings next to the scan
picture would help them to understand what the scan picture meant. Having
someone specially trained to guide them through the booklet was considered
important. Being told about their risk for lung cancer in the future was
off-putting and might discourage a quit attempt. We have co-developed a booklet
to support people to quit smoking when they go for lung cancer screening. The
booklet is currently being tested to see whether it can support people to quit
smoking.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-022-02263-w
PMCID: PMC9756588
PMID: 36522781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
