---
reference_id: "PMID:40835664"
title: "Large-scale newborn screening for organic acidemias in Quanzhou, China: a 10-year retrospective observational study."
authors:
- Lin Y
- Lin C
- Zheng Z
- Chen Y
- Zheng F
- Lin W
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-15625-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- China/epidemiology
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/epidemiology, diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- "Carnitine/analogs & derivatives, blood"
- "Glutaryl-CoA Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Isovaleryl-CoA Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics"
- Incidence
- "Carbon-Carbon Ligases/deficiency, genetics"
- "Brain Diseases, Metabolic"
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large-scale newborn screening for organic acidemias in Quanzhou, China: a 10-year retrospective observational study.
**Authors:** Lin Y, Lin C, Zheng Z, Chen Y, Zheng F, Lin W
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-025-15625-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-15625-1)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2025 Aug 20;15(1):30592. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-15625-1.

Large-scale newborn screening for organic acidemias in Quanzhou, China: a
10-year retrospective observational study.

Lin Y(1)(2), Lin C(3)(4), Zheng Z(3)(4), Chen Y(4), Zheng F(3)(4), Lin W(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Maternity and Children's Hospital, School
of Medicine, Huaqiao University, Quanzhou, Fujian, China.
linyiming0819@sina.com.
(2)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's
Hospital, Quanzhou, Fujian Province, China. linyiming0819@sina.com.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Maternity and Children's Hospital, School
of Medicine, Huaqiao University, Quanzhou, Fujian, China.
(4)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's
Hospital, Quanzhou, Fujian Province, China.
(5)The School of Clinical Medicine, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian
Province, China.

Organic acidemias (OADs) are a group of congenital metabolic disorders whose
incidence, disease spectrum, and genetic profiles differ greatly across
countries. This study aimed to determine the characteristics of OADs in
Quanzhou, China. A total of 693,797 newborns were screened for OADs from 2014 to
2023, and the acylcarnitine and genetic profiles of patients with OADs were
analysed. Sixty-nine patients were confirmed to have OADs, with an overall
incidence of 1/10,055 newborns. Seven types of OADs were identified, of which 18
were 2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MBAD), 18 were
3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency (3-MCCD), 13 were glutaric acidemia
type 1 (GA-1), nine were isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (IBDD), five
were isovaleric acidemia (IVA), four were methylmalonic acidemia (MMA), and two
were propionic academia (PA). All but one of the patients with MBAD had elevated
isovalerylcarnitine levels and corresponding ratios during screening. All
patients with GA-1 had elevated glutarylcarnitine levels and corresponding
ratios during screening, except for one with a low free carnitine level. The
remaining patients presented with elevated acylcarnitine levels during screening
and recall. Several variant hotspots were identified in the ACADSB, MCCC1,
MCCC2, GCDH, ACAD8, and IVD. The overall incidence of OADs in the study
population was 1/10,055 newborns, with MBAD, 3-MCCD, and GA-1 being the three
most common. The acylcarnitine profiles and genetic features of most OADs have
been elucidated. Our findings provide useful information for newborn screening,
genetic diagnosis, and the prevention of OADs.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-15625-1
PMCID: PMC12368017
PMID: 40835664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors
declare no competing interests. Ethics approval and consent to participate: This
study was approved by the Ethical Committee of Quanzhou Maternity and Children’s
Hospital and was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Written informed consent was obtained from the parents of all infants for
collection of samples and publication of medical data.
