---
reference_id: "PMID:38831899"
title: Molecular therapy and nucleic acid adeno-associated virus-based gene therapy delivering combinations of two growth-associated genes to MPS IVA mice.
authors:
- Rintz E
- Celik B
- Fnu N
- Herreño-Pachón AM
- Khan S
- Benincore-Flórez E
- Tomatsu S
journal: Mol Ther Nucleic Acids
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.omtn.2024.102211
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular therapy and nucleic acid adeno-associated virus-based gene therapy delivering combinations of two growth-associated genes to MPS IVA mice.
**Authors:** Rintz E, Celik B, Fnu N, Herreño-Pachón AM, Khan S, Benincore-Flórez E, Tomatsu S
**Journal:** Mol Ther Nucleic Acids (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.omtn.2024.102211](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtn.2024.102211)

## Content

1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2024 May 7;35(2):102211. doi: 
10.1016/j.omtn.2024.102211. eCollection 2024 Jun 11.

Molecular therapy and nucleic acid adeno-associated virus-based gene therapy 
delivering combinations of two growth-associated genes to MPS IVA mice.

Rintz E(1)(2), Celik B(1)(3), Fnu N(1)(3), Herreño-Pachón AM(1)(3), Khan 
S(1)(4), Benincore-Flórez E(1), Tomatsu S(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Nemours Children's Health, Wilmington, DE 19803, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biology, University of Gdansk, 
80-308 Gdansk, Poland.
(3)Faculty of Arts and Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 
19144, USA.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (MPS IVA) is caused by a deficiency of the 
galactosamine (N-acetyl)-6-sulfatase (GALNS) enzyme responsible for the 
degradation of specific glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). The progressive accumulation 
of GAGs leads to various skeletal abnormalities (short stature, hypoplasia, 
tracheal obstruction) and several symptoms in other organs. To date, no 
treatment is effective for patients with bone abnormalities. To improve bone 
pathology, we propose a novel combination treatment with the adeno-associated 
virus (AAV) vectors expressing GALNS enzyme and a natriuretic peptide C (CNP; 
NPPC gene) as a growth-promoting agent for MPS IVA. In this study, an MPS IVA 
mouse model was treated with an AAV vector expressing GALNS combined with 
another AAV vector expressing NPPC gene, followed for 12 weeks. After the 
combination therapy, bone growth in mice was induced with increased enzyme 
activity in tissues (bone, liver, heart, lung) and plasma. Moreover, there were 
significant changes in bone morphology in CNP-treated mice with increased CNP 
activity in plasma. Delivering combinations of CNP and GALNS gene therapies 
enhanced bone growth in MPS IVA mice more than in GALNS gene therapy alone. 
Enzyme expression therapy alone fails to reach the bone growth region; our 
results indicate that combining it with CNP offers a potential alternative.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2024.102211
PMCID: PMC11145352
PMID: 38831899

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.