---
reference_id: "PMID:38163814"
title: "Cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction in post-COVID-19 syndrome: a major health-care burden."
authors:
- Fedorowski A
- Fanciulli A
- Raj SR
- Sheldon R
- Shibao CA
- Sutton R
journal: Nat Rev Cardiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41569-023-00962-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction in post-COVID-19 syndrome: a major health-care burden.
**Authors:** Fedorowski A, Fanciulli A, Raj SR, Sheldon R, Shibao CA, Sutton R
**Journal:** Nat Rev Cardiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41569-023-00962-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41569-023-00962-3)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2024 Jun;21(6):379-395. doi: 10.1038/s41569-023-00962-3. Epub
 2024 Jan 2.

Cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction in post-COVID-19 syndrome: a major 
health-care burden.

Fedorowski A(1)(2)(3), Fanciulli A(4), Raj SR(5)(6), Sheldon R(5), Shibao CA(6), 
Sutton R(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. 
artur.fedorowski@ki.se.
(2)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. 
artur.fedorowski@ki.se.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. 
artur.fedorowski@ki.se.
(4)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(5)Department of Cardiac Sciences, Libin Cardiovascular Institute, Cumming 
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(6)Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department 
of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(7)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
(8)Department of Cardiology, Hammersmith Hospital, National Heart & Lung 
Institute, Imperial College, London, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2024 Jun;21(6):432. doi: 10.1038/s41569-024-00994-3.

Cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction (CVAD) is a malfunction of the 
cardiovascular system caused by deranged autonomic control of circulatory 
homeostasis. CVAD is an important component of post-COVID-19 syndrome, also 
termed long COVID, and might affect one-third of highly symptomatic patients 
with COVID-19. The effects of CVAD can be seen at both the whole-body level, 
with impairment of heart rate and blood pressure control, and in specific body 
regions, typically manifesting as microvascular dysfunction. Many severely 
affected patients with long COVID meet the diagnostic criteria for two common 
presentations of CVAD: postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome and 
inappropriate sinus tachycardia. CVAD can also manifest as disorders associated 
with hypotension, such as orthostatic or postprandial hypotension, and recurrent 
reflex syncope. Advances in research, accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic, have 
identified new potential pathophysiological mechanisms, diagnostic methods and 
therapeutic targets in CVAD. For clinicians who daily see patients with CVAD, 
knowledge of its symptomatology, detection and appropriate management is more 
important than ever. In this Review, we define CVAD and its major forms that are 
encountered in post-COVID-19 syndrome, describe possible CVAD aetiologies, and 
discuss how CVAD, as a component of post-COVID-19 syndrome, can be diagnosed and 
managed. Moreover, we outline directions for future research to discover more 
efficient ways to cope with this prevalent and long-lasting condition.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41569-023-00962-3
PMID: 38163814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]