---
reference_id: "PMID:34809627"
title: A novel variant in FOXC1 associated with atypical Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
authors:
- Wang R
- Wang WQ
- Li XQ
- Zhao J
- Yang K
- Feng Y
- Guo MM
- Liu M
- Liu X
- Wang X
- Yuan YY
- Gao X
- Xu JC
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-021-01130-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel variant in FOXC1 associated with atypical Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
**Authors:** Wang R, Wang WQ, Li XQ, Zhao J, Yang K, Feng Y, Guo MM, Liu M, Liu X, Wang X, Yuan YY, Gao X, Xu JC
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-021-01130-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-021-01130-7)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2021 Nov 22;14(1):277. doi: 10.1186/s12920-021-01130-7.

A novel variant in FOXC1 associated with atypical Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

Wang R(#)(1), Wang WQ(#)(2)(3)(4), Li XQ(#)(5), Zhao J(2), Yang K(2), Feng Y(2), 
Guo MM(2), Liu M(2), Liu X(2), Wang X(6), Yuan YY(7)(8), Gao X(9), Xu JC(10).

Author information:
(1)Postgraduate Training Base Of Jinzhou Medical University (The PLA Rocket 
Force Characteristic Medical Center), 16# XinWai Da Jie, Beijing, 100088, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, The PLA Rocket Force Characteristic Medical 
Center, 16# XinWai Da Jie, Beijing, 100088, People's Republic of China.
(3)College of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Chinese PLA General 
Hospital, Chinese PLA Medical School, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, People's 
Republic of China.
(4)National Clinical Research Center for Otolaryngologic Diseases, State Key Lab 
of Hearing Science, Ministry of Education, China, Beijing Key Lab of Hearing 
Impairment Prevention and Treatment, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, The PLA Rocket Force Characteristic Medical 
Center, 16# XinWai Da Jie, Beijing, 100088, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, The PLA Rocket Force Characteristic Medical 
Center, 16# XinWai Da Jie, Beijing, 100088, People's Republic of China. 
wangxi_sunshine@126.com.
(7)College of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Chinese PLA General 
Hospital, Chinese PLA Medical School, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, People's 
Republic of China. yyymzh@163.com.
(8)National Clinical Research Center for Otolaryngologic Diseases, State Key Lab 
of Hearing Science, Ministry of Education, China, Beijing Key Lab of Hearing 
Impairment Prevention and Treatment, Beijing, People's Republic of China. 
yyymzh@163.com.
(9)Department of Otolaryngology, The PLA Rocket Force Characteristic Medical 
Center, 16# XinWai Da Jie, Beijing, 100088, People's Republic of China. 
mixueer0110@126.com.
(10)Department of Otolaryngology, The PLA Rocket Force Characteristic Medical 
Center, 16# XinWai Da Jie, Beijing, 100088, People's Republic of China. 
xujincao@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Mutations in the Forkhead Box C1 (FOXC1) are known to cause autosomal dominant 
hereditary Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome, which is a genetic disorder characterized 
by ocular and systemic features including glaucoma, variable dental defects, 
craniofacial dysmorphism and hearing loss. Due to late-onset of ocular disorders 
and lack of typical presentation, clinical diagnosis presents a huge challenge. 
In this study, we described a pathogenic in-frame variant in FOXC1 in one 
5-year-old boy who is presented with hypertelorism, pupil deformation in both 
eyes, conductive hearing loss, and dental defects. By whole exome sequencing, we 
identified a 3 bp deletion in FOXC1, c.516_518delGCG (p.Arg173del) as the 
disease-causing variant, which was de novo and not detected in the parents, and 
could be classified as a "pathogenic variant" according to the American College 
of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines. After confirmation of this FOXC1 
variant, clinical data on Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome-associated clinical features 
were collected and analyzed. Furthermore, Although the affected individual 
present hearing loss, however, the hearing loss is conductive and is reversible 
during the follow-up, which might not linke to the FOXC1 variant and is 
coincidental. Routine examination of FOXC1 is necessary for the genetic 
diagnosis of hypertelorism-associated syndrome. These findings may assist 
clinicians in reaching correct clinical and molecular diagnoses, and providing 
appropriate genetic counseling.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-021-01130-7
PMCID: PMC8609746
PMID: 34809627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no competing 
interest in this research.