---
reference_id: "PMID:28552862"
title: Imbalanced Angiogenesis in Peripartum Cardiomyopathy　- Diagnostic Value of Placenta Growth Factor.
authors:
- Mebazaa A
- Seronde MF
- Gayat E
- Tibazarwa K
- Anumba DOC
- Akrout N
- Sadoune M
- Sarb J
- Arrigo M
- Motiejunaite J
- Laribi S
- Legrand M
- Deschamps L
- Fazal L
- Bouadma L
- Collet C
- Manivet P
- Solal AC
- Launay JM
- Samuel JL
- Sliwa K
journal: Circ J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1253/circj.CJ-16-1193
keywords:
- "Cardiomyopathies/blood, diagnosis"
- Female
- Heart Failure/diagnosis
- Humans
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/blood"
- Peripartum Period
- Placenta Growth Factor/blood
- Pregnancy
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-1/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imbalanced Angiogenesis in Peripartum Cardiomyopathy　- Diagnostic Value of Placenta Growth Factor.
**Authors:** Mebazaa A, Seronde MF, Gayat E, Tibazarwa K, Anumba DOC, Akrout N, Sadoune M, Sarb J, Arrigo M, Motiejunaite J, Laribi S, Legrand M, Deschamps L, Fazal L, Bouadma L, Collet C, Manivet P, Solal AC, Launay JM, Samuel JL, Sliwa K
**Journal:** Circ J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1253/circj.CJ-16-1193](https://doi.org/10.1253/circj.CJ-16-1193)

## Content

1. Circ J. 2017 Oct 25;81(11):1654-1661. doi: 10.1253/circj.CJ-16-1193. Epub 2017
 May 27.

Imbalanced Angiogenesis in Peripartum Cardiomyopathy　- Diagnostic Value of 
Placenta Growth Factor.

Mebazaa A(1)(2)(3), Seronde MF(1)(4), Gayat E(1)(2)(3), Tibazarwa K(5)(6), 
Anumba DOC(7), Akrout N(1)(3), Sadoune M(1)(2), Sarb J(7), Arrigo M(1)(3), 
Motiejunaite J(1)(3), Laribi S(1)(8), Legrand M(1)(2)(3), Deschamps L(9), Fazal 
L(1)(2), Bouadma L(10), Collet C(11), Manivet P(1)(11), Solal AC(1)(2)(12), 
Launay JM(1)(11)(13), Samuel JL(1)(2)(3), Sliwa K(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)UMR-S 942 INSERM, Lariboisière Hospital.
(2)Paris Diderot University, Sorbonne Paris Cité.
(3)Department of Anaesthesiology and Critical Care, Lariboisière Hospital, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris.
(4)Department of Cardiology EA3920, University Hospital Jean Minjoz.
(5)Hatter Institute for Cardiovascular Research in Africa and MRC Inter-Cape 
Heart Unit, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Cape Town.
(6)Soweto Cardiovascular Research Unit, University of the Witwatersrand.
(7)Gynecology, Obstetric, Academic Unit of Reproductive and Developmental 
Medicine, The University of Sheffield Medical School.
(8)Department of Emergency Medicine, Lariboisière Hospital, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris.
(9)Department of Pathology, Bichat Hospital, AP-HP.
(10)Department of Medical ICU, Bichat Hospital, AP-HP.
(11)Biochemistry Department, Lariboisière Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux 
de Paris.
(12)Department of Cardiology, Lariboisière Hospital, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris.
(13)Paris Descartes University.

Comment in
    Circ J. 2017 Oct 25;81(11):1578-1579. doi: 10.1253/circj.CJ-17-1073.
    Circ J. 2018 Sep 25;82(10):2689. doi: 10.1253/circj.CJ-17-0624.
    Circ J. 2020 Aug 25;84(9):1672. doi: 10.1253/circj.CJ-20-0096.

BACKGROUND: Concentrations of the anti-angiogenic factor soluble fms-like 
tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1) are altered in peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM). In 
this study we investigated changes in the angiogenesis balance in PPCM.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Plasma concentrations of sFlt-1 and the pro-angiogenic 
placenta growth factor (PlGF) were determined in patients with PPCM during the 
post-partum phase (n=83), in healthy women at delivery (n=30), and in patients 
with acute heart failure (AHF; n=65). Women with cardiac failure prepartum or 
associated with any form of hypertension, including pre-eclampsia, were 
excluded. Compared with non-pregnant women, in women with AHF and PPCM, median 
PlGF concentrations were greater (19 [IQR 16-22] and 98 [IQR 78-126] ng/mL, 
respectively; P<0.001) and the sFlt-1/PlGF ratio was lower (9.8 [6.6-11.3] and 
1.2 [0.9-2.8], respectively; P<0.001). The sFlt-1/PlGF ratio was lower in PPCM 
than in normal deliveries (1.2 [0.9-2.8] vs. 94.8 [68.8-194.1], respectively; 
P<0.0001). The area under the curve for PlGF (cut-off value: 50ng/mL) and/or the 
sFlt-1/PlGF ratio (cut-off value: 4) to distinguish PPCM from either normal 
delivery or AHF was >0.94. Median plasma concentrations of the anti-angiogenic 
factor relaxin-2 were lower in PPCM and AHF (0.3 [IQR 0.3-1.7] and 0.3 [IQR 
0.3-1] ng/mL, respectively) compared with normal deliveries (1,807 [IQR 
1,101-4,050] ng/mL; P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma of PPCM patients shows imbalanced angiogenesis. High PlGF 
and/or low sFlt-1/PlGF may be used to diagnose PPCM.

DOI: 10.1253/circj.CJ-16-1193
PMID: 28552862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]