---
reference_id: "PMID:14753748"
title: Adult-onset idiopathic progressive acro-osteolysis with proximal symphalangism.
authors:
- Tanikawa T
- Okada Y
- Azuma T
- Fukushima A
- Kawahara C
- Tanaka Y
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1359/JBMR.0301210
keywords:
- "Acro-Osteolysis/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
- Age of Onset
- Carrier Proteins
- Etidronic Acid/therapeutic use
- Female
- Finger Joint/pathology
- "Foot Deformities, Acquired/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
- "Hand Deformities, Acquired/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Proteins/genetics
- Sequence Deletion/genetics
- Toe Joint/pathology
- Noggin Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult-onset idiopathic progressive acro-osteolysis with proximal symphalangism.
**Authors:** Tanikawa T, Okada Y, Azuma T, Fukushima A, Kawahara C, Tanaka Y
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1359/JBMR.0301210](https://doi.org/10.1359/JBMR.0301210)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 Jan;19(1):165-7. doi: 10.1359/JBMR.0301210.

Adult-onset idiopathic progressive acro-osteolysis with proximal symphalangism.

Tanikawa T(1), Okada Y, Azuma T, Fukushima A, Kawahara C, Tanaka Y.

Author information:
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Occupational and 
Environmental Health, School of Medicine, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan.

Comment in
    J Bone Miner Res. 2005 Jan;20(1):159; author reply 160. doi: 
10.1359/JBMR.041023.

We experienced a 57-year-old female with adult-onset non-congenital idiopathic 
acro-osteolysis combined with proximal symphalangism. At the age of 36, she 
developed severe pain and swelling of the toe base of both feet and underwent 
Clayton surgery. However, the size of her toes diminished progressively over the 
5-year period after surgery. At the age of 41, she suffered pain and swelling of 
the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints of fingers of both hands. These PIP 
joints became rigid and inflexible. Subsequently, she noticed shortening of the 
little finger of both hands, followed later by shortening of the index, middle, 
and ring fingers. At the age of 57, the thumbs began to shorten. Laboratory and 
endocrinological examinations were not abnormal. Finally, we diagnosed her with 
acro-osteolysis combined with proximal symphalangism by radiological 
examination. In this case, previously unreported mutations of the Noggin gene 
were identified. This is the first case report of adult-onset, non-congenital 
idiopathic acro-osteolysis combined with proximal symphalangism.

DOI: 10.1359/JBMR.0301210
PMID: 14753748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]