---
reference_id: "PMID:28611552"
title: A Novel Mutation in PITX2 in a Patient with Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.
authors:
- Hassed SJ
- Li S
- Xu W
- Taylor AC
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1159/000454963
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel Mutation in PITX2 in a Patient with Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.
**Authors:** Hassed SJ, Li S, Xu W, Taylor AC
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000454963](https://doi.org/10.1159/000454963)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2017 Mar;8(2):107-109. doi: 10.1159/000454963. Epub 2017 Jan
20.

A Novel Mutation in PITX2 in a Patient with Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome.

Hassed SJ(1), Li S(1), Xu W(1), Taylor AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant condition. Anomalies 
include anterior segment dysgenesis of the eye, dental anomalies, maxillary 
hypoplasia, periumbilical anomalies, and congenital heart defects. We report a 
patient with Peters anomaly, dysmorphic features, congenital heart defect, 
umbilical hernia, short stature, and developmental delay. Diagnostic sequencing 
of 23 genes known to be causally related to the condition was performed on the 
patient, parents, and maternal grandparents. A variant of uncertain significance 
in PITX2 was identified. The mother had the same mutation and the father did 
not. The mother had decreased vision, congenitally missing teeth, and required 
jaw surgery as a child. Her asymptomatic parents elected to be tested and were 
negative for the mutation. The mutation, NM_153427.2:c.272G>A (p.Arg91Gln), is 
predicted to be damaging by PolyPhen-2 (score of 0.997), identified as a 
missense mutation with an allele frequency of 1.648e-05 by the Exome Aggregation 
Consortium, and has been reported in ClinVar once, by the laboratory that 
analyzed our patient's sample. Due to the in silico predictions and the results 
of family studies, it is suggested that this variant can be classified as 
pathogenic according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics 
2015 rule Pathogenic(iii)(b), specifically rules PS2, PM2, PM5, PP1, and PP3.

DOI: 10.1159/000454963
PMCID: PMC5465683
PMID: 28611552