---
reference_id: "PMID:14507966"
title: Disregulated RhoGTPases and actin cytoskeleton contribute to the migration defect in Lis1-deficient neurons.
authors:
- Kholmanskikh SS
- Dobrin JS
- Wynshaw-Boris A
- Letourneau PC
- Ross ME
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-25-08673.2003
keywords:
- 1-Alkyl-2-acetylglycerophosphocholine Esterase
- Actins/metabolism
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Cell Migration Inhibition
- "Cell Movement/drug effects, genetics"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Cytoskeleton/metabolism, pathology"
- Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, drug effects, physiology"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Heterozygote
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Mice
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Nervous System Malformations/genetics
- "Neurons/cytology, drug effects, physiology"
- Phospholipases A/metabolism
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- cdc42 GTP-Binding Protein/metabolism
- rac1 GTP-Binding Protein/metabolism
- "rho GTP-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- rho-Associated Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disregulated RhoGTPases and actin cytoskeleton contribute to the migration defect in Lis1-deficient neurons.
**Authors:** Kholmanskikh SS, Dobrin JS, Wynshaw-Boris A, Letourneau PC, Ross ME
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-25-08673.2003](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-25-08673.2003)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2003 Sep 24;23(25):8673-81. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-25-08673.2003.

Disregulated RhoGTPases and actin cytoskeleton contribute to the migration 
defect in Lis1-deficient neurons.

Kholmanskikh SS(1), Dobrin JS, Wynshaw-Boris A, Letourneau PC, Ross ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 
55455, USA.

Lissencephaly is a severe brain malformation caused by impaired neuronal 
migration. Lis1, a causative gene, functions in an evolutionarily conserved 
nuclear translocation pathway regulating dynein motor and microtubule dynamics. 
Whereas microtubule contributions to neuronal motility are incompletely 
understood, the actin cytoskeleton is essential for crawling cell movement of 
all cell types investigated. Lis1 haploinsufficiency is shown here to also 
result in reduced filamentous actin at the leading edge of migrating neurons, 
associated with upregulation of RhoA and downregulation of Rac1 and Cdc42 
activity. Disruption of RhoA function through pharmacological inhibition of its 
effector kinase, p160ROCK, restores normal Rac1 and Cdc42 activity and rescues 
the motility defect in Lis1+/- neurons. These data indicate a previously 
unrecognized role for Lis1 protein in neuronal motility by promoting actin 
polymerization through the regulation of Rho GTPase activity. This effect of 
Lis1 on GTPases does not appear to occur through direct Lis1 binding of Rho, but 
could involve Lis1 effects on Rho modulatory proteins or on microtubule 
dynamics.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-25-08673.2003
PMCID: PMC6740411
PMID: 14507966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]