---
reference_id: "PMID:39817651"
title: "Antithrombotic use in retinal artery occlusion: A narrative review."
authors:
- Liu WY
- Tang YH
- Chen YH
journal: Kaohsiung J Med Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/kjm2.12938
keywords:
- Humans
- Retinal Artery Occlusion/drug therapy
- Fibrinolytic Agents/therapeutic use
- Anticoagulants/therapeutic use
- Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Aspirin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antithrombotic use in retinal artery occlusion: A narrative review.
**Authors:** Liu WY, Tang YH, Chen YH
**Journal:** Kaohsiung J Med Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/kjm2.12938](https://doi.org/10.1002/kjm2.12938)

## Content

1. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2025 Apr;41(4):e12938. doi: 10.1002/kjm2.12938. Epub 2025
 Jan 16.

Antithrombotic use in retinal artery occlusion: A narrative review.

Liu WY(1), Tang YH(2)(3), Chen YH(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Education, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou Main 
Branch, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou 
Main Branch, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou Main 
Branch, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Retinal artery occlusion (RAO) is a critical ophthalmic emergency with a high 
risk of significant visual impairment. While traditional treatment aims to 
promptly restore blood flow to the retina, recent research has investigated the 
potential benefits of anticoagulation therapy for managing this condition. This 
paper reviews current literature and clinical trials investigating the efficacy 
and safety of anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapies, such as systemic 
heparinization and direct oral anticoagulants and aspirin, in treating RAO. The 
mechanism of action involves preventing thrombus propagation and platelet 
aggregation to promote microvascular circulation, potentially mitigating 
ischemic damage and improving visual outcomes. However, controversies exist 
regarding the optimal timing, duration, and selection of antithrombotic agents 
due to the risk of hemorrhagic complications. Further large-scale prospective 
studies are warranted to establish evidence-based guidelines for incorporating 
antithrombotic into the standard management of RAO. This paper underscores the 
evolving landscape of antithrombotic therapy as a promising adjunctive treatment 
strategy in the management of retinal artery occlusion.

© 2025 The Author(s). The Kaohsiung Journal of Medical Sciences published by 
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Kaohsiung Medical University.

DOI: 10.1002/kjm2.12938
PMCID: PMC11964108
PMID: 39817651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.