---
reference_id: "PMID:15290736"
title: "Antiphospholipid syndrome and asymptomatic carriers of antiphospholipid antibody: prospective analysis of 404 individuals."
authors:
- Girón-González JA
- García del Río E
- Rodríguez C
- Rodríguez-Martorell J
- Serrano A
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2004'
keywords:
- "Abortion, Spontaneous/etiology"
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Antiphospholipid/blood"
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/blood, complications, immunology, mortality, physiopathology"
- "Carrier State/blood, immunology"
- Coumarins/therapeutic use
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Recurrence
- Risk Factors
- "Thrombosis/drug therapy, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid syndrome and asymptomatic carriers of antiphospholipid antibody: prospective analysis of 404 individuals.
**Authors:** Girón-González JA, García del Río E, Rodríguez C, Rodríguez-Martorell J, Serrano A
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2004)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2004 Aug;31(8):1560-7.

Antiphospholipid syndrome and asymptomatic carriers of antiphospholipid 
antibody: prospective analysis of 404 individuals.

Girón-González JA(1), García del Río E, Rodríguez C, Rodríguez-Martorell J, 
Serrano A.

Author information:
(1)Servicios de Medicina Interna, Inmunología and Hematología, Hospital 
Universitario Puerta del Mar, Cádiz, Spain. joseantonio.giron@uca.es

Comment in
    J Rheumatol. 2004 Aug;31(8):1474-5.

OBJECTIVE: We carried out a prospective analysis of clinical and analytical 
findings in individuals with antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL).
METHODS: We prospectively studied 404 individuals, classified in 2 groups: (1) 
patients with primary or secondary antiphospholipid syndrome (APS, n = 226); and 
(2) asymptomatic carriers of aPL (n = 178). Patients with APS and thrombosis 
were treated with dicumarin, and an international normalized ratio around 3.0 
(range 2.5-3.5) was targeted. Asymptomatic carriers were not treated, but 
specific prophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin or aspirin was prescribed 
for the periods when individuals were at increased risk of thrombosis. Both 
groups of individuals were followed up at semester intervals for 36 months.
RESULTS: Patients with APS presented with venous (n = 106, 46.9%) and/or 
arterial (n = 70. 31%) thrombosis or fetal loss (n = 58 out of 112 women of 
fertility age, 51.8%). At the time of the first thrombotic event, 50.0% of 
patients with APS had coincident risk factors for thrombosis (previous surgery 
and prolonged immobilization were significantly associated with venous 
thrombosis, and hypercholesterolemia and arterial hypertension with arterial 
thrombosis). Eighteen patients with APS died during the study period. Recurrence 
of thrombosis in patients with APS was linked to insufficient anticoagulation. 
During the followup, no episode of thrombosis was detected in any asymptomatic 
carrier. The proportion of subjects with aPL was similar in patients and in 
asymptomatic carriers. The proportion of subjects with aPL decreased during the 
followup, in both patients and carriers.
CONCLUSION: Differences between patients and asymptomatic carriers with aPL are 
at least partially dependent on the proportion of coincident vascular risk 
factors. The decline in aPL during the followup defines a subgroup in which an 
anticoagulation suppression assay could be tried.

PMID: 15290736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]