---
reference_id: "PMID:40118657"
title: "Novel strategies for rare oncogenic drivers in non-small-cell lung cancer: An update from the 2024 Annual ESMO meeting."
authors:
- van der Wel JWT
- de Langen AJ
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2025.108490
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "ErbB Receptors/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel strategies for rare oncogenic drivers in non-small-cell lung cancer: An update from the 2024 Annual ESMO meeting.
**Authors:** van der Wel JWT, de Langen AJ
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2025.108490](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2025.108490)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2025 Jun;204:108490. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2025.108490. Epub
2025  Mar 14.

Novel strategies for rare oncogenic drivers in non-small-cell lung cancer: An
update from the 2024 Annual ESMO meeting.

van der Wel JWT(1), de Langen AJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Netherlands Cancer Institute, Department of Thoracic Oncology, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(2)Netherlands Cancer Institute, Department of Thoracic Oncology, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: j.d.langen@nki.nl.

Across the landscape of oncogene-addicted non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
various tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have been introduced in the last
twenty years. During the 2024 Annual ESMO meeting new therapeutic options were
presented for EGFR exon 20 insertion mutation, ALK fusion and ROS1 fusion
positive advanced stage NSCLC. For EGFR exon 20 insertion mutation positive
NSCLC, results from REZILIENT-1, a single arm phase II study with zipalertinib,
were presented, showing an objective response rate (ORR) of 50% in patients that
were pretreated with amivantamab, and 25% in patients pretreated with
amivantamab and an EGFR exon 20 insertion-directed TKI. The vast majority of
these patients also received platinum-doublet chemotherapy. For ALK, results
from ALKOVE-1, a single arm phase I/II study with NVL-655, a next generation ALK
TKI, were presented. The ORR was 35 % in patients pretreated with ≥ 2 ALK TKIs
including lorlatinib and 57 % in patients pretreated with ≥ 1 ALK TKI, excluding
lorlatinib. The median number of prior anticancer therapies was 3. Intracranial
responses were seen in lorlatinib naïve- and lorlatinib pretreated patients and
toxicity was manageable. In addition, results of the first-line randomized phase
III INSPIRE study were presented, in which iruplinalkib, an ALK and ROS1
selective TKI, is being evaluated versus crizotinib. Iruplinalkib showed a
superior median PFS (36.8 versus 14.55 months for crizotinib), but no difference
in 36-month overall survival (OS) rate. Finally, results from ARROS-1, a single
arm phase I/II study with zidesamtinib, a ROS1 selective and TRK-sparing TKI,
were presented. An ORR of 73% was obtained in patients that were pretreated with
crizotinib and an ORR of 38% in patients pretreated with repotrectinib. In this
review, we will discuss the relevant study results presented at ESMO 2024 for
these three genomic drivers and hypothesize on their respective place in the
sequence of treatment options.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2025.108490
PMID: 40118657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests: Van der Wel reports no potential
conflict of interest. De Langen reports grants from BMS, MSD, AstraZeneca and
Boehringer Ingelheim, participation on a data safety monitoring or advisory
board for DSI, all paid to the institution, and non-financial support from Merck
Serono and Roche.
