---
reference_id: "PMID:3124283"
title: Twelve year clinical study of patients with hypoxic cor pulmonale given long term domiciliary oxygen therapy.
authors:
- Cooper CB
- Waterhouse J
- Howard P
journal: Thorax
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1136/thx.42.2.105
keywords:
- Aged
- Female
- Home Care Services
- Humans
- Long-Term Care
- "Lung Diseases, Obstructive/complications, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Oxygen Inhalation Therapy
- Prognosis
- "Pulmonary Heart Disease/complications, mortality, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Twelve year clinical study of patients with hypoxic cor pulmonale given long term domiciliary oxygen therapy.
**Authors:** Cooper CB, Waterhouse J, Howard P
**Journal:** Thorax (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1136/thx.42.2.105](https://doi.org/10.1136/thx.42.2.105)

## Content

1. Thorax. 1987 Feb;42(2):105-10. doi: 10.1136/thx.42.2.105.

Twelve year clinical study of patients with hypoxic cor pulmonale given long
term domiciliary oxygen therapy.

Cooper CB(1), Waterhouse J, Howard P.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Medicine, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield.

Patients presenting with chronic obstructive airways disease and hypoxic cor
pulmonale were assessed during a period of clinical stability. Seventy two
patients (53 male) with a mean age of 60 years were selected for long term
oxygen therapy. Mean FEV1 was 0.78 l and forced vital capacity 1.9 l. The mean
arterial oxygen tension (PaO2) was 6.1 kPa (46 mm Hg) and the mean arterial
carbon dioxide tension (PCO2) 6.9 kPa (52 mm Hg). All patients had a PaO2 of
less than 8.0 kPa (60 mm Hg) and 57 patients had a PCO2 of more than 6.0 kPa (45
mm Hg). Pulmonary haemodynamics were measured in 45 patients yielding the
following mean values: pulmonary artery pressure 28.3 mm Hg; cardiac output 5.9
l min-1; total pulmonary vascular resistance 59.2 kPa l-1 S. Oxygen delivery
systems, including 23 oxygen concentrators, were installed in the patients'
homes. Flow rates were adjusted to raise PaO2 to more than 8.0 kPa (60 mm Hg)
for at least 15 hours each day and close supervision was maintained. Overall
five year survival was 62%, which is better than previously reported for this
type of patient; but the 10 year survival was only 26% owing to an observed
acceleration in death rate at about this time. Progressive disturbances of the
pulmonary circulation were arrested. Mortality was associated with the severity
of airflow obstruction, reflecting a continuing pathological process affecting
the airways.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.42.2.105
PMCID: PMC460633
PMID: 3124283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]