---
reference_id: "PMID:25803244"
title: "Contrast Enema for Hirschsprung Disease Investigation: Diagnostic Accuracy and Validity for Subsequent Diagnostic and Surgical Planning."
authors:
- Frongia G
- Günther P
- Schenk JP
- Strube K
- Kessler M
- Mehrabi A
- Romero P
journal: Eur J Pediatr Surg
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1546755
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contrast Enema for Hirschsprung Disease Investigation: Diagnostic Accuracy and Validity for Subsequent Diagnostic and Surgical Planning.
**Authors:** Frongia G, Günther P, Schenk JP, Strube K, Kessler M, Mehrabi A, Romero P
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr Surg (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0035-1546755](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0035-1546755)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2016 Apr;26(2):207-14. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1546755. Epub 
2015 Mar 24.

Contrast Enema for Hirschsprung Disease Investigation: Diagnostic Accuracy and 
Validity for Subsequent Diagnostic and Surgical Planning.

Frongia G(1), Günther P(1), Schenk JP(2), Strube K(1), Kessler M(1), Mehrabi 
A(3), Romero P(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of General, Visceral and 
Transplantation Surgery, University Hospital of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Division of Pediatric Radiology, Department of Diagnostic and Interventional 
Radiology, University Hospital of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, University 
Hospital of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: A targeted Hirschsprung disease (HD) diagnostic is necessary, as 
it determines a specific approach primarily based on surgical resection of the 
affected aganglionic colonic segment. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
diagnostic accuracy of a contrast enema (CE) for HD diagnosis and to determine 
whether it should be performed before or after rectal biopsies (RBs).
METHODS: A retrospective observational study of children undergoing RB for HD 
investigation was performed. In the performed CE, the occurrence and the level 
of a colonic caliber change (CCC) were recorded and its concordance with the 
histologically assessed level of aganglionosis by RB and the odds ratio were 
calculated.
RESULTS: A total of 107 cases were included. Sensitivity and specificity for a 
CCC in CE were 74.1% and 94.6%. A CCC present in CE was associated with a 
50-fold increased probability for a histologically proven HD. The overall 
concordance between a CCC and the histologically assessed level of aganglionosis 
was high (kappa 0.642, p = 0.003), being correct in 94.4% of cases when the CCC 
was located in the rectosigmoid, but only in 50% of cases when it was located in 
more proximal segments. By performing a CE only after HD diagnosis confirmation 
by RB would avoid 67.5% of CE with no loss of diagnostic accuracy.
CONCLUSION: We confirm that CE is a valuable tool for HD diagnosis; however, it 
should only be performed for subsequent diagnostic and surgical planning 
following histological confirmation of HD by RB. On the basis of this, an 
algorithm for an optimized investigation and management of HD is presented.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0035-1546755
PMID: 25803244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]