---
reference_id: "PMID:34750083"
title: "Atypical pneumonia: Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment."
authors:
- Miyashita N
journal: Respir Investig
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2021.09.009
keywords:
- Aged
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Chlamydophila pneumoniae
- Community-Acquired Infections/drug therapy
- Humans
- Mycoplasma pneumoniae
- "Pneumonia/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Pneumonia, Bacterial/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Pneumonia, Mycoplasma/diagnosis, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical pneumonia: Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment.
**Authors:** Miyashita N
**Journal:** Respir Investig (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.resinv.2021.09.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resinv.2021.09.009)

## Content

1. Respir Investig. 2022 Jan;60(1):56-67. doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2021.09.009. Epub
 2021 Nov 5.

Atypical pneumonia: Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment.

Miyashita N(1).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Respiratory Medicine, 
Infectious Disease and Allergology, Kansai Medical University, 2-3-1 Shin-machi, 
Hirakata, Osaka, 573-1191, Japan. Electronic address: 
miyashin@hirakata.kmu.ac.jp.

Atypical pneumonia is caused by atypical pathogens that are not detectable with 
Gram stain and cannot be cultured using standard methods. The most common 
causative organisms of atypical pneumonia are Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia 
pneumoniae, and Legionella species. The therapeutic approach for atypical 
pneumonias is different than that for typical pneumonia. Typical bacterial 
pathogens classically respond to β-lactam antimicrobial therapy because they 
have a cell wall amenable to β-lactam disruption. On the contrary, most atypical 
pathogens do not have a bacterial cell wall, some are intracellular (e.g., 
Legionella), and some are paracellular (e.g., M. pneumoniae). To prevent an 
increase in the number of antimicrobial-resistant strains, the Japanese 
pneumonia guidelines have proposed a differential diagnosis for typical 
bacterial pneumonia and atypical pneumonia to select an appropriate antibiotic 
for the management of mild-to-moderate pneumonia. The guidelines have set up six 
parameters and criteria based on the clinical symptoms, physical signs, and 
laboratory data. However, in the elderly individuals and patients with 
underlying diseases, the differential diagnosis may be difficult or a mixed 
infection may be latent. Therefore, in these individuals, the administration of 
a β-lactam drug plus a macrolide or tetracycline, or only fluoroquinolone should 
be considered from the beginning to cover bacterial and atypical pneumonia.

Copyright © 2021 The Japanese Respiratory Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resinv.2021.09.009
PMID: 34750083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The author has no conflict 
of interest.