---
reference_id: "PMID:39703362"
title: Treatment of Hypothalamic Obesity With GLP-1 Analogs.
authors:
- Dimitri P
- Roth CL
journal: J Endocr Soc
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvae200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Hypothalamic Obesity With GLP-1 Analogs.
**Authors:** Dimitri P, Roth CL
**Journal:** J Endocr Soc (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jendso/bvae200](https://doi.org/10.1210/jendso/bvae200)

## Content

1. J Endocr Soc. 2024 Nov 14;9(1):bvae200. doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvae200.
eCollection  2024 Nov 26.

Treatment of Hypothalamic Obesity With GLP-1 Analogs.

Dimitri P(1)(2), Roth CL(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)The Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Sheffield Children's NHS
Foundation Trust, Sheffield, S10 2TH, UK.
(2)University of Sheffield, Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK.
(3)Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Hospital, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Congenital and acquired damage to hypothalamic nuclei or neuronal
circuits controlling satiety and energy expenditure results in hypothalamic
obesity (HO). To date, successful weight loss and satiety has only been achieved
in a limited number of affected patients across multiple drug trials.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) acts via central pathways that are independent
from the hypothalamus to induce satiety. GLP-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1RAs) may
provide an alternative approach to treating HO.
METHODS: We performed a comprehensive search in Medline, Google Scholar, and
clinical trials registries (ClinicalTrials.gov; clinicaltrialsregister.eur).
This nonsystematic literature review was conducted to identify scientific papers
published from January 2005 to February 2024 using the Pubmed and Embase
databases. Key words used were GLP-1, GLP-1RA, hypothalamic obesity, suprasellar
tumor, and craniopharyngioma.
RESULTS: Our search identified 7 case studies, 5 case series, and 2 published
clinical trials relating to the use of GLP-1RAs in HO. All case studies
demonstrated weight loss and improved metabolic function. In contrast, results
from case series were variable, with some showing no weight loss and others
demonstrating moderate to significant weight loss and improved metabolic
parameters. In the ECHO clinical trial, nearly half the subjects randomized to
weekly exenatide showed reduced body mass index (BMI). Paradoxically, BMI
reduction was greater in patients with more extensive hypothalamic injuries.
CONCLUSION: GLP-1RAs potentially offer a new approach to treating HO. There is a
need to stratify patients who are more likely to respond. Further randomized
controlled trials are required to determine their efficacy either in isolation
or combined with other therapies.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/jendso/bvae200
PMCID: PMC11655849
PMID: 39703362
