---
reference_id: "PMID:16918680"
title: "Osteoglophonic dysplasia: dental and orthodontic implications."
authors:
- Roberts TS
- Stephen L
- Beighton P
journal: Orthod Craniofac Res
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1111/j.1601-6343.2006.00369.x
keywords:
- Adult
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- Dwarfism/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Mouth Rehabilitation
- "Orthodontics, Corrective"
- "Tooth, Impacted/genetics"
- "Tooth, Unerupted/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteoglophonic dysplasia: dental and orthodontic implications.
**Authors:** Roberts TS, Stephen L, Beighton P
**Journal:** Orthod Craniofac Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1601-6343.2006.00369.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1601-6343.2006.00369.x)

## Content

1. Orthod Craniofac Res. 2006 Aug;9(3):153-6. doi: 
10.1111/j.1601-6343.2006.00369.x.

Osteoglophonic dysplasia: dental and orthodontic implications.

Roberts TS(1), Stephen L, Beighton P.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, University of the Western Cape, Cape Town, South 
Africa. troberts@uwc.ac.za

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: Documentation of dental and orthodontic implications of 
osteoglophonic dysplasia (OGD).
SETTINGS AND PARTICIPANTS: Case report describing oral and dental manifestations 
of a female with OGD, aged 39 years, who was first documented three decades ago.
RESULTS: This rare genetic disorder manifests with gross stunting of stature, 
associated with severe craniofacial malformation and multiple unerupted teeth. 
Radiographically, multiple lucent lesions were present in the tubular bones and 
mandible as well as several impacted teeth.
CONCLUSION: We concluded that prosthetic dental replacement in this patient 
would be difficult because of the distorted jaw relationship and large alveolar 
ridges. Equally, craniofacial reconstruction might be compromised by obstruction 
of the nasal airways, difficulty in intubation and postoperative respiratory 
problems.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-6343.2006.00369.x
PMID: 16918680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]