---
reference_id: "PMID:29473937"
title: "Large deletion in PIGL: a common mutational mechanism in CHIME syndrome?"
authors:
- Ceroni JR
- Yamamoto GL
- Honjo RS
- Kim CA
- Passos-Bueno MR
- Bertola DR
journal: Genet Mol Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2017-0172
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large deletion in PIGL: a common mutational mechanism in CHIME syndrome?
**Authors:** Ceroni JR, Yamamoto GL, Honjo RS, Kim CA, Passos-Bueno MR, Bertola DR
**Journal:** Genet Mol Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2017-0172](https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2017-0172)

## Content

1. Genet Mol Biol. 2018 Jan-Mar;41(1):85-91. doi:
10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2017-0172.  Epub 2018 Feb 19.

Large deletion in PIGL: a common mutational mechanism in CHIME syndrome?

Ceroni JR(1), Yamamoto GL(1)(2), Honjo RS(1), Kim CA(1), Passos-Bueno MR(2), 
Bertola DR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Unit, Instituto da Criança do Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de 
Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Centro de Pesquisa sobre o Genoma Humano e Células-Tronco, Instituto de 
Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

CHIME syndrome is an extremely rare autosomal recessive multisystemic disorder 
caused by mutations in PIGL. PIGL is an endoplasmic reticulum localized enzyme 
that catalyzes the second step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) 
biosynthesis, which plays a role in the anchorage of cell-surface proteins 
including receptors, enzymes, and adhesion molecules. Germline mutations in 
other members of GPI and Post GPI Attachment to Proteins (PGAP) family genes 
have been described and constitute a group of diseases within the congenital 
disorders of glycosylation. Patients in this group often present alkaline 
phosphatase serum levels abnormalities and neurological symptoms. We report a 
CHIME syndrome patient who harbors a missense mutation c.500T > C (p.Leu167Pro) 
and a large deletion involving the 5' untranslated region and part of exon 1 of 
PIGL. In CHIME syndrome, a recurrent missense mutation c.500T > C (p.Leu167Pro) 
is found in the majority of patients, associated with a null mutation in the 
other allele, including an overrepresentation of large deletions. The latter are 
not detected by the standard analysis in sequencing techniques, including 
next-generation sequencing. Thus, in individuals with a clinical diagnosis of 
CHIME syndrome in which only one mutation is found, an active search for a large 
deletion should be sought.

DOI: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2017-0172
PMCID: PMC5901507
PMID: 29473937