---
reference_id: "PMID:37077539"
title: "The EDA/EDAR/NF-κB pathway in non-syndromic tooth agenesis: A genetic perspective."
authors:
- Gao Y
- Jiang X
- Wei Z
- Long H
- Lai W
journal: Front Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1168538
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The EDA/EDAR/NF-κB pathway in non-syndromic tooth agenesis: A genetic perspective.
**Authors:** Gao Y, Jiang X, Wei Z, Long H, Lai W
**Journal:** Front Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2023.1168538](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1168538)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Apr 3;14:1168538. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1168538.
eCollection  2023.

The EDA/EDAR/NF-κB pathway in non-syndromic tooth agenesis: A genetic 
perspective.

Gao Y(1)(2), Jiang X(3), Wei Z(1)(2), Long H(1)(2), Lai W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases & National Clinical Research Center for 
Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.
(2)Department of Orthodontics, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, China.
(3)Human Sperm Bank, Key Laboratory of Birth Defects and Related Diseases of 
Women and Children (Sichuan University), Ministry of Education, West China 
Second University Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Non-syndromic tooth agenesis (NSTA) is one of the most common dental 
developmental malformations affected by genetic factors predominantly. Among all 
36 candidate genes reported in NSTA individuals, EDA, EDAR, and EDARADD play 
essential roles in ectodermal organ development. As members of the 
EDA/EDAR/NF-κB signaling pathway, mutations in these genes have been implicated 
in the pathogenesis of NSTA, as well as hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED), 
a rare genetic disorder that affects multiple ectodermal structures, including 
teeth. This review provides an overview of the current knowledge on the genetic 
basis of NSTA, with a focus on the pathogenic effects of the EDA/EDAR/NF-κB 
signaling pathway and the role of EDA, EDAR, and EDARADD mutations in 
developmental tooth defects. We also discuss the phenotypic overlap and genetic 
differences between NSTA and HED. Ultimately, this review highlights the 
importance of genetic analysis in diagnosing and managing NSTA and related 
ectodermal disorders, and the need for ongoing research to improve our 
understanding of these conditions.

Copyright © 2023 Gao, Jiang, Wei, Long and Lai.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1168538
PMCID: PMC10106650
PMID: 37077539

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.