---
reference_id: "PMID:21722845"
title: Steroid responsiveness and wheezing phenotypes.
authors:
- Ducharme FM
- Krajinovic M
journal: Paediatr Respir Rev
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.prrv.2011.02.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Steroid responsiveness and wheezing phenotypes.
**Authors:** Ducharme FM, Krajinovic M
**Journal:** Paediatr Respir Rev (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.prrv.2011.02.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prrv.2011.02.007)

## Content

1. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2011 Sep;12(3):170-6. doi: 10.1016/j.prrv.2011.02.007.

Steroid responsiveness and wheezing phenotypes.

Ducharme FM(1), Krajinovic M.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and of Social Preventive Medicine, University of 
Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. francine.m.ducharme@umontreal.ca

Oral corticosteroids are the cornerstone of management of acute moderate or 
severe asthma whilst preventive inhaled corticosteroids are the mainstay of the 
preventive management of children with asthma. Yet, variation in the magnitude 
of response to corticosteroids has been observed. There is increasing evidence 
that preschool-aged children with viral-induced asthma may display a certain 
degree of corticosteroid resistance, requiring higher doses of corticosteroids 
to overcome it. The identification of determinants of responsiveness is 
complicated by design issues, including heterogeneous populations of children 
with asthma and bronchiolitis or of children with viral-induced and 
multi-trigger asthma phenotypes in published trials. Potential key determinants 
of responsiveness may include age, trigger, phenotype, tobacco smoke exposure 
and genotype. The mechanistic pathway for corticoresistance may originate from a 
gene-environment interaction, leading to non-eosinophilic airway inflammation. 
The clinician should carefully confirm the diagnosis of asthma and ascertain the 
phenotype to select appropriate phenotype-specific therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prrv.2011.02.007
PMCID: PMC7106147
PMID: 21722845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]