---
reference_id: "PMID:38416444"
title: "\"Knees Out\" or \"Knees In\"? Volitional Lateral vs. Medial Hip Rotation During Barbell Squats."
authors:
- Chiu LZF
journal: J Strength Cond Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000004655
content_type: abstract_only
---

# "Knees Out" or "Knees In"? Volitional Lateral vs. Medial Hip Rotation During Barbell Squats.
**Authors:** Chiu LZF
**Journal:** J Strength Cond Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1519/JSC.0000000000004655](https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0000000000004655)

## Content

1. J Strength Cond Res. 2024 Mar 1;38(3):435-443. doi: 
10.1519/JSC.0000000000004655. Epub 2023 Dec 13.

"Knees Out" or "Knees In"? Volitional Lateral vs. Medial Hip Rotation During 
Barbell Squats.

Chiu LZF(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuromusculoskeletal Mechanics Research Program, Faculty of Kinesiology, 
Sport, and Recreation, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Chiu, LZF. "Knees out" or "Knees in"? Volitional lateral versus medial hip 
rotation during barbell squats. J Strength Cond Res 38(3): 435-443, 2024-Medial 
or lateral hip rotation may be present during barbell squats, which could affect 
the hip frontal and transverse plane moments. Male (n = 14) and female (n = 18) 
subjects performed squats using their normal technique and with volitional 
medial and lateral hip rotation. Hip net joint moments (NJM) were calculated 
from 3-dimensional motion capture and force platform measurements. Statistical 
significance was set for omnibus tests (α = 0.05) and Bonferroni's corrected for 
pairwise comparisons (αt-test = 0.0056). Normal squats required hip extensor, 
adductor, and lateral rotator NJM. Lateral rotation squats had smaller hip 
extensor (p = 0.002) and lateral rotator (p < 0.001) NJM and larger hip adductor 
(p < 0.001) NJM than normal squats. Medial rotation squats had smaller hip 
extensor (p = 0.002) and adductor (p < 0.001) NJM and larger hip lateral rotator 
(p < 0.001) NJM than normal squats. These differences exceeded the minimum 
effects worth detecting. As gluteus maximus exerts hip extensor and lateral 
rotator moments, and the adductor magnus exerts hip extensor and adductor 
moments, these muscles combined would be required to meet these hip demands, 
supporting previous research that has established these muscles as the primary 
contributors to the hip extensor NJM. Lateral rotation squats reduce hip lateral 
rotator and increase hip adductor NJM, which may be hypothesized as 
preferentially loading adductor magnus. Medial rotation squats increase hip 
lateral rotator and decrease hip adductor NJM; therefore, this variant may shift 
loading to the gluteus maximus.

Copyright © 2023 National Strength and Conditioning Association.

DOI: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000004655
PMID: 38416444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]