---
reference_id: "PMID:38927397"
title: "Anemia of Chronic Kidney Disease-A Narrative Review of Its Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Management."
authors:
- Badura K
- Janc J
- Wąsik J
- Gnitecki S
- Skwira S
- Młynarska E
- Rysz J
- Franczyk B
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12061191
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anemia of Chronic Kidney Disease-A Narrative Review of Its Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Management.
**Authors:** Badura K, Janc J, Wąsik J, Gnitecki S, Skwira S, Młynarska E, Rysz J, Franczyk B
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines12061191](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines12061191)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2024 May 27;12(6):1191. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12061191.

Anemia of Chronic Kidney Disease-A Narrative Review of Its Pathophysiology, 
Diagnosis, and Management.

Badura K(1), Janc J(1), Wąsik J(1), Gnitecki S(1), Skwira S(1), Młynarska E(1), 
Rysz J(2), Franczyk B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrocardiology, Medical University of Lodz, Ul. Zeromskiego 
113, 90-549 Lodz, Poland.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Hypertension and Family Medicine, Medical 
University of Lodz, Ul. Zeromskiego 113, 90-549 Lodz, Poland.

Anemia is one of the most common chronic kidney disease (CKD) complications. It 
negatively affects patients' quality of life and clinical outcomes. The 
pathophysiology of anemia in CKD involves the interplay of various factors such 
as erythropoietin (EPO) deficiency, iron dysregulation, chronic inflammation, 
bone marrow dysfunction, and nutritional deficiencies. Despite recent advances 
in understanding this condition, anemia still remains a serious clinical 
challenge in population of patients with CKD. Several guidelines have been 
published with the aim to systematize the diagnostic approach and treatment of 
anemia; however, due to emerging data, many recommendations vary between 
publications. Recent studies indicate a potential of novel biomarkers to 
evaluate anemia and related conditions such as iron deficiency, which is often 
present in CKD patients. Our article aims to summarize the pathophysiology of 
anemia in CKD, as well as the diagnosis and management of this condition, 
including novel therapeutic approaches such as hypoxia-inducible factor-prolyl 
hydroxylase inhibitors (HIF-PHI). Understanding these complex subjects is 
crucial for a targeted approach to diagnose and treat patients with anemia in 
CKD effectively.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12061191
PMCID: PMC11200696
PMID: 38927397

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.