---
reference_id: "PMID:30028234"
title: "The clinical use of parvovirus B19 assays: recent advances."
authors:
- Gallinella G
journal: Expert Rev Mol Diagn
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/14737159.2018.1503537
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical use of parvovirus B19 assays: recent advances.
**Authors:** Gallinella G
**Journal:** Expert Rev Mol Diagn (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737159.2018.1503537](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737159.2018.1503537)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2018 Sep;18(9):821-832. doi: 
10.1080/14737159.2018.1503537. Epub 2018 Jul 26.

The clinical use of parvovirus B19 assays: recent advances.

Gallinella G(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology , University of Bologna , Bologna 
, Italy.

Parvovirus B19 (B19V), a single-stranded DNA virus in the family Parvoviridae, 
is a human pathogenic virus, characterized by a selective but not exclusive 
tropism for erythroid progenitor cells. Widely diffuse, it is responsible for an 
ample range of clinical manifestations, whose characteristics and outcomes 
depend on the interplay between the viral properties and the physiological and 
immune status of the infected individuals. The complexity of virus-host 
relationship and the diversity of the clinical course of infection pose a 
diagnostic challenge that may require non-trivial solutions. Areas covered: The 
review includes an updated description of the course of B19V infection in its 
complexity and diversity of pathogenetic mechanisms, discusses the consequent 
requirements for different and appropriated diagnostic approaches, presents the 
main diagnostic techniques, more recent technical advancements, and their 
application to the diverse clinical situations. Expert commentary: The complex 
scenario of the infectious process and the diversity in possible pathogenetic 
mechanisms make necessary a multi-parametric approach for an accurate and 
informative laboratory diagnosis of B19V infection, combining as much as 
possible the molecular detection of viral components, mainly viral DNA, to 
commonly followed immunological detection of virus-specific antibodies and a 
critical assessment of laboratory findings.

DOI: 10.1080/14737159.2018.1503537
PMID: 30028234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]