---
reference_id: "PMID:6110340"
title: The pathogenesis of experimentally induced Trypanosoma brucei infection in the dog. I. Tissue and organ damage.
authors:
- Morrison WI
- Murray M
- Sayer PD
- Preston JM
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '1981'
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain Edema/parasitology, pathology"
- "Cardiomyopathies/parasitology, pathology"
- "Coronary Vessels/parasitology, pathology"
- "Dog Diseases/parasitology, pathology"
- Dogs
- "Edema/parasitology, pathology"
- "Eye Diseases/parasitology, pathology"
- Female
- Kenya
- Male
- "Pituitary Diseases/parasitology, pathology"
- Time Factors
- "Trypanosomiasis, African/pathology, veterinary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pathogenesis of experimentally induced Trypanosoma brucei infection in the dog. I. Tissue and organ damage.
**Authors:** Morrison WI, Murray M, Sayer PD, Preston JM
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (1981)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 1981 Feb;102(2):168-81.

The pathogenesis of experimentally induced Trypanosoma brucei infection in the 
dog. I. Tissue and organ damage.

Morrison WI, Murray M, Sayer PD, Preston JM.

Inoculation of dogs with Trypanosoma brucei produced an acute fetal disease 
similar to that seen following natural infection. The disease was characterised 
by high levels of parasitaemia, moderately severe anemia, and marked changes in 
the lymphoid system. Extravascular invasion by large numbers of trypanosomes was 
widespread throughout the body and was accompanied by severe tissue damage. 
Tissue invasion by trypanosomes was associated with marked cellular infiltration 
involving lymphoid cells and plasma cells followed by macrophages and 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Associated with these reactions, severe cellular 
degeneration and focal necrosis occurred. While these changes were widespread 
and were found in the majority of tissues examined, consistently severe lesions 
were found in the heart, eyes and central nervous system. In many organs, 
lymphatic vessels were distended with fluid, trypanosomes, and a cell population 
similar to that in the surrounding tissue; fibrin deposition and thrombus 
formation was sometimes observed within the lymphatic lumens. Thrombosis was 
also found in the blood vessels of the pampiniform plexus, the venous plexus of 
the ovary, and branches of the renal vein. A severe necrotizing vasculitis 
affecting only the coronary vessels was a prominent feature in some animals.

PMCID: PMC1903681
PMID: 6110340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]