---
reference_id: "PMID:29614632"
title: "Sickle cell dehydration: Pathophysiology and therapeutic applications."
authors:
- Brugnara C
journal: Clin Hemorheol Microcirc
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3233/CH-189007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sickle cell dehydration: Pathophysiology and therapeutic applications.
**Authors:** Brugnara C
**Journal:** Clin Hemorheol Microcirc (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3233/CH-189007](https://doi.org/10.3233/CH-189007)

## Content

1. Clin Hemorheol Microcirc. 2018;68(2-3):187-204. doi: 10.3233/CH-189007.

Sickle cell dehydration: Pathophysiology and therapeutic applications.

Brugnara C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Cell dehydration is a distinguishing characteristic of sickle cell disease and 
an important contributor to disease pathophysiology. Due to the unique 
dependence of Hb S polymerization on cellular Hb S concentration, cell 
dehydration promotes polymerization and sickling. In double heterozygosis for Hb 
S and C (SC disease) dehydration is the determining factor in disease 
pathophysiology. Three major ion transport pathways are involved in sickle cell 
dehydration: the K-Cl cotransport (KCC), the Gardos channel (KCNN4) and Psickle, 
the polymerization induced membrane permeability, most likely mediated by the 
mechano-sensitive ion channel PIEZO1. Each of these pathways exhibit unique 
characteristics in regulation by oxygen tension, intracellular and extracellular 
environment, and functional expression in reticulocytes and mature red cells. 
The unique dependence of K-Cl cotransport on intracellular Mg and the abnormal 
reduction of erythrocyte Mg content in SS and SC cells had led to clinical 
studies assessing the effect of oral Mg supplementation. Inhibition of Gardos 
channel by clotrimazole and senicapoc has led to Phase 1,2,3 trials in patients 
with sickle cell disease. While none of these studies has resulted in the 
approval of a novel therapy for SS disease, they have highlighted the key role 
played by these pathways in disease pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.3233/CH-189007
PMID: 29614632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]