---
reference_id: "PMID:37254569"
title: "Aspartate-glutamate carrier 2 (citrin): a role in glucose and amino acid metabolism in the liver."
authors:
- Holeček M
journal: BMB Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5483/BMBRep.2023-0052
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspartate-glutamate carrier 2 (citrin): a role in glucose and amino acid metabolism in the liver.
**Authors:** Holeček M
**Journal:** BMB Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5483/BMBRep.2023-0052](https://doi.org/10.5483/BMBRep.2023-0052)

## Content

1. BMB Rep. 2023 Jul;56(7):385-391. doi: 10.5483/BMBRep.2023-0052.

Aspartate-glutamate carrier 2 (citrin): a role in glucose and amino acid 
metabolism in the liver.

Holeček M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Hradec 
Králové 500 03, Czech Republic.

Aspartate-glutamate carrier 2 (AGC2, citrin) is a mitochondrial carrier 
expressed in the liver that transports aspartate from mitochondria into the 
cytosol in exchange for glutamate. The AGC2 is the main component of the 
malate-aspartate shuttle (MAS) that ensures indirect transport of NADH produced 
in the cytosol during glycolysis, lactate oxidation to pyruvate, and ethanol 
oxidation to acetaldehyde into mitochondria. Through MAS, AGC2 is necessary to 
maintain intracellular redox balance, mitochondrial respiration, and ATP 
synthesis. Through elevated cytosolic Ca2+ level, the AGC2 is stimulated by 
catecholamines and glucagon during starvation, exercise, and muscle wasting 
disorders. In these conditions, AGC2 increases aspartate input to the urea 
cycle, where aspartate is a source of one of two nitrogen atoms in the urea 
molecule (the other is ammonia), and a substrate for the synthesis of fumarate 
that is gradually converted to oxaloacetate, the starting substrate for 
gluconeogenesis. Furthermore, aspartate is a substrate for the synthesis of 
asparagine, nucleotides, and proteins. It is concluded that AGC2 plays a 
fundamental role in the compartmentalization of aspartate and glutamate 
metabolism and linkage of the reactions of MAS, glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, 
amino acid catabolism, urea cycle, protein synthesis, and cell proliferation. 
Targeting of AGC genes may represent a new therapeutic strategy to fight cancer. 
[BMB Reports 2023; 56(7): 385-391].

DOI: 10.5483/BMBRep.2023-0052
PMCID: PMC10390287
PMID: 37254569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The author have no 
conflicting interests.