---
reference_id: "PMID:26576712"
title: "Peripheral Cryoablation for Treatment of Active Pars Planitis: Long-Term Outcomes of a Retrospective Study."
authors:
- Sohn EH
- Chaon BC
- Jabs DA
- Folk JC
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2015.11.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peripheral Cryoablation for Treatment of Active Pars Planitis: Long-Term Outcomes of a Retrospective Study.
**Authors:** Sohn EH, Chaon BC, Jabs DA, Folk JC
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajo.2015.11.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajo.2015.11.009)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2016 Feb;162:35-42.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2015.11.009. Epub 
2015 Nov 11.

Peripheral Cryoablation for Treatment of Active Pars Planitis: Long-Term 
Outcomes of a Retrospective Study.

Sohn EH(1), Chaon BC(2), Jabs DA(3), Folk JC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Stephen A. Wynn Institute 
for Vision Research, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, Iowa. 
Electronic address: Elliott.Sohn@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Stephen A. Wynn Institute 
for Vision Research, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, Iowa.
(3)Departments of Ophthalmology and Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, New York; Department of Epidemiology, The Johns Hopkins 
University Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland.

PURPOSE: To compare the long-term outcomes of peripheral retinal cryoablation to 
conventional treatment for active pars planitis.
DESIGN: Retrospective, interventional, comparative case series.
METHODS: Review at a single institution was conducted to compare the effect of 
cryotherapy to eyes with pars planitis to those receiving conventional therapy 
(topical, regionally injected, or oral corticosteroid therapy). Best-corrected 
visual acuity (VA), complications, resolution of cystoid macular edema (CME), 
and anterior chamber and vitreous inflammation were assessed.
RESULTS: One hundred thirty-six eyes were treated conventionally, 50 eyes were 
treated with cryotherapy. Median follow-up was 60.8 months (range 
8.1-223.1 months) in the cryotherapy group and 45.0 months (range 
3.1-339.0 months) in the controls. There were no significant differences in 
baseline VA, anterior chamber and vitreous inflammation, presence of CME, and 
prior use of regional corticosteroid injections. VA improved over time in the 
cryotherapy group (slope of -0.0018 logMAR units per month; P = .023) but 
declined in the controls (slope of +0.0011 logMAR units per month; P = .023). 
Kaplan-Meier survival estimates demonstrated faster times to resolution of 
anterior chamber cell, vitreous cell, and CME in the cryotherapy-treated eyes. 
Hazard ratios of remission (adjusted for confounding factors) for vitreous cell 
and CME for those treated with cryotherapy compared to controls were 4.73 (95% 
confidence interval 1.63, 13.63; P = .004) and 6.85 (95% confidence interval 
1.06, 44.78; P = .044), respectively. No ocular complications were identified in 
the cryotherapy group.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that peripheral retinal cryoablation therapy is 
an effective treatment for active pars planitis and may be better than 
conventional regional corticosteroid injections and oral corticosteroid therapy 
for induction of remission.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajo.2015.11.009
PMID: 26576712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]