---
reference_id: "PMID:39525793"
title: "Idiopathic intracranial hypertension following childbirth: a case report and management strategies."
authors:
- Ibrahim AA
- Sheikh Hassan M
- Ahmed AA
- Sidow NO
- Farah Osman Hidig M
- Kadiye MS
- Adam BA
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000002575
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Idiopathic intracranial hypertension following childbirth: a case report and management strategies.
**Authors:** Ibrahim AA, Sheikh Hassan M, Ahmed AA, Sidow NO, Farah Osman Hidig M, Kadiye MS, Adam BA
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MS9.0000000000002575](https://doi.org/10.1097/MS9.0000000000002575)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2024 Sep 18;86(11):6784-6787. doi: 
10.1097/MS9.0000000000002575. eCollection 2024 Nov.

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension following childbirth: a case report and 
management strategies.

Ibrahim AA(1), Sheikh Hassan M(1)(2), Ahmed AA(3), Sidow NO(1), Farah Osman 
Hidig M(1), Kadiye MS(3), Adam BA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mogadishu Somalia Turkish Training and Research 
Hospital.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, Mogadishu University, Somalia.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Mogadishu Somali Turkish Training and Research 
Hospital.

INTRODUCTION: A postpartum headache, also known as pseudotumor cerebri, is 
defined as a headache and shoulder or neck pain that occur in the first 6 weeks 
following childbirth. Common causes of headaches during puerperium include 
pre-eclampsia, subarachnoid hemorrhage, cerebral venous thrombosis, meningitis, 
brain tumors, cerebrovascular diseases, and posterior reversible encephalopathy 
syndrome. Pseudotumor cerebri is an extremely rare cause of postpartum severe 
headache with visual disturbance with or without papilledema.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here, the authors present a 32-year-old postpartum female 
patient who presented with a severe headache and visual disturbance for 10 days. 
Neurological examination did not show any focal or lateralizing deficit. 
However, a fundus examination showed severe bilateral papilledema. A 
contrast-enhanced brain MRI did not reveal a space-occupying mass lesion. MRV 
excluded venous occlusion. A lumbar puncture demonstrated a high opening 
pressure of 75 cmH2O with a normal cell count and protein and glucose levels. 
The patient was diagnosed with idiopathic intracranial hypertension. After 8 
weeks of treatment with diazomid and topiramate, the patient improved 
clinically, and her papilledema regressed.
CLINICAL DISCUSSION: The occurrence of IIH is very rare among postpartum 
females. To our knowledge, very few cases of postpartum IIH have been reported 
in the medical literature. Although rare, patients with postpartum headache with 
visual disturbances should have a fundoscopic examination. The patient was 
diagnosed and managed in time, which led to significant clinical improvement and 
salvage of her vision.
CONCLUSION: As described in this case, idiopathic intracranial hypertension can 
cause severe headaches with and without visual disturbance during the postpartum 
period (despite being rare in this period), so it should be considered in the 
differential diagnosis.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000002575
PMCID: PMC11543231
PMID: 39525793

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of 
interest.Sponsorships or competing interests that may be relevant to content are 
disclosed at the end of this articles.