---
reference_id: "PMID:17568940"
title: "Clinical spectrum of uncomplicated malaria in semi-immune Amazonians: beyond the \" symptomatic \" vs \" asymptomatic \" dichotomy."
authors:
- da Silva-Nunes M
- Ferreira MU
journal: Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1590/s0074-02762007005000051
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical spectrum of uncomplicated malaria in semi-immune Amazonians: beyond the " symptomatic " vs " asymptomatic " dichotomy.
**Authors:** da Silva-Nunes M, Ferreira MU
**Journal:** Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1590/s0074-02762007005000051](https://doi.org/10.1590/s0074-02762007005000051)

## Content

1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2007 Jun;102(3):341-7. doi: 
10.1590/s0074-02762007005000051.

Clinical spectrum of uncomplicated malaria in semi-immune Amazonians: beyond the 
" symptomatic " vs " asymptomatic " dichotomy.

da Silva-Nunes M(1), Ferreira MU.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade 
de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brasil. msnunes1@yahoo.com.br

We analyzed prospectively 326 laboratory-confirmed, uncomplicated malarial 
infections (46.3% due to Plasmodium vivax, 35.3% due to P. falciparum, and 18.4% 
mixed-species infections) diagnosed in 162 rural Amazonians aged 5-73 years. 
Thirteen symptoms (fever, chills, sweating, headache, myalgia, arthralgia, 
abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, cough, dyspnea, and diarrhea) were 
scored using a structured questionnaire. Headache (59.8%), fever (57.1%), and 
myalgia (48.4%) were the most frequent symptoms. Ninety-six (29.4%) episodes, 
all of them diagnosed during cross-sectional surveys of the whole study 
population (96.9% by molecular technique only), were asymptomatic. Of 93 
symptom-less infections left untreated, only 10 became symptomatic over the next 
two months following diagnosis. Fever was perceived as " intense " in 52.6% of 
230 symptomatic malaria episodes, with no fever reported in 19.1% episodes 
although other symptoms were present. We found significant differences in the 
prevalence and perceived intensity of fever and other clinical symptoms in 
relation to parasite load at the time of diagnosis and patient's age, cumulative 
exposure to malaria, recent malaria morbidity, and species of malaria parasite. 
These factors are all likely to affect the effectiveness of malaria control 
strategies based on active or passive detection of febrile subjects in 
semi-immune populations.

DOI: 10.1590/s0074-02762007005000051
PMID: 17568940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]