---
reference_id: "PMID:29072892"
title: Disorders of GNAS Inactivation.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Haldeman-Englert CR
- Hurst ACE
- Levine MA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disorders of GNAS Inactivation.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Haldeman-Englert CR, Hurst ACE, Levine MA

## Content

1. Disorders of GNAS Inactivation.

Haldeman-Englert CR(1), Hurst ACE(2), Levine MA(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2017 Oct 26.

Author information:
(1)Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, North Carolina
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia;, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Disorders of GNAS inactivation include the phenotypes
pseudohypoparathyroidism Ia, Ib, and Ic (PHP-Ia, -Ib, -Ic),
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP), progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH),
and osteoma cutis (OC). PHP-Ia and PHP-Ic are characterized by: End-organ
resistance to endocrine hormones including parathyroid hormone (PTH),
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), gonadotropins (LH and FSH), growth
hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), and CNS neurotransmitters (leading to obesity
and variable degrees of intellectual disability and developmental delay); and
The Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) phenotype (short stature, round
facies, and subcutaneous ossifications) and brachydactyly type E (shortening
mainly of the 4th and/or 5th metacarpals and metatarsals and distal phalanx of
the thumb). Although PHP-Ib is characterized principally by PTH resistance, some
individuals also have partial TSH resistance and mild features of AHO (e.g.,
brachydactyly). PPHP, a more limited form of PHP-Ia, is characterized by various
manifestations of the AHO phenotype without the hormone resistance or obesity.
POH and OC are even more restricted variants of PPHP: POH consists of dermal
ossification beginning in infancy, followed by increasing and extensive bone
formation in deep muscle and fascia. OC consists of extra-skeletal ossification
that is limited to the dermis and subcutaneous tissues.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a disorder of GNAS inactivation is
established in a proband with all or some of the characteristic clinical and
endocrine findings and evidence on molecular genetic testing of a genetic or
epigenetic alteration resulting in lack of expression/function of the GNAS
complex locus. PHP-Ia,.-Ib, and -Ic are associated with reduced or absent
expression/function of the protein Gsα (encoded by the maternal GNAS complex
locus) due to one of the following: An inactivating GNAS pathogenic variant. A
genetic alteration in the imprinting regulatory elements in the GNAS complex
locus or the nearby gene, STX16, that prevents proper maternal imprint of the
GNAS complex locus. Isolated epimutations. Paternal 20q disomy. PPHP and POH/OC
phenotypes are associated with lack of expression/function of Gsα encoded by the
paternal GNAS allele due to an inactivating GNAS pathogenic variant; the POH/OC
phenotypes are also associated with lack of expression/function of Gsα (encoded
by the maternal GNAS allele) as a result of an inactivating GNAS pathogenic
variant.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Deficiencies of parathyroid hormone,
thyroid hormone, and gonadotropins due to hormone resistance are treated in a
standard manner. Growth hormone replacement therapy should be considered if
screening for growth hormone deficiency with appropriate provocative testing is
abnormal. Subcutaneous ossifications that are superficial and well circumscribed
may be surgically removed when they are large or cause local irritation,
although they may recur. Obesity tends to be the most difficult manifestation to
treat as individuals with PHP-Ia and PHP-Ic have decreased resting energy
expenditure and hyperphagia; thus, the usual recommendation of reduced caloric
intake and increased physical activity may be less successful than in persons
with obesity from other causes. Surveillance: Routine monitoring of: Endocrine
function: measurement of serum concentration of PTH, calcium and phosphate, TSH
and free T4, and urinary calcium excretion; Growth velocity and growth hormone
status (serum IGF1 and/or stimulated growth hormone testing); New and/or
enlarging ectopic ossifications; Development of and/or progression of cataracts;
and Psychoeducational needs regarding school assistance / educational support
and developmental therapies (e.g., physical, occupational, and speech therapy).
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Limit dietary intake of phosphorus (dairy
products and meats) in persons with persistently elevated serum levels of
phosphate. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to evaluate
apparently asymptomatic first-degree relatives of an affected individual in
order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt
initiation of treatment. Pregnancy management: For women with a disorder of GNAS
inactivation that affects the maternal allele: Monitoring of serum concentration
of calcium and thyroid studies (TSH, free T4) throughout pregnancy, labor, and
the postpartum period and supplementation of calcium, vitamin D, and thyroid
hormone as needed.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Disorders of GNAS inactivation are inherited in an autosomal
dominant manner with the specific phenotype determined by the parental origin of
the defective allele. Of individuals with a disorder of GNAS inactivation,
approximately 38% have an affected parent and 38% have a de novo GNAS pathogenic
variant; in the remaining approximately 25% the cause is unknown. Each child of
an individual with a disorder of GNAS inactivation has a 50% chance of
inheriting the parent's genetic alteration (except for simplex cases with PHP-1b
for whom the mode of inheritance is not well established). If the maternal GNAS
complex locus is affected, her offspring are at risk for PHP-Ia, PHP-Ib (when
associated with deletions at the imprinting regulatory elements), or PHP-Ic; if
the paternal allele has an inactivating GNAS pathogenic variant, his offspring
are at risk for PPHP or POH/OC. If the genetic alteration in the GNAS complex
locus or the GNAS pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family
member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and preimplantation
genetic testing are technically possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 29072892
