---
reference_id: "PMID:20051941"
title: "High cancer risk in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: a systematic review and surveillance recommendations."
authors:
- van Lier MG
- Wagner A
- Mathus-Vliegen EM
- Kuipers EJ
- Steyerberg EW
- van Leerdam ME
journal: Am J Gastroenterol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.725
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Breast Neoplasms/diagnosis
- Child
- Digestive System Neoplasms/diagnosis
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasms/diagnosis
- "Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- Population Surveillance
- Risk Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High cancer risk in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: a systematic review and surveillance recommendations.
**Authors:** van Lier MG, Wagner A, Mathus-Vliegen EM, Kuipers EJ, Steyerberg EW, van Leerdam ME
**Journal:** Am J Gastroenterol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ajg.2009.725](https://doi.org/10.1038/ajg.2009.725)

## Content

1. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Jun;105(6):1258-64; author reply 1265. doi:
10.1038/ajg.2009.725. Epub 2010 Jan 5.

High cancer risk in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: a systematic review and surveillance
recommendations.

van Lier MG(1), Wagner A, Mathus-Vliegen EM, Kuipers EJ, Steyerberg EW, van
Leerdam ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus University Medical
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.g.f.vanlier@erasmusmc.nl

OBJECTIVES: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominant inherited
disorder associated with increased cancer risk. Surveillance and patient
management are, however, hampered by a wide range in cancer risk estimates. We
therefore performed a systematic review to assess cancer risks in PJS patients
and used these data to develop a surveillance recommendation.
METHODS: A systematic PubMed search was performed up to February 2009, and all
original articles dealing with PJS patients with confirmed cancer diagnoses were
included. Data involving cancer frequencies, mean ages at cancer diagnosis,
relative risks (RRs), and cumulative risks were collected.
RESULTS: Twenty-one original articles, 20 cohort studies, and one meta-analysis
fulfilled the inclusion criteria. The cohort studies showed some overlap in the
patient population and included a total of 1,644 patients; 349 of them developed
384 malignancies at an average age of 42 years. The most common malignancy was
colorectal cancer, followed by breast, small bowel, gastric, and pancreatic
cancers. The reported lifetime risk for any cancer varied between 37 and 93%,
with RRs ranging from 9.9 to 18 in comparison with the general population.
Age-related cumulative risks were given for any cancer and gastrointestinal,
gynecological, colorectal, pancreatic, and lung cancers.
CONCLUSIONS: PJS patients are markedly at risk for several malignancies, in
particular gastrointestinal cancers and breast cancer. On the basis of these
elevated risks, a surveillance recommendation is developed to detect
malignancies in an early phase and to remove polyps that may be premalignant and
may cause complications, so as to improve the outcome.

DOI: 10.1038/ajg.2009.725
PMID: 20051941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
