---
reference_id: "PMID:10594734"
title: Striate palmoplantar keratoderma resulting from desmoplakin haploinsufficiency.
authors:
- Whittock NV
- Ashton GH
- Dopping-Hepenstal PJ
- Gratian MJ
- Keane FM
- Eady RA
- McGrath JA
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.1999.00783.x
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics
- "DNA, Complementary/chemistry"
- Desmoplakins
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/etiology, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- RNA Splicing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Striate palmoplantar keratoderma resulting from desmoplakin haploinsufficiency.
**Authors:** Whittock NV, Ashton GH, Dopping-Hepenstal PJ, Gratian MJ, Keane FM, Eady RA, McGrath JA
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1523-1747.1999.00783.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-1747.1999.00783.x)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 1999 Dec;113(6):940-6. doi:
10.1046/j.1523-1747.1999.00783.x.

Striate palmoplantar keratoderma resulting from desmoplakin haploinsufficiency.

Whittock NV(1), Ashton GH, Dopping-Hepenstal PJ, Gratian MJ, Keane FM, Eady RA,
McGrath JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Pathology, St John's Institute of
Dermatology, The Guy's, King's College, and St Thomas' Hospitals' Medical
School, St Thomas' Hospital, London, UK. neil.2.whittock

Recently, the first example of a human mutation in the gene encoding the
desmosomal plaque protein, desmoplakin, has been described in a patient with
autosomal dominant striate palmoplantar kerato-derma. We now report a further
case of a desmoplakin mutation in a proband with striate palmoplantar
keratoderma that also results in a null allele and haploinsufficiency. The
mutation was a heterozygous G > A transition at the donor + 1 site of intron 7
of the desmoplakin gene (939 + 1 G > A; Genbank M77830). The aberrant splicing
leads to retention of the entire intron 7, which contains a premature
termination codon within the N-terminal domain of the peptide. Because the
mutant null allele could not be identified on cDNA sequencing, we determined by
polymerase chain reaction the exon-intron organization of the desmoplakin gene
to facilitate analysis of genomic DNA. The gene spans approximately 45 kb of
chromosome 6 and comprises 24 exons ranging in size from 51 bp to 3922 bp. We
have also characterized fully the 3'UTR of the desmoplakin cDNA. This study
demonstrates the relevance of haploinsufficiency for desmoplakin in the
pathogenesis of this genodermatosis. Assessment of family members bearing the
mutant allele also emphasizes the significance of an individual's age and
exposure to skin trauma in manifesting full phenotypic expression of the
disorder.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.1999.00783.x
PMID: 10594734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
