---
reference_id: "PMID:25319335"
title: "Beyond macrophages: the diversity of mononuclear cells in tuberculosis."
authors:
- Srivastava S
- Ernst JD
- Desvignes L
journal: Immunol Rev
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/imr.12217
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beyond macrophages: the diversity of mononuclear cells in tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Srivastava S, Ernst JD, Desvignes L
**Journal:** Immunol Rev (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/imr.12217](https://doi.org/10.1111/imr.12217)

## Content

1. Immunol Rev. 2014 Nov;262(1):179-92. doi: 10.1111/imr.12217.

Beyond macrophages: the diversity of mononuclear cells in tuberculosis.

Srivastava S(1), Ernst JD, Desvignes L.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine, Microbiology, and Pathology, New York University 
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the bacterium that causes tuberculosis (TB), is an 
intracellular pathogen of mononuclear phagocytes. Although M. tuberculosis has 
traditionally been thought to survive and replicate in macrophages, recent work 
in our laboratory and others has revealed that M. tuberculosis infects multiple 
subsets of mononuclear phagocytes in vivo and in vitro. In experimental animals, 
M. tuberculosis infects no fewer than five distinct cell subsets in the lungs, 
including resident alveolar macrophages and 4 types of cells that recruited to 
the lungs in response to inflammatory signals: neutrophils, monocytes, 
interstitial macrophages, and dendritic cells. A characteristic of the adaptive 
immune response in TB is that it is delayed for several weeks following 
infection, and we have determined that this delay is due to prolonged residence 
of the bacteria in lung phagocytes prior to acquisition of the bacteria by 
dendritic cells. Among the mechanisms used by M. tuberculosis to delay 
acquisition by dendritic cells is to inhibit apoptosis of alveolar macrophages 
and neutrophils, which sequester the bacteria and prevent their acquisition by 
dendritic cells in the early stages of infection. We hypothesize that each 
infected cell subset makes a distinct contribution to the overall biology of 
M. tuberculosis and allows the bacteria to evade elimination by T-cell responses 
and to avoid rapid killing by antimycobacterial drugs.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imr.12217
PMCID: PMC4203409
PMID: 25319335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.