---
reference_id: "PMID:25791950"
title: "Adverse cardiac events in children with Williams syndrome undergoing cardiovascular surgery: An analysis of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database."
authors:
- Hornik CP
- Collins RT 2nd
- Jaquiss RD
- Jacobs JP
- Jacobs ML
- Pasquali SK
- Wallace AS
- Hill KD
journal: J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.02.016
keywords:
- Age Factors
- "Cardiac Surgical Procedures/adverse effects, mortality"
- Chi-Square Distribution
- Child Mortality
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Databases, Factual"
- Female
- Heart Arrest/etiology
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, surgery"
- Hospital Mortality
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- Infant Mortality
- Logistic Models
- Male
- Multivariate Analysis
- North America/epidemiology
- Odds Ratio
- "Postoperative Complications/diagnosis, etiology, mortality, therapy"
- Registries
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Societies, Medical"
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- "Williams Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adverse cardiac events in children with Williams syndrome undergoing cardiovascular surgery: An analysis of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database.
**Authors:** Hornik CP, Collins RT 2nd, Jaquiss RD, Jacobs JP, Jacobs ML, Pasquali SK, Wallace AS, Hill KD
**Journal:** J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.02.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.02.016)

## Content

1. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015 Jun;149(6):1516-22.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.02.016. Epub 2015 Feb 14.

Adverse cardiac events in children with Williams syndrome undergoing 
cardiovascular surgery: An analysis of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons 
Congenital Heart Surgery Database.

Hornik CP(1), Collins RT 2nd(2), Jaquiss RD(3), Jacobs JP(4), Jacobs ML(5), 
Pasquali SK(6), Wallace AS(3), Hill KD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University, Durham, NC; Duke Clinical Research 
Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC. Electronic address: 
christoph.hornik@dm.duke.edu.
(2)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences 
and Arkansas Children's Hospital, Little Rock, Ark.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University, Durham, NC; Duke Clinical Research 
Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC.
(4)Andrews/Daicoff Cardiovascular Program, Johns Hopkins Children's Heart 
Surgery, St Petersburg, Fla; All Children's Hospital, Tampa, Fla; Florida 
Hospital for Children, Orlando, Fla.
(5)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Md.
(6)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, University of Michigan C.S. Mott Children's 
Hospital, Ann Arbor, Mich.

Comment in
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015 Jun;149(6):1522-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.02.053.
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015 Nov;150(5):1380-1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.08.006.
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015 Nov;150(5):1380. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.07.031.

OBJECTIVE: Patients with Williams syndrome (WS) undergoing cardiac surgery are 
at risk for major adverse cardiac events (MACE). Prevalence and risk factors for 
such events have not been well described. We sought to define frequency and risk 
of MACE in patients with WS using a multicenter clinical registry.
METHODS: We identified cardiac operations performed in patients with WS using 
the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database (2000-2012). 
Operations were divided into 4 groups: isolated supravalvular aortic stenosis, 
complex left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT), isolated right ventricular 
outflow tract (RVOT), and combined LVOT/RVOT procedures. The proportion of 
patients with MACE (in-hospital mortality, cardiac arrest, or postoperative 
mechanical circulatory support) was described and the association with 
preoperative factors was examined.
RESULTS: Of 447 index operations (87 centers), median (interquartile range) age 
and weight at surgery were 2.4 years (0.6-7.4 years) and 10.6 kg (6.5-21.5 kg), 
respectively. Mortality occurred in 20 patients (5%). MACE occurred in 41 
patients (9%), most commonly after combined LVOT/RVOT (18 out of 87; 21%) and 
complex LVOT (12 out of 131; 9%) procedures, but not after isolated RVOT 
procedures. Odds of MACE decreased with age (odds ratio [OR], 0.99; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], 0.98-0.99), weight (OR, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.93-0.99), but 
increased in the presence of any preoperative risk factor (OR, 2.08; 95% CI, 
1.06-4.00), and in procedures involving coronary artery repair (OR, 5.37; 95% 
CI, 2.05-14.06).
CONCLUSIONS: In this multicenter analysis, MACE occurred in 9% of patients with 
WS undergoing cardiac surgery. Demographic and operative characteristics were 
associated with risk. Further study is needed to elucidate mechanisms of MACE in 
this high-risk population.

Copyright © 2015 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.02.016
PMCID: PMC4464977
PMID: 25791950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors have no potential 
conflicts of interest to report.