---
reference_id: "PMID:14730483"
title: "[Can the behavioural phenotype of fragile X syndrome be attributed to mental retardation and to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder?]."
authors:
- Artigas-Pallarés J
- Brun-Gasca C
journal: Rev Neurol
year: '2004'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/genetics
- Behavior
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Fragile X Syndrome/genetics
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Can the behavioural phenotype of fragile X syndrome be attributed to mental retardation and to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder?].
**Authors:** Artigas-Pallarés J, Brun-Gasca C
**Journal:** Rev Neurol (2004)

## Content

1. Rev Neurol. 2004 Jan 1-15;38(1):7-11.

[Can the behavioural phenotype of fragile X syndrome be attributed to mental
retardation and to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder?].

[Article in Spanish]

Artigas-Pallarés J(1), Brun-Gasca C.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Neuropediatría, Hospital de Sabadell, Corporació Sanitària Parc
Taulí, Sabadell, España. 7280jap@comb.es

INTRODUCTION: Fragile X syndrome (FXS) reveals itself as dysmorphic stigmata,
systemic manifestations, neurological symptoms and cognitive-behavioural
manifestations. Mental retardation (MR) and attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) nearly always appear as examples of this last case, but most
patients also present a series of fairly common behavioural characteristics. The
most characteristic types of conduct seen in FXS include: language problems,
lack of attention, hyperactivity, anxiety, shyness, behavioural problems,
stereotypical hand flapping, gaze aversion, obstinacy and aggressiveness.
AIMS: The purpose of this work is to determine which behavioural aspects of the
syndrome are linked to the genetic specificity and are not, therefore,
determined by MR and ADHD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Three groups of patients were compared: 30 children
diagnosed as suffering from FXS, 30 children with MR caused by diverse
aetiologies and 323 children diagnosed as suffering from ADHD.
RESULTS: It was found that there were no significant differences between the IQ
and the age of the FXS and MR groups. To determine the behavioural
characteristics of the three groups the parents of the patients answered
Achenbach's CBCL/4-18 survey.
CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained show that certain types of conduct that are
very typical of FXS are represented significantly more frequently in the FXS
group than in the groups of patients with MR and ADHD. This behaviour includes:
timidity, attachment to adults, shyness, repetition of certain actions over and
over again, pronunciation and speech problems, fear of animals, situations or
places, and concern for tidiness and cleanliness. These findings lend support to
the idea that the behavioural phenotype of FXS is linked to the genetic disorder
and is not, therefore, a consequence of MR or ADHD.

PMID: 14730483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
