---
reference_id: "PMID:33720848"
title: The Pathology of Lymphocytes, Histiocytes, and Immune Mechanisms in Mycobacterium tuberculosis Granulomas.
authors:
- Wadee R
- Wadee AA
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.20-1372
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Pathology of Lymphocytes, Histiocytes, and Immune Mechanisms in Mycobacterium tuberculosis Granulomas.
**Authors:** Wadee R, Wadee AA
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.20-1372](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.20-1372)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Mar 15;104(5):1796-1802. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.20-1372.

The Pathology of Lymphocytes, Histiocytes, and Immune Mechanisms in 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Granulomas.

Wadee R(1), Wadee AA(2).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Anatomical Pathology, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, and National Health Laboratory 
Service (NHLS), Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)2South African Technology Network, Durban, South Africa.

Granuloma formation is the pathologic hallmark of tuberculosis (TB). Few studies 
have detailed the exact production of cytokines in human granulomatous 
inflammation and little is known about accessory molecule expressions in 
tuberculous granulomas. We aimed to identify some of the components of the 
immune response in granulomas in HIV-positive and -negative lymph nodes. We 
investigated the immunohistochemical profiles of CD4+, CD8+, CD68+, Th-17, 
Forkhead box P3 (FOXP3) cells, accessory molecule expression (human leukocyte 
antigen [HLA] classes I and II), and selected cytokines (interleukins 2, 4, and 
6 and interferon-γ) of various cells, in granulomas within lymph nodes from 10 
HIV-negative (-) and 10 HIV-positive (+) cases. CD4+ lymphocyte numbers were 
retained in HIV- granulomas, whereas CD4+:CD8 + cell were reversed in HIV+ TB 
granulomas. CD68 stained all histiocytes. Granulomas from the HIV+ group 
demonstrated a significant increase in FOXP3 cells. Interleukin-2 cytoplasmic 
expression was similar in both groups. Interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) expression was 
moderately increased, IL-6 was statistically increased and IL-4 expression was 
marginally lower in cells from HIV- than HIV+ TB granulomas. Greater numbers of 
cells expressed IFN-γ and IL-6 than IL-2 and IL-4 in HIV- TB granulomas. This 
study highlights the varied cytokine production in HIV-positive and -negative TB 
granulomas and indicates the need to identify localized tissue factors that play 
a role in mounting an adequate immune response required to halt infection. 
Although TB mono-infection causes variation in cell marker expression and 
cytokines in granulomas, alterations in TB and HIV coinfection are greater, 
pointing toward evolution of microorganism synergism.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.20-1372
PMCID: PMC8103466
PMID: 33720848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The experimental work of this 
manuscript has been submitted and awarded by the University of the Witwatersrand 
for the degree of Master of Medicine, to R. Wadee.