---
reference_id: "PMID:12511725"
title: Comparison of exhaled and nasal nitric oxide and exhaled carbon monoxide levels in bronchiectatic patients with and without primary ciliary dyskinesia.
authors:
- Horváth I
- Loukides S
- Wodehouse T
- Csiszér E
- Cole PJ
- Kharitonov SA
- Barnes PJ
journal: Thorax
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1136/thorax.58.1.68
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of exhaled and nasal nitric oxide and exhaled carbon monoxide levels in bronchiectatic patients with and without primary ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Horváth I, Loukides S, Wodehouse T, Csiszér E, Cole PJ, Kharitonov SA, Barnes PJ
**Journal:** Thorax (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1136/thorax.58.1.68](https://doi.org/10.1136/thorax.58.1.68)

## Content

1. Thorax. 2003 Jan;58(1):68-72. doi: 10.1136/thorax.58.1.68.

Comparison of exhaled and nasal nitric oxide and exhaled carbon monoxide levels 
in bronchiectatic patients with and without primary ciliary dyskinesia.

Horváth I(1), Loukides S, Wodehouse T, Csiszér E, Cole PJ, Kharitonov SA, Barnes 
PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute at 
Imperial College, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Thorax. 2004 Jun;59(6):543.

BACKGROUND: Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is associated with chronic airway 
inflammation resulting in bronchiectasis.
METHODS: The levels of exhaled nitric oxide (eNO), carbon monoxide (eCO) and 
nasal NO (nNO) from bronchiectatic patients with PCD (n=14) were compared with 
those from patients with non-PCD bronchiectasis without (n=31) and with cystic 
fibrosis (CF) (n=20) and from normal subjects (n=37) to assess the clinical 
usefulness of these measurements in discriminating between PCD and other causes 
of bronchiectasis.
RESULTS: Exhaled NO levels were lower in patients with PCD than in patients with 
non-PCD non-CF bronchiectasis or healthy subjects (median (range) 2.1 (1.3-3.5) 
ppb v 8.7 (4.5-26.0) ppb, p<0.001; 6.7 (2.6-11.9) ppb, p<0.001, respectively) 
but not lower than bronchiectatic patients with CF (3.0 (1.5-7.5) ppb, p>0.05). 
Nasal levels of nNO were significantly lower in PCD patients than in any other 
subjects (PCD: 54.5 (5.0-269) ppb, non-PCD bronchiectasis without CF: 680 
(310-1000) ppb, non-PCD bronchiectasis with CF: 343 (30-997) ppb, control: 663 
(322-1343) ppb). In contrast, eCO levels were higher in all patient groups than 
in control subjects (PCD: 4.5 (3.0-24.0) ppm, p<0.01, other bronchiectasis 
without CF: 5.0 (3.0-15.0) ppm, p<0.001; CF: 5.3 (2.0-23.0) ppm, p<0.001 v 3.0 
(0.5-5.0) ppm). Low values in both eNO and nNO readings (<2.4 ppb and <187 ppb, 
respectively) identified PCD patients from other bronchiectatic patients with a 
specificity of 98% and a positive predictive value of 92%.
CONCLUSION: The simultaneous measurement of eNO and nNO is a useful screening 
tool for PCD.

DOI: 10.1136/thorax.58.1.68
PMCID: PMC1746449
PMID: 12511725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]