---
reference_id: "PMID:38576368"
title: "Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction, a New Motility Disorder: Single Center Case Series and Treatment Results."
authors:
- Arnaert S
- Arts J
- Raymenants K
- Baert F
- Delsupehe K
journal: J Neurogastroenterol Motil
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5056/jnm23099
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction, a New Motility Disorder: Single Center Case Series and Treatment Results.
**Authors:** Arnaert S, Arts J, Raymenants K, Baert F, Delsupehe K
**Journal:** J Neurogastroenterol Motil (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5056/jnm23099](https://doi.org/10.5056/jnm23099)

## Content

1. J Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2024 Apr 30;30(2):177-183. doi: 10.5056/jnm23099.

Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction, a New Motility Disorder: Single Center 
Case Series and Treatment Results.

Arnaert S(1), Arts J(2)(3), Raymenants K(3), Baert F(1), Delsupehe K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, AZ Delta, Roeselare, Belgium.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, AZ Sint-Lucas, Brugge, Belgium.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, AZ Delta, Roeselare, 
Belgium.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Retrograde cricopharyngeus dysfunction (R-CPD) is a new 
clinical entity characterized by inability to belch and associated symptoms of 
loud gurgling noises, chest and/or abdominal pressure, abdominal bloating, and 
excessive flatulence. R-CPD can be treated with botulinum toxin (BT) injection 
in the upper esophageal sphincter. We hereby report patient demographics, 
symptomatology, and treatment results of a series of consecutive patients who 
presented at our center.
METHODS: Data on 50 consecutive patients presenting with R-CPD were 
prospectively collected using a standardized questionnaire prior to, 1 month 
after treatment and at the end of follow-up. All patients were diagnosed using a 
set of clinical symptoms.
RESULTS: Fifty patients (26 females) were included, median age was 27.5 years 
(range, 17-65). Median body mass index was 22.7 kg/m2 (range, 16.6-37.5). 
Inability to belch was present in all patients, > 90% of patients experienced 
gurgling noises and abdominal/chest discomfort as result of their condition. One 
month after injection of BT, 40.8% of patients experienced complete relief of 
symptoms, 24.5% good symptom improvement, 24.5% some symptom improvement and 
10.2% no improvement. At median follow-up of 29 months (range, 3-50) 
post-treatment, 51.3% (n = 20/39) of patients reported persistent complete 
relief of symptoms, 12.8% good improvement of symptoms (n = 5/39), in 15.4% some 
improvement (6/39) and 20.5% loss of or no response (n = 8/39). Only minor and 
transient side effects were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Our case series of 50 patients with R-CPD shows very good 
short-term and good long-term improvement of symptoms after injection of BT. 
These results are in line with previous studies.

DOI: 10.5056/jnm23099
PMCID: PMC10999848
PMID: 38576368

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None.