---
reference_id: "PMID:20301323"
title: Angelman Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Dagli AI
- Mathews J
- Williams CA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angelman Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Dagli AI, Mathews J, Williams CA

## Content

1. Angelman Syndrome.

Dagli AI(1), Mathews J(2), Williams CA(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1998 Sep 15 [updated 2025 May 1].

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics, Orlando Health Arnold Palmer Hospital, Orlando, Florida
(2)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
(3)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Angelman syndrome (AS) is characterized by severe 
developmental delay or intellectual disability, severe speech impairment, gait 
ataxia and/or tremulousness of the limbs, and unique behavior with an apparent 
happy demeanor that includes frequent laughing, smiling, and excitability. 
Microcephaly and seizures are also common. Developmental delays are first noted 
at around age six months; however, the unique clinical features of AS do not 
become manifest until after age one year.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of AS is established in a proband who meets the 
consensus clinical diagnostic criteria and/or who has findings on molecular 
genetic testing that suggest deficient expression or function of the maternally 
inherited UBE3A allele. Analysis of parent-specific DNA methylation imprints in 
the 15q11.2-q13 chromosome region detects approximately 80% of individuals with 
AS, including those with a deletion, uniparental disomy, or an imprinting 
defect; fewer than 1% of individuals have a cytogenetically visible chromosome 
rearrangement (e.g., translocation or inversion). UBE3A sequence analysis 
detects pathogenic variants in an additional approximately 11% of individuals. 
Therefore, molecular genetic testing (methylation analysis and UBE3A sequence 
analysis) identifies alterations in approximately 90% of individuals. The 
remaining 10% of individuals with classic phenotypic features of AS have the 
disorder as a result of an as-yet unidentified genetic mechanism.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Anti-seizure medication for seizures. 
Accommodation for hypermotoric behaviors and disruptive nighttime wakefulness. 
Behavior modification can be effective for disruptive or self-injurious 
behaviors. Physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy with an 
emphasis on nonverbal methods of communication, including augmentative 
communication aids (e.g., picture cards, communication boards) and signing. 
Individualization and flexibility in school settings. Routine management of 
gastroesophageal reflux, feeding difficulties, constipation, and strabismus. 
Thoraco-lumbar jackets and/or surgical intervention for scoliosis. Bracing or 
surgery as needed for subluxed or pronated ankles or tight Achilles tendons. 
Surveillance: Monitor for new seizures and/or changes in seizures, developmental 
progress, behavior issues, mobility, motor skills, gastroesophageal reflux, 
constipation, and feeding issues at each visit. Evaluation of older children for 
obesity associated with an excessive appetite. Annual clinical examination for 
scoliosis; ophthalmology examination in the first year if strabismus is present; 
ophthalmology exam at age two years with follow up per ophthalmologist; clinical 
examination for scoliosis annually. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Overtreatment 
with sedating medications in order to reduce hyperexcitable and hypermotoric 
behavior. Overtreatment with anti-seizure medication when movement abnormalities 
are mistaken for seizures and/or when EEG abnormalities persist even as seizures 
are controlled.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Individuals with AS typically represent simplex cases (i.e., 
a single affected family member) and have the disorder as the result of a de 
novo genetic alteration associated with a very low recurrence risk. Less 
commonly, an individual with AS has the disorder as the result of a genetic 
alteration associated with an imprinting pattern of autosomal dominant 
inheritance or variable recurrence risk. Reliable recurrence risk assessment 
therefore requires identification of the underlying genetic mechanism in the 
proband and confirmation of the genetic status of the parents. Prenatal 
detection of all the known molecular genetic alterations in the 15q11.2-q13 
region that give rise to AS is possible and is an option for families once the 
underlying genetic mechanism in the proband has been identified.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301323