---
reference_id: "PMID:34706719"
title: Phenotypic and molecular spectra of patients with switch/sucrose nonfermenting complex-related intellectual disability disorders in Korea.
authors:
- Lee Y
- Choi Y
- Seo GH
- Kim GH
- Keum C
- Kim YM
- Do HS
- Choi J
- Choi IH
- Yoo HW
- Lee BH
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-021-01104-9
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Face/abnormalities
- Facies
- Female
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Genotype
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- Hypotrichosis/genetics
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Micrognathism/genetics
- Neck/abnormalities
- Phenotype
- Republic of Korea
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic and molecular spectra of patients with switch/sucrose nonfermenting complex-related intellectual disability disorders in Korea.
**Authors:** Lee Y, Choi Y, Seo GH, Kim GH, Keum C, Kim YM, Do HS, Choi J, Choi IH, Yoo HW, Lee BH
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-021-01104-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-021-01104-9)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2021 Oct 27;14(1):254. doi: 10.1186/s12920-021-01104-9.

Phenotypic and molecular spectra of patients with switch/sucrose nonfermenting 
complex-related intellectual disability disorders in Korea.

Lee Y(1), Choi Y(1), Seo GH(2), Kim GH(3), Keum C(2), Kim YM(4), Do HS(5), Choi 
J(5), Choi IH(6), Yoo HW(1)(3), Lee BH(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University 
of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88, Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 05505, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)3Billion Inc., Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Medical Genetics Center, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University 
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Chungnam National University Sejong Hospital, 
College of Medicine, Chungnam National University, Sejong, Republic of Korea.
(5)Genome Research Center for Birth Defects and Genetic Diseases, Asan Institute 
for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Genetic Counseling, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University 
of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88, Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 05505, 
Republic of Korea. bhlee@amc.seoul.kr.
(8)Medical Genetics Center, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University 
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. bhlee@amc.seoul.kr.

BACKGROUND: The switch/sucrose nonfermenting (SWI/SNF) complex is an adenosine 
triphosphate-dependent chromatin-remodeling complex associated with the 
regulation of DNA accessibility. Germline mutations in the components of the 
SWI/SNF complex are related to human developmental disorders, including the 
Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS), Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS), and 
nonsyndromic intellectual disability. These disorders are collectively referred 
to as SWI/SNF complex-related intellectual disability disorders (SSRIDDs).
METHODS: Whole-exome sequencing was performed in 564 Korean patients with 
neurodevelopmental disorders. Twelve patients with SSRIDDs (2.1%) were 
identified and their medical records were retrospectively analyzed.
RESULTS: ARID1B, found in eight patients, was the most frequently altered gene. 
Four patients harbored pathogenic variants in SMARCA4, SMARCB1, ARID2, and 
SMARCA2. Ten patients were diagnosed with CSS, and one patient without a typical 
phenotype was diagnosed with ARID1B-related nonsyndromic intellectual 
disability. Another patient harboring the SMARCA2 pathogenic variant was 
diagnosed with NCBRS. All pathogenic variants in ARID1B were truncating, whereas 
variants in SMARCA2, SMARCB1, and SMARCA4 were nontruncating (missense). 
Frequently observed phenotypes were thick eyebrows (10/12), hypertrichosis 
(8/12), coarse face (8/12), thick lips (8/12), and long eyelashes (8/12). 
Developmental delay was observed in all patients, and profound speech delay was 
also characteristic. Agenesis or hypoplasia of the corpus callosum was observed 
in half of the patients (6/12).
CONCLUSIONS: SSRIDDs have a broad disease spectrum, including NCBRS, CSS, and 
ARID1B-related nonsyndromic intellectual disability. Thus, SSRIDDs should be 
considered as a small but important cause of human developmental disorders.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-021-01104-9
PMCID: PMC8555129
PMID: 34706719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.