---
reference_id: "PMID:33368379"
title: "Narrative review of glycogen storage disorder type III with a focus on neuromuscular, cardiac and therapeutic aspects."
authors:
- Berling É
- Laforêt P
- Wahbi K
- Labrune P
- Petit F
- Ronzitti G
- "O'Brien A"
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12355
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Child
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type III/metabolism, physiopathology, therapy"
- Hepatomegaly/metabolism
- Humans
- Hypoglycemia/metabolism
- Liver/metabolism
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Muscular Diseases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Narrative review of glycogen storage disorder type III with a focus on neuromuscular, cardiac and therapeutic aspects.
**Authors:** Berling É, Laforêt P, Wahbi K, Labrune P, Petit F, Ronzitti G, O'Brien A
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12355](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12355)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2021 May;44(3):521-533. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12355. Epub
2021  Jan 3.

Narrative review of glycogen storage disorder type III with a focus on
neuromuscular, cardiac and therapeutic aspects.

Berling É(1)(2), Laforêt P(3)(4), Wahbi K(5)(6)(7), Labrune P(8)(9), Petit
F(10), Ronzitti G(1)(2), O'Brien A(1)(11).

Author information:
(1)Généthon, Evry, France.
(2)Université Paris-Saclay, Univ Evry, INSERM, Généthon, Integrare Research Unit
UMR_S951, Evry, France.
(3)APHP, Department of Neurology, Raymond Poincaré Hospital, Centre de Référence
de Pathologie Neuromusculaire Nord-Est-Ile-de-France, Garches, France.
(4)INSERM U 1179, Université Versailles Saint Quentin en Yvelines, Paris-Saclay,
France.
(5)APHP, Cochin Hospital, Cardiology Department, FILNEMUS, Paris-Descartes,
Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Paris, France.
(6)Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(7)INSERM Unit 970, Paris Cardiovascular Research Centre (PARCC), Paris, France.
(8)APHP, Université Paris-Saclay, Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Centre de Référence
Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme Hépatique, Service de Pédiatrie, 92141
Clamart cedex, France.
(9)INSERM U1195, Université Paris-Saclay, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(10)Department of Genetics, APHP, Université Paris Saclay, Hôpital Antoine
Béclère, Clamart, France.
(11)Service de Médecine Génique, Département de Médecine, Centre Hospitalier de
l'Université de Montréal (CHUM), Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

Glycogen storage disorder type III (GSDIII) is a rare inborn error of metabolism
due to loss of glycogen debranching enzyme activity, causing inability to fully
mobilize glycogen stores and its consequent accumulation in various tissues,
notably liver, cardiac and skeletal muscle. In the pediatric population, it
classically presents as hepatomegaly with or without ketotic hypoglycemia and
failure to thrive. In the adult population, it should also be considered in the
differential diagnosis of left ventricular hypertrophy or hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, myopathy, exercise intolerance, as well as liver cirrhosis or
fibrosis with subsequent liver failure. In this review article, we first present
an overview of the biochemical and clinical aspects of GSDIII. We then focus on
the recent findings regarding cardiac and neuromuscular impairment associated
with the disease. We review new insights into the pathophysiology and clinical
picture of this disorder, including symptomatology, imaging and
electrophysiology. Finally, we discuss current and upcoming treatment strategies
such as gene therapy aimed at the replacement of the malfunctioning enzyme to
provide a stable and long-term therapeutic option for this debilitating disease.

© 2020 SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12355
PMID: 33368379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
