---
reference_id: "PMID:21536863"
title: "The Myeloproliferative Neoplasm Symptom Assessment Form (MPN-SAF): international prospective validation and reliability trial in 402 patients."
authors:
- Scherber R
- Dueck AC
- Johansson P
- Barbui T
- Barosi G
- Vannucchi AM
- Passamonti F
- Andreasson B
- Ferarri ML
- Rambaldi A
- Samuelsson J
- Birgegard G
- Tefferi A
- Harrison CN
- Radia D
- Mesa RA
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-328955
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Bone Marrow Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Health Surveys
- Humans
- Internationality
- Italy/epidemiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Myeloproliferative Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Quality of Life
- Records
- Reproducibility of Results
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Sweden/epidemiology
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Myeloproliferative Neoplasm Symptom Assessment Form (MPN-SAF): international prospective validation and reliability trial in 402 patients.
**Authors:** Scherber R, Dueck AC, Johansson P, Barbui T, Barosi G, Vannucchi AM, Passamonti F, Andreasson B, Ferarri ML, Rambaldi A, Samuelsson J, Birgegard G, Tefferi A, Harrison CN, Radia D, Mesa RA
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2011-01-328955](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2011-01-328955)

## Content

1. Blood. 2011 Jul 14;118(2):401-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-328955. Epub 2011
May 2.

The Myeloproliferative Neoplasm Symptom Assessment Form (MPN-SAF): international
prospective validation and reliability trial in 402 patients.

Scherber R(1), Dueck AC, Johansson P, Barbui T, Barosi G, Vannucchi AM,
Passamonti F, Andreasson B, Ferarri ML, Rambaldi A, Samuelsson J, Birgegard G,
Tefferi A, Harrison CN, Radia D, Mesa RA.

Author information:
(1)Rosalind Franklin School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

Symptomatic burden in myeloproliferative neoplasms is present in most patients
and compromises quality of life. We sought to validate a broadly applicable
18-item instrument (Myeloproliferative Neoplasm Symptom Assessment Form
[MPN-SAF], coadministered with the Brief Fatigue Inventory) to assess symptoms
of myelofibrosis, essential thrombocythemia, and polycythemia vera among
prospective cohorts in the United States, Sweden, and Italy. A total of 402
MPN-SAF surveys were administered (English [25%], Italian [46%], and Swedish
[28%]) in 161 patients with essential thrombocythemia, 145 patients with
polycythemia vera, and 96 patients with myelofibrosis. Responses among the 3
administered languages showed great consistency after controlling for MPN
subtype. Strong correlations existed between individual items and key
symptomatic elements represented on both the MPN-SAF and the European
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life
Questionnaire-C30. Enrolling physicians' blinded opinion of patient symptoms (6
symptoms assessed) were highly correlated with corresponding patients'
responses. Serial administration of the English MPN-SAF among 53 patients showed
that most MPN-SAF items are well correlated (r > 0.5, P < .001) and highly
reproducible (intraclass correlation coefficient > 0.7). The MPN-SAF is a
comprehensive and reliable instrument that is available in multiple languages to
evaluate symptoms associated with all types of MPNs in clinical trials globally.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-328955
PMID: 21536863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
