---
reference_id: "PMID:21148255"
title: The development of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome depends on complement C5.
authors:
- de Jorge EG
- Macor P
- Paixão-Cavalcante D
- Rose KL
- Tedesco F
- Cook HT
- Botto M
- Pickering MC
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010050451
keywords:
- Animals
- Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome
- Complement C3/metabolism
- "Complement C5/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Complement C9/metabolism
- "Complement Factor H/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Glomerular Mesangium/metabolism
- Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome/physiopathology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Inbred CBA"
- "Mice, Knockout"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The development of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome depends on complement C5.
**Authors:** de Jorge EG, Macor P, Paixão-Cavalcante D, Rose KL, Tedesco F, Cook HT, Botto M, Pickering MC
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2010050451](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2010050451)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Jan;22(1):137-45. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010050451. Epub
2010  Dec 9.

The development of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome depends on complement C5.

de Jorge EG(1), Macor P, Paixão-Cavalcante D, Rose KL, Tedesco F, Cook HT, Botto
M, Pickering MC.

Author information:
(1)Complement and Inflammation Section, Division of Immunology and Inflammation,
Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane
Road, London W12 ONN, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Jan;22(1):7-9. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010111145.

Gene variants in the alternative pathway of the complement system strongly
associate with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS), presumably by
predisposing to increased complement activation within the kidney. Complement
factor H (CFH) is the major regulator of complement activation through the
alternative pathway. Factor H-deficient mice transgenically expressing a mutant
CFH protein (Cfh(-/-).FHΔ16-20) that functionally mimics the CFH mutations
reported in aHUS patients spontaneously develop thrombotic microangiopathy. To
investigate the role of complement C5 activation in this aHUS model, we
generated C5-deficient Cfh(-/-).FHΔ16-20 mice. Both C5-sufficient and
C5-deficient Cfh(-/-).FHΔ16-20 mice had abnormal C3 deposition within the
kidney, but spontaneous aHUS did not develop in any of the C5-deficient mice.
Furthermore, although Cfh(-/-).FHΔ16-20 animals demonstrated marked
hypersensitivity to experimentally triggered renal injury, animals with
concomitant C5 deficiency did not. These data demonstrate a critical role for C5
activation in both spontaneous aHUS and experimentally triggered renal injury in
animals with defective complement factor H function. This study provides a
rationale to investigate therapeutic inhibition of C5 in human aHUS.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2010050451
PMCID: PMC3014042
PMID: 21148255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
