---
reference_id: "PMID:29232554"
title: Genomic Aberrations that Activate D-type Cyclins Are Associated with Enhanced Sensitivity to the CDK4 and CDK6 Inhibitor Abemaciclib.
authors:
- Gong X
- Litchfield LM
- Webster Y
- Chio LC
- Wong SS
- Stewart TR
- Dowless M
- Dempsey J
- Zeng Y
- Torres R
- Boehnke K
- Mur C
- Marugán C
- Baquero C
- Yu C
- Bray SM
- Wulur IH
- Bi C
- Chu S
- Qian HR
- Iversen PW
- Merzoug FF
- Ye XS
- Reinhard C
- De Dios A
- Du J
- Caldwell CW
- Lallena MJ
- Beckmann RP
- Buchanan SG
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2017.11.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic Aberrations that Activate D-type Cyclins Are Associated with Enhanced Sensitivity to the CDK4 and CDK6 Inhibitor Abemaciclib.
**Authors:** Gong X, Litchfield LM, Webster Y, Chio LC, Wong SS, Stewart TR, Dowless M, Dempsey J, Zeng Y, Torres R, Boehnke K, Mur C, Marugán C, Baquero C, Yu C, Bray SM, Wulur IH, Bi C, Chu S, Qian HR, Iversen PW, Merzoug FF, Ye XS, Reinhard C, De Dios A, Du J, Caldwell CW, Lallena MJ, Beckmann RP, Buchanan SG
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2017.11.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2017.11.006)

## Content

1. Cancer Cell. 2017 Dec 11;32(6):761-776.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2017.11.006.

Genomic Aberrations that Activate D-type Cyclins Are Associated with Enhanced 
Sensitivity to the CDK4 and CDK6 Inhibitor Abemaciclib.

Gong X(1), Litchfield LM(1), Webster Y(1), Chio LC(1), Wong SS(1), Stewart 
TR(1), Dowless M(1), Dempsey J(1), Zeng Y(1), Torres R(2), Boehnke K(2), Mur 
C(2), Marugán C(2), Baquero C(2), Yu C(3), Bray SM(1), Wulur IH(1), Bi C(1), Chu 
S(1), Qian HR(1), Iversen PW(1), Merzoug FF(1), Ye XS(3), Reinhard C(1), De Dios 
A(1), Du J(1), Caldwell CW(1), Lallena MJ(2), Beckmann RP(1), Buchanan SG(4).

Author information:
(1)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN 46285, USA.
(2)Eli Lilly and Company, Alcobendas, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Eli Lilly and Company, Shanghai, China.
(4)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN 46285, USA. Electronic address: 
buchananse@lilly.com.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2017 Dec 11;32(6):721-723. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2017.11.013.

Most cancers preserve functional retinoblastoma (Rb) and may, therefore, respond 
to inhibition of D-cyclin-dependent Rb kinases, CDK4 and CDK6. To date, CDK4/6 
inhibitors have shown promising clinical activity in breast cancer and 
lymphomas, but it is not clear which additional Rb-positive cancers might 
benefit from these agents. No systematic survey to compare relative 
sensitivities across tumor types and define molecular determinants of response 
has been described. We report a subset of cancers highly sensitive to CDK4/6 
inhibition and characterized by various genomic aberrations known to elevate 
D-cyclin levels and describe a recurrent CCND1 3'UTR mutation associated with 
increased expression in endometrial cancer. The results suggest multiple 
additional classes of cancer that may benefit from CDK4/6-inhibiting drugs such 
as abemaciclib.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2017.11.006
PMID: 29232554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]