---
reference_id: "PMID:38278860"
title: Loss of Pax3 causes reduction of melanocytes in the developing mouse cochlea.
authors:
- Udagawa T
- Takahashi E
- Tatsumi N
- Mutai H
- Saijo H
- Kondo Y
- Atkinson PJ
- Matsunaga T
- Yoshikawa M
- Kojima H
- Okabe M
- Cheng AG
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-52629-9
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- Humans
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
- Cochlea
- Stria Vascularis
- Hearing Loss
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Melanocytes
- Deafness
- PAX3 Transcription Factor/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of Pax3 causes reduction of melanocytes in the developing mouse cochlea.
**Authors:** Udagawa T, Takahashi E, Tatsumi N, Mutai H, Saijo H, Kondo Y, Atkinson PJ, Matsunaga T, Yoshikawa M, Kojima H, Okabe M, Cheng AG
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-52629-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52629-9)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jan 26;14(1):2210. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-52629-9.

Loss of Pax3 causes reduction of melanocytes in the developing mouse cochlea.

Udagawa T(#)(1)(2)(3), Takahashi E(#)(4)(5), Tatsumi N(5), Mutai H(6), Saijo
H(5), Kondo Y(4), Atkinson PJ(7), Matsunaga T(6), Yoshikawa M(8), Kojima H(4),
Okabe M(5), Cheng AG(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, The Jikei University School of Medicine,
3-25-8 Nishi-Shimbashi, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8461, Japan.
entudagawa@jikei.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Anatomy, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
entudagawa@jikei.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan. entudagawa@jikei.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, The Jikei University School of Medicine,
3-25-8 Nishi-Shimbashi, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8461, Japan.
(5)Department of Anatomy, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Division Hearing and Balance Research, National Institute of Sensory Organs,
NHO Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
(8)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    Res Sq. 2023 Jun 09:rs.3.rs-2990436. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-2990436/v1.

Cochlear melanocytes are intermediate cells in the stria vascularis that
generate endocochlear potentials required for auditory function. Human PAX3
mutations cause Waardenburg syndrome and abnormalities of skin and retinal
melanocytes, manifested as congenital hearing loss (~ 70%) and hypopigmentation
of skin, hair and eyes. However, the underlying mechanism of hearing loss
remains unclear. Cochlear melanocytes in the stria vascularis originated from
Pax3-traced melanoblasts and Plp1-traced Schwann cell precursors, both of which
derive from neural crest cells. Here, using a Pax3-Cre knock-in mouse that
allows lineage tracing of Pax3-expressing cells and disruption of Pax3, we found
that Pax3 deficiency causes foreshortened cochlea, malformed vestibular
apparatus, and neural tube defects. Lineage tracing and in situ hybridization
show that Pax3+ derivatives contribute to S100+, Kir4.1+ and Dct+ melanocytes
(intermediate cells) in the developing stria vascularis, all of which are
significantly diminished in Pax3 mutant animals. Taken together, these results
suggest that Pax3 is required for the development of neural crest cell-derived
cochlear melanocytes, whose absence may contribute to congenital hearing loss of
Waardenburg syndrome in humans.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-52629-9
PMCID: PMC10817906
PMID: 38278860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
