---
reference_id: "PMID:34800400"
title: "Safety and efficacy of cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat versus alglucosidase alfa plus placebo in late-onset Pompe disease (PROPEL): an international, randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Schoser B
- Roberts M
- Byrne BJ
- Sitaraman S
- Jiang H
- Laforêt P
- Toscano A
- Castelli J
- Díaz-Manera J
- Goldman M
- van der Ploeg AT
- Bratkovic D
- Kuchipudi S
- Mozaffar T
- Kishnani PS
- PROPEL Study Group
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00331-8
keywords:
- "1-Deoxynojirimycin/analogs & derivatives"
- Adolescent
- Double-Blind Method
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/chemically induced, drug therapy"
- Humans
- Treatment Outcome
- alpha-Glucosidases/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and efficacy of cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat versus alglucosidase alfa plus placebo in late-onset Pompe disease (PROPEL): an international, randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Schoser B, Roberts M, Byrne BJ, Sitaraman S, Jiang H, Laforêt P, Toscano A, Castelli J, Díaz-Manera J, Goldman M, van der Ploeg AT, Bratkovic D, Kuchipudi S, Mozaffar T, Kishnani PS, PROPEL Study Group
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00331-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00331-8)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2021 Dec;20(12):1027-1037. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00331-8.

Safety and efficacy of cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat versus alglucosidase
alfa plus placebo in late-onset Pompe disease (PROPEL): an international,
randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, phase 3 trial.

Schoser B(1), Roberts M(2), Byrne BJ(3), Sitaraman S(4), Jiang H(4), Laforêt
P(5), Toscano A(6), Castelli J(4), Díaz-Manera J(7), Goldman M(4), van der Ploeg
AT(8), Bratkovic D(9), Kuchipudi S(4), Mozaffar T(10), Kishnani PS(11); PROPEL
Study Group.

Collaborators: Sebok A, Pestronk A, Dominovic-Kovacevic A, Khan A, Koritnik B,
Tard C, Lindberg C, Quinn C, Eldridge C, Bodkin C, Reyes-Leiva D, Hughes D,
Stefanescu E, Salort-Campana E, Butler E, Bouhour F, Kim G, Konstantinos
Papadimas G, Parenti G, Bartosik-Psujek H, Kushlaf H, Akihiro H, Lau H, Pedro H,
Andersen H, Amartino H, Shiraishi H, Kobayashi H, Tarnev I, Vengoechea J, Avelar
J, Shin JH, Cauci J, Alonso-Pérez J, Janszky J, Berthy J, Kornblum C, Gutschmidt
K, Claeys K, Judit Molnar M, Wencel M, Tarnopolsky M, Dimachkie M, Tchan M,
Freimer M, Longo N, Vidal-Fernandez N, Musumeci O, Goker-Alpan O, Deegan P,
Clemens PR, Roxburgh R, Henderson R, Hopkin R, Sacconi S, Fecarotta S, Attarian
S, Wenninger S, Dearmey S, Hiwot T, Burrow T, Ruck T, Sawada T, Laszlo V,
Löscher W, Chien YH.

Author information:
(1)Friedrich-Baur-Institut, Neurologische Klinik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München, Munich, Germany. Electronic address:
benedikt.schoser@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(2)Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UK.
(3)University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(4)Amicus Therapeutics, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Raymond-Poincaré Hospital, Garches, France.
(6)University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(7)Unitat de Malalties Neuromusculars Servei de Neurologia, Hospital de la Santa
Creu i Sant Pau de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)ErasmusMC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(9)PARC Research Clinic, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(10)University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.
(11)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Erratum in
    Lancet Neurol. 2023 Oct;22(10):e11. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(23)00311-3.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2021 Dec;20(12):973-975. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00358-6.

BACKGROUND: Pompe disease is a rare disorder characterised by progressive loss
of muscle and respiratory function due to acid α-glucosidase deficiency. Enzyme
replacement therapy with recombinant human acid α-glucosidase, alglucosidase
alfa, is the first approved treatment for the disease, but some patients do not
respond, and many do not show a sustained benefit. We aimed to assess the safety
and efficacy of an investigational two-component therapy (cipaglucosidase alfa,
a novel recombinant human acid α-glucosidase, plus miglustat, an enzyme
stabiliser) for late-onset Pompe disease.
METHODS: We did a randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, phase 3 trial at 62
neuromuscular and metabolic medical centres in 24 countries in the Americas,
Asia-Pacific, and Europe. Eligible participants were aged 18 years or older with
late-onset Pompe disease, and had either been receiving alglucosidase alfa for
at least 2 years or were enzyme replacement therapy-naive. Participants were
randomly assigned (2:1) using interactive response technology software,
stratified by 6-min walk distance and previous enzyme replacement therapy
status, to intravenous cipaglucosidase alfa (20 mg/kg) plus oral miglustat or to
intravenous alglucosidase alfa (20 mg/kg) plus oral placebo once every 2 weeks
for 52 weeks. Patients, investigators, and outcome assessors were masked to
treatment assignment. The primary endpoint was change from baseline to week 52
in 6-min walk distance, assessed using a mixed-effect model for repeated
measures analysis for comparison of superiority in the intention-to-treat
population (all patients who received at least one dose of study drug). This
study is now complete and is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03729362.
FINDINGS: Between Dec 3, 2018, and Nov 26, 2019, 130 patients were screened for
eligibility and 125 were enrolled and randomly assigned to receive
cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat (n=85) or alglucosidase alfa plus placebo
(n=40). Two patients in the alglucosidase alfa plus placebo group did not
receive any dose due to absence of genotype confirmation of late-onset Pompe
disease and were excluded from analysis. Six patients discontinued (one in the
alglucosidase alfa plus placebo group, five in the cipaglucosidase alfa plus
miglustat group), and 117 completed the study. At week 52, mean change from
baseline in 6-min walk distance was 20·8 m (SE 4·6) in the cipaglucosidase alfa
plus miglustat group versus 7·2 m (6·6) in the alglucosidase alfa plus placebo
group using last observation carried forward (between-group difference 13·6 m
[95% CI -2·8 to 29·9]). 118 (96%) of 123 patients experienced at least one
treatment-emergent adverse event during the study; the incidence was similar
between the cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat group (n=81 [95%]) and the
alglucosidase alfa plus placebo group (n=37 [97%]). The most frequently reported
treatment-emergent adverse events were fall (25 [29%] patients in the
cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat group vs 15 [39%] in the alglucosidase alfa
plus placebo group), headache (20 [24%] vs 9 [24%]), nasopharyngitis (19 [22%]
vs 3 [8%]), myalgia (14 [16%] vs 5 [13%]), and arthralgia (13 [15%]) vs 5
[13%]). 12 serious adverse events occurred in eight patients in the
cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat group; only one event (anaphylaxis) was
deemed related to study drug. One serious adverse event (stroke) occurred in the
alglucosidase alfa plus placebo group, which was deemed unrelated to study drug.
There were no deaths.
INTERPRETATION: Cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat did not achieve statistical
superiority to alglucosidase alfa plus placebo for improving 6-min walk distance
in our overall population of patients with late-onset Pompe disease. Further
studies should investigate the longer-term safety and efficacy of
cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat and whether this investigational
two-component therapy might provide benefits, particularly in respiratory
function and in patients who have been receiving enzyme replacement therapy for
more than 2 years, as suggested by our secondary and subgroup analyses.
FUNDING: Amicus Therapeutics.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00331-8
PMID: 34800400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests BS reports grant
funding to his institution and consulting fees from Amicus Therapeutics; and has
served as an advisory board member for Sanofi Genzyme, Lupin, Spark
Therapeutics, and Astellas Therapeutics, as a consultant for Alexion, Argenx,
and UCB Pharma, and as a speaker for Kedrion. SS, HJ, JC, MG, and SK are
employees of and hold stock in Amicus Therapeutics. PL reports grant funding to
his institution and consulting and travel fees from Amicus Therapeutics; has
served as an advisory board member, a consultant, and a speaker at Sanofi
Genzyme; and his institution received funding from Sanofi Genzyme. AT has served
as a board member and as a speaker for Sanofi Genzyme, and reports fees for
these activities from Sanofi Genzyme. JD-M has served as a consultant at
Sarepta, Sanofi Genzyme, and Audentes Therapeutics; has received grant funding
to his institution from Sanofi Genzyme and Boehringer Ingelheim and speaker fees
from Sanofi Genzyme, Sarepta, and Lupin; and has received payment for the
development of educational presentations from Sanofi Genzyme. ATvdP has provided
consultancy services for Amicus, Spark Therapeutics, Sanofi Genzyme, Audentes,
Ultragenix, Takeda, Qiuesi, Biomarin, GlaxoSmithKline, and Alexion. DB reports
funds to his institution from Amicus Therapeutics. TM has served in an advisory
capacity for AbbVie, Alexion, Amicus, Argenx, Audentes, Modis, Momenta, Ra
Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi Genzyme, Sarepta, Spark Therapeutics, UCB, and
Ultragenyx; serves on the speaker's bureau for Sanofi Genzyme; serves on the
medical advisory board for the Myositis Association, Neuromuscular Disease
Foundation, Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of California, and Myasthenia Gravis
Foundation of America; receives research funding from the Myositis Association,
the Muscular Dystrophy Association, the National Institutes of Health, and from
Alexion, Amicus, Argenx, Audentes, Bristol Myers Squibb, Cartesian Therapeutics,
Grifols, Momenta, Ra Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi Genzyme, Spark Therapeutics, UCB,
and Valerion; and serves on the data safety monitoring board for Acceleron,
Avexis, Sarepta, and the National Institutes of Health. PSK has served as a
consultant for Sanofi Genzyme, Amicus Therapeutics, Maze Therapeutics, JCR
Pharmaceutical, and Asklepios Biopharmaceutical. All other authors declare no
competing interests.
