---
reference_id: "PMID:41236424"
title: "Ocular Manifestations and Genetic Spectrum of Xeroderma Pigmentosum: Insights From an Indian Cohort in a Global Context."
authors:
- Verma A
- Singh M
- Ramappa M
- Ali H
- Chaurasia S
journal: Cornea
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000004013
keywords:
- Humans
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/genetics, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Male
- Female
- India/epidemiology
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Phenotype
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Eye Neoplasms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular Manifestations and Genetic Spectrum of Xeroderma Pigmentosum: Insights From an Indian Cohort in a Global Context.
**Authors:** Verma A, Singh M, Ramappa M, Ali H, Chaurasia S
**Journal:** Cornea (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ICO.0000000000004013](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICO.0000000000004013)

## Content

1. Cornea. 2026 Feb 1;45(2):223-231. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000004013. Epub 2025
 Oct 8.

Ocular Manifestations and Genetic Spectrum of Xeroderma Pigmentosum: Insights 
From an Indian Cohort in a Global Context.

Verma A(1)(2), Singh M(1), Ramappa M(1)(2), Ali H(3), Chaurasia S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Shantilal Shanghvi Cornea Institute, LV Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India.
(2)Centre for Rare Eye Diseases, LV Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, Telangana, 
India; and.
(3)Prof. Brien Holden Eye Research Centre L V Prasad Eye Institute, Telangana, 
India .

PURPOSE: Xeroderma Pigmentosum (XP) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
caused by defective nucleotide excision repair. Although dermatological features 
are well characterized, data on ocular manifestations and associated genotypes 
in Indian populations remain limited. This study aimed to delineate the ocular 
phenotype and underlying genetic variants in Indian patients with XP and compare 
them with global data.
METHODS: Retrospective review of 23 patients with genetically confirmed XP was 
conducted. Variant pathogenicity was assessed using in silico tools. Logistic 
regression analysis and Generalized Estimating Equations model with a logit link 
function was used to evaluate any potential associations between clinical 
genetic parameters with the occurrence of ocular surface neoplasia (OSN).
RESULTS: The cohort (median age: 24 years; male: female = 15:8) had a high 
consanguinity rate (69.6%). All patients reported of photophobia and visual 
impairment. Ocular surface dryness was also a notable complaint in 17%. Frequent 
ocular findings included conjunctival abnormalities (97%), corneal involvement 
(80%), and eyelid changes (70%). OSN or lid/adnexal tumors together were 
observed in 37% of eyes. Whole exome sequencing identified 18 pathogenic/likely 
pathogenic variants-15 in XP-C and 3 in DDB2 (XP-E), including 12 novel 
variants. There was a statistically significant increased risk of OSN in XP-E 
subtype compared with XP-C subtype.
CONCLUSIONS: XP-C was the predominant subtype, followed by XP-E in patients with 
XP with ocular involvement. XP-E subtype has been reported for the first time in 
Indian data in this study. Most variants were frameshift or stop gain. The 
patients with XP-E subtype may be more at risk of OSN development. These 
findings underscore the importance of routine ocular surveillance and genetic 
testing in XP.

Copyright © 2025 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000004013
PMID: 41236424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding or conflicts of 
interest to disclose.