---
reference_id: "PMID:35330407"
title: "Genetic and Phenotypic Spectrum of KBG Syndrome: A Report of 13 New Chinese Cases and a Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Gao F
- Zhao X
- Cao B
- Fan X
- Li X
- Li L
- Sui S
- Su Z
- Gong C
journal: J Pers Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/jpm12030407
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and Phenotypic Spectrum of KBG Syndrome: A Report of 13 New Chinese Cases and a Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Gao F, Zhao X, Cao B, Fan X, Li X, Li L, Sui S, Su Z, Gong C
**Journal:** J Pers Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jpm12030407](https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm12030407)

## Content

1. J Pers Med. 2022 Mar 5;12(3):407. doi: 10.3390/jpm12030407.

Genetic and Phenotypic Spectrum of KBG Syndrome: A Report of 13 New Chinese 
Cases and a Review of the Literature.

Gao F(1), Zhao X(2), Cao B(1), Fan X(3), Li X(1), Li L(1), Sui S(1), Su Z(2), 
Gong C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Genetics, Metabolism and Adolescent Medicine, 
Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University, National Center for 
Children's Health, Beijing 100045, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Shenzhen Children's Hospital, Shenzhen 518000, 
China.
(3)Pediatric Dapartment, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning 510000, China.

KBG syndrome (KBGS) is a rare autosomal dominant inherited disease that involves 
multiple systems and is associated with variations in the ankyrin repeat domain 
11 (ANKRD11) gene. We report the clinical and genetic data for 13 Chinese KBGS 
patients diagnosed by genetic testing and retrospectively analyse the genotypes 
and phenotypes of previously reported KBGS patients. The 13 patients in this 
study had heterozygous variations in the ANKRD11 gene, including seven 
frameshift variations, three nonsense variations, and three missense variations. 
They carried 11 variation sites, of which eight were previously unreported. The 
clinical phenotype analysis of these 13 patients and 240 previously reported 
patients showed that the occurrence rates of craniofacial anomalies, dental 
anomalies, global developmental delays, intellectual disability/learning 
difficulties, limb anomalies, and behavioural anomalies were >70%. The 
occurrence rates of short stature, delayed bone age, and spinal vertebral body 
anomalies were >50%. The frequency of global developmental delays and 
intellectual disability/learning difficulties in patients with truncated ANKRD11 
gene variation was higher than that in patients with missense variation in the 
ANKRD11 gene (p < 0.05). Collectively, this study reported the genotypic and 
phenotypic characteristics of the largest sample of KBGS patients from China and 
discovered eight new ANKRD11 gene variations, which enriched the variation 
spectrum of the ANKRD11 gene. Variation in the ANKRD11 gene mainly caused 
craniofacial anomalies, growth and developmental anomalies, skeletal system 
anomalies, and nervous system anomalies. Truncated variation in the ANKRD11 gene 
is more likely to lead to global growth retardation and intellectual 
disability/learning difficulties than missense variation in ANKRD11.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm12030407
PMCID: PMC8948816
PMID: 35330407

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.