---
reference_id: "PMID:30078200"
title: Keratins and epidermolysis bullosa simplex.
authors:
- Khani P
- Ghazi F
- Zekri A
- Nasri F
- Behrangi E
- Aghdam AM
- Mirzaei H
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/jcp.26898
keywords:
- Epidermis/physiopathology
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex/genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Keratin-14/genetics
- Keratin-5/genetics
- Skin/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Keratins and epidermolysis bullosa simplex.
**Authors:** Khani P, Ghazi F, Zekri A, Nasri F, Behrangi E, Aghdam AM, Mirzaei H
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.26898](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.26898)

## Content

1. J Cell Physiol. 2018 Jan;234(1):289-297. doi: 10.1002/jcp.26898. Epub 2018 Aug
 4.

Keratins and epidermolysis bullosa simplex.

Khani P(1), Ghazi F(1), Zekri A(1), Nasri F(2), Behrangi E(3), Aghdam AM(4), 
Mirzaei H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Iran University of Medical Sciences (IUMS), Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of 
Medical Sciences (IUMS), Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Laser Surgery, Clinical Research Center, 
Rasoul-e-Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(5)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Medicine, Mashhad University 
of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

Keratin intermediate filaments play an important role in maintaining the 
integrity of the skin structure. Understanding the importance of this subject is 
possible with the investigation of keratin defects in epidermolysis bullosa 
simplex (EBS). Nowadays, in addition to clinical criteria, new molecular 
diagnostic methods, such as next generation sequencing, can help to distinguish 
the subgroups of EBS more precisely. Because the most important and most 
commonly occurring molecular defects in these patients are the defects of 
keratins 5 and14 (KRT5 and KRT14), comprehending the nature structure of these 
proteins and their involved processes can be very effective in understanding the 
pathophysiology of this disease and providing new and effective therapeutic 
platforms to treat it. Here, we summarized the various aspects of the presence 
of KRT5 and KRT14 in the epidermis, their relation to the incidence and severity 
of EBS phenotypes, and the processes with which these proteins can affect them.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.26898
PMID: 30078200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]