---
reference_id: "PMID:37830631"
title: "Anti-Inflammatory and Immunomodulatory Effect of High-Dose Immunoglobulins in Children: From Approved Indications to Off-Label Use."
authors:
- Conti F
- Moratti M
- Leonardi L
- Catelli A
- Bortolamedi E
- Filice E
- Fetta A
- Fabi M
- Facchini E
- Cantarini ME
- Miniaci A
- Cordelli DM
- Lanari M
- Pession A
- Zama D
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12192417
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-Inflammatory and Immunomodulatory Effect of High-Dose Immunoglobulins in Children: From Approved Indications to Off-Label Use.
**Authors:** Conti F, Moratti M, Leonardi L, Catelli A, Bortolamedi E, Filice E, Fetta A, Fabi M, Facchini E, Cantarini ME, Miniaci A, Cordelli DM, Lanari M, Pession A, Zama D
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12192417](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12192417)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Oct 7;12(19):2417. doi: 10.3390/cells12192417.

Anti-Inflammatory and Immunomodulatory Effect of High-Dose Immunoglobulins in 
Children: From Approved Indications to Off-Label Use.

Conti F(1)(2), Moratti M(3), Leonardi L(4), Catelli A(3), Bortolamedi E(3), 
Filice E(5), Fetta A(2)(6), Fabi M(7), Facchini E(8), Cantarini ME(8), Miniaci 
A(1), Cordelli DM(2)(6), Lanari M(2)(7), Pession A(1)(2), Zama D(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, 40138 
Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum, University 
of Bologna, 40138 Bologna, Italy.
(3)Specialty School of Paediatrics, University of Bologna, 40138 Bologna, Italy.
(4)Department of Maternal Infantile and Urological Sciences, Sapienza University 
of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Maggiore Hospital, 40133 Bologna, Italy.
(6)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, UOC Neuropsichiatria 
dell'Età Pediatrica, 40139 Bologna, Italy.
(7)Paediatric Emergency Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di 
Bologna, 40138 Bologna, Italy.
(8)Pediatric Oncology and Hematology Unit "Lalla Seràgnoli", IRCCS Azienda 
Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, 40138 Bologna, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The large-scale utilization of immunoglobulins in patients with 
inborn errors of immunity (IEIs) since 1952 prompted the discovery of their key 
role at high doses as immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory therapy, in the 
treatment of IEI-related immune dysregulation disorders, according to labelled 
and off-label indications. Recent years have been dominated by a progressive 
imbalance between the gradual but constant increase in the use of 
immunoglobulins and their availability, exacerbated by the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.
OBJECTIVES: To provide pragmatic indications for a need-based application of 
high-dose immunoglobulins in the pediatric context.
SOURCES: A literature search was performed using PubMed, from inception until 
1st August 2023, including the following keywords: anti-inflammatory; children; 
high dose gammaglobulin; high dose immunoglobulin; immune dysregulation; 
immunomodulation; immunomodulatory; inflammation; intravenous gammaglobulin; 
intravenous immunoglobulin; off-label; pediatric; subcutaneous gammaglobulin; 
subcutaneous immunoglobulin. All article types were considered.
IMPLICATIONS: In the light of the current imbalance between gammaglobulins' 
demand and availability, this review advocates the urgency of a more conscious 
utilization of this medical product, giving indications about benefits, risks, 
cost-effectiveness, and administration routes of high-dose immunoglobulins in 
children with hematologic, neurologic, and inflammatory immune dysregulation 
disorders, prompting further research towards a responsible employment of 
gammaglobulins and improving the therapeutical decisional process.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12192417
PMCID: PMC10572613
PMID: 37830631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.