---
reference_id: "PMID:21174000"
title: Identification of three novel plasminogen (PLG) gene mutations in a series of 23 patients with low PLG activity.
authors:
- Klammt J
- Kobelt L
- Aktas D
- Durak I
- Gokbuget A
- Hughes Q
- Irkec M
- Kurtulus I
- Lapi E
- Mechoulam H
- Mendoza-Londono R
- Palumbo JS
- Steitzer H
- Tabbara KF
- Ozbek Z
- Pucci N
- Sotomayor T
- Sturm M
- Drogies T
- Ziegler M
- Schuster V
journal: Thromb Haemost
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1160/TH10-04-0216
keywords:
- Blood Coagulation Disorders/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Hydrocephalus/genetics
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Models, Biological"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Periodontitis/genetics
- "Plasminogen/biosynthesis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of three novel plasminogen (PLG) gene mutations in a series of 23 patients with low PLG activity.
**Authors:** Klammt J, Kobelt L, Aktas D, Durak I, Gokbuget A, Hughes Q, Irkec M, Kurtulus I, Lapi E, Mechoulam H, Mendoza-Londono R, Palumbo JS, Steitzer H, Tabbara KF, Ozbek Z, Pucci N, Sotomayor T, Sturm M, Drogies T, Ziegler M, Schuster V
**Journal:** Thromb Haemost (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1160/TH10-04-0216](https://doi.org/10.1160/TH10-04-0216)

## Content

1. Thromb Haemost. 2011 Mar;105(3):454-60. doi: 10.1160/TH10-04-0216. Epub 2010
Dec  21.

Identification of three novel plasminogen (PLG) gene mutations in a series of 23 
patients with low PLG activity.

Klammt J(1), Kobelt L, Aktas D, Durak I, Gokbuget A, Hughes Q, Irkec M, Kurtulus 
I, Lapi E, Mechoulam H, Mendoza-Londono R, Palumbo JS, Steitzer H, Tabbara KF, 
Ozbek Z, Pucci N, Sotomayor T, Sturm M, Drogies T, Ziegler M, Schuster V.

Author information:
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, 
Germany.

Inherited severe hypoplasminogenaemia is a multisystemic disorder leading to 
deficient extravascular fibrinolysis. As a clinical consequence wound healing 
capacity of mucous membranes is markedly impaired leading to ligneous 
conjunctivitis and several other manifestations. Here we report the molecular 
genetic and clinical findings on 23 new cases with severe hypoplasminogenaemia. 
Homozygous or compound-heterozygous mutations in the plasminogen (PLG) gene were 
found in 16 of 23 patients (70%), three of which were novel mutations reported 
here for the first time (C166Y, Y264S, IVS10-7T/G). Compared to 79 previously 
published cases, clinical manifestations of the current group of patients showed 
higher percentages of ligneous periodontitis, congenital hydrocephalus, and 
involvement of the female genital tract. In contrast, involvement of the 
gastrointestinal or urogenital tract was not observed in any of the cases. 
Patients originated to a large extent (61%) from Turkey and the Middle East, and 
showed a comparably frequent occurrence of consanguinity of affected families 
and a greater female to male ratio than was derived from previous reports in the 
literature. Individual treatment of ligneous conjunctivitis included topical 
plasminogen or heparin eye drops, topical or systemic fresh frozen plasma, and 
surgical removal of ligneous pseudomembranes, mostly with modest or transient 
efficacy. In conclusion, the present study underscores the broad range of 
clinical manifestations in PLG-deficient patients with a trend to regional 
differences. Transmission of genetic and clinical data to the recently 
established Plasminogen Deficiency Registry should help to determine the 
prevalence of the disease and to develop more efficient treatment strategies.

DOI: 10.1160/TH10-04-0216
PMID: 21174000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]