---
reference_id: "PMID:19878914"
title: "Spinocerebellar ataxia type 31 is associated with \"inserted\" penta-nucleotide repeats containing (TGGAA)n."
authors:
- Sato N
- Amino T
- Kobayashi K
- Asakawa S
- Ishiguro T
- Tsunemi T
- Takahashi M
- Matsuura T
- Flanigan KM
- Iwasaki S
- Ishino F
- Saito Y
- Murayama S
- Yoshida M
- Hashizume Y
- Takahashi Y
- Tsuji S
- Shimizu N
- Toda T
- Ishikawa K
- Mizusawa H
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.019
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16"
- Founder Effect
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Haplotypes
- Homozygote
- Humans
- In Situ Hybridization
- Introns
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutagenesis, Insertional"
- Physical Chromosome Mapping
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/classification, genetics"
- Thymidine Kinase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar ataxia type 31 is associated with "inserted" penta-nucleotide repeats containing (TGGAA)n.
**Authors:** Sato N, Amino T, Kobayashi K, Asakawa S, Ishiguro T, Tsunemi T, Takahashi M, Matsuura T, Flanigan KM, Iwasaki S, Ishino F, Saito Y, Murayama S, Yoshida M, Hashizume Y, Takahashi Y, Tsuji S, Shimizu N, Toda T, Ishikawa K, Mizusawa H
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.019)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Nov;85(5):544-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.019. Epub 
2009 Oct 29.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 31 is associated with "inserted" penta-nucleotide 
repeats containing (TGGAA)n.

Sato N(1), Amino T, Kobayashi K, Asakawa S, Ishiguro T, Tsunemi T, Takahashi M, 
Matsuura T, Flanigan KM, Iwasaki S, Ishino F, Saito Y, Murayama S, Yoshida M, 
Hashizume Y, Takahashi Y, Tsuji S, Shimizu N, Toda T, Ishikawa K, Mizusawa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Graduate School, Tokyo 
Medical and Dental University, Yushima 1-5-45, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 31 (SCA31) is an adult-onset autosomal-dominant 
neurodegenerative disorder showing progressive cerebellar ataxia mainly 
affecting Purkinje cells. The SCA31 critical region was tracked down to a 900 kb 
interval in chromosome 16q22.1, where the disease shows a strong founder effect. 
By performing comprehensive Southern blot analysis and BAC- and fosmid-based 
sequencing, we isolated two genetic changes segregating with SCA31. One was a 
single-nucleotide change in an intron of the thymidine kinase 2 gene (TK2). 
However, this did not appear to affect splicing or expression patterns. The 
other was an insertion, from 2.5-3.8 kb long, consisting of complex 
penta-nucleotide repeats including a long (TGGAA)n stretch. In controls, shorter 
(1.5-2.0 kb) insertions lacking (TGGAA)n were found only rarely. The SCA31 
repeat insertion's length inversely correlated with patient age of onset, and an 
expansion was documented in a single family showing anticipation. The repeat 
insertion was located in introns of TK2 and BEAN (brain expressed, associated 
with Nedd4) expressed in the brain and formed RNA foci in the nuclei of 
patients' Purkinje cells. An electrophoretic mobility-shift assay showed that 
essential splicing factors, serine/arginine-rich splicing factors SFRS1 and 
SFRS9, bind to (UGGAA)n in vitro. Because (TGGAA)n is a characteristic sequence 
of paracentromeric heterochromatin, we speculate that the insertion might have 
originated from heterochromatin. SCA31 is important because it exemplifies human 
diseases associated with "inserted" microsatellite repeats that can expand 
through transmission. Our finding suggests that the ectopic microsatellite 
repeat, when transcribed, might cause a disease involving the essential splicing 
factors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.019
PMCID: PMC2775824
PMID: 19878914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]