---
reference_id: "PMID:19837698"
title: Analysis of mouse models of cytochrome c oxidase deficiency owing to mutations in Sco2.
authors:
- Yang H
- Brosel S
- Acin-Perez R
- Slavkovich V
- Nishino I
- Khan R
- Goldberg IJ
- Graziano J
- Manfredi G
- Schon EA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp477
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- Copper/metabolism
- "Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/enzymology, genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics
- "Embryo, Mammalian/enzymology, pathology"
- Enzyme Assays
- Immunohistochemistry
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Molecular Chaperones
- "Muscles/enzymology, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- Organ Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of mouse models of cytochrome c oxidase deficiency owing to mutations in Sco2.
**Authors:** Yang H, Brosel S, Acin-Perez R, Slavkovich V, Nishino I, Khan R, Goldberg IJ, Graziano J, Manfredi G, Schon EA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddp477](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp477)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jan 1;19(1):170-80. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp477.

Analysis of mouse models of cytochrome c oxidase deficiency owing to mutations 
in Sco2.

Yang H(1), Brosel S, Acin-Perez R, Slavkovich V, Nishino I, Khan R, Goldberg IJ, 
Graziano J, Manfredi G, Schon EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, Berrie-303A, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.

Mutations in SCO2, a protein required for the proper assembly and functioning of 
cytochrome c oxidase (COX; complex IV of the mitochondrial respiratory chain), 
cause a fatal infantile cardioencephalomyopathy with COX deficiency. We have 
generated mice harboring a Sco2 knock-out (KO) allele and a Sco2 knock-in (KI) 
allele expressing an E-->K mutation at position 129 (E129K), corresponding to 
the E140K mutation found in almost all human SCO2-mutated patients. Whereas 
homozygous KO mice were embryonic lethals, homozygous KI and compound 
heterozygous KI/KO mice were viable, but had muscle weakness; biochemically, 
they had respiratory chain deficiencies as well as complex IV assembly defects 
in multiple tissues. There was a concomitant reduction in mitochondrial copper 
content, but the total amount of copper in examined tissues was not reduced. 
These mouse models should be of use in further studies of Sco2 function, as well 
as in testing therapeutic approaches to treat the human disorder.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp477
PMCID: PMC2792155
PMID: 19837698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]