---
reference_id: "PMID:35627274"
title: Complex Presentation of Hao-Fountain Syndrome Solved by Exome Sequencing Highlighting Co-Occurring Genomic Variants.
authors:
- Priolo M
- Mancini C
- Pizzi S
- Chiriatti L
- Radio FC
- Cordeddu V
- Pintomalli L
- Mammì C
- Dallapiccola B
- Tartaglia M
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13050889
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental"
- Bronchiectasis/genetics
- Constipation/genetics
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
- Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator/genetics
- Deafness
- Exome/genetics
- Genomics
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability
- "Polycystic Kidney, Autosomal Dominant/genetics"
- Ubiquitin-Specific Peptidase 7/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complex Presentation of Hao-Fountain Syndrome Solved by Exome Sequencing Highlighting Co-Occurring Genomic Variants.
**Authors:** Priolo M, Mancini C, Pizzi S, Chiriatti L, Radio FC, Cordeddu V, Pintomalli L, Mammì C, Dallapiccola B, Tartaglia M
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13050889](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13050889)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 May 16;13(5):889. doi: 10.3390/genes13050889.

Complex Presentation of Hao-Fountain Syndrome Solved by Exome Sequencing 
Highlighting Co-Occurring Genomic Variants.

Priolo M(1), Mancini C(2), Pizzi S(2), Chiriatti L(1), Radio FC(2), Cordeddu 
V(3), Pintomalli L(1), Mammì C(1), Dallapiccola B(2), Tartaglia M(2).

Author information:
(1)Unità di Genetica Medica, Grande Ospedale Metropolitano 
"Bianchi-Melacrino-Morelli", 89124 Reggio Calabria, Italy.
(2)Area di Ricerca Genetica e Malattie Rare, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, 
IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanità, 00161 Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: The co-occurrence of pathogenic variants has emerged as a relatively 
common finding underlying complex phenotypes. Here, we used whole-exome 
sequencing (WES) to solve an unclassified multisystem clinical presentation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A 20-year-old woman affected by moderate intellectual 
disability (ID), dysmorphic features, hypertrichosis, scoliosis, recurrent 
bronchitis, and pneumonia with bronchiectasis, colelithiasis, chronic severe 
constipation, and a family history suggestive of autosomal dominant recurrence 
of polycystic kidney disease was analyzed by WES to identify the genomic events 
underlying the condition.
RESULTS: Four co-occurring genomic events fully explaining the proband's 
clinical features were identified. A de novo truncating USP7 variant was 
disclosed as the cause of Hao-Fountain syndrome, a disorder characterized by 
syndromic ID and distinctive behavior. Compound heterozygosity for a major 
cystic fibrosis-causing variant and the modulator allele, IVS8-5T, in CFTR 
explained the recurrent upper and lower respiratory way infections, 
bronchiectasis, cholelithiasis, and chronic constipation. Finally, a truncating 
PKD2 variant co-segregating with polycystic kidney disease in the family allowed 
presymptomatic disease diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The co-occurring variants in USP7 and CFTR variants explained the 
multisystem disorder of the patient. The comprehensive dissection of the 
phenotype and early diagnosis of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease 
allowed us to manage the CFTR-related disorder symptoms and monitor renal 
function and other complications associated with PKD2 haploinsufficiency, 
addressing proper care and surveillance.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13050889
PMCID: PMC9141324
PMID: 35627274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.