---
reference_id: "PMID:8528214"
title: Novel FGFR2 mutations in Crouzon and Jackson-Weiss syndromes show allelic heterogeneity and phenotypic variability.
authors:
- Park WJ
- Meyers GA
- Li X
- Theda C
- Day D
- Orlow SJ
- Jones MC
- Jabs EW
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/4.7.1229
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel FGFR2 mutations in Crouzon and Jackson-Weiss syndromes show allelic heterogeneity and phenotypic variability.
**Authors:** Park WJ, Meyers GA, Li X, Theda C, Day D, Orlow SJ, Jones MC, Jabs EW
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/4.7.1229](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/4.7.1229)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1995 Jul;4(7):1229-33. doi: 10.1093/hmg/4.7.1229.

Novel FGFR2 mutations in Crouzon and Jackson-Weiss syndromes show allelic 
heterogeneity and phenotypic variability.

Park WJ(1), Meyers GA, Li X, Theda C, Day D, Orlow SJ, Jones MC, Jabs EW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21287-3914, USA.

Mutations have been reported for several craniosynostotic disorders in exon IIIa 
(exon U or 7) or IIIc (exon B or 9) of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 
gene (FGFR2). Among the conditions with FGFR2 mutations are two autosomal 
dominant syndromes, Crouzon and Jackson-Weiss. In this study, 24 Crouzon and one 
Jackson-Weiss syndrome patients were screened for mutations in the two exons by 
direct sequencing, and mutations were detected in 28% (7/25) of all cases. Five 
different mutations were found including two novel (W290G, C342W) and two 
previously reported, recurrent mutations for Crouzon syndrome (A344A, S354C), 
and one new mutation for Jackson-Weiss syndrome (C342R). The W290G mutation was 
found in exon IIIa which is common to both alternatively spliced forms of FGFR2, 
BEK (expressed predominantly in primordial bones) and KGFR (expressed 
preferentially in epithelia). Atypical Crouzon syndrome features of 
epithelial-derived anal and/or external ear anomalies were present in the two 
affected family members with the mutation. This phenotype possibly reflects the 
expression of both mutant BEK and KGFR. In addition, the Jackson-Weiss syndrome 
mutation, C342R, in exon IIIc was observed previously in other craniosynostotic 
syndromes, Crouzon and Pfeiffer. These results underscore the allelic 
heterogeneity of these conditions and the complexity of the phenotypic 
consequences of FGFR2 mutations.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/4.7.1229
PMID: 8528214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]