---
reference_id: "PMID:31621376"
title: "Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: An Ascorbate Compartmentalization Disorder?"
authors:
- Boel A
- Veszelyi K
- Németh CE
- Beyens A
- Willaert A
- Coucke P
- Callewaert B
- Margittai É
journal: Antioxid Redox Signal
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1089/ars.2019.7843
keywords:
- Animals
- "Arteries/abnormalities, metabolism, pathology"
- "Ascorbic Acid/genetics, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- "Elastic Tissue/metabolism, pathology"
- "Glucose Transport Proteins, Facilitative/genetics"
- Homeostasis/genetics
- Humans
- "Joint Instability/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Mitochondria/drug effects, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Oxidation-Reduction
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Vascular Malformations/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: An Ascorbate Compartmentalization Disorder?
**Authors:** Boel A, Veszelyi K, Németh CE, Beyens A, Willaert A, Coucke P, Callewaert B, Margittai É
**Journal:** Antioxid Redox Signal (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1089/ars.2019.7843](https://doi.org/10.1089/ars.2019.7843)

## Content

1. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2021 Apr 10;34(11):875-889. doi: 10.1089/ars.2019.7843.
 Epub 2019 Nov 14.

Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: An Ascorbate Compartmentalization Disorder?

Boel A(1), Veszelyi K(2), Németh CE(3), Beyens A(1), Willaert A(1), Coucke P(1),
Callewaert B(1), Margittai É(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Institute of Clinical Experimental Research, Molecular Biology, and
Pathobiochemistry, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(3)Department of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology, and Pathobiochemistry,
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

Significance: Cardiovascular disorders are the most important cause of morbidity
and mortality in the Western world. Monogenic developmental disorders of the
heart and vessels are highly valuable to study the physiological and
pathological processes in cardiovascular system homeostasis. The arterial
tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is a rare, autosomal recessive connective tissue
disorder showing lengthening, tortuosity, and stenosis of the large arteries,
with a propensity for aneurysm formation. In histopathology, it associates with
fragmentation and disorganization of elastic fibers in several tissues,
including the arterial wall. ATS is caused by pathogenic variants in SLC2A10
encoding the facilitative glucose transporter (GLUT)10. Critical Issues:
Although several hypotheses have been forwarded, the molecular mechanisms
linking disrupted GLUT10 activity with arterial malformations are largely
unknown. Recent Advances: The vascular and systemic manifestations and natural
history of ATS patients have been largely delineated. GLUT10 was identified as
an intracellular transporter of dehydroascorbic acid, which contributes to
collagen and elastin cross-linking in the endoplasmic reticulum, redox
homeostasis in the mitochondria, and global and gene-specific
methylation/hydroxymethylation affecting epigenetic regulation in the nucleus.
We revise here the current knowledge on ATS and the role of GLUT10 within the
compartmentalization of ascorbate in physiological and diseased states. Future
Directions: Centralization of clinical, treatment, and outcome data will enable
better management for ATS patients. Establishment of representative animal
disease models could facilitate the study of pathomechanisms underlying ATS.
This might be relevant for other forms of vascular dysplasia, such as isolated
aneurysm formation, hypertensive vasculopathy, and neovascularization. Antioxid.
Redox Signal. 34, 875-889.

DOI: 10.1089/ars.2019.7843
PMID: 31621376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
