---
reference_id: PMID:36617712
title: Effect of the Ultraviolet Radiation on the Lens.
authors:
- Borges-Rodríguez Y
- Morales-Cueto R
- Rivillas-Acevedo L
journal: Curr Protein Pept Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2174/1389203724666230106161436
keywords:
- Humans
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
- "Lens, Crystalline/chemistry, metabolism, radiation effects"
- "Cataract/etiology, metabolism"
- "Crystallins/analysis, chemistry, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of the Ultraviolet Radiation on the Lens.
**Authors:** Borges-Rodríguez Y, Morales-Cueto R, Rivillas-Acevedo L
**Journal:** Curr Protein Pept Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1389203724666230106161436](https://doi.org/10.2174/1389203724666230106161436)

## Content

1. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2023;24(3):215-228. doi: 
10.2174/1389203724666230106161436.

Effect of the Ultraviolet Radiation on the Lens.

Borges-Rodríguez Y(1), Morales-Cueto R(2), Rivillas-Acevedo L(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación en Dinámica Celular, Instituto de Investigación en 
Ciencias Básicas y Aplicadas, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos. 
Cuernavaca, Morelos, C.P. 62209 México.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias Químicas e Ingeniería, Universidad Autónoma del Estado 
de Morelos. Cuernavaca, Morelos, C.P. 62209, México.

The lens is a transparent, biconvex anatomical structure of the eyes responsible 
for light transmission and fine focusing on the retina. It is fundamentally 
constituted by water-soluble proteins called crystallins which are responsible 
for lens transparency due to their stable and highly organized disposition in 
the lens fiber cells. Some conformational changes and the subsequent aggregation 
of crystallins lead to loss of transparency in the lens and are the beginning of 
cataracts, which is the most frequent cause of reversible blindness in the 
world. Ultraviolet radiation is considered one of the risk factors for cataract 
development. The lens is exposed to radiation between 295 and 400 nm. This UV 
radiation may induce several processes that destroy the crystallins; the most 
significant is the oxidative stress due to increased free radicals formation. 
The oxidative stress is directly involved in modifications of the crystallin 
proteins leading to the formation of high molecular weight aggregates and then 
the subsequent opacification of the lens, known as cataracts. This review aims 
to summarize current knowledge about the damage of the lens proteins caused by 
ultraviolet radiation and its role in developing cataracts.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1389203724666230106161436
PMID: 36617712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]