---
reference_id: "PMID:36720125"
title: Clinical picture, diagnostics and treatment of bacterial meningitis.
authors:
- Sín R
- Struncova D
- Cechurova L
journal: Neuro Endocrinol Lett
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical picture, diagnostics and treatment of bacterial meningitis.
**Authors:** Sín R, Struncova D, Cechurova L
**Journal:** Neuro Endocrinol Lett (2022)

## Content

1. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2022 Dec 31;43(7-8):372-377.

Clinical picture, diagnostics and treatment of bacterial meningitis.

Sín R(1), Struncova D(2), Cechurova L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Travel Medicine, Faculty of Medicine in 
Pilsen, Charles University; University Hospital Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic.
(2)Emergency Medical Service of the Pilsen Region, Pilsen, Czech Republic.

Bacterial meningitis is a serious infectious disease of the cerebral meninges, 
which occurs worldwide and threatens the lives of people of all ages. The 
largest number of cases in developed countries is caused by the gram-positive 
bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae. Other more common agents are Neisseria 
meningitidis serotype B and Listeria monocytogenes. Fever is the most commonly 
reported symptom in paediatric patients, occurring in up to 93% of cases. 
Further, it is possible to observe headache, vomiting and positive meningeal 
phenomena. The most common symptoms in adults are fever, headache, positive 
meningeal symptoms and impaired consciousness. Examination of cerebrospinal 
fluid is essential for the diagnosis of bacterial meningitis. The basis of 
treatment is the earliest possible administration of antibiotics, initially 
empirically and then purposefully according to the results. Corticosteroids, 
traditionally dexamethasone, are also used in therapy.

PMID: 36720125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]