---
reference_id: "PMID:27936530"
title: "Endocrinology Update: Thyroid Disorders."
authors:
- Kelley S
journal: FP Essent
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endocrinology Update: Thyroid Disorders.
**Authors:** Kelley S
**Journal:** FP Essent (2016)

## Content

1. FP Essent. 2016 Dec;451:11-16.

Endocrinology Update: Thyroid Disorders.

Kelley S(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan Medical School Briarwood Family Medicine, 1801 
Briarwood Circle, Ann Arbor, MI 48108.

Thyroid disease affects nearly every organ system in the body. Hypothyroidism is 
a state of thyroid hormone insufficiency that results in decreased metabolism 
and secondary effects including fatigue and weight gain. Primary hypothyroidism 
typically is a result of autoimmune thyroiditis or iodine deficiency and is 
assessed by measurement of the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level. This 
level usually is elevated in patients with hypothyroidism and low in patients 
with hyperthyroidism. Levothyroxine is the treatment of choice for 
hypothyroidism. Hyperthyroidism is a state of thyroid hormone excess, which 
increases the metabolic rate and causes symptoms including anxiety and tremor. 
Graves disease is the most common etiology in developed countries. Patients with 
hyperthyroidism are evaluated with measurement of TSH and free thyroxine levels. 
Management options include antithyroid drugs, radioactive iodine, and surgery. 
Thyroid nodules are detected commonly in family medicine, and may or may not be 
associated with thyroid hormone abnormalities. Patients with thyroid nodules 
should be evaluated with TSH level measurement and thyroid ultrasonography to 
guide further testing.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required 
for reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.

PMID: 27936530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]