---
reference_id: "PMID:35217064"
title: Targeting NAE1-mediated protein hyper-NEDDylation halts cholangiocarcinogenesis and impacts on tumor-stroma crosstalk in experimental models.
authors:
- Olaizola P
- Lee-Law PY
- Fernandez-Barrena MG
- Alvarez L
- Cadamuro M
- Azkargorta M
- "O'Rourke CJ"
- Caballero-Camino FJ
- Olaizola I
- Macias RIR
- Marin JJG
- Serrano-Maciá M
- Martinez-Chantar ML
- Avila MA
- Aspichueta P
- Calvisi DF
- Evert M
- Fabris L
- Castro RE
- Elortza F
- Andersen JB
- Bujanda L
- Rodrigues PM
- Perugorria MJ
- Banales JM
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2022.02.007
keywords:
- Animals
- Bile Duct Neoplasms/etiology
- "Bile Ducts, Intrahepatic"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cholangiocarcinoma/etiology
- Humans
- Mice
- "Models, Theoretical"
- Proteomics
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting NAE1-mediated protein hyper-NEDDylation halts cholangiocarcinogenesis and impacts on tumor-stroma crosstalk in experimental models.
**Authors:** Olaizola P, Lee-Law PY, Fernandez-Barrena MG, Alvarez L, Cadamuro M, Azkargorta M, O'Rourke CJ, Caballero-Camino FJ, Olaizola I, Macias RIR, Marin JJG, Serrano-Maciá M, Martinez-Chantar ML, Avila MA, Aspichueta P, Calvisi DF, Evert M, Fabris L, Castro RE, Elortza F, Andersen JB, Bujanda L, Rodrigues PM, Perugorria MJ, Banales JM
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2022.02.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2022.02.007)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2022 Jul;77(1):177-190. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2022.02.007. Epub 2022 
Feb 23.

Targeting NAE1-mediated protein hyper-NEDDylation halts cholangiocarcinogenesis 
and impacts on tumor-stroma crosstalk in experimental models.

Olaizola P(1), Lee-Law PY(2), Fernandez-Barrena MG(3), Alvarez L(4), Cadamuro 
M(5), Azkargorta M(6), O'Rourke CJ(7), Caballero-Camino FJ(1), Olaizola I(1), 
Macias RIR(8), Marin JJG(8), Serrano-Maciá M(9), Martinez-Chantar ML(10), Avila 
MA(3), Aspichueta P(11), Calvisi DF(12), Evert M(12), Fabris L(13), Castro 
RE(14), Elortza F(6), Andersen JB(7), Bujanda L(15), Rodrigues PM(16), 
Perugorria MJ(17), Banales JM(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases, Biodonostia Health 
Research Institute - Donostia University Hospital -, University of the Basque 
Country (UPV/EHU), San Sebastian, Spain.
(2)Department of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases, Biodonostia Health 
Research Institute - Donostia University Hospital -, University of the Basque 
Country (UPV/EHU), San Sebastian, Spain; Department of Gastroenterology & 
Hepatology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, The Netherlands.
(3)National Institute for the Study of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases 
(CIBERehd, "Instituto de Salud Carlos III"), Spain; Hepatology Program, CIMA. 
University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias 
de Navarra (IdiSNA), Pamplona, Spain.
(4)Hepatology Program, CIMA. University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine (DMM), University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(6)National Institute for the Study of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases 
(CIBERehd, "Instituto de Salud Carlos III"), Spain; Proteomics Platform, CIC 
bioGUNE, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), ProteoRed-ISCIII, 
Bizkaia Science and Technology Park, Derio, Spain.
(7)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), Department of Health and 
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)National Institute for the Study of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases 
(CIBERehd, "Instituto de Salud Carlos III"), Spain; Experimental Hepatology and 
Drug Targeting (HEVEPHARM) Group, Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca 
(IBSAL), University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(9)Liver Disease Laboratory, CIC bioGUNE, Basque Research and Technology 
Alliance (BRTA), Spain.
(10)National Institute for the Study of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases 
(CIBERehd, "Instituto de Salud Carlos III"), Spain; Liver Disease Laboratory, 
CIC bioGUNE, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Spain.
(11)National Institute for the Study of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases 
(CIBERehd, "Instituto de Salud Carlos III"), Spain; Department of Physiology, 
Faculty of Medicine and Nursing, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), 
48940 Leioa, Spain; Biocruces Bizkaia Health Research Institute, Cruces 
University Hospital, 48903 Barakaldo, Spain.
(12)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(13)Department of Molecular Medicine (DMM), University of Padua, Padua, Italy; 
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale Liver Center (YLC), School of Medicine, 
Yale University New Haven, CT, USA.
(14)Research Institute for Medicines (iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(15)Department of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases, Biodonostia Health 
Research Institute - Donostia University Hospital -, University of the Basque 
Country (UPV/EHU), San Sebastian, Spain; National Institute for the Study of 
Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases (CIBERehd, "Instituto de Salud Carlos III"), 
Spain.
(16)Department of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases, Biodonostia Health 
Research Institute - Donostia University Hospital -, University of the Basque 
Country (UPV/EHU), San Sebastian, Spain; National Institute for the Study of 
Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases (CIBERehd, "Instituto de Salud Carlos III"), 
Spain; IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain. Electronic 
address: pedro.rodrigues@biodonostia.org.
(17)Department of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases, Biodonostia Health 
Research Institute - Donostia University Hospital -, University of the Basque 
Country (UPV/EHU), San Sebastian, Spain; National Institute for the Study of 
Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases (CIBERehd, "Instituto de Salud Carlos III"), 
Spain; Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Nursing, University of 
the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), 48940 Leioa, Spain. Electronic address: 
matxus.perugorria@biodonostia.org.
(18)Department of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases, Biodonostia Health 
Research Institute - Donostia University Hospital -, University of the Basque 
Country (UPV/EHU), San Sebastian, Spain; National Institute for the Study of 
Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases (CIBERehd, "Instituto de Salud Carlos III"), 
Spain; IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain; Department of 
Biochemistry and Genetics, School of Sciences, University of Navarra, Pamplona, 
Spain. Electronic address: jesus.banales@biodonostia.org.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2022 Jul;77(1):12-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2022.04.018.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) comprises a heterogeneous group of 
malignant tumors associated with dismal prognosis. Alterations in 
post-translational modifications (PTMs), including NEDDylation, result in 
abnormal protein dynamics, cell disturbances and disease. Herein, we investigate 
the role of NEDDylation in CCA development and progression.
METHODS: Levels and functions of NEDDylation, together with response to 
pevonedistat (NEDDylation inhibitor) or CRISPR/Cas9 against NAE1 were evaluated 
in vitro, in vivo and/or in patients with CCA. The development of preneoplastic 
lesions in Nae1+/- mice was investigated using an oncogene-driven CCA model. The 
impact of NEDDylation in CCA cells on tumor-stroma crosstalk was assessed using 
CCA-derived cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). Proteomic analyses were 
carried out by mass-spectrometry.
RESULTS: The NEDDylation machinery was found overexpressed and overactivated in 
human CCA cells and tumors. Most NEDDylated proteins found upregulated in CCA 
cells, after NEDD8-immunoprecipitation and further proteomics, participate in 
the cell cycle, proliferation or survival. Genetic (CRISPR/Cas9-NAE1) and 
pharmacological (pevonedistat) inhibition of NEDDylation reduced CCA cell 
proliferation and impeded colony formation in vitro. NEDDylation depletion 
(pevonedistat or Nae1+/- mice) halted tumorigenesis in subcutaneous, orthotopic, 
and oncogene-driven models of CCA in vivo. Moreover, pevonedistat potentiated 
chemotherapy-induced cell death in CCA cells in vitro. Mechanistically, impaired 
NEDDylation triggered the accumulation of both cullin RING ligase and NEDD8 
substrates, inducing DNA damage and cell cycle arrest. Furthermore, impaired 
NEDDylation in CCA cells reduced the secretion of proteins involved in 
fibroblast activation, angiogenesis, and oncogenic pathways, ultimately 
hampering CAF proliferation and migration.
CONCLUSION: Aberrant protein NEDDylation contributes to cholangiocarcinogenesis 
by promoting cell survival and proliferation. Moreover, NEDDylation impacts the 
CCA-stroma crosstalk. Inhibition of NEDDylation with pevonedistat may represent 
a potential therapeutic strategy for patients with CCA.
LAY SUMMARY: Little is known about the role of post-translational modifications 
of proteins in cholangiocarcinoma development and progression. Herein, we show 
that protein NEDDylation is upregulated and hyperactivated in 
cholangiocarcinoma, promoting tumor growth. Pharmacological inhibition of 
NEDDylation halts cholangiocarcinogenesis and could be an effective therapeutic 
strategy to tackle these tumors.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2022.02.007
PMID: 35217064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Authors disclose no 
conflict of interest related to this manuscript. Please refer to the 
accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.