---
reference_id: "PMID:33844652"
title: SARS-CoV-2 as a superantigen in multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
authors:
- Kouo T
- Chaisawangwong W
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1172/JCI149327
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SARS-CoV-2 as a superantigen in multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
**Authors:** Kouo T, Chaisawangwong W
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI149327](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI149327)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2021 May 17;131(10):e149327. doi: 10.1172/JCI149327.

SARS-CoV-2 as a superantigen in multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.

Kouo T(1), Chaisawangwong W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, and.
(2)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2021 May 17;131(10):146614. doi: 10.1172/JCI146614.

Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a rare but deadly new 
disease in children that rapidly progresses to hyperinflammation and shock, and 
can lead to multiple organ failure if unrecognized. It has been found to be 
temporally associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and is often associated with 
SARS-CoV-2 exposure in children. In this issue of the JCI, Porritt, Paschold, et 
al. identify restricted T cell receptor (TCR) β-chain variable domain (Vβ) usage 
in patients with severe MIS-C, indicating a potential role for SARS-CoV-2 as a 
superantigen. These findings suggest that a blood test that determines the 
presence of specific TCRβ variable gene (TRBV) segments may identify patients at 
risk for severe MIS-C.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI149327
PMCID: PMC8121522
PMID: 33844652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.