---
reference_id: "PMID:32799913"
title: Drosophila myosin mutants model the disparate severity of type 1 and type 2B distal arthrogryposis and indicate an enhanced actin affinity mechanism.
authors:
- Guo Y
- Kronert WA
- Hsu KH
- Huang A
- Sarsoza F
- Bell KM
- Suggs JA
- Swank DM
- Bernstein SI
journal: Skelet Muscle
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13395-020-00241-6
keywords:
- Actins/metabolism
- Animals
- "Arthrogryposis/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Drosophila Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Drosophila melanogaster
- Locomotion
- Longevity
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, pathology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Myosin Heavy Chains/genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- Protein Binding
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drosophila myosin mutants model the disparate severity of type 1 and type 2B distal arthrogryposis and indicate an enhanced actin affinity mechanism.
**Authors:** Guo Y, Kronert WA, Hsu KH, Huang A, Sarsoza F, Bell KM, Suggs JA, Swank DM, Bernstein SI
**Journal:** Skelet Muscle (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13395-020-00241-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13395-020-00241-6)

## Content

1. Skelet Muscle. 2020 Aug 15;10(1):24. doi: 10.1186/s13395-020-00241-6.

Drosophila myosin mutants model the disparate severity of type 1 and type 2B 
distal arthrogryposis and indicate an enhanced actin affinity mechanism.

Guo Y(1), Kronert WA(1), Hsu KH(1), Huang A(2), Sarsoza F(1), Bell KM(2), Suggs 
JA(1), Swank DM(2), Bernstein SI(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Molecular Biology Institute and Heart Institute, San 
Diego State University, San Diego, CA, 92182-4614, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences & Biomedical Engineering, Center for 
Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 
Troy, NY, 12180, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Molecular Biology Institute and Heart Institute, San 
Diego State University, San Diego, CA, 92182-4614, USA. sbernstein@sdsu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Distal arthrogryposis (DA) is a group of autosomal dominant skeletal 
muscle diseases characterized by congenital contractures of distal limb joints. 
The most common cause of DA is a mutation of the embryonic myosin heavy chain 
gene, MYH3. Human phenotypes of DA are divided into the weakest form-DA1, a 
moderately severe form-DA2B (Sheldon-Hall Syndrome), and a severe DA 
disorder-DA2A (Freeman-Sheldon Syndrome). As models of DA1 and DA2B do not 
exist, their disease mechanisms are poorly understood.
METHODS: We produced the first models of myosin-based DA1 (F437I) and DA2B 
(A234T) using transgenic Drosophila melanogaster and performed an integrative 
analysis of the effects of the mutations. Assessments included lifespan, 
locomotion, ultrastructural analysis, muscle mechanics, ATPase activity, in 
vitro motility, and protein modeling.
RESULTS: We observed significant defects in DA1 and DA2B Drosophila flight and 
jump ability, as well as myofibril assembly and stability, with homozygotes 
displaying more severe phenotypes than heterozygotes. Notably, DA2B flies showed 
dramatically stronger phenotypic defects compared to DA1 flies, mirroring the 
human condition. Mechanical studies of indirect flight muscle fibers from DA1 
heterozygotes revealed reduced power output along with increased stiffness and 
force production, compared to wild-type controls. Further, isolated DA1 myosin 
showed significantly reduced myosin ATPase activity and in vitro actin filament 
motility. These data in conjunction with our sinusoidal analysis of fibers 
suggest prolonged myosin binding to actin and a slowed step associated with Pi 
release and/or the power stroke. Our results are supported by molecular modeling 
studies, which indicate that the F437I and A234T mutations affect specific amino 
acid residue interactions within the myosin motor domain that may alter 
interaction with actin and nucleotide.
CONCLUSIONS: The allele-specific ultrastructural and locomotory defects in our 
Drosophila DA1 and DA2B models are concordant with the differential severity of 
the human diseases. Further, the mechanical and biochemical defects engendered 
by the DA1 mutation reveal that power production, fiber stiffness, and 
nucleotide handling are aberrant in F437I muscle and myosin. The defects 
observed in our DA1 and DA2B Drosophila models provide insight into DA 
phenotypes in humans, suggesting that contractures arise from prolonged 
actomyosin interactions.

DOI: 10.1186/s13395-020-00241-6
PMCID: PMC7429702
PMID: 32799913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.