---
reference_id: "PMID:20811126"
title: Development of human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) and human umbilical vein smooth muscle cell (HUVSMC) branch/stem structures on hydrogel layers via biological laser printing (BioLP).
authors:
- Wu PK
- Ringeisen BR
journal: Biofabrication
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1088/1758-5082/2/1/014111
keywords:
- Biomimetic Materials
- Biomimetics/methods
- Cell Differentiation/physiology
- Cell Growth Processes/physiology
- Coculture Techniques/methods
- "Endothelial Cells/cytology, physiology"
- Humans
- "Hydrogel, Polyethylene Glycol Dimethacrylate/chemistry"
- Lasers
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- "Muscle, Smooth, Vascular/cytology, physiology"
- "Myocytes, Smooth Muscle/cytology, physiology"
- "Neovascularization, Physiologic"
- Printing
- Tissue Scaffolds
- Umbilical Veins/cytology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) and human umbilical vein smooth muscle cell (HUVSMC) branch/stem structures on hydrogel layers via biological laser printing (BioLP).
**Authors:** Wu PK, Ringeisen BR
**Journal:** Biofabrication (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1088/1758-5082/2/1/014111](https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5082/2/1/014111)

## Content

1. Biofabrication. 2010 Mar;2(1):014111. doi: 10.1088/1758-5082/2/1/014111. Epub
2010 Mar 10.

Development of human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) and human umbilical
vein smooth muscle cell (HUVSMC) branch/stem structures on hydrogel layers via
biological laser printing (BioLP).

Wu PK(1), Ringeisen BR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Southern Oregon University, Ashland, OR 97520, USA.

Angiogenesis is one of the prerequisite steps for viable tissue formation. The
ability to influence the direction and structure in the formation of a vascular
system is crucial in engineering tissue. Using biological laser printing
(BioLP), we fabricated branch/stem structures of human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVEC) and human umbilical vein smooth muscle cells (HUVSMC).
The structure is simple as to mimic vascular networks in natural tissue but also
allow cells to develop new, finer structures away from the stem and branches.
Additionally, we printed co-culture structures by first depositing only HUVECs,
followed by 24 h incubation to allow for adequate cell-cell communication and
differentiation into lumina; these cell printed scaffold layers were then
removed from incubation and inserted into the BioLP apparatus so that HUVSMCs
could be directly deposited on top and around the previously printed HUVEC
structures. The growth and differentiation of these co-culture structures was
then compared to the growth of printed samples with either HUVECs or HUVSMCs
alone. Lumen formation was found to closely mimic the original branch and stem
structure. The beginning of a network structure is observed. HUVSMCs acted to
limit HUVEC over-growth and migration when compared to printed HUVEC structures
alone. HUVSMCs and HUVECS, when printed in close contact, appear to form
cell-cell junctions around lumen-like structures. They demonstrate a symbiotic
relationship which affects their development of phenotype when in close
proximity of each other. Our results indicate that it is possible to direct the
formation and growth of lumen and lumen network using BioLP.

DOI: 10.1088/1758-5082/2/1/014111
PMID: 20811126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
