---
reference_id: "PMID:31744817"
title: A Versatile ES Cell-Based Melanoma Mouse Modeling Platform.
authors:
- Bok I
- Vera O
- Xu X
- Jasani N
- Nakamura K
- Reff J
- Nenci A
- Gonzalez JG
- Karreth FA
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-2924
keywords:
- Animals
- Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Embryonic Stem Cells
- Melanocytes
- Melanoma/genetics
- Mice
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Versatile ES Cell-Based Melanoma Mouse Modeling Platform.
**Authors:** Bok I, Vera O, Xu X, Jasani N, Nakamura K, Reff J, Nenci A, Gonzalez JG, Karreth FA
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-2924](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-2924)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2020 Feb 15;80(4):912-921. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-2924.
Epub  2019 Nov 19.

A Versatile ES Cell-Based Melanoma Mouse Modeling Platform.

Bok I(1)(2), Vera O(1), Xu X(1), Jasani N(1)(2), Nakamura K(1), Reff J(1), Nenci
A(3), Gonzalez JG(3), Karreth FA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida.
(2)Cancer Biology PhD Program, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida.
(3)Gene Targeting Core Facility, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida.
(4)Department of Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida. florian.karreth@moffitt.org.

Comment in
    Cancer Res. 2020 Feb 15;80(4):655-656. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-3869.

Comment on
    Cancer Res. 2020 Feb 15;80(4):655-656. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-3869.

The cumbersome and time-consuming process of generating new mouse strains and
multiallelic experimental animals often hinders the use of genetically
engineered mouse models (GEMM) in cancer research. Here, we describe the
development and validation of an embryonic stem cell (ESC)-GEMM platform for
rapid modeling of melanoma in mice. The platform incorporates 12 clinically
relevant genotypes composed of combinations of four driver alleles
(LSL-BrafV600E, LSL-NrasQ61R, PtenFlox, and Cdkn2aFlox) and regulatory alleles
to spatiotemporally control the perturbation of genes of interest. The ESCs
produce high-contribution chimeras, which recapitulate the melanoma phenotypes
of conventionally bred mice. Using the ESC-GEMM platform to modulate Pten
expression in melanocytes in vivo, we highlighted the utility and advantages of
gene depletion by CRISPR-Cas9, RNAi, or conditional knockout for melanoma
modeling. Moreover, complementary genetic methods demonstrated the impact of
Pten restoration on the prevention and maintenance of Pten-deficient melanomas.
Finally, we showed that chimera-derived melanoma cell lines retain regulatory
allele competency and are a powerful resource to complement ESC-GEMM chimera
experiments in vitro and in syngeneic grafts in vivo Thus, when combined with
sophisticated genetic tools, the ESC-GEMM platform enables rapid,
high-throughput, and versatile studies aimed at addressing outstanding questions
in melanoma biology.Significance: This study presents a high-throughput and
versatile ES cell-based mouse modeling platform that can be combined with
state-of-the-art genetic tools to address unanswered questions in melanoma in
vivo See related commentary by Thorkelsson et al., p. 655.

©2019 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-2924
PMCID: PMC7024666
PMID: 31744817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of
interest
