---
reference_id: "PMID:40617357"
title: Functional characterization of genetic variants affecting the intracellular domains of ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1).
authors:
- Teigen M
- Ølnes ÅS
- Bjune K
- Bogsrud MP
- Strøm TB
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jlr.2025.100854
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1/genetics, metabolism, chemistry"
- Humans
- Genetic Variation
- Protein Domains
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional characterization of genetic variants affecting the intracellular domains of ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1).
**Authors:** Teigen M, Ølnes ÅS, Bjune K, Bogsrud MP, Strøm TB
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jlr.2025.100854](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlr.2025.100854)

## Content

1. J Lipid Res. 2025 Aug;66(8):100854. doi: 10.1016/j.jlr.2025.100854. Epub 2025
Jul 3.

Functional characterization of genetic variants affecting the intracellular
domains of ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1).

Teigen M(1), Ølnes ÅS(2), Bjune K(3), Bogsrud MP(4), Strøm TB(3).

Author information:
(1)Unit for Cardiac and Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics,
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: temari@ous-hf.no.
(2)Unit for Cardiac and Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics,
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway.
(3)Unit for Cardiac and Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics,
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Unit for Cardiac and Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics,
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Department of Pharmaceuticals and
Biomedicine, Norwegian Directorate of Health, Oslo, Norway.

The ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) effluxes cellular cholesterol
and phospholipids to extracellular acceptors, mainly apolipoprotein A1,
generating high-density lipoprotein (HDL) particles. This is the first step in
the anti-atherosclerotic process of transporting excess cholesterol from
non-hepatic tissues to the liver. Loss-of-function variants in ABCA1 lead to
reduced HDL cholesterol levels in plasma, thus possibly diminishing the
atheroprotective effect of HDL. More than 250 missense variants have been
reported in the ABCA1 gene, most of which remain to be functionally
characterized. In this study, we have characterized 74 variants affecting the
intracellular domains of ABCA1 by assessing cholesterol efflux activity and cell
surface localization of the protein, thereby shifting the pathogenicity
classification of 10 variants from class 3 (uncertain significance) to class 4
(likely pathogenic) or class 2 (likely benign). Consequently, functional
characterization contributes to a better understanding of the molecular basis of
the pathogenicity of genetic variants in ABCA1, which could also clarify the
mechanism of action of the protein.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jlr.2025.100854
PMCID: PMC12341595
PMID: 40617357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.
