---
reference_id: "PMID:29660143"
title: "Disseminated Kaposi sarcoma with epithelioid morphology in an HIV/AIDS patient: A previously unreported variant."
authors:
- Basra P
- Paramo J
- Alexis J
journal: J Cutan Pathol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/cup.13254
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disseminated Kaposi sarcoma with epithelioid morphology in an HIV/AIDS patient: A previously unreported variant.
**Authors:** Basra P, Paramo J, Alexis J
**Journal:** J Cutan Pathol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cup.13254](https://doi.org/10.1111/cup.13254)

## Content

1. J Cutan Pathol. 2018 Jul;45(7):526-529. doi: 10.1111/cup.13254. Epub 2018 May
9.

Disseminated Kaposi sarcoma with epithelioid morphology in an HIV/AIDS patient: 
A previously unreported variant.

Basra P(1), Paramo J(2), Alexis J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Mount Sinai Medical Center, Miami Beach, Florida.
(2)Department of Surgery, Mount Sinai Medical Center, Miami Beach, Florida.

Kaposi sarcoma is an oligoclonal HHV-8-driven vascular proliferation that was 
first described by a Viennese dermatologist Dr Moritz Kaposi. The disease has 
been seen in different clinical-epidemiological settings with a wide morphologic 
spectrum. We report a 52-year-old Caucasian man with HIV/AIDS and Kaposi sarcoma 
who presented with dyspnea and pleural effusion. He reported numerous tender 
subcutaneous nodules developing over the past few months on his chest, back and 
abdomen. An excisional biopsy of one of the nodules was performed. Touch preps 
revealed malignant cells in clusters. Microscopically, the neoplasm appeared 
undifferentiated with an epithelioid morphology, and involved the dermis and 
subcutaneous fat. Despite the medical history, Kaposi sarcoma was not considered 
foremost in the differential diagnosis. The malignant cells were positive for 
vimentin and negative for S100 protein, keratin AE1/3, CK7, CK20, napsin A, 
TTF-1 and synaptophysin. Additional stains revealed positivity for HHV-8, CD31 
and D2-40, supporting the diagnosis of Kaposi sarcoma. Kaposi sarcoma has been 
well described with many variants that may cause diagnostic difficulty. An 
epithelioid variant has not been reported and consequently, may cause 
misinterpretation of an otherwise well-known entity that may become life 
threatening if appropriate treatment is not initiated in a timely manner.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cup.13254
PMID: 29660143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]