---
reference_id: "PMID:20301779"
title: Dyskeratosis Congenita and Related Telomere Biology Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Savage SA
- Niewisch MR
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dyskeratosis Congenita and Related Telomere Biology Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Savage SA, Niewisch MR

## Content

1. Dyskeratosis Congenita and Related Telomere Biology Disorders.

Savage SA(1), Niewisch MR(2)(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2009 Nov 12 [updated 2023 Jan 19].

Author information:
(1)Director, Clinical Genetics Branch, Clinical Director, Division of Cancer 
Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(2)Special Volunteer, Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology 
and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland
(3)Clinical Fellow, Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Dyskeratosis congenita and related telomere biology 
disorders (DC/TBD) are caused by impaired telomere maintenance resulting in 
short or very short telomeres. The phenotypic spectrum of telomere biology 
disorders is broad and includes individuals with classic dyskeratosis congenita 
(DC) as well as those with very short telomeres and an isolated physical 
finding. Classic DC is characterized by a triad of dysplastic nails, lacy 
reticular pigmentation of the upper chest and/or neck, and oral leukoplakia, 
although this may not be present in all individuals. People with DC/TBD are at 
increased risk for progressive bone marrow failure (BMF), myelodysplastic 
syndrome or acute myelogenous leukemia, solid tumors (usually squamous cell 
carcinoma of the head/neck or anogenital cancer), and pulmonary fibrosis. Other 
findings can include eye abnormalities (epiphora, blepharitis, sparse eyelashes, 
ectropion, entropion, trichiasis), taurodontism, liver disease, gastrointestinal 
telangiectasias, and avascular necrosis of the hips or shoulders. Although most 
persons with DC/TBD have normal psychomotor development and normal neurologic 
function, significant developmental delay is present in both forms; additional 
findings include cerebellar hypoplasia (Hoyeraal Hreidarsson syndrome) and 
bilateral exudative retinopathy and intracranial calcifications (Revesz syndrome 
and Coats plus syndrome). Onset and progression of manifestations of DC/TBD 
vary: at the mild end of the spectrum are those who have only minimal physical 
findings with normal bone marrow function, and at the severe end are those who 
have the diagnostic triad and early-onset BMF.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: A majority of individuals with DC/TBD have abnormally short 
telomeres for their age, as determined by multicolor flow cytometry fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (flow-FISH) on lymphocyte subsets. To date, ACD, CTC1, 
DKC1, NAF1, NHP2, NOP10, PARN, POT1, RPA1, RTEL1, STN1, TERC, TERT, TINF2, 
WRAP53, and ZCCHC8 are the genes in which pathogenic variants are known to cause 
DC/TBD and to result in very short telomeres. Pathogenic variants in one of 
these 16 genes have been identified in approximately 80% of individuals who meet 
clinical diagnostic criteria for DC/TBD.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is tailored to the 
individual. Hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) is the only curative 
treatment for BMF and leukemia, but long-term outcome has historically been poor 
due to treatment toxicity; if a suitable donor is not available, androgen 
therapy may be considered for BMF. Treatment of other cancers is tailored to the 
type of cancer. Of note, cancer therapy may pose an increased risk for prolonged 
cytopenias as well as pulmonary and hepatic toxicity. Treatment of pulmonary 
fibrosis is primarily supportive, although lung transplantation may be 
considered. Surveillance: For BMF: complete blood count (CBC) annually if normal 
and more often if abnormal; annual bone marrow aspirate and biopsy. For those on 
androgen therapy: routine monitoring of CBC, liver function, liver ultrasound, 
and endocrinology evaluation. For cancer risk: monthly self-examination for 
oral, head, and neck cancer; annual cancer screening by an otolaryngologist and 
dermatologist; annual gynecologic examination. For pulmonary fibrosis: annual 
pulmonary function tests starting either at diagnosis or when the individual can 
perform the test (often age ~8 years); bubble echocardiogram to look for 
pulmonary arteriovenous malformations if suspected based on clinical symptoms. 
Routine dental screening every six months and good oral hygiene are recommended. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Blood donation by family members if HCT is being 
considered; non-leukodepleted and non-irradiated blood products; the combination 
of androgens and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in treatment of BMF (has 
been associated with splenic rupture); toxic agents implicated in tumorigenesis 
(e.g., smoking, excessive sun exposure). Evaluation of relatives at risk: If a 
relative has signs or symptoms suggestive of DC/TBD or is being evaluated as a 
potential HCT donor, telomere length testing – or, if the pathogenic variant(s) 
in the family are known, molecular genetic testing – is warranted.
GENETIC COUNSELING: The mode of inheritance of DC/TBD varies by gene: X-linked: 
DKC1. Autosomal dominant: NAF1, RPA1, TERC, TINF2, and ZCCHC8. Autosomal 
dominant or autosomal recessive: ACD, PARN, RTEL1, and TERT. Autosomal 
recessive: CTC1, NHP2, NOP10, POT1, STN1, and WRAP53. Genetic counseling 
regarding risk to family members depends on accurate diagnosis, determination of 
the mode of inheritance in each family, and results of molecular genetic 
testing. Once the DC/TBD-related pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in 
an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are 
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301779