---
reference_id: "PMID:25863565"
title: "Can c-myc amplification reliably discriminate postradiation from primary angiosarcoma of the breast?"
authors:
- Laé M
- Lebel A
- Hamel-Viard F
- Asselain B
- Trassard M
- Sastre X
- Kirova YM
journal: Cancer Radiother
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.canrad.2015.01.001
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Breast Neoplasms/chemistry, diagnosis, genetics, radiotherapy, surgery"
- "Carcinoma, Ductal, Breast/radiotherapy, surgery"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 8/genetics, ultrastructure"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "DNA, Neoplasm/genetics"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Gene Amplification
- "Genes, myc"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/chemistry, diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Interphase
- Lymph Node Excision
- Mastectomy
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms, Radiation-Induced/chemistry, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Neoplasms, Second Primary/chemistry, diagnosis, genetics"
- Radioisotope Teletherapy/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Can c-myc amplification reliably discriminate postradiation from primary angiosarcoma of the breast?
**Authors:** Laé M, Lebel A, Hamel-Viard F, Asselain B, Trassard M, Sastre X, Kirova YM
**Journal:** Cancer Radiother (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.canrad.2015.01.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canrad.2015.01.001)

## Content

1. Cancer Radiother. 2015 May;19(3):168-74. doi: 10.1016/j.canrad.2015.01.001.
Epub  2015 Apr 8.

Can c-myc amplification reliably discriminate postradiation from primary
angiosarcoma of the breast?

Laé M(1), Lebel A(2), Hamel-Viard F(1), Asselain B(3), Trassard M(1), Sastre
X(1), Kirova YM(4).

Author information:
(1)Département de biologie des tumeurs, 26, rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France.
(2)Département d'oncologie radiothérapie, 26, rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France.
(3)Département de biostatistiques, institut Curie, 26, rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris,
France.
(4)Département d'oncologie radiothérapie, 26, rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France.
Electronic address: youlia.kirova@curie.fr.

PURPOSE: Breast angiosarcomas are rare vascular malignancies that arise
secondary to irradiation or de novo as primary tumours. The aim of this study is
to know whether c-myc amplification can reliably discriminate these two
entities.
MATERIEL AND METHODS: Forty-seven patients treated for breast angiosarcomas were
studied. Thirty-two patients were diagnosed with postradiation angiosarcomas
after breast cancer treatment and 15 patients with primary angiosarcomas.
Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed by
hybridization of probes covering C-MYC (chromosome 8q24.21) and CEP8 on tissue
sections.
RESULTS: Amplification (5- to 20-fold) of the c-myc oncogene was found in all
breast radiation-induced angiosarcomas (32 tumours) but in none of the 15
primary angiosarcomas except one (7%).
CONCLUSION: This study reinforces that there are true pathogenetic differences
between the two types of breast angiosarcomas which are morphologically
indistinguishable. These data point the pathways preferentially involved in the
pathogenesis of post radiation angiosarcomas of the breast and may provide the
basis for an additional targeted therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Société française de radiothérapie oncologique (SFRO).
Published by Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canrad.2015.01.001
PMID: 25863565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
