---
reference_id: "PMID:32481259"
title: "Identification of a novel mutation in pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia in a Chinese family: A case report."
authors:
- Tang Y
- Zheng F
- Lin X
- Pan Q
- Li L
- Li H
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000019965
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a novel mutation in pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia in a Chinese family: A case report.
**Authors:** Tang Y, Zheng F, Lin X, Pan Q, Li L, Li H
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000019965](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000019965)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 May 22;99(21):e19965. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000019965.

Identification of a novel mutation in pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia in a 
Chinese family: A case report.

Tang Y(1), Zheng F, Lin X, Pan Q, Li L, Li H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Affiliated Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School 
of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, P.R. China.

INTRODUCTION: Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) indicates a group of rare disorders 
characterized by end-organ resistance to various hormones, primarily parathyroid 
hormone (PTH). One of its most common type is PHP-Ia, which is caused by 
maternally inherited inactivating mutations in GNAS. In this report, we present 
a Chinese girl with typical features of PHP-Ia and a novel mutation of the GNAS 
gene.
PATIENT CONCERNS: A 9-year-old Chinese girl presented with recurrent epileptic 
seizure.
DIAGNOSIS: Biochemical and imaging findings were consistent with PHP-Ia, 
including typical Albright hereditary osteodystrophy phenotype (short stature, 
round face, brachydactyly, and mild mental retardation), PTH resistance 
(hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, elevated serum PTH, and multiple intracranial 
calcification) and thyroid stimulating hormone resistance (elevated serum 
thyroid stimulating hormone).
INTERVENTIONS: The patient was given 1α-hydroxylated vitamin D (calcitriol, 
0.5 ug/d), calcium carbonate and vitamin D3 tablets (1.5 g/d, including 600 mg 
calcium and 125 IU vitamin D3). DNA analysis of the GNAS gene was performed for 
the whole family.
OUTCOMES: Investigation of the GNAS gene revealed a novel mutation c.313delG 
(p.Glu105Lysfs*7) in the patient, as well as her mother. So the diagnosis of 
PHP-Ia was confirmed.
CONCLUSION: The study further expands the spectrum of known GNAS mutations 
associated with PHP and lay emphasis on the genetic analysis of GNAS gene for 
identifying genetic abnormalities as well as making diagnosis and 
differentiation of various subtypes of PHP.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000019965
PMCID: PMC7249942
PMID: 32481259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.