---
reference_id: "PMID:24334290"
title: "Variant non ketotic hyperglycinemia is caused by mutations in LIAS, BOLA3 and the novel gene GLRX5."
authors:
- Baker PR 2nd
- Friederich MW
- Swanson MA
- Shaikh T
- Bhattacharya K
- Scharer GH
- Aicher J
- Creadon-Swindell G
- Geiger E
- MacLean KN
- Lee WT
- Deshpande C
- Freckmann ML
- Shih LY
- Wasserstein M
- Rasmussen MB
- Lund AM
- Procopis P
- Cameron JM
- Robinson BH
- Brown GK
- Brown RM
- Compton AG
- Dieckmann CL
- Collard R
- Coughlin CR 2nd
- Spector E
- Wempe MF
- Van Hove JL
journal: Brain
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awt328
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variant non ketotic hyperglycinemia is caused by mutations in LIAS, BOLA3 and the novel gene GLRX5.
**Authors:** Baker PR 2nd, Friederich MW, Swanson MA, Shaikh T, Bhattacharya K, Scharer GH, Aicher J, Creadon-Swindell G, Geiger E, MacLean KN, Lee WT, Deshpande C, Freckmann ML, Shih LY, Wasserstein M, Rasmussen MB, Lund AM, Procopis P, Cameron JM, Robinson BH, Brown GK, Brown RM, Compton AG, Dieckmann CL, Collard R, Coughlin CR 2nd, Spector E, Wempe MF, Van Hove JL
**Journal:** Brain (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awt328](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt328)

## Content

1. Brain. 2014 Feb;137(Pt 2):366-79. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt328. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

Variant non ketotic hyperglycinemia is caused by mutations in LIAS, BOLA3 and 
the novel gene GLRX5.

Baker PR 2nd(1), Friederich MW, Swanson MA, Shaikh T, Bhattacharya K, Scharer 
GH, Aicher J, Creadon-Swindell G, Geiger E, MacLean KN, Lee WT, Deshpande C, 
Freckmann ML, Shih LY, Wasserstein M, Rasmussen MB, Lund AM, Procopis P, Cameron 
JM, Robinson BH, Brown GK, Brown RM, Compton AG, Dieckmann CL, Collard R, 
Coughlin CR 2nd, Spector E, Wempe MF, Van Hove JL.

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, 80045, 
USA.

Patients with nonketotic hyperglycinemia and deficient glycine cleavage enzyme 
activity, but without mutations in AMT, GLDC or GCSH, the genes encoding its 
constituent proteins, constitute a clinical group which we call 'variant 
nonketotic hyperglycinemia'. We hypothesize that in some patients the aetiology 
involves genetic mutations that result in a deficiency of the cofactor lipoate, 
and sequenced genes involved in lipoate synthesis and iron-sulphur cluster 
biogenesis. Of 11 individuals identified with variant nonketotic 
hyperglycinemia, we were able to determine the genetic aetiology in eight 
patients and delineate the clinical and biochemical phenotypes. Mutations were 
identified in the genes for lipoate synthase (LIAS), BolA type 3 (BOLA3), and a 
novel gene glutaredoxin 5 (GLRX5). Patients with GLRX5-associated variant 
nonketotic hyperglycinemia had normal development with childhood-onset spastic 
paraplegia, spinal lesion, and optic atrophy. Clinical features of 
BOLA3-associated variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia include severe 
neurodegeneration after a period of normal development. Additional features 
include leukodystrophy, cardiomyopathy and optic atrophy. Patients with lipoate 
synthase-deficient variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia varied in severity from 
mild static encephalopathy to Leigh disease and cortical involvement. All 
patients had high serum and borderline elevated cerebrospinal fluid glycine and 
cerebrospinal fluid:plasma glycine ratio, and deficient glycine cleavage enzyme 
activity. They had low pyruvate dehydrogenase enzyme activity but most did not 
have lactic acidosis. Patients were deficient in lipoylation of mitochondrial 
proteins. There were minimal and inconsistent changes in cellular iron handling, 
and respiratory chain activity was unaffected. Identified mutations were 
phylogenetically conserved, and transfection with native genes corrected the 
biochemical deficiency proving pathogenicity. Treatments of cells with lipoate 
and with mitochondrially-targeted lipoate were unsuccessful at correcting the 
deficiency. The recognition of variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia is important 
for physicians evaluating patients with abnormalities in glycine as this will 
affect the genetic causation and genetic counselling, and provide prognostic 
information on the expected phenotypic course.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt328
PMCID: PMC3914472
PMID: 24334290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]