---
reference_id: "PMID:23951239"
title: Distinct gene expression signatures in lynch syndrome and familial colorectal cancer type x.
authors:
- Dominguez-Valentin M
- Therkildsen C
- Veerla S
- Jönsson M
- Bernstein I
- Borg A
- Nilbert M
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071755
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct gene expression signatures in lynch syndrome and familial colorectal cancer type x.
**Authors:** Dominguez-Valentin M, Therkildsen C, Veerla S, Jönsson M, Bernstein I, Borg A, Nilbert M
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0071755](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0071755)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 12;8(8):e71755. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071755. 
eCollection 2013.

Distinct gene expression signatures in lynch syndrome and familial colorectal 
cancer type x.

Dominguez-Valentin M(1), Therkildsen C, Veerla S, Jönsson M, Bernstein I, Borg 
A, Nilbert M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 
Lund, Sweden. mev_dv@yahoo.com

INTRODUCTION: Heredity is estimated to cause at least 20% of colorectal cancer. 
The hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer subset is divided into Lynch 
syndrome and familial colorectal cancer type X (FCCTX) based on presence of 
mismatch repair (MMR) gene defects.
PURPOSE: We addressed the gene expression signatures in colorectal cancer linked 
to Lynch syndrome and FCCTX with the aim to identify candidate genes and to map 
signaling pathways relevant in hereditary colorectal carcinogenesis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The 18 k whole-genome c-DNA-mediated annealing, selection, 
extension, and ligation (WG-DASL) assay was applied to 123 colorectal cancers, 
including 39 Lynch syndrome tumors and 37 FCCTX tumors. Target genes were 
technically validated using real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) and the 
expression signature was validated in independent datasets.
RESULTS: Colorectal cancers linked to Lynch syndrome and FCCTX showed distinct 
gene expression profiles, which by significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) 
differed by 2188 genes. Functional pathways involved were related to G-protein 
coupled receptor signaling, oxidative phosphorylation, and cell cycle function 
and mitosis. qRT-PCR verified altered expression of the selected genes NDUFA9, 
AXIN2, MYC, DNA2 and H2AFZ. Application of the 2188-gene signature to 
independent datasets showed strong correlation to MMR status.
CONCLUSION: Distinct genetic profiles and deregulation of different canonical 
pathways apply to Lynch syndrome and FCCTX and key targets herein may be 
relevant to pursue for refined diagnostic and therapeutic strategies in 
hereditary colorectal cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071755
PMCID: PMC3741139
PMID: 23951239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.