---
reference_id: "PMID:28082430"
title: Increased cardiac work provides a link between systemic hypertension and heart failure.
authors:
- Wilson AJ
- Wang VY
- Sands GB
- Young AA
- Nash MP
- LeGrice IJ
journal: Physiol Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.14814/phy2.13104
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased cardiac work provides a link between systemic hypertension and heart failure.
**Authors:** Wilson AJ, Wang VY, Sands GB, Young AA, Nash MP, LeGrice IJ
**Journal:** Physiol Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.14814/phy2.13104](https://doi.org/10.14814/phy2.13104)

## Content

1. Physiol Rep. 2017 Jan;5(1):e13104. doi: 10.14814/phy2.13104.

Increased cardiac work provides a link between systemic hypertension and heart 
failure.

Wilson AJ(1)(2), Wang VY(3), Sands GB(3)(2), Young AA(3)(4), Nash MP(3)(5), 
LeGrice IJ(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Auckland Bioengineering Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New 
Zealand alexander.wilson@auckland.ac.nz.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)Auckland Bioengineering Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New 
Zealand.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Medical Imaging, University of Auckland, Auckland, 
New Zealand.
(5)Department of Engineering Science, University of Auckland, Auckland, New 
Zealand.

The spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) is an established model of human 
hypertensive heart disease transitioning into heart failure. The study of the 
progression to heart failure in these animals has been limited by the lack of 
longitudinal data. We used MRI to quantify left ventricular mass, volume, and 
cardiac work in SHRs at age 3 to 21 month and compared these indices to data 
from Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) controls. SHR had lower ejection fraction compared with 
WKY at all ages, but there was no difference in cardiac output at any age. At 
21 month the SHR had significantly elevated stroke work (51 ± 3 mL.mmHg SHR vs. 
24 ± 2 mL.mmHg WKY; n = 8, 4; P < 0.001) and cardiac minute work 
(14.2 ± 1.2 L.mmHg/min SHR vs. 6.2 ± 0.8 L.mmHg/min WKY; n = 8, 4; P < 0.001) 
compared to control, in addition to significantly larger left ventricular mass 
to body mass ratio (3.61 ± 0.15 mg/g SHR vs. 2.11 ± 0.008 mg/g WKY; n = 8, 6; 
P < 0.001). SHRs showed impaired systolic function, but developed hypertrophy to 
compensate and successfully maintained cardiac output. However, this was 
associated with an increase in cardiac work at age 21 month, which has 
previously demonstrated fibrosis and cell death. The interplay between these 
factors may be the mechanism for progression to failure in this animal model.

© 2017 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 
on behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.13104
PMCID: PMC5256162
PMID: 28082430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]