---
reference_id: "PMID:39001399"
title: Bispecific Antibodies for the Management of Relapsed/Refractory Multiple Myeloma.
authors:
- Tacchetti P
- Barbato S
- Mancuso K
- Zamagni E
- Cavo M
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16132337
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bispecific Antibodies for the Management of Relapsed/Refractory Multiple Myeloma.
**Authors:** Tacchetti P, Barbato S, Mancuso K, Zamagni E, Cavo M
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16132337](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16132337)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Jun 26;16(13):2337. doi: 10.3390/cancers16132337.

Bispecific Antibodies for the Management of Relapsed/Refractory Multiple 
Myeloma.

Tacchetti P(1), Barbato S(1)(2), Mancuso K(1)(2), Zamagni E(1)(2), Cavo M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Istituto di Ematologia 
"Seràgnoli", Bologna, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Università di Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.

Bispecific antibodies (BsAbs) are artificially engineered antibodies that can 
bind simultaneously to the CD3 subunit within the T-cell receptor complex and an 
antigen on tumor cells, leading to T-cell activation and tumor cell killing. 
BsAbs against BCMA or GPRC5D have shown impressive clinical activity in heavily 
pretreated patients with relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma (RRMM), with some 
agents having already received regulatory approval after the third (by the 
European Medicines Agency, EMA) or fourth (by the Food and Drug Administration, 
FDA) line of therapy; the results of early-phase clinical trials targeting FcRH5 
are also promising. Overall, BsAbs as monotherapy correlated with an ORR that 
exceeded 60%, with a high CR rate ranging between 25% and 50% and a median PFS 
of around 1 year among patients with a median of 4-6 prior lines of therapy. The 
main toxicities include cytokine release syndrome, cytopenias, 
hypogammaglobulinemia, and infections; on-target off-tumor adverse events 
involving the skin, mucosa, hair, and nails may also occur with anti-GPRC5D 
BsAbs. Active research to increase their efficacy and improve their tolerance is 
still in progress, including combination therapies and application in earlier 
treatment lines and the development of novel agents. A better understanding of 
the mechanisms of resistance is a challenge and could lead to more personalized 
approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16132337
PMCID: PMC11240369
PMID: 39001399

Conflict of interest statement: P.T. has received honoraria from Amgen, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb/Celgene, Janssen, Takeda, AbbVie, Sanofi, GlaxoSmithKline, 
and Pfizer; S.B. declares no potential conflicts of interest; K.M. has received 
honoraria from Celgene, Takeda, Amgen, Sanofi, and Janssen; E.Z. has received 
honoraria from Janssen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Amgen, and Takeda; M.C. has served 
as a consultant/advisor for and has received honoraria from Amgen, AbbVie, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Karyopharm 
Therapeutics, Menarini Stemline, and Sanofi.