---
reference_id: "PMID:18650449"
title: Molecular analysis of t(15;17) genomic breakpoints in secondary acute promyelocytic leukemia arising after treatment of multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Hasan SK
- Mays AN
- Ottone T
- Ledda A
- La Nasa G
- Cattaneo C
- Borlenghi E
- Melillo L
- Montefusco E
- Cervera J
- Stephen C
- Satchi G
- Lennard A
- Libura M
- Byl JA
- Osheroff N
- Amadori S
- Felix CA
- Voso MT
- Sperr WR
- Esteve J
- Sanz MA
- Grimwade D
- Lo-Coco F
journal: Blood
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-115600
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/metabolism"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- DNA/chemistry
- "DNA Topoisomerases, Type II/metabolism"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Introns
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/chemically induced, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mitoxantrone/adverse effects, pharmacology"
- "Models, Genetic"
- Multiple Sclerosis/therapy
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular analysis of t(15;17) genomic breakpoints in secondary acute promyelocytic leukemia arising after treatment of multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Hasan SK, Mays AN, Ottone T, Ledda A, La Nasa G, Cattaneo C, Borlenghi E, Melillo L, Montefusco E, Cervera J, Stephen C, Satchi G, Lennard A, Libura M, Byl JA, Osheroff N, Amadori S, Felix CA, Voso MT, Sperr WR, Esteve J, Sanz MA, Grimwade D, Lo-Coco F
**Journal:** Blood (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2007-10-115600](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2007-10-115600)

## Content

1. Blood. 2008 Oct 15;112(8):3383-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-115600. Epub
2008  Jul 23.

Molecular analysis of t(15;17) genomic breakpoints in secondary acute
promyelocytic leukemia arising after treatment of multiple sclerosis.

Hasan SK(1), Mays AN, Ottone T, Ledda A, La Nasa G, Cattaneo C, Borlenghi E,
Melillo L, Montefusco E, Cervera J, Stephen C, Satchi G, Lennard A, Libura M,
Byl JA, Osheroff N, Amadori S, Felix CA, Voso MT, Sperr WR, Esteve J, Sanz MA,
Grimwade D, Lo-Coco F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biopathology, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia (t-APL) with t(15;17) translocation
is a well-recognized complication of cancer treatment with agents targeting
topoisomerase II. However, cases are emerging after mitoxantrone therapy for
multiple sclerosis (MS). Analysis of 12 cases of mitoxantrone-related t-APL in
MS patients revealed an altered distribution of chromosome 15 breakpoints versus
de novo APL, biased toward disruption within PML intron 6 (11 of 12, 92% vs 622
of 1022, 61%: P = .035). Despite this intron spanning approximately 1 kb,
breakpoints in 5 mitoxantrone-treated patients fell within an 8-bp region
(1482-9) corresponding to the "hotspot" previously reported in t-APL,
complicating mitoxantrone-containing breast cancer therapy. Another shared
breakpoint was identified within the approximately 17-kb RARA intron 2 involving
2 t-APL cases arising after mitoxantrone treatment for MS and breast cancer,
respectively. Analysis of PML and RARA genomic breakpoints in functional assays
in 4 cases, including the shared RARA intron 2 breakpoint at 14 446-49,
confirmed each to be preferential sites of topoisomerase IIalpha-mediated DNA
cleavage in the presence of mitoxantrone. This study further supports the
presence of preferential sites of DNA damage induced by mitoxantrone in PML and
RARA genes that may underlie the propensity to develop this subtype of leukemia
after exposure to this agent.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-115600
PMCID: PMC2954750
PMID: 18650449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
