---
reference_id: "PMID:27499981"
title: Tuberculous pleural effusion.
authors:
- Zhai K
- Lu Y
- Shi HZ
journal: J Thorac Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.21037/jtd.2016.05.87
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberculous pleural effusion.
**Authors:** Zhai K, Lu Y, Shi HZ
**Journal:** J Thorac Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.21037/jtd.2016.05.87](https://doi.org/10.21037/jtd.2016.05.87)

## Content

1. J Thorac Dis. 2016 Jul;8(7):E486-94. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2016.05.87.

Tuberculous pleural effusion.

Zhai K(1), Lu Y(1), Shi HZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Institute of 
Respiratory Medicine and Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing 100020, China.

Although it is curable, tuberculosis remains one of the most frequent causes of 
pleural effusions on a global scale, especially in developing countries. 
Tuberculous pleural effusion (TPE) is one of the most common forms of 
extrapulmonary tuberculosis. TPE usually presents as an acute illness with 
fever, cough and pleuritic chest pain. The pleural fluid is an exudate that 
usually has predominantly lymphocytes. The gold standard for the diagnosis of 
TPE remains the detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in pleural fluid, or 
pleural biopsy specimens, either by microscopy and/or culture, or the 
histological demonstration of caseating granulomas in the pleura along with acid 
fast bacilli, Although adenosine deaminase and interferon-γ in pleural fluid 
have been documented to be useful tests for the diagnosis of TPE. It can be 
accepted that in areas with high tuberculosis prevalence, the easiest way to 
establish the diagnosis of TPE in a patient with a lymphocytic pleural effusion 
is to generally demonstrate a adenosine deaminase level above 40 U/L. The 
recommended treatment for TPE is a regimen with isoniazid, rifampin, and 
pyrazinamide for two months followed by four months of two drugs, isoniazid and 
rifampin.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2016.05.87
PMCID: PMC4958858
PMID: 27499981

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.