---
reference_id: "PMID:31377632"
title: "SPS: Understanding the complexity."
authors:
- El-Abassi R
- Soliman MY
- Villemarette-Pittman N
- England JD
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2019.06.021
keywords:
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- "Stiff-Person Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SPS: Understanding the complexity.
**Authors:** El-Abassi R, Soliman MY, Villemarette-Pittman N, England JD
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2019.06.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2019.06.021)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2019 Sep 15;404:137-149. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2019.06.021. Epub
2019  Jul 17.

SPS: Understanding the complexity.

El-Abassi R(1), Soliman MY(2), Villemarette-Pittman N(2), England JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Louisiana State University School of medicine, New 
Orleans, USA. Electronic address: relab1@lsuhsc.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Louisiana State University School of medicine, New 
Orleans, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurol Sci. 2020 Nov 15;418:117144. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2020.117144.

INTRODUCTION: Stiff-person syndrome (SPS), first described in 1956 by Moersch 
and Woltman, is a progressive autoimmune disorder with core features of chronic 
fluctuating progressive truncal and limb rigidity and painful muscle spasms 
leading to gait difficulties, falls and an appearance that resembles tin 
soldiers. The syndrome is a rare, highly disabling disorder of the central 
nervous and frequently results in significant disability. Understanding of the 
etiology, clinical spectrum, diagnostic workup and therapeutic modalities for 
this painful and disabling disorder has vastly evolved over the past few years 
with more confidence in classifying and treating the patients. The purpose of 
this review is to increase the awareness, early detection, and treatment of this 
disabling disease.
METHOD: PubMed was searched, all date inclusive, using the following phrases: 
stiff person syndrome,anti-Glutamic acid decarboxylase (Anti-GAD) antibody 
syndrome, Progressive encephalomyelitis with rigidity and myoclonus (PERM), and 
Paraneoplastic Stiff Person syndrome. No filters or restrictions were used. A 
total of 888 articles were identified.
RESULTS: The results were narrowed to 190 citations after excluding non-English 
and duplicate reports. Clinical presentation, laboratory testing, treatment, and 
prognosis were categorized and summarized.
DISCUSSION: In this article we will discuss the epidemiology, presentation and 
classification. Explain the pathophysiology of SPS and the autoimmune mechanisms 
involved. Discuss the diagnostic approach and treatments available, as well as, 
the prognosis and outcome.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2019.06.021
PMID: 31377632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]