---
reference_id: "PMID:15896192"
title: "Structural changes in the airways in asthma: observations and consequences."
authors:
- Bai TR
- Knight DA
journal: Clin Sci (Lond)
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1042/CS20040342
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural changes in the airways in asthma: observations and consequences.
**Authors:** Bai TR, Knight DA
**Journal:** Clin Sci (Lond) (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1042/CS20040342](https://doi.org/10.1042/CS20040342)

## Content

1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2005 Jun;108(6):463-77. doi: 10.1042/CS20040342.

Structural changes in the airways in asthma: observations and consequences.

Bai TR(1), Knight DA.

Author information:
(1)James Hogg iCAPTURE Centre for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, 
University of British Columbia, St. Paul's Hospital, 1081 Burrard Street, 
Vancouver, BC V6Z 1Y6, Canada. tbai@mrl.ubc.ca

Structural changes reported in the airways of asthmatics include epithelial 
fragility, goblet cell hyperplasia, enlarged submucosal mucus glands, 
angiogenesis, increased matrix deposition in the airway wall, increased airway 
smooth muscle mass, wall thickening and abnormalities in elastin. Genetic 
influences, as well as fetal and early life exposures, may contribute to 
structural changes such as subepithelial fibrosis from an early age. Other 
structural alterations are related to duration of disease and/or long-term 
uncontrolled inflammation. The increase in smooth muscle mass in both large and 
small airways probably occurs via multiple mechanisms, and there are probably 
changes in the phenotype of smooth muscle cells, some showing enhanced synthetic 
capacity, others enhanced proliferation or contractility. Fixed airflow 
limitation is probably due to remodelling, whereas the importance of structural 
changes to the phenomenon of airways hyperresponsiveness may be dependent on the 
specific clinical phenotype of asthma evaluated. Reduced compliance of the 
airway wall secondary to enhanced matrix deposition may protect against airway 
narrowing. Conversely, in severe asthma, disruption of alveolar attachments and 
adventitial thickening may augment airway narrowing. The encroachment upon 
luminal area by submucosal thickening may be disadvantageous by increasing the 
risk of airway closure in the presence of the intraluminal cellular and mucus 
exudate associated with asthma exacerbations. Structural changes may increase 
airway narrowing by alteration of smooth muscle dynamics through limitation of 
the ability of the smooth muscle to periodically lengthen.

DOI: 10.1042/CS20040342
PMID: 15896192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]