---
reference_id: "PMID:32551948"
title: Isoniazid Preventive Therapy in Contacts of Multidrug-Resistant Tuberculosis.
authors:
- Huang CC
- Becerra MC
- Calderon R
- Contreras C
- Galea J
- Grandjean L
- Lecca L
- Yataco R
- Zhang Z
- Murray M
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.201908-1576OC
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isoniazid Preventive Therapy in Contacts of Multidrug-Resistant Tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Huang CC, Becerra MC, Calderon R, Contreras C, Galea J, Grandjean L, Lecca L, Yataco R, Zhang Z, Murray M
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.201908-1576OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201908-1576OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2020 Oct 15;202(8):1159-1168. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201908-1576OC.

Isoniazid Preventive Therapy in Contacts of Multidrug-Resistant Tuberculosis.

Huang CC(1)(2), Becerra MC(2), Calderon R(3), Contreras C(3), Galea J(4), 
Grandjean L(5)(6)(7), Lecca L(3), Yataco R(3), Zhang Z(1)(2), Murray M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Global Health Equity, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Global Health and Social Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Partners in Health-Socios En Salud Sucursal, Lima, Peru.
(4)School of Social Work, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida.
(5)Wellcome Centre for Clinical Tropical Medicine, Imperial College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(6)Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru; and.
(7)TB Centre, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United 
Kingdom.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2020 Oct 15;202(8):1077-1078. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.202006-2488ED.

Rationale: The World Health Organization recommends the use of isoniazid (INH) 
alone or in combination with rifapentine to treat latent tuberculosis 
infections. The recent rise of drug-resistant tuberculosis has complicated the 
choice of treatment regimen for latent tuberculosis infection.Objectives: To 
evaluate the effects of INH preventive therapy on the contacts of patients with 
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis.Methods: In a prospective cohort study 
conducted between September 2009 and August 2012, we identified 4,500 index 
patients with tuberculosis and 14,044 tuberculosis-exposed household contacts 
who we followed for 1 year for the occurrence of incident tuberculosis disease. 
Although Peruvian national guidelines specify that INH preventive therapy should 
be provided to contacts aged 19 years old or younger, only half this group 
received INH preventive therapy.Measurements and Main Results: Among 4,216 
contacts under 19 years of age, 2,106 contacts (50%) initiated INH preventive 
therapy at enrollment. The protective effect of INH was more extreme in contacts 
exposed to drug-sensitive tuberculosis (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.30; 95% 
confidence interval, 0.18-0.48) and to multidrug-resistant tuberculosis 
(adjusted hazard ratio, 0.19; 95% confidence interval, 0.05-0.66) compared with 
those exposed to mono-INH-resistant tuberculosis (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.80; 
95% confidence interval, 0.23-2.80). In the second independent study, 
tuberculosis occurred in none of the 76 household contacts who received INH 
preventive therapy compared with 3% (8 of 273) of those who did not.Conclusions: 
Household contacts who received INH preventive therapy had a lower incidence of 
tuberculosis disease even when they had been exposed to an index patient with 
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. INH may have a role in the management of 
latent multidrug-resistant tuberculosis infection.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201908-1576OC
PMCID: PMC7560814
PMID: 32551948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]