---
reference_id: "PMID:37534417"
title: Early Treatment of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.
authors:
- Jonat B
- Geneslaw AS
- Capone CA
- Shah S
- Bartucca L
- Sewell TB
- Acker KP
- Mitchell E
- Cheung EW
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2023-061297
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early Treatment of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.
**Authors:** Jonat B, Geneslaw AS, Capone CA, Shah S, Bartucca L, Sewell TB, Acker KP, Mitchell E, Cheung EW
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2023-061297](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2023-061297)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2023 Sep 1;152(3):e2023061297. doi: 10.1542/peds.2023-061297.

Early Treatment of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.

Jonat B(1), Geneslaw AS(1), Capone CA(2), Shah S(2), Bartucca L(3), Sewell 
TB(1), Acker KP(3), Mitchell E(2), Cheung EW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, 
NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at 
Hofstra/Northwell, Cohen Children's Medical Center, Northwell Health, New Hyde 
Park.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Weill Cornell Medical Center, NewYork-Presbyterian 
Komansky Children's Hospital, New York, New York.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) 
is a severe hyperinflammatory illness occurring after severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 infection. The optimal treatment of MIS-C is unknown, 
although prior studies have indicated benefits of intravenous immunoglobulin 
(IVIG) and glucocorticoids. We hypothesize that early treatment with 
glucocorticoids is associated with shorter hospital length of stay (LOS).
METHODS: This study is a multicenter retrospective cohort study of patients 
hospitalized with MIS-C over a roughly 1-year period. The primary outcome was 
hospital LOS comparing subjects who received glucocorticoids within 48 hours of 
arrival to the treating hospital to those who did not. Secondary outcomes 
included ICU LOS. Unadjusted and adjusted analyses were performed.
RESULTS: The final analysis included 131 subjects. Subjects who received early 
glucocorticoids were more likely to receive early IVIG and to require ICU 
admission. Early glucocorticoid administration was associated with shorter ICU 
LOS (4 vs 9 days, P = .004) in the unadjusted analysis. In the adjusted 
analysis, early glucocorticoid administration and early IVIG administration were 
both independently associated with shorter hospital LOS (incidence rate ratio 
0.75, P = .025; incidence rate ratio 0.56, P = .026, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Glucocorticoids and intravenous immunoglobulin were independently 
associated with shorter hospital length of stay when given early in 
hospitalization to MIS-C patients after accounting for potential confounding 
factors. The optimal dose and duration of treatment require further 
investigation, but this study supports early combination therapy with both IVIG 
and glucocorticoids for all children hospitalized with MIS-C.

Copyright © 2023 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2023-061297
PMCID: PMC10471509
PMID: 37534417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES: Dr Jonat 
reports employment as a patient safety physician with Boehringer Ingelheim 
Pharmaceuticals Inc., which began after completion of this study and initial 
submission of this manuscript but before publication. All study materials were 
prepared while Dr Jonat was employed by Columbia University. Dr Jonat reports 
receiving consulting fees from the World Health Organization. All other authors 
have no conflicts of interest relevant to this article to disclose.