---
reference_id: "PMID:34980503"
title: Clinical and molecular characteristics of tectonic (TCTN1) gene-related Joubert syndrome in a Saudi boy.
authors:
- Shirah BH
- Alshaikh NM
- Shawli A
- Naseer MI
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2021.12.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular characteristics of tectonic (TCTN1) gene-related Joubert syndrome in a Saudi boy.
**Authors:** Shirah BH, Alshaikh NM, Shawli A, Naseer MI
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2021.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2021.12.005)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2022 Apr;44(4):299-302. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2021.12.005. Epub 
2021 Dec 31.

Clinical and molecular characteristics of tectonic (TCTN1) gene-related Joubert 
syndrome in a Saudi boy.

Shirah BH(1), Alshaikh NM(2), Shawli A(3), Naseer MI(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research 
Centre, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(2)College of Medicine, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia; King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia; Pediatric Department, Ministry of National Guard Health 
Affairs, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: shaikhnm1@ngha.med.sa.
(3)College of Medicine, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia; King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia; Pediatric Department, Ministry of National Guard Health 
Affairs, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research, King Abdulaziz University, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia; Department of Medical Laboratory Technology, Faculty of 
Applied Medical Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

Joubert syndrome (OMIM:609863) is a hereditary disorder characterized by 
hypotonia, developmental delay, and a distinctive cerebellar and brain stem 
malformation known as the molar tooth sign. Variants in tectonic genes TCTN1-3 
have been described in a few patients with Joubert syndrome. Furthermore, 
Joubert syndrome attributed to variants in the TCTN1 (NM_001082538.2) gene has 
been only described in two reports. This report expands the clinical variability 
and molecular characterization of an emerging novel causative gene for Joubert 
syndrome in a Saudi boy born to non-consanguineous marriage with a c.1418del 
p.(Pro473Leufs*42) and c.800A > G p.(Tyr267Cys) representing a novel compound 
heterozygous variant of the TCTN1 gene identified by whole-exome sequencing and 
confirmed by Sanger sequencing. This is the first report of compound 
heterozygous Joubert syndrome type 13 from Saudi Arabia.

Copyright © 2021 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2021.12.005
PMID: 34980503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.