---
reference_id: "PMID:22819295"
title: "Whole mitochondrial genome analysis of a family with NARP/MILS caused by m.8993T>C mutation in the MT-ATP6 gene."
authors:
- Kara B
- Arıkan M
- Maraş H
- Abacı N
- Cakıris A
- Ustek D
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.06.013
keywords:
- Child
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/analysis"
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- "Genome, Mitochondrial"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Infant
- "Leigh Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mitochondria/genetics
- "Mitochondrial Myopathies/genetics, pathology"
- Mitochondrial Proton-Translocating ATPases/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics, pathology"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole mitochondrial genome analysis of a family with NARP/MILS caused by m.8993T>C mutation in the MT-ATP6 gene.
**Authors:** Kara B, Arıkan M, Maraş H, Abacı N, Cakıris A, Ustek D
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.06.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.06.013)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2012 Nov;107(3):389-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.06.013.
Epub  2012 Jul 10.

Whole mitochondrial genome analysis of a family with NARP/MILS caused by
m.8993T>C mutation in the MT-ATP6 gene.

Kara B(1), Arıkan M, Maraş H, Abacı N, Cakıris A, Ustek D.

Author information:
(1)Medical Faculty, Deparment of Pediatrics, Division of Child Neurology,
Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey. bulentkara@excite.com

Mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encoded nucleotide 8993 can cause NARP
syndrome (neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa) or MILS (maternally
inherited Leigh syndrome). The rare T8993C mutation in the MT-ATP6 gene is
generally considered to be clinically milder, but there is marked clinical
heterogeneity ranging from asymptomatic carriers to fatal infantile Leigh
syndrome. Clinical heterogeneity has mostly been attributed to mtDNA
heteroplasmy, but environmental, autosomal, tissue-specific factors, nuclear
modifier genes, and mtDNA variations may also modulate disease expression. Here,
we report the results of whole mitochondrial genome analysis of a family with
m.8993T>C mutation in the MT-ATP6 gene and associated with NARP/MILS, and
discuss the familial inheritance, effects of variation in combinations and
heteroplasmy levels on the clinical findings. The whole mitochondrial genome was
sequenced with ~182× average depth of coverage per sample with next-generation
sequencing technology. Thus, all heteroplasmic (>%10) and homoplasmic variations
were determined (except for 727C insertion) and classified according to the
associations with mitochondrial diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.06.013
PMID: 22819295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
