---
reference_id: "PMID:22532251"
title: A transcriptome signature of endothelial lymphatic cells coexists with the chronic oxidative stress signature in radiation-induced post-radiotherapy breast angiosarcomas.
authors:
- Hadj-Hamou NS
- Laé M
- Almeida A
- de la Grange P
- Kirova Y
- Sastre-Garau X
- Malfoy B
journal: Carcinogenesis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs155
keywords:
- "Breast Neoplasms/etiology, genetics, radiotherapy"
- "Endothelium/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Gene Dosage
- "Hemangiosarcoma/etiology, genetics"
- Humans
- "Lymph Nodes/metabolism, pathology"
- Oxidative Stress
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A transcriptome signature of endothelial lymphatic cells coexists with the chronic oxidative stress signature in radiation-induced post-radiotherapy breast angiosarcomas.
**Authors:** Hadj-Hamou NS, Laé M, Almeida A, de la Grange P, Kirova Y, Sastre-Garau X, Malfoy B
**Journal:** Carcinogenesis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/carcin/bgs155](https://doi.org/10.1093/carcin/bgs155)

## Content

1. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Jul;33(7):1399-405. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs155. Epub 2012
 Apr 24.

A transcriptome signature of endothelial lymphatic cells coexists with the
chronic oxidative stress signature in radiation-induced post-radiotherapy breast
angiosarcomas.

Hadj-Hamou NS(1), Laé M, Almeida A, de la Grange P, Kirova Y, Sastre-Garau X,
Malfoy B.

Author information:
(1)Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, UMR3244, 26 Rue d'Ulm Paris Cedex 5
F-75248, France.

Radiation-induced breast angiosarcomas are rare but recognized complication of
breast cancer radiotherapy and are of poor prognosis. Little is known about the
genetic abnormalities present in these secondary tumors. Herein, we investigated
the differences in the genome and in the transcriptome that discriminate these
tumors as a function of their etiology. Seven primary breast angiosarcomas and
18 secondary breast angiosarcomas arising in the irradiation field of a
radiotherapy were analyzed. Copy number alterations and gene expression were
analyzed using Affymetrix SNP 6.0 Array and Affymetrix Exon Arrays,
respectively. We showed that two transcriptome signatures of the radiation
tumorigenesis coexisted in these tumors. One was histology specific and
correctly discriminated 100% of the primary tumors from the radiation-induced
tumors. The deregulation of marker genes, including podoplanin (PDPN), prospero
homeobox 1 (PROX-1), vascular endothelial growth factor 3 (VEGFR3) and
endothelin receptor A (EDNRA), suggests that the radiation-induced breast
angiosarcomas developed from radiation-stimulated lymphatic endothelial cells.
None of the genes of the histology-specific signature were present in our
previously published signature of the radiation tumorigenesis which shows the
presence of a chronic oxidative stress in radiation-induced sarcomas of various
histologies. Nevertheless, this oxidative stress signature classified correctly
88% of the breast angiosarcomas as a function of the etiology. In contrast, MYC
amplification, which is observed in all radiation-induced tumors but also at a
low rate in primary tumors, was not a marker of the radiation tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgs155
PMID: 22532251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
