---
reference_id: "PMID:29088299"
title: "HLA-DRB1 and DQB1 alleles in Japanese type 1 autoimmune hepatitis: The predisposing role of the DR4/DR8 heterozygous genotype."
authors:
- Oka S
- Furukawa H
- Yasunami M
- Kawasaki A
- Nakamura H
- Nakamura M
- Komori A
- Abiru S
- Nagaoka S
- Hashimoto S
- Naganuma A
- Naeshiro N
- Yoshizawa K
- Yamashita H
- Ario K
- Ohta H
- Sakai H
- Yabuuchi I
- Takahashi A
- Abe K
- Yatsuhashi H
- Tohma S
- Ohira H
- Tsuchiya N
- Migita K
journal: PLoS One
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187325
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA-DRB1 and DQB1 alleles in Japanese type 1 autoimmune hepatitis: The predisposing role of the DR4/DR8 heterozygous genotype.
**Authors:** Oka S, Furukawa H, Yasunami M, Kawasaki A, Nakamura H, Nakamura M, Komori A, Abiru S, Nagaoka S, Hashimoto S, Naganuma A, Naeshiro N, Yoshizawa K, Yamashita H, Ario K, Ohta H, Sakai H, Yabuuchi I, Takahashi A, Abe K, Yatsuhashi H, Tohma S, Ohira H, Tsuchiya N, Migita K
**Journal:** PLoS One (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0187325](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0187325)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2017 Oct 31;12(10):e0187325. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187325. 
eCollection 2017.

HLA-DRB1 and DQB1 alleles in Japanese type 1 autoimmune hepatitis: The 
predisposing role of the DR4/DR8 heterozygous genotype.

Oka S(1)(2), Furukawa H(1)(2), Yasunami M(3)(4), Kawasaki A(1), Nakamura H(4), 
Nakamura M(5)(6)(7), Komori A(6)(7), Abiru S(7), Nagaoka S(7), Hashimoto S(7), 
Naganuma A(7), Naeshiro N(7), Yoshizawa K(7), Yamashita H(7), Ario K(7), Ohta 
H(7), Sakai H(7), Yabuuchi I(7), Takahashi A(8), Abe K(8), Yatsuhashi H(6)(7), 
Tohma S(2), Ohira H(8), Tsuchiya N(1), Migita K(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Japan.
(2)Clinical Research Center for Allergy and Rheumatology, National Hospital 
Organization Sagamihara National Hospital, 18-1 Sakuradai, Minami-ku, 
Sagamihara, Japan.
(3)Department of Medical Genomics, Life Science Institute, Saga-ken Medical 
Centre Koseikan, 400 Kasemachi-Nakabaru, Saga, Japan.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki 
University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Japan.
(5)Department of Hepatology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Japan.
(6)Clinical Research Center, National Hospital Organization Nagasaki Medical 
Center, 2-1001-1 Kubara, Omura, Japan.
(7)NHO-AIH study group, National Hospital Organization Nagasaki Medical Center, 
2-1001-1 Kubara, Omura, Japan.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology and Rheumatology, Fukushima Medical University 
School of Medicine, 1 Hikarigaoka, Fukushima, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a chronic progressive liver disease. 
AIH is composed predominantly of type 1 in Japanese populations. The genetic and 
environmental factors are associated with the pathogenesis of AIH. 
HLA-DRB1*03:01 and *04:01 are associated with type 1 AIH in European and *04:05 
in Japanese populations. Here, we conducted an HLA association study in order to 
find HLA alleles or haplotypes predisposing or protective for Japanese AIH.
METHODS: HLA-DRB1 and DQB1 genotyping of 360 type 1 AIH patients and 1026 
healthy controls was performed.
RESULTS: The predisposing association of DRB1*04:01 (P = 0.0006, corrected P 
[Pc] = 0.0193, odds ratio [OR] 2.97, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.62-5.43), 
DRB1*04:05 (P = 1.89×10-21, Pc = 5.86×10-20, OR 3.41, 95% CI 2.65-4.38), and 
DQB1*04:01 (P = 4.66×10-18, Pc = 6.99×10-17, OR 3.89, 95% CI 2.84-5.33) and the 
protective association of DRB1*13:02 (P = 0.0003, Pc = 0.0080, OR 0.48, 95% CI 
0.32-0.72) with Japanese type 1 AIH were observed. An association of the DR4/DR8 
heterozygous genotype with Japanese AIH was identified for the first time (P = 
3.12×10-9, OR 3.52, 95% CI 2.34-5.29). Susceptible diplotypes were 
DRB1*04:05-DQB1*04:01/DRB1*08:02-DQB1*03:02 (P = 0.0004, OR 24.77, 95% CI 
1.45-424.31) and DRB1*04:05-DQB1*04:01/DRB1*08:03-DQB1*06:01 (P = 1.18×10-6, OR 
10.64, 95% CI 3.19-35.46). Serum levels of Immunoglobulin G and Immunoglobulin 
M, International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group score, positive rate of anti-smooth 
muscle antibodies, and the rate of definite AIH were higher in AIH patients with 
DRB1*04:05 than without.
CONCLUSIONS: The important roles of specific combinations of DRB1 and DQB1 
alleles or haplotypes in the pathogenesis of type 1 AIH were suggested. The 
association of DR4/DR8 heterozygous genotype suggested the pathologic importance 
of trans-complementing DQα-β heterodimer molecules encoded by DQA1 allele of one 
haplotype and the DQB1 allele of the other haplotype, as it was proposed in the 
HLA association studies of Type 1 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187325
PMCID: PMC5663488
PMID: 29088299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: ST was supported by 
research grants from pharmaceutical companies: AbbVie GK., Ayumi Pharmaceutical 
Corporation, Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma 
Corporation, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited. ST received honoraria from 
AbbVie GK., Astellas Pharma Inc., Ayumi Pharmaceutical Corporation, Mitsubishi 
Tanabe Pharma Corporation, Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Pfizer Japan Inc, 
Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited. The other authors declare no financial or 
commercial conflict of interest. This does not alter the authors' adherence to 
PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.