---
reference_id: "PMID:23356643"
title: SOX11 contributes to the regulation of GDF5 in joint maintenance.
authors:
- Kan A
- Ikeda T
- Fukai A
- Nakagawa T
- Nakamura K
- Chung UI
- Kawaguchi H
- Tabin CJ
journal: BMC Dev Biol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-13-4
keywords:
- "5' Untranslated Regions"
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Cartilage/embryology
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- "Growth Differentiation Factor 5/genetics, physiology"
- Humans
- Joints/embryology
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- "SOXC Transcription Factors/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SOX11 contributes to the regulation of GDF5 in joint maintenance.
**Authors:** Kan A, Ikeda T, Fukai A, Nakagawa T, Nakamura K, Chung UI, Kawaguchi H, Tabin CJ
**Journal:** BMC Dev Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-213X-13-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-213X-13-4)

## Content

1. BMC Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 29;13:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-13-4.

SOX11 contributes to the regulation of GDF5 in joint maintenance.

Kan A(1), Ikeda T, Fukai A, Nakagawa T, Nakamura K, Chung UI, Kawaguchi H, Tabin 
CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: Individual skeletal elements of the vertebrate limbs arise through a 
segmentation process introducing joints in specific locations. However, the 
molecular pathways controlling joint formation and subsequent joint maintenance 
are largely unknown. In this study, we focused on SOX11, and its contribution to 
the regulation of GDF5, a secreted signal necessary for proper joint formation 
and postnatal joint homeostasis.
RESULTS: Sox11 is initially expressed broadly in the murine cartilage 
condensations at early stages of skeletal development, but its expression is 
specifically increased in the forming joint interzone as is forms. SOX11 
overexpression can directly activate GDF5 expression both in vitro and in 
micromass cell cultures prepared from chick limb buds. Conserved SOX family 
binding sites are present in the 5' UTR region of the GDF5 gene and we show 
SOX11 can specifically bind to one of them. While misexpression of Sox11 in 
developing chick limbs through RCAS virus infection does not induce Gdf5 
expression in ectopic locations, it does enhance its expression. To explore the 
roles of Sox11 in joint homeostasis, we analyzed adult knee joints in an 
osteoarthritis mouse model where the medial meniscus and the medial collateral 
ligament were removed. We also analyzed knee joints from human subjects who 
underwent total knee replacement surgery. We find that SOX11 is mainly expressed 
in the weight-bearing areas of knee joints, and its expression is decreased in 
degraded cartilage during progression of knee osteoarthritis in both mice and 
humans.
CONCLUSIONS: This work implicates SOX11 as a potential regulator of GDF5 
expression in joint maintenance and suggests a possible role in the pathogenesis 
of osteoarthritis.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-213X-13-4
PMCID: PMC3760452
PMID: 23356643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]