---
reference_id: "PMID:36759750"
title: A novel AGK splicing mutation in a patient with Sengers syndrome and left ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Fan P
- Yang KQ
- Han B
- Kong D
- Yin WH
- Li JH
- Yang ZX
- Niu LL
- Fu CS
- Rong CZ
- Lin YH
- Wang H
- Zhou XL
- Gao LG
- Qin XC
- Tian T
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41390-023-02515-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel AGK splicing mutation in a patient with Sengers syndrome and left ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Fan P, Yang KQ, Han B, Kong D, Yin WH, Li JH, Yang ZX, Niu LL, Fu CS, Rong CZ, Lin YH, Wang H, Zhou XL, Gao LG, Qin XC, Tian T
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41390-023-02515-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41390-023-02515-3)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2023 Aug;94(2):683-690. doi: 10.1038/s41390-023-02515-3. Epub
2023  Feb 9.

A novel AGK splicing mutation in a patient with Sengers syndrome and left 
ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy.

Fan P(1), Yang KQ(1), Han B(2), Kong D(1), Yin WH(3), Li JH(4), Yang ZX(5), Niu 
LL(6), Fu CS(7), Rong CZ(8), Lin YH(9), Wang H(10), Zhou XL(1), Gao LG(11), Qin 
XC(12), Tian T(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular 
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Beijing Jishuitan Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular 
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Departments of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Fuwai Hospital, National Center 
for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Yuncheng Central Hospital, Yuncheng, China.
(6)Department of Echocardiography, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for 
Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union 
Medical College, Beijing, China.
(7)Department of Cardiology, the Second Hospital of Anhui Medical University, 
Hefei, China.
(8)Department of Cardiology, the Second People's Hospital of Fuyang, Fuyang, 
China.
(9)Diagnostic Laboratory Center, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for 
Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union 
Medical College, Beijing, China.
(10)Department of Medicine, UT Health San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(11)Department of Comprehensive Surgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, 
China. gaolinggen@163.com.
(12)Department of Emergency Centre, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China. xiuchuanqin@126.com.
(13)Department of Cardiology, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular 
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China. tiantaophd@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Sengers syndrome characterized by hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is an 
extremely rare genetic disorder. Sengers syndrome associated with left 
ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) has not been described.
METHODS: Genetic testing was used to identify candidate AGK variants in the 
proband. The predicted molecular structures were constructed by protein 
modeling. Exon skipping caused by the identified splicing mutations was verified 
by in silico analyses and in vitro assays. The genotypic and phenotypic features 
of patients with AGK splicing mutations were extracted by a systematic review.
RESULTS: The proband was characterized by Sengers syndrome and LVNC and caused 
by a novel compound heterozygous AGK splicing mutation. This compound mutation 
simultaneously perturbed the protein sequences and spatial conformation of the 
acylglycerol kinase protein. In silico and in vitro analyses demonstrated 
skipping of exons 7 and 8 and premature truncation as a result of exon 8 
skipping. The systematic review indicated that patients with an AGK splicing 
mutation may have milder phenotypes of Sengers syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: The genotypic and phenotypic spectrums of Sengers syndrome have 
been expanded, which will provide essential information for genetic counseling. 
The molecular mechanism in AGK mutations can offer insights into the potential 
targets for treatment.
IMPACT: First description of a child with Sengers syndrome and left ventricular 
non-compaction cardiomyopathy. A novel pathogenic compound heterozygous splicing 
mutation in AGK for Sengers syndrome was identified. The identified mutations 
led to exons skipping by in silico analyses and in vitro assays.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to the International Pediatric 
Research Foundation, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41390-023-02515-3
PMID: 36759750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]