---
reference_id: "PMID:35608903"
title: Withdrawal or continuation of cholinesterase inhibitors or memantine or both, in people with dementia.
authors:
- Parsons C
- Lim WY
- Loy C
- McGuinness B
- Passmore P
- Ward SA
- Hughes C
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD009081.pub2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Withdrawal or continuation of cholinesterase inhibitors or memantine or both, in people with dementia.
**Authors:** Parsons C, Lim WY, Loy C, McGuinness B, Passmore P, Ward SA, Hughes C
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD009081.pub2](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD009081.pub2)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021 Feb 3;2(2):CD009081. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD009081.pub2.

Withdrawal or continuation of cholinesterase inhibitors or memantine or both, in 
people with dementia.

Parsons C(1), Lim WY(2), Loy C(3), McGuinness B(4), Passmore P(4), Ward SA(5), 
Hughes C(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK.
(2)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Institute for Clinical Research, National 
Institutes of Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Shah Alam, Malaysia.
(3)Brain and Mind Centre and Sydney School of Public Health, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Centre for Public Health, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK.
(5)Monash Aging Research Center, The Kingston Centre, Cheltenham, Australia.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD009081.

BACKGROUND: Dementia is a progressive syndrome characterised by deterioration in 
memory, thinking and behaviour, and by impaired ability to perform daily 
activities. Two classes of drug - cholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, 
galantamine and rivastigmine) and memantine - are widely licensed for dementia 
due to Alzheimer's disease, and rivastigmine is also licensed for Parkinson's 
disease dementia. These drugs are prescribed to alleviate symptoms and delay 
disease progression in these and sometimes in other forms of dementia. There are 
uncertainties about the benefits and adverse effects of these drugs in the long 
term and in severe dementia, about effects of withdrawal, and about the most 
appropriate time to discontinue treatment.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effects of withdrawal or continuation of 
cholinesterase inhibitors or memantine, or both, in people with dementia on: 
cognitive, neuropsychiatric and functional outcomes, rates of 
institutionalisation, adverse events, dropout from trials, mortality, quality of 
life and carer-related outcomes.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement 
Group's Specialised Register up to 17 October 2020 using terms appropriate for 
the retrieval of studies of cholinesterase inhibitors or memantine. The 
Specialised Register contains records of clinical trials identified from monthly 
searches of a number of major healthcare databases, numerous trial registries 
and grey literature sources.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included all randomised, controlled clinical trials 
(RCTs) which compared withdrawal of cholinesterase inhibitors or memantine, or 
both, with continuation of the same drug or drugs.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed 
citations and full-text articles for inclusion, extracted data from included 
trials and assessed risk of bias using the Cochrane risk of bias tool. Where 
trials were sufficiently similar, we pooled data for outcomes in the short term 
(up to 2 months after randomisation), medium term (3-11 months) and long term 
(12 months or more). We assessed the overall certainty of the evidence for each 
outcome using GRADE methods.
MAIN RESULTS: We included six trials investigating cholinesterase inhibitor 
withdrawal, and one trial investigating withdrawal of either donepezil or 
memantine. No trials assessed withdrawal of memantine only. Drugs were withdrawn 
abruptly in five trials and stepwise in two trials. All participants had 
dementia due to Alzheimer's disease, with severities ranging from mild to very 
severe, and were taking cholinesterase inhibitors without known adverse effects 
at baseline. The included trials randomised 759 participants to treatment groups 
relevant to this review. Study duration ranged from 6 weeks to 12 months. There 
were too few included studies to allow planned subgroup analyses. We considered 
some studies to be at unclear or high risk of selection, performance, detection, 
attrition or reporting bias. Compared to continuing cholinesterase inhibitors, 
discontinuing treatment may be associated with worse cognitive function in the 
short term (standardised mean difference (SMD) -0.42, 95% confidence interval 
(CI) -0.64 to -0.21; 4 studies; low certainty), but the effect in the medium 
term is very uncertain (SMD -0.40, 95% CI -0.87 to 0.07; 3 studies; very low 
certainty). In a sensitivity analysis omitting data from a study which only 
included participants who had shown a relatively poor prior response to 
donepezil, inconsistency was reduced and we found that cognitive function may be 
worse in the discontinuation group in the medium term (SMD -0.62; 95% CI -0.94 
to -0.31). Data from one longer-term study suggest that discontinuing a 
cholinesterase inhibitor is probably associated with worse cognitive function at 
12 months (mean difference (MD) -2.09 Standardised Mini-Mental State Examination 
(SMMSE) points, 95% CI -3.43 to -0.75; moderate certainty). Discontinuation may 
make little or no difference to functional status in the short term (SMD -0.25, 
95% CI -0.54 to 0.04; 2 studies; low certainty), and its effect in the medium 
term is uncertain (SMD -0.38, 95% CI -0.74 to -0.01; 2 studies; very low 
certainty). After 12 months, discontinuing a cholinesterase inhibitor probably 
results in greater functional impairment than continuing treatment (MD -3.38 
Bristol Activities of Daily Living Scale (BADLS) points, 95% CI -6.67 to -0.10; 
one study; moderate certainty). Discontinuation may be associated with a 
worsening of neuropsychiatric symptoms over the short term and medium term, 
although we cannot exclude a minimal effect (SMD - 0.48, 95% CI -0.82 to -0.13; 
2 studies; low certainty; and SMD -0.27, 95% CI -0.47 to -0.08; 3 studies; low 
certainty, respectively). Data from one study suggest that discontinuing a 
cholinesterase inhibitor may result in little to no change in neuropsychiatric 
status at 12 months (MD -0.87 Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) points; 95% CI 
-8.42 to 6.68; moderate certainty). We found no clear evidence of an effect of 
discontinuation on dropout due to lack of medication efficacy or deterioration 
in overall medical condition (odds ratio (OR) 1.53, 95% CI 0.84 to 2.76; 4 
studies; low certainty), on number of adverse events (OR 0.85, 95% CI 0.57 to 
1.27; 4 studies; low certainty) or serious adverse events (OR 0.80, 95% CI 0.46 
to 1.39; 4 studies; low certainty), and on mortality (OR 0.75, 95% CI 0.36 to 
1.55; 5 studies; low certainty). Institutionalisation was reported in one trial, 
but it was not possible to extract data for the groups relevant to this review.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: This review suggests that discontinuing cholinesterase 
inhibitors may result in worse cognitive, neuropsychiatric and functional status 
than continuing treatment, although this is supported by limited evidence, 
almost all of low or very low certainty. As all participants had dementia due to 
Alzheimer's disease, our findings are not transferable to other dementia types. 
We were unable to determine whether the effects of discontinuing cholinesterase 
inhibitors differed with baseline dementia severity. There is currently no 
evidence to guide decisions about discontinuing memantine. There is a need for 
further well-designed RCTs, across a range of dementia severities and settings. 
We are aware of two ongoing registered trials. In making decisions about 
discontinuing these drugs, clinicians should exercise caution, considering the 
evidence from existing trials along with other factors important to patients and 
their carers.

Copyright © 2021 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009081.pub2
PMCID: PMC8094886
PMID: 35608903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CP, CH, BMcG, WYL, SAW have no known conflicts 
of interest. PP was an investigator in a donepezil‐licensing European study. He 
has received honoraria and educational and clinical trial grants from 
manufacturers of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and memantine. CL has received 
a Wellcome Trust Travelling Award in relation to his work with Cochrane.