---
reference_id: "PMID:39704415"
title: "Misprocessing of α -Galactosidase A, Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress, and the Unfolded Protein Response."
authors:
- Živná M
- Dostálová G
- Barešová V
- Mušálková D
- Svojšová K
- Meiseles D
- Kinstlinger S
- Kuchař L
- Asfaw B
- Poupětová H
- Vlášková H
- Kmochová T
- Vyleťal P
- Hartmannová H
- Hodaňová K
- Stránecký V
- Steiner-Mrázová L
- Hnízda A
- Živný J
- Radina M
- Votruba M
- Sovová J
- Trešlová H
- Stolnaja L
- Reková P
- Roblová L
- Honsová E
- Rychlík I
- Dvela-Levitt M
- Bleyer AJ
- Linhart A
- Sikora J
- Kmoch S
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.0000000535
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Misprocessing of α -Galactosidase A, Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress, and the Unfolded Protein Response.
**Authors:** Živná M, Dostálová G, Barešová V, Mušálková D, Svojšová K, Meiseles D, Kinstlinger S, Kuchař L, Asfaw B, Poupětová H, Vlášková H, Kmochová T, Vyleťal P, Hartmannová H, Hodaňová K, Stránecký V, Steiner-Mrázová L, Hnízda A, Živný J, Radina M, Votruba M, Sovová J, Trešlová H, Stolnaja L, Reková P, Roblová L, Honsová E, Rychlík I, Dvela-Levitt M, Bleyer AJ, Linhart A, Sikora J, Kmoch S
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.0000000535](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.0000000535)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2025 Apr 1;36(4):628-644. doi: 10.1681/ASN.0000000535. Epub 
2024 Nov 12.

Misprocessing of α -Galactosidase A, Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress, and the 
Unfolded Protein Response.

Živná M(1)(2), Dostálová G(3), Barešová V(1), Mušálková D(1), Svojšová K(1), 
Meiseles D(4), Kinstlinger S(4), Kuchař L(1), Asfaw B(1), Poupětová H(5), 
Vlášková H(6), Kmochová T(1), Vyleťal P(1), Hartmannová H(1), Hodaňová K(1), 
Stránecký V(1), Steiner-Mrázová L(1), Hnízda A(1), Živný J(1), Radina M(1), 
Votruba M(1), Sovová J(1), Trešlová H(1), Stolnaja L(6), Reková P(5), Roblová 
L(3), Honsová E(7)(8), Rychlík I(9), Dvela-Levitt M(4), Bleyer AJ(1)(2), Linhart 
A(3), Sikora J(1)(8), Kmoch S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and Inherited 
Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and 
General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Section on Nephrology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North 
Carolina.
(3)Second Department of Internal Cardiovascular Medicine, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(4)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, 
Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(5)Department of Neurology and Centre of Clinical Neuroscience, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(6)Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of Pediatrics and Inherited Metabolic 
Disorders, General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(7)AeskuLab Pathology, Prague, Czech Republic.
(8)Institute of Pathology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and 
General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(9)Department of Medicine, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in 
Prague and Faculty Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, Prague, Czech Republic.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1681/ASN.0000000625.

KEY POINTS: The clinical significance of a number of missense variants of 
α-galactosidase A is often ambiguous. Defective proteostasis of some missense 
α-galactosidase A variants induced chronic endoplasmic reticulum stress and the 
unfolded protein response. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded protein 
response may explain clinical manifestations of non-classic Fabry disease.
BACKGROUND: Classic Fabry disease is caused by GLA mutations that result in loss 
of enzymatic activity of α-galactosidase A, lysosomal storage of 
globotriaosylceramide, and a resulting multisystemic disease. In non-classic 
Fabry disease, patients have some preserved α-galactosidase A activity and a 
milder disease course. Heterozygous female patients may also be affected. While 
Fabry disease pathogenesis has been mostly attributed to catalytic deficiency of 
mutated α-galactosidase A, lysosomal storage, and impairment of lysosomal 
functions, other pathogenic factors may contribute, especially in nonclassic 
Fabry disease.
METHODS: We characterized the genetic, clinical, biochemical, molecular, 
cellular, and organ pathology correlates of the p.L394P α-galactosidase A 
variant that was identified initially in six individuals with kidney failure by 
the Czech national screening program for Fabry disease and by further screening 
in an additional 24 family members.
RESULTS: Clinical findings in affected male patients revealed a milder clinical 
course, with approximately 15% residual α-galactosidase A activity with normal 
plasma lyso-globotriaosylceramide levels and abnormally low ratio of these 
values. None of the four available kidney biopsies showed lysosomal storage. 
Laboratory investigations documented intracellular retention of mutated 
α-galactosidase A with resulting endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded 
protein response, which were alleviated with BRD4780, a small molecule clearing 
misfolded proteins from the early secretory compartment. We observed similar 
findings of endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response in five 
kidney biopsies with several other classic and non-classic Fabry disease 
missense α-galactosidase A variants.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified defective proteostasis of mutated α-galactosidase A 
resulting in chronic endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response 
of α-galactosidase A expressing cells as a contributor to Fabry disease 
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.0000000535
PMCID: PMC11975233
PMID: 39704415

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure forms, as provided by each author, 
are available with the online version of the article at 
http://links.lww.com/JSN/E956.