---
reference_id: PMID:29378611
title: Episomal HIV-1 DNA and its relationship to other markers of HIV-1 persistence.
authors:
- Martinez-Picado J
- Zurakowski R
- Buzón MJ
- Stevenson M
journal: Retrovirology
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12977-018-0398-1
keywords:
- "Antiretroviral Therapy, Highly Active"
- CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/virology
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- "DNA, Circular/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA, Viral/genetics, metabolism"
- "HIV Infections/drug therapy, virology"
- "HIV-1/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- Virus Latency
- Virus Replication/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Episomal HIV-1 DNA and its relationship to other markers of HIV-1 persistence.
**Authors:** Martinez-Picado J, Zurakowski R, Buzón MJ, Stevenson M
**Journal:** Retrovirology (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12977-018-0398-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12977-018-0398-1)

## Content

1. Retrovirology. 2018 Jan 30;15(1):15. doi: 10.1186/s12977-018-0398-1.

Episomal HIV-1 DNA and its relationship to other markers of HIV-1 persistence.

Martinez-Picado J(1)(2)(3), Zurakowski R(4), Buzón MJ(5), Stevenson M(6).

Author information:
(1)AIDS Research Institute IrsiCaixa, University Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, 
Ctra. de Canyet s/n, Badalona, 08916, Barcelona, Spain. jmpicado@irsicaixa.es.
(2)University of Vic-Central University of Catalonia (UVic-UCC), Vic, Spain. 
jmpicado@irsicaixa.es.
(3)Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, 
Spain. jmpicado@irsicaixa.es.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, 
USA.
(5)Infectious Diseases Department, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute, Hospital 
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

Reverse transcription of HIV-1 results in the generation of a linear cDNA that 
serves as the precursor to the integrated provirus. Other classes of 
extrachromosomal viral cDNA molecules can be found in acutely infected cells 
including the 1-LTR and 2-LTR circles of viral DNA, also referred as episomal 
HIV-1 DNA. Circulating CD4+ T-cells of treatment-naïve individuals contain 
significant levels of unintegrated forms of HIV-1 DNA. However, the importance 
of episomal HIV-1 DNA in the study of viral persistence during antiviral therapy 
(ART) is debatable. 2-LTR circles are preferentially observed in the effector 
memory CD4+ T cell subset of long-term treated subjects. Treatment 
intensification of standard regimens has been used to determine if more potent 
ART can impact viral reservoir activity. Adding a potent antiretroviral drug to 
a stable triple-drug regimen has no measurable impact on plasma HIV-1 RNA 
levels, suggesting that ongoing cycles of HIV-1 replication are not a major 
mechanism driving persistent plasma viremia during triple-drug ART. However, in 
randomized clinical trials of HIV-1-infected adults on apparently effective ART, 
the addition of an integrase inhibitor (raltegravir) to stable regimens resulted 
in a transient increase in 2-LTR circles in some patients, suggesting a 
pre-intensification steady-state in which the processes of virion generation and 
de novo infection were occurring. Mathematical modeling of 2-LTR production 
during integrase inhibitor intensification suggests the coexistence, at 
different levels, of ongoing de novo infection and de novo replication 
mechanisms, specifically in inflamed lymphoid drug sanctuaries. Most reports 
looking into potential changes in 2-LTR circles in interventional clinical 
studies have simultaneously assessed other potential surrogate markers of viral 
persistence. Transient increases in 2-LTR circles have been correlated to 
decreases in CD8+ T-cell activation, transient CD45RA-CD4+ T-cell 
redistribution, and decreases in the hypercoagulation biomarker D-dimer in 
ART-intensified individuals. It is difficult, however, to establish a systematic 
association because the level of correlation with different types of markers 
differs significantly among studies. In conclusion, despite suppressive ART, a 
steady-state of de novo infection may persist in some infected individuals and 
that this may drive immune activation and inflammation changes reflecting 
residual viral reservoir activity during otherwise apparently suppressive ART.

DOI: 10.1186/s12977-018-0398-1
PMCID: PMC5789633
PMID: 29378611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]