---
reference_id: "PMID:22164337"
title: Management of coagulopathy in patients with decompensated liver cirrhosis.
authors:
- Amarapurkar PD
- Amarapurkar DN
journal: Int J Hepatol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.4061/2011/695470
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of coagulopathy in patients with decompensated liver cirrhosis.
**Authors:** Amarapurkar PD, Amarapurkar DN
**Journal:** Int J Hepatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.4061/2011/695470](https://doi.org/10.4061/2011/695470)

## Content

1. Int J Hepatol. 2011;2011:695470. doi: 10.4061/2011/695470. Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Management of coagulopathy in patients with decompensated liver cirrhosis.

Amarapurkar PD(1), Amarapurkar DN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Bombay Hospital and Medical Research Centre, 
Mumbai 400 020, India.

Patients with decompensated liver cirrhosis have significantly impaired 
synthetic function. Many proteins involved in the coagulation process are 
synthesized in the liver. Routinely performed tests of the coagulation are 
abnormal in patients with decompensated liver cirrhosis. This has led to the 
widespread belief that decompensated liver cirrhosis is prototype of acquired 
hemorrhagic coagulopathy. If prothrombin time is prolonged more than 3 seconds 
over control, invasive procedures like liver biopsy, splenoportogram, 
percutaneous cholangiography, or surgery were associated with increased risk of 
bleeding, and coagulopathy should be corrected with infusion of fresh frozen 
plasma. These practices were without any scientific evidence and were associated 
with significant hazards of fresh frozen plasma transfusion. Now, it is realized 
that coagulation is a complex process involving the interaction of 
procoagulation and anticoagulation factors and the fibrinolytic system. As there 
is reduction in both anti and procoagulant factors, global tests of coagulation 
are normal in patients with acute and chronic liver disease indicating that 
coagulopathy in liver disease is more of a myth than a reality. In the last few 
years, surgical techniques have substantially improved, and complex procedures 
like liver transplantation can be done without the use of blood or blood 
products. Patients with liver cirrhosis may also be at increased risk of 
thrombosis. In this paper, we will discuss coagulopathy, increased risk of 
thrombosis, and their management in decompensated liver cirrhosis.

DOI: 10.4061/2011/695470
PMCID: PMC3227517
PMID: 22164337