---
reference_id: "PMID:31808946"
title: "Pathophysiology and targets for treatment in hereditary galactosemia: A systematic review of animal and cellular models."
authors:
- Haskovic M
- Coelho AI
- Bierau J
- Vanoevelen JM
- Steinbusch LKM
- Zimmermann LJI
- Villamor-Martinez E
- Berry GT
- Rubio-Gozalbo ME
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12202
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Galactokinase/genetics, metabolism"
- Galactose/metabolism
- "Galactosemias/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology, therapy"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Oxidative Stress
- Phenotype
- "UDPglucose 4-Epimerase/genetics, metabolism"
- "UTP-Hexose-1-Phosphate Uridylyltransferase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology and targets for treatment in hereditary galactosemia: A systematic review of animal and cellular models.
**Authors:** Haskovic M, Coelho AI, Bierau J, Vanoevelen JM, Steinbusch LKM, Zimmermann LJI, Villamor-Martinez E, Berry GT, Rubio-Gozalbo ME
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12202](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12202)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2020 May;43(3):392-408. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12202. Epub
2020  Jan 14.

Pathophysiology and targets for treatment in hereditary galactosemia: A 
systematic review of animal and cellular models.

Haskovic M(1)(2)(3), Coelho AI(1)(2)(3), Bierau J(2), Vanoevelen JM(2)(3), 
Steinbusch LKM(2), Zimmermann LJI(1)(3), Villamor-Martinez E(1)(3), Berry GT(4), 
Rubio-Gozalbo ME(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Maastricht University Medical Center+, Maastricht, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center+, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)The Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Division of Genetics and 
Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts.

Since the first description of galactosemia in 1908 and despite decades of 
research, the pathophysiology is complex and not yet fully elucidated. 
Galactosemia is an inborn error of carbohydrate metabolism caused by deficient 
activity of any of the galactose metabolising enzymes. The current standard of 
care, a galactose-restricted diet, fails to prevent long-term complications. 
Studies in cellular and animal models in the past decades have led to an 
enormous progress and advancement of knowledge. Summarising current evidence in 
the pathophysiology underlying hereditary galactosemia may contribute to the 
identification of treatment targets for alternative therapies that may 
successfully prevent long-term complications. A systematic review of cellular 
and animal studies reporting on disease complications (clinical signs and/or 
biochemical findings) and/or treatment targets in hereditary galactosemia was 
performed. PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Web of Science were searched, 46 original 
articles were included. Results revealed that Gal-1-P is not the sole 
pathophysiological agent responsible for the phenotype observed in galactosemia. 
Other currently described contributing factors include accumulation of galactose 
metabolites, uridine diphosphate (UDP)-hexose alterations and subsequent 
impaired glycosylation, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, altered signalling 
pathways, and oxidative stress. galactokinase (GALK) inhibitors, UDP-glucose 
pyrophosphorylase (UGP) up-regulation, uridine supplementation, ER stress 
reducers, antioxidants and pharmacological chaperones have been studied, showing 
rescue of biochemical and/or clinical symptoms in galactosemia. Promising 
co-adjuvant therapies include antioxidant therapy and UGP up-regulation. This 
systematic review provides an overview of the scattered information resulting 
from animal and cellular studies performed in the past decades, summarising the 
complex pathophysiological mechanisms underlying hereditary galactosemia and 
providing insights on potential treatment targets.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12202
PMCID: PMC7317974
PMID: 31808946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflict of 
interest.