---
reference_id: "PMID:27348054"
title: Dengue virus NS1 enhances viral replication and pro-inflammatory cytokine production in human dendritic cells.
authors:
- Alayli F
- Scholle F
journal: Virology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2016.06.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue virus NS1 enhances viral replication and pro-inflammatory cytokine production in human dendritic cells.
**Authors:** Alayli F, Scholle F
**Journal:** Virology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.virol.2016.06.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2016.06.008)

## Content

1. Virology. 2016 Sep;496:227-236. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2016.06.008. Epub 2016
Jun  24.

Dengue virus NS1 enhances viral replication and pro-inflammatory cytokine 
production in human dendritic cells.

Alayli F(1), Scholle F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC, USA. Electronic address: frank_scholle@ncsu.edu.

Dengue virus (DV) has become the most prevalent arthropod borne virus due to 
globalization and climate change. It targets dendritic cells during infection 
and leads to production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Several DV 
non-structural proteins (NS) modulate activation of human dendritic cells. We 
investigated the effect of DV NS1 on human monocyte-derived dendritic cells 
(mo-DCs) during dengue infection. NS1 is secreted into the serum of infected 
individuals where it interacts with various immune mediators and cell types. We 
purified secreted DV1 NS1 from supernatants of 293T cells that over-express the 
protein. Upon incubation with mo-DCs, we observed NS1 uptake and enhancement of 
early DV1 replication. As a consequence, mo-DCs that were pre-exposed to NS1 
produced more pro-inflammatory cytokines in response to subsequent DV infection 
compared to DCs exposed to heat-inactivated NS1 (HNS1). Therefore the presence 
of exogenous NS1 is able to modulate dengue infection in mo-DCs.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2016.06.008
PMCID: PMC4969143
PMID: 27348054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]