---
reference_id: "PMID:9398128"
title: Factors contributing to the degree of polyuria in a patient with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus.
authors:
- Spira A
- Gowrishankar M
- Halperin ML
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0272-6386(97)90089-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factors contributing to the degree of polyuria in a patient with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Spira A, Gowrishankar M, Halperin ML
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0272-6386(97)90089-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0272-6386(97)90089-5)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 1997 Dec;30(6):829-35. doi: 10.1016/s0272-6386(97)90089-5.

Factors contributing to the degree of polyuria in a patient with poorly 
controlled diabetes mellitus.

Spira A(1), Gowrishankar M, Halperin ML.

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, St Michael's Hospital, University of Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

Polyuria due to a glucose-induced osmotic diuresis is common in patients with 
hyperglycemia. This diuresis usually abates when the plasma glucose level 
approaches its renal threshold; the usual time course is less than 8 hours after 
commencing therapy. A 69-year-old man with non-insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus maintained hyperglycemia (540 mg/dL) and polyuria (4.7 L/24 hr) for 40 
hours. Because there was no external supply of glucose, a balance study was 
conducted between the third and 40th hour after commencing treatment. In this 
interval, the overall concentration of glucose in the urine was less than 100 
mmol/L and the urine osmolality was 378 mOsm/kg H2O. To evaluate the expected 
composition of the urine during a glucose-induced osmotic diuresis, urine was 
analyzed in normal rats infused with glucose plus urea and in untreated BB 
diabetic rats (plasma glucose and urea similar to that in our patient) as well 
as in 29 patients with hyperglycemia and polyuria. Glucose accounted for 60% of 
the urinary osmoles in rats and humans. Two subgroups of patients had a much 
lower urine glucose: one had an impaired concentrating ability (n = 6) and the 
other had an increased rate of renal glucose reabsorption (n = 5). In 
conclusion, in polyuria caused by hyperglycemia, the urine glucose should be 300 
to 400 mmol/L with normal renal function. In the case we report, both the 
concentration of glucose and its excretion rate were much lower than expected 
with steady-state hyperglycemia (540 mg/dL) due to the high rate of excretion of 
NaCl, a concentrating defect, and excessive renal reabsorption of glucose.

DOI: 10.1016/s0272-6386(97)90089-5
PMID: 9398128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]