---
reference_id: "PMID:34659339"
title: A Founder Pathogenic Variant of PPIB Unique to Chinese Population Causes Osteogenesis Imperfecta IX.
authors:
- Zhu W
- Yan K
- Chen X
- Zhao W
- Wu Y
- Tang H
- Chen M
- Wu J
- Wang P
- Zhang R
- Shen Y
- Zhang D
journal: Front Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.717294
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Founder Pathogenic Variant of PPIB Unique to Chinese Population Causes Osteogenesis Imperfecta IX.
**Authors:** Zhu W, Yan K, Chen X, Zhao W, Wu Y, Tang H, Chen M, Wu J, Wang P, Zhang R, Shen Y, Zhang D
**Journal:** Front Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2021.717294](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2021.717294)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2021 Sep 29;12:717294. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.717294.
eCollection  2021.

A Founder Pathogenic Variant of PPIB Unique to Chinese Population Causes 
Osteogenesis Imperfecta IX.

Zhu W(1)(2), Yan K(3), Chen X(2), Zhao W(1)(2), Wu Y(1)(2), Tang H(1)(2), Chen 
M(4), Wu J(5), Wang P(5), Zhang R(2), Shen Y(1)(6), Zhang D(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Women's Reproductive Health Research Key Laboratory of Zhejiang Province and 
Department of Reproductive Endocrinology, Women's Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Reproductive Endocrinology, Women's Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Genetics and Reproduction, Women's Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Genomic Medicine and Center for Medical Genetics, Changhua 
Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan.
(5)MyGenostics Inc., Beijing, China.
(6)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Neurology, Boston Children's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(7)Key Laboratory of Reproductive Genetics, Zhejiang University, Ministry of 
Education, Hangzhou, China.

Background: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous genetic disorder 
characterized by bone fragility. PPIB pathogenic variants cause a perinatal 
lethal form of OI type IX. A limited number of pathogenic variants have been 
reported so far worldwide. Methods: We identified a rare pedigree whose 
phenotype was highly consistent with OI-IX. Exome sequencing was performed to 
uncover the causal variants. The variant pathogenicity was classified following 
the ACMG/AMP guidelines. The founder effect and the age of the variant were 
assessed. Results: We identified a homozygous missense variant c.509G > 
A/p.G170D in PPIB in an affected fetus. This variant is a Chinese-specific 
allele and can now be classified as pathogenic. We estimated the allele 
frequency (AF) of this variant to be 0.0000427 in a Chinese cohort involving 
128,781 individuals. All patients and carriers shared a common haplotype, 
indicative of a founder effect. The estimated age of variant was 65,160 years. 
We further identified pathogenic variants of PPIB in gnomAD and ClinVar 
databases, the conserved estimation of OI type IX incidence to be 1/1,000,000 in 
Chinese population. Conclusion: We reported a founder pathogenic variant in PPIB 
specific to the Chinese population. We further provided our initial estimation 
of OI-IX disease incidence in China.

Copyright © 2021 Zhu, Yan, Chen, Zhao, Wu, Tang, Chen, Wu, Wang, Zhang, Shen and 
Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.717294
PMCID: PMC8511635
PMID: 34659339

Conflict of interest statement: JW and PW were employed by the complany 
MyGenostics Inc. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted 
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.