---
reference_id: "PMID:37429899"
title: ALDH1A1 promotes PARP inhibitor resistance by enhancing retinoic acid receptor-mediated DNA polymerase θ expression.
authors:
- Lavudi K
- Banerjee A
- Li N
- Yang Y
- Cai S
- Bai X
- Zhang X
- Li A
- Wani E
- Yang SM
- Zhang J
- Rai G
- Backes F
- Patnaik S
- Guo P
- Wang QE
journal: NPJ Precis Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41698-023-00411-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALDH1A1 promotes PARP inhibitor resistance by enhancing retinoic acid receptor-mediated DNA polymerase θ expression.
**Authors:** Lavudi K, Banerjee A, Li N, Yang Y, Cai S, Bai X, Zhang X, Li A, Wani E, Yang SM, Zhang J, Rai G, Backes F, Patnaik S, Guo P, Wang QE
**Journal:** NPJ Precis Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41698-023-00411-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41698-023-00411-x)

## Content

1. NPJ Precis Oncol. 2023 Jul 10;7(1):66. doi: 10.1038/s41698-023-00411-x.

ALDH1A1 promotes PARP inhibitor resistance by enhancing retinoic acid
receptor-mediated DNA polymerase θ expression.

Lavudi K(1)(2), Banerjee A(1)(2), Li N(1)(2), Yang Y(1)(2), Cai S(1)(2), Bai
X(1)(2), Zhang X(3), Li A(4), Wani E(1), Yang SM(5), Zhang J(1)(2), Rai G(5),
Backes F(6), Patnaik S(7), Guo P(1)(8), Wang QE(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, College of Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA.
(2)Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210,
USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, College of Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA.
(4)Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, 63130, USA.
(5)Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, 20850,
USA.
(6)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Division of Gynecologic Oncology,
College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA.
(7)School of Biotechnology, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology,
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, 751024, India.
(8)Center for RNA Nanobiotechnology and Nanomedicine, Division of Pharmaceutics
and Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
43210, USA.
(9)Department of Radiation Oncology, College of Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. qi-en.wang@osumc.edu.
(10)Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210,
USA. qi-en.wang@osumc.edu.

Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase (PARP) inhibitors (PARPi) have been approved for
both frontline and recurrent setting in ovarian cancer with homologous
recombination (HR) repair deficiency. However, more than 40% of BRCA1/2-mutated
ovarian cancer lack the initial response to PARPi treatment, and the majority of
those that initially respond eventually develop resistance. Our previous study
has demonstrated that increased expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A1
(ALDH1A1) contributes to PARPi resistance in BRCA2-mutated ovarian cancer cells
by enhancing microhomology-mediated end joining (MMEJ) but the mechanism remains
unknown. Here, we find that ALDH1A1 enhances the expression of DNA polymerase θ
(Polθ, encoded by the POLQ gene) in ovarian cancer cells. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that the retinoic acid (RA) pathway is involved in the transcription
activation of the POLQ gene. The RA receptor (RAR) can bind to the retinoic acid
response element (RARE) located in the promoter of the POLQ gene, promoting
transcription activation-related histone modification in the presence of RA.
Given that ALDH1A1 catalyzes the biosynthesis of RA, we conclude that ALDH1A1
promotes POLQ expression via the activation of the RA signaling pathway.
Finally, using a clinically-relevant patient-derived organoid (PDO) model, we
find that ALDH1A1 inhibition by the pharmacological inhibitor NCT-505 in
combination with the PARP inhibitor olaparib synergistically reduce the cell
viability of PDOs carrying BRCA1/2 mutation and positive ALDH1A1 expression. In
summary, our study elucidates a new mechanism contributing to PARPi resistance
in HR-deficient ovarian cancer and shows the therapeutic potential of combining
PARPi and ALDH1A1 inhibition in treating these patients.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41698-023-00411-x
PMCID: PMC10333219
PMID: 37429899

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
