---
reference_id: "PMID:19836681"
title: "[Dengue fever: clinical features]."
authors:
- Dellamonica P
journal: Arch Pediatr
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/S0929-693X(09)75306-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Dengue fever: clinical features].
**Authors:** Dellamonica P
**Journal:** Arch Pediatr (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0929-693X(09)75306-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0929-693X(09)75306-0)

## Content

1. Arch Pediatr. 2009 Oct;16 Suppl 2:S80-4. doi: 10.1016/S0929-693X(09)75306-0.

[Dengue fever: clinical features].

[Article in French]

Dellamonica P(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Nice-Sophia-Antipolis, Service Infectiologie, Hôpital Archet 1, 
CHU de Nice, BP 3079, 06202 NICE cedex 3, France. dellamonica.p@chu-nice.fr

The vector for dengue fever and chikungunya, Aedes albopictus, was recently 
identified in Southeastern France, although the usual vector for dengue fever is 
Aedes aegypti, raising the possibility of cases occurring among the local 
population via viraemic individuals returning from endemic areas. Dengue fever 
is usually transmitted by Aedes aegypti. It is due to an arbovirus-flavivirus of 
which four different serotypes are known: Den 1 to 4. Each serotype is 
responsible for specific prolonged immunity but no cross-reactivity exists 
between serotypes. Clinically, the onset is abrupt with frontal headache, 
retro-orbital pain, myalgia, joint pain, prostration and, in many cases, a 
macular rash usually sparing the face and extremities. Haemorrhagic signs may 
occur, such as petechiae, purpura, epistaxis or bleeding gingivae. Two severe 
forms of dengue fever, particularly among children below 3 years of age, include 
dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF) and DHF with shock (dengue shock syndrome). If a 
case is suspected in metropolitan France, the diagnosis should be systematically 
confirmed by positive specific IgM, RT-PCR or viral isolation. Treatment of 
dengue fever, whether in its uncomplicated form or with hemorrhagic 
manifestations or shock, remains symptomatic. There is no specific anti-viral 
treatment. A case should be notified to allow French health authorities to take 
the appropriate measures for vector control.

DOI: 10.1016/S0929-693X(09)75306-0
PMID: 19836681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]