---
reference_id: "PMID:37632006"
title: The Spectrum of Neurological Manifestations of Varicella-Zoster Virus Reactivation.
authors:
- Kennedy PGE
journal: Viruses
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/v15081663
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Spectrum of Neurological Manifestations of Varicella-Zoster Virus Reactivation.
**Authors:** Kennedy PGE
**Journal:** Viruses (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v15081663](https://doi.org/10.3390/v15081663)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2023 Jul 30;15(8):1663. doi: 10.3390/v15081663.

The Spectrum of Neurological Manifestations of Varicella-Zoster Virus 
Reactivation.

Kennedy PGE(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology and Neuroscience, College of Medical, Veterinary & Life 
Sciences, Garscube Campus, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G61 1QH, Scotland, UK.

Varicella-Zoster virus (VZV) is a pathogenic human alpha herpes virus that 
causes varicella (chicken pox) as a primary infection and, following a variable 
period of latency in different ganglionic neurons, it reactivates to produce 
herpes zoster (shingles). The focus of this review is on the wide spectrum of 
the possible neurological manifestations of VZV reactivation. While the most 
frequent reactivation syndrome is herpes zoster, this may be followed by the 
serious and painful post-herpetic neuralgia (PHN) and by many other neurological 
conditions. Prominent among these conditions is a VZV vasculopathy, but the role 
of VZV in causing giant cell arteritis (GCA) is currently controversial. VZV 
reactivation can also cause segmental motor weakness, myelitis, cranial nerve 
syndromes, Guillain-Barre syndrome, meningoencephalitis, and zoster sine 
herpete, where a neurological syndrome occurs in the absence of the zoster rash. 
The field is complicated by the relatively few cases of neurological 
complications described and by the issue of causation when a neurological 
condition is not manifest at the same time as the zoster rash.

DOI: 10.3390/v15081663
PMCID: PMC10457770
PMID: 37632006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.