---
reference_id: "PMID:29799801"
title: The Genetics of Primary Microcephaly.
authors:
- Jayaraman D
- Bae BI
- Walsh CA
journal: Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-genom-083117-021441
keywords:
- Centrioles/pathology
- DNA Repair
- DNA Replication
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/metabolism
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Neuroglia/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Genetics of Primary Microcephaly.
**Authors:** Jayaraman D, Bae BI, Walsh CA
**Journal:** Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-genom-083117-021441](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genom-083117-021441)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2018 Aug 31;19:177-200. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-genom-083117-021441. Epub 2018 May 23.

The Genetics of Primary Microcephaly.

Jayaraman D(1)(2)(3), Bae BI(4), Walsh CA(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, 
and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA.
(2)Harvard-MIT MD-PhD Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.
(3)Current affiliation: Boston Combined Residency Program (Child Neurology), 
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA; email: 
divya.jayaraman@childrens.harvard.edu.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06510, USA; email: byoung-il.bae@yale.edu.
(5)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.
(6)Departments of Pediatrics and Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA; email: christopher.walsh@childrens.harvard.edu.

Primary microcephaly (MCPH, for "microcephaly primary hereditary") is a disorder 
of brain development that results in a head circumference more than 3 standard 
deviations below the mean for age and gender. It has a wide variety of causes, 
including toxic exposures, in utero infections, and metabolic conditions. While 
the genetic microcephaly syndromes are relatively rare, studying these syndromes 
can reveal molecular mechanisms that are critical in the regulation of neural 
progenitor cells, brain size, and human brain evolution. Many of the causative 
genes for MCPH encode centrosomal proteins involved in centriole biogenesis. 
However, other MCPH genes fall under different mechanistic categories, notably 
DNA replication and repair. Recent gene discoveries and functional studies have 
implicated novel cellular processes, such as cytokinesis, centromere and 
kinetochore function, transmembrane or intracellular transport, Wnt signaling, 
and autophagy, as well as the apical polarity complex. Thus, MCPH genes 
implicate a wide variety of molecular and cellular mechanisms in the regulation 
of cerebral cortical size during development.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-genom-083117-021441
PMID: 29799801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]