---
reference_id: "PMID:24295616"
title: An introduction to the clinical phenomenology of Tourette syndrome.
authors:
- Martino D
- Madhusudan N
- Zis P
- Cavanna AE
journal: Int Rev Neurobiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-411546-0.00001-9
keywords:
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/epidemiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Comorbidity
- Humans
- Mood Disorders/epidemiology
- Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder/epidemiology
- "Tourette Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An introduction to the clinical phenomenology of Tourette syndrome.
**Authors:** Martino D, Madhusudan N, Zis P, Cavanna AE
**Journal:** Int Rev Neurobiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-12-411546-0.00001-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-411546-0.00001-9)

## Content

1. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2013;112:1-33. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-411546-0.00001-9.

An introduction to the clinical phenomenology of Tourette syndrome.

Martino D(1), Madhusudan N, Zis P, Cavanna AE.

Author information:
(1)Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Woolwich, London, United Kingdom; Centre for
Neuroscience and Trauma, Queen Mary University of London, London, United
Kingdom; King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
davidemartino@nhs.net.

Tourette syndrome (TS) is the primary tic disorder that reaches most commonly
medical attention and monitoring, with an estimated prevalence close to 1%
between 5 and 18 years of age. Motor and phonic tics are the core features of
TS. In addition to their well-characterized phenomenology, tics display a
peculiar variability over time, which is strongly influenced by a variety of
contextual factors. The sensory phenomena of TS are increasingly recognized as
another crucial symptom of TS and consist of premonitory urges and somatic
hypersensitivity. A relevant proportion of patients with TS display complex,
tic-like, repetitive behaviors that include echophenomena, coprophenomena, and
nonobscene socially inappropriate behaviors (NOSIBs). The burden of behavioral
comorbidities is very important in determining the degree of disability of TS
patients. Only a small minority of TS patients presents exclusively with a tic
disorder. Obsessive-compulsive symptoms and related disorder (OCD) are common in
TS, and the clinical distinction between compulsions and complex tics may be
difficult in some cases. Probably, the presence of comorbid attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the main determinant of cognitive dysfunction
in TS patients and influences heavily also the risk of developing disruptive
behaviors. Affective disorders, impulse control disorders, autism spectrum
disorders, and personality disorders complete the wide psychopathological
spectrum of this condition, but have been less investigated than OCD and ADHD.
The complexity of the Tourette spectrum has been confirmed by cluster and factor
analytical approaches, and is likely to inform the study of the genetic basis of
this disorder, as well as future reappraisal of its nosography, with the
development of novel clinical subtypes.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-411546-0.00001-9
PMID: 24295616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
