---
reference_id: "PMID:36134665"
title: Multiple Nf1 Schwann cell populations reprogram the plexiform neurofibroma tumor microenvironment.
authors:
- Kershner LJ
- Choi K
- Wu J
- Zhang X
- Perrino M
- Salomonis N
- Shern JF
- Ratner N
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.154513
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- "Neurofibroma, Plexiform/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Neurofibromatosis 1/genetics, pathology"
- "Schwann Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Nf1 Schwann cell populations reprogram the plexiform neurofibroma tumor microenvironment.
**Authors:** Kershner LJ, Choi K, Wu J, Zhang X, Perrino M, Salomonis N, Shern JF, Ratner N
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.154513](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.154513)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2022 Sep 22;7(18):e154513. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.154513.

Multiple Nf1 Schwann cell populations reprogram the plexiform neurofibroma tumor 
microenvironment.

Kershner LJ(1), Choi K(1), Wu J(1), Zhang X(2), Perrino M(1), Salomonis N(3)(4), 
Shern JF(2), Ratner N(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(2)Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(3)Division of Biomedical Informatics, and.
(4)Departments of Pediatrics and Bioinformatics, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

To define alterations early in tumor formation, we studied nerve tumors in 
neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1), a tumor predisposition syndrome. Affected individuals 
develop neurofibromas, benign tumors driven by NF1 loss in Schwann cells (SCs). 
By comparing normal nerve cells to plexiform neurofibroma (PN) cells using 
single-cell and bulk RNA sequencing, we identified changes in 5 SC populations, 
including a de novo SC progenitor-like (SCP-like) population. Long after Nf1 
loss, SC populations developed PN-specific expression of Dcn, Postn, and Cd74, 
with sustained expression of the injury response gene Postn and showed dramatic 
expansion of immune and stromal cell populations; in corresponding human PNs, 
the immune and stromal cells comprised 90% of cells. Comparisons between 
injury-related and tumor monocytes/macrophages support early monocyte 
recruitment and aberrant macrophage differentiation. Cross-species analysis 
verified each SC population and unique conserved patterns of predicted cell-cell 
communication in each SC population. This analysis identified PROS1-AXL, 
FGF-FGFR, and MIF-CD74 and its effector pathway NF-κB as deregulated in NF1 SC 
populations, including SCP-like cells predicted to influence other types of SCs, 
stromal cells, and/or immune cells in mouse and human. These findings highlight 
remarkable changes in multiple types of SCs and identify therapeutic targets for 
PN.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.154513
PMCID: PMC9675562
PMID: 36134665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]