---
reference_id: "PMID:1384311"
title: Immunologic markers of progression to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome are time-dependent and illness-specific.
authors:
- Kr채mer A
- Biggar RJ
- Hampl H
- Friedman RM
- Fuchs D
- Wachter H
- Goedert JJ
journal: Am J Epidemiol
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a116422
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunologic markers of progression to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome are time-dependent and illness-specific.
**Authors:** Kr채mer A, Biggar RJ, Hampl H, Friedman RM, Fuchs D, Wachter H, Goedert JJ
**Journal:** Am J Epidemiol (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a116422](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a116422)

## Content

1. Am J Epidemiol. 1992 Jul 1;136(1):71-80. doi: 
10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a116422.

Immunologic markers of progression to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome are 
time-dependent and illness-specific.

Kr채mer A(1), Biggar RJ, Hampl H, Friedman RM, Fuchs D, Wachter H, Goedert JJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biometry, University of T체bingen, Germany.

Since prevalent cohorts may be biased by the duration of human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) infection (onset bias), it is useful to assess the potential 
predictive value of markers in incident cohorts of HIV-positive subjects for 
whom the date of seroconversion is known or can reliably be estimated. Of 131 
homosexual men with HIV-1 seroconversion from New York City and Washington, DC, 
who were evaluated annually beginning in 1982, 60 developed acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) by the end of 1989. The prognostic significance 
of immunologic markers (proportion of CD4+ T-lymphocytes, neopterin, beta 
2-microglobulin, serum interferon, and anti-p24 antibody) and of a virologic 
marker (HIV p24 antigen) was determined using measurements made at defined time 
intervals after the known or estimated date of HIV seroconversion. When 
measurements made 3 years after seroconversion were used, all markers except 
anti-p24 antibody were found to be significant estimators of AIDS risk in 
univariate analyses. In multivariate Cox regression modeling, the maximum 
information was obtained by including neopterin, interferon, and the CD4+ 
T-lymphocyte proportion. The predictive value of markers after HIV 
seroconversion could change considerably from one interval to another. Elevated 
levels of beta 2-microglobulin and neopterin significantly predicted the 
development of Kaposi's sarcoma. These two markers were highly correlated (r = 
0.74). The authors conclude that immunologic markers can be important for an HIV 
staging system for estimating prognosis and facilitating early therapeutic 
intervention in HIV-positive patients.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a116422
PMID: 1384311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]