---
reference_id: "PMID:41634022"
title: In vivo dual RNA-Seq uncovers key effectors of epithelial barrier disruption by an extracellular pathogen.
authors:
- Giraud-Gatineau A
- Haustant G
- Monot M
- Picardeau M
- Benaroudj N
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-026-69033-8
keywords:
- Animals
- "Tight Junctions/metabolism, microbiology"
- RNA-Seq
- Host-Pathogen Interactions/genetics
- Calcium/metabolism
- Mice
- "Bacterial Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Epithelial Cells/microbiology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Myosin-Light-Chain Kinase/metabolism
- Calmodulin/metabolism
- Transcriptome
- Virulence
- Calcium Signaling
- "Virulence Factors/metabolism, genetics"
- "Epithelium/metabolism, microbiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In vivo dual RNA-Seq uncovers key effectors of epithelial barrier disruption by an extracellular pathogen.
**Authors:** Giraud-Gatineau A, Haustant G, Monot M, Picardeau M, Benaroudj N
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-026-69033-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-69033-8)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2026 Feb 3;17(1):2274. doi: 10.1038/s41467-026-69033-8.

In vivo dual RNA-Seq uncovers key effectors of epithelial barrier disruption by 
an extracellular pathogen.

Giraud-Gatineau A(1), Haustant G(2), Monot M(2), Picardeau M(3), Benaroudj N(4).

Author information:
(1)Biology of Spirochetes, Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, CNRS UMR 
6047, Paris, France. agiraudg@pasteur.fr.
(2)Plate-forme Technologique Biomics, Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, 
Paris, France.
(3)Biology of Spirochetes, Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, CNRS UMR 
6047, Paris, France.
(4)Biology of Spirochetes, Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, CNRS UMR 
6047, Paris, France. nadia.benaroudj@pasteur.fr.

Disruption of host cell barriers is a fundamental strategy enabling pathogens to 
establish a paracellular infection. Here, using dual RNA-Seq, we determine the 
in vivo host-pathogen transcriptomic landscape upon infection by the 
extracellular pathogen Leptospira interrogans and uncover a mechanism of 
cell-cell junction disruption. We demonstrate that, upon infection, an increase 
in intracellular calcium triggers tight junction destabilization, by activating 
the calmodulin and myosin light chain kinase signalization. We identify two 
bacterial effectors of the Virulence-Modifying (VM) proteins family, 
structurally related to toxin-like proteins, that promote modulation of calcium 
homeostasis and disruption of cell-cell junctions, thereby allowing Leptospira 
translocation across epithelium barriers, tissue colonization and pathogenicity. 
Furthermore, we demonstrate that at least one of these VM proteins is secreted 
and associates with host cells. Altogether, these findings reveal a unique 
strategy by which an extracellular pathogen secretes toxin-like proteins to 
exploit host calcium signaling for breaching epithelial barriers.

© 2026. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-026-69033-8
PMCID: PMC12966279
PMID: 41634022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.