---
reference_id: "PMID:20804473"
title: Application of simplified Fuhrman grading system in clear-cell renal cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Hong SK
- Jeong CW
- Park JH
- Kim HS
- Kwak C
- Choe G
- Kim HH
- Lee SE
journal: BJU Int
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2010.09561.x
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Carcinoma, Renal Cell/classification, mortality, pathology"
- Epidemiologic Methods
- Female
- Humans
- "Kidney Neoplasms/classification, mortality, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Application of simplified Fuhrman grading system in clear-cell renal cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Hong SK, Jeong CW, Park JH, Kim HS, Kwak C, Choe G, Kim HH, Lee SE
**Journal:** BJU Int (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1464-410X.2010.09561.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1464-410X.2010.09561.x)

## Content

1. BJU Int. 2011 Feb;107(3):409-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2010.09561.x. Epub 
2010 Aug 26.

Application of simplified Fuhrman grading system in clear-cell renal cell 
carcinoma.

Hong SK(1), Jeong CW, Park JH, Kim HS, Kwak C, Choe G, Kim HH, Lee SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the efficacy of simplified (two- or three-tiered) 
Fuhrman grading systems as prognostic indicators in clear-cell renal cell 
carcinoma (RCC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: By reviewing records, various clinicopathological factors 
were assessed in 431 patients who received surgical management for clear-cell 
RCC. A conventional four-tiered Fuhrman grading system was compared with a 
modified two-tiered grading system (Fuhrman grades I and II were combined as one 
class, and grades III and IV as another) and also with a three-tiered grading 
system (only grades I and II were combined). Efficacies of grading systems were 
assessed via univariate analyses and multivariate models for prediction of 
cancer-specific survival.
RESULTS: In univariate analysis, the four-tiered and three-tiered grading 
systems showed similar accuracies (76.5 vs 76.2%, P =0.614) for predicting 
cancer-specific survival, which were greater than that of the two-tiered system 
(72.5%; both P < 0.05). Of the three grading systems, only the three-tiered 
system was an independent predictor of cancer-specific survival in multivariate 
analysis (P = 0.046). When receiver operating characteristic-derived areas under 
the curve (AUCs) of multivariate models for predicting cancer-specific survivals 
were assessed, AUCs for models including the three-tiered Fuhrman grading system 
and the conventional four-tiered Fuhrman grading system were the same (95.3%), 
followed by that of a model incorporating the two-tiered grading system (95.1%).
CONCLUSION: A modified, three-tiered Fuhrman grading system can be considered an 
appropriate option in the application of a nuclear grading system to the 
prognostication of clear-cell RCC in both univariate analysis and multivariate 
model setting.

© 2010 THE AUTHORS. JOURNAL COMPILATION © 2010 BJU INTERNATIONAL.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2010.09561.x
PMID: 20804473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]