---
reference_id: "PMID:24063005"
title: "Nosology of juvenile muscular atrophy of distal upper extremity: from monomelic amyotrophy to Hirayama disease--Indian perspective."
authors:
- Hassan KM
- Sahni H
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1155/2013/478516
keywords:
- Child
- Electromyography
- Hand/pathology
- Humans
- India
- "Muscular Atrophy/classification, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, therapy"
- Radiography
- "Spinal Muscular Atrophies of Childhood/classification, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nosology of juvenile muscular atrophy of distal upper extremity: from monomelic amyotrophy to Hirayama disease--Indian perspective.
**Authors:** Hassan KM, Sahni H
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2013/478516](https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/478516)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:478516. doi: 10.1155/2013/478516. Epub 2013 Aug 26.

Nosology of juvenile muscular atrophy of distal upper extremity: from monomelic 
amyotrophy to Hirayama disease--Indian perspective.

Hassan KM(1), Sahni H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine, Command Hospital, 
Alipore, West Bengal University of Health Sciences, Kolkata 700 027, India.

Since its original description by Keizo Hirayama in 1959, "juvenile muscular 
atrophy of the unilateral upper extremity" has been described under many 
nomenclatures from the east. Hirayama disease (HD), also interchangeably 
referred to as monomelic amyotrophy, has been more frequently recognised in the 
west only in the last two decades. HD presents in adolescence and young 
adulthood with insidious onset unilateral or bilateral asymmetric atrophy of 
hand and forearm with sparing of brachioradialis giving the characteristic 
appearance of oblique amyotrophy. Symmetrically bilateral disease has also been 
recognized. Believed to be a cervical flexion myelopathy, HD differs from motor 
neuron diseases because of its nonprogressive course and pathologic findings of 
chronic microcirculatory changes in the lower cervical cord. Electromyography 
shows features of acute and/or chronic denervation in C7, C8, and T1 myotomes in 
clinically affected limb and sometimes also in clinically unaffected 
contralateral limb. Dynamic forward displacement of dura in flexion causes 
asymmetric flattening of lower cervical cord. While dynamic contrast magnetic 
resonance imaging is diagnostic, routine study has high predictive value. There 
is a need to lump all the nomenclatures under the rubric of HD as prognosis in 
this condition is benign and prompt diagnosis is important to institute early 
collar therapy.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/478516
PMCID: PMC3770029
PMID: 24063005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]