---
reference_id: PMID:20104589
title: Mutation of FA2H underlies a complicated form of hereditary spastic paraplegia (SPG35).
authors:
- Dick KJ
- Eckhardt M
- Paisán-Ruiz C
- Alshehhi AA
- Proukakis C
- Sibtain NA
- Maier H
- Sharifi R
- Patton MA
- Bashir W
- Koul R
- Raeburn S
- Gieselmann V
- Houlden H
- Crosby AH
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21205
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- Brain/pathology
- CHO Cells
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromatography, Thin Layer"
- Consanguinity
- Cricetinae
- Cricetulus
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mixed Function Oxygenases/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Pregnancy
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/enzymology, genetics"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of FA2H underlies a complicated form of hereditary spastic paraplegia (SPG35).
**Authors:** Dick KJ, Eckhardt M, Paisán-Ruiz C, Alshehhi AA, Proukakis C, Sibtain NA, Maier H, Sharifi R, Patton MA, Bashir W, Koul R, Raeburn S, Gieselmann V, Houlden H, Crosby AH
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21205](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21205)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Apr;31(4):E1251-60. doi: 10.1002/humu.21205.

Mutation of FA2H underlies a complicated form of hereditary spastic paraplegia 
(SPG35).

Dick KJ(1), Eckhardt M, Paisán-Ruiz C, Alshehhi AA, Proukakis C, Sibtain NA, 
Maier H, Sharifi R, Patton MA, Bashir W, Koul R, Raeburn S, Gieselmann V, 
Houlden H, Crosby AH.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics, Clinical Developmental Sciences, St George's University of 
London, London, UK.

Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) describes a heterogeneous group of inherited 
neurodegenerative disorders in which the cardinal pathological feature is upper 
motor neurone degeneration leading to progressive spasticity and weakness of the 
lower limbs. Using samples from a large Omani family we recently mapped a gene 
for a novel autosomal recessive form of HSP (SPG35) in which the spastic 
paraplegia was associated with intellectual disability and seizures. Magnetic 
resonance imaging of the brain of SPG35 patients showed white matter 
abnormalities suggestive of a leukodystrophy. Here we report homozygous 
mutations in the fatty acid 2-hydroxylase gene (FA2H) in the original family 
used to define the SPG35 locus (p.Arg235Cys) as well as in a previously 
unreported Pakistani family with a similar phenotype (p.Arg53_Ile58del). 
Measurement of enzyme activity in vitro revealed significantly reduced enzymatic 
function of FA2H associated with these mutations. These results demonstrate that 
mutations in FA2H are associated with SPG35, and that abnormal hydroxylation of 
myelin galactocerebroside lipid components can lead to a severe progressive 
phenotype, with a clinical presentation of complicated HSP and radiological 
features of leukodystrophy. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21205
PMID: 20104589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]