---
reference_id: PMID:12874437
title: Contribution of polyol pathway to diabetes-induced oxidative stress.
authors:
- Chung SS
- Ho EC
- Lam KS
- Chung SK
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1097/01.asn.0000077408.15865.06
keywords:
- Aldehyde Reductase/metabolism
- Diabetes Mellitus/metabolism
- Humans
- L-Iditol 2-Dehydrogenase/metabolism
- "Lens, Crystalline/metabolism"
- Nervous System/metabolism
- Oxidative Stress
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contribution of polyol pathway to diabetes-induced oxidative stress.
**Authors:** Chung SS, Ho EC, Lam KS, Chung SK
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.asn.0000077408.15865.06](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.asn.0000077408.15865.06)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003 Aug;14(8 Suppl 3):S233-6. doi: 
10.1097/01.asn.0000077408.15865.06.

Contribution of polyol pathway to diabetes-induced oxidative stress.

Chung SS(1), Ho EC, Lam KS, Chung SK.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Department of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Long, China. smchung@hkucc.hku.hk

Diabetes causes increased oxidative stress, which is thought to play an 
important role in the pathogenesis of various diabetic complications. However, 
the source of the hyperglycemia-induced oxidative stress is not clear. It was 
found that the polyol pathway is the major contributor to oxidative stress in 
the lenses and nerves of diabetic mice. The first enzyme in the pathway, aldose 
reductase (AR), reduces glucose to sorbitol, which is then converted to fructose 
by sorbitol dehydrogenase (SDH). Transgenic mice that overexpress AR 
specifically in their lenses showed a significant increase in oxidative stress 
when they became hyperglycemic, as indicated by a decrease in GSH and an 
increase in malondialdehyde in their lenses. Introducing an SDH-deficient 
mutation into these transgenic mice significantly normalized the GSH and 
malondialdehyde levels. These results indicate that both enzymes of the polyol 
pathway contributed to hyperglycemia-induced oxidative stress in the lens. In 
the wild-type mice, diabetes caused a significant decrease in GSH in their 
sciatic nerves, indicative of oxidative stress. In the AR null mutant mice, 
diabetes did not lead to any decrease in the nerve GSH level. These results 
indicate that similar to the situation in the lens, AR is also the major 
contributor to hyperglycemia-induced oxidative stress in the nerve. Although 
increased flux of glucose through the polyol pathway leads to diabetic lesions 
in both the lenses and nerve, the mechanisms may be different. AR-induced 
osmotic stress seems to be the cause of diabetic cataract, whereas AR-induced 
oxidative stress is probably the cause of neuronal dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1097/01.asn.0000077408.15865.06
PMID: 12874437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]