---
reference_id: "PMID:38357623"
title: "Visual Agnosia Mimicking Memory Impairment: A Case Report of Posterior Cortical Atrophy."
authors:
- Cárdenas-Belaunzarán J
- Cerrillo-Avila KA
journal: Neuroophthalmology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/01658107.2023.2257311
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visual Agnosia Mimicking Memory Impairment: A Case Report of Posterior Cortical Atrophy.
**Authors:** Cárdenas-Belaunzarán J, Cerrillo-Avila KA
**Journal:** Neuroophthalmology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/01658107.2023.2257311](https://doi.org/10.1080/01658107.2023.2257311)

## Content

1. Neuroophthalmology. 2023 Sep 15;48(1):30-36. doi:
10.1080/01658107.2023.2257311.  eCollection 2024.

Visual Agnosia Mimicking Memory Impairment: A Case Report of Posterior Cortical 
Atrophy.

Cárdenas-Belaunzarán J(1), Cerrillo-Avila KA(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuro-Ophthalmology Department, Asociación para Evitar la Ceguera en México, 
I.A.P., Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Independent researcher, Mexico City, Mexico.

Vision specialists will benefit from increased awareness of posterior cortical 
atrophy (PCA) syndrome. Failure to adequately identify the chief complaint as a 
visual symptom may lead to incorrect diagnosis or diagnostic delay. A previously 
healthy, 59-year-old woman presented with a 5-year history of 'losing her 
stuff'. Upon psychiatric and neuro-ophthalmological evaluation, this symptom was 
better recognised as a feature of visual agnosia and simultanagnosia. She also 
presented with multiple previously unrecognised symptoms indicative of higher 
visual processing dysfunction, such as alexia without agraphia, ocular motor 
apraxia, optic ataxia, prosopagnosia, akinetopsia and topographagnosia, so 
further assessment to investigate for PCA was carried out. After a work-up 
including cognitive assessment, brain structural/functional imaging, and 
laboratory tests she was diagnosed with visual-variant Alzheimer's disease. 
Patients with PCA merit a detailed review of their symptoms, as well as the use 
of office tests such as cognitive evaluation tools, different types of 
perimetry, colour vision tests, and non-delayed psychiatric consultation for 
correct management and assessment. This report will emphasise five key aspects 
to be considered when evaluating patients with PCA.

© 2023 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.

DOI: 10.1080/01658107.2023.2257311
PMCID: PMC10863342
PMID: 38357623

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.