---
reference_id: "PMID:40122770"
title: "Young Onset Lung Cancer in India: Insights Into Clinical, Demographic, and Genomic Profiles."
authors:
- Malik PS
- Pathak N
- Sharma A
- Birla M
- Rastogi A
- Sharma A
- Khurana S
- Pushpam D
- Gupta I
- Rathore A
- Jain D
- Kumar S
- Pathy S
- Kaushal R
- Noronha V
- Prabhash K
- Karaba A
- Gauribidanur Raghavendrachar V
- Muniyappa N
journal: Clin Lung Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2025.02.014
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, epidemiology, pathology, therapy"
- India/epidemiology
- Male
- Adult
- Young Adult
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, epidemiology, pathology"
- Age of Onset
- Genomics
- Follow-Up Studies
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Survival Rate
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Young Onset Lung Cancer in India: Insights Into Clinical, Demographic, and Genomic Profiles.
**Authors:** Malik PS, Pathak N, Sharma A, Birla M, Rastogi A, Sharma A, Khurana S, Pushpam D, Gupta I, Rathore A, Jain D, Kumar S, Pathy S, Kaushal R, Noronha V, Prabhash K, Karaba A, Gauribidanur Raghavendrachar V, Muniyappa N
**Journal:** Clin Lung Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cllc.2025.02.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cllc.2025.02.014)

## Content

1. Clin Lung Cancer. 2025 Jul;26(5):420-428.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2025.02.014.
Epub 2025 Feb 22.

Young Onset Lung Cancer in India: Insights Into Clinical, Demographic, and
Genomic Profiles.

Malik PS(1), Pathak N(2), Sharma A(3), Birla M(2), Rastogi A(2), Sharma A(2),
Khurana S(2), Pushpam D(2), Gupta I(4), Rathore A(5), Jain D(5), Kumar S(6),
Pathy S(7), Kaushal R(8), Noronha V(9), Prabhash K(9), Karaba A(10),
Gauribidanur Raghavendrachar V(10), Muniyappa N(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dr.B.R.A.I.R.C.H., All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. Electronic address: drprabhatsm@aiims.edu.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dr.B.R.A.I.R.C.H., All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Institute (Jhajjar Campus),
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Indian Institute of
Technology, Delhi, India.
(5)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi,
India.
(6)Department of Surgical Oncology, Dr.B.R.A.I.R.C.H., All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(7)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dr.B.R.A.I.R.C.H., All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(8)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai, India.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai, India.
(10)Clinical Genomics, Strands Life Sciences, Bangalore, India.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer (LC) is traditionally perceived as a disease primarily
affecting the elderly. However, individuals under the age of 40 represent a rare
subset, accounting for up to 6% of all LC cases. There is limited information
about demographic, clinical, pathological, and molecular features and treatment
outcomes of young-onset LC.
METHODS: In this study, we have analyzed the clinical, pathological, molecular,
treatment, and survival outcome data of non-small-cell lung cancer patients δ 40
years of age treated at a tertiary care center in India. Additionally, we
compared the in-house genomic data of young-onset LC and late-onset LC tested on
a common targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel.
RESULTS: A total of 133 patients were included, with a median age of 36 years
(21-40 years). Females constituted 40.6% of total, and 79% were never smokers.
Adenocarcinoma was the most common histology (85.7%), and oncogene fusions were
common (ALK fusion in 34% and ROS1 in 7%). After a median follow-up of 39.2
months (95% CI 20.3-49.86), median overall survival was 26 months (95% CI
15.56-32.43) and median progression-free survival (of patients with stage 4
disease) was 6.53 months (95% CI 5.03-8.4). In-house NGS data reveals a striking
enrichment of fusions (ALK and RET) in young-onset LC.
CONCLUSION: Young-onset LC is a unique entity with a higher prevalence of
targetable genomic alterations, especially oncogene fusions. All efforts should
be made to identify the targetable alterations in this enriched population and
implement targeted therapy.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2025.02.014
PMID: 40122770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors declare that they have no
known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
