---
reference_id: PMID:20169159
title: "When the sun prickles your nose: an EEG study identifying neural bases of photic sneezing."
authors:
- Langer N
- Beeli G
- Jäncke L
journal: PLoS One
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009208
content_type: abstract_only
---

# When the sun prickles your nose: an EEG study identifying neural bases of photic sneezing.
**Authors:** Langer N, Beeli G, Jäncke L
**Journal:** PLoS One (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0009208](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0009208)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 15;5(2):e9208. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009208.

When the sun prickles your nose: an EEG study identifying neural bases of photic 
sneezing.

Langer N(1), Beeli G, Jäncke L.

Author information:
(1)Psychological Institute, Division of Neuropsychology, University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland. n.langer@psychologie.uzh.ch

BACKGROUND: Exposure to bright light such as sunlight elicits a sneeze or 
prickling sensation in about one of every four individuals. This study presents 
the first scientific examination of this phenomenon, called 'the photic sneeze 
reflex'.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In the present experiment, 'photic sneezers' 
and controls were exposed to a standard checkerboard stimulus (block 1) and 
bright flashing lights (block 2) while their EEG (electro-encephalogram) was 
recorded. Remarkably, we found a generally enhanced excitability of the visual 
cortex (mainly in the cuneus) to visual stimuli in 'photic sneezers' compared 
with control subjects. In addition, a stronger prickling sensation in the nose 
of photic sneezers was found to be associated with activation in the insula and 
stronger activation in the secondary somatosensory cortex.
CONCLUSION: We propose that the photic sneeze phenomenon might be the 
consequence of higher sensitivity to visual stimuli in the visual cortex and of 
co-activation of somatosensory areas. The 'photic sneeze reflex' is therefore 
not a classical reflex that occurs only at a brainstem or spinal cord level but, 
in stark contrast to many theories, involves also specific cortical areas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009208
PMCID: PMC2821404
PMID: 20169159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.