---
reference_id: "PMID:24127788"
title: Reduced burden of very large and rare CNVs in bipolar affective disorder.
authors:
- Grozeva D
- Kirov G
- Conrad DF
- Barnes CP
- Hurles M
- Owen MJ
- "O'Donovan MC"
- Craddock N
journal: Bipolar Disord
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/bdi.12125
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Bipolar Disorder/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Copy Number Variations/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Schizophrenia/genetics
- United Kingdom/epidemiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced burden of very large and rare CNVs in bipolar affective disorder.
**Authors:** Grozeva D, Kirov G, Conrad DF, Barnes CP, Hurles M, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC, Craddock N
**Journal:** Bipolar Disord (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bdi.12125](https://doi.org/10.1111/bdi.12125)

## Content

1. Bipolar Disord. 2013 Dec;15(8):893-8. doi: 10.1111/bdi.12125. Epub 2013 Oct
16.

Reduced burden of very large and rare CNVs in bipolar affective disorder.

Grozeva D(1), Kirov G, Conrad DF, Barnes CP, Hurles M, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC,
Craddock N.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff.

OBJECTIVES: Large, rare chromosomal copy number variants (CNVs) have been shown
to increase the risk for schizophrenia and other neuropsychiatric disorders
including autism, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, learning
difficulties, and epilepsy. Their role in bipolar disorder (BD) is less clear.
There are no reports of an increase in large, rare CNVs in BD in general, but
some have reported an increase in early-onset cases. We previously found that
the rate of such CNVs in individuals with BD was not increased, even in
early-onset cases. Our aim here was to examine the rate of large rare CNVs in BD
in comparison with a new large independent reference sample from the same
country.
METHODS: We studied the CNVs in a case-control sample consisting of 1,650 BD
cases (reported previously) and 10,259 reference individuals without a known
psychiatric disorder who took part in the original Wellcome Trust Case Control
Consortium (WTCCC) study. The 10,259 reference individuals were affected with
six non-psychiatric disorders (coronary artery disease, types 1 and 2 diabetes,
hypertension, Crohn's disease, and rheumatoid arthritis). Affymetrix 500K array
genotyping data were used to call the CNVs.
RESULTS: The rate of CNVs > 100 kb was not statistically different between cases
and controls. The rate of very large (defined as > 1 Mb) and rare (< 1%) CNVs
was significantly lower in patients with BD compared with the reference group.
CNV loci associated with schizophrenia were not enriched in BD and, in fact,
cases of BD had the lowest number of such CNVs compared with any of the WTCCC
cohorts; this finding held even for the early-onset BD cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Schizophrenia and BD differ with respect to CNV burden and
association with specific CNVs. Our findings support the hypothesis that BD is
etiologically distinct from schizophrenia with respect to large, rare CNVs and
the accompanying associated neurodevelopmental abnormalities.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bdi.12125
PMID: 24127788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
