---
reference_id: "PMID:38903756"
title: Rare exonic CELSR3 variants identified in Bladder Exstrophy Epispadias Complex.
authors:
- Jelin AC
- Sopko N
- Sobreira N
- Boyadjiev SA
- Wohler E
- Morrill C
- Witmer PD
- Michaud J
- Valle D
- Gearhart J
- Dicarlo H
journal: Front Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1266210
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare exonic CELSR3 variants identified in Bladder Exstrophy Epispadias Complex.
**Authors:** Jelin AC, Sopko N, Sobreira N, Boyadjiev SA, Wohler E, Morrill C, Witmer PD, Michaud J, Valle D, Gearhart J, Dicarlo H
**Journal:** Front Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2024.1266210](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2024.1266210)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2024 Jun 5;15:1266210. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1266210.
eCollection  2024.

Rare exonic CELSR3 variants identified in Bladder Exstrophy Epispadias Complex.

Jelin AC(#)(1)(2), Sopko N(#)(3), Sobreira N(2)(4), Boyadjiev SA(5), Wohler 
E(2), Morrill C(3), Witmer PD(2), Michaud J(3), Valle D(2), Gearhart J(3), 
Dicarlo H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, United States.
(2)Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatric Urology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD, United States.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 
United States.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, United 
States.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION/BACKGROUND: Bladder exstrophy epispadias complex (BEEC) is a rare 
congenital anomaly of unknown etiology, although, genetic and environmental 
factors have been associated with its development. Variants in several genes 
expressed in the urogenital pathway have been reported as causative for bladder 
exstrophy in human and murine models. The expansion of next-generation 
sequencing and molecular genomics has improved our ability to identify the 
underlying genetic causes of similarly complex diseases and could thus assist 
with the investigation of the molecular basis of BEEC.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to identify the presence of rare heterozygous 
variants in genes previously implicated in bladder exstrophy and correlate them 
with the presence or absence of bladder regeneration in our study population.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We present a case series of 12 patients with BEEC who had 
bladder biopsies performed by pediatric urology during bladder neck 
reconstruction or bladder augmentation. Cases were classified as "sufficient" or 
"insufficient" (n = 5 and 7, respectively) based on a bladder volume of greater 
than or less than 40% of expected bladder size. Control bladder tissue specimens 
were obtained from patients (n = 6) undergoing biopsies for conditions other 
than bladder exstrophy. Whole exome sequencing was performed on DNA isolated 
from the bladder specimens. Based on the hypothesis of de novo mutations, as 
well as the potential implications of autosomal dominant conditions with 
incomplete penetrance, each case was evaluated for autosomal dominant variants 
in a set of genes previously implicated in BEEC.
RESULTS: Our review of the literature identified 44 genes that have been 
implicated in human models of bladder exstrophy. Our whole exome sequencing data 
analysis identified rare variants in two of these genes among the cases 
classified as sufficient, and seven variants in five of these genes among the 
cases classified as insufficient.
CONCLUSION: We identified rare variants in seven previously implicated genes in 
our BEEC specimens. Additional research is needed to further understand the 
cellular signaling underlying this potentially genetically heterogeneous 
embryological condition.

Copyright © 2024 Jelin, Sopko, Sobreira, Boyadjiev, Wohler, Morrill, Witmer, 
Michaud, Valle, Gearhart and Dicarlo.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1266210
PMCID: PMC11188427
PMID: 38903756

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.