---
reference_id: "PMID:27553018"
title: "Tuberculosis and its Treatment: An Overview."
authors:
- Bansal R
- Sharma D
- Singh R
journal: Mini Rev Med Chem
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2174/1389557516666160823160010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberculosis and its Treatment: An Overview.
**Authors:** Bansal R, Sharma D, Singh R
**Journal:** Mini Rev Med Chem (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1389557516666160823160010](https://doi.org/10.2174/1389557516666160823160010)

## Content

1. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2018;18(1):58-71. doi: 10.2174/1389557516666160823160010.

Tuberculosis and its Treatment: An Overview.

Bansal R(1), Sharma D(1), Singh R(1).

Author information:
(1)University Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sector-14, Panjab 
University, Chandigarh-160014, India.

Tuberculosis (TB) is a primordial infectious disease that mainly affects the 
lungs. M. tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis) is the etiological agent of 
TB and currently more than one-third of the world population is suffering from 
TB. For the treatment of TB, administration of multiple antibiotics such as 
isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol is required for a long period 
of time to kill bacteria. However, antibiotic resistance is an emerging problem 
in multiple drug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) infections. World Health 
Organization (WHO) has developed a novel strategy called DOTS (directly observed 
treatment, short-course), in which specific combination of anti-TB drugs is 
given to control TB. In this review article we have focused on the comprehensive 
management of TB and have provided the valuable information about first and 
second line anti-TB drugs, DOTS and novel drug delivery systems to be used 
against M. tuberculosis. Important aspects related to new anti-TB drugs and 
vaccines in various stages of clinical development are also covered in this 
article.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1389557516666160823160010
PMID: 27553018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]