---
reference_id: "PMID:12432080"
title: Effects of Charcot-Marie-Tooth-linked mutations of the neurofilament light subunit on intermediate filament formation.
authors:
- Perez-Olle R
- Leung CL
- Liem RK
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1242/jcs.00148
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Blotting, Western"
- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics
- "Fluorescent Antibody Technique, Indirect"
- Humans
- "Intermediate Filament Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Neurofilament Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of Charcot-Marie-Tooth-linked mutations of the neurofilament light subunit on intermediate filament formation.
**Authors:** Perez-Olle R, Leung CL, Liem RK
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.00148](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.00148)

## Content

1. J Cell Sci. 2002 Dec 15;115(Pt 24):4937-46. doi: 10.1242/jcs.00148.

Effects of Charcot-Marie-Tooth-linked mutations of the neurofilament light 
subunit on intermediate filament formation.

Perez-Olle R(1), Leung CL, Liem RK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University College of Physicians & 
Surgeons, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Neurofilaments (NFs) are the major intermediate filaments (IFs) of mature 
neurons. They play important roles in the structure and function of axons. 
Recently, two mutations in the neurofilament light (NFL) subunit have been 
identified in families affected by Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) neuropathy type 2. 
We have characterized the effects of these NFL mutations on the formation of IF 
networks using a transient transfection system. Both mutations disrupted the 
self-assembly of human NFL. The Q333P mutant in the rod domain of NFL also 
disrupted the formation of rat and human NFL/NFM heteropolymers. The phenotypes 
produced by the P8R mutation in the head domain of NFL were less severe. The P8R 
mutant NFL co-polymerized with NFM to form bundled filaments and, less often, 
aggregates. Our results suggest that alterations in the formation of a normal IF 
network in neurons elicited by these NFL mutations may contribute to the 
development of Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.00148
PMID: 12432080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]