---
reference_id: "PMID:15706485"
title: "Genetic heterogeneity in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: mutations in both the CBP and EP300 genes cause disease."
authors:
- Roelfsema JH
- White SJ
- Ariyürek Y
- Bartholdi D
- Niedrist D
- Papadia F
- Bacino CA
- den Dunnen JT
- van Ommen GJ
- Breuning MH
- Hennekam RC
- Peters DJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1086/429130
keywords:
- Acetyltransferases/genetics
- Amino Acid Sequence
- CREB-Binding Protein
- Female
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome/genetics
- Trans-Activators/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic heterogeneity in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: mutations in both the CBP and EP300 genes cause disease.
**Authors:** Roelfsema JH, White SJ, Ariyürek Y, Bartholdi D, Niedrist D, Papadia F, Bacino CA, den Dunnen JT, van Ommen GJ, Breuning MH, Hennekam RC, Peters DJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1086/429130](https://doi.org/10.1086/429130)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Apr;76(4):572-80. doi: 10.1086/429130. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

Genetic heterogeneity in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: mutations in both the CBP 
and EP300 genes cause disease.

Roelfsema JH(1), White SJ, Ariyürek Y, Bartholdi D, Niedrist D, Papadia F, 
Bacino CA, den Dunnen JT, van Ommen GJ, Breuning MH, Hennekam RC, Peters DJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Sylvius Laboratory, Leiden, The Netherlands.

CREB-binding protein and p300 function as transcriptional coactivators in the 
regulation of gene expression through various signal-transduction pathways. Both 
are potent histone acetyl transferases. A certain level of CREB-binding protein 
is essential for normal development, since inactivation of one allele causes 
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS). There is a direct link between loss of acetyl 
transferase activity and RSTS, which indicates that the disorder is caused by 
aberrant chromatin regulation. We screened the entire CREB-binding protein gene 
(CBP) for mutations in patients with RSTS by using methods that find point 
mutations and larger rearrangements. In 92 patients, we were able to identify a 
total of 36 mutations in CBP. By using multiple ligation-dependent probe 
amplification, we found not only several deletions but also the first reported 
intragenic duplication in a patient with RSTS. We extended the search for 
mutations to the EP300 gene and showed that mutations in EP300 also cause this 
disorder. These are the first mutations identified in EP300 for a congenital 
disorder.

DOI: 10.1086/429130
PMCID: PMC1199295
PMID: 15706485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]