---
reference_id: "PMID:33106268"
title: Acetylation of Isoniazid Is a Novel Mechanism of Isoniazid Resistance in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
authors:
- Arun KB
- Madhavan A
- Abraham B
- Balaji M
- Sivakumar KC
- Nisha P
- Kumar RA
journal: Antimicrob Agents Chemother
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1128/AAC.00456-20
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acetylation of Isoniazid Is a Novel Mechanism of Isoniazid Resistance in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Arun KB, Madhavan A, Abraham B, Balaji M, Sivakumar KC, Nisha P, Kumar RA
**Journal:** Antimicrob Agents Chemother (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1128/AAC.00456-20](https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.00456-20)

## Content

1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2020 Dec 16;65(1):e00456-20. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.00456-20. Print 2020 Dec 16.

Acetylation of Isoniazid Is a Novel Mechanism of Isoniazid Resistance in 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Arun KB(#)(1), Madhavan A(#)(1), Abraham B(2), Balaji M(1), Sivakumar KC(3), 
Nisha P(2), Kumar RA(4).

Author information:
(1)Mycobacterium Research Laboratory, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.
(2)Agro-Processing and Technology Division, National Institute for 
Interdisciplinary Science and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.
(3)Bioinformatics Facility, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.
(4)Mycobacterium Research Laboratory, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India rakumar@rgcb.res.in.
(#)Contributed equally

Isoniazid (INH), one of the first-line drugs used for the treatment of 
tuberculosis, is a prodrug which is activated by the intracellular KatG enzyme 
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis The activated drug hinders cell wall biosynthesis 
by inhibiting the InhA protein. INH-resistant strains of M. tuberculosis usually 
have mutations in katG, inhA, ahpC, kasA, and ndh genes. However, INH-resistant 
strains which do not have mutations in any of these genes are reported, 
suggesting that these strains may adopt some other mechanism to become resistant 
to INH. In the present study, we characterized Rv2170, a putative 
acetyltransferase in M. tuberculosis, to elucidate its role in inactivating 
isoniazid. The purified recombinant protein was able to catalyze the transfer of 
the acetyl group to INH from acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA). High-performance 
liquid chromatography (HPLC) and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) 
analyses showed that following acetylation by Rv2170, INH is broken down into 
isonicotinic acid and acetylhydrazine. A drug susceptibility assay and confocal 
analysis showed that Mycobacterium smegmatis, which is susceptible to INH, is 
not inhibited by INH acetylated with Rv2170. Mutant proteins of Rv2170 failed to 
acetylate INH. Recombinant M. smegmatis and M. tuberculosis H37Ra overexpressing 
Rv2170 were found to be resistant to INH at MICs that inhibited wild-type 
strains. Besides, intracellular M. tuberculosis H37Ra overexpressing Rv2170 
survived better in macrophages when treated with INH. Our results strongly 
indicate that Rv2170 acetylates INH, and this could be one of the strategies 
adopted by at least some M. tuberculosis strains to overcome INH toxicity, 
although this needs to be tested in INH-resistant clinical strains.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00456-20
PMCID: PMC7927840
PMID: 33106268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]