---
reference_id: "PMID:36622139"
title: "Insights into familial adult myoclonus epilepsy pathogenesis: How the same repeat expansion in six unrelated genes may lead to cortical excitability."
authors:
- Depienne C
- van den Maagdenberg AMJM
- Kühnel T
- Ishiura H
- Corbett MA
- Tsuji S
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/epi.17504
keywords:
- Humans
- Introns
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic"
- Microsatellite Repeats
- RNA
- Cortical Excitability
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights into familial adult myoclonus epilepsy pathogenesis: How the same repeat expansion in six unrelated genes may lead to cortical excitability.
**Authors:** Depienne C, van den Maagdenberg AMJM, Kühnel T, Ishiura H, Corbett MA, Tsuji S
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.17504](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.17504)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2023 Jun;64 Suppl 1:S31-S38. doi: 10.1111/epi.17504. Epub 2023 Jan 
22.

Insights into familial adult myoclonus epilepsy pathogenesis: How the same 
repeat expansion in six unrelated genes may lead to cortical excitability.

Depienne C(1), van den Maagdenberg AMJM(2)(3), Kühnel T(1), Ishiura H(4)(5), 
Corbett MA(6), Tsuji S(4)(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Essen, University of 
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Robinson Research Institute, University of Adelaide, Adelaide Medical School, 
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(7)Institute of Medical Genomics, International University of Health and 
Welfare, Chiba, Japan.

Familial adult myoclonus epilepsy (FAME) results from the same pathogenic 
TTTTA/TTTCA pentanucleotide repeat expansion in six distinct genes encoding 
proteins with different subcellular localizations and very different functions, 
which poses the issue of what causes the neurobiological disturbances that lead 
to the clinical phenotype. Postmortem and electrophysiological studies have 
pointed to cortical hyperexcitability as well as dysfunction and 
neurodegeneration of both the cortex and cerebellum of FAME subjects. FAME 
expansions, contrary to the same expansion in DAB1 causing spinocerebellar 
ataxia type 37, seem to have no or limited impact on their recipient gene 
expression, which suggests a pathophysiological mechanism independent of the 
gene and its function. Current hypotheses include toxicity of the RNA molecules 
carrying UUUCA repeats, or toxicity of polypeptides encoded by the repeats, a 
mechanism known as repeat-associated non-AUG translation. The analysis of 
postmortem brains of FAME1 expansion (in SAMD12) carriers has revealed the 
presence of RNA foci that could be formed by the aggregation of RNA molecules 
with abnormal UUUCA repeats, but evidence is still lacking for other FAME 
subtypes. Even when the expansion is located in a gene ubiquitously expressed, 
expression of repeats remains undetectable in peripheral tissues (blood, skin). 
Therefore, the development of appropriate cellular models (induced pluripotent 
stem cell-derived neurons) or the study of affected tissues in patients is 
required to elucidate how FAME repeat expansions located in unrelated genes lead 
to disease.

© 2023 The Authors. Epilepsia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.17504
PMID: 36622139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors has any conflict of interest 
to disclose.