---
reference_id: "PMID:23732143"
title: The burden of hypertension.
authors:
- Kintscher U
journal: EuroIntervention
year: '2013'
doi: 10.4244/EIJV9SRA3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The burden of hypertension.
**Authors:** Kintscher U
**Journal:** EuroIntervention (2013)
**DOI:** [10.4244/EIJV9SRA3](https://doi.org/10.4244/EIJV9SRA3)

## Content

1. EuroIntervention. 2013 May;9 Suppl R:R12-5. doi: 10.4244/EIJV9SRA3.

The burden of hypertension.

Kintscher U.

Arterial hypertension is among the leading global risks for mortality, being 
responsible for 9.4 million deaths in 2010. The reason for this enormous burden 
has been documented in multiple studies. Hypertension is strongly associated 
with overall cardiovascular risk. Increased blood pressure contributes to 
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular endpoints, such as myocardial infarction, 
heart failure, cardiovascular death and stroke. In addition, an age-dependent 
positive correlation exists between systolic blood pressure (SBP)/ diastolic 
blood pressure (DBP) and stroke, as well as between SBP/DBP and ischaemic heart 
disease. All these data suggest that hypertension is the number one risk for 
mortality because of its dominant role in cardiovascular pathogenesis. Despite a 
recently documented fall in blood pressure levels during the last decade in 
Europe, it appears very likely that hypertension, as a strong age-dependent risk 
factor, will remain one of the most crucial cardiovascular risk factors in an 
ageing world population. Along these lines, the well-known suboptimal 
hypertension control rates should be of great concern, and the identification 
and study of new strategies for an improvement in awareness and effective 
treatment for hypertension are absolutely essential.

DOI: 10.4244/EIJV9SRA3
PMID: 23732143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]