---
reference_id: "PMID:9272508"
title: "Clinical management of patients with the long QT syndrome: drugs, devices, and gene-specific therapy."
authors:
- Moss AJ
journal: Pacing Clin Electrophysiol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1111/j.1540-8159.1997.tb03627.x
keywords:
- Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/therapeutic use
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- "Defibrillators, Implantable"
- Ganglionectomy
- Genetic Therapy
- Genotype
- Humans
- Ion Channels/genetics
- "Long QT Syndrome/drug therapy, genetics, surgery, therapy"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Pacemaker, Artificial"
- Phenotype
- Potassium Channels/genetics
- Sodium Channels/genetics
- "Syncope, Vasovagal/etiology"
- "Tachycardia, Ventricular/etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical management of patients with the long QT syndrome: drugs, devices, and gene-specific therapy.
**Authors:** Moss AJ
**Journal:** Pacing Clin Electrophysiol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1540-8159.1997.tb03627.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-8159.1997.tb03627.x)

## Content

1. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1997 Aug;20(8 Pt 2):2058-60. doi:
10.1111/j.1540-8159.1997.tb03627.x.

Clinical management of patients with the long QT syndrome: drugs, devices, and
gene-specific therapy.

Moss AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, New York, USA.

The familial long QT syndrome (LQTS) is now recognized as a genetic
channelopathy with a propensity to arrhythmogenic syncope and sudden death.
Three genetic mutations have been identified that involve the slow and fast
delayed potassium rectifier currents and the sodium current. Distinctive ECG-T
wave phenotypes are associated with each of the three genotypes. Current day
therapy includes: beta-adrenergic blocking drugs; pacemakers; left
cervicothoracic sympathetic ganglionectomy; implanted cardioverter
defibrillators; and possibly, drugs that improve mutant ionic channel
dysfunction. LQTS has provided unique insight into the complex relationship
between ionic channel dysfunction and ventricular tachyarrhythmias.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-8159.1997.tb03627.x
PMID: 9272508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
