---
reference_id: "PMID:25877451"
title: Substantial burden of dizziness in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Marrie RA
- Cutter GR
- Tyry T
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2012.08.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Substantial burden of dizziness in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Marrie RA, Cutter GR, Tyry T
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2012.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2012.08.004)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2013 Jan;2(1):21-8. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2012.08.004.
 Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Substantial burden of dizziness in multiple sclerosis.

Marrie RA(1), Cutter GR(2), Tyry T(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Community Health Sciences, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, CAN. Electronic address: rmarrie@hsc.mb.ca.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
USA.
(3)Division of Neurology, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Dizziness affects 49-59% of persons with MS but few prior studies
examined the impact of dizziness in persons with multiple sclerosis (MS). Using
the North American Research Committee on Multiple Sclerosis (NARCOMS) Registry,
we examined the measurement properties of the Dizziness Handicap Inventory (DHI)
in persons with MS, and the association between the DHI and health-related
quality of life (HRQOL).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In 2004, NARCOMS participants completed the DHI. We
scored the DHI for each participant and evaluated the association of the DHI
scores and the participant demographic and clinical characteristics of interest
using t-tests and Kruskal-Wallis tests as appropriate. We examined the
association between the DHI scores and HRQOL (PCS-12, MCS-12) and disability
status using Spearman rank correlations and generalized linear models.
RESULTS: 8123 participants completed the questionnaire, of whom 74.5% were women
and 96.6% were white. Their mean (SD) age of symptom onset was 30.3 (9.7) years
and median (IQR) score on Patient Determined Disease Steps (PDDS) was 4 (1-6).
The median (interquartile range) DHI score was 20 (0-44). The impact of
dizziness could be classified as mild in over 60% of participants (n=4660),
moderate in 30.9% (n=2340) and severe in 7.55% (n=572). The odds of reporting
moderate or severe dizziness were reduced with higher socioeconomic status
(post-graduate degree vs. less than high school education odds ratio [OR] 0.38;
95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.28-0.52) and increased with higher levels of
disability (severe vs. mild disability OR 1.38; 95% CI: 1.13-1.68). Physical and
mental HRQOL decreased as the impact of dizziness increased (DHI-PCS-12 r=-0.34,
DHI-MCS-12 r=-0.37).
CONCLUSIONS: Dizziness is common in MS and adversely impacts quality of life.
More effective management of this symptom may improve HRQOL and deserves more
attention.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2012.08.004
PMID: 25877451
