---
reference_id: "PMID:11300264"
title: Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome as a human example for accelerated cochlear nerve degeneration.
authors:
- Fish JH 3rd
- Scholtz AW
- Hussl B
- Kreczy A
- Schrott-Fischer A
journal: Otol Neurotol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1097/00129492-200103000-00009
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/pathology"
- Adolescent
- Axons/pathology
- Bone Diseases/complications
- Child
- Cochlear Nerve/pathology
- Eye Diseases/complications
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/diagnosis, etiology"
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/complications
- Male
- Microcephaly/complications
- Nerve Degeneration/pathology
- "Nerve Fibers, Myelinated/pathology"
- Spiral Ganglion/pathology
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome as a human example for accelerated cochlear nerve degeneration.
**Authors:** Fish JH 3rd, Scholtz AW, Hussl B, Kreczy A, Schrott-Fischer A
**Journal:** Otol Neurotol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00129492-200103000-00009](https://doi.org/10.1097/00129492-200103000-00009)

## Content

1. Otol Neurotol. 2001 Mar;22(2):170-7. doi: 10.1097/00129492-200103000-00009.

Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome as a human example for accelerated 
cochlear nerve degeneration.

Fish JH 3rd(1), Scholtz AW, Hussl B, Kreczy A, Schrott-Fischer A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Innsbruck, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal (COFS) syndrome is a rare 
autosomal-recessive disorder that includes microcephaly, severe mental 
retardation, and multiple congenital anomalies. Otologic findings are usually 
limited to descriptions of the auricles.
PATIENT AND METHODS: The authors report inner ear histopathologic findings of a 
deceased 13-year-old patient with COFS. A histologic study of the inner ear in 
COFS syndrome has not yet been described. This patient was documented as having 
a profound bilateral sensorineural hearing loss at the age of 2 years.
RESULTS: Histologic evaluation revealed accelerated neural and neuronal 
degeneration at the cochlear and retrocochlear levels. Remaining myelinated 
nerve fibers, counted in the spiral lamina, had degenerated by up to 97% when 
compared with normal innervation densities. Afferent nerve fibers innervating 
inner hair cells were completely absent, whereas medial efferent fibers to outer 
hair cells were found. Vestibular nerve fibers were less affected.
CONCLUSION: The authors report inner ear findings that differ from animal models 
of primary cochlear neural degeneration and that resemble the pattern of 
hereditary cochlear nerve degeneration reported in Friedreich's ataxia.

DOI: 10.1097/00129492-200103000-00009
PMID: 11300264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]