---
reference_id: "PMID:35698999"
title: "The prevalence and assessment of pain and dyspnoea in acute exacerbations of COPD: A systematic review."
authors:
- Clarke SY
- Williams MT
- Johnston KN
- Lee AL
journal: Chron Respir Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/14799731221105518
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The prevalence and assessment of pain and dyspnoea in acute exacerbations of COPD: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Clarke SY, Williams MT, Johnston KN, Lee AL
**Journal:** Chron Respir Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/14799731221105518](https://doi.org/10.1177/14799731221105518)

## Content

1. Chron Respir Dis. 2022 Jan-Dec;19:14799731221105518. doi: 
10.1177/14799731221105518.

The prevalence and assessment of pain and dyspnoea in acute exacerbations of 
COPD: A systematic review.

Clarke SY(1)(2), Williams MT(3), Johnston KN(3), Lee AL(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiotherapy, School of Primary and Allied Health Care, 
Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, 2541Monash University, 
Frankston, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Physiotherapy Department, Eastern Health, Victoria, Australia.
(3)IMPlementation And Clinical Translation in Health (IIMPACT), Allied Health 
and Human Performance, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia.
(4)Centre for Allied Health Research and Education, Cabrini Health, Victoria, 
Australia.
(5)Institute for Breathing and Sleep, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Dyspnoea and pain are symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). This review focused upon pain and dyspnoea during hospital 
admissions for acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD), with the aim of examining 
prevalence, assessment, clinical associations, and researcher-reported 
implications of these symptoms.
METHODS: Four electronic databases were searched from inception to 31 May 2021. 
Full text versions of studies were assessed for methodological quality and data 
were extracted independently by two reviewers. Where data permitted, pooled 
prevalence of pain and dyspnoea were calculated by meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Four studies were included. The pooled prevalence of pain and dyspnoea 
was 44% (95% confidence interval (CI) 35%-52%) and 91% (95% CI 87%-94%) 
respectively. An array of instruments with varying focal periods were reported 
(pain: six tools, dyspnoea: four tools). Associations and clinical implications 
between the two symptoms at the time of hospital admission were rarely reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Few studies reported prevalence of pain and dyspnoea during an 
AECOPD. A greater understanding into the prevalence, intensity and associations 
of these symptoms during AECOPD could be furthered by use of standardised 
assessment tools with clearly defined focal periods.

DOI: 10.1177/14799731221105518
PMCID: PMC9201350
PMID: 35698999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.