---
reference_id: "PMID:36456709"
title: "Retrospective analyses of clinical features in 28 Chinese patients with type V osteogenesis imperfecta: new perspectives in an old issue."
authors:
- Tan Z
- Shek HT
- Dong Z
- Feng L
- Zhou Y
- Yin S
- Qiu A
- Dong L
- Gao B
- Chen P
- To MKT
journal: Osteoporos Int
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00198-022-06581-x
keywords:
- Humans
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications, drug therapy, genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- East Asian People
- Mutation
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- Calcinosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrospective analyses of clinical features in 28 Chinese patients with type V osteogenesis imperfecta: new perspectives in an old issue.
**Authors:** Tan Z, Shek HT, Dong Z, Feng L, Zhou Y, Yin S, Qiu A, Dong L, Gao B, Chen P, To MKT
**Journal:** Osteoporos Int (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00198-022-06581-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-022-06581-x)

## Content

1. Osteoporos Int. 2023 Feb;34(2):369-377. doi: 10.1007/s00198-022-06581-x. Epub 
2022 Dec 2.

Retrospective analyses of clinical features in 28 Chinese patients with type V 
osteogenesis imperfecta: new perspectives in an old issue.

Tan Z(#)(1)(2), Shek HT(#)(1), Dong Z(1), Feng L(1), Zhou Y(1), Yin S(1), Qiu 
A(1), Dong L(1), Gao B(3)(4), Chen P(5)(6), To MKT(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, The University of Hong 
Kong-Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, School of Clinical Medicine, Li 
Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, The University of Hong 
Kong-Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, China. gaobo@hku.hk.
(4)School of Biomedical Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. gaobo@hku.hk.
(5)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, The University of Hong 
Kong-Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, China. pkchen@hku-szh.org.
(6)School of Biomedical Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. pkchen@hku-szh.org.
(7)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, The University of Hong 
Kong-Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, China. mikektto@hku.hk.
(8)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, School of Clinical Medicine, Li 
Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. 
mikektto@hku.hk.
(#)Contributed equally

Type V osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a form of OI characterized by radial head 
dislocation (RHD), calcification of interosseous membrane (CIM), and 
hyperplastic callus (HPC). In this study, we characterized the clinical features 
of 28 type V OI patients. We presented that dysfunctions of elbow, hip joint, 
and abnormal epiphyseal growth plate were associated with ectopic calcification 
and summarized the history of HPC progression and treatment.
INTRODUCTION: The current study aims to systematically characterize the skeletal 
phenotypes of patients with type V OI and suggested possible surgical solutions.
METHODS: A total of 28 patients were admitted for inpatient care at The Hong 
Kong University-Shenzhen Hospital diagnosed with type V OI (either clinically 
diagnosed or genetically confirmed with the IFITM5 c.-14C > T mutation).
RESULTS: Prevalence of type V radiological features was comparable to previous 
literatures (RHD, 100%; CIM, 100%; HPC, 44%; and scoliosis, 50%). Novel skeletal 
phenotypes were presented including extension of coronoid process, acetabular 
labrum, acetabular protrusion, spontaneous autofusion of the hip, bulbous 
epiphysis, and popcorn calcification. Significant increase in BMD was observed 
in patients with bisphosphonate treatment. Twenty-five percent (3/12) of 
patients with preoperative use of indomethacin developed HPC postoperatively, 
and HPCs were absorbed in 2 young patients 2 years later.
CONCLUSION: This retrospective study summarized the clinical features and 
highlighted the abnormalities in elbow, hip joint, and growth plate in type V OI 
patients. Our study contributed to a more comprehensive clinical spectrum of 
type V OI. We also characterized the natural progression of HPC formation and 
resorption in patients in different ages. The use of bisphosphonate treatment is 
effective in improving bone mineral density in type V OI patients, and whether 
indomethacin can reduce incidence of HPC formation deserves further 
investigation.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-022-06581-x
PMCID: PMC9852172
PMID: 36456709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.