---
reference_id: "PMID:37161390"
title: A novel mutation in RNF216 gene in a Turkish case with Gordon Holmes syndrome.
authors:
- Durmaz Çelik N
- Erzurumluoğlu E
- Özben S
- Toprak U
- Yorulmaz G
- Artan S
- Özkan S
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-023-01529-4
keywords:
- Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone/deficiency
- Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics
- Hypogonadism
- Mutation
- Humans
- Ataxia
- Klinefelter Syndrome
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation in RNF216 gene in a Turkish case with Gordon Holmes syndrome.
**Authors:** Durmaz Çelik N, Erzurumluoğlu E, Özben S, Toprak U, Yorulmaz G, Artan S, Özkan S
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-023-01529-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-023-01529-4)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2023 May 9;16(1):98. doi: 10.1186/s12920-023-01529-4.

A novel mutation in RNF216 gene in a Turkish case with Gordon Holmes syndrome.

Durmaz Çelik N(1), Erzurumluoğlu E(2), Özben S(3), Toprak U(4), Yorulmaz G(5), 
Artan S(2), Özkan S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Eskişehir Osmangazi University Faculty of Medicine, 
Eskişehir, Turkey. doktornazli@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Eskişehir Osmangazi 
University, Eskişehir, Turkey.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Health Sciences, Antalya Training and 
Research Hospital, Antalya, Turkey.
(4)Department of Radiology, Eskişehir Osmangazi University Faculty of Medicine, 
Eskişehir, Turkey.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Eskişehir Osmangazi University Faculty of 
Medicine, Eskişehir, Turkey.
(6)Department of Neurology, Eskişehir Osmangazi University Faculty of Medicine, 
Eskişehir, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Gordon Holmes syndrome (GHS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, cognitive decline, and 
cerebellar ataxia. Mutations in the Ring Finger Protein 216 (RNF216) gene have 
been known to be associated with GHS therewithal RNF216 mutations have been 
detected in cases with Huntington-like disease, 4H syndrome (hypodontia, 
hypomyelination, ataxia and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism), and congenital 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here we report a novel homozygous frameshift mutation in 
RNF216 gene c.1860_1861dupCT (p.Cys621SerfsTer56) in a patient with 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, ataxia, and cognitive decline diagnosed with GHS 
also co-occurrence of parkinsonism and dystonia which was not reported before.
CONCLUSIONS: We report an extremely rare case of GHS. The core features of GHS 
are well defined, but genotype-phenotype correlations are still limited. To 
understand the pathophysiology of different phenotypes, the type and 
localization of novel mutations need to be defined, and the effect of these 
different variants on clinical features needs to be determined. Further studies 
should explain the factors of phenotypic variability present in GHS patients 
with RNF216 mutations.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-023-01529-4
PMCID: PMC10169457
PMID: 37161390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing intrests for 
this manuscript.