---
reference_id: "PMID:24014553"
title: "Addison's disease: a survey on 633 patients in Padova."
authors:
- Betterle C
- Scarpa R
- Garelli S
- Morlin L
- Lazzarotto F
- Presotto F
- Coco G
- Masiero S
- Parolo A
- Albergoni MP
- Favero R
- Barollo S
- Salvà M
- Basso D
- Chen S
- Rees Smith B
- Furmaniak J
- Mantero F
journal: Eur J Endocrinol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1530/EJE-13-0528
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Addison's disease: a survey on 633 patients in Padova.
**Authors:** Betterle C, Scarpa R, Garelli S, Morlin L, Lazzarotto F, Presotto F, Coco G, Masiero S, Parolo A, Albergoni MP, Favero R, Barollo S, Salvà M, Basso D, Chen S, Rees Smith B, Furmaniak J, Mantero F
**Journal:** Eur J Endocrinol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EJE-13-0528](https://doi.org/10.1530/EJE-13-0528)

## Content

1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013 Oct 21;169(6):773-84. doi: 10.1530/EJE-13-0528. Print 
2013 Dec.

Addison's disease: a survey on 633 patients in Padova.

Betterle C(1), Scarpa R, Garelli S, Morlin L, Lazzarotto F, Presotto F, Coco G, 
Masiero S, Parolo A, Albergoni MP, Favero R, Barollo S, Salvà M, Basso D, Chen 
S, Rees Smith B, Furmaniak J, Mantero F.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Via Ospedale 
Civile, 105, 35128 Padova, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Addison's disease (AD) is a rare endocrine condition.
DESIGN: We aimed to evaluate clinical, immunologic, adrenal imaging, and genetic 
features in 633 Italian patients with AD followed up since 1967.
METHODS: Adrenal cortex autoantibodies, presence of other autoimmune and 
nonautoimmune diseases, nonadrenal autoantibodies, adrenal imaging, and genetic 
profile for HLA-DRB1 and AIRE were analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 492 (77.7%) patients were found to be affected by autoimmune 
AD (A-AD), 57 (9%) tuberculous AD, 29 (4.6%) genetic-associated AD, 10 (1.6%) 
adrenal cancer, six (0.94%) post-surgical AD, four (0.6%) vascular 
disorder-related AD, three (0.5%) post-infectious AD, and 32 (5.1%) were defined 
as idiopathic. Adrenal cortex antibodies were detected in the vast majority 
(88100%) of patients with recent onset A-AD, but in none of those with 
nonautoimmune AD. Adrenal imaging revealed normal/atrophic glands in all A-AD 
patients: 88% of patients with A-AD had other clinical or subclinical autoimmune 
diseases or were positive for nonadrenal autoantibodies. Based on the 
coexistence of other autoimmune disorders, 65.6% of patients with A-AD were 
found to have type 2 autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome (APS2), 14.4% have APS1, 
and 8.5% have APS4. Class II HLA alleles DRB1*03 and DRB1*04 were increased, and 
DRB1*01, DRB1*07, DRB1*013 were reduced in APS2 patients when compared with 
controls. Of the patients with APS1, 96% were revealed to have AIRE gene 
mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: A-AD is the most prevalent form of adrenal insufficiency in Italy, 
and ∼90% of the patients are adrenal autoantibody-positive at the onset. 
Assessment of patients with A-AD for the presence of other autoimmune diseases 
should be helpful in monitoring and diagnosing APS types 1, 2, or 4 and 
improving patients' care.

DOI: 10.1530/EJE-13-0528
PMID: 24014553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]