---
reference_id: "PMID:37844979"
title: Severe chronic diarrhoea caused by hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis.
authors:
- Toppeta A
- Dell'Era A
- Molteni P
- Ardizzone S
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2023-256673
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe chronic diarrhoea caused by hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Toppeta A, Dell'Era A, Molteni P, Ardizzone S
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2023-256673](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2023-256673)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2023 Oct 16;16(10):e256673. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2023-256673.

Severe chronic diarrhoea caused by hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis.

Toppeta A(1), Dell'Era A(2)(3), Molteni P(3), Ardizzone S(3).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, 
University of Milan, Milano, Italy angelica.toppeta24@gmail.com.
(2)Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, 
University of Milan, Milano, Italy.
(3)Gastroenterology and Endoscopy Unit, ASST Fatebenefratelli-Sacco, Milano, 
Lombardia, Italy.

Amyloidosis includes a heterogeneous group of diseases caused by the 
extracellular deposition of insoluble fibrillar proteins, leading to multiple 
organ dysfunction and a poor life expectancy. In the early stages of 
amyloidosis, gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms are uncommon. We describe a rare 
case of hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTRv) with involvement of the 
heart, nervous system and GI tract. A man in his 60s was hospitalised due to 
chronic diarrhoea, orthostatic hypotension, malabsorption and weight loss. An 
organic origin for the diarrhoea was suspected, but the most common causes were 
ruled out. The review of GI biopsies and an abdominal fat aspirate confirmed the 
diagnosis of amyloidosis. The diagnosis of ATTRv amyloidosis with GI 
presentation is challenging, especially in the early stages, and misdiagnosis is 
common. The recent approval of therapies emphasises the importance of early 
diagnosis to prevent irreversible organ damage.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2023-256673
PMCID: PMC10583022
PMID: 37844979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.