---
reference_id: "PMID:29461901"
title: Predicting treatment outcome of drug-susceptible tuberculosis patients using machine-learning models.
authors:
- Hussain OA
- Junejo KN
journal: Inform Health Soc Care
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/17538157.2018.1433676
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predicting treatment outcome of drug-susceptible tuberculosis patients using machine-learning models.
**Authors:** Hussain OA, Junejo KN
**Journal:** Inform Health Soc Care (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17538157.2018.1433676](https://doi.org/10.1080/17538157.2018.1433676)

## Content

1. Inform Health Soc Care. 2019;44(2):135-151. doi:
10.1080/17538157.2018.1433676.  Epub 2018 Feb 20.

Predicting treatment outcome of drug-susceptible tuberculosis patients using 
machine-learning models.

Hussain OA(1), Junejo KN(1).

Author information:
(1)a Graduate School of Science and Engineering , Karachi Institute of Economics 
and Technology , Karachi , Pakistan.

Tuberculosis (TB) is a deadly contagious disease and a serious global health 
problem. It is curable but due to its lengthy treatment process, a patient is 
likely to leave the treatment incomplete, leading to a more lethal, drug 
resistant form of disease. The World Health Organization (WHO) propagates 
Directly Observed Therapy Short-course (DOTS) as an effective way to stop the 
spread of TB in communities with a high burden. But DOTS also adds a significant 
burden on the financial feasibility of the program. We aim to facilitate TB 
programs by predicting the outcome of the treatment of a particular patient at 
the start of treatment so that their health workers can be utilized in a 
targeted and cost-effective way. The problem was modeled as a classification 
problem, and the outcome of treatment was predicted using state-of-art 
implementations of 3 machine learning algorithms. 4213 patients were evaluated, 
out of which 64.37% completed their treatment. Results were evaluated using 4 
performance measures; accuracy, precision, sensitivity, and specificity. The 
models offer an improvement of more than 12% accuracy over the baseline 
prediction. Empirical results also revealed some insights to improve TB 
programs. Overall, our proposed methodology will may help teams running TB 
programs manage their human resources more effectively, thus saving more lives.

DOI: 10.1080/17538157.2018.1433676
PMID: 29461901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]