---
reference_id: "PMID:18563633"
title: Causes of and diagnostic approach to methylmalonic acidurias.
authors:
- Fowler B
- Leonard JV
- Baumgartner MR
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-008-0839-4
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, etiology, genetics"
- Cobamides/metabolism
- Genetic Complementation Test
- Humans
- "Methylmalonic Acid/blood, urine"
- Mutation
- "Racemases and Epimerases/deficiency, genetics"
- Succinate-CoA Ligases/genetics
- "Vitamin B 12/analogs & derivatives, metabolism, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Causes of and diagnostic approach to methylmalonic acidurias.
**Authors:** Fowler B, Leonard JV, Baumgartner MR
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-008-0839-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-008-0839-4)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2008 Jun;31(3):350-60. doi: 10.1007/s10545-008-0839-4.
Epub  2008 Jun 19.

Causes of and diagnostic approach to methylmalonic acidurias.

Fowler B(1), Leonard JV, Baumgartner MR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Unit, University Children's Hospital, Roemergasse 8, Basel, 
CH-4058, Switzerland. Brian.Fowler@unibas.ch

Several mutant genetic classes that cause isolated methylmalonic acidurias 
(MMAuria) are known based on biochemical, enzymatic and genetic complementation 
analysis. The mut(0) and mut(-) defects result from deficiency of MMCoA mutase 
apoenzyme which requires adenosyl-cobalamin (Ado-Cbl) as coenzyme. The cblA, 
cblB and the variant 2 form of cblD complementation groups are linked to 
processes unique to Ado-Cbl synthesis. The cblC, cblD and cblF complementation 
groups are associated with defective methyl-cobalamin synthesis as well. 
Mutations in the genes associated with most of these defects have been 
described. Recently a few patients have been described with mild MMAuria 
associated with mutations of the MMCoA epimerase gene or with neurological 
symptoms due to SUCL mutations. A comprehensive diagnostic approach involves 
investigations at the level of metabolites, genetic complementation analysis and 
enzymatic studies, and finally mutation analysis. MMA levels in urine range from 
10-20 mmol/mol creatinine in mild disturbances of MMA metabolism to over 20000 
mmol/mol creatinine in severe MMCoA mutase deficiency, but show considerable 
overlap and are of limited value for differential diagnosis. The underlying 
defect in isolated MMAuria can be characterized in cultured skin fibroblasts 
using several assays, e.g. conversion of propionate to succinate, specific 
activity of MMCoA, cobalamin adenosyltransferase assay, cellular uptake of 
CN-[(57)Co] cobalamin and its conversion to cobalamin coenzymes and 
complementation analysis. The reliable characterization of patients with 
isolated MMAuria pinpoints the correct gene for mutation analysis. Reliable 
classification of these patients is essential for ongoing and future prospective 
studies on treatment and outcome.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-008-0839-4
PMID: 18563633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]