---
reference_id: "PMID:36980989"
title: Mutational Spectrum of the ABCA12 Gene and Genotype-Phenotype Correlation in a Cohort of 64 Patients with Autosomal Recessive Congenital Ichthyosis.
authors:
- Hotz A
- Kopp J
- Bourrat E
- Oji V
- Süßmuth K
- Komlosi K
- Bouadjar B
- Tantcheva-Poór I
- Hellström Pigg M
- Betz RC
- Giehl K
- Schedel F
- Weibel L
- Schulz S
- Stölzl DV
- Tadini G
- Demiral E
- Berggard K
- Zimmer AD
- Alter S
- Fischer J
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14030717
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ichthyosis, Lamellar/genetics"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Mutation
- "Ichthyosiform Erythroderma, Congenital/genetics"
- Genetic Association Studies
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Acyltransferases/genetics
- Phospholipases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutational Spectrum of the ABCA12 Gene and Genotype-Phenotype Correlation in a Cohort of 64 Patients with Autosomal Recessive Congenital Ichthyosis.
**Authors:** Hotz A, Kopp J, Bourrat E, Oji V, Süßmuth K, Komlosi K, Bouadjar B, Tantcheva-Poór I, Hellström Pigg M, Betz RC, Giehl K, Schedel F, Weibel L, Schulz S, Stölzl DV, Tadini G, Demiral E, Berggard K, Zimmer AD, Alter S, Fischer J
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14030717](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14030717)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Mar 15;14(3):717. doi: 10.3390/genes14030717.

Mutational Spectrum of the ABCA12 Gene and Genotype-Phenotype Correlation in a 
Cohort of 64 Patients with Autosomal Recessive Congenital Ichthyosis.

Hotz A(1)(2)(3), Kopp J(1), Bourrat E(4), Oji V(3)(5), Süßmuth K(5), Komlosi 
K(1)(2)(3), Bouadjar B(6), Tantcheva-Poór I(7), Hellström Pigg M(8), Betz RC(9), 
Giehl K(3)(10), Schedel F(5), Weibel L(11), Schulz S(12), Stölzl DV(13), Tadini 
G(3)(14), Demiral E(15), Berggard K(16), Zimmer AD(1), Alter S(1)(2)(3), Fischer 
J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Center for Cornification Disorders, Freiburg Center for Rare Diseases, 
Medical Center, University of Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.
(3)European Reference Networks (ERN Skin), 75015 Paris, France.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Reference Center for Rare Skin Diseases MAGEC, 
Saint Louis Hospital AP-HP, 75015 Paris, France.
(5)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Muenster University Medical 
Center, 48149 Muenster, Germany.
(6)Department of Dermatology, CHU of Bab-El-Oued Algiers, Algiers 16008, 
Algeria.
(7)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Faculty of Medicine and University 
Hospital, University of Cologne, 50937 Cologne, Germany.
(8)Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 64 Solna, Sweden.
(9)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Medical Faculty & University 
Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(10)Department of Dermatology, Venerology und Allergology, University Hospital 
of Munich, 80337 Munich, Germany.
(11)Pediatric Skin Center, Dermatology Department, University Children's 
Hospital Zurich, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland.
(12)Synlab Medical Practice for Human Genetics Jena, 07747 Jena, Germany.
(13)Center for Inflammatory Skin Diseases, Department of Dermatology and 
Allergy, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, 24105 Kiel, 
Germany.
(14)Pediatric Dermatology Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and 
Transplantation, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda-Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
University of Milan, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(15)Department of Medical Genetics, Inonu University School of Medicine, 44280 
Malatya, Turkey.
(16)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Skåne University Hospital, 221 85 
Lund, Sweden.

Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) is a non-syndromic congenital 
disorder of cornification characterized by abnormal scaling of the skin. The 
three major phenotypes are lamellar ichthyosis, congenital ichthyosiform 
erythroderma, and harlequin ichthyosis. ARCI is caused by biallelic mutations in 
ABCA12, ALOX12B, ALOXE3, CERS3, CYP4F22, NIPAL4, PNPLA1, SDR9C7, SULT2B1, and 
TGM1. The most severe form of ARCI, harlequin ichthyosis, is caused by mutations 
in ABCA12. Mutations in this gene can also lead to congenital ichthyosiform 
erythroderma or lamellar ichthyosis. We present a large cohort of 64 patients 
affected with ARCI carrying biallelic mutations in ABCA12. Our study comprises 
34 novel mutations in ABCA12, expanding the mutational spectrum of 
ABCA12-associated ARCI up to 217 mutations. Within these we found the possible 
mutational hotspots c.4541G>A, p.(Arg1514His) and c.4139A>G, p.(Asn1380Ser). A 
correlation of the phenotype with the effect of the genetic mutation on protein 
function is demonstrated. Loss-of-function mutations on both alleles generally 
result in harlequin ichthyosis, whereas biallelic missense mutations mainly lead 
to CIE or LI.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14030717
PMCID: PMC10048568
PMID: 36980989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.