---
reference_id: "PMID:36648576"
title: Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Immunological Management of Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome and Other Defects in Thymic Development.
authors:
- Mustillo PJ
- Sullivan KE
- Chinn IK
- Notarangelo LD
- Haddad E
- Davies EG
- de la Morena MT
- Hartog N
- Yu JE
- Hernandez-Trujillo VP
- Ip W
- Franco J
- Gambineri E
- Hickey SE
- Varga E
- Markert ML
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-022-01418-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "DiGeorge Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Chromosome Deletion
- CHARGE Syndrome
- Chromosomes
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Immunological Management of Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome and Other Defects in Thymic Development.
**Authors:** Mustillo PJ, Sullivan KE, Chinn IK, Notarangelo LD, Haddad E, Davies EG, de la Morena MT, Hartog N, Yu JE, Hernandez-Trujillo VP, Ip W, Franco J, Gambineri E, Hickey SE, Varga E, Markert ML
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-022-01418-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-022-01418-y)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2023 Feb;43(2):247-270. doi: 10.1007/s10875-022-01418-y. Epub
2023 Jan 17.

Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Immunological Management of Chromosome
22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome and Other Defects in Thymic Development.

Mustillo PJ(1), Sullivan KE(2), Chinn IK(3), Notarangelo LD(4), Haddad E(5),
Davies EG(6), de la Morena MT(7), Hartog N(8), Yu JE(9), Hernandez-Trujillo
VP(10), Ip W(11), Franco J(12), Gambineri E(13)(14), Hickey SE(15), Varga E(16),
Markert ML(17).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, 43205, USA.
peter.mustillo@nationwidechildrens.org.
(2)Division of Allergy Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(3)Division of Immunology, Allergy, and Retrovirology, Department of Pediatrics,
Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(4)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Department of Microbiology, Infectious Diseases and
Immunology, CHU Sainte-Justine, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, H3T 1C5,
Canada.
(6)Department of Immunology, Great Ormond Street Hospital and UCL Great Ormond
Street Institute of Child Health, London, WC1N 3HJ, UK.
(7)Division of Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children's
Hospital, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98105, USA.
(8)Spectrum Health Helen DeVos Children's Hospital Department of Allergy and
Immunology, Michigan State University College of Human Medicine, East Lansing,
USA.
(9)Division of Allergy, Immunology & Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(10)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Nicklaus
Children's Hospital, Miami, FL, USA.
(11)Department of Immunology, Great Ormond Street Hospital and UCL Great Ormond
Street Institute of Child Health, London, WC1N 3JH, UK.
(12)Grupo de Inmunodeficiencias Primarias, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de
Antioquia UdeA, Medellin, Colombia.
(13)Department of "NEUROFARBA", Section of Child's Health, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy.
(14)Centre of Excellence, Division of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Meyer
Children's Hospital IRCCS, Florence, Italy.
(15)Division of Genetic & Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, 43205, USA.
(16)Institute for Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus,
OH, 43205, USA.
(17)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 27710,
USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Immunol. 2024 Jan 22;44(2):53. doi: 10.1007/s10875-024-01655-3.

Current practices vary widely regarding the immunological work-up and management
of patients affected with defects in thymic development (DTD), which include
chromosome 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome (22q11.2del) and other causes of
DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) and coloboma, heart defect, atresia choanae, retardation
of growth and development, genital hypoplasia, ear anomalies/deafness (CHARGE)
syndrome. Practice variations affect the initial and subsequent assessment of
immune function, the terminology used to describe the condition and immune
status, the accepted criteria for recommending live vaccines, and how often
follow-up is needed based on the degree of immune compromise. The lack of
consensus and widely varying practices highlight the need to establish updated
immunological clinical practice guidelines. These guideline recommendations
provide a comprehensive review for immunologists and other clinicians who manage
immune aspects of this group of disorders.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-022-01418-y
PMCID: PMC9892161
PMID: 36648576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PJM received past honoraria from Horizon
Therapeutics (advisory board). KS serves on the Immune Deficiency Foundation.
The thymic transplant description and other references of MLM relate to the work
that that was funded, in part, by Enzyant Therapeutics or performed under a
Sponsored Research Agreement in partnership with Enzyvant Therapeutics, GmbH.
IKC reports work with Wolters Kluwer (UptoDate), past consultant for Enzyvant.
NH reports COI with Horizon, speaker, advisory board; Binding Site, speaker;
Takeda, speaker, advisory board; and Pharming Healthcare, advisory board,
scientific steering committee. EH is a recipient of honoraria for AdBoard
meetings from CSl-Behring, Octapharma, and Takeda and from DSMB from Jasper
Therapeutics and owns shares in Immugenia biotech company. The other authors
declare they have no conflict of interest.
