---
reference_id: "PMID:38461779"
title: Reduced burden of Arsenic-Related cancers after water mitigation in Taiwan.
authors:
- Jhuang JR
- Lee CH
- Chiang CJ
- Chen CJ
- Lee WC
journal: Environ Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2024.108542
keywords:
- Humans
- Arsenic/analysis
- "Bowen's Disease"
- Drinking Water
- "Carcinoma, Transitional Cell"
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular"
- Taiwan/epidemiology
- Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Water Supply
- "Water Pollutants, Chemical"
- Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Liver Neoplasms
- Lung Neoplasms/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced burden of Arsenic-Related cancers after water mitigation in Taiwan.
**Authors:** Jhuang JR, Lee CH, Chiang CJ, Chen CJ, Lee WC
**Journal:** Environ Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envint.2024.108542](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2024.108542)

## Content

1. Environ Int. 2024 Mar;185:108542. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2024.108542. Epub 2024
 Mar 5.

Reduced burden of Arsenic-Related cancers after water mitigation in Taiwan.

Jhuang JR(1), Lee CH(2), Chiang CJ(1), Chen CJ(3), Lee WC(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan; Taiwan Cancer Registry, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan; College of
Medicine, Fu-Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan; Taiwan Cancer Registry, Taipei,
Taiwan; Institute of Health Data Analytics and Statistics, College of Public
Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
wenchung@ntu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Epidemiological evidence has demonstrated an association between
arsenic in drinking water and increased cancer incidence. This population-based
study investigates the impact of a tap water supply system installation in
Blackfoot disease-endemic regions of Taiwan on cancer incidence.
METHODS: By using the Taiwan Cancer Registry dataset, we enrolled patients aged
40-84 diagnosed with arsenic-related cancers, including hepatocellular
carcinoma, small and squamous cell lung cancer, Bowen's disease, basal and
squamous cell skin cancer, urothelial bladder cancer, and upper tract urothelial
carcinoma between 1995 and 2019. Random-effects age-period-cohort models were
used to estimate the cancer incidence data, and a stabilized kriging method was
employed to interpolate incidence rates to more precise spatiotemporal units.
RESULTS: The results showed that the age-standardized incidence rates of all six
types of studied cancers were consistently higher in Blackfoot disease-endemic
areas than those in other areas from 1995 to 2019. However, the gap in incidence
rates between Blackfoot disease-endemic areas and the remaining regions began to
narrow approximately after the 1960 birth cohort when the tap water supply
system installation commenced. For small and squamous cell lung cancer, Bowen's
disease, and urothelial bladder cancer, the excess incidence rates sharply
declined to null for those born after the year of arsenic mitigation. For upper
tract urothelial carcinoma, the excess incidence rates decreased more gradually
for those born after the year of arsenic mitigation. For hepatocellular
carcinoma and basal and squamous cell skin cancer, the excess incidence rates
remained constant. Spatiotemporal clusters of high incidence rates were
identified in the core townships of Blackfoot disease-endemic areas. These
clusters began to dissipate mainly after the 1960 birth cohort.
CONCLUSION: Arsenic mitigation from drinking water in Taiwan is associated with
a reduced burden of small and squamous cell lung cancers, Bowen's disease,
urothelial bladder cancer, and upper tract urothelial carcinoma.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2024.108542
PMID: 38461779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
