---
reference_id: "PMID:35487607"
title: Polycystic Kidney/Liver Disease.
authors:
- Roediger R
- Dieterich D
- Chanumolu P
- Deshpande P
journal: Clin Liver Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2022.01.009
keywords:
- Cysts/therapy
- Female
- Humans
- Kidney/physiology
- "Liver Diseases/etiology, therapy"
- Male
- Polycystic Kidney Diseases/therapy
- "Polycystic Kidney, Autosomal Dominant/therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polycystic Kidney/Liver Disease.
**Authors:** Roediger R, Dieterich D, Chanumolu P, Deshpande P
**Journal:** Clin Liver Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cld.2022.01.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cld.2022.01.009)

## Content

1. Clin Liver Dis. 2022 May;26(2):229-243. doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2022.01.009. Epub
2022 Apr 1.

Polycystic Kidney/Liver Disease.

Roediger R(1), Dieterich D(2), Chanumolu P(3), Deshpande P(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Liver Disease, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine,
1 Gustave L Levy Place, Box 1123, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address:
Rebecca.roediger@mssm.edu.
(2)Division of Liver Disease, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine,
1 Gustave L Levy Place, Box 1123, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine, 1
Gustave L Levy Place, Box 1123, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a genetic disorder that
leads to chronic kidney disease and end-stage kidney disease (ESKD). Polycystic
liver disease (PCLD) is the most common extrarenal manifestation of ADPKD.
Though isolated PCLD and PCLD due to ADPKD are genetically distinct, they follow
a similar clinical course of hepatomegaly from multiple cysts with preserved
liver function. Tolvaptan use in ADPKD can slow down the deterioration of renal
function and growth of cysts. Somatostatin analogs can slow the growth of
polycystic livers but the effect is short-lived. The only curative therapy for
PCLD is liver transplantation. Renal transplantation can significantly improve
survival in patients with ESKD due to ADPKD.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cld.2022.01.009
PMID: 35487607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
