---
reference_id: "PMID:11470760"
title: "Genetic polymorphisms of glutathione S-transferases M1 and T1 associated with susceptibility to aflatoxin-related hepatocarcinogenesis among chronic hepatitis B carriers: a nested case-control study in Taiwan."
authors:
- Sun CA
- Wang LY
- Chen CJ
- Lu SN
- You SL
- Wang LW
- Wang Q
- Wu DM
- Santella RM
journal: Carcinogenesis
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1093/carcin/22.8.1289
keywords:
- Adult
- Aflatoxin B1/toxicity
- Carrier State
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Glutathione Transferase/genetics
- "Hepatitis B, Chronic/complications"
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/chemically induced, complications, epidemiology, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Taiwan/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic polymorphisms of glutathione S-transferases M1 and T1 associated with susceptibility to aflatoxin-related hepatocarcinogenesis among chronic hepatitis B carriers: a nested case-control study in Taiwan.
**Authors:** Sun CA, Wang LY, Chen CJ, Lu SN, You SL, Wang LW, Wang Q, Wu DM, Santella RM
**Journal:** Carcinogenesis (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/carcin/22.8.1289](https://doi.org/10.1093/carcin/22.8.1289)

## Content

1. Carcinogenesis. 2001 Aug;22(8):1289-94. doi: 10.1093/carcin/22.8.1289.

Genetic polymorphisms of glutathione S-transferases M1 and T1 associated with
susceptibility to aflatoxin-related hepatocarcinogenesis among chronic hepatitis
B carriers: a nested case-control study in Taiwan.

Sun CA(1), Wang LY, Chen CJ, Lu SN, You SL, Wang LW, Wang Q, Wu DM, Santella RM.

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
sunca@ndmctsgh.edu.tw

This study was conducted to investigate the modifying effect of glutathione
S-transferase (GST) M1 and T1 polymorphisms on aflatoxin-induced
hepatocarcinogenesis among chronic hepatitis B virus surface antigen (HBsAg)
carriers. A total of 79 HBsAg-positive cases of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
diagnosed between 1991 and 1997 were identified and individually matched to one
or two HBsAg-positive controls on age, gender, residence and date of recruitment
from the same cancer screening cohort in Taiwan. Blood samples were tested for
hepatitis B and C viral markers by enzyme immunoassay and for aflatoxin B(1)
(AFB(1))-albumin adducts by competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. GSTM1
and GSTT1 genotypes were determined by PCR. There was a statistically
significant relationship between detectable levels of AFB(1)-albumin adducts in
serum and risk of HCC among chronic HBsAg carriers, with an adjusted odds ratio
(OR) of 2.0 [95% confidence interval (CI) 1.1-3.7]. In addition, the effect of
aflatoxin exposure on HCC risk was more pronounced among chronic HBsAg carriers
with the GSTT1 null genotype (OR 3.7, 95% CI 1.5-9.3) than those who were
non-null (OR 0.9, 95% CI 0.3-2.4). The interaction between serum AFB(1)-albumin
adduct level and GSTT1 genotype was statistically significant (P = 0.03). For
GSTM1 the effect of aflatoxin exposure on HCC risk in those with the null
genotype was also greater (adjusted OR 2.8, 95% CI 1.0-7.8) than in those with
the gene present (adjusted OR 1.8, 95% CI 0.8-4.5), but the difference was not
significant (P = 0.91). Notably, when the interaction between aflatoxin exposure
and GSTT1 genotype was considered, aflatoxin exposure by itself was not a
significant determinant of HCC risk among chronic HBsAg carriers. These results
demonstrate the importance of gene-environment interactions in the
multifactorial development of HCC.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/22.8.1289
PMID: 11470760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
