---
reference_id: "PMID:35636921"
title: Phase II trial of weekly erlotinib dosing to reduce duodenal polyp burden associated with familial adenomatous polyposis.
authors:
- Samadder NJ
- Foster N
- McMurray RP
- Burke CA
- Stoffel E
- Kanth P
- Das R
- Cruz-Correa M
- Vilar E
- Mankaney G
- Buttar N
- Thirumurthi S
- Turgeon DK
- Sossenheimer M
- Westover M
- Richmond E
- Umar A
- "Della'Zanna G"
- Rodriguez LM
- Szabo E
- Zahrieh D
- Limburg PJ
journal: Gut
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326532
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase II trial of weekly erlotinib dosing to reduce duodenal polyp burden associated with familial adenomatous polyposis.
**Authors:** Samadder NJ, Foster N, McMurray RP, Burke CA, Stoffel E, Kanth P, Das R, Cruz-Correa M, Vilar E, Mankaney G, Buttar N, Thirumurthi S, Turgeon DK, Sossenheimer M, Westover M, Richmond E, Umar A, Della'Zanna G, Rodriguez LM, Szabo E, Zahrieh D, Limburg PJ
**Journal:** Gut (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326532](https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326532)

## Content

1. Gut. 2023 Feb;72(2):256-263. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326532. Epub 2022 May
30.

Phase II trial of weekly erlotinib dosing to reduce duodenal polyp burden 
associated with familial adenomatous polyposis.

Samadder NJ(1), Foster N(2), McMurray RP(3), Burke CA(4), Stoffel E(5), Kanth 
P(6), Das R(7), Cruz-Correa M(8)(9), Vilar E(10), Mankaney G(11), Buttar N(12), 
Thirumurthi S(13), Turgeon DK(14), Sossenheimer M(6), Westover M(6), Richmond 
E(15), Umar A(15), Della'Zanna G(15), Rodriguez LM(16), Szabo E(15), Zahrieh 
D(3), Limburg PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic Minnesota, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA Samadder.Jewel@mayo.edu limburg.paul@mayo.edu.
(2)Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic Minnesota, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, 
Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(6)Gastroenterology & Hepatology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(8)Medicine, University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(9)Cancer Biology, UPR Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(10)Clinical Cancer Prevention, UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, 
USA.
(11)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(12)Gastroenterology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.
(13)Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The University of Texas M. D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(14)Medicine/Gastroenterology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(15)Division of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.
(16)Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

IMPORTANCE: Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) are at markedly 
increased risk for duodenal adenomas and cancer. Combination sulindac and 
erlotinib was previously shown to reduce duodenal polyp burden but was 
associated with a relatively high adverse event (AE) rate.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate if a once weekly dosing schedule for erlotinib 
intervention improves the AE profile, while still providing efficacy with 
respect to reduced polyp burden, in participants with FAP.
DESIGN, SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Single-arm trial, enrolling 46 participants 
with FAP, conducted from October 2017 to September 2019 in eight academic cancer 
centres.
EXPOSURES: Participants self-administered 350 mg of erlotinib by mouth, one time 
per week for 6 months.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Duodenal polyp burden (sum of polyp diameters) was 
assessed in the proximal duodenum by esophagogastroduodenoscopy performed at 
baseline and 6 months, with mean per cent change defined as the primary efficacy 
outcome of interest. Rate of grade 2-3 AEs was evaluated as a co-primary 
outcome. Secondary outcomes included changes in total duodenal polyp count, 
along with changes in lower gastrointestinal (GI) polyp burden and count (for 
participants examined by optional lower endoscopy).
RESULTS: Forty-six participants (mean age, 44.1 years (range, 18-68); women, 22 
(48%)) were enrolled; 42 participants completed 6 months of intervention and 
were included in the per-protocol analysis. Duodenal polyp burden was 
significantly reduced after 6 months of weekly erlotinib intervention, with a 
mean per cent change of -29.6% (95% CI, -39.6% to -19.7%; p<0.0001). Similar 
results were observed in subgroup analyses defined by participants with advanced 
duodenal polyposis (Spigelman 3) at baseline (mean, -27%; 95% CI, -38.7% to 
-15.2%; p<0.0001). Post-intervention Spigelman stage was downstaged in 12% of 
the participants. Lower GI polyp number was also decreased after 6 months of 
intervention (median, -30.8%; IQR, -47.4% to 0.0%; p=0.0256). Grade 2 or 3 AEs 
were reported in 71.7% of subjects, with only two experiencing grade 3 toxicity 
at least possibly related to intervention.
CONCLUSION: In this single-arm, multi-centre trial of participants with FAP, 
erlotinib one time per week resulted in markedly lower duodenal polyp burden, 
and modestly reduced lower GI polyp burden, after 6 months of intervention. 
While AEs were still reported by nearly three-quarters of all participants, 
these events were generally lower grade and well-tolerated. These findings 
support further investigation of erlotinib as an effective, acceptable cancer 
preventive agent for FAP-associated GI polyposis.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02961374.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326532
PMCID: PMC9708943
PMID: 35636921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: PJL serves as Chief Medical 
Officer for Screening at Exact Sciences through a contracted services agreement 
with Mayo Clinic. PJL and Mayo Clinic have contractual rights to receive 
royalties through this agreement; Exact Sciences. JS is a consultant for Janssen 
Research and Development, Recursion Pharmaceuticals and Cancer Prevention 
Pharmaceuticals. CAB is a consultant for SLA pharma, Freenome, and has received 
research support from Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Cancer Prevention 
Pharmaceuticals, Ferring Pharmaceuticals and Emtora Biosciences. EV has a 
consulting or advisory role with Janssen Research and Development and Recursion 
Pharma and has received research support from Janssen Research and Development.