---
reference_id: "PMID:38707145"
title: "Contemporary Treatment of Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Tousidonis M
- Alvarez-Mokthari S
- Khayat S
- Sanjuan de Moreta G
- Ochandiano S
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.57577
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contemporary Treatment of Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Tousidonis M, Alvarez-Mokthari S, Khayat S, Sanjuan de Moreta G, Ochandiano S
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.57577](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.57577)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Apr 4;16(4):e57577. doi: 10.7759/cureus.57577. eCollection 2024 
Apr.

Contemporary Treatment of Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Case Report and Literature 
Review.

Tousidonis M(1), Alvarez-Mokthari S(1), Khayat S(1), Sanjuan de Moreta G(2), 
Ochandiano S(1).

Author information:
(1)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Gregorio Marañon University Hospital, Madrid, 
ESP.
(2)Otolaryngology, Gregorio Marañon University Hospital, Madrid, ESP.

Silent sinus syndrome is a rare clinical entity affecting the maxillary sinus, 
characterized by ipsilateral enophthalmos and hypoglobus. Its etiology and 
pathophysiology are still debated. It is diagnosed by clinical examination and 
confirmed with computed tomography. It is commonly managed surgically. We 
present the case of a 34-year-old woman with silent sinus syndrome treated with 
a patient-specific implant for orbital reconstruction, functional endoscopic 
sinus surgery approach, intraoperative scan, and surgical navigation, 
successfully restoring orbital volume and sinus ventilation.

Copyright © 2024, Tousidonis et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.57577
PMCID: PMC11069629
PMID: 38707145

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.