---
reference_id: "PMID:29889417"
title: Management of bacterial menigitis in 2016.
authors:
- Javouhey E
journal: Bull Acad Natl Med
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of bacterial menigitis in 2016.
**Authors:** Javouhey E
**Journal:** Bull Acad Natl Med (2016)

## Content

1. Bull Acad Natl Med. 2016 Jan;200(1):99-111.

Management of bacterial menigitis in 2016.

[Article in English, French]

Javouhey E.

Bacterial meningitis is a severe infection of the central nervous system with 
significant impact on survival and functional outcome. Complications are related 
to the release of bacterial components in the subarachnoid space closed to the 
brain. Three types of complications are distinguished: septic shock that alters 
the oxygen delivery, intracranial hypertension (ICH) that may alter the 
cerebralperfusion pressure and severe metabolic disorders like hyponatremia. The 
management is based on an early diagnosis allowing initiating antibiotics within 
the first hour. An associated corticosteroids treatment with dexamethasone 
improves the prognosis of pneumococcal and Haemophilus meningitis. The 
identification of septic shock signs should be rapid to initiate fluid bolus and 
sometimes vasopressors in order to maintain a good organ perfusion. The 
detection of altered level of consciousness is a crucial indication of ICH. 
Control of intracranial pressure (ICP) as well as a good hemodynamic is based on 
a continuous monitoring of ICP and arterial pressure in order to assure an 
adapted cerebral perfusion pressure. Cerebrospinalfluid (CSF) drainage is one of 
the most eflicient means to control ICP as resorption of CSF is often altered in 
bacterial meningitis. Seizures should be avoided, the sedation-pain control 
optimized and ventilation adapted to assure normal oxygenation and normal CO₂ 
levels. Hyponatremia is most often related to a salt wasting syndrome linked to 
aquaporin's deregulation. Its rapid correction is required to avoid worsening of 
the cerebral oedema.

PMID: 29889417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]