---
reference_id: "PMID:38692758"
title: "Targeting Hypercapnia in Chronic Lung Disease and Obesity Hypoventilation: Benefits and Challenges."
authors:
- Brown LK
journal: Sleep Med Clin
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jsmc.2024.02.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting Hypercapnia in Chronic Lung Disease and Obesity Hypoventilation: Benefits and Challenges.
**Authors:** Brown LK
**Journal:** Sleep Med Clin (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jsmc.2024.02.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsmc.2024.02.014)

## Content

1. Sleep Med Clin. 2024 Jun;19(2):357-369. doi: 10.1016/j.jsmc.2024.02.014. Epub 
2024 Mar 15.

Targeting Hypercapnia in Chronic Lung Disease and Obesity Hypoventilation: 
Benefits and Challenges.

Brown LK(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, 
USA. Electronic address: lkbrown@salud.unm.edu.

Hypoventilation is a complication that is not uncommon in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease and calls for both medical treatment of the underlying disease 
and, frequently, noninvasive ventilation either during exacerbations requiring 
hospitalization or in a chronic state in the patient at home. Obesity 
hypoventilation syndrome by definition is associated with ventilatory failure 
and hypercapnia. It may or may not be accompanied by obstructive sleep apnea, 
which when detected becomes an additional target for positive airway pressure 
treatment. Intensive research has not completely resolved the best choice of 
treatment, and the simplest modality, continuous positive airway pressure, may 
still be entertained.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsmc.2024.02.014
PMID: 38692758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr L.K. Brown coedits the Sleep and 
Respiratory Neurobiology section of Current Opinion in Pulmonary Medicine and is 
a coauthor of an article on positive airway pressure treatment for OSA in 
UpToDate. Dr L.K. Brown is a member of the Council of the New Mexico Medical 
Society and serves on the Board of Trustees of the Greater Albuquerque Medical 
Association. He chairs the Polysomnography Practice Advisory Committee of the 
New Mexico Medical Board and chairs the New Mexico Advisory Board for 
Respiratory Care. Dr L.K. Brown chairs the Board of Directors of GAMA-PAC, the 
political action committee of the Greater Albuquerque Medical Association.