---
reference_id: "PMID:37035220"
title: "Pancreatic β-cell dysfunction in type 2 diabetes: Implications of inflammation and oxidative stress."
authors:
- Dludla PV
- Mabhida SE
- Ziqubu K
- Nkambule BB
- Mazibuko-Mbeje SE
- Hanser S
- Basson AK
- Pheiffer C
- Kengne AP
journal: World J Diabetes
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4239/wjd.v14.i3.130
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pancreatic β-cell dysfunction in type 2 diabetes: Implications of inflammation and oxidative stress.
**Authors:** Dludla PV, Mabhida SE, Ziqubu K, Nkambule BB, Mazibuko-Mbeje SE, Hanser S, Basson AK, Pheiffer C, Kengne AP
**Journal:** World J Diabetes (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4239/wjd.v14.i3.130](https://doi.org/10.4239/wjd.v14.i3.130)

## Content

1. World J Diabetes. 2023 Mar 15;14(3):130-146. doi: 10.4239/wjd.v14.i3.130.

Pancreatic β-cell dysfunction in type 2 diabetes: Implications of inflammation 
and oxidative stress.

Dludla PV(1)(2), Mabhida SE(1), Ziqubu K(3), Nkambule BB(4), Mazibuko-Mbeje 
SE(3), Hanser S(5), Basson AK(6), Pheiffer C(1), Kengne AP(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research and Innovation Platform, South African Medical Research 
Council, Cape Town 7505, South Africa.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Zululand, 
KwaDlangezwa 3880, South Africa. pdludla@mrc.ac.za.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, North-West University, Mmabatho 2745, South 
Africa.
(4)School of Laboratory Medicine and Medical Sciences, University of 
KwaZulu-Natal, Durban 4000, South Africa.
(5)Department of Physiology and Environmental Health, University of Limpopo, 
Sovenga 0727, South Africa.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Zululand, 
KwaDlangezwa 3880, South Africa.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town 7500, South 
Africa.
(8)Non-Communicable Diseases Research Unit, South African Medical Research 
Council, Tygerberg 7505, South Africa.

Insulin resistance and pancreatic β-cell dysfunction are major pathological 
mechanisms implicated in the development and progression of type 2 diabetes 
(T2D). Beyond the detrimental effects of insulin resistance, inflammation and 
oxidative stress have emerged as critical features of T2D that define β-cell 
dysfunction. Predominant markers of inflammation such as C-reactive protein, 
tumor necrosis factor alpha, and interleukin-1β are consistently associated with 
β-cell failure in preclinical models and in people with T2D. Similarly, 
important markers of oxidative stress, such as increased reactive oxygen species 
and depleted intracellular antioxidants, are consistent with pancreatic β-cell 
damage in conditions of T2D. Such effects illustrate a pathological relationship 
between an abnormal inflammatory response and generation of oxidative stress 
during the progression of T2D. The current review explores preclinical and 
clinical research on the patho-logical implications of inflammation and 
oxidative stress during the development of β-cell dysfunction in T2D. Moreover, 
important molecular mechanisms and relevant biomarkers involved in this process 
are discussed to divulge a pathological link between inflammation and oxidative 
stress during β-cell failure in T2D. Underpinning the clinical relevance of the 
review, a systematic analysis of evidence from randomized controlled trials is 
covered, on the potential therapeutic effects of some commonly used antidiabetic 
agents in modulating inflammatory makers to improve β-cell function.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.4239/wjd.v14.i3.130
PMCID: PMC10075035
PMID: 37035220

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.