---
reference_id: "PMID:30412434"
title: Pattern of Scleritis in an Egyptian Cohort.
authors:
- Abd El Latif E
- Seleet MM
- El Hennawi H
- Abdulbadiea Rashed M
- Elbarbary H
- Sabry K
- Abdelmonagy Ibrahim M
journal: Ocul Immunol Inflamm
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/09273948.2018.1544372
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pattern of Scleritis in an Egyptian Cohort.
**Authors:** Abd El Latif E, Seleet MM, El Hennawi H, Abdulbadiea Rashed M, Elbarbary H, Sabry K, Abdelmonagy Ibrahim M
**Journal:** Ocul Immunol Inflamm (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09273948.2018.1544372](https://doi.org/10.1080/09273948.2018.1544372)

## Content

1. Ocul Immunol Inflamm. 2019;27(6):890-896. doi: 10.1080/09273948.2018.1544372. 
Epub 2018 Nov 9.

Pattern of Scleritis in an Egyptian Cohort.

Abd El Latif E(1), Seleet MM(2), El Hennawi H(1), Abdulbadiea Rashed M(3), 
Elbarbary H(1), Sabry K(1), Abdelmonagy Ibrahim M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Alexandria University , 
Alexandria , Egypt.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University , 
Cairo , Egypt.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Al-Azhar University , Cairo 
, Egypt.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Fayoum University , Fayoum 
, Egypt.

Purpose: To report the clinical experience with scleritis at four Egyptian 
tertiary care eye centers. Methods: Multicenter retrospective chart review of 
all patients with scleritis visiting four ocular inflammation referral clinics 
in Egypt between January 2013 and October 2017. Results: A total of 303 
scleritis patients were enrolled. These included 76 male and 227 female 
patients. The most frequent subtype of scleritis was nodular anterior scleritis 
(44.9%). Rheumatoid arthritis and Wegener granulomatosis were the 2 most common 
systemic associations among our cohort. Eyes with necrotizing scleritis with 
inflammation had the lowest mean initial and final BCVA. Conclusion: The visual 
prognosis of an eye with scleritis varies with the subtype of scleral 
inflammation. In our cohort, it was found to be poorer in eyes with necrotizing 
scleritis with inflammation compared to other subtypes.

DOI: 10.1080/09273948.2018.1544372
PMID: 30412434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]