---
reference_id: "PMID:28448489"
title: "Determinants of severe dehydration from diarrheal disease at hospital presentation: Evidence from 22 years of admissions in Bangladesh."
authors:
- Andrews JR
- Leung DT
- Ahmed S
- Malek MA
- Ahmed D
- Begum YA
- Qadri F
- Ahmed T
- Faruque ASG
- Nelson EJ
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005512
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Determinants of severe dehydration from diarrheal disease at hospital presentation: Evidence from 22 years of admissions in Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Andrews JR, Leung DT, Ahmed S, Malek MA, Ahmed D, Begum YA, Qadri F, Ahmed T, Faruque ASG, Nelson EJ
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0005512](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0005512)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Apr 27;11(4):e0005512. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005512. eCollection 2017 Apr.

Determinants of severe dehydration from diarrheal disease at hospital 
presentation: Evidence from 22 years of admissions in Bangladesh.

Andrews JR(1), Leung DT(2)(3), Ahmed S(4), Malek MA(4), Ahmed D(4), Begum YA(4), 
Qadri F(4), Ahmed T(4), Faruque ASG(4), Nelson EJ(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 
United States of America.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States of America.
(3)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Pathology, University 
of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States of America.
(4)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b), 
Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(5)Emerging Pathogens Institute and Child Health Research Institute, Department 
of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 
United States of America.
(6)Department of Environmental and Global Health, College of Public Health and 
Health Professions, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States of 
America.

BACKGROUND: To take advantage of emerging opportunities to reduce morbidity and 
mortality from diarrheal disease, we need to better understand the determinants 
of life-threatening severe dehydration (SD) in resource-poor settings.
METHODOLOGY/FINDINGS: We analyzed records of patients admitted with acute 
diarrheal disease over twenty-two years at the International Centre for 
Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (1993-2014). Patients presenting with 
and without SD were compared by multivariable logistic regression models, which 
included socio-demographic factors and pathogens isolated. Generalized additive 
models evaluated non-linearities between age or household income and SD. Among 
55,956 admitted patients, 13,457 (24%) presented with SD. Vibrio cholerae was 
the most common pathogen isolated (12,405 patients; 22%), and had the strongest 
association with SD (AOR 4.77; 95% CI: 4.41-5.51); detection of multiple 
pathogens did not exacerbate SD risk. The highest proportion of severely 
dehydrated patients presented in a narrow window only 4-12 hours after symptom 
onset. Risk of presenting with SD increased sharply from zero to ten years of 
age and remained high throughout adolescence and adulthood. Adult women had a 
38% increased odds (AOR 1.38; 95% CI: 1.30-1.46) of SD compared to adult men. 
The probability of SD increased sharply at low incomes. These findings were 
consistent across pathogens.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: There remain underappreciated populations vulnerable 
to life-threatening diarrheal disease that include adult women and the very 
poor. In addition to efforts that address diarrheal disease in young children, 
there is a need to develop interventions for these other high-risk populations 
that are accessible within 4 hours of symptom onset.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005512
PMCID: PMC5423662
PMID: 28448489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.