---
reference_id: "PMID:23495356"
title: "Cytoskeleton in action: lissencephaly, a neuronal migration disorder."
authors:
- Moon HM
- Wynshaw-Boris A
journal: Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/wdev.67
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Movement
- "Cerebral Cortex/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cytoskeleton/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Doublecortin Protein
- Humans
- "Lissencephaly/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Malformations of Cortical Development, Group II/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Nervous System Malformations/genetics, pathology"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Reelin Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytoskeleton in action: lissencephaly, a neuronal migration disorder.
**Authors:** Moon HM, Wynshaw-Boris A
**Journal:** Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/wdev.67](https://doi.org/10.1002/wdev.67)

## Content

1. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2013 Mar-Apr;2(2):229-45. doi:
10.1002/wdev.67.

Cytoskeleton in action: lissencephaly, a neuronal migration disorder.

Moon HM, Wynshaw-Boris A.

During neocortical development, the extensive migratory movements of neurons 
from their place of birth to their final location are essential for the 
coordinated wiring of synaptic circuits and proper neurological function. 
Failure or delay in neuronal migration causes severe abnormalities in cortical 
layering, which consequently results in human lissencephaly ('smooth brain'), a 
neuronal migration disorder. The brains of lissencephaly patients have 
less-convoluted gyri in the cerebral cortex with impaired cortical lamination of 
neurons. Since microtubule (MT) and actin-associated proteins play important 
functions in regulating the dynamics of MT and actin cytoskeletons during 
neuronal migration, genetic mutations or deletions of crucial genes involved in 
cytoskeletal processes lead to lissencephaly in human and neuronal migration 
defects in mouse. During neuronal migration, MT organization and transport are 
controlled by platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase isoform 1b regulatory 
subunit 1 (PAFAH1B1, formerly known as LIS1, Lissencephaly-1), doublecortin 
(DCX), YWHAE, and tubulin. Actin stress fibers are modulated by PAFAH1B1 (LIS1), 
DCX, RELN, and VLDLR (very low-density lipoprotein receptor)/LRP8 (low-density 
lipoprotein-related receptor 8, formerly known as APOER2). There are several 
important levels of crosstalk between these two cytoskeletal systems to 
establish accurate cortical patterning in development. The recent understanding 
of the protein networks that govern neuronal migration by regulating 
cytoskeletal dynamics, from human and mouse genetics as well as molecular and 
cellular analyses, provides new insights on neuronal migration disorders and may 
help us devise novel therapeutic strategies for such brain malformations.

DOI: 10.1002/wdev.67
PMCID: PMC3593794
PMID: 23495356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]