---
reference_id: "PMID:18760074"
title: The extrahepatic manifestations of hepatitis B virus.
authors:
- Baig S
- Alamgir M
journal: J Coll Physicians Surg Pak
year: '2008'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The extrahepatic manifestations of hepatitis B virus.
**Authors:** Baig S, Alamgir M
**Journal:** J Coll Physicians Surg Pak (2008)

## Content

1. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2008 Jul;18(7):451-7.

The extrahepatic manifestations of hepatitis B virus.

Baig S(1), Alamgir M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemisty, Ziauddin University Hospital, Karachi. 
baigsaeeda@yahoo.com

Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) leads to a number of hepatic complications, from acute 
to chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma, is a 
well-established fact. Upcoming clinical research, over the years, associates 
numerous extrahepatic manifestations during the acute and chronic episodes of 
hepatitis B with significant morbidity and mortality. A causal relationship 
between HBV and serious autoimmune disorders has also been observed among 
certain susceptible vaccine recipients in a defined temporal period following 
immunization. The cause of these extrahepatic manifestations is generally 
believed to be immune mediated. The most commonly described include skin rash, 
arthritis, arthralgia, glomerulonephritis, polyarteritis nodosa, and papular 
acrodermatitis etc. The serum-sickness like "arthritis-dermatitis" prodrome has 
also been observed in approximately one-third of patients acquiring HBV 
infections. Skin manifestations of HBV infection typically present as palpable 
purpura reported to be caused by chronic HBV, although this association remains 
controversial. To consider the relationship between HBV and other clinically 
significant disorders as well as serious autoimmune disorders among certain 
vaccine recipients is the topic of this review. Variable factors that influence 
extrahepatic manifestation are discussed, including possible synergy between 
hepatitis B virus and the immune system.

PMID: 18760074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]