---
reference_id: "PMID:21659959"
title: Alternative splicing in Acad8 resulting a mitochondrial defect and progressive hepatic steatosis in mice.
authors:
- Sabbagha NG
- Kao HJ
- Yang CF
- Huang CC
- Lin WD
- Tsai FJ
- Chen TH
- Tarn WY
- Wu JY
- Chen YT
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e31821b89ee
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alternative splicing in Acad8 resulting a mitochondrial defect and progressive hepatic steatosis in mice.
**Authors:** Sabbagha NG, Kao HJ, Yang CF, Huang CC, Lin WD, Tsai FJ, Chen TH, Tarn WY, Wu JY, Chen YT
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1203/PDR.0b013e31821b89ee](https://doi.org/10.1203/PDR.0b013e31821b89ee)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2011 Jul;70(1):31-6. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e31821b89ee.

Alternative splicing in Acad8 resulting a mitochondrial defect and progressive 
hepatic steatosis in mice.

Sabbagha NG(1), Kao HJ, Yang CF, Huang CC, Lin WD, Tsai FJ, Chen TH, Tarn WY, Wu 
JY, Chen YT.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.

Using a combination of N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-mediated mutagenesis and 
metabolomics-guided screening, we identified mice with elevated blood levels of 
short-chain C4-acylcarnitine and increased urine isobutyryl-glycine. Genome-wide 
homozygosity screening, followed by fine mapping, located the disease gene to 
15-25 Mb of mouse chromosome 9 where a candidate gene, Acad8, encoding 
mitochondrial isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase was located. Genomic DNA sequencing 
revealed a single-nucleotide mutation at -17 of the first intron of Acad8 in 
affected mice. cDNA sequencing revealed an intronic 28-bp insertion at the site 
of the mutation, which caused a frame shift with a premature stop codon. In 
vitro splicing assay confirmed that the mutation was sufficient to activate an 
upstream, aberrant 3' splice site. There was a reduction in the expression of 
Acad8 at both the mRNA and protein levels. The mutant mice grew normally but 
demonstrated cold intolerance at young age with a progressive hepatic steatosis. 
Homozygous mutant mice hepatocytes had abnormal mitochondria with crystalline 
inclusions, suggestive of mitochondriopathy. This mouse model of isobutyryl-CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency could provide us a better understanding of the possible 
role of IBD deficiency in mitochondriopathy and fatty liver.

DOI: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e31821b89ee
PMID: 21659959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]