---
reference_id: "PMID:36937985"
title: "Literature review, report, and analysis of genotype and clinical phenotype of a rare case of ulnar-mammary syndrome."
authors:
- Zhang X
- Chen L
- Li L
- An J
- He Q
- Zhang X
- Lu W
- Xiao Y
- Dong Z
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1052931
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Literature review, report, and analysis of genotype and clinical phenotype of a rare case of ulnar-mammary syndrome.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Chen L, Li L, An J, He Q, Zhang X, Lu W, Xiao Y, Dong Z
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2023.1052931](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2023.1052931)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2023 Mar 3;11:1052931. doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1052931. 
eCollection 2023.

Literature review, report, and analysis of genotype and clinical phenotype of a 
rare case of ulnar-mammary syndrome.

Zhang X(1), Chen L(1), Li L(1), An J(1), He Q(1), Zhang X(1), Lu W(1), Xiao 
Y(1), Dong Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: The clinical characteristics of Ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS) caused 
by mutations in TBX3 (T-Box transcription factor 3) were studied and the 
correlation between genotype and clinical phenotype were analyzed to improve 
awareness and early diagnosis of the disease.
METHODS: The clinical data of a boy aged 13 years and 5 months with left forearm 
deformity and growth retardation as the main features were analyzed. Genomic 
exon detection was performed, and the results were verified by Sanger 
sequencing. Simultaneously, we performed literature review to analyze the 
correlation between clinical phenotypes and genotypes.
RESULTS: The clinical manifestations in the child were short stature, ulnar 
hypoplasia of the forearm, hypohidrosis, retracted nipple, micropenis, and 
cryptorchidism. Laboratory examination revealed hyperthyroidism, growth hormone 
deficiency, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Imaging results displayed delayed 
bone age, small pituitary gland, and persistence of Rathke's cleft cyst. The 
results of the exome sequencing revealed the deletion of AGA at positions 
1121-1,124 of TBX3, which resulted in a frameshift mutation (c.1121-1124del 
AGAG; pGlu374fs). According to the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) 
assessment, the mutation is a pathogenic variant. A definitive diagnosis of UMS 
was made on the basis of the clinical phenotype of the patient. The Chinese and 
English literature were reviewed to analyze the correlation between TBX3 
genotype and clinical phenotype.
CONCLUSION: UMS is a rare hereditary disease caused by mutations in TBX3. There 
is significant clinical heterogeneity associated with the variants of this gene. 
To our knowledge, this mutation site in TBX3 has been reported for the first 
time, thereby expanding the mutation spectrum of this gene.

© 2023 Zhang, Chen, Li, An, He, Zhang, Lu, Xiao and Dong.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2023.1052931
PMCID: PMC10020526
PMID: 36937985

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.