---
reference_id: PMID:20301447
title: PEX7-Related Rhizomelic Chondrodysplasia Punctata.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Braverman NE
- Carroll R
- Muss C
- Fallatah W
- Jain M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PEX7-Related Rhizomelic Chondrodysplasia Punctata.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Braverman NE, Carroll R, Muss C, Fallatah W, Jain M

## Content

1. PEX7-Related Rhizomelic Chondrodysplasia Punctata.

Braverman NE(1), Carroll R(2), Muss C(3), Fallatah W(4), Jain M(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2001 Nov 16 [updated 2025 Aug 7].

Author information:
(1)Departments of Human Genetics and Pediatrics, McGill University;, Montreal 
Children's Hospital Research Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
(2)Division of Orthogenetics, Nemours Children's Hospital, Wilmington, Delaware
(3)Division of Genetics, Nemours Children's Hospital, Wilmington, Delware
(4)Biochemical Genetics and Peroxisomal Diseases Laboratories, Kennedy Krieger 
Institute at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: PEX7-related rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata 
(PEX7-RCDP), a peroxisome biogenesis disorder (PBD), has a classic (severe) form 
and a nonclassic (mild) form. Classic (severe) PEX7-RCDP is characterized by 
proximal shortening of the humerus (rhizomelia) and to a lesser degree the 
femur, punctate calcifications in cartilage with epiphyseal and metaphyseal 
abnormalities (chondrodysplasia punctata, or CDP), coronal clefts of the 
vertebral bodies, and cataracts that are usually present at birth or appear in 
the first few months of life. Birth weight, length, and head circumference are 
often at the lower range of normal; postnatal growth deficiency is profound. 
Intellectual disability is severe, and most children develop seizures. Most 
affected children do not survive the first decade of life; a proportion die in 
the neonatal period. Nonclassic (mild) PEX7-RCDP is characterized by congenital 
or childhood cataracts, CDP or, infrequently, chondrodysplasia manifesting only 
as mild epiphyseal changes, joint contractures, neurobehavioral abnormalities, 
and milder intellectual disability and growth restriction than classic 
PEX7-RCDP.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PEX7-RCDP is established in a proband with 
suggestive clinical, radiographic, and laboratory findings and biallelic 
pathogenic variants in PEX7 identified on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: In those with classic (severe) 
PEX7-RCDP, management is supportive and limited by the severe health issues 
present at birth and poor outcome. Dietary restriction of phytanic acid to avoid 
the consequences of phytanic acid accumulation over time may benefit individuals 
with mild PEX7-RCDP. Physical therapy to improve contractures; orthopedic 
procedures may improve function in some individuals; consider need for 
positioning and mobility devices; spinal decompression with or without fusion 
depending on region of compression and myelopathic signs; cataract extraction 
may restore and/or preserve vision; community vision services through early 
intervention or school district; poor feeding and recurrent aspiration may 
necessitate placement of a gastrostomy tube; developmental and educational 
support; standard treatment of seizures by an experienced neurologist; good 
pulmonary clearance and attention to respiratory function; influenza vaccine, 
RSV monoclonal antibody, and other interventions to prevent lung disease; 
management of congenital heart disease per cardiologist; dermatologist 
management of skin manifestations; management of kidney and urinary tract 
anomalies per nephrologist and/or urologist; social work and care coordination 
as needed. Surveillance: Annual measurement of phytanic acid levels in children 
with non-classic (mild) PEX7-RCDP; musculoskeletal assessment, assessment for 
kyphosis and scoliosis, and neurologic exam with assessment for seizures at each 
visit; vision assessment every three months until cataracts are detected and 
then as recommended by ophthalmologist; assessment of growth, nutritional 
status, safety of oral intake, development, behavior, and respiratory function 
at each visit; cardiac exam, echocardiogram, and EKG with frequency per treating 
cardiologist; urine and imaging studies to assess for kidney stones as needed; 
assessment for skin issues and family needs at each visit.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PEX7-RCDP is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If 
both parents are known to be heterozygous for a PEX7 pathogenic variant, each 
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of inheriting both 
pathogenic variants and being affected, a 50% chance of inheriting one 
pathogenic variant and being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the PEX7 pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic carrier testing of 
at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301447