---
reference_id: "PMID:34811894"
title: Respiratory manifestations in the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes.
authors:
- Bascom R
- Dhingra R
- Francomano CA
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31953
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory manifestations in the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes.
**Authors:** Bascom R, Dhingra R, Francomano CA
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31953](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31953)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2021 Dec;187(4):533-548. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31953. Epub 2021 Nov 22.

Respiratory manifestations in the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes.

Bascom R(1), Dhingra R(2), Francomano CA(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, 
Penn State College of Medicine, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Public Health Sciences, Penn State 
College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Persons with the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) report a wide range of 
respiratory symptoms, most commonly shortness of breath, exercise limitation, 
and cough. Also reported are noisy breathing attributed to asthma, difficulty 
with deep inhalation, and inspiratory thoracic pain. The literature consists of 
case reports and small cross-sectional and cohort studies. One case-control 
study estimated twofold to threefold greater respiratory disease burden among 
persons with EDS as compared to controls. The differential diagnosis for 
symptoms is broad. Structural alterations include pectus deformities, scoliosis, 
recurrent rib subluxations, and tracheobronchomalacia, associated with varying 
degrees of physiologic impairment. Those with vascular EDS have an increased 
risk of pneumothorax, intrapulmonary bleeding, cysts, and nonmalignant fibrous 
nodules. Functional aerodigestive manifestations such as inducible laryngeal 
obstruction may be misdiagnosed as asthma, with gastro-esophageal dysmotility 
and reflux as common contributing factors. Inflammatory manifestations include 
costochondritis, bronchiectasis, and localized respiratory allergic and 
nonallergic mast cell activation. Cranio-cervical instability can dysregulate 
respiratory control pathways. There is a need for careful phenotyping using 
standardized clinical tools and patient-reported outcomes and continuing 
collaboration with aerodigestive specialists including otolaryngologists and 
gastroenterologists. Also needed is further evaluation of respiratory symptoms 
in persons with hypermobility spectrum disorders. Personalized monitoring 
strategies are invaluable for interpretation and long-term management of 
respiratory symptoms.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31953
PMID: 34811894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]