---
reference_id: "PMID:38951975"
title: "Multiple Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency: Phenotypic and Genetic Features of a Malaysian Cohort."
authors:
- Schee JP
- Tan JS
- Tan CY
- Shahrizaila N
- Wong KT
- Goh KJ
journal: J Clin Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3988/jcn.2023.0265
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency: Phenotypic and Genetic Features of a Malaysian Cohort.
**Authors:** Schee JP, Tan JS, Tan CY, Shahrizaila N, Wong KT, Goh KJ
**Journal:** J Clin Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3988/jcn.2023.0265](https://doi.org/10.3988/jcn.2023.0265)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurol. 2024 Jul;20(4):422-430. doi: 10.3988/jcn.2023.0265.

Multiple Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency: Phenotypic and Genetic Features of a 
Malaysian Cohort.

Schee JP(1), Tan JS(2), Tan CY(3), Shahrizaila N(3), Wong KT(2)(4), Goh KJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. scheejieping@um.edu.my.
(2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(3)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(4)Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University 
Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia.
(5)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. gohkj@ummc.edu.my.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD) is an 
inherited disorder of fatty acid oxidation that causes lipid storage myopathy 
(LSM). This is the first report on MADD that describes the phenotypic and 
genetic features of a Malaysian cohort.
METHODS: Among the >2,500 patients in a local muscle biopsy database, patients 
with LSM were identified and their genomic DNA were extracted from muscle 
samples and peripheral blood. All 13 exons of the electron-transfer flavoprotein 
dehydrogenase gene (ETFDH) were subsequently sequenced. Fifty controls were 
included to determine the prevalence of identified mutations in the normal 
population.
RESULTS: Fourteen (82%) of the 17 LSM patients had MADD with ETFDH mutations. 
Twelve (86%) were Chinese and two were Malay sisters. Other unrelated patients 
reported that they had no relevant family history. Nine (64%) were females. The 
median age at onset was 18.5 years (interquartile range=16-37 years). All 14 
demonstrated proximal limb weakness, elevated serum creatine kinase levels, and 
myopathic changes in electromyography. Three patients experienced a metabolic 
crisis at their presentation. Sanger sequencing of ETFDH revealed nine different 
variants/mutations, one of which was novel: c.998A>G (p.Y333C) in exon 9. 
Notably, 12 (86%) patients, including the 2 Malay sisters, carried a common 
c.250G>A (p.A84T) variant, consistent with the hotspot mutation reported in 
southern China. All of the patients responded well to riboflavin therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Most of our Malaysian cohort with LSM had late-onset, 
riboflavin-responsive MADD with ETFDH mutations, and they demonstrated 
phenotypic and genetic features similar to those of cases reported in southern 
China. Furthermore, we report a novel ETFDH mutation and possibly the first ever 
MADD patients of Malay descent.

Copyright © 2024 Korean Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.3988/jcn.2023.0265
PMCID: PMC11220347
PMID: 38951975

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.