---
reference_id: "PMID:18363515"
title: "Replacement therapy for Addison's disease: recent developments."
authors:
- Løvås K
- Husebye ES
journal: Expert Opin Investig Drugs
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1517/13543784.17.4.497
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Replacement therapy for Addison's disease: recent developments.
**Authors:** Løvås K, Husebye ES
**Journal:** Expert Opin Investig Drugs (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1517/13543784.17.4.497](https://doi.org/10.1517/13543784.17.4.497)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2008 Apr;17(4):497-509. doi: 
10.1517/13543784.17.4.497.

Replacement therapy for Addison's disease: recent developments.

Løvås K(1), Husebye ES.

Author information:
(1)University of Bergen, Institute of Medicine, Section of Endocrinology, 5021 
Bergen, Norway. Kristian.lovas@helse-bergen.no

BACKGROUND: The hormone deficiencies in Addison's disease (primary adrenal 
insufficiency) are conventionally treated with oral glucocorticoid and 
mineralocorticoid replacement but the available therapies do not restore the 
physiological hormone levels and biorhythm. Despite such treatment these 
patients self-report impaired health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and recent 
research has indicated increased mortality.
OBJECTIVE/METHODS: We review the literature and recent developments in 
replacement therapy.
RESULTS/CONCLUSION: Patients with Addison's disease require mineralocorticoid 
replacement, i.e., fludrocortisone 0.05 - 0.20 mg once daily. Starting doses of 
glucocorticoids should be 15 - 20 mg for hydrocortisone or 20 - 30 mg for 
cortisone acetate, divided into two or three doses, and preferentially 
weight-adjusted. There are indications that the synthetic glucocorticoids have 
undesirable metabolic long-term effects, which make them less suitable as 
first-line treatment. Timed-release hydrocortisone tablets and continuous 
subcutaneous hydrocortisone infusion are promising new treatment modalities. 
Studies of replacement with the adrenal androgen dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) 
in adrenal failure have shown inconsistent benefit on HRQoL. DHEA, or possibly 
testosterone replacement is likely to be beneficial for selected groups of 
patients with Addison's disease but this remains to be shown. We here give our 
opinion of the best treatment and future direction of research in this area.

DOI: 10.1517/13543784.17.4.497
PMID: 18363515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]