---
reference_id: "PMID:28220407"
title: Favourable Outcome in Two Pregnancies in a Patient with 3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl-CoA Lyase Deficiency.
authors:
- Santosa D
- Donner MG
- Vom Dahl S
- Fleisch M
- Hoehn T
- Mayatepek E
- Heldt K
- Niehues T
- Häussinger D
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2017_7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Favourable Outcome in Two Pregnancies in a Patient with 3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl-CoA Lyase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Santosa D, Donner MG, Vom Dahl S, Fleisch M, Hoehn T, Mayatepek E, Heldt K, Niehues T, Häussinger D
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2017_7](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2017_7)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2017;37:1-5. doi: 10.1007/8904_2017_7. Epub 2017 Feb 21.

Favourable Outcome in Two Pregnancies in a Patient with
3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl-CoA Lyase Deficiency.

Santosa D(1), Donner MG(2)(3), Vom Dahl S(2), Fleisch M(4), Hoehn T(5),
Mayatepek E(5), Heldt K(6), Niehues T(6), Häussinger D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases,
Heinrich-Heine University, Moorenstrasse 5, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany.
david.santosa@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases,
Heinrich-Heine University, Moorenstrasse 5, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Gastroenterologie Brugg, Brugg, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Gynecology, Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology,
University Children's Hospital, Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(6)Childrens Hospital, HELIOS Klinikum Krefeld, Krefeld, Germany.

In patients with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl(HMG)-CoA lyase deficiency (OMIM
246450), five pregnancies have been described worldwide, which were either
terminated or resulted in severe metabolic sequelae during pregnancy or
delivery. Here, we report on a patient with HMG-CoA lyase deficiency, who
underwent two uncomplicated pregnancies. The 19-year-old patient was admitted
because of recurrent vomiting and nausea. Diagnostics revealed pregnancy at week
8 of gestation. Metabolic analyses revealed normal lactate and blood glucose
levels and normal acid-base status. Urine organic acid analysis showed an
elevated excretion of 3-CH3-glutaric acid, 2,3-CH3-glutaconic acid, and
3-CH3-3-OH-glutaric acid. Oral treatment with carnitine and glucose wes
administered intravenously during the period of nausea and vomiting. After
clinical recovery, a diet with 0.89 g/kg of protein/d and 38 kcal/kg body
weight/d was given. Meals were taken every 3 h. Additionally, 70 g of starch was
given at midnight to maintain normoglycemia at night time. Peripartum, a
complete parenteral nutrition, was delivered through a central venous catheter.
The patient delivered a healthy male infant by Caesarean section at week 38 of
gestation (Apgar 9/10/10) and remained metabolically stable throughout the
peripartum period. Postpartum nutrition was gradually changed from parenteral to
oral diet. Two years later, the patient became pregnant again and presented with
hyperemesis gravidarum. With metabolic monitoring and treatment as before no
decompensation occurred. At week 38 of gestation, she delivered a healthy female
infant by elective Caesarian section (Apgar 9/10/10). This case report describes
the metabolic and obstetric management of two pregnancies in a patient with
HMG-CoA lyase deficiency with favorable outcome without metabolic complications.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2017_7
PMCID: PMC5740040
PMID: 28220407
