---
reference_id: "PMID:18781672"
title: "Functional organization of the basal ganglia: therapeutic implications for Parkinson's disease."
authors:
- Obeso JA
- Rodríguez-Oroz MC
- Benitez-Temino B
- Blesa FJ
- Guridi J
- Marin C
- Rodriguez M
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/mds.22062
keywords:
- "Afferent Pathways/pathology, physiopathology"
- Animals
- Antiparkinson Agents/therapeutic use
- "Basal Ganglia/anatomy & histology, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Cerebral Cortex/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Corpus Striatum/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Globus Pallidus/pathology, physiopathology"
- Haplorhini
- Humans
- "Models, Animal"
- "Models, Neurological"
- "Parkinson Disease/drug therapy, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional organization of the basal ganglia: therapeutic implications for Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Obeso JA, Rodríguez-Oroz MC, Benitez-Temino B, Blesa FJ, Guridi J, Marin C, Rodriguez M
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.22062](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.22062)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2008;23 Suppl 3:S548-59. doi: 10.1002/mds.22062.

Functional organization of the basal ganglia: therapeutic implications for 
Parkinson's disease.

Obeso JA(1), Rodríguez-Oroz MC, Benitez-Temino B, Blesa FJ, Guridi J, Marin C, 
Rodriguez M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Clinica Universitaria and Medical 
School and Neuroscience Centre, CIMA, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. 
jobeso@unav.es

The basal ganglia (BG) are a highly organized network, where different parts are 
activated for specific functions and circumstances. The BG are involved in 
movement control, as well as associative learning, planning, working memory, and 
emotion. We concentrate on the "motor circuit" because it is the best understood 
anatomically and physiologically, and because Parkinson's disease is mainly 
thought to be a movement disorder. Normal function of the BG requires fine 
tuning of neuronal excitability within each nucleus to determine the exact 
degree of movement facilitation or inhibition at any given moment. This is 
mediated by the complex organization of the striatum, where the excitability of 
medium spiny neurons is controlled by several pre- and postsynaptic mechanisms 
as well as interneuron activity, and secured by several recurrent or internal BG 
circuits. The motor circuit of the BG has two entry points, the striatum and the 
subthalamic nucleus (STN), and an output, the globus pallidus pars interna 
(GPi), which connects to the cortex via the motor thalamus. Neuronal afferents 
coding for a given movement or task project to the BG by two different systems: 
(1) Direct disynaptic projections to the GPi via the striatum and STN. (2) 
Indirect trisynaptic projections to the GPi via the globus pallidus pars externa 
(GPe). Corticostriatal afferents primarily act to inhibit medium spiny neurons 
in the "indirect circuit" and facilitate neurons in the "direct circuit." The 
GPe is in a pivotal position to regulate the motor output of the BG. Dopamine 
finely tunes striatal input as well as neuronal striatal activity, and modulates 
GPe, GPi, and STN activity. Dopaminergic depletion in Parkinson's disease 
disrupts the corticostriatal balance leading to increased activity the indirect 
circuit and reduced activity in the direct circuit. The precise chain of events 
leading to increased STN activity is not completely understood, but impaired 
dopaminergic regulation of the GPe, GPi, and STN may be involved. The 
parkinsonian state is characterized by disruption of the internal balance of the 
BG leading to hyperactivity in the two main entry points of the network 
(striatum and STN) and excessive inhibitory output from the GPi. Replacement 
therapy with standard levodopa creates a further imbalance, producing an 
abnormal pattern of neuronal discharge and synchronization of neuronal firing 
that sustain the "off" and "on with dyskinesia" states. The effect of levodopa 
is robust but short-lasting and converts the parkinsonian BG into a highly 
unstable system, where pharmacological and compensatory effects act in opposing 
directions. This creates a scenario that substantially departs from the normal 
physiological state of the BG.

(c) 2008 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22062
PMID: 18781672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]