---
reference_id: "PMID:32855205"
title: Inhibition of Histone H3K27 Demethylases Inactivates Brachyury (TBXT) and Promotes Chordoma Cell Death.
authors:
- Cottone L
- Cribbs AP
- Khandelwal G
- Wells G
- Ligammari L
- Philpott M
- Tumber A
- Lombard P
- Hookway ES
- Szommer T
- Johansson C
- Brennan PE
- Pillay N
- Jenner RG
- Oppermann U
- Flanagan AM
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-1387
keywords:
- "Activating Transcription Factor 4/genetics, metabolism"
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- Cell Death/drug effects
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Chordoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Chromatin/genetics, metabolism"
- "Drug Screening Assays, Antitumor"
- Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- "Fetal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- "Histone Demethylases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- Lysine/metabolism
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Small Molecule Libraries/pharmacology
- "T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Brachyury Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of Histone H3K27 Demethylases Inactivates Brachyury (TBXT) and Promotes Chordoma Cell Death.
**Authors:** Cottone L, Cribbs AP, Khandelwal G, Wells G, Ligammari L, Philpott M, Tumber A, Lombard P, Hookway ES, Szommer T, Johansson C, Brennan PE, Pillay N, Jenner RG, Oppermann U, Flanagan AM
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-1387](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-1387)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2020 Oct 15;80(20):4540-4551. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-1387. 
Epub 2020 Aug 27.

Inhibition of Histone H3K27 Demethylases Inactivates Brachyury (TBXT) and 
Promotes Chordoma Cell Death.

Cottone L(1), Cribbs AP(2), Khandelwal G(3), Wells G(2), Ligammari L(1), 
Philpott M(2), Tumber A(4), Lombard P(1), Hookway ES(1)(2), Szommer T(4), 
Johansson C(2), Brennan PE(4), Pillay N(1)(5), Jenner RG(3), Oppermann 
U(#)(6)(4)(7), Flanagan AM(#)(8)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Botnar Research Centre, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and 
Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Cancer Biology, UCL Cancer Institute, University College 
London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Histopathology, Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital, Stanmore, 
Middlesex, United Kingdom.
(6)Botnar Research Centre, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and 
Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
a.flanagan@ucl.ac.uk udo.oppermann@sgc.ox.ac.uk.
(7)FRIAS - Freiburg Institute of Advanced Studies, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Pathology, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom. a.flanagan@ucl.ac.uk udo.oppermann@sgc.ox.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Expression of the transcription factor brachyury (TBXT) is normally restricted 
to the embryo, and its silencing is epigenetically regulated. TBXT promotes 
mesenchymal transition in a subset of common carcinomas, and in chordoma, a rare 
cancer showing notochordal differentiation, TBXT acts as a putative oncogene. We 
hypothesized that TBXT expression is controlled through epigenetic inhibition to 
promote chordoma cell death. Screening of five human chordoma cell lines 
revealed that pharmacologic inhibition of the histone 3 lysine 27 demethylases 
KDM6A (UTX) and KDM6B (JMJD3) leads to cell death. This effect was phenocopied 
by dual genetic inactivation of KDM6A/B using CRISPR/Cas9. Inhibition of KDM6A/B 
with a novel compound KDOBA67 led to a genome-wide increase in repressive 
H3K27me3 marks with concomitant reduction in active H3K27ac, H3K9ac, and H3K4me3 
marks. TBXT was a KDM6A/B target gene, and chromatin changes at TBXT following 
KDOBA67 treatment were associated with a reduction in TBXT protein levels in all 
models tested, including primary patient-derived cultures. In all models tested, 
KDOBA67 treatment downregulated expression of a network of transcription factors 
critical for chordoma survival and upregulated pathways dominated by ATF4-driven 
stress and proapoptotic responses. Blocking the AFT4 stress response did not 
prevent suppression of TBXT and induction of cell death, but ectopic 
overexpression of TBXT increased viability, therefore implicating TBXT as a 
potential therapeutic target of H3K27 demethylase inhibitors in chordoma. Our 
work highlights how knowledge of normal processes in fetal development can 
provide insight into tumorigenesis and identify novel therapeutic approaches. 
SIGNIFICANCE: Pharmacologic inhibition of H3K27-demethylases in human chordoma 
cells promotes epigenetic silencing of oncogenic TBXT, alters gene networks 
critical to survival, and represents a potential novel therapy.

©2020 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-1387
PMCID: PMC7616956
PMID: 32855205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors 
declare no potential conflicts of interest.