---
reference_id: "PMID:8609132"
title: Cervical kyphosis in patients who have Larsen syndrome.
authors:
- Johnston CE 2nd
- Birch JG
- Daniels JL
journal: J Bone Joint Surg Am
year: '1996'
doi: 10.2106/00004623-199604000-00007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cervical kyphosis in patients who have Larsen syndrome.
**Authors:** Johnston CE 2nd, Birch JG, Daniels JL
**Journal:** J Bone Joint Surg Am (1996)
**DOI:** [10.2106/00004623-199604000-00007](https://doi.org/10.2106/00004623-199604000-00007)

## Content

1. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1996 Apr;78(4):538-45. doi: 
10.2106/00004623-199604000-00007.

Cervical kyphosis in patients who have Larsen syndrome.

Johnston CE 2nd(1), Birch JG, Daniels JL.

Author information:
(1)Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children, Dallas, Texas 75219, USA.

Comment in
    J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1997 Oct;79(10):1590-1.

Four patients who had Larsen syndrome and cervical kyphosis were managed 
operatively and followed for an average of seventy months (range, forty to 
ninety-two months). The preoperative cervical kyphosis ranged from 35 to 65 
degrees. The patients had had a posterior cervical arthrodesis alone when they 
were infants, at an average age fo fourteen months (range, ten to sixteen 
months). In three infants, the kyphosis either stabilized (one patient) or 
reversed into lordosis (two patients). Thus, the kyphosis corrected gradually by 
continued anterior growth in the presence of a solid posterior fusion. In the 
fourth infant, the kyphosis progressed to 110 degrees because of pseudarthrosis. 
This child had anterior decompression and arthrodesis for an acute neurological 
deficit. We believe that cervical kyphosis is sometimes present but not 
diagnosed in patients who have Larsen syndrome. Early diagnosis followed by 
operative stabilization should help such patients avoid neurological deficits. 
Posterior cervical arthrodesis alone, performed in infancy, provided stability 
and the opportunity for the gradual correction of the deformity by continued 
anterior growth in three of our four patients.

DOI: 10.2106/00004623-199604000-00007
PMID: 8609132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]