---
reference_id: "PMID:35709786"
title: "Abdominal pain in covid times: time to think twice."
authors:
- Noreillie MA
- Dedeurwaerdere F
- Jijo J
- Al Hanini S
- Marolleau F
journal: Acta Gastroenterol Belg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.51821/85.2.8680
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abdominal pain in covid times: time to think twice.
**Authors:** Noreillie MA, Dedeurwaerdere F, Jijo J, Al Hanini S, Marolleau F
**Journal:** Acta Gastroenterol Belg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.51821/85.2.8680](https://doi.org/10.51821/85.2.8680)

## Content

1. Acta Gastroenterol Belg. 2022 Apr-Jun;85(2):400-402. doi: 10.51821/85.2.8680.

Abdominal pain in covid times: time to think twice.

Noreillie MA(1), Dedeurwaerdere F(2), Jijo J(3), Al Hanini S(3), Marolleau F(4).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology department, AZ Delta, Roeselare, Belgium.
(2)Pathology department, AZ Delta, Roeselare, Belgium.
(3)Pediatric department, AZ Delta, Menen, Belgium.
(4)Gastroenterology department, AZ Delta, Menen, Belgium.

We report a case of abdominal pain followed by acute systolic heart failure due 
to multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C). This multisystem 
disease typically appears several weeks after infection with COVID-19 in 
children and young adults. There is a wide spectrum of presentation with MIS-C: 
some present with features of shock, others with a condition that has 
overlapping characteristics with Kawasaki disease (KD), and others with more 
non-specific features. Very often the symptoms include gastrointestinal 
symptoms. Our 17-year-old patient presented with fever, abdominal pain and 
inflammatory laboratory results. Rapidly after admission he developed acute 
heart failure with biopsy-confirmed myocarditis. The diagnostic criteria of 
MIS-C were met. This case emphasizes the changing diagnostic landscape. However 
rare, we want to raise awareness for MIS-C in children and young adults 
presenting with abdominal pain. Because of the risk of rapid clinical 
deterioration, early recognition and a multidisciplinary approach can be 
life-saving.

© Acta Gastro-Enterologica Belgica.

DOI: 10.51821/85.2.8680
PMID: 35709786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest