---
reference_id: "PMID:31724723"
title: "DNA methylation in disease: Immunodeficiency, Centromeric instability, Facial anomalies syndrome."
authors:
- Vukic M
- Daxinger L
journal: Essays Biochem
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1042/EBC20190035
keywords:
- "DNA/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA (Cytosine-5-)-Methyltransferases/genetics
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA Methylation/physiology
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/physiology"
- "Face/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Tandem Repeat Sequences/physiology
- DNA Methyltransferase 3B
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA methylation in disease: Immunodeficiency, Centromeric instability, Facial anomalies syndrome.
**Authors:** Vukic M, Daxinger L
**Journal:** Essays Biochem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1042/EBC20190035](https://doi.org/10.1042/EBC20190035)

## Content

1. Essays Biochem. 2019 Dec 20;63(6):773-783. doi: 10.1042/EBC20190035.

DNA methylation in disease: Immunodeficiency, Centromeric instability, Facial
anomalies syndrome.

Vukic M(1), Daxinger L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre (LUMC), Leiden
2300, RC, The Netherlands.

DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification essential for normal mammalian
development. Initially associated with gene silencing, more diverse roles for
DNA methylation in the regulation of gene expression patterns are increasingly
being recognized. Some of these insights come from studying the function of
genes that are mutated in human diseases characterized by abnormal DNA
methylation landscapes. The first disorder to be associated with congenital
defects in DNA methylation was Immunodeficiency, Centromeric instability, Facial
anomalies syndrome (ICF). The hallmark of this syndrome is hypomethylation of
pericentromeric satellite repeats, with mutations in four genes: DNMT3B, ZBTB24,
CDCA7 and HELLS, being linked to the disease. Here, we discuss recent progress
in understanding the molecular interactions between these genes and consider
current evidence for how aberrant DNA methylation may contribute to the abnormal
phenotype present in ICF syndrome patients.

© 2019 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/EBC20190035
PMCID: PMC6923317
PMID: 31724723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing
interests associated with this manuscript.
