---
reference_id: "PMID:33795320"
title: "Higher throughput drug screening for rare respiratory diseases: readthrough therapy in primary ciliary dyskinesia."
authors:
- Lee DDH
- Cardinale D
- Nigro E
- Butler CR
- Rutman A
- Fassad MR
- Hirst RA
- Moulding D
- Agrotis A
- Forsythe E
- Peckham D
- Robson E
- Smith CM
- Somavarapu S
- Beales PL
- Hart SL
- Janes SM
- Mitchison HM
- Ketteler R
- Hynds RE
- "O'Callaghan C"
journal: Eur Respir J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1183/13993003.00455-2020
keywords:
- Cilia
- "Ciliary Motility Disorders/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Drug Evaluation, Preclinical"
- High-Throughput Screening Assays
- Humans
- "Kartagener Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Mucociliary Clearance
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Higher throughput drug screening for rare respiratory diseases: readthrough therapy in primary ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Lee DDH, Cardinale D, Nigro E, Butler CR, Rutman A, Fassad MR, Hirst RA, Moulding D, Agrotis A, Forsythe E, Peckham D, Robson E, Smith CM, Somavarapu S, Beales PL, Hart SL, Janes SM, Mitchison HM, Ketteler R, Hynds RE, O'Callaghan C
**Journal:** Eur Respir J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1183/13993003.00455-2020](https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00455-2020)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J. 2021 Oct 14;58(4):2000455. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00455-2020.
Print  2021 Oct.

Higher throughput drug screening for rare respiratory diseases: readthrough
therapy in primary ciliary dyskinesia.

Lee DDH(1)(2), Cardinale D(1)(2), Nigro E(3), Butler CR(3), Rutman A(4), Fassad
MR(5)(6), Hirst RA(4), Moulding D(7), Agrotis A(8), Forsythe E(5), Peckham D(9),
Robson E(9), Smith CM(1), Somavarapu S(10), Beales PL(5), Hart SL(5), Janes
SM(3), Mitchison HM(5), Ketteler R(8), Hynds RE(3)(11)(12), O'Callaghan
C(13)(4)(12).

Author information:
(1)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(2)D.D.H. Lee and D. Cardinale contributed equally.
(3)Lungs for Living Research Centre, UCL Respiratory, Division of Medicine,
University College London, London, UK.
(4)Centre for PCD Diagnosis and Research, Dept of Respiratory Sciences,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(5)Ciliary Disease Section, Genetics and Genomic Medicine Research and Teaching
Dept, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(6)Dept of Human Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Alexandria University,
Alexandria, Egypt.
(7)Developmental Biology and Cancer, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child
Health, London, UK.
(8)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London,
UK.
(9)Leeds Institute for Medical Research, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(10)Dept of Pharmaceutics, UCL School of Pharmacy, University College London,
London, UK.
(11)UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London, UK.
(12)R.E. Hynds and C. O'Callaghan contributed equally to this article as lead
authors and supervised the work.
(13)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK
cocallaghan@ucl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Development of therapeutic approaches for rare respiratory diseases
is hampered by the lack of systems that allow medium-to-high-throughput
screening of fully differentiated respiratory epithelium from affected patients.
This is a particular problem for primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), a rare
genetic disease caused by mutations in genes that adversely affect ciliary
movement and consequently mucociliary transport. Primary cell culture of basal
epithelial cells from nasal brush biopsies followed by ciliated differentiation
at the air-liquid interface (ALI) has proven to be a useful tool in PCD
diagnostics but the technique's broader utility, including in pre-clinical PCD
research, has been restricted by the limited number of basal cells that can be
expanded from such biopsies.
METHODS: We describe an immunofluorescence screening method, enabled by
extensive expansion of basal cells from PCD patients and the directed
differentiation of these cells into ciliated epithelium in miniaturised 96-well
transwell format ALI cultures. As proof-of-principle, we performed a
personalised investigation in a patient with a rare and severe form of PCD
(reduced generation of motile cilia), in this case caused by a homozygous
nonsense mutation in the MCIDAS gene.
RESULTS: Initial analyses of ciliary ultrastructure, beat pattern and beat
frequency in the 96-well transwell format ALI cultures indicate that a range of
different PCD defects can be retained in these cultures. The screening system in
our proof-of-principal investigation allowed drugs that induce translational
readthrough to be evaluated alone or in combination with nonsense-mediated decay
inhibitors. We observed restoration of basal body formation but not the
generation of cilia in the patient's nasal epithelial cells in vitro.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides a platform for higher throughput analyses of
airway epithelia that is applicable in a range of settings and suggests novel
avenues for drug evaluation and development in PCD caused by nonsense mutations.

Copyright ©The authors 2021.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00455-2020
PMCID: PMC8514977
PMID: 33795320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: D.D.H. Lee has nothing to
disclose. Conflict of interest: D. Cardinale has nothing to disclose. Conflict
of interest: E. Nigro has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: C.R. Butler
has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: A. Rutman has nothing to
disclose. Conflict of interest: M.R. Fassad has nothing to disclose. Conflict of
interest: R.A. Hirst has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: D. Moulding
has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: A. Agrotis has nothing to
disclose. Conflict of interest: E. Forsythe has nothing to disclose. Conflict of
interest: D. Peckham has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: E. Robson
has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: C.M. Smith has nothing to
disclose. Conflict of interest: S. Somavarapu has nothing to disclose. Conflict
of interest: P.L. Beales has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: S.L.
Hart has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: S.M. Janes has nothing to
disclose. Conflict of interest: H.M. Mitchison has nothing to disclose. Conflict
of interest: R. Ketteler has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: R.E.
Hynds has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: C. O'Callaghan has nothing
to disclose.
