---
reference_id: "PMID:22011234"
title: Mechanical determinants of airways hyperresponsiveness.
authors:
- Bates JH
- Maksym GN
journal: Crit Rev Biomed Eng
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1615/critrevbiomedeng.v39.i4.30
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanical determinants of airways hyperresponsiveness.
**Authors:** Bates JH, Maksym GN
**Journal:** Crit Rev Biomed Eng (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1615/critrevbiomedeng.v39.i4.30](https://doi.org/10.1615/critrevbiomedeng.v39.i4.30)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Biomed Eng. 2011;39(4):281-96. doi:
10.1615/critrevbiomedeng.v39.i4.30.

Mechanical determinants of airways hyperresponsiveness.

Bates JH(1), Maksym GN.

Author information:
(1)Vermont Lung Center, University of Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington, 
VA 05405-0075, USA. jason.h.bates@uvm.edu

Asthmatic individuals typically experience exaggerated decrements in their 
ability to breathe after receiving standardized doses of smooth muscle agonist, 
a phenomenon known as airways hyperresponsiveness (AHR). Breathing difficulties 
are caused by excessive narrowing of the pulmonary airways, which is instigated 
by shortening of the airway smooth muscle (ASM). Exactly why many asthmatic 
individuals are hyperresponsive, however, remains controversial because of the 
many varied mechanisms that could possibly be involved. Nevertheless, much of 
the understanding of AHR comes down to a matter of considering the spatial 
configuration of the components that make up the airway, and the static and 
dynamic physical forces these components experience. In this review, we consider 
these mechanical factors, which are conveniently subdivided into three groups 
involving (i) the active forces construing to narrow the airways, (ii) the 
mechanical loads against which these forces must work, and (iii) the geometric 
transformation of a given degree of ASM shortening into airway narrowing. Each 
of these groups of factors has potent potential to influence AHR. It is likely, 
however, that they operate together to produce the AHR characteristic of severe 
asthma.

DOI: 10.1615/critrevbiomedeng.v39.i4.30
PMID: 22011234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]