---
reference_id: "PMID:8346704"
title: Function of proteoglycans in the extracellular matrix.
authors:
- Yanagishita M
journal: Acta Pathol Jpn
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.1993.tb02569.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Function of proteoglycans in the extracellular matrix.
**Authors:** Yanagishita M
**Journal:** Acta Pathol Jpn (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1440-1827.1993.tb02569.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1827.1993.tb02569.x)

## Content

1. Acta Pathol Jpn. 1993 Jun;43(6):283-93. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1827.1993.tb02569.x.

Function of proteoglycans in the extracellular matrix.

Yanagishita M(1).

Author information:
(1)Bone Research Branch, National Institute of Dental Research, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Proteoglycans are glycosylated proteins which have covalently attached highly 
anionic glycosaminoglycans. Many forms of proteoglycans are present in virtually 
all extracellular matrices of connective tissues. The major biological function 
of proteoglycans derives from the physicochemical characteristics of the 
glycosaminoglycan component of the molecule, which provides hydration and 
swelling pressure to the tissue enabling it to withstand compressional forces. 
This function is best illustrated by the most abundant proteoglycan in cartilage 
tissues, aggrecan. During the past decade, diverse species of proteoglycans have 
been identified in many connective tissues, on cell surfaces and in 
intracellular compartments. These proteoglycans have distinct biological 
functions apart from their hydrodynamic functions, and their involvement in many 
aspects of cell and tissue activities has been demonstrated. For example, 
decorin, which is widely distributed in many connective tissues, may have 
functions in regulating collagen fibril formation and in modifying the activity 
of transforming growth factor-beta; perlecan, the major heparan sulfate 
proteoglycan in the glomerular basement membrane, may play an important role as 
the major anionic site responsible for the charge selectivity in glomerular 
filtration. Specific interactions between proteoglycans (through both their 
glycosaminoglycan and core protein components) and macromolecules in the 
extracellular matrix are the key factors in the functions of proteoglycans. 
Exciting biological functions of proteoglycans are now gradually emerging.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.1993.tb02569.x
PMID: 8346704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]