---
reference_id: "PMID:23948895"
title: Tauopathies and tau oligomers.
authors:
- Takashima A
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3233/JAD-130653
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tauopathies and tau oligomers.
**Authors:** Takashima A
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-130653](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-130653)

## Content

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;37(3):565-8. doi: 10.3233/JAD-130653.

Tauopathies and tau oligomers.

Takashima A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Aging Neurobiology, National Center for Geriatrics and 
Gerontology, Oobu-shi, Aichi, Japan.

Tauopathies are neurodegenerative diseases characterized behaviorally by 
dementia and neuropathologically by neurofibrillary tangles and neuronal loss. 
Tau gene mutations have been found in frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism 
linked to chromosome 17, suggesting that mutation of tau induces tauopathy. 
Studies on in vitro tau aggregation show that tau forms two different 
intermediate aggregates--called tau oligomers and granular tau oligomers--before 
forming fibrils. Moreover, studies using a mouse model that expresses human tau 
demonstrated that the process of neurofibrillary tangle formation, rather than 
tangles themselves, may cause synapse loss and neuron loss. Further analyses 
suggest that hyperphosphorylated tau or oligomeric tau is involved in synaptic 
loss, whereas granular tau oligomers are responsible for neuronal loss. Thus, 
different forms of tau aggregates are involved in the different pathological 
changes that occur in tauopathies.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-130653
PMID: 23948895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]