---
reference_id: "PMID:23204254"
title: Chronic bronchitis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Kim V
- Criner GJ
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.201210-1843CI
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic bronchitis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Kim V, Criner GJ
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.201210-1843CI](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201210-1843CI)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 Feb 1;187(3):228-37. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201210-1843CI. Epub 2012 Nov 29.

Chronic bronchitis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kim V(1), Criner GJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. 
victor.kim@tuhs.temple.edu

Chronic bronchitis (CB) is a common but variable phenomenon in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It has numerous clinical consequences, 
including an accelerated decline in lung function, greater risk of the 
development of airflow obstruction in smokers, a predisposition to lower 
respiratory tract infection, higher exacerbation frequency, and worse overall 
mortality. CB is caused by overproduction and hypersecretion of mucus by goblet 
cells, which leads to worsening airflow obstruction by luminal obstruction of 
small airways, epithelial remodeling, and alteration of airway surface tension 
predisposing to collapse. Despite its clinical sequelae, little is known about 
the pathophysiology of CB and goblet cell hyperplasia in COPD, and treatment 
options are limited. In addition, it is becoming increasingly apparent that in 
the classic COPD spectrum, with emphysema on one end and CB on the other, most 
patients lie somewhere in the middle. It is known now that many patients with 
severe emphysema can develop CB, and small airway pathology has been linked to 
worse clinical outcomes, such as increased mortality and lesser improvement in 
lung function after lung volume reduction surgery. However, in recent years, a 
greater understanding of the importance of CB as a phenotype to identify 
patients with a beneficial response to therapy has been described. Herein we 
review the epidemiology of CB, the evidence behind its clinical consequences, 
the current understanding of the pathophysiology of goblet cell hyperplasia in 
COPD, and current therapies for CB.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201210-1843CI
PMCID: PMC4951627
PMID: 23204254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]