---
reference_id: "PMID:29053830"
title: "Friedreich's ataxia: clinical features, pathogenesis and management."
authors:
- Cook A
- Giunti P
journal: Br Med Bull
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/bmb/ldx034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Friedreich's ataxia: clinical features, pathogenesis and management.
**Authors:** Cook A, Giunti P
**Journal:** Br Med Bull (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bmb/ldx034](https://doi.org/10.1093/bmb/ldx034)

## Content

1. Br Med Bull. 2017 Dec 1;124(1):19-30. doi: 10.1093/bmb/ldx034.

Friedreich's ataxia: clinical features, pathogenesis and management.

Cook A(1), Giunti P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Ataxia Centre, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2019 Apr;51(4):580-581. doi: 10.1038/s41588-019-0387-x.

INTRODUCTION: Friedreich's ataxia is the most common inherited ataxia.
SOURCES OF DATA: Literature search using PubMed with keywords Friedreich's 
ataxia together with published papers known to the authors.
AREAS OF AGREEMENT: The last decade has seen important advances in our 
understanding of the pathogenesis of disease. In particular, the genetic and 
epigenetic mechanisms underlying the disease now offer promising novel 
therapeutic targets.
AREAS OF CONTROVERSY: The search for effective disease-modifying agents 
continues. It remains to be determined whether the most effective approach to 
treatment lies with increasing frataxin protein levels or addressing the 
metabolic consequences of the disease, for example with antioxidants.
AREAS TIMELY FOR DEVELOPING RESEARCH: Management of Freidreich's ataxia is 
currently focussed on symptomatic management, delivered by the multidisciplinary 
team. Phase II clinical trials in agents that address the abberrant silencing of 
the frataxin gene need to be translated into large placebo-controlled Phase III 
trials to help establish their therapeutic potential.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com

DOI: 10.1093/bmb/ldx034
PMCID: PMC5862303
PMID: 29053830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]