---
reference_id: "PMID:32487903"
title: Sarcoidosis and the Nervous System.
authors:
- Pawate S
journal: Continuum (Minneap Minn)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1212/CON.0000000000000855
keywords:
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Cranial Nerve Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- Humans
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- "Sarcoidosis/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Spinal Cord Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sarcoidosis and the Nervous System.
**Authors:** Pawate S
**Journal:** Continuum (Minneap Minn) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1212/CON.0000000000000855](https://doi.org/10.1212/CON.0000000000000855)

## Content

1. Continuum (Minneap Minn). 2020 Jun;26(3):695-715. doi:
10.1212/CON.0000000000000855.

Sarcoidosis and the Nervous System.

Pawate S.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article provides an overview and update on the
neurologic manifestations of sarcoidosis.
RECENT FINDINGS: The 2018 Neurosarcoidosis Consortium diagnostic criteria
emphasize that biopsy is key for diagnosis and determines the level of
diagnostic certainty. Thus, definite neurosarcoidosis requires nervous system
biopsy and probable neurosarcoidosis requires biopsy from extraneural tissue.
Without biopsy, possible neurosarcoidosis can be diagnosed if the clinical,
imaging, and laboratory picture is compatible and other causes are ruled out.
Recent large retrospective studies from the United States and France established
that infliximab appears to be efficacious when other treatments are inadequate.
SUMMARY: Sarcoidosis is a multisystem noninfectious granulomatous disorder that
is immune mediated, reflecting the response to an as-yet unidentified antigen or
antigens. Neurosarcoidosis refers to neurologic involvement due to sarcoidosis
that clinically manifests in 5% of cases of sarcoidosis, with asymptomatic
involvement in as many as another one in five patients with sarcoidosis. Sarcoid
granulomas can occur in any anatomic substrate in the nervous system, causing
protean manifestations that have earned neurosarcoidosis the sobriquet the great
mimic. Nevertheless, central nervous system sarcoidosis occurs in well-defined
presentations that can be classified as cranial neuropathies, meningeal disease,
brain parenchymal (including pituitary-hypothalamic) disease, and spinal cord
disease. In addition, the peripheral nervous system is affected in the form of
peripheral neuropathy and myopathy. Glucocorticoids are the cornerstone of
treatment, especially in the acute stage, whereas steroid-sparing agents such as
methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetil, and azathioprine are used for prolonged
therapy to minimize steroid toxicity. Anti-tumor necrosis factor agents may help
in refractory cases.

DOI: 10.1212/CON.0000000000000855
PMID: 32487903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
