---
reference_id: "PMID:37018992"
title: "Review on the effect of chemotherapy on the intestinal barrier: Epithelial permeability, mucus and bacterial translocation."
authors:
- Dahlgren D
- Lennernäs H
journal: Biomed Pharmacother
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114644
keywords:
- Humans
- Bacterial Translocation
- Intestinal Mucosa/microbiology
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Permeability
- Mucus
- Neutropenia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review on the effect of chemotherapy on the intestinal barrier: Epithelial permeability, mucus and bacterial translocation.
**Authors:** Dahlgren D, Lennernäs H
**Journal:** Biomed Pharmacother (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114644](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114644)

## Content

1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2023 Jun;162:114644. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114644.
Epub 2023 Apr 3.

Review on the effect of chemotherapy on the intestinal barrier: Epithelial
permeability, mucus and bacterial translocation.

Dahlgren D(1), Lennernäs H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
Electronic address: hans.lennernas@farmbio.uu.se.

Chemotherapy kills fast-growing cells including gut stem cells. This affects all
components of the physical and functional intestinal barrier, i.e., the mucus
layer, epithelium, and immune system. This results in an altered intestinal
permeability of toxic compounds (e.g., endotoxins) as well as luminal bacterial
translocation into the mucosa and central circulation. However, there is
uncertainty regarding the relative contributions of the different barrier
components for the development of chemotherapy-induced gut toxicity. This review
present an overview of the intestinal mucosal barrier determined with various
types of molecular probes and methods, and how they are affected by chemotherapy
based on reported rodent and human data. We conclude that there is overwhelming
evidence that chemotherapy increases bacterial translocation, and that it
affects the mucosal barrier by rendering the mucosa more permeable to large
permeability probes. Chemotherapy also seems to impede the intestinal mucus
barrier, even though this has been less clearly evaluated from a functional
standpoint but certainly plays a role in bacteria translocation. Combined, it is
however difficult to outline a clear temporal or succession between the
different gastrointestinal events and barrier functions, especially as
chemotherapy-induced neutropenia is also involved in intestinal immunological
homeostasis and bacterial translocation. A thorough characterization of this
would need to include a time dependent development of neutropenia, intestinal
permeability, and bacterial translocation, ideally after a range of
chemotherapeutics and dosing regimens.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114644
PMID: 37018992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
