---
reference_id: "PMID:22539601"
title: "Prevalence, mutation spectrum, and cardiac phenotype of the Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome in Sweden."
authors:
- Winbo A
- Stattin EL
- Diamant UB
- Persson J
- Jensen SM
- Rydberg A
journal: Europace
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/europace/eus111
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Genetic Predisposition to Disease/epidemiology, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Jervell-Lange Nielsen Syndrome/epidemiology, genetics"
- KCNQ1 Potassium Channel/genetics
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- Sweden/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence, mutation spectrum, and cardiac phenotype of the Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome in Sweden.
**Authors:** Winbo A, Stattin EL, Diamant UB, Persson J, Jensen SM, Rydberg A
**Journal:** Europace (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/europace/eus111](https://doi.org/10.1093/europace/eus111)

## Content

1. Europace. 2012 Dec;14(12):1799-806. doi: 10.1093/europace/eus111. Epub 2012
Apr  26.

Prevalence, mutation spectrum, and cardiac phenotype of the Jervell and
Lange-Nielsen syndrome in Sweden.

Winbo A(1), Stattin EL, Diamant UB, Persson J, Jensen SM, Rydberg A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Clinical Sciences, Pediatrics, Umeå
University, 90185 Umeå, Sweden. annika.winbo@pediatri.umu.se

AIMS: To explore the national prevalence, mutation spectrum, cardiac phenotype,
and outcome of the uncommon Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS),
associated with a high risk of sudden cardiac death.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A national inventory of clinical JLNS cases was performed.
Genotype and area of origin were ascertained in index families. Retrospective
clinical data were collected from medical records and interviews. We identified
19 cases in 13 Swedish families. A JLNS prevalence >1:200 000 was revealed (five
living cases <10 years of age). The mutation spectrum consisted of eight KCNQ1
mutations, whereof p.R518X in 12/24 alleles. Geographic clustering of four
mutations (20/24 alleles) and similarities to Norway's mutation spectrum were
seen. A high prevalence of heterozygotes was suggested. Three paediatric cases
on β-blockers since birth were as yet asymptomatic. Seven symptomatic cases had
suffered an aborted cardiac arrest and four had died suddenly. QTc prolongation
was significantly longer in symptomatic cases (mean 605 ± 62 vs. 518 ± 50 ms, P
= 0.016). β-Blockers reduced, but did not abolish, cardiac events in any
previously symptomatic case. β-Blocker type, dosage, and compliance probably
affect outcome significantly. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy
(ICD, n = 6) was associated with certain complications; however, no case of
sudden death.
CONCLUSION: Founder effects could explain 83% of the Swedish JLNS mutation
spectrum and probably contribute to the high JLNS prevalence found in
preadolescent Swedish children. Due to the severe cardiac phenotype in JLNS, the
importance of stringent β-blocker therapy and compliance, and consideration of
ICD implantation in the case of therapy failure is stressed.

DOI: 10.1093/europace/eus111
PMID: 22539601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
