---
reference_id: "PMID:33860637"
title: Breath-holding and tidal breathing nasal NO to screen children for Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
authors:
- Beydon N
- Tamalet A
- Escudier E
- Legendre M
- Thouvenin G
journal: Pediatr Pulmonol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ppul.25432
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Breath-holding and tidal breathing nasal NO to screen children for Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Beydon N, Tamalet A, Escudier E, Legendre M, Thouvenin G
**Journal:** Pediatr Pulmonol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ppul.25432](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.25432)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2021 Jul;56(7):2242-2249. doi: 10.1002/ppul.25432. Epub 2021
 Apr 26.

Breath-holding and tidal breathing nasal NO to screen children for Primary 
Ciliary Dyskinesia.

Beydon N(1)(2), Tamalet A(3), Escudier E(4), Legendre M(4), Thouvenin G(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)APHP, Unité Fonctionnelle de Physiologie-Explorations Fonctionnelles 
Respiratoires (EFR), Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France.
(2)INSERM U934, Centre de Recherche Saint Antoine, Paris, France.
(3)AP-HP, Centre de Référence des Maladies Respiratoires Rares, Service de 
pneumologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France.
(4)AP-HP Département de Génétique médicale, Sorbonne Université, Inserm UMR_S933 
Maladies génétiques d'expression pédiatrique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, 
France.

Nasal nitric oxide (nNO) measurement is recommended to screen for Primary 
Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) in subjects with suggestive history and symptoms. 
Clinical use of alternative methods (i.e., breath-hold [BH], tidal breathing 
[TB]) in children unable to perform the gold standard slow Exhalation against a 
Resistance (ER) method has not been sufficiently evaluated. We extracted 
retrospectively (2013-2019) 454 files (374 subjects) containing nNO results. 
Median [IQR] age at inclusion was 7.0 [4.7-11.0] years, 105 (28.1%) children 
were younger than 5 years. ER or BH methods were more frequently mastered by 
children older than 5 years compared to younger children (69.4% and 52.7% vs. 
21% and 5.6%, respectively; p < .0001), the latter succeeding only in TB 
measurement in 77.4% of cases. In 130 files with both ER and BH measurements 
(nNO-ER and nNO-BH), nNO-BH was 102 [96.2; 108.3]% that of nNO-ER. In 175 files 
including nNO-ER and nNO-TB measurements, nNO-TB was 64.4 [IQR: 53.7; 80.4]% 
that of nNO-ER with an excellent correlation between nNO values (r = .94 [95% CI 
0.91; 0.95]; p < .0001) and discordance in the interpretation of nNO results in 
16 (10.2%) cases. Final PCD diagnosis was similar in patients included before or 
after 5 years of age (confirmed 16 (15.2%) and 48 (17.8%); excluded 81 (77.1%) 
and 192 (71.4%), respectively; p = .32). In conclusion, reliable nNO-BH and 
nNO-ER results are interchangeable. Children tested with ER or with TB method 
have similar final PCD diagnosis. Alternative methods to measure nNO might be 
studied further for use in clinical practice.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.25432
PMID: 33860637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]