---
reference_id: "PMID:9222635"
title: Otological manifestations of primary ciliary dyskinesia.
authors:
- el-Sayed Y
- al-Sarhani A
- al-Essa AR
journal: Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2273.1997.00895.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Otological manifestations of primary ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** el-Sayed Y, al-Sarhani A, al-Essa AR
**Journal:** Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2273.1997.00895.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2273.1997.00895.x)

## Content

1. Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci. 1997 Jun;22(3):266-70. doi: 
10.1046/j.1365-2273.1997.00895.x.

Otological manifestations of primary ciliary dyskinesia.

el-Sayed Y(1), al-Sarhani A, al-Essa AR.

Author information:
(1)Otorhinolaryngology Department, King Abdel-ziz University Hospital, Riyadh, 
Saudi, Arabia.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia is a hereditary defect in the ultrastructure of 
cilia, leading to poor ciliary motility. The sinonasal and the bronchial 
manifestations of the disease are well documented; whereas its otological 
aspects have received less attention. In this report, we describe the clinical 
profile of 16 patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia laying particular 
emphasis on the otological manifestations. All children (11 patients) had 
bilateral otitis media with effusion. Of the five adults, three had 
tympanosclerosis; one had bilateral cholesteatoma; and one patient had bilateral 
keratosis obturans in combination with tympanosclerosis. Hearing improvement and 
a dry ear was achieved in all the children treated by tympanostomy tube 
insertion. The study suggests that otitis media is a prominent feature of this 
disorder. Most subjects suffer from protracted bilateral otitis media with 
effusion throughout childhood.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2273.1997.00895.x
PMID: 9222635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]