---
reference_id: "PMID:28220979"
title: More significance of TB-IGRA except for the diagnose of tuberculosis.
authors:
- Xu JC
- Li ZY
- Chen XN
- Shi CL
- Wu MY
- Chen H
- Zhu XY
- Song HF
- Wu MJ
- Xu P
journal: J Clin Lab Anal
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/jcla.22183
content_type: abstract_only
---

# More significance of TB-IGRA except for the diagnose of tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Xu JC, Li ZY, Chen XN, Shi CL, Wu MY, Chen H, Zhu XY, Song HF, Wu MJ, Xu P
**Journal:** J Clin Lab Anal (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcla.22183](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcla.22183)

## Content

1. J Clin Lab Anal. 2018 Jan;32(1):e22183. doi: 10.1002/jcla.22183. Epub 2017 Feb
 21.

More significance of TB-IGRA except for the diagnose of tuberculosis.

Xu JC(1)(2), Li ZY(1), Chen XN(1)(2), Shi CL(1), Wu MY(1)(2), Chen H(1)(2), Zhu 
XY(1)(2), Song HF(1)(2), Wu MJ(1)(2), Xu P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Fifth People's Hospital of Suzhou, Suzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of TB Prevention and Cure of Suzhou, Suzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: Tuberculosis (TB)-interferon gamma release assay (IGRA) test has the 
characteristics of short time, high specificity, and high sensitivity, but it 
lacks the correlation research between TB-IGRA test results and body's immune 
cells, disease progression and prognosis, which is explored in this study.
DESIGN: A retrospective study was carried out on positive TB-IGRA patients who 
were infected with TB and diagnosed at our hospital from January 2014 to June 
2015. The TB-IGRA, routine blood test, T-cell subgroup data were collected for 
statistical analysis.
RESULTS: TB-IGRA results were in positive proportion to the lymphocytes, CD4+ T 
cells and CD4+ CD28+ T cells, whereas negative to the Treg cells. Patient with 
unilateral pulmonary lesion had higher TB-IGRA than those with bilateral 
pulmonary lesions. After the stimulation of TB-specific antigen, the proportion 
of CD4+ IFN-γ+ and CD8+ IFN-γ+ T Tcells were both increased and the CD4+ IFN-γ+ 
T had positive correlation with the value of TB-IGRA.
CONCLUSIONS: IFN-γ was tested with TB-IGRA in patients with TB by the specific 
TB T cells and correlated with the lymphocytes, while the lymphocytes also 
closely related to the host's anti-TB immunity and disease outcome. Hence the 
result of TB-IGRA could reflect the specific anti-TB immunity ability of the 
host, disease progression and prognosis. This study further expands the 
application scope of TB-IGRA technology in the diagnosis of TB and lays a 
foundation for clinical practice to understand the immunity state of the 
patients with TB and the application of auxiliary clinical immunity regulators.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.22183
PMCID: PMC6817251
PMID: 28220979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]