---
reference_id: "PMID:29210716"
title: "Relationship Between Pityriasis Lichenoides and Mycosis Fungoides: A Clinicopathological, Immunohistochemical, and Molecular Study."
authors:
- Zaaroura H
- Sahar D
- Bick T
- Bergman R
journal: Am J Dermatopathol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000001057
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- "Mycosis Fungoides/genetics, pathology"
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/genetics, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship Between Pityriasis Lichenoides and Mycosis Fungoides: A Clinicopathological, Immunohistochemical, and Molecular Study.
**Authors:** Zaaroura H, Sahar D, Bick T, Bergman R
**Journal:** Am J Dermatopathol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/DAD.0000000000001057](https://doi.org/10.1097/DAD.0000000000001057)

## Content

1. Am J Dermatopathol. 2018 Jun;40(6):409-415. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000001057.

Relationship Between Pityriasis Lichenoides and Mycosis Fungoides: A
Clinicopathological, Immunohistochemical, and Molecular Study.

Zaaroura H(1), Sahar D(2), Bick T(3), Bergman R(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Dermatology.
(2)Hematology, and.
(3)Pathology, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel.
(4)Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Several cases of pityriasis lichenoides (PL) have been reported to
evolve into mycosis fungoides (MF).
OBJECTIVE: To elucidate clues to this progression.
METHODS: Fifty-eight patients with PL between 2000 and 2013 (follow-up: 3-16
years, average: 8.3).
RESULTS: A total of 3 (5.2%) of the 58 patients with PL developed MF after 3-11
years of prolonged clinical course. Papules and small plaques characterized PLs,
and patches and larger plaques subsequent MFs. A total of 35 of 41 (85%)
followed up non-MF associated patients with PL reported lasting complete
remissions. Histopathologically, apoptotic keratinocytes disappeared mostly or
completely in subsequent MFs. The presence of epidermotropism, folliculotropism,
and epidermal lymphocytic nuclear atypia in PLs was not predictive of MF. CD8
cells were the dominant intraepidermal lymphocytes in the 3 PLs but remained so
in only 1 subsequent MF. CD7 lymphocytes decreased substantially in 2 MFs, and
lymphocytic nuclear atypia increased markedly in 1. T-cell receptor gene
rearrangement studies demonstrated clonal populations in 1 of 2 studied PLs and
in all 3 subsequent MFs.
CONCLUSIONS: A few PLs may evolve into MF. Prolonged clinical course, appearance
of patches and larger plaques, markedly increased lymphocytic nuclear atypia,
marked diminution of apoptotic keratinocytes and CD7 and CD8 lymphocytes, and
clonal T-cell receptor gene rearrangement may serve as clues.

DOI: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000001057
PMID: 29210716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
