---
reference_id: "PMID:39739969"
title: MicroRNAs secreted by the parasitic nematode Brugia malayi disrupt lymphatic endothelial cell integrity.
authors:
- Johnson H
- Banakis S
- Chung M
- Ghedin E
- Voronin D
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0012803
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MicroRNAs secreted by the parasitic nematode Brugia malayi disrupt lymphatic endothelial cell integrity.
**Authors:** Johnson H, Banakis S, Chung M, Ghedin E, Voronin D
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0012803](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0012803)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2024 Dec 31;18(12):e0012803. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0012803. eCollection 2024 Dec.

MicroRNAs secreted by the parasitic nematode Brugia malayi disrupt lymphatic 
endothelial cell integrity.

Johnson H(1), Banakis S(1), Chung M(1), Ghedin E(1), Voronin D(1).

Author information:
(1)Systems Genomics Section, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, Division of 
Intramural Research, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Lymphatic filariasis (LF) is a neglected tropical disease affecting over 51 
million people in 72 endemic countries. Causative agents of LF are 
mosquito-borne parasitic nematodes Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, and 
Brugia timori. The adult parasites impact the integrity of lymphatic vessels and 
damage valves, leading to a remodeling of the lymphatic system and lymphatic 
dilation. Chronic infections can develop into severe clinical manifestations, 
primarily lymphedema, hydrocoele, and elephantiasis. Mechanistic studies on the 
underlying pathology due to the parasite are necessary to better manage human 
filariasis. Since parasite molecules, such as microRNAs (miRNAs), can be found 
in secreted extracellular vesicles (EVs) and are transported between parasite 
and host cells, we hypothesized that these could also play a role in the 
development of pathology in LF. In this study, we tested two B. malayi miRNAs 
previously detected in vitro in the culture media of microfilarial stages of 
worms. While one is Brugia-specific (bma-miR-5864) and the other 
nematode-specific (bma-miR-86), both miRNAs are secreted in high abundance. We 
first examined the in vitro response by transcriptomic profiling of human 
lymphatic endothelial cells to treatment with these miRNAs, which allowed us to 
identify genes involved in maintaining the integrity of the lymphatic 
endothelium. We then measured the effect of these miRNAs on the regulation of 
proteins necessary for cell integrity, demonstrating downregulation leading to a 
significant increase in the permeability of the endothelium monolayer. With this 
study we identify parasite miRNAs involved in undermining the integrity of 
endothelial cells, thus potentially contributing to the development of 
pathology. These findings could pave the way for a novel treatment strategy 
where the inhibition of parasite-secreted molecules could slow the progression 
of LF pathology. From a broader perspective, the miRNAs secreted by filarial 
parasites could potentially be used in the future for diagnosing and monitoring 
disease progression or treatment efficacy.

Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be 
freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise 
used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the 
Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0012803
PMCID: PMC11706539
PMID: 39739969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.