---
reference_id: "PMID:17510210"
title: Filamin B mutations cause chondrocyte defects in skeletal development.
authors:
- Lu J
- Lian G
- Lenkinski R
- De Grand A
- Vaid RR
- Bryce T
- Stasenko M
- Boskey A
- Walsh C
- Sheen V
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm114
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Filamin B mutations cause chondrocyte defects in skeletal development.
**Authors:** Lu J, Lian G, Lenkinski R, De Grand A, Vaid RR, Bryce T, Stasenko M, Boskey A, Walsh C, Sheen V
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddm114](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddm114)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Jul 15;16(14):1661-75. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm114. Epub 2007 
May 17.

Filamin B mutations cause chondrocyte defects in skeletal development.

Lu J(1), Lian G, Lenkinski R, De Grand A, Vaid RR, Bryce T, Stasenko M, Boskey 
A, Walsh C, Sheen V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Filamin B (FLNB) is a cytoplasmic protein that regulates the cytoskeletal 
network by cross-linking actin, linking cell membrane to the cytoskeleton and 
regulating intracellular signaling pathways responsible for skeletal development 
(Stossel, T.P., Condeelis, J., Cooley, L., Hartwig, J.H., Noegel, A., 
Schleicher, M. and Shapiro, S.S. (2001) Filamins as integrators of cell 
mechanics and signalling. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2, 138-145). Mutations in 
FLNB cause human skeletal disorders [boomerang dysplasia, spondylocarpotarsal 
(SCT), Larsen, and atelosteogenesis I/III syndromes], which are characterized by 
disrupted vertebral segmentation, joint formation and endochondral ossification 
[Krakow, D., Robertson, S.P., King, L.M., Morgan, T., Sebald, E.T., Bertolotto, 
C., Wachsmann-Hogiu, S., Acuna, D., Shapiro, S.S., Takafuta, T. et al. (2004) 
Mutations in the gene encoding filamin B disrupt vertebral segmentation, joint 
formation and skeletogenesis. Nat. Genet., 36, 405-410; Bicknell, L.S., Morgan, 
T., Bonafe, L., Wessels, M.W., Bialer, M.G., Willems, P.J., Cohn, D.H., Krakow, 
D. and Robertson, S.P. (2005) Mutations in FLNB cause boomerang dysplasia. J. 
Med. Genet., 42, e43]. Here we show that Flnb deficient mice have shortened 
distal limbs with small body size, and develop fusion of the ribs and vertebrae, 
abnormal spinal curvatures, and dysmorphic facial/calvarial bones, similar to 
the human phenotype. Characterization of the mutant mice demonstrated increased 
apoptosis along the bone periphery of the distal appendages, consistent with 
reduced bone width. No changes in the initial proliferative rate of chondrocytes 
were observed, but the progressive differentiation of chondrocyte precursors was 
impaired, consistent with reduced bone length. The extracellular matrix appeared 
disrupted and phosphorylated beta1-integrin (a collagen receptor and Flnb 
binding partner) expression was diminished in the mutant growth plate. Like 
integrin-deficient chondrocytes, adhesion to the ECM was decreased in Flnb(-/-) 
chondrocytes, and inhibition of beta1-integrin in these cells led to further 
impairments in cell spreading. These data suggest that disruption of the 
ECM-beta1-integrin-Flnb pathway contributes to defects in vertebral and distal 
limb development, similar to those seen in the human autosomal recessive SCT due 
to Flnb mutations.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm114
PMID: 17510210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]