---
reference_id: "PMID:31823134"
title: A novel FOXL2 mutation in two infertile patients with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome.
authors:
- Hu J
- Ke H
- Luo W
- Yang Y
- Liu H
- Li G
- Qin Y
- Ma J
- Zhao S
journal: J Assist Reprod Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s10815-019-01651-2
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Asian People/genetics
- "Blepharophimosis/complications, genetics"
- Case-Control Studies
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Forkhead Box Protein L2/genetics
- "Infertility, Female/etiology, pathology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Skin Abnormalities/complications, genetics"
- "Urogenital Abnormalities/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel FOXL2 mutation in two infertile patients with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome.
**Authors:** Hu J, Ke H, Luo W, Yang Y, Liu H, Li G, Qin Y, Ma J, Zhao S
**Journal:** J Assist Reprod Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10815-019-01651-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10815-019-01651-2)

## Content

1. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2020 Jan;37(1):223-229. doi:
10.1007/s10815-019-01651-2.  Epub 2019 Dec 10.

A novel FOXL2 mutation in two infertile patients with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Hu J(1), Ke H(1), Luo W(1), Yang Y(1), Liu H(1), Li G(1), Qin Y(1), Ma J(1),
Zhao S(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, National Research Center for Assisted
Reproductive Technology and Reproductive Genetics, The Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Endocrinology, Ministry of Education, Shandong University, 44
Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, 250012, Shandong, China.
(2)Center for Reproductive Medicine, National Research Center for Assisted
Reproductive Technology and Reproductive Genetics, The Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Endocrinology, Ministry of Education, Shandong University, 44
Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, 250012, Shandong, China. shidouzhao@sdu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a
rare, autosomal dominant disease. There are two clinical types of BPES: type I
patients have eyelid abnormalities accompanied by infertility in affected
females, while type II patients only display eyelid malformations. Previous
studies have reported that the forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) gene mutations cause
BPES.
PURPOSE: To identify plausible FOXL2 mutation in a Chinese family with BPES and
infertility METHODS: Mutational screening of FOXL2 was performed in the affected
members and 223 controls. Functional characterization of the novel mutation
identified was carried out in vitro by luciferase reporter assay and subcellular
localization experiment.
RESULTS: A novel heterozygous mutation c.188 T > A (p.I63N) in FOXL2 was
identified in two BPES patients in this family. The mutation abolished the
transcriptional repression of FOXL2 on the promoters of CYP19A1 and CCND2 genes,
as shown by luciferase reporter assays. However, no dominant-negative effect was
observed for the mutation, and it did not impact FOXL2 protein nuclear
localization and distribution.
CONCLUSIONS: The mutation c.188 T > A (p.I63N) in FOXL2 might be causative for
BPES and infertility in this family and further amplified the spectrum of FOXL2
mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s10815-019-01651-2
PMCID: PMC7000634
PMID: 31823134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests.
