---
reference_id: "PMID:31012139"
title: "POEMS Syndrome: 2019 Update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and management."
authors:
- Dispenzieri A
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.25495
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Allografts
- Bortezomib/therapeutic use
- "Castleman Disease/blood, diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "POEMS Syndrome/blood, diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Stem Cell Transplantation
- Thalidomide/therapeutic use
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# POEMS Syndrome: 2019 Update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and management.
**Authors:** Dispenzieri A
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.25495](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.25495)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 2019 Jul;94(7):812-827. doi: 10.1002/ajh.25495. Epub 2019 May
23.

POEMS Syndrome: 2019 Update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and management.

Dispenzieri A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Division of Clinical Chemistry, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota.

DISEASE OVERVIEW: Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein, skin 
changes (POEMS) syndrome is a paraneoplastic syndrome due to an underlying 
plasma cell neoplasm. The major criteria for the syndrome are 
polyradiculoneuropathy, clonal plasma cell disorder (PCD), sclerotic bone 
lesions, elevated vascular endothelial growth factor, and the presence of 
Castleman disease. Minor features include organomegaly, endocrinopathy, 
characteristic skin changes, papilledema, extravascular volume overload, and 
thrombocytosis. Diagnoses are often delayed because the syndrome is rare and can 
be mistaken for other neurologic disorders, most commonly chronic inflammatory 
demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy. POEMS syndrome should be distinguished 
from the Castleman disease variant of POEMS syndrome, which has no clonal PCD 
and typically little to no peripheral neuropathy but has several of the minor 
diagnostic criteria for POEMS syndrome.
DIAGNOSIS: The diagnosis of POEMS syndrome is made with three of the major 
criteria, two of which must include polyradiculoneuropathy and clonal PCD, and 
at least one of the minor criteria.
RISK STRATIFICATION: Because the pathogenesis of the syndrome is not well 
understood, risk stratification is limited to clinical phenotype rather than 
specific molecular markers. Risk factors include low serum albumin, age, pleural 
effusion, pulmonary hypertension, and reduced eGFR.
RISK-ADAPTED THERAPY: For those patients with a dominant sclerotic plasmacytoma, 
first line therapy is irradiation. Patients with diffuse sclerotic lesions or 
disseminated bone marrow involvement and for those who have progression of their 
disease 3 to 6 months after completing radiation therapy should receive systemic 
therapy. Corticosteroids are temporizing, but alkylators are the mainstay of 
treatment, either in the form of low dose conventional therapy or high dose with 
stem cell transplantation. Lenalidomide shows promise with manageable toxicity. 
Thalidomide and bortezomib also have activity, but their benefit needs to be 
weighed against their risk of exacerbating the peripheral neuropathy. Prompt 
recognition and institution of both supportive care measures and therapy 
directed against the plasma cell result in the best outcomes.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.25495
PMID: 31012139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]