---
reference_id: "PMID:21391237"
title: TMEM43 mutations in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy-related myopathy.
authors:
- Liang WC
- Mitsuhashi H
- Keduka E
- Nonaka I
- Noguchi S
- Nishino I
- Hayashi YK
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/ana.22338
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Animals
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- "Cell Nucleus/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cyclic AMP Response Element-Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- Electroporation/methods
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Humans
- Immunoprecipitation/methods
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/metabolism
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, pathology"
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss/genetics, pathology"
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed/methods"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Transfection/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TMEM43 mutations in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy-related myopathy.
**Authors:** Liang WC, Mitsuhashi H, Keduka E, Nonaka I, Noguchi S, Nishino I, Hayashi YK
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.22338](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.22338)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2011 Jun;69(6):1005-13. doi: 10.1002/ana.22338. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

TMEM43 mutations in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy-related myopathy.

Liang WC(1), Mitsuhashi H, Keduka E, Nonaka I, Noguchi S, Nishino I, Hayashi YK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is a genetically 
heterogeneous muscular disease that presents with muscular dystrophy, joint 
contractures, and cardiomyopathy with conduction defects. Mutations in several 
nuclear envelope protein genes have been associated with EDMD in less than half 
of patients, implying the existence of other causative and modifier genes. We 
therefore analyzed TMEM43, which encodes LUMA, a newly identified nuclear 
membrane protein and also a binding partner of emerin and lamins, to investigate 
whether LUMA may contribute to the pathomechanism of EDMD-related myopathy.
METHODS: Forty-one patients with EDMD-related myopathy were enrolled. In vitro 
and in vivo transfection analyses were performed to assay the binding partners 
and oligomerization of mutant LUMA.
RESULTS: We identified heterozygous missense mutations, p.Glu85Lys and 
p.Ile91Val in TMEM43, in 2 EDMD-related myopathy patients. Reduced nuclear 
staining of LUMA was observed in the muscle from the patient with p.Glu85Lys 
mutation. By in vitro transfection analysis, p.Glu85Lys mutant LUMA resulted to 
failure in oligomerization, a process that may be important for protein complex 
formation on nuclear membrane. Furthermore, we demonstrated for the first time 
that LUMA can interact with another nuclear membrane protein, SUN2, in addition 
to emerin. Cells expressing mutant LUMA revealed reduced nuclear staining with 
or without aggregates of emerin and SUN2 together with a higher proportion of 
abnormally shaped nuclei. In vivo expression of mutant LUMA by electroporation 
in mouse tibialis anterior muscles likewise demonstrated the decreased staining 
of emerin and SUN2 on myonuclei.
INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that mutant LUMAs may be associated with 
EDMD-related myopathy.

Copyright © 2011 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.22338
PMID: 21391237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]