---
reference_id: "PMID:38072392"
title: Situs Ambiguus Is Associated With Adverse Clinical Outcomes in Children With Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
authors:
- Kaspy KR
- Dell SD
- Davis SD
- Ferkol TW
- Rosenfeld M
- Sagel SD
- Milla C
- Olivier KN
- Barber AT
- Wee W
- Lin FC
- Li L
- Rampakakis E
- Zariwala MA
- Knowles MR
- Leigh MW
- Shapiro AJ
journal: Chest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2023.12.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Situs Ambiguus Is Associated With Adverse Clinical Outcomes in Children With Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Kaspy KR, Dell SD, Davis SD, Ferkol TW, Rosenfeld M, Sagel SD, Milla C, Olivier KN, Barber AT, Wee W, Lin FC, Li L, Rampakakis E, Zariwala MA, Knowles MR, Leigh MW, Shapiro AJ
**Journal:** Chest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chest.2023.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2023.12.005)

## Content

1. Chest. 2024 May;165(5):1070-1081. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2023.12.005. Epub 2023 
Dec 9.

Situs Ambiguus Is Associated With Adverse Clinical Outcomes in Children With 
Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.

Kaspy KR(1), Dell SD(2), Davis SD(3), Ferkol TW(3), Rosenfeld M(4), Sagel SD(5), 
Milla C(6), Olivier KN(7), Barber AT(8), Wee W(9), Lin FC(10), Li L(10), 
Rampakakis E(1), Zariwala MA(11), Knowles MR(7), Leigh MW(3), Shapiro AJ(12).

Author information:
(1)McGill University Health Centre Research Institute, Montreal Children's 
Hospital, Montreal, QC.
(2)BC Children's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Marsico Lung Institute, University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Research Institute, University 
of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
CO.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Marsico Lung Institute, University of North Carolina 
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA.
(9)Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(10)Department of Biostatistics, Gillings School of Global Public Health, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.
(11)Department of Pathology/Lab Medicine, Marsico Lung Institute, University of 
North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC.
(12)McGill University Health Centre Research Institute, Montreal Children's 
Hospital, Montreal, QC. Electronic address: adam.shapiro@muhc.mcgill.ca.

BACKGROUND: Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare disorder of motile cilia 
associated with situs abnormalities. At least 12% of patients with PCD have 
situs ambiguus (SA), including organ laterality defects falling outside normal 
arrangement (situs solitus [SS]) or mirror image inversion (situs inversus 
totalis [SIT]).
RESEARCH QUESTION: Do patients with PCD and SA achieve worse clinical outcomes 
compared with those with SS or SIT?
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: This cross-sectional, multicenter study evaluated 
participants aged 21 years or younger with PCD. Participants were classified as 
having SA, including heterotaxy, or not having SA (SS or SIT). Markers of 
disease severity were compared between situs groups, adjusting for age at 
enrollment and severe CCDC39 or CCDC40 genotype, using generalized linear models 
and logistic and Poisson regression.
RESULTS: In 397 participants with PCD (mean age, 8.4 years; range, 0.1-21), 42 
patients were classified as having SA, including 16 patients (38%) with complex 
cardiovascular malformations or atrial isomerism, 13 patients (31%) with simple 
CVM, and 13 patients (31%) without cardiovascular malformations. Of these, 15 
patients (36%) underwent cardiac surgery, 24 patients (57%) showed an anatomic 
spleen abnormality, and seven patients (17%) showed both. The remaining 355 
participants did not have SA, including 152 with SIT and 203 with SS. Overall, 
70 participants (17%) harbored the severe CCDC39 or CCDC40 genotype. Compared 
with participants without SA, those with SA showed lower median BMI z scores 
(P = .03), lower FVC z scores (P = .01), and more hospitalizations and IV 
antibiotic courses for acute respiratory infections during the 5 years before 
enrollment (P < .01). Participants with cardiovascular malformations requiring 
surgery or with anatomic spleen abnormalities showed lower median BMI z scores 
and more hospitalizations and IV therapies for respiratory illnesses compared 
with participants without SA.
INTERPRETATION: Children with PCD and SA achieve worse nutritional and pulmonary 
outcomes with more hospitalizations for acute respiratory illnesses than those 
with SS or SIT combined. Poor nutrition and increased hospitalizations for 
respiratory infections in participants with SA and PCD are associated with 
cardiovascular malformations requiring cardiac surgery, splenic anomalies, or 
both.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; Nos.: NCT02389049 and NCT00323167; URL: www.
CLINICALTRIALS: gov.

Copyright © 2023 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2023.12.005
PMCID: PMC11110675
PMID: 38072392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial/Nonfinancial Disclosures The authors 
have reported to CHEST the following: S. D. Dell, S. D. Davis, T. W. F., M. R., 
S. D. S., C. M., K. N. O., M. A. Z., M. R. K., M. W. L., A. J. S. report 
financial support was provided by National Institutes of Health. S. D. Davis, T. 
W. F., M. W. L., A. J. S. report a relationship with The PCD Foundation that 
includes: board membership. A. J. S. reports a relationship with The PCD 
Foundation that includes: employment. S. D. Davis receives grant support from 
ReCode Therapeutics. A. J. S. receives grant support from The Chest Foundation. 
T. W. F. served as a consultant for Translate Bio and Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals. 
T. W. F. and A. J. S. are advisory board members for Parion Sciences and ReCode 
Therapeutics. None declared (K. R. K., A. T. B., W. W., F.-C. L., L. L., E. R.).