---
reference_id: "PMID:15566352"
title: Bleeding and bruising in patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and other collagen vascular disorders.
authors:
- De Paepe A
- Malfait F
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2004.05220.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bleeding and bruising in patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and other collagen vascular disorders.
**Authors:** De Paepe A, Malfait F
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2141.2004.05220.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2141.2004.05220.x)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 2004 Dec;127(5):491-500. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2004.05220.x.

Bleeding and bruising in patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and other collagen 
vascular disorders.

De Paepe A(1), Malfait F.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, 
B-9000 Ghent, Belgium. anne.depaepe@ugent.be

Easy bruising and bleeding are not only characteristic manifestations of 
clotting and platelet disorders, they are also prominent features in some 
heritable collagen disorders, such as the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS). The EDS 
comprise a heterogeneous group of connective tissue diseases sharing clinical 
manifestations in skin, ligaments and joints, blood vessels and internal organs. 
Most EDS subtypes are caused by mutations in genes encoding the fibrillar 
collagens type I, III and V, or in genes coding for enzymes involved in the 
post-translational modification of these collagens. Easy bruising is, to a 
variable degree, present in all subtypes of EDS, and is because of fragility of 
the capillaries and the perivascular connective tissues. Vascular fragility 
affecting medium-sized and large arteries and veins is typically observed in the 
vascular subtype of EDS, caused by a molecular defect in collagen type III, an 
important constituent of blood vessel walls and hollow organs. Extensive 
bruising, spontaneous arterial rupture, leading to severe internal bleeding or 
premature death, and rupture of hollow organs, such as the intestine or the 
gravid uterus are predominant features of this subtype. Haematological studies 
including evaluation of clotting factors, platelet aggregation and bleeding time 
are usually normal in patients with EDS, except for the Hess test (Rumple-Leede 
test), which may be abnormal, indicating capillary fragility. In some forms of 
EDS confirmation of the clinical diagnosis and subtype is possible with 
biochemical and molecular studies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2004.05220.x
PMID: 15566352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]