---
reference_id: "PMID:35759636"
title: "Intermediate Uveitis: A Review."
authors:
- Teo AYT
- Betzler BK
- Hua KLQ
- Chen EJ
- Gupta V
- Agrawal R
journal: Ocul Immunol Inflamm
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/09273948.2022.2070503
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intermediate Uveitis: A Review.
**Authors:** Teo AYT, Betzler BK, Hua KLQ, Chen EJ, Gupta V, Agrawal R
**Journal:** Ocul Immunol Inflamm (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09273948.2022.2070503](https://doi.org/10.1080/09273948.2022.2070503)

## Content

1. Ocul Immunol Inflamm. 2023 Jul;31(5):1041-1060. doi: 
10.1080/09273948.2022.2070503. Epub 2022 Jun 27.

Intermediate Uveitis: A Review.

Teo AYT(1), Betzler BK(1), Hua KLQ(1), Chen EJ(2), Gupta V(3), Agrawal 
R(1)(2)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(2)National Healthcare Group Eye Institute, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore.
(3)Advanced Eye Centre, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India.
(4)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Singapore.
(5)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore.
(6)Duke NUS Medical School, Singapore.

PURPOSE: This review aims to provide an update on the clinical presentation, 
etiologies, complications, and treatment options in intermediate uveitis (IU).
METHODS: Narrative literature review.
RESULTS: IU affects all age groups with no clear gender predominance and has 
varied etiologies including systemic illnesses and infectious diseases, or pars 
planitis. In some instances, IU may be the sole presentation of an underlying 
associated condition or disease. Management of IU and its complications include 
administration of corticosteroids, antimetabolites, T-cell inhibitors, and/or 
biologics, along with surgical interventions, with varying degrees of 
effectiveness across literature. In particular, increasing evidence of the 
safety and efficacy of immunomodulatory agents and biologics has seen greater 
adoption of these therapies in clinical practice.
CONCLUSIONS: IU is an anatomical description of uveitis, involving intraocular 
inflammation of the vitreous, peripheral retinal vasculature, and pars plana. 
Various treatment options for intermediate uveitis are currently used in 
practice.

DOI: 10.1080/09273948.2022.2070503
PMID: 35759636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]