---
reference_id: "PMID:29893226"
title: The pathogenesis of psoriatic arthritis.
authors:
- Veale DJ
- Fearon U
journal: Lancet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30830-4
keywords:
- "Arthritis, Psoriatic/etiology, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pathogenesis of psoriatic arthritis.
**Authors:** Veale DJ, Fearon U
**Journal:** Lancet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30830-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30830-4)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2018 Jun 2;391(10136):2273-2284. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30830-4. 
Epub 2018 Jun 1.

The pathogenesis of psoriatic arthritis.

Veale DJ(1), Fearon U(2).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology EULAR Centre of Excellence, St Vincent's University Hospital and 
University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. Electronic address: 
douglas.veale@ucd.ie.
(2)Rheumatology EULAR Centre of Excellence, St Vincent's University Hospital and 
University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; Department of Molecular 
Rheumatology, Trinity Biomedical Science Institute, Trinity College Dublin, 
Dublin, Ireland.

Psoriatic arthritis is a chronic, immune-mediated, inflammatory arthropathy that 
presents with inflammation of the joints and entheses, including those of the 
axial skeleton, and is associated with increased mortality from cardiovascular 
disease. Diagnosis is primarily based on clinical phenotype because of the 
diversity of the associated features, which can include skin and nail disease, 
dactylitis, uveitis, and osteitis. Improved understanding of the pathogenesis of 
psoriatic arthritis has led to the development of effective biologics and 
small-molecular drugs targeting specific cytokines and signalling pathways, 
which can prevent disease progression and improve quality of life. However, at 
least 40% of patients with psoriatic arthritis have only a partial response or 
fail to respond to such treatments. Cytokine inhibitors, mainly those specific 
for tumour necrosis factor and, more recently, the interleukin 23-T-helper-17 
cell pathway, have been highly successful in the treatment of disease 
manifestations in several different tissues, although targeting the interleukin 
23-T-helper-17 cell pathway might be more effective in psoriasis than in 
arthritis. However, the precise mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of 
psoriatic arthritis-which include genetics, environmental factors, and 
immune-mediated inflammation-are complex, and the relationship between disease 
of the joint and that of other domains is poorly understood. Improving our 
understanding of psoriatic arthritis pathogenesis could help to establish 
validated biomarkers for diagnosis, predict therapeutic response and remission, 
develop precision medicines, and predict which patients will respond to which 
therapy. We discuss advances in pathogenetic translational research that could 
inform these issues.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30830-4
PMID: 29893226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]