---
reference_id: "PMID:38232990"
title: "The evolution of in vitro models of lung fibrosis: promising prospects for drug discovery."
authors:
- Kolanko E
- Cargnoni A
- Papait A
- Silini AR
- Czekaj P
- Parolini O
journal: Eur Respir Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1183/16000617.0127-2023
keywords:
- Humans
- Endothelial Cells/pathology
- Disease Progression
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial"
- Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis/pathology
- Drug Discovery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The evolution of in vitro models of lung fibrosis: promising prospects for drug discovery.
**Authors:** Kolanko E, Cargnoni A, Papait A, Silini AR, Czekaj P, Parolini O
**Journal:** Eur Respir Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1183/16000617.0127-2023](https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0127-2023)

## Content

1. Eur Respir Rev. 2024 Jan 17;33(171):230127. doi: 10.1183/16000617.0127-2023.
Print 2024 Jan 31.

The evolution of in vitro models of lung fibrosis: promising prospects for drug
discovery.

Kolanko E(1)(2), Cargnoni A(3)(2), Papait A(4)(5), Silini AR(3), Czekaj P(1),
Parolini O(6)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cytophysiology, Katowice Medical University of Silesia in
Katowice, Katowice, Poland.
(2)These authors contributed equally.
(3)Fondazione Poliambulanza Istituto Ospedaliero, Centro di Ricerca E. Menni,
Brescia, Italy.
(4)Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Department Life Sciences and Public
Health, Roma, Italy.
(5)Fondazione Policlinico Universitario "A. Gemelli" IRCCS, Roma, Italy.
(6)Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Department Life Sciences and Public
Health, Roma, Italy ornella.parolini@unicatt.it.

Lung fibrosis is a complex process, with unknown underlying mechanisms,
involving various triggers, diseases and stimuli. Different cell types
(epithelial cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts and macrophages) interact
dynamically through multiple signalling pathways, including
biochemical/molecular and mechanical signals, such as stiffness, affecting cell
function and differentiation. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is the most
common fibrosing interstitial lung disease (fILD), characterised by a notably
high mortality. Unfortunately, effective treatments for advanced fILD, and
especially IPF and non-IPF progressive fibrosing phenotype ILD, are still
lacking. The development of pharmacological therapies faces challenges due to
limited knowledge of fibrosis pathogenesis and the absence of pre-clinical
models accurately representing the complex features of the disease. To address
these challenges, new model systems have been developed to enhance the
translatability of preclinical drug testing and bridge the gap to human clinical
trials. The use of two- and three-dimensional in vitro cultures derived from
healthy or diseased individuals allows for a better understanding of the
underlying mechanisms responsible for lung fibrosis. Additionally, microfluidics
systems, which replicate the respiratory system's physiology ex vivo, offer
promising opportunities for the development of effective therapies, especially
for IPF.

Copyright ©The authors 2024.

DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0127-2023
PMCID: PMC10792439
PMID: 38232990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: All authors have nothing
to disclose.
