---
reference_id: "PMID:30637988"
title: "Phenotypic spectrum of NDE1-related disorders: from microlissencephaly to microhydranencephaly."
authors:
- Abdel-Hamid MS
- El-Dessouky SH
- Ateya MI
- Gaafar HM
- Abdel-Salam GMH
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61035
keywords:
- Adult
- Chromosome Mapping
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Hydranencephaly/diagnosis, genetics"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Microcephaly/diagnosis, genetics"
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic spectrum of NDE1-related disorders: from microlissencephaly to microhydranencephaly.
**Authors:** Abdel-Hamid MS, El-Dessouky SH, Ateya MI, Gaafar HM, Abdel-Salam GMH
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61035](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61035)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Mar;179(3):494-497. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61035. Epub
2019  Jan 13.

Phenotypic spectrum of NDE1-related disorders: from microlissencephaly to
microhydranencephaly.

Abdel-Hamid MS(1), El-Dessouky SH(2), Ateya MI(3), Gaafar HM(3), Abdel-Salam
GMH(4).

Author information:
(1)Medical Molecular Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome Research
Division, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Prenatal Diagnosis and Fetal Medicine Department, Human Genetics and Genome
Research Division, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Fetal Medicine Unit, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(4)Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome Research Division,
National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.

Biallelic variants in the NDE1 gene have been shown to occur in extreme
microcephaly. Most of the patients displayed microlissencephaly but one with
microhydranencephaly. We report on three sibs in which the brain MRI and CT
scans demonstrated variable degree of reduced volume of cerebral hemispheres and
ventriculomegaly. Further, they had agenesis of corpus callosum, cerebellar, and
brainstem hypoplasia. Fetal ultrasound at 32 weeks' gestation of the third sib
revealed severe micrencephaly with extensive hydranencephaly and an anomaly
consistent with non cleaved (fused) thalami. Because of the fused thalami, the
STIL gene was targeted initially but showed negative results. His postnatal MRI
showed that the cerebral hemispheres are markedly reduced in size (with no
definite frontal, parietal, or occipital lobes) and replaced by a large sac
filled with CSF. An intact falx cerebri was identified. This extensive
hydarencephaly led us to consider the NDE1 and to identify a novel homozygous
nonsense variant (c.54G>A, p.W18*). The variability of the degree of brain
malformations and the apparent fusion of the thalami were illusive and delayed
the recognition of the genetic etiology. Our results provide the first antenatal
description of this rare syndrome. Further, we expand the genetic architecture
and the neuroradiologic phenotype of NDE1-related disorders.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61035
PMID: 30637988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
