---
reference_id: "PMID:39233127"
title: "Topographical metal burden correlates with brain atrophy and clinical severity in Wilson's disease."
authors:
- Fan SP
- Chen YF
- Li CH
- Kuo YC
- Lee NC
- Chien YH
- Hwu WL
- Tseng TC
- Su TH
- Hsu CT
- Chen HL
- Lin CH
- Ni YH
journal: Neuroimage
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120829
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/pathology, diagnostic imaging"
- Female
- Male
- Adult
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Atrophy/pathology
- Copper/blood
- Young Adult
- "Iron/metabolism, blood"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Adolescent
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topographical metal burden correlates with brain atrophy and clinical severity in Wilson's disease.
**Authors:** Fan SP, Chen YF, Li CH, Kuo YC, Lee NC, Chien YH, Hwu WL, Tseng TC, Su TH, Hsu CT, Chen HL, Lin CH, Ni YH
**Journal:** Neuroimage (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120829](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120829)

## Content

1. Neuroimage. 2024 Oct 1;299:120829. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120829. Epub
 2024 Sep 2.

Topographical metal burden correlates with brain atrophy and clinical severity
in Wilson's disease.

Fan SP(1), Chen YF(2), Li CH(3), Kuo YC(3), Lee NC(4), Chien YH(4), Hwu WL(4),
Tseng TC(5), Su TH(6), Hsu CT(7), Chen HL(8), Lin CH(9), Ni YH(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Medical Imaging, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan;
Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital Hsinchu Branch,
Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, No. 7,
Chung-Shan South Road, Taipei, 100, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, No. 7,
Chung-Shan South Road, Taipei, 100, Taiwan; Department of Pediatrics, National
Taiwan University Hospital Hsinchu Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, No. 7,
Chung-Shan South Road, Taipei, 100, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan;
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Biomedical
Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
chlin@ntu.edu.tw.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, No. 7,
Chung-Shan South Road, Taipei, 100, Taiwan. Electronic address: yhni@ntu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM) is a post-processing
technique that creates brain susceptibility maps reflecting metal burden through
tissue magnetic susceptibility. We assessed topographic differences in magnetic
susceptibility between participants with and without Wilson's disease (WD),
correlating these findings with clinical severity, brain volume, and biofluid
copper and iron indices.
METHODS: A total of 43 patients with WD and 20 unaffected controls, were
recruited. QSM images were derived from a 3T MRI scanner. Clinical severity was
defined using the minimal Unified Wilson's Disease Rating Scale (M-UWDRS) and
Montreal Cognitive Assessment scoring. Differences in magnetic susceptibilities
between groups were evaluated using general linear regression models, adjusting
for age and sex. Correlations between the susceptibilities and clinical scores
were analyzed using Spearman's method.
RESULTS: In age- and sex-adjusted analyses, magnetic susceptibility values were
increased in WD patients compared with controls, including caudate nucleus,
putamen, globus pallidus, and substantia nigra (all p < 0.01). Putaminal
susceptibility was greater with an initial neuropsychiatric presentation (n =
25) than with initial hepatic dysfunction (n = 18; p = 0.04). Susceptibility
changes correlated negatively with regional brain volume in almost all
topographic regions. Serum ferritin, but not serum copper or ceruloplasmin,
correlated positively with magnetic susceptibility level in the caudate nucleus
(p = 0.04), putamen (p = 0.04) and the hippocampus (p = 0.03). The dominance of
magnetic susceptibility in cortical over subcortical regions correlated with
M-UWDRS scores (p < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: The magnetic susceptibility changes could serve as a surrogate
marker for patients with WD.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120829
PMID: 39233127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.
