---
reference_id: "PMID:35191092"
title: EGFR Signaling Is Required for Maintaining Adult Cartilage Homeostasis and Attenuating Osteoarthritis Progression.
authors:
- Wei Y
- Ma X
- Sun H
- Gui T
- Li J
- Yao L
- Zhong L
- Yu W
- Han B
- Nelson CL
- Han L
- Beier F
- Enomoto-Iwamoto M
- Ahn J
- Qin L
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4531
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cartilage, Articular/metabolism, pathology"
- "Chondrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- ErbB Receptors/metabolism
- Female
- Homeostasis
- Male
- Mice
- "Osteoarthritis/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EGFR Signaling Is Required for Maintaining Adult Cartilage Homeostasis and Attenuating Osteoarthritis Progression.
**Authors:** Wei Y, Ma X, Sun H, Gui T, Li J, Yao L, Zhong L, Yu W, Han B, Nelson CL, Han L, Beier F, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Ahn J, Qin L
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.4531](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.4531)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2022 May;37(5):1012-1023. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4531. Epub 2022 
Mar 9.

EGFR Signaling Is Required for Maintaining Adult Cartilage Homeostasis and 
Attenuating Osteoarthritis Progression.

Wei Y(1)(2), Ma X(1)(3), Sun H(1), Gui T(1), Li J(1), Yao L(1), Zhong L(1), Yu 
W(1)(2), Han B(4), Nelson CL(1), Han L(4), Beier F(5), Enomoto-Iwamoto M(6), Ahn 
J(1)(7), Qin L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Departent of Orthopaedics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of 
Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(4)School of Biomedical Engineering, Science and Health Systems, Drexel 
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, 
London, Canada.
(6)Department of Orthopaedics, School of Medicine, University of Maryland, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(7)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA.

The uppermost superficial zone of articular cartilage is the first line of 
defense against the initiation of osteoarthritis (OA). We previously used 
Col2-Cre to demonstrate that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a tyrosine 
kinase receptor, plays an essential role in maintaining superficial chondrocytes 
during articular cartilage development. Here, we showed that EGFR activity in 
the articular cartilage decreased as mice age. In mouse and human OA samples, 
EGFR activity was initially reduced at the superficial layer and then resurged 
in cell clusters within the middle and deep zone in late OA. To investigate the 
role of EGFR signaling in postnatal and adult cartilage, we constructed an 
inducible mouse model with cartilage-specific EGFR inactivation (Aggrecan-CreER 
EgfrWa5/flox , Egfr iCKO). EdU incorporation revealed that postnatal Egfr iCKO 
mice contained fewer slow-cycling cells than controls. EGFR deficiency induced 
at 3 months of age reduced cartilage thickness and diminished superficial 
chondrocytes, in parallel to alterations in lubricin production, cell 
proliferation, and survival. Furthermore, male Egfr iCKO mice developed much 
more severe OA phenotypes, including cartilage erosion, subchondral bone plate 
thickening, cartilage degeneration at the lateral site, and mechanical 
allodynia, after receiving destabilization of the medial meniscus (DMM) surgery. 
Similar OA phenotypes were also observed in female iCKO mice. Moreover, 
tamoxifen injections of iCKO mice at 1 month post-surgery accelerated OA 
development 2 months later. In summary, our data demonstrated that chondrogenic 
EGFR signaling maintains postnatal slow-cycling cells and plays a critical role 
in adult cartilage homeostasis and OA progression. © 2022 American Society for 
Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR).

© 2022 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR).

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4531
PMCID: PMC9098673
PMID: 35191092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.