---
reference_id: "PMID:15965026"
title: Genomic deletion of a long-range bone enhancer misregulates sclerostin in Van Buchem disease.
authors:
- Loots GG
- Kneissel M
- Keller H
- Baptist M
- Chang J
- Collette NM
- Ovcharenko D
- Plajzer-Frick I
- Rubin EM
journal: Genome Res
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1101/gr.3437105
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic deletion of a long-range bone enhancer misregulates sclerostin in Van Buchem disease.
**Authors:** Loots GG, Kneissel M, Keller H, Baptist M, Chang J, Collette NM, Ovcharenko D, Plajzer-Frick I, Rubin EM
**Journal:** Genome Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gr.3437105](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.3437105)

## Content

1. Genome Res. 2005 Jul;15(7):928-35. doi: 10.1101/gr.3437105. Epub 2005 Jun 17.

Genomic deletion of a long-range bone enhancer misregulates sclerostin in Van 
Buchem disease.

Loots GG(1), Kneissel M, Keller H, Baptist M, Chang J, Collette NM, Ovcharenko 
D, Plajzer-Frick I, Rubin EM.

Author information:
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, 
California 94720, USA. loots1@llnl.gov

Mutations in distant regulatory elements can have a negative impact on human 
development and health, yet because of the difficulty of detecting these 
critical sequences, we predominantly focus on coding sequences for diagnostic 
purposes. We have undertaken a comparative sequence-based approach to 
characterize a large noncoding region deleted in patients affected by Van Buchem 
(VB) disease, a severe sclerosing bone dysplasia. Using BAC recombination and 
transgenesis, we characterized the expression of human sclerostin (SOST) from 
normal (SOST(wt)) or Van Buchem (SOST(vbDelta) alleles. Only the SOST(wt) allele 
faithfully expressed high levels of human SOST in the adult bone and had an 
impact on bone metabolism, consistent with the model that the VB noncoding 
deletion removes a SOST-specific regulatory element. By exploiting cross-species 
sequence comparisons with in vitro and in vivo enhancer assays, we were able to 
identify a candidate enhancer element that drives human SOST expression in 
osteoblast-like cell lines in vitro and in the skeletal anlage of the embryonic 
day 14.5 (E14.5) mouse embryo, and discovered a novel function for sclerostin 
during limb development. Our approach represents a framework for characterizing 
distant regulatory elements associated with abnormal human phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.3437105
PMCID: PMC1172036
PMID: 15965026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]