---
reference_id: "PMID:23499962"
title: UPLC-MS/MS analysis of C5-acylcarnitines in dried blood spots.
authors:
- Janzen N
- Steuerwald U
- Sander S
- Terhardt M
- Peter M
- Sander J
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.03.001
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/blood, diagnosis"
- "Carnitine/analogs & derivatives, blood"
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid/methods"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Dried Blood Spot Testing
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Isovaleryl-CoA Dehydrogenase/blood, deficiency"
- Limit of Detection
- Neonatal Screening
- Reproducibility of Results
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# UPLC-MS/MS analysis of C5-acylcarnitines in dried blood spots.
**Authors:** Janzen N, Steuerwald U, Sander S, Terhardt M, Peter M, Sander J
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2013.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2013.03.001)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2013 Jun 5;421:41-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.03.001. Epub 2013
 Mar 13.

UPLC-MS/MS analysis of C5-acylcarnitines in dried blood spots.

Janzen N(1), Steuerwald U, Sander S, Terhardt M, Peter M, Sander J.

Author information:
(1)Screening-Labor Hannover, Hannover, Germany. n.janzen@metabscreen.de

BACKGROUND: Metabolic screening including newborn screening requires further
differentiation of C5-acylcarnitines in order to separate different metabolic
disorders and to detect interferents like pivalic acid originating from
antibiotics.
METHODS: For individual quantification of C5-acylcarnitine isoforms in dried
blood spots we combined UPLC using a C18 column and gradient elution with tandem
mass spectrometry in ESI+mode.
RESULTS: Results were linear, coefficients of determination (R(2))>0.9977,
intra- and inter-assay coefficients of variations <5.2%, recovery 96.8-105.2%,
limits of detection and quantitation <0.2 μmol/L. Out of 29.309 blood samples of
the isolated population of the Faroe Islands 56 exceeded the cut-off of 0.5
μmol/L for C5-acylcarnitine; 45 of which could be retested using the method
described. Pivaloylcarnitine was identified in 43 samples, isovalerylcarnitine
was found in two samples.
CONCLUSIONS: The method was developed to allow direct re-analysis of samples
showing elevated concentrations of C5-acylcarnitines in a metabolic screening
program based on quantification of acylcarnitines after butylation. The
technique should be especially useful in newborn screening for exclusion of
false positives and for differentiation between isovaleric acidemia and
2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.03.001
PMID: 23499962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
