---
reference_id: "PMID:40626687"
title: "Near-Adult Height Outcomes in Patients Treated With rhIGF-1 for Severe Growth Failure: Real-World IGFD Registry Data."
authors:
- Ramon-Krauel M
- Polak M
- Maghnie M
- Woelfle J
- Sert C
- Perrot V
- Bang P
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgaf390
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Young Adult
- Body Height/drug effects
- Growth Disorders/drug therapy
- "Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/deficiency, therapeutic use"
- Recombinant Proteins/therapeutic use
- "Registries/statistics & numerical data"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Treatment Outcome
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Near-Adult Height Outcomes in Patients Treated With rhIGF-1 for Severe Growth Failure: Real-World IGFD Registry Data.
**Authors:** Ramon-Krauel M, Polak M, Maghnie M, Woelfle J, Sert C, Perrot V, Bang P
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgaf390](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgaf390)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2026 Jan 21;111(2):e500-e511. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgaf390.

Near-Adult Height Outcomes in Patients Treated With rhIGF-1 for Severe Growth 
Failure: Real-World IGFD Registry Data.

Ramon-Krauel M(1)(2)(3), Polak M(4), Maghnie M(3)(5)(6), Woelfle J(7), Sert 
C(8), Perrot V(8), Bang P(9).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, 08950 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades 
Metabólicas Asociadas, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(3)Endo-ERN European Reference Network on Rare Endocrine Conditions, 1105 AZ 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Gynaecology, and Diabetology, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants 
Malades, IMAGINE Institute, INSERM U1016, Université Paris Cité, 75015 Paris, 
France.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 16100 Genova, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health, University of Genova, 16132 Genova, Italy.
(7)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
(8)Ipsen, 92100 Boulogne-Billancourt, France.
(9)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University, 581 83 Linköping, Sweden.

CONTEXT: The Global Increlex® Growth Forum Database (IGFD) Registry monitors 
real-world effectiveness and safety of recombinant human IGF-1 (rhIGF-1; 
Increlex® [mecasermin]) treatment in children and adolescents with severe growth 
failure due to severe primary IGF-I deficiency (SPIGFD).
OBJECTIVE: To report characteristics, effectiveness, and safety data from 
patients receiving rhIGF-1 treatment who achieved near-adult height (NAH), and 
determine factors that predict height gain to NAH.
METHODS: Descriptive analyses of patients included in the Global IGFD Registry 
(NCT00903110) who achieved NAH are reported for the overall population, 
treatment-naïve prepubertal (NPP) patients, and patients with Laron syndrome. 
Linear regression analyses of height gain to NAH are also reported.
RESULTS: One hundred and two patients enrolled in the Global IGFD Registry 
achieved NAH at data cut-off (April 20, 2023). Mean age at rhIGF-1 treatment 
initiation was 11.8 years; median treatment duration was 3.9 years. Mean (SD) 
height SD score (HtSDS) gain from rhIGF-1 initiation to NAH was 0.9 (1.1). In 
NPP patients, mean (SD) HtSDS gain was 1.4 (1.0). Almost half of NPP patients 
reached NAH within the normal range. Despite improved height in patients with 
Laron syndrome, only 10.5% reached NAH within the normal range; 3 patients with 
Laron syndrome were NPP. Treatment naivety was predictive of height gain in the 
overall NAH population. Safety data aligned with previous reports.
CONCLUSION: In a real-world setting, despite patients with SPIGFD initiating 
rhIGF-1 treatment at a relatively advanced age, rhIGF-1 treatment resulted in 
improved NAH. The greatest improvements in height outcomes were observed in NPP 
patients.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT00903110.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgaf390
PMCID: PMC12819849
PMID: 40626687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]