---
reference_id: "PMID:33980505"
title: "Primary trabeculectomy for advanced glaucoma: pragmatic multicentre randomised controlled trial (TAGS)"
authors:
- King AJ
- Fernandes RAS
- Azuara-Blanco A
- Burr J
- Ramsay C
- Cooper D
- Foster PJ
- Javanbakht M
- Guggenheim JA
- Brice R
- Dakin H
- Muldrew A
- Crabb DP
journal: BMJ
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1136/bmj.n1014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary trabeculectomy for advanced glaucoma: pragmatic multicentre randomised controlled trial (TAGS)
**Authors:** King AJ, Fernandes RAS, Azuara-Blanco A, Burr J, Ramsay C, Cooper D, Foster PJ, Javanbakht M, Guggenheim JA, Brice R, Dakin H, Muldrew A, Crabb DP
**Journal:** BMJ (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmj.n1014](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n1014)

## Content

1. BMJ. 2021 May 12;373:n1014. doi: 10.1136/bmj.n1014.

Primary trabeculectomy for advanced glaucoma: pragmatic multicentre randomised
controlled trial (TAGS).

King AJ, Fernandes RAS, Azuara-Blanco A, Burr J, Ramsay C, Cooper D, Foster PJ,
Javanbakht M, Guggenheim JA, Brice R, Dakin H, Muldrew A, Crabb DP.

Objective: To determine whether primary trabeculectomy or primary medical
treatment produces better outcomes in term of quality of life, clinical
effectiveness, and safety in patients presenting with advanced glaucoma.
Design: Pragmatic multicentre randomised controlled trial. Setting: 27
secondary care glaucoma departments in the UK. Participants: 453 adults
presenting with newly diagnosed advanced open angle glaucoma in at least one
eye (Hodapp classification) between 3 June 2014 and 31 May 2017.
Interventions: Mitomycin C augmented trabeculectomy (n=227) and escalating
medical management with intraocular pressure reducing drops (n=226) MAIN
OUTCOME MEASURES: Primary outcome: vision specific quality of life measured with
Visual Function Questionnaire-25 (VFQ-25) at 24 months. Secondary outcomes:
general health status, glaucoma related quality of life, clinical effectiveness
(intraocular pressure, visual field, visual acuity), and safety. Results: At 24
months, the mean VFQ-25 scores in the trabeculectomy and medical arms were 85.4
(SD 13.8) and 84.5 (16.3), respectively (mean difference 1.06, 95% confidence
interval -1.32 to 3.43; P=0.38). Mean intraocular pressure was 12.4 (SD 4.7) mm
Hg for trabeculectomy and 15.1 (4.8) mm Hg for medical management (mean
difference -2.8 (-3.8 to -1.7) mm Hg; P<0.001). Adverse events occurred in 88
(39%) patients in the trabeculectomy arm and 100 (44%) in the medical
management arm (relative risk 0.88, 95% confidence interval 0.66 to 1.17;
P=0.37). Serious side effects were rare. Conclusion: Primary trabeculectomy had
similar quality of life and safety outcomes and achieved a lower intraocular
pressure compared with primary medication.

PMID: 33980505
