---
reference_id: "PMID:27713816"
title: CGG-repeat dynamics and FMR1 gene silencing in fragile X syndrome stem cells and stem cell-derived neurons.
authors:
- Zhou Y
- Kumari D
- Sciascia N
- Usdin K
journal: Mol Autism
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13229-016-0105-9
keywords:
- "5' Untranslated Regions"
- Alleles
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Line
- DNA Methylation
- "Embryonic Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Fragile X Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Silencing
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Primary Cell Culture
- Time Factors
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CGG-repeat dynamics and FMR1 gene silencing in fragile X syndrome stem cells and stem cell-derived neurons.
**Authors:** Zhou Y, Kumari D, Sciascia N, Usdin K
**Journal:** Mol Autism (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13229-016-0105-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-016-0105-9)

## Content

1. Mol Autism. 2016 Oct 6;7:42. doi: 10.1186/s13229-016-0105-9. eCollection 2016.

CGG-repeat dynamics and FMR1 gene silencing in fragile X syndrome stem cells and
stem cell-derived neurons.

Zhou Y(1), Kumari D(1), Sciascia N(2), Usdin K(1).

Author information:
(1)Section on Gene Structure and Disease, Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD USA.
(2)Section on Gene Structure and Disease, Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD USA ; Present Address: Laboratory of Genome
Integrity, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD USA.

BACKGROUND: Fragile X syndrome (FXS), a common cause of intellectual disability
and autism, results from the expansion of a CGG-repeat tract in the 5'
untranslated region of the FMR1 gene to >200 repeats. Such expanded alleles,
known as full mutation (FM) alleles, are epigenetically silenced in
differentiated cells thus resulting in the loss of FMRP, a protein important for
learning and memory. The timing of repeat expansion and FMR1 gene silencing is
controversial.
METHODS: We monitored the repeat size and methylation status of FMR1 alleles
with expanded CGG repeats in patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) and embryonic stem cells (ESCs) that were grown for extended period of
time either as stem cells or differentiated into neurons. We used a PCR assay
optimized for the amplification of large CGG repeats for sizing, and a
quantitative methylation-specific PCR for the analysis of FMR1 promoter
methylation. The FMR1 mRNA levels were analyzed by qRT-PCR. FMRP levels were
determined by western blotting and immunofluorescence. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation was used to study the association of repressive histone
marks with the FMR1 gene in FXS ESCs.
RESULTS: We show here that while FMR1 gene silencing can be seen in FXS
embryonic stem cells (ESCs), some silenced alleles contract and when the repeat
number drops below ~400, DNA methylation erodes, even when the repeat number
remains >200. The resultant active alleles do not show the large step-wise
expansions seen in stem cells from other repeat expansion diseases. Furthermore,
there may be selection against large active alleles and these alleles do not
expand further or become silenced on neuronal differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support the hypotheses that (i) large expansions occur
prezygotically or in the very early embryo, (ii) large unmethylated alleles may
be deleterious in stem cells, (iii) methylation can occur on alleles with >400
repeats very early in embryogenesis, and (iv) expansion and contraction may
occur by different mechanisms. Our data also suggest that the threshold for
stable methylation of FM alleles may be higher than previously thought. A higher
threshold might explain why some carriers of FM alleles escape methylation. It
may also provide a simple explanation for why silencing has not been observed in
mouse models with >200 repeats.

DOI: 10.1186/s13229-016-0105-9
PMCID: PMC5053128
PMID: 27713816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
