---
reference_id: "PMID:26018533"
title: Gamma Interferon Assays Used in the Diagnosis of Tuberculosis.
authors:
- Horvat RT
journal: Clin Vaccine Immunol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1128/CVI.00199-15
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gamma Interferon Assays Used in the Diagnosis of Tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Horvat RT
**Journal:** Clin Vaccine Immunol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CVI.00199-15](https://doi.org/10.1128/CVI.00199-15)

## Content

1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2015 Aug;22(8):845-9. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00199-15. Epub
2015  May 27.

Gamma Interferon Assays Used in the Diagnosis of Tuberculosis.

Horvat RT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical 
Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA rhorvat@kumc.edu.

Tuberculosis (TB) is an ancient disease that has infected humans for thousands 
of years. However, despite diagnostic tests that detect the disease and 
effective therapy, there are still millions of people worldwide who are infected 
with TB. The first TB test used to detect infected patients was a skin test that 
identifies individuals actively infected with TB. This test used a mix of 
proteins from culture filtrates of the bacteria Mycobacterium tuberculosis. 
Recently, two new diagnostic tests have been introduced; these two new tests can 
detect TB infection in patients by challenging peripheral blood cells with 
specific TB proteins. These assays measure the cellular immune response to these 
proteins. This minireview evaluates the new assays and compares them to the use 
of the TB skin test. The use of these new assays may have some advantages in 
detecting individuals with active tuberculosis. However, there is still a role 
for the use of the skin test, especially in young patients.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00199-15
PMCID: PMC4519719
PMID: 26018533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]