---
reference_id: "PMID:39209060"
title: Sarcoidosis and Emergency Hospitalization.
authors:
- Gazengel P
- Hindre R
- Jeny F
- Mendes S
- Caliez J
- Freynet O
- Rotenberg C
- Didier M
- Dhote R
- Cohen Y
- Uzunhan Y
- Bouvry D
- Nunes H
journal: Chest
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2024.06.3839
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sarcoidosis/mortality, therapy, epidemiology, diagnosis, complications"
- "Hospitalization/statistics & numerical data"
- Adult
- Aged
- Prognosis
- "Emergency Service, Hospital/statistics & numerical data"
- Hospital Mortality
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sarcoidosis and Emergency Hospitalization.
**Authors:** Gazengel P, Hindre R, Jeny F, Mendes S, Caliez J, Freynet O, Rotenberg C, Didier M, Dhote R, Cohen Y, Uzunhan Y, Bouvry D, Nunes H
**Journal:** Chest (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chest.2024.06.3839](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2024.06.3839)

## Content

1. Chest. 2025 Jan;167(1):164-171. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2024.06.3839. Epub 2024
Aug  28.

Sarcoidosis and Emergency Hospitalization.

Gazengel P(1), Hindre R(2), Jeny F(2), Mendes S(2), Caliez J(2), Freynet O(2),
Rotenberg C(2), Didier M(2), Dhote R(3), Cohen Y(4), Uzunhan Y(2), Bouvry D(2),
Nunes H(2).

Author information:
(1)Service de pneumologie, Centre de référence des maladies pulmonaires rares
(site constitutif), hôpital Avicenne, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, UMR
Inserm U1272, Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, Bobigny, France. Electronic
address: pierre.gazengel@gmail.com.
(2)Service de pneumologie, Centre de référence des maladies pulmonaires rares
(site constitutif), hôpital Avicenne, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, UMR
Inserm U1272, Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, Bobigny, France.
(3)Service de médecine interne, hôpital Avicenne, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux
de Paris, Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, Bobigny, France.
(4)Service de reanimation, hôpital Avicenne, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de
Paris, Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, Bobigny, France.

BACKGROUND: Sarcoidosis is an idiopathic systemic granulomatosis whose evolution
is self-limiting in most cases. However, it can progress to organ damage that
menaces the vital or functional prognosis of patients. Sarcoidosis itself, but
also its comorbidities, can pose a threat to the patient, require rapid
initiation of treatment, and justify emergency hospitalization.
RESEARCH QUESTION: What are the reasons and prognosis of patients with
sarcoidosis hospitalized in emergency?
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: The objectives of our study were to describe the
causes of admission for and to identify predictors of mortality in patients with
sarcoidosis hospitalized in emergency. This is a retrospective monocentric
study. We included patients hospitalized after a stay in the ED or ICU, or
requiring an unscheduled hospitalization after telephone advice or a
consultation, between January 1, 2017, and July 7, 2020.
RESULTS: We identified 154 patients with sarcoidosis hospitalized in emergency,
among which 14 (9%) required the ICU. There were 81 male patients, with a median
age of 55.0 years (interquartile range, 44.0-67.0). Sarcoidosis was inaugural in
20 patients (14%). The primary reason for hospitalization was lower respiratory
infections in 32 patients (21%), followed by acute pulmonary exacerbation of
sarcoidosis in 17 (11%), suspected cardiac sarcoidosis in 13 (8.4%), and
neurosarcoidosis in 12 (7.7%). The median length of stay was 6 days
(interquartile range, 3.00-10.0). In-hospital mortality rate was 3.9%. The
2-year transplantation-free survival after hospitalization was 86.8% (95% CI,
81.4-92.5). The factors associated with a worse transplantation-free survival
were Charlson Comorbidity Index score (hazard ratio [HR], 1.29; 95% CI,
1.04-1.61; P = .021), pulmonary hypertension (HR, 2.53; 95% CI, 1.10-5.83; P =
.029), and oxygen therapy during hospitalization (HR, 4.18; 95% CI, 1.55-11.29;
P = .005).
INTERPRETATION: Our findings indicate that the overall mortality of patients
with sarcoidosis hospitalized in emergency was high. The presence of
comorbidities and the severity of respiratory failure, as reflected by oxygen
requirement, are important prognostic determinants.

Copyright © 2024 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2024.06.3839
PMID: 39209060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial/Nonfinancial Disclosures None
declared.
