---
reference_id: "PMID:39938516"
title: Distinct mismatch-repair complex genes set neuronal CAG-repeat expansion rate to drive selective pathogenesis in HD mice.
authors:
- Wang N
- Zhang S
- Langfelder P
- Ramanathan L
- Gao F
- Plascencia M
- Vaca R
- Gu X
- Deng L
- Dionisio LE
- Vu H
- Maciejewski E
- Ernst J
- Prasad BC
- Vogt TF
- Horvath S
- Aaronson JS
- Rosinski J
- Yang XW
journal: Cell
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2025.01.031
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Huntington Disease/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
- "MutS Homolog 3 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Mismatch Repair/genetics
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Huntingtin Protein/genetics
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- "MutS Homolog 2 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Male
- MutL Protein Homolog 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct mismatch-repair complex genes set neuronal CAG-repeat expansion rate to drive selective pathogenesis in HD mice.
**Authors:** Wang N, Zhang S, Langfelder P, Ramanathan L, Gao F, Plascencia M, Vaca R, Gu X, Deng L, Dionisio LE, Vu H, Maciejewski E, Ernst J, Prasad BC, Vogt TF, Horvath S, Aaronson JS, Rosinski J, Yang XW
**Journal:** Cell (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2025.01.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.01.031)

## Content

1. Cell. 2025 Mar 20;188(6):1524-1544.e22. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2025.01.031. Epub
2025 Feb 11.

Distinct mismatch-repair complex genes set neuronal CAG-repeat expansion rate to
drive selective pathogenesis in HD mice.

Wang N(1), Zhang S(1), Langfelder P(1), Ramanathan L(1), Gao F(1), Plascencia
M(1), Vaca R(1), Gu X(1), Deng L(1), Dionisio LE(1), Vu H(2), Maciejewski E(2),
Ernst J(2), Prasad BC(3), Vogt TF(3), Horvath S(4), Aaronson JS(3), Rosinski
J(3), Yang XW(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, The Jane and Terry Semel Institute for
Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)CHDI Management, Inc., Princeton, NJ, USA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Altos Labs, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, The Jane and Terry Semel Institute for
Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA, USA. Electronic address: xwyang@mednet.ucla.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jul 15:2024.07.09.602815. doi: 10.1101/2024.07.09.602815.

Huntington's disease (HD) modifiers include mismatch-repair (MMR) genes, but
their connections to neuronal pathogenesis remain unclear. Here, we genetically
tested 9 HD genome-wide association study (GWAS)/MMR genes in mutant Huntingtin
(mHtt) mice with 140 inherited CAG repeats (Q140). Knockout (KO) of genes
encoding a distinct MMR complex either strongly (Msh3 and Pms1) or moderately
(Msh2 and Mlh1) rescues phenotypes with early onset in striatal medium-spiny
neurons (MSNs) and late onset in the cortical neurons: somatic CAG-repeat
expansion, transcriptionopathy, and mHtt aggregation. Msh3 deficiency
ameliorates open-chromatin dysregulation in Q140 neurons. Mechanistically, the
fast linear rate of mHtt modal-CAG-repeat expansion in MSNs (8.8 repeats/month)
is drastically reduced or stopped by MMR mutants. Msh3 or Pms1 deficiency
prevents mHtt aggregation by keeping somatic MSN CAG length below 150.
Importantly, Msh3 deficiency corrects synaptic, astrocytic, and locomotor
defects in HD mice. Thus, Msh3 and Pms1 drive fast somatic mHtt CAG-expansion
rates in HD-vulnerable neurons to elicit repeat-length/threshold-dependent,
selective, and progressive pathogenesis in vivo.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2025.01.031
PMCID: PMC11972609
PMID: 39938516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests X.W.Y. is a Scientific
Advisory Board member for Lyterian and Ophidion and a consultant/seminar speaker
for Ionis, Biogen, Novartis, Roche, LifeEdit, PTC, Ascidian, Sangamo, and
Forbion. P.L. served as an occasional consultant for The Bioinformatics CRO,
Vynance, and FOXO Technologies, Inc. S.H. works for Altos Labs, UK.
