---
reference_id: "PMID:38064509"
title: Distinct mouse models of Stargardt disease display differences in pharmacological targeting of ceramides and inflammatory responses.
authors:
- Engfer ZJ
- Lewandowski D
- Dong Z
- Palczewska G
- Zhang J
- Kordecka K
- Płaczkiewicz J
- Panas D
- Foik AT
- Tabaka M
- Palczewski K
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2314698120
keywords:
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- Stargardt Disease/metabolism
- "Macular Degeneration/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Retinaldehyde/metabolism
- Retina/metabolism
- "Retinal Degeneration/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct mouse models of Stargardt disease display differences in pharmacological targeting of ceramides and inflammatory responses.
**Authors:** Engfer ZJ, Lewandowski D, Dong Z, Palczewska G, Zhang J, Kordecka K, Płaczkiewicz J, Panas D, Foik AT, Tabaka M, Palczewski K
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2314698120](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2314698120)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Dec 12;120(50):e2314698120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2314698120. Epub 2023 Dec 8.

Distinct mouse models of Stargardt disease display differences in 
pharmacological targeting of ceramides and inflammatory responses.

Engfer ZJ(1)(2), Lewandowski D(1), Dong Z(1), Palczewska G(1), Zhang J(1), 
Kordecka K(3), Płaczkiewicz J(3), Panas D(4)(5), Foik AT(3), Tabaka M(4)(5), 
Palczewski K(1)(2)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Gavin Herbert Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, University of 
California, Irvine, CA 92697.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of California, Irvine, CA 
92697.
(3)Ophthalmic Biology Group, International Centre for Translational Eye 
Research, Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw 
01-224, Poland.
(4)International Centre for Translational Eye Research, Warsaw 01-224, Poland.
(5)Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw 01-224, 
Poland.
(6)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697.
(7)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, 
Irvine, CA 92697.

Mutations in many visual cycle enzymes in photoreceptors and retinal pigment 
epithelium (RPE) cells can lead to the chronic accumulation of toxic retinoid 
byproducts, which poison photoreceptors and the underlying RPE if left 
unchecked. Without a functional ATP-binding cassette, sub-family A, member 4 
(ABCA4), there is an elevation of all-trans-retinal and prolonged buildup of 
all-trans-retinal adducts, resulting in a retinal degenerative disease known as 
Stargardt-1 disease. Even in this monogenic disorder, there is significant 
heterogeneity in the time to onset of symptoms among patients. Using a 
combination of molecular techniques, we studied Abca4 knockout (simulating human 
noncoding disease variants) and Abca4 knock-in mice (simulating human misfolded, 
catalytically inactive protein variants), which serve as models for Stargardt-1 
disease. We compared the two strains to ascertain whether they exhibit 
differential responses to agents that affect cytokine signaling and/or ceramide 
metabolism, as alterations in either of these pathways can exacerbate retinal 
degenerative phenotypes. We found different degrees of responsiveness to 
maraviroc, a known immunomodulatory CCR5 antagonist, and to the 
ceramide-lowering agent AdipoRon, an agonist of the ADIPOR1 and ADIPOR2 
receptors. The two strains also display different degrees of transcriptional 
deviation from matched WT controls. Our phenotypic comparison of the two 
distinct Abca4 mutant-mouse models sheds light on potential therapeutic avenues 
previously unexplored in the treatment of Stargardt disease and provides a 
surrogate assay for assessing the effectiveness for genome editing.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2314698120
PMCID: PMC10723050
PMID: 38064509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:K.P. is a 
consultant for Polgenix, Inc. and serves on the Scientific Advisory Board at 
Hyperion Eye, Ltd. All other authors have declared that no conflict of interest 
exists.