---
reference_id: "PMID:39301763"
title: "Efficacy, safety and differential outcomes of immune-chemotherapy with gemcitabine, cisplatin and durvalumab in patients with biliary tract cancers: A multicenter real world cohort."
authors:
- Mitzlaff K
- Kirstein MM
- Müller C
- Venerito M
- Olkus A
- Dill MT
- Weinmann A
- Kocheise L
- Busch A
- Schulze K
- Allo G
- Waldschmidt DT
- Barsch M
- Bengsch B
- Quante M
- Gonzalez-Carmona MA
- Himmelsbach V
- Finkelmeier F
- Kloeckner R
- Schirmacher P
- Marquardt JU
- Zimpel C
journal: United European Gastroenterol J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ueg2.12656
keywords:
- Humans
- Gemcitabine
- "Deoxycytidine/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Male
- Female
- "Cisplatin/administration & dosage, therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Biliary Tract Neoplasms/drug therapy, mortality"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Aged
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use, administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Progression-Free Survival
- Treatment Outcome
- Germany/epidemiology
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Adult
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy, safety and differential outcomes of immune-chemotherapy with gemcitabine, cisplatin and durvalumab in patients with biliary tract cancers: A multicenter real world cohort.
**Authors:** Mitzlaff K, Kirstein MM, Müller C, Venerito M, Olkus A, Dill MT, Weinmann A, Kocheise L, Busch A, Schulze K, Allo G, Waldschmidt DT, Barsch M, Bengsch B, Quante M, Gonzalez-Carmona MA, Himmelsbach V, Finkelmeier F, Kloeckner R, Schirmacher P, Marquardt JU, Zimpel C
**Journal:** United European Gastroenterol J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ueg2.12656](https://doi.org/10.1002/ueg2.12656)

## Content

1. United European Gastroenterol J. 2024 Nov;12(9):1230-1242. doi: 
10.1002/ueg2.12656. Epub 2024 Sep 20.

Efficacy, safety and differential outcomes of immune-chemotherapy with 
gemcitabine, cisplatin and durvalumab in patients with biliary tract cancers: A 
multicenter real world cohort.

Mitzlaff K(1), Kirstein MM(1), Müller C(2), Venerito M(2), Olkus A(3), Dill 
MT(3)(4)(5), Weinmann A(6), Kocheise L(7), Busch A(8), Schulze K(7), Allo G(9), 
Waldschmidt DT(9), Barsch M(10), Bengsch B(10), Quante M(10), Gonzalez-Carmona 
MA(11), Himmelsbach V(12), Finkelmeier F(12), Kloeckner R(13), Schirmacher 
P(14), Marquardt JU(1), Zimpel C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine I, University Medical Center-Campus Lübeck, Lübeck, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases, Otto von 
Guericke University Hospital, Magdeburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, Infectious Diseases and 
Intoxication, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), NCT Heidelberg, a Partnership 
Between DKFZ and Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg, Research Group Experimental 
Hepatology, Inflammation and Cancer, Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, University Medical Center of the Johannes 
Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(7)I. Department for Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Oncology, Hematology and BMT with Section of Pneumology, 
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Faculty of Medicine and 
University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(10)Department of Medicine II, Gastroenterology, Hepatology, Endocrinology, and 
Infectious Disease, University Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(12)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, University 
Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.
(13)Department for Interventional Radiology, University Medical Center-Campus 
Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(14)Institute of Pathology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Combined Immuno-chemotherapy consisting of gemcitabine, cisplatin 
and the programmed death-ligand one inhibitor durvalumab (GCD) is the new 
standard of care for patients with biliary tract cancers (BTC) based on positive 
results of the TOPAZ-1 study.
OBJECTIVE: We here evaluated the efficacy and safety of GCD for BTC in a German 
multicenter real-world patient cohort.
METHODS: Patients with BTC treated with GCD from 9 German centers were included. 
Clinicopathological baseline parameters, overall survival (OS), response rate 
and adverse events (AEs) were retrospectively analyzed. The prognostic impact 
was determined by Kaplan-Meier analyses and Cox regression models.
RESULTS: A total of 165 patients treated with GCD between 2021 and 2024 were 
included in the study. Median OS and median progression-free survival were 14 
months (95% CI 10.3-17.7) and 8 months (95% CI 6.8-9.2), respectively. The best 
overall response rate was 28.5% and disease control rate was 65.5%. While 
extrahepatic and intrahepatic BTC showed similar outcomes, mOS was significantly 
shorter in patients with gall bladder cancer (GB-CA) with 9 months (95% CI 
5.5-12.4; p = 0.02). In univariate analyses age ≥70 years, Eastern Cooperative 
Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (PS) ≥1, status post cholecystectomy, 
GB-CA and high baseline CRP values were significantly associated with OS. ECOG 
PS ≥ 1 and GB-CA remained independent prognostic factors for OS in multivariable 
cox regression analysis. AEs have been reported in 130 patients (78.8%), 
including 149 grade 3-4 AEs (25.5%). One patient died of severe infectious 
pneumonia. Immune-related (ir)AEs occurred in 17 patients (10.3%), including 9 
grade 3-4 irAEs (2.2%), which led to treatment interruption in 4 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Immuno-chemotherapy in patients with BTC was feasible, effective 
and safe in a real-life scenario. Our results were comparable to the phase 3 
clinical trial results (TOPAZ-1). Reduced efficacy was noted in patients with 
GB-CA and/or a reduced performance status that warrants further investigation.

© 2024 The Author(s). United European Gastroenterology Journal published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of United European Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.1002/ueg2.12656
PMCID: PMC11578849
PMID: 39301763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CZ reports participation in the advisory boards 
and lecture fees from AstraZeneca and travel expenses from Roche. JUM received 
honoraria from Roche, AstraZeneca, Ipsen, Eisai, MSD. PS received honoraria from 
Incyte, Eisai, BMS and MSD. KS received advisory and consulting fees from MSD 
and AstraZeneca as well as lecture fees from AstraZeneca. F. F. has received 
travel support from Ipsen, Abbvie, Astra Zeneca and speaker's fees from AbbVie, 
MSD, Ipsen and Astra Zeneca. MQ received advisory boards and lecture fees from 
AstraZeneca, BMS, MSD, Amgen, Takeda, Astella and Roche. MTD reports travel 
expenses covered by AstraZeneca and KM reports travel expenses covered by Roche 
and Ipsen.