---
reference_id: "PMID:38107059"
title: "Targeted therapies in bladder cancer: signaling pathways, applications, and challenges."
authors:
- Peng M
- Chu X
- Peng Y
- Li D
- Zhang Z
- Wang W
- Zhou X
- Xiao D
- Yang X
journal: MedComm (2020)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mco2.455
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted therapies in bladder cancer: signaling pathways, applications, and challenges.
**Authors:** Peng M, Chu X, Peng Y, Li D, Zhang Z, Wang W, Zhou X, Xiao D, Yang X
**Journal:** MedComm (2020) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mco2.455](https://doi.org/10.1002/mco2.455)

## Content

1. MedComm (2020). 2023 Dec 15;4(6):e455. doi: 10.1002/mco2.455. eCollection 2023
 Dec.

Targeted therapies in bladder cancer: signaling pathways, applications, and 
challenges.

Peng M(1)(2), Chu X(2), Peng Y(2), Li D(2), Zhang Z(2), Wang W(2), Zhou X(2), 
Xiao D(2), Yang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Xiangya Hospital Central South University Changsha 
Hunan China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Study and Discovery of Small Targeted Molecules of Hunan 
Province The Research Center of Reproduction and Translational Medicine of Hunan 
Province Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology & Traditional Chinese Medicine 
Research of Ministry of Education Department of Pharmacy School of Medicine 
Hunan Normal University Changsha Hunan China.

Bladder cancer (BC) is one of the most prevalent malignancies in men. 
Understanding molecular characteristics via studying signaling pathways has made 
tremendous breakthroughs in BC therapies. Thus, targeted therapies including 
immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs), and 
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) have markedly improved advanced BC outcomes over 
the last few years. However, the considerable patients still progress after a 
period of treatment with current therapeutic regimens. Therefore, it is crucial 
to guide future drug development to improve BC survival, based on the molecular 
characteristics of BC and clinical outcomes of existing drugs. In this 
perspective, we summarize the applications and benefits of these targeted drugs 
and highlight our understanding of mechanisms of low response rates and immune 
escape of ICIs, ADCs toxicity, and TKI resistance. We also discuss potential 
solutions to these problems. In addition, we underscore the future drug 
development of targeting metabolic reprogramming and cancer stem cells (CSCs) 
with a deep understanding of their signaling pathways features. We expect that 
finding biomarkers, developing novo drugs and designing clinical trials with 
precisely selected patients and rationalized drugs will dramatically improve the 
quality of life and survival of patients with advanced BC.

© 2023 The Authors. MedComm published by Sichuan International Medical Exchange 
& Promotion Association (SCIMEA) and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mco2.455
PMCID: PMC10724512
PMID: 38107059

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.