---
reference_id: "PMID:20301701"
title: Huntington Disease-Like 2.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Anderson DG
- Krause A
- Margolis RL
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington Disease-Like 2.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Anderson DG, Krause A, Margolis RL

## Content

1. Huntington Disease-Like 2.

Anderson DG(1), Krause A(2), Margolis RL(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2004 Jan 30 [updated 2025 Apr 10].

Author information:
(1)Consultant Neurologist, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital;, Honorary Senior
Lecturer, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom
(2)Head, Division of Human Genetics, National Health Laboratory Service and
School of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
(3)ABCD Charitable Trust Professor of Schizophrenia, Professor of Psychiatry and
Neurology, Laboratory of Genetic Neurobiology, Division of Neurobiology,
Department of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Huntington disease-like 2 (HDL2) typically presents in
midlife with a relentless progressive triad of movement, emotional, and
cognitive abnormalities that lead to death within ten to 20 years. HDL2 cannot
be differentiated from Huntington disease (HD) clinically. Neurologic
abnormalities include chorea, hypokinesia (rigidity, bradykinesia), dysarthria,
abnormalities of eye movements and gait, and hyperreflexia in the later stages
of the disease. There is a strong correlation between the duration of the
disease and the progression of motor and cognitive signs and symptoms.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of HDL2 is established in a proband with
characteristic clinical findings and heterozygous expansion of 40 or more CTG
trinucleotide repeats in JPH3 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is symptomatic and is
presumably similar to that for HD and other neurodegenerative disorders –
although this must be considered speculative pending objective data.
Pharmacologic agents that may suppress abnormal movements include tetrabenazine
and its derivatives or low-dose neuroleptic agents such as fluphenazine and
haloperidol. Remove loose rugs and clutter from the individual's home and
minimize or eliminate the need for stairs to help prevent falls and other
injuries; physical therapy evaluation and treatment for mobility issues; speech
therapy, communication devices, and environmental modifications for dysarthria;
speech-language pathology and nutrition referrals for dysphagia; food should be
prepared in such a manner as to prevent choking; feeding changes when needed to
minimize risk of aspiration; driving may need to be curtailed or limited to
prevent risk of accidents; planning for financial matters; environmental
interventions for cognitive issues; antidepressants, antipsychotics, mood
stabilizers (lithium, valproic acid, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine),
electroconvulsive therapy, and occasionally stimulants may improve psychiatric
manifestations. Education about the course of disease; social work and care
coordination support. Surveillance: Annual evaluation or more frequently as
needed to assess motor skills including gait and abnormal movements; physical
therapy assessment of mobility and appropriate strategies or devices to minimize
falls; assess cognitive skills and driving safety to assure that affected
individuals do not present a danger to themselves or others; assess weight,
nutrition, swallowing, and risk of aspiration in order to implement feeding
changes when necessary; assess for psychiatric manifestations, including mood,
suicidality, anxiety, irritability, and apathy; assess sleep and sexual
concerns; assess family needs; assess planning for future (financial, legal
issues). Agents/circumstances to avoid: Any agents that increase ataxia should
be used with caution; begin psychoactive medicines at lower doses and increase
doses carefully; minimize polypharmacy, which may increase the risk of delirium.
GENETIC COUNSELING: HDL2 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most
individuals with HDL2 have an affected parent. At conception, each child of an
individual with HDL2 has a 50% chance of inheriting the HDL2-causing allele.
Offspring who inherit a pathogenic (full-penetrance) HDL2-causing allele (≥40
CTG repeats) are considered at risk of developing HDL2 in their lifetime;
offspring who inherit an allele of questionable significance (29-39 CTG repeats)
may or may not develop manifestations of HDL2. Testing of asymptomatic adults at
risk for HDL2 is possible once a heterozygous expansion of a CTG repeat in JPH3
has been identified in an affected family member. Testing for the JPH3 CTG
repeat expansion in the absence of definite manifestations of the disease is
predictive testing. Prudence suggests following the same genetic testing
guidelines used for HD, including counseling prior to testing, a confidant to
serve as a social support, and availability of counseling following the
disclosure of genetic results. If the presence of an HDL2-causing allele has
been confirmed in the affected parent or in an affected relative of the at-risk
parent, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 20301701
