---
reference_id: "PMID:28284779"
title: Heart Transplantation for Chagas Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Benatti RD
- Oliveira GH
- Bacal F
journal: J Heart Lung Transplant
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2017.02.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heart Transplantation for Chagas Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Benatti RD, Oliveira GH, Bacal F
**Journal:** J Heart Lung Transplant (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.healun.2017.02.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healun.2017.02.006)

## Content

1. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2017 Jun;36(6):597-603. doi: 
10.1016/j.healun.2017.02.006. Epub 2017 Feb 3.

Heart Transplantation for Chagas Cardiomyopathy.

Benatti RD(1), Oliveira GH(2), Bacal F(3).

Author information:
(1)Advanced Heart Failure and Transplant Center, Harrington Heart and Vascular 
Institute, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio. Electronic address: 
Rodolfo.Benatti@UHhospitals.org.
(2)Advanced Heart Failure and Transplant Center, Harrington Heart and Vascular 
Institute, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio.
(3)Heart Institute (InCor), University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, 
Brazil.

Chagas cardiomyopathy (CC) is one of the chronic manifestations of Trypanosoma 
cruzi (T. cruzi) infection and is a major public health disease in Latin 
America. Since it is a chronic systemic infection, Chagas disease was long 
considered a potential contraindication for transplantation because of the risk 
of recurrence with immunosuppression. However, early South American experience 
in the 1980's established the feasibility of heart transplantation (HT) in 
patients with Chagas disease. Indeed, the first cardiac transplant for a 
recipient with CC was performed in 1985 in Brazil. Chagas etiology of heart 
failure has become the third most common indication for HT in South America. T. 
cruzi reactivation post-transplant is a common issue that requires prophylactic 
surveillance but responds well to appropriate therapy. Chagas reactivation has 
been associated with the potency of the immunosuppressive protocol and occurs 
more frequently after rejection episodes. Yet, many important questions 
regarding the management of Chagas HT candidates and recipients remain 
unanswered. For example, biventricular systolic failure is frequent in end-stage 
CC, but its impact on the modality of mechanical circulatory bridging has not 
been described. Also, there is no consensus regarding the most adequate 
immunosuppressive regimen that balances the risk of graft rejection and disease 
reactivation. The real efficacy and safety of HT for end-stage CC will only be 
appreciated when a Latin American transplant registry is established. This 
review covers the current state of the art of HT for CC.

Copyright © 2017 International Society for the Heart and Lung Transplantation. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.healun.2017.02.006
PMID: 28284779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]