---
reference_id: "PMID:27245705"
title: "Novel identification and characterisation of Transient receptor potential melastatin 3 ion channels on Natural Killer cells and B lymphocytes: effects on cell signalling in Chronic fatigue syndrome/Myalgic encephalomyelitis patients."
authors:
- Nguyen T
- Staines D
- Nilius B
- Smith P
- Marshall-Gradisnik S
journal: Biol Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s40659-016-0087-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel identification and characterisation of Transient receptor potential melastatin 3 ion channels on Natural Killer cells and B lymphocytes: effects on cell signalling in Chronic fatigue syndrome/Myalgic encephalomyelitis patients.
**Authors:** Nguyen T, Staines D, Nilius B, Smith P, Marshall-Gradisnik S
**Journal:** Biol Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40659-016-0087-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40659-016-0087-2)

## Content

1. Biol Res. 2016 May 31;49(1):27. doi: 10.1186/s40659-016-0087-2.

Novel identification and characterisation of Transient receptor potential 
melastatin 3 ion channels on Natural Killer cells and B lymphocytes: effects on 
cell signalling in Chronic fatigue syndrome/Myalgic encephalomyelitis patients.

Nguyen T(1)(2), Staines D(3)(4), Nilius B(5), Smith P(3), Marshall-Gradisnik 
S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)The National Centre for Neuroimmunology and Emerging Diseases, Menzies Health 
Institute, Griffith University, Parklands Drive, Southport, Mailbox 68, Gold 
Coast, 4222, Australia. thao.nguyen2@griffithuni.edu.au.
(2)School of Medical Science, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia. 
thao.nguyen2@griffithuni.edu.au.
(3)The National Centre for Neuroimmunology and Emerging Diseases, Menzies Health 
Institute, Griffith University, Parklands Drive, Southport, Mailbox 68, Gold 
Coast, 4222, Australia.
(4)School of Medical Science, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia.
(5)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Laboratory of Ion Channel Research, KU 
Leuven University, 49 Herestraat, Leuven, B-3000, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Transient receptor potential melastatin 3 (TRPM3) cation channels 
are ubiquitously expressed by multiple cells and have an important regulatory 
role in calcium-dependent cell signalling to help maintain cellular homeostasis. 
TRPM3 protein expression has yet to be determined on Natural Killer (NK) cells 
and B lymphocytes. Multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms have been reported 
in TRPM3 genes from isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells, NK and B cells 
in Chronic fatigue syndrome/Myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME) patients and have 
been proposed to correlate with illness presentation. The object of the study 
was to assess TRPM3 surface expression on NK and B lymphocytes from healthy 
controls, followed by a comparative investigation examining TRPM3 surface 
expression, and cytoplasmic and mitochondrial calcium influx in CD19(+) B cells, 
CD56(bright) and CD56(dim) cell populations from CFS/ME patients.
RESULTS: TRPM3 cell surface expression was identified for NK and B lymphocytes 
in healthy controls (CD56(bright) TRPM3 35.72 % ± 7.37; CD56(dim) 5.74 % ± 2.00; 
B lymphocytes 2.05 % ± 0.19, respectively). There was a significant reduction of 
TRPM3 surface expression on CD19(+) B cells (1.56 ± 0.191) and CD56(bright) NK 
cells (17.37 % ± 5.34) in CFS/ME compared with healthy controls. Anti-CD21 and 
anti-IgM conjugated biotin was cross-linked with streptavidin,and subsequently 
treatment with thapsigargin. This showed a significant reduction in cytoplasmic 
calcium ion concentration in CD19(+) B lymphocytes. CD56(bright) NK cells also 
had a significant decrease in cytoplasmic calcium in the presence of 2-APB and 
thapsigargin in CFS/ME patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The results from this preliminary investigation identify, for the 
first time, TRPM3 surface expression on both NK and B lymphocytes in healthy 
controls. We also report for the first time, significant reduction in TRPM3 cell 
surface expression in NK and B lymphocytes, as well as decreased intracellular 
calcium within specific conditions in CFS/ME patients. This warrants further 
examination of these pathways to elucidate whether TRPM3 and impaired calcium 
mobilisation has a role in CFS/ME.

DOI: 10.1186/s40659-016-0087-2
PMCID: PMC4888729
PMID: 27245705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]