---
reference_id: "PMID:20635794"
title: Specific polysaccharide antibody deficiency in chromosome 18p deletion syndrome and immunoglobulin A deficiency.
authors:
- Browning MJ
journal: J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol
year: '2010'
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Bacterial/biosynthesis"
- Child
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18/immunology"
- Female
- Humans
- "IgA Deficiency/genetics, immunology"
- Pneumococcal Vaccines/immunology
- "Polysaccharides, Bacterial/genetics, immunology"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Specific polysaccharide antibody deficiency in chromosome 18p deletion syndrome and immunoglobulin A deficiency.
**Authors:** Browning MJ
**Journal:** J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol (2010)

## Content

1. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 2010;20(3):263-6.

Specific polysaccharide antibody deficiency in chromosome 18p deletion syndrome 
and immunoglobulin A deficiency.

Browning MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester, United 
Kingdom. michael.browning@uhl-tr.nhs.uk

Immunoglobulin (Ig) A deficiency has long been recognized in patients with 
chromosome 18 abnormalities. We present the case of a young girl in whom a 
chromosome 18p deletion syndrome (46,XX,del[18][p11.1]) was associated not only 
with IgA deficiency, but also with an inability to make antibody to the 
unconjugated pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine, Pneumovax II, indicating a 
concomitant specific polysaccharide antibody deficiency. The patient suffered 
from recurrent upper respiratory tract and genitourinary infections, which were 
controlled by the use of prophylactic antibiotics. The association of specific 
polysaccharide antibody deficiency, IgA deficiency, and chromosome 18p deletion 
syndrome has not been described previously, and extends the immunological 
phenotype of antibody deficiencies associated with defects of chromosome 18. The 
presence of specific polysaccharide antibody deficiency should be investigated 
in patients with chromosome 18 abnormalities, as these patients may have a more 
severe spectrum of infections than patients with chromosome 18 abnormalities and 
selective IgA deficiency alone.

PMID: 20635794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]