---
reference_id: "PMID:36342045"
title: Diagnosis and management of monkeypox in primary care.
authors:
- Rallapalli S
- Razai MS
- Majeed A
- Drysdale SB
journal: J R Soc Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/01410768221131914
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of monkeypox in primary care.
**Authors:** Rallapalli S, Razai MS, Majeed A, Drysdale SB
**Journal:** J R Soc Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/01410768221131914](https://doi.org/10.1177/01410768221131914)

## Content

1. J R Soc Med. 2022 Oct;115(10):384-389. doi: 10.1177/01410768221131914. Epub
2022  Nov 7.

Diagnosis and management of monkeypox in primary care.

Rallapalli S(1), Razai MS(2), Majeed A(3), Drysdale SB(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical and Biomedical Education, St George's University of 
London, London, SW17 0RE, UK.
(2)Population Health Research Institute, St George's University of London, 
London, SW17 0RE, UK.
(3)Department of Primary Care and Public Health, Imperial College London, 
London, W6 8RP, UK.
(4)Department of Paediatric Infectious Diseases, St George's University 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, SW17 0QT, UK.
(5)Centre for Neonatal and Paediatric Infection, St George's University of 
London, London, SW17 0RE, UK.

The monkeypox virus outbreak continues to evolve worldwide. While most people 
recover without treatment, primary care clinicians may be the first point of 
contact for those affected. Prompt assessment, diagnosis, isolation, treatment 
and prophylaxis will reduce the risk of community transmission. The current 
public health advice is to test suspected cases and monitor close contacts. If 
individuals test positive for the monkeypox virus, self-isolation at home is 
recommended for most people with mild symptoms. If patients report severe 
symptoms, referral and admission to hospital will be needed, where further 
interventions such as antivirals may be administered. The infection can spread 
through close contact; therefore, healthcare professionals must take 
precautions, such as using appropriate personal protective equipment for 
possible or probable cases.

DOI: 10.1177/01410768221131914
PMCID: PMC9720287
PMID: 36342045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]