---
reference_id: "PMID:37473502"
title: Investigating the aggregation perspective of Dengue virus proteome.
authors:
- Kapuganti SK
- Saumya KU
- Verma D
- Giri R
journal: Virology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2023.07.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigating the aggregation perspective of Dengue virus proteome.
**Authors:** Kapuganti SK, Saumya KU, Verma D, Giri R
**Journal:** Virology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.virol.2023.07.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2023.07.010)

## Content

1. Virology. 2023 Sep;586:12-22. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2023.07.010. Epub 2023 Jul 
13.

Investigating the aggregation perspective of Dengue virus proteome.

Kapuganti SK(1), Saumya KU(1), Verma D(1), Giri R(2).

Author information:
(1)Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, School of Basic Sciences, VPO Kamand, 
Himachal Pradesh, 175005, India.
(2)Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, School of Basic Sciences, VPO Kamand, 
Himachal Pradesh, 175005, India. Electronic address: 
rajanishgiri@iitmandi.ac.in.

Dengue viruses are human pathogens that are transmitted through mosquitoes. 
Apart from the typical symptoms associated with viral fevers, DENV infections 
are known to cause several neurological complications such as meningitis, 
encephalitis, intracranial haemorrhage, retinopathies along with the more 
severe, and sometimes fatal, vascular leakage and dengue shock syndrome. This 
study was designed to investigate, in detail, the predicted viral protein 
aggregation prone regions among all serotypes. Further, in order to understand 
the cross-talk between viral protein aggregation and aggregation of cellular 
proteins, cross-seeding experiments between the DENV NS1 (1-30), corresponding 
to the β-roll domain and the diabetes hallmark protein, amylin, were performed. 
Various techniques such as fluorescence spectroscopy, circular dichroism, atomic 
force microscopy and immunoblotting have been employed for this. We observe that 
the DENV proteomes have many predicted APRs and the NS1 (1-30) of DENV1-3, 2K 
and capsid anchor of DENV2 and DENV4 are capable of forming amyloids, in vitro. 
Further, the DENV NS1 (1-30), aggregates are also able to cross-seed and enhance 
amylin aggregation and vice-versa. This knowledge may lead to an opportunity for 
designing suitable inhibitors of protein aggregation that may be beneficial for 
viral infections and comorbidities.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2023.07.010
PMID: 37473502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.