---
reference_id: "PMID:36627608"
title: CMTM6 overexpression confers trastuzumab resistance in HER2-positive breast cancer.
authors:
- Xing F
- Gao H
- Chen G
- Sun L
- Sun J
- Qiao X
- Xue J
- Liu C
journal: Mol Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12943-023-01716-y
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Breast Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy"
- Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Trastuzumab/pharmacology
- MARVEL Domain-Containing Proteins/genetics
- Myelin Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CMTM6 overexpression confers trastuzumab resistance in HER2-positive breast cancer.
**Authors:** Xing F, Gao H, Chen G, Sun L, Sun J, Qiao X, Xue J, Liu C
**Journal:** Mol Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12943-023-01716-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-023-01716-y)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer. 2023 Jan 10;22(1):6. doi: 10.1186/s12943-023-01716-y.

CMTM6 overexpression confers trastuzumab resistance in HER2-positive breast
cancer.

Xing F(1), Gao H(1), Chen G(1), Sun L(1), Sun J(1), Qiao X(1), Xue J(1), Liu
C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Innovative Cancer Drug Research and Engineering
Center of Liaoning Province, Cancer Stem Cell and Translation Medicine Lab,
Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, 110022, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Innovative Cancer Drug Research and Engineering
Center of Liaoning Province, Cancer Stem Cell and Translation Medicine Lab,
Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, 110022, China.
liucg@sj-hospital.org.

Erratum in
    Mol Cancer. 2024 Jan 5;23(1):3. doi: 10.1186/s12943-023-01918-4.
    Mol Cancer. 2025 Apr 14;24(1):115. doi: 10.1186/s12943-025-02317-7.

Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive (HER2+) breast cancer is
characterized by invasive growth, rapid metastasis and chemoresistance.
Trastuzumab is an effective treatment for HER2+ breast cancer; however,
trastuzumab resistance leads to cancer relapse and metastasis. CKLF-like MARVEL
transmembrane domain-containing 6 (CMTM6) has been considered as a new immune
checkpoint for tumor-induced immunosuppression. The role of CMTM6 in trastuzumab
resistance remains unknown. Here, we uncover a role of CMTM6 in
trastuzumab-resistant HER2+ breast cancer. CMTM6 expression was upregulated in
trastuzumab-resistant HER2+ breast cancer cell. Patients with high CMTM6
expressing HER2+ breast cancer had worse overall and progression-free survival
than those with low CMTM6 expression. In vitro, CMTM6 knockdown inhibited the
proliferation and migration of HER2+ breast cancer cells, and promoted their
apoptosis, while CMTM6 overexpression reversed these effects. CMTM6 and HER2
proteins were co-localized on the surface of breast cancer cells, and CMTM6
silencing reduced HER2 protein levels in breast cancer cells.
Co-immunoprecipitation revealed that CMTM6 directly interacted with HER2 in
HER2+ breast cancer cells, and CMTM6 overexpression inhibited HER2
ubiquitination. Collectively, these findings highlight that CMTM6 stabilizes
HER2 protein, contributing to trastuzumab resistance and implicate CMTM6 as a
potential prognostic marker and therapeutic target for overcoming trastuzumab
resistance in HER2+ breast cancer.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12943-023-01716-y
PMCID: PMC9830830
PMID: 36627608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
