---
reference_id: "PMID:27303468"
title: "Kniest Dysplasia: New Radiographic Features in the Skeleton."
authors:
- Maldjian C
- Chew FS
- Klein R
- Bonakdarpour A
- McCarthy J
- Kelly J
journal: Radiol Case Rep
year: '2007'
doi: 10.2484/rcr.v2i2.89
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kniest Dysplasia: New Radiographic Features in the Skeleton.
**Authors:** Maldjian C, Chew FS, Klein R, Bonakdarpour A, McCarthy J, Kelly J
**Journal:** Radiol Case Rep (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2484/rcr.v2i2.89](https://doi.org/10.2484/rcr.v2i2.89)

## Content

1. Radiol Case Rep. 2015 Dec 7;2(2):72-7. doi: 10.2484/rcr.v2i2.89. eCollection 
2007.

Kniest Dysplasia: New Radiographic Features in the Skeleton.

Maldjian C, Chew FS, Klein R, Bonakdarpour A, McCarthy J, Kelly J.

OBJECTIVE: To describe skeletal findings in patients with Kniest dysplasia, 
focusing on osseous abnormalities that have not been characteristically 
associated with this disorder.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a retrospective study. The radiographs of four 
patients with known Kniest Dysplasia were evaluated by three musculoskeletal 
radiologists.
RESULTS: Bilateral radial head dislocations and bilateral clubfeet were seen in 
our series. Other characteristic findings for this dysplasia were seen in all 
four patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Clubfeet and radial head dislocations may be associated with Kniest 
dysplasia. The presence of these osseous findings in the context of multiple 
skeletal abnormalities suggestive of a skeletal dysplasia should indicate the 
possibility of Kniest dysplasia and pathognomonic features for this entity 
should be sought.

DOI: 10.2484/rcr.v2i2.89
PMCID: PMC4891633
PMID: 27303468