---
reference_id: "PMID:21092305"
title: Multiple mycobacterial antigens are targets of the adaptive immune response in pulmonary sarcoidosis.
authors:
- Oswald-Richter KA
- Beachboard DC
- Zhan X
- Gaskill CF
- Abraham S
- Jenkins C
- Culver DA
- Drake W
journal: Respir Res
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-161
keywords:
- Adaptive Immunity/immunology
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antigens, Bacterial/immunology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mycobacterium/immunology
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/immunology"
- Th1 Cells/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple mycobacterial antigens are targets of the adaptive immune response in pulmonary sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Oswald-Richter KA, Beachboard DC, Zhan X, Gaskill CF, Abraham S, Jenkins C, Culver DA, Drake W
**Journal:** Respir Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1465-9921-11-161](https://doi.org/10.1186/1465-9921-11-161)

## Content

1. Respir Res. 2010 Nov 23;11(1):161. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-161.

Multiple mycobacterial antigens are targets of the adaptive immune response in 
pulmonary sarcoidosis.

Oswald-Richter KA(1), Beachboard DC, Zhan X, Gaskill CF, Abraham S, Jenkins C, 
Culver DA, Drake W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-2363, USA. kyra.richter@vanderbilt.edu

INTRODUCTION: Sarcoidosis is a multisystem granulomatous disease for which the 
association with mycobacteria continues to strengthen. It is hypothesized that a 
single, poorly degradable antigen is responsible for sarcoidosis pathogenesis. 
Several reports from independent groups support mycobacterial antigens having a 
role in sarcoidosis pathogenesis. To identify other microbial targets of the 
adaptive immune response, we tested the ability of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells to 
recognize multiple mycobacterial antigens.
METHODS: Fifty-four subjects were enrolled in this study: 31 sarcoidosis 
patients, nine non-tuberculosis mycobacterial (NTM) infection controls, and 14 
PPD- controls. Using flow cytometry, we assessed for Th1 immune responses to 
ESAT-6, katG, Ag85A, sodA, and HSP.
RESULTS: Alveolar T-cells from twenty-two of the 31 sarcoidosis patients 
produced a CD4+ response to at least one of ESAT-6, katG, Ag85A, sodA, or HSP, 
compared to two of 14 PPD- controls (p = 0.0008) and five of nine NTM controls 
(p = 0.44), while eighteen of the 31 sarcoidosis subjects tested produced a CD8+ 
response to at least one of the mycobacterial antigens compared to two of 14 
PPD- controls (p = 0.009) and three of nine NTM controls (0.26). Not only did 
the BAL-derived T cells respond to multiple virulence factors, but also to 
multiple, distinct epitopes within a given protein. The detection of 
proliferation upon stimulation with the mycobacterial virulence factors 
demonstrates that these responses are initiated by antigen specific recognition.
CONCLUSIONS: Together these results reveal that antigen-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells responses to multiple mycobacterial epitopes are present within sites of 
active sarcoidosis involvement, and that these antigen-specific responses are 
present at the time of diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-161
PMCID: PMC2999599
PMID: 21092305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]