---
reference_id: "PMID:35119035"
title: "Bohring-Opitz syndrome caused by a novel ASXL1 mutation (c.3762delT) in an IVF baby: A case report."
authors:
- Wang D
- Yuan X
- Guo H
- Yan S
- Wang G
- Wang Y
- Wang T
- He J
- Peng X
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000028759
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Craniosynostoses/genetics
- Female
- Fertilization in Vitro
- Humans
- Infant
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Sialorrhea
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bohring-Opitz syndrome caused by a novel ASXL1 mutation (c.3762delT) in an IVF baby: A case report.
**Authors:** Wang D, Yuan X, Guo H, Yan S, Wang G, Wang Y, Wang T, He J, Peng X
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000028759](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000028759)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2022 Feb 4;101(5):e28759. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000028759.

Bohring-Opitz syndrome caused by a novel ASXL1 mutation (c.3762delT) in an IVF 
baby: A case report.

Wang D(1), Yuan X(2), Guo H(1), Yan S(1), Wang G(1), Wang Y(1), Wang T(1), He 
J(1), Peng X(1).

Author information:
(1)Changsha Hospital for Maternal and Child Health Care of Hunan Normal 
University, China.
(2)The First Hospital of Hunan University of Chinese Medicine, China.

RATIONALE: Bohring-Opitz syndrome is a severe congenital disorder associated 
with a de novo mutation in the additional sex combs-like 1 (ASXL1) gene, and it 
is characterized by symptoms that include developmental delay and 
musculoskeletal and neurological features.
PATIENT CONCERNS: The patient was a girl, an in vitro fertilization (IVF) baby, 
with delayed motor development, drooling, short stature, slow growth, low muscle 
tone, image diagnosis of hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, delayed tooth 
eruption, high palatal arch, adduction of the thumb, drooling, not chewing, 
excessive joint activity, and ligament relaxation.
DIAGNOSIS: Whole-exome sequencing analysis detected 1 novel disruptive 
frameshift mutation in ASXL1 in the proband but wild-type ASXL1 in both parents.
INTERVENTIONS: Approximately 1 year of rehabilitation training, which included 
exercise therapy, toy imitation operation, cognition of daily objects, daily 
living skills training, gesture language training, oral muscle training, and 
hand movement training.
OUTCOMES: After approximately 1 year of training, the patient was 3 years old 
and able to eat normally without drooling. She was able to grasp objects and 
pick them up after they fell. She was able to grasp small objects and actively 
played with toys. In addition, she was able to crawl on the floor (at slow 
speed, with poor initiative), stand with assistance, and walk with assistance; 
she was unstable when standing unassisted (standing unassisted for 8 seconds at 
most during training).
LESSON: ASXL1 c.3762delT is a novel mutation that may be caused by IVF. This 
finding suggests that appropriate gene mutation detection approaches may be 
necessary for IVF technology.

Copyright © 2022 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000028759
PMCID: PMC8812699
PMID: 35119035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.