---
reference_id: "PMID:38517161"
title: Resolution of severe neurobehavioral difficulties in an individual with Primrose syndrome with sertraline.
authors:
- Moon YM
- Park SE
- Smith-Hicks C
- Hauptman A
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63610
keywords:
- Humans
- Sertraline/therapeutic use
- Male
- Adolescent
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, drug therapy"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics, drug therapy"
- Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, drug therapy, psychology"
- Calcinosis
- Ear Diseases
- Muscular Atrophy
- Nerve Tissue Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Resolution of severe neurobehavioral difficulties in an individual with Primrose syndrome with sertraline.
**Authors:** Moon YM, Park SE, Smith-Hicks C, Hauptman A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63610](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63610)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2024 Aug;194(8):e63610. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63610. Epub 2024
 Mar 22.

Resolution of severe neurobehavioral difficulties in an individual with Primrose 
syndrome with sertraline.

Moon YM(1), Park SE(1)(2), Smith-Hicks C(3)(4), Hauptman A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, 
USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins Univerisity, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Primrose syndrome (PS) is a rare genetic disease characterized by developmental 
delay, intellectual disability, sensorineural hearing loss, and dysmorphic 
features. PS is caused by de novo pathogenic variants in the ZBTB20 gene, which 
encodes a transcription factor modulating neurogenesis. We describe resolution 
with sertraline of neurobehavioral difficulties in a 17-year-old Hispanic male 
with PS with de novo heterozygous c.1916G > A (p.C639Y) variant of ZBTB20. 
Neurobehavioral difficulties included aggression towards self and others, 
irritability, tearfulness, and mood liability that did not respond to behavioral 
interventions or aripiprazole. Treatment with sertraline, a medication indicated 
for psychiatric disorders including anxiety and depression, led to the 
resolution of neurobehavioral difficulties after 2 weeks of initiation of 
medication. The treatment course suggests that selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors, such as sertraline, may be a useful tool for neurobehavioral 
difficulties in PS over antipsychotics that are accompanied by complex side 
effect profiles, and suggest that anxiety is the primary cause of the 
neurobehavioral difficulties in this patient.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63610
PMID: 38517161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]