---
reference_id: "PMID:25496790"
title: "[Smoking cessation in smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease]."
authors:
- Underner M
- Perriot J
- Peiffer G
journal: Rev Mal Respir
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2014.07.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Smoking cessation in smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].
**Authors:** Underner M, Perriot J, Peiffer G
**Journal:** Rev Mal Respir (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmr.2014.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmr.2014.07.001)

## Content

1. Rev Mal Respir. 2014 Dec;31(10):937-60. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2014.07.001. Epub 
2014 Aug 18.

[Smoking cessation in smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in French]

Underner M(1), Perriot J(2), Peiffer G(3).

Author information:
(1)Service de pneumologie, centre de lutte antituberculeuse (CLAT 86), unité de 
tabacologie, CHU de Poitiers, CHU la Milétrie, pavillon René-Beauchant, BP 577, 
86021 Poitiers cedex, France. Electronic address: m.underner@chu-poitiers.fr.
(2)Dispensaire Émile-Roux, centre de tabacologie, centre de lutte 
antituberculeuse (CLAT 63), 63100 Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(3)Service de pneumologie, consultation de tabacologie - CHR Metz-Thionville, 
57038 Metz, France.

One out of two smokers who smoke throughout their lifetime will die from a 
disease related to smoking. Tobacco smoking therefore represents a major global 
public health issue. Smoking is the leading cause of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Projections for 2020 indicate that by then, COPD will 
have become the third cause of death and the fifth cause of disability 
worldwide. Stopping smoking reduces the risk of developing COPD and is an 
essential treatment for this inflammatory disease. Smoking cessation decreases 
the prevalence of respiratory symptoms, number of hospitalizations, and decline 
in FEV1, as well as exacerbation frequency and overall mortality. Among the 
patients, 38-77% with COPD are smokers. Their daily cigarette consumption and 
level of nicotine dependence are often high. The combination of high intensity 
behavioral interventions and medication treatments (nicotine replacement 
therapy, varenicline, bupropion) is the most effective strategy for smokers with 
COPD. In contrast, behavioral interventions without medication are not more 
effective than simple advice to stop. Two factors seem to predict the success of 
the attempt to quit in smokers with COPD: a strong motivation to quit and the 
use of smoking cessation medications.

Copyright © 2014 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2014.07.001
PMID: 25496790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]