---
reference_id: "PMID:33780808"
title: Low-field portable brain MRI in CNS demyelinating disease.
authors:
- Mateen FJ
- Cooley CZ
- Stockmann JP
- Rice DR
- Vogel AC
- Wald LL
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2021.102903
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low-field portable brain MRI in CNS demyelinating disease.
**Authors:** Mateen FJ, Cooley CZ, Stockmann JP, Rice DR, Vogel AC, Wald LL
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2021.102903](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2021.102903)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2021 Jun;51:102903. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2021.102903.
 Epub 2021 Mar 18.

Low-field portable brain MRI in CNS demyelinating disease.

Mateen FJ(1), Cooley CZ(2), Stockmann JP(2), Rice DR(3), Vogel AC(3), Wald 
LL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 
Electronic address: fmateen@mgh.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 
Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 
Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and 
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.

A low-field (80 mT), portable MRI scanner has been developed that may address 
barriers to MRI for people with multiple sclerosis (MS). As a proof of concept 
study, we imaged two participants with central nervous system demyelinating 
disease by both a standard 1.5 Tesla MRI and the portable MRI scanner. These 
images demonstrate the ability to identify a solitary demyelinating lesion in 
early stage disease and cortical atrophy and chronic white matter changes in 
late stage disease. In spite of device limitations, including border distortion 
and lower image quality, the portable device has important implications for 
addressing barriers to care in people with MS.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2021.102903
PMID: 33780808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Drs. Wald, 
Cooley, and Stockmann have an equity share and consulting role in Neuro42 Inc, 
which was formed to commercialize portable brain MRI. Dr. Mateen, Mr. Rice, and 
Mr. Vogel report no conflicts of interest.