---
reference_id: "PMID:32881242"
title: Exploration of CTNNB1 ctDNA as a putative biomarker for hepatoblastoma.
authors:
- Kahana-Edwin S
- McCowage G
- Cain L
- Saletta F
- Yuksel A
- Graf N
- Karpelowsky J
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.28594
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/blood, genetics"
- "Circulating Tumor DNA/blood, genetics"
- "DNA, Neoplasm/blood, genetics"
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Hepatoblastoma/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- "beta Catenin/blood, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploration of CTNNB1 ctDNA as a putative biomarker for hepatoblastoma.
**Authors:** Kahana-Edwin S, McCowage G, Cain L, Saletta F, Yuksel A, Graf N, Karpelowsky J
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.28594](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.28594)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2020 Nov;67(11):e28594. doi: 10.1002/pbc.28594. Epub
2020  Sep 2.

Exploration of CTNNB1 ctDNA as a putative biomarker for hepatoblastoma.

Kahana-Edwin S(1), McCowage G(2), Cain L(2), Saletta F(1), Yuksel A(3), Graf 
N(4), Karpelowsky J(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Children's Cancer Research Unit, Kids Research, The Children's Hospital at 
Westmead, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)Cancer Centre for Children, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, 
New South Wales, Australia.
(3)The Tumour Bank, Children's Cancer Research Unit, Kids Research, The 
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.
(4)Department of Histopathology, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, 
New South Wales, Australia.
(5)Paediatric Oncology and Thoracic Surgery, The Children's Hospital at 
Westmead, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.
(6)Division of Child and Adolescent Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
New South Wales, Australia.

Driver mutations in the CTNNB1 gene (encoding β-catenin) are a hallmark of 
sporadic hepatoblastoma (HBL). Our results show that CTNNB1 circulating tumour 
DNA (ctDNA) is readily detected in patients diagnosed with localised HBL, with 
serial sampling along the course of therapy and follow up providing a sensitive 
mechanism to monitor tumour dynamics and response to treatment. This exciting 
potential for CTNNB1 ctDNA to serve as a biomarker for treatment response in HBL 
holds clinical value, and requires assessment in a larger cohort of mixed tumour 
stages and recurrent disease.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.28594
PMID: 32881242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]