---
reference_id: "PMID:35720238"
title: "Complete gonadal dysgenesis analysis in the population of Latvia: malignant outcomes and a review of literature."
authors:
- Jakovleva A
- Kovalova Z
journal: Med Pharm Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.15386/mpr-2064
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complete gonadal dysgenesis analysis in the population of Latvia: malignant outcomes and a review of literature.
**Authors:** Jakovleva A, Kovalova Z
**Journal:** Med Pharm Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.15386/mpr-2064](https://doi.org/10.15386/mpr-2064)

## Content

1. Med Pharm Rep. 2022 Jan;95(1):47-53. doi: 10.15386/mpr-2064. Epub 2022 Jan 31.

Complete gonadal dysgenesis analysis in the population of Latvia: malignant 
outcomes and a review of literature.

Jakovleva A(1)(2), Kovalova Z(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Residency, Riga Stradins University, 
Riga, Latvia.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Clinical University Hospital, Riga, 
Latvia.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Riga Stradins University, 
Riga, Latvia.
(4)Department of Hemato-oncology, Children's Clinical University Hospital, Riga, 
Latvia.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Complete gonadal dysgenesis or Swyer syndrome is a rare 
genetic disorder characterized by 46,XY karyotype and female phenotype with 
undeveloped streak gonads and high malignancy risk. The condition usually 
manifests in teenage and young adults with delayed puberty and primary 
amenorrhea. The purpose of this study was to investigate the incidence and 
potential malignant outcomes of complete gonadal dysgenesis in Latvia.
METHODS: 37 patients were included in a retrospective study from 1996 to 2016. 
In fifteen cases, additional patient information was available. Information from 
medical records was collected on age at the time of diagnosis: anamnesis data, 
laboratory results, histology of gonads, and treatment.
RESULTS: Complete gonadal dysgenesis with karyotype 46,XY was proven in 36 
(97.3%) cases and one (2.7%) case with karyotype 47,XY,+21. The average age of 
patients at the time of diagnosis was 15.4 ± 8.0 years. The study included 15 
cases: eight patients (53.3%) were investigated for primary amenorrhea, and 
incomplete development of secondary sexual characteristics, 5 patients (33.3%) 
with abdominal pain and lower abdominal mass, 2 patients (13.3%) were diagnosed 
at birth. Gonadectomy was performed in 12 cases (80%). The median time between 
diagnosis and gonadectomy was 0.4 ± 4.3 years. The histopathology results from 
the gonadal biopsy showed malignancy in 7 cases (58.3%). The most commonly 
diagnosed tumors were dysgerminoma and gonadoblastoma.
CONCLUSION: Early diagnosis of Swyer syndrome is necessary in view of the risk 
of malignancy that can develop at a young age. In several cases, the diagnosis 
of the syndrome was made only after the malignant process development. The study 
showed the median time between diagnosis and gonadectomy was suboptimal. 
Therefore, women with amenorrhea and lack of secondary sexual characteristics 
require careful investigation.

DOI: 10.15386/mpr-2064
PMCID: PMC9177091
PMID: 35720238