---
reference_id: "PMID:18565211"
title: Hereditary alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency and its clinical consequences.
authors:
- Fregonese L
- Stolk J
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-16
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Liver Cirrhosis/physiopathology, therapy"
- Mutation
- Prevalence
- "Pulmonary Emphysema/physiopathology, therapy"
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency and its clinical consequences.
**Authors:** Fregonese L, Stolk J
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-3-16](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-3-16)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2008 Jun 19;3:16. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-16.

Hereditary alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency and its clinical consequences.

Fregonese L(1), Stolk J.

Author information:
(1)Alpha1 International Registry, c/o Department of Pulmology, Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. L.Fregonese@lumc.nl

Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a genetic disorder that manifests as 
pulmonary emphysema, liver cirrhosis and, rarely, as the skin disease 
panniculitis, and is characterized by low serum levels of AAT, the main protease 
inhibitor (PI) in human serum. The prevalence in Western Europe and in the USA 
is estimated at approximately 1 in 2,500 and 1 : 5,000 newborns, and is highly 
dependent on the Scandinavian descent within the population. The most common 
deficiency alleles in North Europe are PI Z and PI S, and the majority of 
individuals with severe AATD are PI type ZZ. The clinical manifestations may 
widely vary between patients, ranging from asymptomatic in some to fatal liver 
or lung disease in others. Type ZZ and SZ AATD are risk factors for the 
development of respiratory symptoms (dyspnoea, coughing), early onset emphysema, 
and airflow obstruction early in adult life. Environmental factors such as 
cigarette smoking, and dust exposure are additional risk factors and have been 
linked to an accelerated progression of this condition. Type ZZ AATD may also 
lead to the development of acute or chronic liver disease in childhood or 
adulthood: prolonged jaundice after birth with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia and 
abnormal liver enzymes are characteristic clinical signs. Cirrhotic liver 
failure may occur around age 50. In very rare cases, necrotizing panniculitis 
and secondary vasculitis may occur. AATD is caused by mutations in the SERPINA1 
gene encoding AAT, and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. The 
diagnosis can be established by detection of low serum levels of AAT and 
isoelectric focusing. Differential diagnoses should exclude bleeding disorders 
or jaundice, viral infection, hemochromatosis, Wilson's disease and autoimmune 
hepatitis. For treatment of lung disease, intravenous alpha-1-antitrypsin 
augmentation therapy, annual flu vaccination and a pneumococcal vaccine every 5 
years are recommended. Relief of breathlessness may be obtained with long-acting 
bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroids. The end-stage liver and lung 
disease can be treated by organ transplantation. In AATD patients with 
cirrhosis, prognosis is generally grave.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-16
PMCID: PMC2441617
PMID: 18565211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]