---
reference_id: "PMID:15698568"
title: Three-dimensional structure and regulation of the DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs).
authors:
- Rivera-Calzada A
- Maman JD
- Spagnolo L
- Pearl LH
- Llorca O
journal: Structure
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2004.12.006
keywords:
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins
- Catalytic Domain
- Cell Cycle Proteins/chemistry
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- DNA/metabolism
- DNA-Activated Protein Kinase
- DNA-Binding Proteins/chemistry
- Enzyme Activation
- Humans
- Molecular Conformation
- Nuclear Proteins
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/chemistry
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/chemistry
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Three-dimensional structure and regulation of the DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs).
**Authors:** Rivera-Calzada A, Maman JD, Spagnolo L, Pearl LH, Llorca O
**Journal:** Structure (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2004.12.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2004.12.006)

## Content

1. Structure. 2005 Feb;13(2):243-55. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2004.12.006.

Three-dimensional structure and regulation of the DNA-dependent protein kinase
catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs).

Rivera-Calzada A(1), Maman JD, Spagnolo L, Pearl LH, Llorca O.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas (CSIC), Ramiro de Maeztu 9, Campus Universidad Complutense, 28040
Madrid, Spain.

Erratum in
    Structure (Camb). 2005 Mar;13(3):495. Maman, Joseph P [corrected to Maman,
Joseph D].

DNA-PKcs is a large PI3-kinase-related protein kinase (PIKK) that plays a
central role in DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair via nonhomologous end
joining. Using cryo-electron microscopy we have now generated an approximately
13 A three-dimensional map of DNA-PKcs, revealing the overall architecture and
topology of the 4128 residue polypeptide chain and allowing location of domains.
The highly conserved C-terminal PIKK catalytic domain forms a central structure
from which FAT and FATC domains protrude. Conformational changes observed in
these domains on DNA binding suggest that they transduce DNA-induced
conformational changes to the catalytic core and regulate kinase activity. The
N-terminal segments form long curved tubular-shaped domains based on helical
repeats to create interacting surfaces required for macromolecular assembly.
Comparison of DNA-PKcs with another PIKK DNA repair factor, ATM, defines a
common architecture for this important protein family.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2004.12.006
PMID: 15698568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
