---
reference_id: PMID:31562289
title: "Hearing consequences in Gjb2 knock-in mice: implications for human p.V37I mutation."
authors:
- Lin X
- Li G
- Zhang Y
- Zhao J
- Lu J
- Gao Y
- Liu H
- Li GL
- Yang T
- Song L
- Wu H
journal: Aging (Albany NY)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.18632/aging.102246
keywords:
- Animals
- Asian People/genetics
- Connexin 26
- Connexins/genetics
- Furosemide/toxicity
- Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- Potassium/metabolism
- Sodium Potassium Chloride Symporter Inhibitors/toxicity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hearing consequences in Gjb2 knock-in mice: implications for human p.V37I mutation.
**Authors:** Lin X, Li G, Zhang Y, Zhao J, Lu J, Gao Y, Liu H, Li GL, Yang T, Song L, Wu H
**Journal:** Aging (Albany NY) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.18632/aging.102246](https://doi.org/10.18632/aging.102246)

## Content

1. Aging (Albany NY). 2019 Sep 27;11(18):7416-7441. doi: 10.18632/aging.102246. 
Epub 2019 Sep 27.

Hearing consequences in Gjb2 knock-in mice: implications for human p.V37I 
mutation.

Lin X(1)(2)(3), Li G(1)(2)(3), Zhang Y(1)(2)(3), Zhao J(1)(2)(3), Lu J(1)(2)(3), 
Gao Y(1)(2)(3), Liu H(1)(2)(3), Li GL(1)(2)(3), Yang T(1)(2)(3), Song 
L(1)(2)(3), Wu H(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, 
China.
(2)Ear Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 
200125, China.
(3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine on Ear and Nose diseases, 
Shanghai 200125, China.

Human p.V37I mutation of GJB2 gene was strongly correlated with late-onset 
progressive hearing loss, especially among East Asia populations. We generated a 
knock-in mouse model based on human p.V37I variant (c.109G>A) that recapitulated 
the human phenotype. Cochlear pathology revealed no significant hair cell loss, 
stria vascularis atrophy or spiral ganglion neuron loss, but a significant 
change in the length of gap junction plaques, which may have contributed to the 
observed mild endocochlear potential (EP) drop in homozygous mice lasting 
lifetime. The cochlear amplification in homozygous mice was compromised, but 
outer hair cells' function remained unchanged, indicating that the reduced 
amplification was EP- rather than prestin-generated. In addition to ABR 
threshold elevation, ABR wave I latencies were also prolonged in aged homozygous 
animals. We found in homozygous IHCs a significant increase in ICa but no change 
in Ca2+ efficiency in triggering exocytosis. Environmental insults such as noise 
exposure, middle ear injection of KCl solution and systemic application of 
furosemide all exacerbated the pathological phenotype in homozygous mice. We 
conclude that this Gjb2 mutation-induced hearing loss results from 1) reduced 
cochlear amplifier caused by lowered EP, 2) IHCs excitotoxicity associated with 
potassium accumulation around hair cells, and 3) progression induced by 
environmental insults.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.102246
PMCID: PMC6782001
PMID: 31562289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declared that 
no conflict of interest exists.