---
reference_id: "PMID:29607805"
title: Intestinal Ostomy.
authors:
- Ambe PC
- Kurz NR
- Nitschke C
- Odeh SF
- Möslein G
- Zirngibl H
journal: Dtsch Arztebl Int
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2018.0182
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intestinal Ostomy.
**Authors:** Ambe PC, Kurz NR, Nitschke C, Odeh SF, Möslein G, Zirngibl H
**Journal:** Dtsch Arztebl Int (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3238/arztebl.2018.0182](https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.2018.0182)

## Content

1. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2018 Mar 16;115(11):182-187. doi:
10.3238/arztebl.2018.0182.

Intestinal Ostomy.

Ambe PC(1), Kurz NR, Nitschke C, Odeh SF, Möslein G, Zirngibl H.

Author information:
(1)Department of; Visceral, Minimally Invasive, and Oncological Surgery, Marien 
Hospital Düsseldorf; Department of General and Visceral Surgery, Chair of 
Surgery II, Helios University Hospital Wuppertal, University of Witten/Herdecke 
Helios University Hospital Wuppertal, University of Witten/Herdecke; Center for 
Hereditary Gastrointestinal Tumors, Chair of Surgery II, Helios; University 
Hospital Wuppertal, University of Witten/Herdecke.

BACKGROUND: About 100 000 ostomy carriers are estimated to live in Germany 
today. The creation of an ostomy represents a major life event that can be 
associated with impaired quality of life. Optimal ostomy creation and proper 
ostomy care are crucially important determinants of the success of treatment and 
of the patients' quality of life.
METHODS: This article is based on pertinent publications retrieved by a 
selective search in PubMed, GoogleScholar, and Scopus, and on the authors' 
experience.
RESULTS: Intestinal stomata can be created using either the small or the large 
bowel. More than 75% of all stomata are placed as part of the treatment of 
colorectal cancer. The incidence of stoma-related complications is reported to 
be 10-70%. Skin irritation, erosion, and ulceration are the most common early 
complications, with a combined incidence of 25-34%, while stoma prolapse is the 
most common late complication, with an incidence of 8-75%. Most early 
complications can be managed conservatively, while most late complications 
require surgical revision. In 19% of cases, an ostomy that was initially planned 
to be temporary becomes permanent. Inappropriate stoma location and inadequate 
ostomy care are the most common causes of early complications. Both surgical and 
patient-related factors influence late complications.
CONCLUSION: Every step from the planning of a stoma to its postoperative care 
should be discussed with the patient in detail. Preoperative marking is 
essential for an optimal stoma site. Optimal patient management with the 
involvement of an ostomy nurse increases ostomy acceptance, reduces 
ostomy-related complications, and improves the quality of life of ostomy 
carriers.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2018.0182
PMCID: PMC5913578
PMID: 29607805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]