---
reference_id: "PMID:25736532"
title: "Isaacs syndrome: A review."
authors:
- Ahmed A
- Simmons Z
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/mus.24632
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isaacs syndrome: A review.
**Authors:** Ahmed A, Simmons Z
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.24632](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.24632)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2015 Jul;52(1):5-12. doi: 10.1002/mus.24632. Epub 2015 Mar 31.

Isaacs syndrome: A review.

Ahmed A(1), Simmons Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Penn State Hershey Medical Center, EC 037, 30 Hope 
Drive, Hershey, Pennsylvania, 17033, USA.
(2)Department of Humanities, Penn State Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, 
Pennyslvania, USA.

Isaacs syndrome is a peripheral nerve hyperexcitability (PNH) syndrome that 
presents as continuous motor activity. Clinical findings include cramps, 
fasciculations, and myokymia. Electrodiagnosis plays a key role in diagnosis by 
demonstrating after-discharges on nerve conduction studies, and fasciculation 
potentials, myokymic discharges, neuromyotonic discharges, and other types of 
abnormal spontaneous activity on needle examination. Etiopathogenesis involves 
the interaction of genetic, autoimmune, and paraneoplastic factors, which 
requires a broad-ranging evaluation for underlying causes. Initial treatment is 
symptomatic, but immune therapy is often needed and can be effective. The 
purpose of this review is to describe the syndrome and its pathogenesis, assist 
the reader in evaluating patients with suspected Isaacs syndrome and 
distinguishing it from other disorders of PNH, and suggest an approach to 
management, including both symptomatic and immunomodulating therapy.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.24632
PMID: 25736532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]