---
reference_id: "PMID:22195407"
title: Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Proytcheva M
journal: Semin Diagn Pathol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2011.08.007
keywords:
- Child
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Immunophenotyping
- "Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Juvenile/genetics, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Proytcheva M
**Journal:** Semin Diagn Pathol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.semdp.2011.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.semdp.2011.08.007)

## Content

1. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2011 Nov;28(4):298-303. doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2011.08.007.

Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.

Proytcheva M(1).

Author information:
(1)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Children's Memorial
Hospital, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA. mproytcheva@childrensmemorial.org

Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is a rare childhood neoplasm with
features characteristic of both myelodysplastic and myeloproliferative
disorders. Children with JMML typically present with marked splenomegaly and
hepatomegaly and varying degrees of lymphadenopathy, pallor, and skin rash. The
peripheral blood usually show leukocytosis, absolute monocytosis, often with
dysplastic features, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. While the bone marrow
findings are less specific, hypercellularity due to myelomonocytic
proliferation, mild dysplasia, and a reduced number of megakaryocytes are
usually present. The hallmark of JMML is hypersensitivity of marrow progenitors
to granulocyte-monocyte colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) in vitro. Recent
studies have shown that this abnormal proliferation is due to an aberrant signal
transduction resulting from mutations in components of the RAS-signaling
pathway. JMML is an aggressive neoplasm and, while hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation is currently the only curative option, there is an unacceptably
high relapse rate after transplant.

DOI: 10.1053/j.semdp.2011.08.007
PMID: 22195407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
