---
reference_id: "PMID:30415551"
title: "Intra-familial Transmission of Chronic Hepatitis B Infection: A Large Population-Based Cohort Study in Northern Iran."
authors:
- Katoonizadeh A
- Motamed-Gorji N
- Sharafkhah M
- Ostovaneh M
- Esmaili S
- Eslami L
- Gharravi A
- Khoshnia M
- Shayanrad A
- Shakki Katouli F
- Shiravi Khuzani A
- Amini Kafi-Abad S
- Maghsudlu M
- George J
- Poustchi H
- Malekzadeh R
journal: Arch Iran Med
year: '2018'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intra-familial Transmission of Chronic Hepatitis B Infection: A Large Population-Based Cohort Study in Northern Iran.
**Authors:** Katoonizadeh A, Motamed-Gorji N, Sharafkhah M, Ostovaneh M, Esmaili S, Eslami L, Gharravi A, Khoshnia M, Shayanrad A, Shakki Katouli F, Shiravi Khuzani A, Amini Kafi-Abad S, Maghsudlu M, George J, Poustchi H, Malekzadeh R
**Journal:** Arch Iran Med (2018)

## Content

1. Arch Iran Med. 2018 Oct 1;21(10):436-442.

Intra-familial Transmission of Chronic Hepatitis B Infection: A Large 
Population-Based Cohort Study in Northern Iran.

Katoonizadeh A(1), Motamed-Gorji N(1), Sharafkhah M(1), Ostovaneh M(1)(2), 
Esmaili S(1)(3), Eslami L(1), Gharravi A(1), Khoshnia M(1), Shayanrad A(1), 
Shakki Katouli F(4), Shiravi Khuzani A(5), Amini Kafi-Abad S(6), Maghsudlu M(6), 
George J(3), Poustchi H(1), Malekzadeh R(1).

Author information:
(1)Liver and Pancreatobiliary Diseases Research Center, Digestive Disease 
Research Institute, Shariati Hospital, Tehran university of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Johns 
Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, USA.
(3)Storr Liver Centre, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, Westmead 
Hospital and University of Sydney, Westmead, NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of Radiology, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Radiology, Sina Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization Research Center, Department of 
Pathology, Tehran, Iran.

AIM: The aim of this study was to investigate the intra-familial transmission of 
chronic hepatitis B (CHB) in Golestan province, that has the highest prevalence 
of CHB in Iran.
METHODS: The Golestan Cohort Study (GCS) is a population-based prospective study 
of 50045 individuals, 40 years or older, initially set-up to study upper GI 
cancers in Northern Iran. In 2008, a baseline measurement of hepatitis B surface 
antigen (HBsAg) on the stored serum of all GCS participants identified 3505 
HBsAg+ individuals. In 2011, we assessed HBV serological markers in 2590 
initially HBsAg+ individuals and their first-degree relatives including spouses 
(1454) and children (3934).
RESULTS: The median (IQR) age of spouses and children were 52 (12) and 25 (12) 
years respectively. Out of 5388 family members, 2393 (44.5%) had no HBV markers, 
indicating susceptibility to infection. Of these, 378 (15.8%) were 
fully-vaccinated children with no apparent response to primary immunization. 
HBsAg was positive in 2.2% (n = 33) of spouses and 8.2% (n = 325) of children 
(overall rate of 6.6%). HBcAb was positive in 761 (52.3%) and 914 (23%) spouses 
and children, respectively. The rate of spontaneous loss of HBsAg (HBsAg-, 
HBsAb+ and HbcAb+) was 41.3% and 13.9% in spouses and children, respectively. A 
higher rate of HBsAg+ children (10.2%) was found in families in which the mother 
was positive for HBsAg compared with families where the father was positive for 
HBsAg (6.3%) (P < 0.001). When both parents were positive for HBsAg, the rate of 
HBsAg positivity was high (23.5%, P < 0.001). Despite high virus exposure rates 
between spouses (52.6 %), the prevalence of HBsAg positivity among them was very 
low (2.3 %).
CONCLUSION: Sexual and parent-to-child transmission are important routes of CHB 
spread in this population from northern Iran despite the fact that 24 years have 
passed since the beginning of hepatitis B vaccination in infants. Low percentage 
of HBsAg positivity in spouses is related to high HBsAg clearance rate among 
them.

© 2018 The Author(s). This is an open-access article distributed under the terms 
of the Creative Commons Attribution License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is 
properly cited.

PMID: 30415551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]