---
reference_id: "PMID:34033373"
title: Preeclampsia.
authors:
- Karrar SA
- Martingano DJ
- Hong PL
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preeclampsia.
**Authors:** Karrar SA, Martingano DJ, Hong PL

## Content

1. Preeclampsia.

Karrar SA(1), Martingano DJ(2), Hong PL(1).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2024 Feb 25.

Author information:
(1)Nassau University Medical Center
(2)William Carey University; Rutgers University; Episcopal Health Services Inc.

Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy constitute a leading cause of maternal and 
perinatal mortality worldwide. Preeclampsia, with or without severe features, is 
a disorder of pregnancy associated with new-onset hypertension, usually with 
accompanying proteinuria, which occurs most often after 20 weeks of gestation 
and frequently near term. This disease represents a spectrum of hypertensive 
disease in pregnancy, beginning with gestational hypertension and progressing to 
develop severe features, ultimately leading to its more severe manifestations, 
such as eclampsia and HELLP syndrome. This disease encompasses 2% to 8% of 
pregnancy-related complications, more than 50,000 maternal deaths, and over 
500,000 fetal deaths worldwide. Early diagnosis and prompt management are 
essential to preventing both maternal and neonatal complications through 
symptomatic management and delivery planning. The parameters for initial 
identification of hypertension in the context of pregnancy-induced hypertension 
constituting the "mild range" are specifically defined as a systolic blood 
pressure (SBP) of 140 mm Hg or more or diastolic blood pressure (DBP) of 90 mm 
Hg or more on 2 occasions at least 4 hours apart; or shorter interval timing in 
cases of "severe range" hypertension with SBP of 160 mm Hg or more or DBP of 110 
mm Hg or more, all of which must be identified after 20 weeks of gestation. Such 
criteria identified before 20 weeks of gestation would be defined as 
pre-existing essential hypertension or "chronic hypertension." The initial 
presentation of preeclampsia typically arises in near-term pregnancies. The 
progression of pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH) is presently understood to 
first begin with gestational hypertension, where there is new-onset 
hypertension, and then followed by more severe forms of hypertension with 
specific laboratory and clinical criteria to be discussed further. It is 
important to acknowledge, however, that the understanding of the pathophysiology 
of PIH has improved, and its diagnostic criteria have evolved, resulting in the 
classical triad of hypertension, edema, and proteinuria transitioning to 
hypertension and organ dysfunction (ie, renal, hepatic, neurologic, 
hematological, or uteroplacental.) Nonetheless, the most recent definitions 
endorsed by governing bodies such as the American College of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology (ACOG) have largely been based on consensus and expert opinion, not 
primary research.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 34033373

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Shahd Karrar declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Daniel Martingano 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Peter Hong declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.