---
reference_id: "PMID:28573375"
title: "Chronic maxillary atelectasis and silent sinus syndrome: two faces of the same clinical entity."
authors:
- de Dorlodot C
- Collet S
- Rombaux P
- Horoi M
- Hassid S
- Eloy P
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-017-4622-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- Endoscopy
- "Enophthalmos/diagnostic imaging, etiology, surgery"
- Esthetics
- "Facial Asymmetry/etiology, surgery"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Maxillary Sinus/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Middle Aged
- "Paranasal Sinus Diseases/classification, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic maxillary atelectasis and silent sinus syndrome: two faces of the same clinical entity.
**Authors:** de Dorlodot C, Collet S, Rombaux P, Horoi M, Hassid S, Eloy P
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-017-4622-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-017-4622-8)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2017 Sep;274(9):3367-3373. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-017-4622-8. Epub 2017 Jun 1.

Chronic maxillary atelectasis and silent sinus syndrome: two faces of the same 
clinical entity.

de Dorlodot C(1), Collet S(2), Rombaux P(3), Horoi M(4), Hassid S(5), Eloy P(2).

Author information:
(1)ENT Department, Université Catholique de Louvain, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire UCL Namur, Av. Docteur Gaston Therasse 1, 5530, Yvoir, Belgium. 
clotildededorlodot@gmail.com.
(2)ENT Department, Université Catholique de Louvain, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire UCL Namur, Av. Docteur Gaston Therasse 1, 5530, Yvoir, Belgium.
(3)ENT Department, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, UCL, Av. Hippocrate 10, 
1200, Bruxelles, Belgium.
(4)ENT Department, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Saint-Pierre, ULB, Rue Haute 
322, 1000, Bruxelles, Belgium.
(5)ENT Department, Hospital Erasme, ULB, Route de Lennik 808, 1070, Anderlecht, 
Belgium.

Chronic maxillary atelectasis (CMA) and silent sinus syndrome (SSS) are rare 
clinical entities characterized by an implosion of the maxillary sinus that may 
or may not be associated with sinonasal symptoms, and are complicated by 
ipsilateral enophthalmos. The objective of this article is to discuss the 
definitions, physiopathology, clinical and radiographic characteristics, and 
surgical management of these entities. We retrospectively reviewed 18 patients 
(7 women, 11 men, aged 12-70 years) diagnosed and treated in the ear, nose, and 
throat departments of four Belgian teaching hospitals between 2000 and 2015. 
Nine patients had a history of sinus disease. In all cases, a computed 
tomography scan showed downward displacement of the orbital floor, increased 
orbital volume, and maxillary sinus contraction. Five patients met the criteria 
for grade II CMA and 13 for grade III CMA. Four patients met the criteria for 
SSS. All patients underwent wide endoscopic middle maxillary antrostomy. There 
were no orbital complications and all patients experienced resolution or a 
dramatic reduction of their symptomatology. Only one patient asked for an 
orbital floor reconstruction to correct a persisting cosmetic deformity. 
Although CMA and SSS are usually regarded as different entities in the 
literature, we believe that they lie on the same clinical spectrum. Treatment 
for both conditions is similar, i.e., middle meatal antrostomy to halt or even 
reverse the pathological evolution and reconstruction of the orbital floor in 
the event of persistent cosmetic deformity.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-017-4622-8
PMID: 28573375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]