---
reference_id: "PMID:28204871"
title: The role of beta-catenin mutation and SOX9 expression in sex cord-stromal tumours of the testis.
authors:
- Bremmer F
- Behnes CL
- Schildhaus HU
- Gaisa NT
- Reis H
- Jarry H
- Radzun HJ
- Stroebel P
- Schweyer S
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-017-2090-6
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "SOX9 Transcription Factor/analysis, biosynthesis"
- "Sex Cord-Gonadal Stromal Tumors/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Testicular Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "beta Catenin/analysis, biosynthesis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of beta-catenin mutation and SOX9 expression in sex cord-stromal tumours of the testis.
**Authors:** Bremmer F, Behnes CL, Schildhaus HU, Gaisa NT, Reis H, Jarry H, Radzun HJ, Stroebel P, Schweyer S
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-017-2090-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-017-2090-6)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2017 Apr;470(4):421-428. doi: 10.1007/s00428-017-2090-6. Epub 
2017 Feb 16.

The role of beta-catenin mutation and SOX9 expression in sex cord-stromal 
tumours of the testis.

Bremmer F(1), Behnes CL(2), Schildhaus HU(2), Gaisa NT(3), Reis H(4), Jarry 
H(5), Radzun HJ(2), Stroebel P(2), Schweyer S(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Robert-Koch-Str.40, 37075, Göttingen, Germany. 
felix.bremmer@med.uni-goettingen.de.
(2)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Robert-Koch-Str.40, 37075, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Pathology, RWTH Aachen University, Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52074, 
Aachen, Germany.
(4)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Essen, University of 
Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstraße 55, 45147, Essen, Germany.
(5)Experimental Endocrinology, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Robert-Koch-Str.40, 37075, Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Gemeinschaftspraxis Pathologie, Am Fuchsengraben 3, 82319, Starnberg, 
Germany.

The WHO classification of testis tumours includes the group of sex cord-stromal 
tumours. They are divided into several histological types, i.e. Leydig cell 
(LCT) and Sertoli cell tumours (SCT). Based on the physiological expression of 
β-catenin in normal testis/Sertoli cells, it was previously shown that SCT can 
carry a β-catenin mutation, causing a nuclear positivity for β-catenin and 
cyclin D1. Furthermore, it could be shown that the stabilization of β-catenin in 
Sertoli cells causes the loss of the Sertoli cell marker SOX9. We wanted to know 
whether the stabilization of β-catenin in sex cord-stromal tumours influences 
SOX-9 expression and thus could be used in the diagnosis of sex cord-stromal 
tumours. Therefore, 53 cases of sex cord-stromal tumours and tumour-like lesions 
were investigated for their immunohistochemical expressions of β-catenin, cyclin 
D1 and SOX9. In addition, mutation analyses of the β-catenin gene (exon 3; 
CTNNB1) were performed. β-catenin mutation in SCT results in nuclear β-catenin 
and cyclin-D1 expressions on immunohistochemical analysis. The nuclear 
expression/stabilization of β-catenin causes the loss of SOX9 in these tumours. 
In contrast, SOX9 is considerably expressed in non-mutated SCT as well as in 
Sertoli cells of non-neoplastic testes. In summary, immunohistochemical analyses 
of β-catenin and SOX9 are useful to distinguish SCT from other sex cord-stromal 
tumours of the testis. Furthermore, the presence of SOX9 indicates that the 
cells of origin may be Sertoli cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-017-2090-6
PMID: 28204871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]