---
reference_id: "PMID:37075791"
title: Efficacy of Antiseizure Medications in Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome.
authors:
- Horiguchi A
- Koichihara R
- Kikuchi K
- Nonoyama H
- Daida A
- Oba D
- Hirata Y
- Matsuura R
- Ohashi H
- Hamano SI
journal: Neuropediatrics
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1055/a-2077-1988
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of Antiseizure Medications in Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome.
**Authors:** Horiguchi A, Koichihara R, Kikuchi K, Nonoyama H, Daida A, Oba D, Hirata Y, Matsuura R, Ohashi H, Hamano SI
**Journal:** Neuropediatrics (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-2077-1988](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2077-1988)

## Content

1. Neuropediatrics. 2023 Oct;54(5):339-343. doi: 10.1055/a-2077-1988. Epub 2023
Apr  19.

Efficacy of Antiseizure Medications in Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome.

Horiguchi A(1), Koichihara R(1), Kikuchi K(1), Nonoyama H(1), Daida A(1), Oba 
D(2), Hirata Y(1), Matsuura R(1), Ohashi H(2), Hamano SI(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Saitama, Saitama, 
Japan.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Saitama, 
Saitama, Japan.

Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is caused by deletion of the terminal region of 
chromosome 4 short arm and is frequently associated with intractable epilepsy. 
This article evaluates the clinical features of epileptic seizures in WHS and 
the therapeutic efficacy of oral antiseizure medications (ASMs). Patients with 
WHS who were treated for epilepsy at the Saitama Children's Medical Center under 
5 years of age were included. WHS was diagnosed based on genetic tests and 
clinical symptoms. Medical records regarding the age of onset of epilepsy, 
seizure type, treatment of status epilepticus (SE), and effectiveness of ASMs 
were retrospectively reviewed. Oral ASMs were considered effective when seizures 
were reduced by at least 50% compared with the premedication level. Eleven 
patients were included in the study. The median age at the onset of epilepsy was 
9 months (range: 5-32 months). Unknown-onset bilateral tonic-clonic seizure was 
the most common type of seizure, occurring in 10 patients. Focal clonic seizures 
occurred in four patients. Ten patients exhibited recurrent episodes of SE, and 
its frequency during infancy was monthly in eight patients and yearly in two. SE 
occurrence peaked at 1 year of age and decreased after 3 years of age. The most 
effective ASM was levetiracetam. Although WHS-associated epilepsy is intractable 
with frequent SE occurrence during infancy, improvement in seizure control is 
expected with age. Levetiracetam may be a novel ASM for WHS.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-2077-1988
PMID: 37075791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.H. received funding for travel and speaker 
honoraria from UCB Japan Co. Ltd, Daiichi Sankyo Co. Ltd., and Eisai Co. Ltd., 
and received research funds from Syneos Health Clinical Co. Ltd for the clinical 
trial of Zogenix. K.K. received research funds from Syneos Health Clinical Co. 
Ltd. for the clinical trial of Zogenix. Atsuro Daida received grant funding to 
research abroad from SENSHIN Medical Research Foundation. The other authors have 
no conflicts of interest to declare.