---
reference_id: "PMID:38396839"
title: "Current Understanding of Immune Thrombocytopenia: A Review of Pathogenesis and Treatment Options."
authors:
- Mititelu A
- Onisâi MC
- Roșca A
- Vlădăreanu AM
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25042163
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current Understanding of Immune Thrombocytopenia: A Review of Pathogenesis and Treatment Options.
**Authors:** Mititelu A, Onisâi MC, Roșca A, Vlădăreanu AM
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25042163](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25042163)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Feb 10;25(4):2163. doi: 10.3390/ijms25042163.

Current Understanding of Immune Thrombocytopenia: A Review of Pathogenesis and 
Treatment Options.

Mititelu A(1), Onisâi MC(1), Roșca A(2), Vlădăreanu AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Emergency University Hospital of Bucharest, 050098 Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Physiology, Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
050471 Bucharest, Romania.

The management of immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) and the prediction of patient 
response to therapy still represent a significant and constant challenge in 
hematology. ITP is a heterogeneous disease with an unpredictable evolution. 
Although the pathogenesis of ITP is currently better known and its etiology has 
been extensively studied, up to 75% of adult patients with ITP may develop 
chronicity, which represents a significant burden on patients' quality of life. 
A major risk of ITP is bleeding, but knowledge on the exact relationship between 
the degree of thrombocytopenia and bleeding symptoms, especially at a lower 
platelet count, is lacking. The actual management of ITP is based on immune 
suppression (corticosteroids and intravenous immunoglobulins), or the use of 
thrombopoietin receptor agonists (TPO-RAs), rituximab, or spleen tyrosine kinase 
(Syk) inhibitors. A better understanding of the underlying pathology has 
facilitated the development of a number of new targeted therapies (Bruton's 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, neonatal Fc receptors, strategies targeting B and 
plasma cells, strategies targeting T cells, complement inhibitors, and newer 
TPO-RAs for improving megakaryopoiesis), which seem to be highly effective and 
well tolerated and result in a significant improvement in patients' quality of 
life. The disadvantage is that there is a lack of knowledge of the predictive 
factors of response to treatments, which would help in the development of an 
optimized treatment algorithm for selected patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25042163
PMCID: PMC10889445
PMID: 38396839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.