---
reference_id: "PMID:38469616"
title: Longitudinal Study on Changes of Cancer-Related Fatigue in Elderly Patients with Postoperative Chemotherapy for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
authors:
- Wang T
- Wang Y
- Luo Y
- Chen H
journal: Ann Ital Chir
year: '2024'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Longitudinal Study on Changes of Cancer-Related Fatigue in Elderly Patients with Postoperative Chemotherapy for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Wang T, Wang Y, Luo Y, Chen H
**Journal:** Ann Ital Chir (2024)

## Content

1. Ann Ital Chir. 2024;95(1):22-29.

Longitudinal Study on Changes of Cancer-Related Fatigue in Elderly Patients with 
Postoperative Chemotherapy for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Wang T(1), Wang Y(1), Luo Y(1), Chen H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, 200030 Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Cancer-related fatigue (CRF) stands out as one of the most prevalent 
subjective adverse reactions experienced by patients following chemotherapy, 
often resulting in unfavorable symptoms for elderly non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC) patients during chemotherapy. Hence, the aim of this study was to 
explore the fluctuations in CRF levels among elderly NSCLC patients undergoing 
chemotherapy.
METHODS: This retrospective study involved 400 elderly patients diagnosed with 
NSCLC. Standardized guidelines were employed to direct patient care following 
lung cancer surgery (T0), subsequent to the first (T1), second (T2), third (T3), 
and fourth (T4) cycles of chemotherapy. At various intervals, all patients 
underwent assessments utilizing the Piper Fatigue Scale, Karnofsky Performance 
Status (KPS) Scale, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) Scale, and 
Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale. Additionally, serum levels of IL-6 and TNF-α 
were quantified using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: Throughout the treatment regimen, patients exhibited a declining trend 
in CRF, CD-RISC, and KPS scores (p < 0.05, T0 vs T4), whereas the PSQI score 
demonstrated a notable increase (p < 0.05, T0 vs T4). Furthermore, ELISA results 
revealed that as treatment advanced, the average levels of inflammatory markers 
interleukin 6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α during the T4 period 
significantly decreased compared to those at T0 (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: As the number of chemotherapy treatments for elderly NSCLC patients 
increased, the severity of CRF and the manifestations of sleep disorders were 
escalated. Additionally, physical function, psychological resilience, as well as 
IL-6 and TNF-α levels, exhibited a downward trend.

PMID: 38469616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]