---
reference_id: "PMID:20858596"
title: "Molecular networks implicated in speech-related disorders: FOXP2 regulates the SRPX2/uPAR complex."
authors:
- Roll P
- Vernes SC
- Bruneau N
- Cillario J
- Ponsole-Lenfant M
- Massacrier A
- Rudolf G
- Khalife M
- Hirsch E
- Fisher SE
- Szepetowski P
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq415
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Binding Sites
- Consensus Sequence/genetics
- Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay
- Female
- "Forkhead Transcription Factors/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Regulatory Networks
- "Genes, Reporter"
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Luciferases/metabolism
- Male
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/complications, genetics"
- Membrane Proteins
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Neoplasm Proteins
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- Protein Binding
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Urokinase Plasminogen Activator/genetics, metabolism"
- "Speech Disorders/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular networks implicated in speech-related disorders: FOXP2 regulates the SRPX2/uPAR complex.
**Authors:** Roll P, Vernes SC, Bruneau N, Cillario J, Ponsole-Lenfant M, Massacrier A, Rudolf G, Khalife M, Hirsch E, Fisher SE, Szepetowski P
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddq415](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddq415)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Dec 15;19(24):4848-60. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq415. Epub 2010
Sep 21.

Molecular networks implicated in speech-related disorders: FOXP2 regulates the
SRPX2/uPAR complex.

Roll P(1), Vernes SC, Bruneau N, Cillario J, Ponsole-Lenfant M, Massacrier A,
Rudolf G, Khalife M, Hirsch E, Fisher SE, Szepetowski P.

Author information:
(1)INSERM Unité 910, Marseille, France.

It is a challenge to identify the molecular networks contributing to the neural
basis of human speech. Mutations in transcription factor FOXP2 cause
difficulties mastering fluent speech (developmental verbal dyspraxia, DVD),
whereas mutations of sushi-repeat protein SRPX2 lead to epilepsy of the rolandic
(sylvian) speech areas, with DVD or with bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria.
Pathophysiological mechanisms driven by SRPX2 involve modified interaction with
the plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR). Independent
chromatin-immunoprecipitation microarray screening has identified the uPAR gene
promoter as a potential target site bound by FOXP2. Here, we directly tested for
the existence of a transcriptional regulatory network between human FOXP2 and
the SRPX2/uPAR complex. In silico searches followed by gel retardation assays
identified specific efficient FOXP2-binding sites in each of the promoter
regions of SRPX2 and uPAR. In FOXP2-transfected cells, significant decreases
were observed in the amounts of both SRPX2 (43.6%) and uPAR (38.6%) native
transcripts. Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that FOXP2 expression
yielded a marked inhibition of SRPX2 (80.2%) and uPAR (77.5%) promoter activity.
A mutant FOXP2 that causes DVD (p.R553H) failed to bind to SRPX2 and uPAR target
sites and showed impaired down-regulation of SRPX2 and uPAR promoter activity.
In a patient with polymicrogyria of the left rolandic operculum, a novel FOXP2
mutation (p.M406T) was found in the leucine-zipper (dimerization) domain.
p.M406T partially impaired the FOXP2 regulation of SRPX2 promoter activity,
whereas that of the uPAR promoter remained unchanged. Together with recently
described FOXP2-CNTNAP2 and SRPX2/uPAR links, the FOXP2-SRPX2/uPAR network
provides exciting insights into molecular pathways underlying speech-related
disorders.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq415
PMCID: PMC2989892
PMID: 20858596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
