---
reference_id: "PMID:33895745"
title: "The Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Computed Tomography Score in Adults with Bronchiectasis: A Derivation und Validation Study."
authors:
- Rademacher J
- Dettmer S
- Fuge J
- Vogel-Claussen J
- Shin HO
- Shah A
- Pedro PI
- Wilson R
- Welte T
- Wacker F
- Loebinger MR
- Ringshausen FC
journal: Respiration
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1159/000514927
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Computed Tomography Score in Adults with Bronchiectasis: A Derivation und Validation Study.
**Authors:** Rademacher J, Dettmer S, Fuge J, Vogel-Claussen J, Shin HO, Shah A, Pedro PI, Wilson R, Welte T, Wacker F, Loebinger MR, Ringshausen FC
**Journal:** Respiration (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000514927](https://doi.org/10.1159/000514927)

## Content

1. Respiration. 2021;100(6):499-509. doi: 10.1159/000514927. Epub 2021 Apr 23.

The Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Computed Tomography Score in Adults with 
Bronchiectasis: A Derivation und Validation Study.

Rademacher J(1), Dettmer S(2), Fuge J(3), Vogel-Claussen J(2), Shin HO(2), Shah 
A(4), Pedro PI(5), Wilson R(4), Welte T(1), Wacker F(2), Loebinger MR(4), 
Ringshausen FC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Biomedical 
Research in End-stage and Obstructive Lung Disease Hannover (BREATH), German 
Center for Lung Research (DZL), Hannover, Germany.
(2)Department of Radiology, Hannover Medical School, Biomedical Research in 
End-stage and Obstructive Lung Disease Hannover (BREATH), German Center for Lung 
Research (DZL), Hannover, Germany.
(3)Biomedical Research in End-stage and Obstructive Lung Disease Hannover 
(BREATH), German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Hannover, Germany.
(4)Host Defence Unit, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Brompton and 
Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial 
College London, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Respiration. 2022;101(4):436. doi: 10.1159/000523729.

BACKGROUND: Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare genetic disorder which 
requires a complex diagnostic workup. Thus, an easy and widely available 
screening method would be helpful to identify patients who need a further 
diagnostic workup for PCD.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to develop and validate a computed 
tomography (CT) score for PCD to facilitate etiological diagnosis in adults with 
bronchiectasis.
METHOD: Chest CTs from 121 adults with bronchiectasis were scored for 
bronchiectasis morphology, distribution, and associated findings. Patients with 
and without the etiological diagnosis of PCD (46 and 75, respectively) were 
compared. Significantly, different imaging findings (p < 0.05) in univariate 
analysis were considered for multivariate analysis. Distinct findings were used 
to build the score. Based on this score, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) 
curve analysis was performed. The score was validated with 2 independent 
cohorts, another cohort from the same institution with 56 patients (28 with PCD) 
and an external cohort from another referral center with 172 patients (86 with 
PCD).
RESULTS: The following parameters predicted PCD in adults with bronchiectasis 
and were included in the score with weighting according to their regression 
coefficients: 2 points were given for predominance in the middle/lower lobe, 2 
points for tree-in-bud pattern, 2 points for atelectasis or prior resection of a 
middle/lower lobe, and 3 points for absence of emphysema and fibrosis. Situs 
inversus was only observed in subjects with PCD (Kartagener syndrome) and, thus, 
was not used in the primary ciliary dyskinesia computed tomography (PCD-CT) 
score as group comparisons could not be performed. ROC curve analysis revealed 
an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.90 (95% CI 0.85-0.96). Youden index was the 
highest at a threshold of >6 with a sensitivity of 83% and a specificity of 83%. 
In the validation cohorts, ROC curve analysis confirmed the performance of the 
score with an AUC of 0.83 (95% CI 0.72-0.94) in the first validation cohort and 
0.79 (95% CI 0.73-0.86) in the external validation cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: The PCD-CT score provides the first validated CT score for PCD and 
helps physicians in identifying adult bronchiectasis patients who require 
further diagnostic workup. Key message: The PCD-CT score provides the first 
validated CT score to assist physicians in identifying adult bronchiectasis 
patients who require a further diagnostic workup for PCD. It potentially 
improves earlier recognition of this rare and underdiagnosed disease.

© 2021 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000514927
PMCID: PMC8220914
PMID: 33895745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Dettmer received grants and/or 
advisory/lecture/clinical trial fees from Bayer and Boehringer Ingelheim. Prof. 
Loebinger received grants and/or advisory/lecture/clinical trial fees and/or 
nonfinancial support from Bayer, Grifols, Polyphor, and Astra Zeneca. Dr. 
Ringshausen and/or his institution received grants and/or 
advisory/lecture/clinical trial fees and/or nonfinancial support from Aposan, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celtaxsys, Chiesi, Corbus, Grifols, 
InfectoPharm, Insmed, MSD, Novartis, PARI, Parion, Polyphor, Vertex, and Zambon. 
Dr. Ringshausen serves as member and co-chair of the scientific advisory board 
of the German PCD and Kartagener syndrome patient support group. Prof. 
Vogel-Claussen received grants and/or advisory/lecture/clinical trial fees from 
Siemens Healthineers, AstraZeneca, GSK, Novartis, and Boehringer Ingelheim. 
Prof. Wacker received grants and/or advisory/lecture/clinical trial fees from 
Siemens, Visage, and Delcath. All other authors declare that they have no 
conflict of interest in relation with this study.