---
reference_id: "PMID:25119324"
title: Arterialised earlobe capillary blood gases in the COPD population.
authors:
- Young J
journal: Br J Nurs
year: '2014'
doi: 10.12968/bjon.2014.23.15.838
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterialised earlobe capillary blood gases in the COPD population.
**Authors:** Young J
**Journal:** Br J Nurs (2014)
**DOI:** [10.12968/bjon.2014.23.15.838](https://doi.org/10.12968/bjon.2014.23.15.838)

## Content

1. Br J Nurs. 2014 Aug 12;23(15):838-42. doi: 10.12968/bjon.2014.23.15.838.

Arterialised earlobe capillary blood gases in the COPD population.

Young J(1).

Author information:
(1)Community Nurse Lecturer, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge.

Arterialised ear lobe capillary blood (ELCB) gas sampling is a widely used 
clinical procedure undertaken across both primary and secondary care settings. 
The prevalence of this sampling method has grown among health professionals, 
coupled with a growing demand for domiciliary oxygen therapy in the UK, in 
particular for those who have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
Research studies supporting arterialised ELCB gas sampling show inconsistencies 
in technique, and a survey of respiratory nurses' current practice demonstrated 
wider inconsistencies. In the absence of national clinical guidelines to direct 
this practice, and an acknowledged and accepted under-calculation of partial 
pressure of oxygen, this article investigates the sampling method used to obtain 
arterialised ELCB gas sampling and consequently questions its reliability in 
practice.

DOI: 10.12968/bjon.2014.23.15.838
PMID: 25119324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]