---
reference_id: "PMID:38161331"
title: "Single-cell RNA landscape of osteoimmune microenvironment in osteoporotic vertebral compression fracture and Kümmell's disease."
authors:
- Xu Y
- Huang S
- Li Z
- Dai L
- Wu H
- Wang P
- Yao X
- Luo W
- Liu Y
- Yang W
- Feng Y
- Miao H
- Xu J
- Ye D
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1276098
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell RNA landscape of osteoimmune microenvironment in osteoporotic vertebral compression fracture and Kümmell's disease.
**Authors:** Xu Y, Huang S, Li Z, Dai L, Wu H, Wang P, Yao X, Luo W, Liu Y, Yang W, Feng Y, Miao H, Xu J, Ye D
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2023.1276098](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2023.1276098)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Dec 15;11:1276098. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1276098. 
eCollection 2023.

Single-cell RNA landscape of osteoimmune microenvironment in osteoporotic 
vertebral compression fracture and Kümmell's disease.

Xu Y(#)(1), Huang S(#)(2), Li Z(#)(3), Dai L(1), Wu H(1), Wang P(1), Yao X(1), 
Luo W(1), Liu Y(1), Yang W(1), Feng Y(4), Miao H(1), Xu J(5)(6), Ye D(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangzhou Red Cross Hospital, Guangzhou Red Cross Hospital of Jinan 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pain Medicine, Guangzhou Red Cross Hospital, Guangzhou Red 
Cross Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Spinal Degeneration and Deformity Surgery, Affiliated Hospital 
of Guangdong Medical University, Zhanjiang, China.
(4)The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(5)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Perth, 
WA, Australia.
(6)Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shenzhen, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Background: Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) enables specific analysis of 
cell populations at single-cell resolution; however, there is still a lack of 
single-cell-level studies to characterize the dynamic and complex interactions 
between osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures (OVCFs) and Kümmell's 
disease (KD) in the osteoimmune microenvironment. In this study, we used 
scRNA-seq analysis to investigate the osteoimmune microenvironment and cellular 
composition in OVCFs and KD. Methods: ScRNA-seq was used to perform analysis of 
fractured vertebral bone tissues from one OVCF and one KD patients, and a total 
of 8,741 single cells were captured for single-cell transcriptomic analysis. The 
cellularity of human vertebral bone tissue was further analyzed using uniform 
manifold approximation and projection. Pseudo-time analysis and gene enrichment 
analysis revealed the biological function of cell fate and its counterparts. 
CellphoneDB was used to identify the interactions between bone cells and immune 
cells in the osteoimmune microenvironment of human vertebral bone tissue and 
their potential functions. Results: A cellular profile of the osteoimmune 
microenvironment of human vertebral bone tissue was established, including 
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), pericytes, myofibroblasts, fibroblasts, 
chondrocytes, endothelial cells (ECs), granulocytes, monocytes, T cells, B 
cells, plasma cells, mast cells, and early erythrocytes. MSCs play an 
immunoregulatory function and mediate osteogenic differentiation and cell 
proliferation. The differentiation trajectory of osteoclasts in human vertebral 
bone tissue was also revealed. In addition, ECs actively participate in 
inflammatory infiltration and coupling with bone cells. T and B cells actively 
participate in regulating bone homeostasis. Finally, by identifying the 
interaction of ligand-receptor pairs, we found that immune cells and osteoclasts 
have bidirectional regulatory characteristics, have the effects of regulating 
bone resorption by osteoclasts and promoting bone formation, and are essential 
for bone homeostasis. It is also highlighted that CD8-TEM cells and osteoclasts 
might crosstalk via CD160-TNFRSF14 ligand-receptor interaction. Conclusion: Our 
analysis reveals a differential landscape of molecular pathways, population 
composition, and cell-cell interactions during OVCF development into KD. OVCFs 
exhibit a higher osteogenic differentiation capacity, owing to abundant immune 
cells. Conversely, KD results in greater bone resorption than bone formation due 
to depletion of MSCs and a relatively suppressed immune system, and this immune 
imbalance eventually leads to vertebral avascular necrosis. The site of action 
between immune cells and osteoclasts is expected to be a new therapeutic target, 
and these results may accelerate mechanistic and functional studies of 
osteoimmune cell types and specific gene action in vertebral avascular necrosis 
and pathological bone loss diseases, paving the way for drug discovery.

Copyright © 2023 Xu, Huang, Li, Dai, Wu, Wang, Yao, Luo, Liu, Yang, Feng, Miao, 
Xu and Ye.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1276098
PMCID: PMC10755405
PMID: 38161331

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor XF 
declared a shared affiliation with the author JX at the time of review. The 
authors declare that they were editorial board members of Frontiers, at the time 
of submission. This had no impact on the peer review process and the final 
decision.