---
reference_id: "PMID:23877423"
title: "Osteopetrosis: genetics, treatment and new insights into osteoclast function."
authors:
- Sobacchi C
- Schulz A
- Coxon FP
- Villa A
- Helfrich MH
journal: Nat Rev Endocrinol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2013.137
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Osteopetrosis/congenital, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- RANK Ligand/metabolism
- "Signal Transduction/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteopetrosis: genetics, treatment and new insights into osteoclast function.
**Authors:** Sobacchi C, Schulz A, Coxon FP, Villa A, Helfrich MH
**Journal:** Nat Rev Endocrinol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrendo.2013.137](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2013.137)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2013 Sep;9(9):522-36. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2013.137. Epub 
2013 Jul 23.

Osteopetrosis: genetics, treatment and new insights into osteoclast function.

Sobacchi C(1), Schulz A, Coxon FP, Villa A, Helfrich MH.

Author information:
(1)Unit Of Support/Institute of Genetic and Biomedical Research, Milan Unit, 
National Research Council, Humanitas Clinical and Research Centre, Via Manzoni 
113, 20089 Rozzano, Italy.

Osteopetrosis is a genetic condition of increased bone mass, which is caused by 
defects in osteoclast formation and function. Both autosomal recessive and 
autosomal dominant forms exist, but this Review focuses on autosomal recessive 
osteopetrosis (ARO), also known as malignant infantile osteopetrosis. The 
genetic basis of this disease is now largely uncovered: mutations in TCIRG1, 
CLCN7, OSTM1, SNX10 and PLEKHM1 lead to osteoclast-rich ARO (in which 
osteoclasts are abundant but have severely impaired resorptive function), 
whereas mutations in TNFSF11 and TNFRSF11A lead to osteoclast-poor ARO. In 
osteoclast-rich ARO, impaired endosomal and lysosomal vesicle trafficking 
results in defective osteoclast ruffled-border formation and, hence, the 
inability to resorb bone and mineralized cartilage. ARO presents soon after 
birth and can be fatal if left untreated. However, the disease is heterogeneous 
in clinical presentation and often misdiagnosed. This article describes the 
genetics of ARO and discusses the diagnostic role of next-generation sequencing 
methods. The management of affected patients, including guidelines for the 
indication of haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (which can provide a cure 
for many types of ARO), are outlined. Finally, novel treatments, including 
preclinical data on in utero stem cell treatment, RANKL replacement therapy and 
denosumab therapy for hypercalcaemia are also discussed.

DOI: 10.1038/nrendo.2013.137
PMID: 23877423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]