---
reference_id: "PMID:37356965"
title: Pathology explains various mechanisms of auto-immune inflammatory peripheral neuropathies.
authors:
- Vallat JM
- Mathis S
journal: Brain Pathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/bpa.13184
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathology explains various mechanisms of auto-immune inflammatory peripheral neuropathies.
**Authors:** Vallat JM, Mathis S
**Journal:** Brain Pathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bpa.13184](https://doi.org/10.1111/bpa.13184)

## Content

1. Brain Pathol. 2024 Mar;34(2):e13184. doi: 10.1111/bpa.13184. Epub 2023 Jun 25.

Pathology explains various mechanisms of auto-immune inflammatory peripheral 
neuropathies.

Vallat JM(1), Mathis S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department and Laboratory of Neurology, National Reference Center for 'Rare 
Peripheral Neuropathies', University Hospital of Limoges (CHU Limoges), Limoges, 
France.
(2)Department of Neurology (Nerve-Muscle Unit), 'Grand Sud-Ouest' National 
Reference Center for Neuromuscular Disorders, ALS Center, University Hospital of 
Bordeaux (CHU Bordeaux), Bordeaux, France.

Autoimmune neuropathies are a heterogeneous group of rare and disabling diseases 
in which the immune system is thought to target antigens in the peripheral 
nervous system: they usually respond to immune therapies. Guillain-Barré 
syndrome is divided into several subtypes including "acute inflammatory 
demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy," "acute motor axonal neuropathy," "acute 
motor sensory neuropathy," and other variants. Chronic forms such as chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) and other subtypes and 
polyneuropathy associated with IgM monoclonal gammopathy; autoimmune nodopathies 
also belong to this group of auto-immune neuropathies. It has been shown that 
immunoglobulin G from the serum of about 30% of CIDP patients immunolabels nodes 
of Ranvier or paranodes of myelinated axons. Whatever the cause of myelin damage 
of the peripheral nervous system, the initial attack on myelin by a dysimmune 
process may begin either at the internodal area or in the paranodal and nodal 
regions. The term "nodoparanodopathy" was first applied to some "axonal 
Guillain-Barré syndrome" subtypes, then extended to cases classified as CIDP 
bearing IgG4 antibodies against paranodal axoglial proteins. In these cases, 
paranodal dissection develops in the absence of macrophage-induced 
demyelination. In contrast, the mechanisms of demyelination of other dysimmune 
neuropathies induced by macrophages are unexplained, as no antibodies have been 
identified in such cases. The main objective of this presentation is to show 
that the pathology illustrates, confirms, and may explain such mechanisms.

© 2023 The Authors. Brain Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.13184
PMCID: PMC10901618
PMID: 37356965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.