---
reference_id: "PMID:40533660"
title: How chronic inflammation fuels carcinogenesis as an environmental epimutagen.
authors:
- Liu YY
- Ohashi Y
- Ushijima T
journal: Discov Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12672-025-02971-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How chronic inflammation fuels carcinogenesis as an environmental epimutagen.
**Authors:** Liu YY, Ohashi Y, Ushijima T
**Journal:** Discov Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12672-025-02971-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12672-025-02971-9)

## Content

1. Discov Oncol. 2025 Jun 18;16(1):1150. doi: 10.1007/s12672-025-02971-9.

How chronic inflammation fuels carcinogenesis as an environmental epimutagen.

Liu YY(1), Ohashi Y(1), Ushijima T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epigenomics, Institute for Advanced Life Sciences, Hoshi
University, Tokyo, 142-8501, Japan.
(2)Department of Epigenomics, Institute for Advanced Life Sciences, Hoshi
University, Tokyo, 142-8501, Japan. tushijima142@hoshi.ac.jp.

Chronic inflammation, induced by environmental and intrinsic factors, frequently
leads to carcinogenesis. In inflammation-associated cancers, such as gastric,
colon, and cervical cancers, an important role of epigenetic alterations has
been implicated. Such epigenetic alterations include aberrant DNA methylation
and histone modifications, some of which can permanently alter cellular
characteristics and predispose cells to malignant transformation. Even in
normal-appearing tissues, high levels of aberrant DNA methylation can be
present, with these levels correlating to future cancer risk. The mechanisms of
how chronic inflammation induces aberrant DNA methylation involve the repression
of DNA methylation erasers, TET enzymes, and the increased activity of DNMTs.
Aberrant DNA methylation in normal tissues can serve as a biomarker for cancer
risk in the stomach and uterus. Beyond chronic inflammation, factors such as
folate, vitamin B12, and vitamin C deficiency can affect DNA methylation through
metabolic pathways. Additionally, environmental chemicals, such as arsenic and
NNK, and microbial metabolites, have been implicated in inducing epigenetic
alterations. Further research is warranted on epigenetic alterations due to
environmental factors, and the factors themselves, namely epimutagens.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12672-025-02971-9
PMCID: PMC12176710
PMID: 40533660

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: We declare a
conflict of interest with Sysmex company, which is developing an epigenetic
gastric cancer risk diagnosis. We declare a conflict of interest with Sysmex
company, which is developing an epigenetic gastric cancer risk diagnosis.
