---
reference_id: PMID:18220965
title: "The influenza virus NS1 protein: inhibitor of innate and adaptive immunity."
authors:
- Fernandez-Sesma A
journal: Infect Disord Drug Targets
year: '2007'
doi: 10.2174/187152607783018754
keywords:
- Humans
- Immune Tolerance/immunology
- "Immunity, Innate"
- "Influenza A virus/chemistry, immunology"
- "Influenza B virus/chemistry, immunology"
- "Influenza, Human/immunology, prevention & control"
- "Interferon Type I/antagonists & inhibitors, immunology"
- "RNA, Viral/metabolism"
- "RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Viral Nonstructural Proteins/genetics, immunology, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The influenza virus NS1 protein: inhibitor of innate and adaptive immunity.
**Authors:** Fernandez-Sesma A
**Journal:** Infect Disord Drug Targets (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2174/187152607783018754](https://doi.org/10.2174/187152607783018754)

## Content

1. Infect Disord Drug Targets. 2007 Dec;7(4):336-43. doi: 
10.2174/187152607783018754.

The influenza virus NS1 protein: inhibitor of innate and adaptive immunity.

Fernandez-Sesma A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology. Mount Sinai School of Medicine. New York, NY 
10029, USA. ana.sesma@mssm.edu

The influenza virus NS1 protein has been shown to be a multifunctional immune 
modulator and a virulence factor for this virus. Among its multiple functions 
are the inhibition of the type I interferon (IFN) system in infected cells, the 
binding and sequestration of dsRNA, the interference with the host mRNA 
processing, the facilitation of preferential viral mRNA translation, and the 
inhibition of dendritic cell (DC) activation. The combination of all these 
functions makes the NS1 protein a very potent inhibitor of immunity and allows 
influenza virus to efficiently escape the immune surveillance and to establish 
infection in the host. There are different domains in the NS1 protein that are 
required for specific functions, which provides several potential targets for 
the action of antiviral drugs. Additionally, the crystal structure of both the 
N-terminal RNA binding domain and the C-terminal effector domain of the NS1 
protein have been resolved, potentially allowing for better antiviral drug 
design. Recent advances in the understanding how viruses are detected by 
infected cells are unveiling the mechanisms by which the NS1 protein can perform 
some of its multiple immune modulating activities. In this review the multiple 
functions of the NS1 protein are discussed and several possible options for drug 
targets within the influenza virus NS1 protein will be explored. Such drugs 
could make influenza viruses less efficient at evading the immune system in the 
host.

DOI: 10.2174/187152607783018754
PMID: 18220965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]