---
reference_id: "PMID:35204506"
title: Effect of Ornithine Transcarbamylase (OTC) Deficiency on Pregnancy and Puerperium.
authors:
- Sysák R
- Brennerová K
- Krlín R
- Štencl P
- Rusňák I
- Vargová M
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics12020415
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Ornithine Transcarbamylase (OTC) Deficiency on Pregnancy and Puerperium.
**Authors:** Sysák R, Brennerová K, Krlín R, Štencl P, Rusňák I, Vargová M
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics12020415](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics12020415)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2022 Feb 5;12(2):415. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics12020415.

Effect of Ornithine Transcarbamylase (OTC) Deficiency on Pregnancy and 
Puerperium.

Sysák R(1), Brennerová K(2), Krlín R(3), Štencl P(1), Rusňák I(4), Vargová M(1).

Author information:
(1)1st Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius 
University in Bratislava, 851 07 Bratislava, Slovakia.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, National Institute of Children's Diseases, 831 01 
Bratislava, Slovakia.
(3)2nd Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius 
University in Bratislava, 821 01 Bratislava, Slovakia.
(4)1st Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Faculty of Medicine, Slovak 
Medical University, 831 01 Bratislava, Slovakia.

Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency is the most common inherited 
metabolic disorder in urea cycles with an incidence of 1:14,000 live births. 
Pregnancy, childbirth and the postpartum period are considered challenging for 
women with this hereditary metabolic disorder, with a risk of hyperammonemia, 
especially in the first week after delivery. In our article, we discuss severe 
hepatic failure, a pregnancy complication in an OTC deficient patient that has 
not previously been published. Firstly, our aim is to highlight the need for a 
strict adherence to the recommendation of the gradual increase of protein intake 
during pregnancy and the importance of multidisciplinary monitoring of pregnant 
patients with OTC deficiency. Secondly, we refer to critical postpartum 
hyperammonemia in patients with this hereditary metabolic disorder.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics12020415
PMCID: PMC8871159
PMID: 35204506

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.