---
reference_id: "PMID:28882737"
title: "Five-year Survival of Patients With Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma in the Russian Federation: Results From the RENSUR5 Registry."
authors:
- Tsimafeyeu I
- Zolotareva T
- Varlamov S
- Zukov R
- Petkau V
- Mazhbich M
- Statsenko G
- Safina S
- Zaitsev I
- Sakaeva D
- Popov A
- Borisov P
- Vladimirova L
journal: Clin Genitourin Cancer
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.clgc.2017.07.017
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Carcinoma, Renal Cell/drug therapy, pathology, surgery"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- Interferons/therapeutic use
- "Kidney Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, surgery"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Registries
- Retrospective Studies
- Russia
- Survival Analysis
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Five-year Survival of Patients With Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma in the Russian Federation: Results From the RENSUR5 Registry.
**Authors:** Tsimafeyeu I, Zolotareva T, Varlamov S, Zukov R, Petkau V, Mazhbich M, Statsenko G, Safina S, Zaitsev I, Sakaeva D, Popov A, Borisov P, Vladimirova L
**Journal:** Clin Genitourin Cancer (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clgc.2017.07.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clgc.2017.07.017)

## Content

1. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2017 Dec;15(6):e1069-e1072. doi: 
10.1016/j.clgc.2017.07.017. Epub 2017 Aug 9.

Five-year Survival of Patients With Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma in the 
Russian Federation: Results From the RENSUR5 Registry.

Tsimafeyeu I(1), Zolotareva T(2), Varlamov S(3), Zukov R(4), Petkau V(5), 
Mazhbich M(6), Statsenko G(7), Safina S(8), Zaitsev I(9), Sakaeva D(10), Popov 
A(11), Borisov P(12), Vladimirova L(13).

Author information:
(1)Kidney Cancer Research Bureau, Moscow, Russia. Electronic address: 
tsimafeyeu@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Samara Regional Clinical Oncology Center, 
Samara, Russia.
(3)Department of Oncourology, Altai Regional Cancer Center, Barnaul, Russia.
(4)Department of Oncourology, A.I. Kryzhanovsky Krasnoyarsk Cancer Center, 
Krasnoyarsk, Russia.
(5)Outpatient Department, Sverdlovsk Regional Oncological Dispensary, 
Ekaterinburg, Russia.
(6)Department of Oncourology, Omsk Regional Cancer Center, Omsk, Russia.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Omsk Regional Cancer Center, Omsk, Russia.
(8)Department of Chemotherapy No. 3, Tatarstan Republican Clinical Oncology 
Dispensary, Kazan, Russia.
(9)Department of Urology, Astrakhan Regional Cancer Center, Astrakhan, Russia.
(10)Department of Chemotherapy, Republican Clinical Oncology Center, Ufa, 
Russia.
(11)Department of Urology, Obninsk Medical Radiological Research Center, 
Obninsk, Russia.
(12)Outpatient Department, Saint Petersburg City Clinical Oncology Center, Saint 
Petersburg, Russia.
(13)Department of Antitumor Drug Therapy, Rostov Research Institute of Oncology, 
Rostov-on-Don, Russia.

BACKGROUND: The 5-year overall survival (OS) of patients with metastatic renal 
cell carcinoma (mRCC) has been rarely reported. The aim of the RENSUR5 registry 
study was to obtain real-world data on the use of therapy for mRCC and assess 
the 5-year OS in the Russian population.
PATIENT AND METHODS: Patients were retrospectively identified at 11 cancer 
centers in different regions of Russia (Astrakhan, Barnaul, Ekaterinburg, Kazan, 
Krasnoyarsk, Obninsk, Omsk, Rostov-on-Don, Samara, St. Petersburg, and Ufa). 
Patients were included if mRCC had been diagnosed from January 2010 to January 
2011. Anonymized data were collected through an online registry covering the 
demographic data, treatments, and outcomes.
RESULTS: A total of 439 adult mRCC patients were included in the present study 
for analysis. The mean age at diagnosis of mRCC was 60.9 years (range, 33-90 
years; with 9% of patients aged ≥ 75 years). The patients were predominantly men 
(70.2%) and 67.7% had nephrectomy. Clear cell and non-clear cell tumors were 
detected in 61.1% and 7.7% of patients, respectively. A total of 271 patients 
(62%) received systemic therapy. The median duration of therapy was 11 months 
(95% confidence interval, 9.5-12.5 months). Most treatment was with interferon 
only (n = 145); 105 patients (23.9%) received targeted therapy, and 69 patients 
(15.7%) received ≥ 2 treatment lines. The 1-, 3-, and 5-year OS rate was 49.4%, 
18.9%, and 8.2%, respectively. The median OS from the start of treatment was 12 
months (95% confidence interval, 9.7-14.4 months).
CONCLUSION: RENSUR5 is a large real-world database assessing the mRCC treatment 
patterns and 5-year OS in Russia. According to the first results of the present 
study, we believe that 5-year OS should improve with novel therapies. The 
limited administration of targeted therapies was reflected by the results of the 
5-year survival rate. The treatment of mRCC has changed in the past years with 
new treatment options significantly improving OS. The 5-year OS of patients 
treated with immunotherapy and targeted therapy should be analyzed in the real 
world.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clgc.2017.07.017
PMID: 28882737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]