---
reference_id: "PMID:39467237"
title: "Autoimmune Encephalitis and Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes: A Nationwide Study on Epidemiology and Antibody Testing Performance."
authors:
- Kerstens J
- Schreurs MWJ
- de Vries JM
- Neuteboom RF
- Brenner J
- Crijnen YS
- van Steenhoven RW
- de Bruijn MAAM
- van Sonderen A
- van Coevorden-Hameete MH
- Bastiaansen AEM
- Vermeiren MR
- Damoiseaux JGMC
- Otten HG
- Frijns CJM
- Meek B
- Platteel ACM
- van de Mortel A
- Delnooz CCS
- Broeren MAC
- Verbeek MM
- Hoff EI
- Boukhrissi S
- Franken SC
- Nagtzaam MMP
- Paunovic M
- Veenbergen S
- Sillevis Smitt PAE
- Titulaer MJ
journal: Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200318
keywords:
- Humans
- "Autoantibodies/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Nervous System/epidemiology, immunology, diagnosis"
- Middle Aged
- Male
- Female
- Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Adult
- "Encephalitis/epidemiology, immunology, diagnosis"
- "Hashimoto Disease/epidemiology, immunology, diagnosis, blood"
- Young Adult
- Netherlands/epidemiology
- Adolescent
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune Encephalitis and Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes: A Nationwide Study on Epidemiology and Antibody Testing Performance.
**Authors:** Kerstens J, Schreurs MWJ, de Vries JM, Neuteboom RF, Brenner J, Crijnen YS, van Steenhoven RW, de Bruijn MAAM, van Sonderen A, van Coevorden-Hameete MH, Bastiaansen AEM, Vermeiren MR, Damoiseaux JGMC, Otten HG, Frijns CJM, Meek B, Platteel ACM, van de Mortel A, Delnooz CCS, Broeren MAC, Verbeek MM, Hoff EI, Boukhrissi S, Franken SC, Nagtzaam MMP, Paunovic M, Veenbergen S, Sillevis Smitt PAE, Titulaer MJ
**Journal:** Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXI.0000000000200318](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXI.0000000000200318)

## Content

1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2024 Nov;11(6):e200318. doi: 
10.1212/NXI.0000000000200318. Epub 2024 Oct 28.

Autoimmune Encephalitis and Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes: A Nationwide 
Study on Epidemiology and Antibody Testing Performance.

Kerstens J(1), Schreurs MWJ(1), de Vries JM(1), Neuteboom RF(1), Brenner J(1), 
Crijnen YS(1), van Steenhoven RW(1), de Bruijn MAAM(1), van Sonderen A(1), van 
Coevorden-Hameete MH(1), Bastiaansen AEM(1), Vermeiren MR(1), Damoiseaux 
JGMC(1), Otten HG(1), Frijns CJM(1), Meek B(1), Platteel ACM(1), van de Mortel 
A(1), Delnooz CCS(1), Broeren MAC(1), Verbeek MM(1), Hoff EI(1), Boukhrissi 
S(1), Franken SC(1), Nagtzaam MMP(1), Paunovic M(1), Veenbergen S(1), Sillevis 
Smitt PAE(1), Titulaer MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (J.K., J.M.V., R.F.N., J.B., Y.C., R.W.v.S., 
M.A.A.M.d.B., M.H.v.C.-H., A.E.M.B., M.V., S.C.F., M.M.P.N., M.P., P.A.E.S.S., 
M.J.T.); Department of Immunology (M.S., S.B., S.V.), Laboratory Medical 
Immunology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam; Department of 
Neurology (M.A.A.M.D.B.), Elisabeth-TweeSteden Hospital, Tilburg; Department of 
Neurology (A.v.S.), Haaglanden Medical Center, The Hague; Central Diagnostic 
Laboratory (J.D.), Maastricht University Medical Center; Central Diagnostic 
Laboratory (H.G.O.); Department of Neurology (C.J.M.F.), Utrecht University 
Medical Center; Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology (B.M.), Saint 
Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein; Laboratory of Medical Microbiology and Immunology 
(A.C.M.P.), Elisabeth-TweeSteden Hospital, Tilburg; Department of Neurology 
(A.M., C.C.D.); Clinical Laboratory (M.A.C.B.), Máxima Medical Center, 
Veldhoven; Departments of Neurology and Human Genetics (M.M.V.), Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen; and Department of Neurology (E.I.H.), 
Zuyderland Medical Center, Heerlen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Autoimmune encephalitis (AIE) and paraneoplastic 
neurologic syndromes (PNSs) encompass a heterogeneous group of 
antibody-associated disorders. Both the number of syndromes and commercially 
available antibody tests have increased considerably over the past decade. 
High-quality population-based data on epidemiology of these disorders and 
real-world performance of antibody tests are needed.
METHODS: In this nationwide retrospective cohort study, we identified all serum 
and CSF samples tested for antibodies against intracellular antigens (IAs: Hu 
[ANNA1], Yo [PCA1], CV2 [CRMP5], Ri [ANNA2], Ma1, Ma2 [Ta], amphiphysin, GAD65, 
GFAP, KLHL11, CARP VIII) or extracellular antigens (EAs: NMDAR, LGI1, Caspr2, 
GABA-B-R, GABA-A-R, AMPAR, DPPX, GlyR, mGluR1, VGCC, IgLON5, Tr [DNER]) between 
January 2016 and December 2021 in the Netherlands. Nationwide coverage was 
guaranteed for all antibodies except anti-GAD65 and anti-VGCC. We calculated 
sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative 
predictive value (NPV); obtained clinical information about patients who tested 
positive; assigned diagnosis of AIE/PNS according to diagnostic criteria; and 
calculated incidence rates for IA, EA, and individual antibody-associated 
syndromes.
RESULTS: In the study period, 2,877 (9.5%) of 30,246 samples, belonging to 1,228 
patients, tested positive. Sensitivity and specificity were high (>95%) to very 
high (>99%) for most tests in both serum and CSF. PPVs for several tests were 
moderate to poor, especially for serum testing of IA antibodies (25%-80%). 
Clinical data were available for 940 (76.5%) of 1,228 patients. A total of 578 
AIE/PNS diagnoses were made. The incidence rate for AIE/PNS (per million 
person-years) increased from 4.70 (95% CI 3.72-5.85) in 2016 to 5.76 (4.69-7.00) 
in 2021. Overall, the incidence rate was 5.57 (5.13-6.05), 2.96 (2.64-3.31) for 
the EA and 2.61 (2.31-2.94) for the IA subgroup. The 4 most common AIE/PNS types 
were anti-NMDAR, anti-LGI1, anti-Hu, and anti-GAD65, together comprising almost 
two-thirds of all diagnoses (364/578, 63.0%).
DISCUSSION: Most commercial antibody tests perform well overall, but important 
pitfalls remain. Although almost all tests had high specificity, PPV was only 
modest in the setting of these rare diseases and mass testing. We observe trends 
toward increasing incidence of antibody-associated AIE/PNS.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200318
PMCID: PMC11521097
PMID: 39467237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J. Kerstens received a Research Mobility 
Fellowship from the European Joint Program on Rare Diseases (EJP-RD); M.W.J. 
Schreurs reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript; J.M. de Vries has 
received an Autoimmune Encephalitis Alliance (AEA) Seed Grant (2021); R.F. 
Neuteboom reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript; J. Brenner has been 
funded by Dioraphte (2001 0403); Y.S. Crijnen reports no disclosures relevant to 
the manuscript; R.W. van Steenhoven has been funded by ZonMw, Alzheimer 
Nederland, and has received an AEA Seed Grant (2024); M.A.A.M. de Bruijn has 
been funded by EpilepsieNL; A. van Sonderen reports no disclosures relevant to 
the manuscript; M.H. van Coevorden-Hameete reports no disclosures relevant to 
the manuscript; A.E.M. Bastiaansen has been funded by ZonMw (Memorabel program); 
M.R. Vermeiren reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript; J.G.M.C. 
Damoiseaux reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript; H.G. Otten reports 
no disclosures relevant to the manuscript; C.J.M. Frijns reports no disclosures 
relevant to the manuscript; B. Meek reports no disclosures relevant to the 
manuscript; A.C.M. Platteel reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript; 
A. van de Mortel reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript; C.C.S. 
Delnooz reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript; M.A.C. Broeren 
reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript; M.M. Verbeek reports no 
disclosures relevant to the manuscript; E.I. Hoff reports no disclosures 
relevant to the manuscript; S. Boukhrissi reports no disclosures relevant to the 
manuscript; S.C. Franken reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript; 
M.M.P. Nagtzaam reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript; M. Paunovic 
has been funded by an E-RARE grant; S. Veenbergen reports no disclosures 
relevant to the manuscript; P.A.E. Sillevis Smitt holds a patent for the 
detection of anti-DNER, and received research support from Euroimmun; M.J. 
Titulaer has filed a patent, on behalf of Erasmus MC, for methods for typing 
neurologic disorders and cancer, and devices for use therein, has received 
research funds for serving on a scientific advisory board of AmGen, for 
consultation at Guidepoint Global LLC, for consultation at UCB, has received an 
unrestricted research grant from Euroimmun AG and from CSL Behring, has received 
funding from EpilepsieNL. Go to Neurology.org/NN for full disclosures.