---
reference_id: "PMID:31989186"
title: Impaired Bone Microarchitecture in Patients with Hereditary Hemochromatosis and Skeletal Complications.
authors:
- Jandl NM
- Rolvien T
- Schmidt T
- Mussawy H
- Nielsen P
- Oheim R
- Amling M
- Barvencik F
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00223-020-00658-7
keywords:
- "Absorptiometry, Photon"
- Age Factors
- Aged
- Bone Density
- Bone and Bones/pathology
- "Fractures, Bone/etiology, pathology"
- "Hemochromatosis/complications, pathology"
- Humans
- "Osteonecrosis/etiology, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired Bone Microarchitecture in Patients with Hereditary Hemochromatosis and Skeletal Complications.
**Authors:** Jandl NM, Rolvien T, Schmidt T, Mussawy H, Nielsen P, Oheim R, Amling M, Barvencik F
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00223-020-00658-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-020-00658-7)

## Content

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2020 May;106(5):465-475. doi: 10.1007/s00223-020-00658-7. 
Epub 2020 Jan 27.

Impaired Bone Microarchitecture in Patients with Hereditary Hemochromatosis and 
Skeletal Complications.

Jandl NM(1)(2), Rolvien T(3)(4), Schmidt T(3), Mussawy H(4), Nielsen P(5), Oheim 
R(3), Amling M(3), Barvencik F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Lottestrasse 59, 22529, Hamburg, Germany. n.jandl@uke.de.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany. n.jandl@uke.de.
(3)Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Lottestrasse 59, 22529, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Orthopedics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, University Medical 
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

Hereditary hemochromatosis (HHC) is characterized by excessive intestinal iron 
absorption resulting in a pathological increase of iron levels. Parenchyma 
damage may be a consequence of iron deposition in affected organs (e.g., liver, 
pancreas, gonads) as well as bones and joints, leading to osteoporosis with 
increased fracture risk and arthropathy. Up to date, it is not known whether HHC 
can also be considered as a risk factor for osteonecrosis. Likewise, the 
underlying skeletal changes are unknown regarding, e.g., microstructural 
properties of bone. We aimed to study the spectrum of skeletal complications in 
HHC and the possible underlying microarchitectural changes. Therefore, we 
retrospectively analyzed all patients with HHC (n = 10) presenting in our 
outpatient clinic for bone diseases. In addition to dual-energy X-ray 
absorptiometry (DXA), high-resolution peripheral quantitative computed 
tomography (HR-pQCT) was performed and bone turnover markers, 25-OH-D3, ferritin 
and transferrin saturation were measured. Cortical volumetric bone mineral 
density (Ct.BMD) and cortical thickness (Ct.Th) were reduced, whereas trabecular 
microstructure (Tb.Th) and volumetric bone mineral density (Tb.BMD) were 
preserved compared to age- and gender-adjusted reference values from the 
literature. Interestingly, the occurrence of bone complications was age 
dependent; while younger patients presented with osteonecroses or transient bone 
marrow edema, patients older than 65 years presented with fractures. Our study 
provides first insights into altered bone microarchitecture in HHC and sheds new 
light on the occurrence of osteonecrosis. If available, HR-pQCT is a useful 
complement to fracture risk assessment and to determine microstructural 
deterioration and volumetric bone mineralization deficits.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-020-00658-7
PMID: 31989186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]