---
reference_id: "PMID:37265903"
title: Fulminant Clostridioides difficile Colitis With SARS-CoV-2 Infection.
authors:
- Duhan S
- Keisham B
- Salim A
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.38401
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fulminant Clostridioides difficile Colitis With SARS-CoV-2 Infection.
**Authors:** Duhan S, Keisham B, Salim A
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.38401](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.38401)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 May 1;15(5):e38401. doi: 10.7759/cureus.38401. eCollection 2023 
May.

Fulminant Clostridioides difficile Colitis With SARS-CoV-2 Infection.

Duhan S(1), Keisham B(1), Salim A(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Sinai Hospital of Baltimore, Baltimore, USA.

Clostridioides difficile (C. difficile)and coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
infections can have overlapping symptoms. Recently, the association and outcomes 
of coinfection have been studied. We present the case of an 83-year-old lady 
with Parkinson's disease (PD) who was admitted with pneumonia secondary to 
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection. She was 
treated with empiric antibiotics ampicillin-sulbactam and azithromycin, along 
with antiviral therapy remdesivir and baricitinib, and dexamethasone. The 
patient developed severe C. difficile infection with a leukemoid reaction. She 
was treated with intravenous metronidazole and oral vancomycin without any 
improvement. Before she could receive a fecal microbiota transplant, her 
infection progressed to fulminant colitis, and she required emergent surgery. 
The patient developed several complications post-surgery and succumbed to the 
severe illness. Our patient's multiple comorbidities and an underlying COVID-19 
infection predisposed her to severe illness. This case emphasizes the 
long-standing discussion on antibiotic stewardship and encourages a debate on 
the role of immunosuppressant antiviral medications and underlying PD in 
predisposing patients to a severe C. difficile infection.

Copyright © 2023, Duhan et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.38401
PMCID: PMC10231867
PMID: 37265903

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.