---
reference_id: "PMID:22331945"
title: Phase II study of imatinib in advanced chordoma.
authors:
- Stacchiotti S
- Longhi A
- Ferraresi V
- Grignani G
- Comandone A
- Stupp R
- Bertuzzi A
- Tamborini E
- Pilotti S
- Messina A
- Spreafico C
- Gronchi A
- Amore P
- Vinaccia V
- Casali PG
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.35.3656
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Benzamides
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Chordoma/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Imatinib Mesylate
- Immunoenzyme Techniques
- Immunoprecipitation
- Italy
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Piperazines/therapeutic use
- Prospective Studies
- Pyrimidines/therapeutic use
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor beta/metabolism"
- Survival Rate
- Switzerland
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase II study of imatinib in advanced chordoma.
**Authors:** Stacchiotti S, Longhi A, Ferraresi V, Grignani G, Comandone A, Stupp R, Bertuzzi A, Tamborini E, Pilotti S, Messina A, Spreafico C, Gronchi A, Amore P, Vinaccia V, Casali PG
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2011.35.3656](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2011.35.3656)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Mar 20;30(9):914-20. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.35.3656. Epub
2012  Feb 13.

Phase II study of imatinib in advanced chordoma.

Stacchiotti S(1), Longhi A, Ferraresi V, Grignani G, Comandone A, Stupp R, 
Bertuzzi A, Tamborini E, Pilotti S, Messina A, Spreafico C, Gronchi A, Amore P, 
Vinaccia V, Casali PG.

Author information:
(1)Fondazione Istitutodi Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Istituto 
Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy. silvia.stacchiotti@istitutotumori.mi.it

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2012 Mar 20;30(9):896-8. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.40.6942.

PURPOSE: To explore the antitumor activity of imatinib in patients with advanced 
platelet-derived growth factor β (PDGFB)/PDGF receptor β (PDGFRB)-positive 
chordomas.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In a collaborative Italian-Swiss, prospective, phase II 
clinical study conducted from November 2004 through April 2006, 56 patients with 
advanced PDGFB and/or PDGFRB chordoma received 800 mg/d of imatinib until 
progression. The primary end point was the overall tumor response rate (ORR), 
defined by RECIST. Secondary, exploratory end points included tissue response 
(ie, changes in tumor density or signal intensity/contrast enhancement, and/or 
[18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography [PET] uptake), overall 
survival, progression-free survival (PFS), and pain score.
RESULTS: Among 50 patients evaluable by RECIST, the best response was one 
partial response (PR) obtained at 6 months (ORR, 2%). There were 35 patients 
with stable disease (SD, 70%) and a 64% clinical benefit rate (ie, RECIST 
complete response + PR + SD ≥ 6 months). A minor dimensional response (< 20%) 
was detected in nine patients. A maximum standard uptake value decrease ≥ 25% 
was observed in 10 (39%) of 26 patients evaluable for PET response at 3 months. 
Changes in the Brief Pain Inventory score were consistent with the response 
assessment. Median PFS (intention-to-treat population, 56 patients) was 9 
months. No unexpected toxicities were observed.
CONCLUSION: This is the largest phase II study in chordoma to date. It confirms 
anecdotal evidence that imatinib has antitumor activity in this orphan disease, 
and therefore, it is worth further investigation.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2011.35.3656
PMID: 22331945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]