---
reference_id: "PMID:14970098"
title: Dracunculiasis (guinea worm disease).
authors:
- Greenaway C
journal: CMAJ
year: '2004'
keywords:
- Adult
- Africa South of the Sahara/epidemiology
- Child
- "Dracunculiasis/epidemiology, physiopathology, prevention & control"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Public Health Practice
- Water Supply
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dracunculiasis (guinea worm disease).
**Authors:** Greenaway C
**Journal:** CMAJ (2004)

## Content

1. CMAJ. 2004 Feb 17;170(4):495-500.

Dracunculiasis (guinea worm disease).

Greenaway C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University. ca.greenaway@mcgill.ca

Dracunculiasis (guinea worm disease) is a parasitic disease that is limited to
remote, rural villages in 13 sub-Saharan African countries that do not have
access to safe drinking water. It is one the next diseases targeted for
eradication by the World Health Organization. Guinea worm disease is transmitted
by drinking water containing copepods (water fleas) that are infected with
Dracunculiasis medinensis larvae. One year after human ingestion of infected
water a female adult worm emerges, typically from a lower extremity, producing
painful ulcers that can impair mobility for up to several weeks. This disease
occurs annually when agricultural activities are at their peak. Large
proportions of economically productive individuals of a village are usually
affected simultaneously, resulting in decreased agricultural productivity and
economic hardship. Eradication of guinea worm disease depends on prevention, as
there is no effective treatment or vaccine. Since 1986, there has been a 98%
reduction in guinea worm disease worldwide, achieved primarily through
community-based programs. These programs have educated local populations on how
to filter drinking water to remove the parasite and how to prevent those with
ulcers from infecting drinking-water sources. Complete eradication will require
sustained high-level political, financial and community support.

PMCID: PMC332717
PMID: 14970098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
