---
reference_id: "PMID:28228528"
title: "Clinical, genetic, and structural basis of congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 11β-hydroxylase deficiency."
authors:
- Khattab A
- Haider S
- Kumar A
- Dhawan S
- Alam D
- Romero R
- Burns J
- Li D
- Estatico J
- Rahi S
- Fatima S
- Alzahrani A
- Hafez M
- Musa N
- Razzghy Azar M
- Khaloul N
- Gribaa M
- Saad A
- Charfeddine IB
- Bilharinho de Mendonça B
- Belgorosky A
- Dumic K
- Dumic M
- Aisenberg J
- Kandemir N
- Alikasifoglu A
- Ozon A
- Gonc N
- Cheng T
- Kuhnle-Krahl U
- Cappa M
- Holterhus PM
- Nour MA
- Pacaud D
- Holtzman A
- Li S
- Zaidi M
- Yuen T
- New MI
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1621082114
keywords:
- "Adrenal Hyperplasia, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- "Africa, Northern"
- Consanguinity
- Female
- "Gonadal Steroid Hormones/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle East
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Steroid 11-beta-Hydroxylase/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, genetic, and structural basis of congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 11β-hydroxylase deficiency.
**Authors:** Khattab A, Haider S, Kumar A, Dhawan S, Alam D, Romero R, Burns J, Li D, Estatico J, Rahi S, Fatima S, Alzahrani A, Hafez M, Musa N, Razzghy Azar M, Khaloul N, Gribaa M, Saad A, Charfeddine IB, Bilharinho de Mendonça B, Belgorosky A, Dumic K, Dumic M, Aisenberg J, Kandemir N, Alikasifoglu A, Ozon A, Gonc N, Cheng T, Kuhnle-Krahl U, Cappa M, Holterhus PM, Nour MA, Pacaud D, Holtzman A, Li S, Zaidi M, Yuen T, New MI
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1621082114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1621082114)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Mar 7;114(10):E1933-E1940. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1621082114. Epub 2017 Feb 22.

Clinical, genetic, and structural basis of congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to
11β-hydroxylase deficiency.

Khattab A(1)(2), Haider S(3), Kumar A(1)(2), Dhawan S(1)(2), Alam D(1)(2),
Romero R(3), Burns J(3), Li D(3), Estatico J(1)(2), Rahi S(1)(2), Fatima
S(1)(2), Alzahrani A(4), Hafez M(5), Musa N(5), Razzghy Azar M(6), Khaloul N(7),
Gribaa M(7), Saad A(7), Charfeddine IB(7), Bilharinho de Mendonça B(8),
Belgorosky A(9), Dumic K(10), Dumic M(10), Aisenberg J(11), Kandemir N(12),
Alikasifoglu A(12), Ozon A(12), Gonc N(12), Cheng T(1)(2), Kuhnle-Krahl U(13),
Cappa M(14), Holterhus PM(15), Nour MA(16), Pacaud D(17), Holtzman A(1)(2), Li
S(1)(2), Zaidi M(1)(2), Yuen T(1)(2), New MI(18)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Adrenal Steroid Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029.
(2)Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
10029.
(3)School of Pharmacy, University College London, London WC1N 4AX, United
Kingdom.
(4)King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh 12713, Saudi
Arabia.
(5)Diabetes, Endocrine, and Metabolism Pediatrics Unit, Department of
Pediatrics, Cairo University, 11617 Cairo, Egypt.
(6)Ali Asghar Children's Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, 10000
Tehran, Iran.
(7)Laboratory of Human Cytogenetic Molecular Genetics and Biology of
Reproduction, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia.
(8)Developmental Endocrinology Unit, Hormone and Molecular Genetics Laboratory,
University of São Paulo, Sao Paulo 05508, Brazil.
(9)Garrahan Pediatric Hospital, 1881 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(10)University Hospital Centre Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(11)Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes Medicine, Hackensack University Medical
Center, Hackensack, NJ 07601.
(12)Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, 06100 Ankara, Turkey.
(13)Childrens Hospital, University of Munich, 80539 Munich, Germany.
(14)Bambino Gesù Hospital, 00146 Roma, Italy.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, 24105
Kiel, Germany.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, University of Saskatchewan College of Medicine,
Saskatoon, SK, Canada S7N 0W8.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada T3B
6A8.
(18)Division of Adrenal Steroid Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029; maria.new@mssm.edu.

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), resulting from mutations in CYP11B1, a
gene encoding 11β-hydroxylase, represents a rare autosomal recessive Mendelian
disorder of aberrant sex steroid production. Unlike CAH caused by 21-hydroxylase
deficiency, the disease is far more common in the Middle East and North Africa,
where consanguinity is common often resulting in identical mutations.
Clinically, affected female newborns are profoundly virilized (Prader score of
4/5), and both genders display significantly advanced bone ages and are
oftentimes hypertensive. We find that 11-deoxycortisol, not frequently measured,
is the most robust biochemical marker for diagnosing 11β-hydroxylase deficiency.
Finally, computational modeling of 25 missense mutations of CYP11B1 revealed
that specific modifications in the heme-binding (R374W and R448C) or
substrate-binding (W116C) site of 11β-hydroxylase, or alterations in its
stability (L299P and G267S), may predict severe disease. Thus, we report
clinical, genetic, hormonal, and structural effects of CYP11B1 gene mutations in
the largest international cohort of 108 patients with steroid 11β-hydroxylase
deficiency CAH.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1621082114
PMCID: PMC5347606
PMID: 28228528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
