---
reference_id: "PMID:39280458"
title: A Case of Bilateral Retinal Vasculitis in Atypical Cogan Syndrome.
authors:
- Inokuchi C
- Sato S
- Terada M
- Uematsu S
- Shirai S
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.66984
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case of Bilateral Retinal Vasculitis in Atypical Cogan Syndrome.
**Authors:** Inokuchi C, Sato S, Terada M, Uematsu S, Shirai S
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.66984](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.66984)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Aug 16;16(8):e66984. doi: 10.7759/cureus.66984. eCollection 2024 
Aug.

A Case of Bilateral Retinal Vasculitis in Atypical Cogan Syndrome.

Inokuchi C(1), Sato S(2)(1), Terada M(3), Uematsu S(1), Shirai S(1).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology, Itami City Hospital, Itami, JPN.
(2)Ophthalmology, Osaka University, Osaka, JPN.
(3)Immunology and Allergy, Itami City Hospital, Itami, JPN.

Cogan syndrome (CS) is a rare chronic inflammatory disease characterized by 
ocular and inner ear inflammation. Well-known ocular manifestations include 
non-syphilitic interstitial keratitis (IK); however, some cases are not 
associated with IK. Inner ear symptoms include sensorineural hearing loss, 
rotatory vertigo, and tinnitus, which can become irreversible without timely 
treatment. Therefore, early and appropriate diagnosis and therapeutic 
intervention are important. However, due to its rarity, few physicians have 
encountered CS and early diagnosis is difficult. In this report, we present the 
details of the diagnosis and treatment of an atypical CS. The patient was a 
44-year-old Japanese woman who was admitted to the Department of Immunology and 
Allergy at Itami City Hospital (Itami City, Hyogo, Japan) due to a persistent 
fever of approximately 40°C for nine days. Multiple erythematous lesions 
appeared on both lower legs, and she experienced decreased vision in her left 
eye. Uveitis with retinal vasculitis was observed in both eyes and the optic 
nerve head showed remarkable swelling in the left eye. Hearing tests revealed 
impaired hearing in both ears. Based on these findings, we diagnosed atypical CS 
and initiated systemic and topical steroid therapy. Approximately two weeks 
later, visual acuity and hearing levels improved. Fluorescein angiography (FA) 
revealed a non-perfusion area in both eyes, and retinal photocoagulation was 
performed using a pattern-scanning laser. Eighteen months after the laser 
irradiation, retinal neovascularization (RNV) was observed in the area where the 
laser was applied to the left eye; therefore, an additional laser was applied. 
Combination therapy with steroids and immunosuppressive drugs was continued 
until the patient's last visit three years later and she did not experience any 
recurrence of uveitis or hearing loss. In this case, a pattern-scanning laser 
was used for retinal photocoagulation to prevent RNV; however, RNV occurred 
within the area of the laser spots. In such cases of retinal capillary occlusion 
due to vasculitis, it may be better to close the spacing or use a conventional 
laser system. In the presence of retinal vasculitis with systemic inflammation, 
CS should be suspected, and a hearing test should be performed, even in the 
absence of subjective symptoms. Early treatment and prevention of irreversible 
hearing loss should be necessary. Careful follow-up in collaboration with other 
departments is important for CS cases.

Copyright © 2024, Inokuchi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.66984
PMCID: PMC11402271
PMID: 39280458

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived 
by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.