---
reference_id: "PMID:32165495"
title: A peroxisome deficiency-induced reductive cytosol state up-regulates the brain-derived neurotrophic factor pathway.
authors:
- Abe Y
- Honsho M
- Kawaguchi R
- Matsuzaki T
- Ichiki Y
- Fujitani M
- Fujiwara K
- Hirokane M
- Oku M
- Sakai Y
- Yamashita T
- Fujiki Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.011989
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A peroxisome deficiency-induced reductive cytosol state up-regulates the brain-derived neurotrophic factor pathway.
**Authors:** Abe Y, Honsho M, Kawaguchi R, Matsuzaki T, Ichiki Y, Fujitani M, Fujiwara K, Hirokane M, Oku M, Sakai Y, Yamashita T, Fujiki Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA119.011989](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA119.011989)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Apr 17;295(16):5321-5334. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.011989.
Epub  2020 Mar 12.

A peroxisome deficiency-induced reductive cytosol state up-regulates the 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor pathway.

Abe Y(1), Honsho M(2), Kawaguchi R(3), Matsuzaki T(4), Ichiki Y(5), Fujitani 
M(6), Fujiwara K(3), Hirokane M(3), Oku M(5), Sakai Y(5), Yamashita T(7), Fujiki 
Y(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Organelle Homeostasis, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan; Faculty of Arts and 
Science, Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan.
(2)Division of Organelle Homeostasis, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan; Institute of Rheological 
Functions of Food, Hisayama-machi, Fukuoka 811-2501, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Systems Life Sciences, Kyushu University Graduate School, 
744 Motooka, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Kyushu University Graduate 
School, 744 Motooka, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan.
(5)Division of Applied Life Sciences, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto 
University, Kitashirakawa-Oiwake, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan.
(6)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; Department of Anatomy and 
Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, Shimane University, Izumo, Shimane 693-8501, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; Core Research for Evolutional Science 
and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0075, 
Japan.
(8)Division of Organelle Homeostasis, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan; Institute of Rheological 
Functions of Food, Hisayama-machi, Fukuoka 811-2501, Japan. Electronic address: 
yfujiki@kyudai.jp.

The peroxisome is a subcellular organelle that functions in essential metabolic 
pathways, including biosynthesis of plasmalogens, fatty acid β-oxidation of 
very-long-chain fatty acids, and degradation of hydrogen peroxide. Peroxisome 
biogenesis disorders (PBDs) manifest as severe dysfunction in multiple organs, 
including the central nervous system (CNS), but the pathogenic mechanisms in 
PBDs are largely unknown. Because CNS integrity is coordinately established and 
maintained by neural cell interactions, we here investigated whether cell-cell 
communication is impaired and responsible for the neurological defects 
associated with PBDs. Results from a noncontact co-culture system consisting of 
primary hippocampal neurons with glial cells revealed that a 
peroxisome-deficient astrocytic cell line secretes increased levels of 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), resulting in axonal branching of the 
neurons. Of note, the BDNF expression in astrocytes was not affected by defects 
in plasmalogen biosynthesis and peroxisomal fatty acid β-oxidation in the 
astrocytes. Instead, we found that cytosolic reductive states caused by a 
mislocalized catalase in the peroxisome-deficient cells induce the elevation in 
BDNF secretion. Our results suggest that peroxisome deficiency dysregulates 
neuronal axogenesis by causing a cytosolic reductive state in astrocytes. We 
conclude that astrocytic peroxisomes regulate BDNF expression and thereby 
support neuronal integrity and function.

© 2020 Abe et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.011989
PMCID: PMC7170515
PMID: 32165495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article