---
reference_id: "PMID:20845425"
title: Distinct microbiome in pouchitis compared to healthy pouches in ulcerative colitis and familial adenomatous polyposis.
authors:
- Zella GC
- Hait EJ
- Glavan T
- Gevers D
- Ward DV
- Kitts CL
- Korzenik JR
journal: Inflamm Bowel Dis
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/ibd.21460
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct microbiome in pouchitis compared to healthy pouches in ulcerative colitis and familial adenomatous polyposis.
**Authors:** Zella GC, Hait EJ, Glavan T, Gevers D, Ward DV, Kitts CL, Korzenik JR
**Journal:** Inflamm Bowel Dis (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ibd.21460](https://doi.org/10.1002/ibd.21460)

## Content

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011 May;17(5):1092-100. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21460. Epub 2010 
Sep 15.

Distinct microbiome in pouchitis compared to healthy pouches in ulcerative 
colitis and familial adenomatous polyposis.

Zella GC(1), Hait EJ, Glavan T, Gevers D, Ward DV, Kitts CL, Korzenik JR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02114, USA. gzella@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Pouchitis occurs in up to 50% of patients with ulcerative colitis 
(UC) undergoing ileal pouch anal anastomosis (IPAA). Pouchitis rarely occurs in 
patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) who undergo IPAA. Our aim was 
to compare mucosal and luminal flora in patients with UC-associated pouchitis 
(UCP), healthy UC pouches (HUC), and healthy FAP pouches (FAP).
METHODS: Nineteen patients were enrolled in this cross-sectional study (nine 
UCP, three HUC, seven FAP). Patients with active pouchitis were identified using 
the Pouchitis Disease Activity Index (PDAI). Ileal pouch mucosal biopsies and 
fecal samples were analyzed with a 16S rDNA-based terminal restriction fragment 
length polymorphism (TRFLP) approach. Pooled fecal DNA from four UCP and four 
FAP pouches were sequenced for further speciation.
RESULTS: TRFLP data revealed statistically significant differences in the 
mucosal and fecal microbiota between each group of patients. UCP samples 
exhibited significantly more TRFLP peaks matching Clostridium and Eubacterium 
genera compared to HUC and FAP pouches and fewer peaks matching Lactobacillus 
and Streptococcus genera compared to FAP. DNA Sanger sequencing of a subset of 
luminal samples revealed UCP having more identifiable sequences of Firmicutes 
(51.2% versus 21.2%) and Verrucomicrobia (20.2% versus 3.2%), and fewer 
Bacteroidetes (17.9% versus 60.5%) and Proteobacteria (9.8% versus 14.7%) 
compared to FAP.
CONCLUSIONS: The pouch microbial environment appears to be distinctly different 
in the settings of UC pouchitis, healthy UC, and FAP. These findings suggest 
that a dysbiosis may exist in pouchitis which may be central to understanding 
the disease.

Copyright © 2010 Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ibd.21460
PMID: 20845425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]