---
reference_id: "PMID:38481988"
title: Clinical and Genetic Spectrum of Nine Cases of NLRP3-Associated Autoinflammatory Disease (NLRP3-AID) and Identification of One Novel NLRP3 Mutation by Genetic Variation Analyses.
authors:
- Shangguan Y
- Ding X
- Ma L
- Cai YX
- Xiang S
- Huang XF
- Shen Y
- Yu HG
- Zheng W
journal: J Immunol Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1155/2024/5722548
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Genetic Spectrum of Nine Cases of NLRP3-Associated Autoinflammatory Disease (NLRP3-AID) and Identification of One Novel NLRP3 Mutation by Genetic Variation Analyses.
**Authors:** Shangguan Y, Ding X, Ma L, Cai YX, Xiang S, Huang XF, Shen Y, Yu HG, Zheng W
**Journal:** J Immunol Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2024/5722548](https://doi.org/10.1155/2024/5722548)

## Content

1. J Immunol Res. 2024 Mar 6;2024:5722548. doi: 10.1155/2024/5722548. eCollection
 2024.

Clinical and Genetic Spectrum of Nine Cases of NLRP3-Associated Autoinflammatory 
Disease (NLRP3-AID) and Identification of One Novel NLRP3 Mutation by Genetic 
Variation Analyses.

Shangguan Y(#)(1)(2), Ding X(#)(3), Ma L(#)(4), Cai YX(3), Xiang S(5), Huang 
XF(3), Shen Y(5), Yu HG(4), Zheng W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital and 
Yuying Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Structural Malformations in Children of Zhejiang Province, 
Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Zhejiang Provincial Clinical Research Center for Pediatric Disease, The 
Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)Rheumatology and Immunology Department, Children's Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(5)Department of Nephrology and Immunology, Children's Hospital of Soochow 
University, Suzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: NLRP3-associated autoinflammatory disease (NLRP3-AID) is characterized 
by gain-of-function variants in the NLRP3 gene. Since there are little 
literature focusing on pediatric NLRP3-AID in China, we aimed to elucidate the 
phenotypic and genotypic profiles of Chinese patients with NLRP3-AID.
METHODS: Patients with NLRP3-AID at three rheumatology centers in China were 
genotyped through whole exome sequencing or gene panel sequencing. Sanger 
sequencing was performed on all patients and their parents. Clinical phenotype, 
treatment, and prognosis were analyzed.
RESULTS: Nine patients with NLRP3-AID were enrolled between December 2014 and 
October 2022 with an average follow-up period exceeding 30 months. The median 
age of onset was 12 months, and 66.7% were younger than 3 years old. The 
diagnosis was significantly delayed and the median delay duration was 115 
months. The patients most commonly presented with rash (100%), 
arthritis/arthralgia (88.9%), lymphadenopathy (88.9%), fever (77.8%), and growth 
retardation (44.4%). During acute attack, white blood cell, C-reactive protein, 
and/or erythrocyte sedimentation rate all increased in all cases, and 
inflammatory markers remained elevated beyond 7 days postfever resolution in 
57.1% of patients (4/7). Two cases of chronic infantile neurological cutaneous 
articular syndrome (CINCA) had clubbed fingers, one with interstitial lung 
disease, a finding rarely reported. Treatment with glucocorticoids (77.8%) and 
biologic agents (33.3%) yielded 66% complete remission and 33% partial 
remission. Genetic analysis identified eight pathogenic NLRP3 missense 
mutations, including one novel mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study illuminated the distinct clinical and genetic features of 
Chinese NLRP3-AID patients, emphasizing the significance of early genetic 
screening. Despite delayed diagnosis, treatment primarily with glucocorticoids 
and biologic agents, led to favorable outcomes. Genetic heterogeneity, including 
a novel mutation, highlighted the complexity of NLRP3-AID in this population.

Copyright © 2024 Yaoyao Shangguan et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2024/5722548
PMCID: PMC10937081
PMID: 38481988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.