---
reference_id: "PMID:20301648"
title: Aicardi-Goutières Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Crow YJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aicardi-Goutières Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Crow YJ

## Content

1. Aicardi-Goutières Syndrome.

Crow YJ(1)(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2005 Jun 29 [updated 2016 Nov 22].

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Neuroinflammation, Institut Imagine, Paris,
France
(2)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Most characteristically, Aicardi-Goutières syndrome
(AGS) manifests as an early-onset encephalopathy that usually, but not always,
results in severe intellectual and physical disability. A subgroup of infants
with AGS present at birth with abnormal neurologic findings, hepatosplenomegaly,
elevated liver enzymes, and thrombocytopenia, a picture highly suggestive of
congenital infection. Otherwise, most affected infants present at variable times
after the first few weeks of life, frequently after a period of apparently
normal development. Typically, they demonstrate the subacute onset of a severe
encephalopathy characterized by extreme irritability, intermittent sterile
pyrexias, loss of skills, and slowing of head growth. Over time, as many as 40%
develop chilblain skin lesions on the fingers, toes, and ears. It is becoming
apparent that atypical, sometimes milder, cases of AGS exist, and thus the true
extent of the phenotype associated with pathogenic variants in the AGS-related
genes is not yet known.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of AGS is established in a proband with typical
clinical findings and characteristic abnormalities on cranial CT (calcification
of the basal ganglia and white matter) and MRI (leukodystrophic changes); AND/OR
by identification of one of the following: Biallelic pathogenic variants in
ADAR, RNASEH2A, RNASEH2B, RNASEH2C, SAMHD1, or TREX1. Specific heterozygous
autosomal dominant pathogenic variants in TREX1 and ADAR. A variety of
heterozygous autosomal dominant pathogenic variants in IFIH1.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Chest physiotherapy and treatment of
respiratory complications; attention to diet and feeding methods to assure
adequate caloric intake and avoid aspiration; management of seizures using
standard protocols. Surveillance: Monitoring for signs of diabetes insipidus in
the neonatal period; repeat ophthalmologic examinations at least for the first
few years of life to evaluate for evidence of glaucoma; monitoring for evidence
of scoliosis, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and hypothyroidism.
GENETIC COUNSELING: AGS is most frequently inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner; in a few instances the disease can result from specific de novo or
inherited autosomal dominant pathogenic variants in ADAR or TREX1, and a variety
of heterozygous autosomal dominant pathogenic variants in IFIH1. At conception,
each sib of an affected individual with autosomal recessive AGS has a 25% chance
of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25%
chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Individuals with AGS do not
typically reproduce. Once the pathogenic variants have been identified in an
affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives, prenatal testing
for a pregnancy at increased risk for AGS, and preimplantation genetic testing
are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301648
