---
reference_id: "PMID:24714783"
title: "Matrix-Applied Characterized Autologous Cultured Chondrocytes Versus Microfracture: Two-Year Follow-up of a Prospective Randomized Trial."
authors:
- Saris D
- Price A
- Widuchowski W
- Bertrand-Marchand M
- Caron J
- Drogset JO
- Emans P
- Podskubka A
- Tsuchida A
- Kili S
- Levine D
- Brittberg M
- SUMMIT study group
journal: Am J Sports Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1177/0363546514528093
keywords:
- Adult
- "Arthroplasty, Subchondral/methods"
- "Cartilage, Articular/injuries, surgery"
- "Chondrocytes/pathology, transplantation"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Knee Injuries/pathology, surgery"
- Knee Joint/pathology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- "Transplantation, Autologous"
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Matrix-Applied Characterized Autologous Cultured Chondrocytes Versus Microfracture: Two-Year Follow-up of a Prospective Randomized Trial.
**Authors:** Saris D, Price A, Widuchowski W, Bertrand-Marchand M, Caron J, Drogset JO, Emans P, Podskubka A, Tsuchida A, Kili S, Levine D, Brittberg M, SUMMIT study group
**Journal:** Am J Sports Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0363546514528093](https://doi.org/10.1177/0363546514528093)

## Content

1. Am J Sports Med. 2014 Jun;42(6):1384-94. doi: 10.1177/0363546514528093. Epub 
2014 Apr 8.

Matrix-Applied Characterized Autologous Cultured Chondrocytes Versus 
Microfracture: Two-Year Follow-up of a Prospective Randomized Trial.

Saris D(1), Price A(2), Widuchowski W(3), Bertrand-Marchand M(4), Caron J(5), 
Drogset JO(6), Emans P(7), Podskubka A(8), Tsuchida A(9), Kili S(10), Levine 
D(11), Brittberg M(12); SUMMIT study group.

Collaborators: Paša L, Trc T, Slynarski K, Sanson BJ, Bezuidenhoudt M, Allizard 
M, Banach W, Chouteau J, Hamon P.

Author information:
(1)University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands Reconstructive 
Medicine, Tissue Regeneration, MIRA Institute, University of Twente, Enschede, 
the Netherlands d.saris@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)NIHR Biomedical Research Unit, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, 
Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)District Hospital of Orthopedics and Trauma Surgery, Department of Knee 
Surgery, Arthroscopy and Sports Traumatology, Piekary Slaskie, Poland.
(4)Chirurgie Arthrose, Sport et Arthroscopie, Polyclinique Saint Roch, 
Montpellier, France.
(5)St Elisabeth Ziekenhuis, Afdeling Orthopedie, Tilburg, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Orthopaedics, Trondheim University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(7)Academisch Ziekenhuis Maastricht, Afdeling Orthopedie, Maastricht, the 
Netherlands.
(8)First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Hospital Bulovka, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(9)University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(10)Genzyme Biosurgery (now Sanofi Biosurgery), Oxford, UK.
(11)Genzyme Biosurgery (now Sanofi Biosurgery), Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(12)Region Halland Orthopedics, Kungsbacka Hospital, Kungsbacka, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Randomized controlled trials studying the efficacy and safety of 
matrix-applied characterized autologous cultured chondrocytes (MACI) versus 
microfracture (MFX) for treating cartilage defects are limited.
PURPOSE: To compare the clinical efficacy and safety of MACI versus MFX in the 
treatment of patients with symptomatic cartilage defects of the knee.
STUDY DESIGN: Randomized controlled clinical trial; Level of evidence, 1.
METHODS: Patients enrolled in the SUMMIT (Demonstrate the Superiority of MACI 
implant to Microfracture Treatment) trial had ≥1 symptomatic focal cartilage 
defect (Outerbridge grade III or IV; ≥3 cm(2)) of the femoral condyles or 
trochlea, with a baseline Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) 
pain value <55. The co-primary efficacy endpoint was the change in the KOOS pain 
and function subscores from baseline to 2 years. Histological evaluation and 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) assessments of structural repair tissue, 
treatment failure, the remaining 3 KOOS subscales, and safety were also 
assessed.
RESULTS: Of the 144 patients treated, 137 (95%) completed the 2-year assessment. 
Patients had a mean age of 33.8 years and a mean lesion size of 4.8 cm(2). The 
mean KOOS pain and function subscores from baseline to 2 years were 
significantly more improved with MACI than with MFX (pain: MACI, 37.0 to 82.5 vs 
MFX, 35.5 to 70.9; function: MACI, 14.9 to 60.9 vs MFX, 12.6 to 48.7; P = .001). 
A significant improvement in scores was also observed on the KOOS subscales of 
activities of daily living (MACI, 43.5 to 87.2 vs MFX, 42.6 to 75.8; P < .001), 
knee-related quality of life (MACI, 18.8 to 56.2 vs MFX, 17.2 to 47.3; P = 
.029), and other symptoms (MACI, 48.3 to 83.7 vs MFX, 44.4 to 72.2; P < .001) 
for patients treated with MACI compared with MFX. Repair tissue quality was good 
as assessed by histology/MRI, but no difference was shown between treatments. A 
low number of treatment failures (nonresponders: MACI, 12.5% vs MFX, 31.9%; P = 
.016) and no unexpected safety findings were reported.
CONCLUSION: The treatment of symptomatic cartilage knee defects ≥3 cm(2) in size 
using MACI was clinically and statistically significantly better than with MFX, 
with similar structural repair tissue and safety, in this heterogeneous patient 
population. Moreover, MACI offers a more efficacious alternative than MFX with a 
similar safety profile for the treatment of symptomatic articular cartilage 
defects of the knee.

© 2014 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1177/0363546514528093
PMID: 24714783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]