---
reference_id: "PMID:31059505"
title: "Seasonal patterns of dengue fever in rural Ecuador: 2009-2016."
authors:
- Sippy R
- Herrera D
- Gaus D
- Gangnon RE
- Patz JA
- Osorio JE
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0007360
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seasonal patterns of dengue fever in rural Ecuador: 2009-2016.
**Authors:** Sippy R, Herrera D, Gaus D, Gangnon RE, Patz JA, Osorio JE
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0007360](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0007360)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2019 May 6;13(5):e0007360. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0007360. eCollection 2019 May.

Seasonal patterns of dengue fever in rural Ecuador: 2009-2016.

Sippy R(1)(2), Herrera D(3), Gaus D(3), Gangnon RE(1)(4), Patz JA(1)(5), Osorio 
JE(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(2)Department of Family Medicine & Community Health, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(3)Salud y Desarrollo Andino, Pedro Vicente Maldonado, Pichincha, Ecuador.
(4)Department of Biostatistics & Medical Informatics, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(5)Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(6)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Season is a major determinant of infectious disease rates, including arboviruses 
spread by mosquitoes, such as dengue, chikungunya, and Zika. Seasonal patterns 
of disease are driven by a combination of climatic or environmental factors, 
such as temperature or rainfall, and human behavioral time trends, such as 
school year schedules, holidays, and weekday-weekend patterns. These factors 
affect both disease rates and healthcare-seeking behavior. Seasonality of dengue 
fever has been studied in the context of climatic factors, but short- and 
long-term time trends are less well-understood. With 2009-2016 medical record 
data from patients diagnosed with dengue fever at two hospitals in rural 
Ecuador, we used Poisson generalized linear modeling to determine short- and 
long-term seasonal patterns of dengue fever, as well as the effect of day of the 
week and public holidays. In a subset analysis, we determined the impact of 
school schedules on school-aged children. With a separate model, we examined the 
effect of climate on diagnosis patterns. In the first model, the most important 
predictors of dengue fever were annual sinusoidal fluctuations in disease, 
long-term trends (as represented by a spline for the full study duration), day 
of the week, and hospital. Seasonal trends showed single peaks in case 
diagnoses, during mid-March. Compared to the average of all days, cases were 
more likely to be diagnosed on Tuesdays (risk ratio (RR): 1.26, 95% confidence 
interval (CI) 1.05-1.51) and Thursdays (RR: 1.25, 95% CI 1.02-1.53), and less 
likely to be diagnosed on Saturdays (RR: 0.81, 95% CI 0.65-1.01) and Sundays 
(RR: 0.74, 95% CI 0.58-0.95). Public holidays were not significant predictors of 
dengue fever diagnoses, except for an increase in diagnoses on the day after 
Christmas (RR: 2.77, 95% CI 1.46-5.24). School schedules did not impact dengue 
diagnoses in school-aged children. In the climate model, important climate 
variables included the monthly total precipitation, an interaction between total 
precipitation and monthly absolute minimum temperature, an interaction between 
total precipitation and monthly precipitation days, and a three-way interaction 
between minimum temperature, total precipitation, and precipitation days. This 
is the first report of long-term dengue fever seasonality in Ecuador, one of few 
reports from rural patients, and one of very few studies utilizing daily disease 
reports. These results can inform local disease prevention efforts, public 
health planning, as well as global and regional models of dengue fever trends.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0007360
PMCID: PMC6522062
PMID: 31059505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.