---
reference_id: "PMID:36980758"
title: Investigation of 11p15.5 Methylation Defects Associated with Beckwith-Wiedemann Spectrum and Embryonic Tumor Risk in Lateralized Overgrowth Patients.
authors:
- Tüysüz B
- Bozlak S
- Uludağ Alkaya D
- Ocak S
- Kasap B
- Sunamak Çifçi E
- Seker A
- Bayhan IA
- Apak H
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers15061872
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigation of 11p15.5 Methylation Defects Associated with Beckwith-Wiedemann Spectrum and Embryonic Tumor Risk in Lateralized Overgrowth Patients.
**Authors:** Tüysüz B, Bozlak S, Uludağ Alkaya D, Ocak S, Kasap B, Sunamak Çifçi E, Seker A, Bayhan IA, Apak H
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers15061872](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15061872)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Mar 21;15(6):1872. doi: 10.3390/cancers15061872.

Investigation of 11p15.5 Methylation Defects Associated with Beckwith-Wiedemann 
Spectrum and Embryonic Tumor Risk in Lateralized Overgrowth Patients.

Tüysüz B(1), Bozlak S(1), Uludağ Alkaya D(1), Ocak S(2), Kasap B(1), Sunamak 
Çifçi E(1), Seker A(3), Bayhan IA(4), Apak H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul 
University-Cerrahpasa, 34098 Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, 
Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, 34098 Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, 
Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, 34098 Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Baltalimani Bone Diseases 
Training and Research Center, University of Health Sciences, 34470 Istanbul, 
Turkey.

The Beckwith-Wiedemann spectrum (BWSp) ranges from isolated lateralized 
overgrowth (ILO) to classic phenotypes. In this broad clinical spectrum, an 
epigenetic alteration on chromosome 11p15.5 can be detected. The risk for 
embryonal tumors is high, especially in patients with lateralized overgrowth 
(LO). The aim of this study is to investigate epigenetic alterations in 11p15.5 
and tumor risk in 87 children with LO. The methylation level of 11p15.5 was 
examined in the blood of all patients and in skin samples or buccal swabs from 
40 patients with negative blood tests; 63.2% of patients were compatible with 
the ILO phenotype, 18.4% were atypical, and 18.4% were classic. The molecular 
diagnosis rate was 81.2% for the atypical and classic phenotypes, and 10.9% for 
the ILO phenotype. In patients with epigenetic alterations, LO was statistically 
significantly more severe than in test negatives. Tumors developed in six (6.9%) 
of the total 87 patients with LO; four belonged to the atypical or classical 
phenotype (12.5%) and two to ILO (3.5%). Three of the four patients with 
atypical/classical phenotypes had pUPD11, one had IC1-GOM alteration, and two 
ILO patients were negative. We conclude that LO patients should be monitored for 
tumor risk even if their epigenetic tests are negative.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15061872
PMCID: PMC10046725
PMID: 36980758

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.