---
reference_id: "PMID:25506500"
title: Clinical genetics and pathobiology of ciliary chondrodysplasias.
authors:
- Schmidts M
journal: J Pediatr Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3233/PGE-14089
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical genetics and pathobiology of ciliary chondrodysplasias.
**Authors:** Schmidts M
**Journal:** J Pediatr Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3233/PGE-14089](https://doi.org/10.3233/PGE-14089)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Genet. 2014 Nov;3(2):46-94. doi: 10.3233/PGE-14089.

Clinical genetics and pathobiology of ciliary chondrodysplasias.

Schmidts M(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany ; Genetics and Genomics Medicine, Institute of Child Health, 
University College London, London, UK.

Ciliary chondrodysplasias represent a heterogenous group of rare, nearly 
exclusively autosomal recessively inherited developmental conditions. While the 
skeletal phenotype, mainly affecting limbs, ribs and sometimes the craniofacial 
skeleton, is predominant, extraskeletal disease affecting the kidneys, liver, 
heart, eyes and other organs and tissues is observed inconsistently. Significant 
lethality, resulting from cardiorespiratory failure due to thoracic constriction 
as well as from renal and hepatic insufficiency or primary cardiac failure due 
to congenital heart disease, is observed with these conditions. The underlying 
genetic defects as well as developmental biology and cell biology work 
undertaken using animal model systems, suggest that these rare conditions result 
from ciliary malfunction. The skeletal phenotype is believed to result from 
imbalances in the hedgehog signaling pathway that normally occurs in functional 
cilia in chondrocytes. Although phenotypes have been historically distinguished 
based on clinical features into short-rib polydactyly syndrome, Jeune 
asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy, Mainzer-Saldino syndrome, Sensenbrenner 
syndrome (cranioectodermal dysplasia), oral-facial-digital syndrome and 
Ellis-van Creveld syndrome, recent research suggests that there is significant 
genetic as well as phenotypic overlap between the conditions. This review 
discusses ciliary chondrodysplasias from phenotypic hallmarks to clinical 
management and summarizes progress in identification of the underlying molecular 
mechanisms as well as potential future therapeutic perspectives.

DOI: 10.3233/PGE-14089
PMCID: PMC4262788
PMID: 25506500