---
reference_id: "PMID:26020379"
title: "An update of the Mayo Clinic cohort of patients with adult primary central nervous system vasculitis: description of 163 patients."
authors:
- Salvarani C
- Brown RD Jr
- Christianson T
- Miller DV
- Giannini C
- Huston J 3rd
- Hunder GG
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000738
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Biopsy
- Cerebral Angiography
- Cyclophosphamide/therapeutic use
- Female
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Incidence
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Severity of Illness Index
- Sex Factors
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnosis, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An update of the Mayo Clinic cohort of patients with adult primary central nervous system vasculitis: description of 163 patients.
**Authors:** Salvarani C, Brown RD Jr, Christianson T, Miller DV, Giannini C, Huston J 3rd, Hunder GG
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000000738](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000000738)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 May;94(21):e738. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000738.

An update of the Mayo Clinic cohort of patients with adult primary central 
nervous system vasculitis: description of 163 patients.

Salvarani C(1), Brown RD Jr, Christianson T, Miller DV, Giannini C, Huston J 
3rd, Hunder GG.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (RDB); Division of Biomedical Statistics and 
Informatics (TC); Department of Radiology (JH); Division of Anatomic Pathology 
(CG, DVM); and Division of Rheumatology (GGH), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.

Primary central nervous system vasculitis (PCNSV) is an uncommon condition in 
which lesions are limited to vessels of the brain and spinal cord. Because the 
clinical manifestations are not specific, the diagnosis is often difficult, and 
permanent disability and death are frequent outcomes. This study is based on a 
cohort of 163 consecutive patients with PCNSV who were examined at the Mayo 
Clinic over a 29-year period from 1983 to 2011. The aim of the study was to 
define the characteristics of these patients, which represents the largest 
series in adults reported to date. A total of 105 patients were diagnosed by 
angiographic findings and 58 by biopsy results. The patients diagnosed by biopsy 
more frequently had at presentation cognitive dysfunction, greater cerebrospinal 
fluid total protein concentrations, less frequent cerebral infarcts, and more 
frequent leptomeningeal gadolinium-enhanced lesions on magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), along with less mortality and disability at last follow-up. The 
patients diagnosed by angiograms more frequently had at presentation hemiparesis 
or a persistent neurologic deficit or stroke, more frequent infarcts on MRI and 
an increased mortality. These differences were mainly related to the different 
size of the vessels involved in the 2 groups. Although most patients responded 
to therapy with glucocorticoids alone or in conjunction with cyclophosphamide 
and tended to improve during the follow-up period, an overall increased 
mortality rate was observed. Relapses occurred in one-quarter of the patients 
and were less frequent in patients treated with prednisone and cyclophosphamide 
compared with those treated with prednisone alone. The mortality rate and degree 
of disability at last follow-up were greater in those with increasing age, 
cerebral infarctions on MRI, angiographic large vessel involvement, and 
diagnosis made by angiography alone, but were lower in those with 
gadolinium-enhanced lesions on MRI and in those with cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy. The annual incidence rate of PCNSV was estimated at 2.4 cases per 
1,000,000 person-years. PCNSV appears to consist of several subsets defined by 
the size of the vessels involved, the clinical characteristics at presentation, 
MRI findings, and histopathological patterns on biopsy. Early recognition and 
treatment may reduce poor outcomes.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000738
PMCID: PMC4616419
PMID: 26020379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.