---
reference_id: "PMID:32066658"
title: Genetic evidence of gender difference in autism spectrum disorder supports the female-protective effect.
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Li N
- Li C
- Zhang Z
- Teng H
- Wang Y
- Zhao T
- Shi L
- Zhang K
- Xia K
- Li J
- Sun Z
journal: Transl Psychiatry
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41398-020-0699-8
keywords:
- Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics
- Brain
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Sex Characteristics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic evidence of gender difference in autism spectrum disorder supports the female-protective effect.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Li N, Li C, Zhang Z, Teng H, Wang Y, Zhao T, Shi L, Zhang K, Xia K, Li J, Sun Z
**Journal:** Transl Psychiatry (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41398-020-0699-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-020-0699-8)

## Content

1. Transl Psychiatry. 2020 Jan 15;10(1):4. doi: 10.1038/s41398-020-0699-8.

Genetic evidence of gender difference in autism spectrum disorder supports the 
female-protective effect.

Zhang Y(1)(2), Li N(1), Li C(1), Zhang Z(1), Teng H(3), Wang Y(3), Zhao T(1), 
Shi L(1)(4), Zhang K(1), Xia K(5), Li J(6)(7), Sun Z(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genomic Medicine, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, 
325025, China.
(2)National Clinical Research Centre for Geriatric Disorders, Department of 
Geriatrics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410008, 
China.
(3)Beijing Institutes of Life Science, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, 
100101, China.
(4)Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, 
China.
(5)Center for Medical Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan, 410008, China.
(6)National Clinical Research Centre for Geriatric Disorders, Department of 
Geriatrics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410008, 
China. lijinchen@csu.edu.cn.
(7)Center for Medical Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan, 410008, China. lijinchen@csu.edu.cn.
(8)Institute of Genomic Medicine, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, 
325025, China. sunzs@biols.ac.cn.
(9)Beijing Institutes of Life Science, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, 
100101, China. sunzs@biols.ac.cn.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder with a 
male-to-female prevalence of 4:1. However, the genetic mechanisms underlying 
this gender difference remain unclear. Mutation burden analysis, a TADA model, 
and co-expression and functional network analyses were performed on de novo 
mutations (DNMs) and corresponding candidate genes. We found that the prevalence 
of putative functional DNMs (loss-of-function and predicted deleterious missense 
mutations) in females was significantly higher than that in males, suggesting 
that a higher genetic load was required in females to reach the threshold for a 
diagnosis. We then prioritized 174 candidate genes, including 60 shared genes, 
91 male-specific genes, and 23 female-specific genes. All of the three 
subclasses of candidate genes were significantly more frequently co-expressed in 
female brains than male brains, suggesting that compensation effects of the 
deficiency of ASD candidate genes may be more likely in females. Nevertheless, 
the three subclasses of candidate genes were co-expressed with each other, 
suggesting a convergent functional network of male and female-specific genes. 
Our analysis of different aspects of genetic components provides suggestive 
evidence supporting the female-protective effect in ASD. Moreover, further study 
is needed to integrate neuronal and hormonal data to elucidate the underlying 
gender difference in ASD.

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-020-0699-8
PMCID: PMC7026157
PMID: 32066658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.