---
reference_id: "PMID:29277171"
title: Post-intensive care syndrome symptoms and health-related quality of life in family decision-makers of critically ill patients.
authors:
- Petrinec AB
- Martin BR
journal: Palliat Support Care
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1017/S1478951517001043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Post-intensive care syndrome symptoms and health-related quality of life in family decision-makers of critically ill patients.
**Authors:** Petrinec AB, Martin BR
**Journal:** Palliat Support Care (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S1478951517001043](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1478951517001043)

## Content

1. Palliat Support Care. 2018 Dec;16(6):719-724. doi: 10.1017/S1478951517001043. 
Epub 2017 Dec 26.

Post-intensive care syndrome symptoms and health-related quality of life in 
family decision-makers of critically ill patients.

Petrinec AB(1), Martin BR(2).

Author information:
(1)Case Western Reserve University Frances Payne Bolton School of 
Nursing,Cleveland,Ohio.
(2)Summa Health System Department of Internal Medicine,Division of Critical Care 
Medicine,Akron,Ohio.

OBJECTIVE: Family members of critically ill patients can suffer symptoms of 
post-intensive care syndrome-family (PICS-F), including anxiety, depression, and 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with a diminished quality of life. Our aim 
was to examine the relationship between coping strategies used by family 
decision-makers (FDMs) of critically ill patients and the severity of PICS-F 
symptoms and to examine the relationship between FDM PICS-F symptoms and 
health-related quality of life (HRQOL).
METHOD: A single-center, prospective, longitudinal descriptive study was 
undertaken of FDMs of intensive care unit (ICU) patients admitted to a large 
tertiary care hospital. PICS-F symptoms and coping strategy use were measured 
upon ICU admission (T1), 30 days (T2) after ICU admission, and 60 days (T3) 
after ICU admission. HRQOL was measured by the Short Form-36 version 2 at T1 and 
T3.
RESULTS: We found a significant prevalence of anxiety (45.8%), depression (25%), 
and PTSD (11.1%) symptoms among FDMs over the course of the study. The patient 
mortality rate in our sample was 50%. The HRQOL mental summary score in FDMs was 
low at T1 and decreased to M = 41.72 (standard deviation = 12.47) by T3. 
Avoidant coping demonstrated moderate relationships with PTSD symptoms and 
anxiety at T3. A previous history of anxiety, depression, or PTSD was a 
significant predictor of PICS-F symptom severity and prevalence. PICS symptom 
severity at T3 explained 75% of the variance in HRQOL mental summary 
score.Significance of resultsThis study describes a significant prevalence of 
PICS-F symptoms in FDMs with a diminished mental HRQOL.

DOI: 10.1017/S1478951517001043
PMID: 29277171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]