---
reference_id: "PMID:11589979"
title: "The site of the hearing loss in Refsum's disease."
authors:
- Oysu C
- Aslan I
- Basaran B
- Baserer N
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1016/s0165-5876(01)00559-6
keywords:
- Audiometry/methods
- Child
- "Evoked Potentials, Auditory, Brain Stem"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/diagnosis, etiology"
- Humans
- Male
- "Otoacoustic Emissions, Spontaneous"
- "Refsum Disease/complications, diagnosis"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The site of the hearing loss in Refsum's disease.
**Authors:** Oysu C, Aslan I, Basaran B, Baserer N
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0165-5876(01)00559-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0165-5876(01)00559-6)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2001 Nov 1;61(2):129-34. doi:
10.1016/s0165-5876(01)00559-6.

The site of the hearing loss in Refsum's disease.

Oysu C(1), Aslan I, Basaran B, Baserer N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Taksim State Hospital for Education and
Research, Istanbul, Turkey. coysu@doruk.net.tr

Refsum's disease is a disorder of lipid metabolism with pigmentary retinopathy,
demyelinating neuropathy, ataxia, and hearing loss. Previous histological
studies have located the site of hearing impairment in the inner ear, but it has
never been confirmed audiologicaly in the literature. In this reported case of
Refsum's disease, despite hearing loss and absence of response in ABR, robust
otoacoustic emissions were measured. Together with these and other audiological
findings, we conclude that our case might be the first reported case of Refsum's
disease with auditory neuropathy. The site of the hearing abnormality in
Refsum's disease may be 'post-outer hair cells' in some cases as in the current
case. Because of their limited benefits and risk of noise-induced damage to
outer hair cells, the use of hearing aids before otoacoustic emission
measurements should be considered cautiously in Refsum's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-5876(01)00559-6
PMID: 11589979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
