---
reference_id: "PMID:21738161"
title: "The immunology of stroke: from mechanisms to translation."
authors:
- Iadecola C
- Anrather J
journal: Nat Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/nm.2399
keywords:
- Adaptive Immunity/immunology
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- Brain Infarction/immunology
- Brain Ischemia/immunology
- Cell Death/immunology
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate/immunology"
- "Inflammation/drug therapy, immunology"
- Lymphocytes/immunology
- "Stroke/drug therapy, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The immunology of stroke: from mechanisms to translation.
**Authors:** Iadecola C, Anrather J
**Journal:** Nat Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.2399](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2399)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2011 Jul 7;17(7):796-808. doi: 10.1038/nm.2399.

The immunology of stroke: from mechanisms to translation.

Iadecola C(1), Anrather J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurobiology, Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA. coi2001@med.cornell.edu

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2011 Dec 06;17(12):1547-8; author reply 1548. doi: 10.1038/nm.2588.

Immunity and inflammation are key elements of the pathobiology of stroke, a
devastating illness second only to cardiac ischemia as a cause of death
worldwide. The immune system participates in the brain damage produced by
ischemia, and the damaged brain, in turn, exerts an immunosuppressive effect
that promotes fatal infections that threaten the survival of people after
stroke. Inflammatory signaling is involved in all stages of the ischemic
cascade, from the early damaging events triggered by arterial occlusion to the
late regenerative processes underlying post-ischemic tissue repair. Recent
developments have revealed that stroke engages both innate and adaptive
immunity. But adaptive immunity triggered by newly exposed brain antigens does
not have an impact on the acute phase of the damage. Nevertheless, modulation of
adaptive immunity exerts a remarkable protective effect on the ischemic brain
and offers the prospect of new stroke therapies. As immunomodulation is not
devoid of deleterious side effects, a better understanding of the reciprocal
interaction between the immune system and the ischemic brain is essential to
harness the full therapeutic potential of the immunology of stroke.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.2399
PMCID: PMC3137275
PMID: 21738161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]