---
reference_id: "PMID:27320412"
title: Congenital immunodeficiency in an individual with Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome due to a novel missense mutation in KMT2A.
authors:
- Stellacci E
- Onesimo R
- Bruselles A
- Pizzi S
- Battaglia D
- Leoni C
- Zampino G
- Tartaglia M
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37681
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital immunodeficiency in an individual with Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome due to a novel missense mutation in KMT2A.
**Authors:** Stellacci E, Onesimo R, Bruselles A, Pizzi S, Battaglia D, Leoni C, Zampino G, Tartaglia M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37681](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37681)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Sep;170(9):2389-93. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37681. Epub
2016  Jun 20.

Congenital immunodeficiency in an individual with Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome due 
to a novel missense mutation in KMT2A.

Stellacci E(1), Onesimo R(2), Bruselles A(1), Pizzi S(3), Battaglia D(4), Leoni 
C(2), Zampino G(2), Tartaglia M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Molecular Medicine, Istituto 
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(2)Rare Diseases and Genetic Disorders, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario 
Agostino Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
(3)Genetic Disorders and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico 
Bambino Gesù IRCSS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Infantile Neuropsychiatric Unit, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario 
Agostino Gemelli, Rome, Italy.

Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome (WSS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized 
by hypertrichosis, short stature, intellectual disability, developmental delay, 
and facial dysmorphism. Since the original reports by Wiedemann and co-workers, 
and Steiner and Marques, only a few cases have been described. Recently, the 
clinical variability of the disorder has more precisely been characterized by 
Jones and co-workers, who also identified heterozygous KMT2A mutations as the 
molecular defect underlying this condition. Here, we report on a boy with a 
complex phenotype overlapping WSS but exhibiting epilepsy, feeding difficulties, 
microcephaly, and congenital immunodeficiency with low levels of immunoglobulins 
as additional features. Whole exome sequencing allowed identifying a previously 
unreported de novo KMT2A missense mutation affecting the DNA binding domain of 
the methyltransferase. This finding expands the clinical phenotype associated 
with KMT2A mutations to include immunodeficiency and epilepsy as clinically 
relevant features for this disorder. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37681
PMID: 27320412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]