---
reference_id: "PMID:35613398"
title: "[Non-HFE hemochromatosis: a case report]."
authors:
- Martínez-Ávila MC
- Toro-Trujillo E
- Alvarez-Londoño A
journal: Rev Gastroenterol Peru
year: '2021'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Non-HFE hemochromatosis: a case report].
**Authors:** Martínez-Ávila MC, Toro-Trujillo E, Alvarez-Londoño A
**Journal:** Rev Gastroenterol Peru (2021)

## Content

1. Rev Gastroenterol Peru. 2021 Oct-Dec;41(4):261-264.

[Non-HFE hemochromatosis: a case report].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez-Ávila MC(1), Toro-Trujillo E(2), Alvarez-Londoño A(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Medicina Interna, Centro Hospitalario Serena del Mar. 
Cartagena, Colombia; Instituto de Cáncer, Centro Hospitalario Serena del Mar. 
Cartagena, Colombia.
(2)Departamento de Medicina Interna, Centro Hospitalario Serena del Mar. 
Cartagena, Colombia.
(3)Instituto de Cáncer, Centro Hospitalario Serena del Mar. Cartagena, Colombia.

Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) consists of a progressive iron overload that 
leads to an abnormal accumulation of iron in different target organs; and, if 
not treated in time, can cause multi-organ dysfunction. Various genetic 
mutations associated with HH have been described, the most frequent is 
associated with the HFE-gene, which is found in 90% of cases. At present, 
therapeutic phlebotomy continues to be the treatment of choice for the 
management of this pathology. We report the case of a patient under follow-up 
for severe liver fibrosis, with persistence of a high ferrokinetic profile, who 
five years later was diagnosed with HH not associated to a mutation in the 
HFE-gene; He was managed with periodic phlebotomies, rapidly presenting a 
significant clinical improvement and decrease of ferritin levels.

PMID: 35613398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]