---
reference_id: PMID:12626383
title: GALT deficiency causes UDP-hexose deficit in human galactosemic cells.
authors:
- Lai K
- Langley SD
- Khwaja FW
- Schmitt EW
- Elsas LJ
journal: Glycobiology
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwg033
keywords:
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- "Cell Transformation, Viral"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Fibroblasts/drug effects, metabolism, virology"
- Galactose/pharmacology
- "Galactosephosphates/metabolism, pharmacology"
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Kinetics
- Phenotype
- Simian virus 40/genetics
- Transfection
- "UTP-Glucose-1-Phosphate Uridylyltransferase/genetics, metabolism"
- "UTP-Hexose-1-Phosphate Uridylyltransferase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Uridine Diphosphate Glucose/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GALT deficiency causes UDP-hexose deficit in human galactosemic cells.
**Authors:** Lai K, Langley SD, Khwaja FW, Schmitt EW, Elsas LJ
**Journal:** Glycobiology (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/glycob/cwg033](https://doi.org/10.1093/glycob/cwg033)

## Content

1. Glycobiology. 2003 Apr;13(4):285-94. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwg033. Epub 2003 Jan
 3.

GALT deficiency causes UDP-hexose deficit in human galactosemic cells.

Lai K(1), Langley SD, Khwaja FW, Schmitt EW, Elsas LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, 2040 Ridgewood 
Drive, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. klai@med.miami.edu

Previously we reported that stable transfection of human UDP-glucose 
pyrophosphorylase (hUGP2) rescued galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase 
(GALT)-deficient yeast from "galactose toxicity." Here we test in human cell 
lines the hypothesis that galactose toxicity was caused by excess accumulation 
of galactose-1-phosphate (Gal-1-P), inhibition of hUGP2, and UDP-hexose 
deficiency. We found that SV40-transformed fibroblasts derived from a 
galactosemic patient accumulated Gal-1-P from 1.2+/-0.4 to 5.2+/-0.5 mM and 
stopped growing when transferred from 0.1% glucose to 0.1% galactose. Control 
fibroblasts accumulated little Gal-1-P and continued to grow. The GALT-deficient 
cells had 157+/-10 micromoles UDP-glucose/100 g protein and 25+/-5 micromoles 
UDP-galactose/100 g protein when grown in 0.1% glucose. The control cells had 
236+/-25 micromoles UDP- glucose/100 g protein and 82+/-10 micromoles 
UDP-galactose/100 g protein when grown in identical medium. When we transfected 
the GALT-deficient cells with either the hUGP2 or GALT gene, their UDP-glucose 
content increased to 305+/-28 micromoles/100 g protein (hUGP2-transfected) and 
210+/-13 micromoles/100 g protein (GALT-transfected), respectively. Similarly, 
UDP-galactose content increased to 75+/-12 micromoles/100 g protein 
(hUGP2-transfected) and 55+/-9 micromoles/100 g protein (GALT-transfected), 
respectively. Though the GALT-transfected cells grew in 0.1% galactose with 
little accumulation of Gal-1-P (0.2+/-0.02 mM), the hUGP2-transfected cells grew 
but accumulated some Gal-1-P (3.1+/-0.4 mM). We found that 2.5 mM Gal-1-P 
increased the apparent KM of purified hUGP2 for glucose-1-phosphate from 19.7 
microM to 169 microM, without changes in apparent Vmax. The Ki of the reaction 
was 0.47 mM. Gal-1-P also inhibited UDP-N-acetylglucosamine pyrophosphorylase, 
which catalyzes the formation of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine. We conclude that 
intracellular concentrations of Gal-1-P found in classic galactosemia inhibit 
UDP-hexose pyrophosphorylases and reduce the intracellular concentrations of 
UDP-hexoses. Reduced Sambucus nigra agglutinin binding to glycoproteins isolated 
from cells with increased Gal-1-P is consistent with the resultant inhibition of 
glycoprotein glycosylation.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwg033
PMID: 12626383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]