---
reference_id: "PMID:8820774"
title: Abdominal pain in infants and children.
authors:
- Moir CR
journal: Mayo Clin Proc
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1016/S0025-6196(11)63773-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abdominal pain in infants and children.
**Authors:** Moir CR
**Journal:** Mayo Clin Proc (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0025-6196(11)63773-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0025-6196(11)63773-7)

## Content

1. Mayo Clin Proc. 1996 Oct;71(10):984-9, quiz 989. doi: 
10.1016/S0025-6196(11)63773-7.

Abdominal pain in infants and children.

Moir CR(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The challenges of childhood abdominal pain are to treat the majority of children 
with self-limited conditions of obscure but benign causes and to identify the 
child with a rare, life-threatening cause of pain. The diagnostic algorithm of 
abdominal pain during childhood is best compartmentalized into three groups: 
infants, preschoolers, and school-age children. In infants, bilious vomiting 
heralds a life-threatening or surgically indicated disorder. Most nonsurgical 
conditions are related to gastroenteritis, constipation, and reflux. The 
majority of children with abdominal pain experience spontaneous resolution of 
their symptoms without specific management. For every 15 school-age children 
with abdominal pain, 1, at most, will have a serious condition such as 
appendicitis. Parents and children appreciate a careful appraisal of the 
symptoms, and the physician should listen to their concerns and perform a 
thorough examination. Laboratory or radiologic studies are rarely indicated.

DOI: 10.1016/S0025-6196(11)63773-7
PMID: 8820774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]