---
reference_id: "PMID:10684875"
title: Reciprocal inhibitory connections regulate the spatiotemporal properties of intrathalamic oscillations.
authors:
- Sohal VS
- Huntsman MM
- Huguenard JR
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-05-01735.2000
keywords:
- Angelman Syndrome/physiopathology
- Animals
- "Epilepsy, Absence/physiopathology"
- Membrane Potentials/physiology
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Models, Neurological"
- Neural Inhibition/physiology
- "Neurons/chemistry, physiology"
- Periodicity
- Reaction Time/physiology
- "Receptors, GABA-A/physiology"
- "Thalamus/cytology, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reciprocal inhibitory connections regulate the spatiotemporal properties of intrathalamic oscillations.
**Authors:** Sohal VS, Huntsman MM, Huguenard JR
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-05-01735.2000](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-05-01735.2000)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2000 Mar 1;20(5):1735-45. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-05-01735.2000.

Reciprocal inhibitory connections regulate the spatiotemporal properties of
intrathalamic oscillations.

Sohal VS(1), Huntsman MM, Huguenard JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305-5122, USA.

Mice with an inactivated GABA(A) receptor beta(3) subunit gene have features of
Angelman syndrome, including absence-like seizures. This suggests the occurrence
of abnormal hypersynchrony in the thalamocortical system. Within the thalamus,
the efficacy of inhibitory synapses between thalamic reticular (RE) neurons is
selectively compromised, and thalamic oscillations in vitro are prolonged and
lack spatial phase gradients (). Here we used computational models to examine
how intra-RE inhibition regulates intrathalamic oscillations. A major effect is
an abbreviation of network responses, which is caused by long-lasting intra-RE
inhibition that shunts recurrent excitatory input. In addition, differential
activation of RE cells desynchronizes network activity. Near the slice center,
where many cells are initially activated, there is a resultant high level of
intra-RE inhibition. This leads to RE cell burst truncation in the central
region and a gradient in the timing of thalamocortical cell activity similar to
that observed in vitro. Although RE cell burst durations were shortened by this
mechanism, there was very little effect on the times at which RE cells began to
burst. The above results depended on widespread stimuli that activated RE cells
in regions larger than the diameter of intra-RE connections. By contrast, more
focal stimuli could elicit oscillations that lasted several cycles and remained
confined to a small region. These results suggest that intra-RE inhibition
restricts intrathalamic activity to particular spatiotemporal patterns to allow
focal recurrent activity that may be relevant for normal thalamocortical
function while preventing widespread synchronization as occurs in seizures.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-05-01735.2000
PMCID: PMC6772943
PMID: 10684875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
