---
reference_id: "PMID:35466620"
title: "Takayasu Arteritis: Pattern Of Clinical And Radiological Features, Experience From Pakistan."
authors:
- Khan A
- Asif S
- Haroon M
- Aslam MZ
- Shamim R
- Din ZU
journal: J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad
year: '2022'
doi: 10.55519/JAMC-01-8196
keywords:
- Adult
- Angiography
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Pakistan/epidemiology
- Retrospective Studies
- Takayasu Arteritis/diagnostic imaging
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Takayasu Arteritis: Pattern Of Clinical And Radiological Features, Experience From Pakistan.
**Authors:** Khan A, Asif S, Haroon M, Aslam MZ, Shamim R, Din ZU
**Journal:** J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad (2022)
**DOI:** [10.55519/JAMC-01-8196](https://doi.org/10.55519/JAMC-01-8196)

## Content

1. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad. 2022 Jan-Mar;34(1):17-23. doi: 
10.55519/JAMC-01-8196.

Takayasu Arteritis: Pattern Of Clinical And Radiological Features, Experience 
From Pakistan.

Khan A(1), Asif S(2), Haroon M(2), Aslam MZ(2), Shamim R(2), Din ZU(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Bolan medical College Quetta, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Fatima Memorial Hospital Shadman, Lahore, 
Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Takayasu arteritis (TKA) is a rare large vessel vasculitis occurring 
in young adults of less than 50 year of age. We analyse the clinical, 
radiological features, and treatment regimens in Pakistani patients presenting 
to a tertiary care center.
METHODS: A retrospective cross-sectional analysis of TKA patients done at the 
Rheumatology department of Fatima Memorial Hospital. A comprehensive evaluation 
of clinical, laboratory, radiographic features and treatment regimens was 
carried out.
RESULTS: A consecutive cohort of 18 patients, with 13 patients (72%) of female 
gender was studied. Mean age of the cohort was 35.94±2.7 years. A mean delay of 
2.32±0.43 years between symptoms and final diagnosis was reported, attributed to 
alternate diagnosis in 57.1% and late presentation in 42.8% cases. Limb 
claudication (44.4%), absent pulses (38.9%), were the common initial 
manifestation. Hypertension (61.5%), blood pressure discrepancy between arms 
(88.9%) and bruit (72.2%) over major vessels were common systemic features. As 
per angiographic classification, Type V (44.4%), and Type I (33.3%), were most 
common pattern of disease in the cohort. Subclavian artery (72.2%), renal artery 
(33.3%), iliofemoral arteries (27.8%), and coronary artery involvement (16.7%) 
were the common lesions. Coronary artery lesion was higher in females (p=0.52) 
while renal artery lesion in males (p=0.27). There was no statistically 
significant difference in involvement of vessels according to gender (p >0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Type V and Type I are the common pattern of TKA. Limb claudication 
was the most common initial manifestation. Renal artery involvement was seen 
more commonly in males while coronary artery involvement more commonly in 
females.

DOI: 10.55519/JAMC-01-8196
PMID: 35466620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]