---
reference_id: "PMID:25931203"
title: "Takayasu arteritis and ulcerative colitis: high rate of co-occurrence and genetic overlap."
authors:
- Terao C
- Matsumura T
- Yoshifuji H
- Kirino Y
- Maejima Y
- Nakaoka Y
- Takahashi M
- Amiya E
- Tamura N
- Nakajima T
- Origuchi T
- Horita T
- Matsukura M
- Kochi Y
- Ogimoto A
- Yamamoto M
- Takahashi H
- Nakayamada S
- Saito K
- Wada Y
- Narita I
- Kawaguchi Y
- Yamanaka H
- Ohmura K
- Atsumi T
- Tanemoto K
- Miyata T
- Kuwana M
- Komuro I
- Tabara Y
- Ueda A
- Isobe M
- Mimori T
- Matsuda F
journal: Arthritis Rheumatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/art.39157
keywords:
- Adult
- "Colitis, Ulcerative/epidemiology, genetics"
- Comorbidity
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- HLA-B52 Antigen/genetics
- Humans
- Interleukin-12 Subunit p40/genetics
- Japan/epidemiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- "Takayasu Arteritis/epidemiology, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Takayasu arteritis and ulcerative colitis: high rate of co-occurrence and genetic overlap.
**Authors:** Terao C, Matsumura T, Yoshifuji H, Kirino Y, Maejima Y, Nakaoka Y, Takahashi M, Amiya E, Tamura N, Nakajima T, Origuchi T, Horita T, Matsukura M, Kochi Y, Ogimoto A, Yamamoto M, Takahashi H, Nakayamada S, Saito K, Wada Y, Narita I, Kawaguchi Y, Yamanaka H, Ohmura K, Atsumi T, Tanemoto K, Miyata T, Kuwana M, Komuro I, Tabara Y, Ueda A, Isobe M, Mimori T, Matsuda F
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheumatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.39157](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.39157)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 May;67(8):2226-32. doi: 10.1002/art.39157.

Takayasu arteritis and ulcerative colitis: high rate of co-occurrence and
genetic overlap.

Terao C(1), Matsumura T(2), Yoshifuji H(1), Kirino Y(3), Maejima Y(4), Nakaoka
Y(5), Takahashi M(1), Amiya E(2), Tamura N(4), Nakajima T(1), Origuchi T(6),
Horita T(7), Matsukura M(2), Kochi Y(2), Ogimoto A(8), Yamamoto M(9), Takahashi
H(9), Nakayamada S(10), Saito K(10), Wada Y(11), Narita I(11), Kawaguchi Y(12),
Yamanaka H(12), Ohmura K(1), Atsumi T(7), Tanemoto K(13), Miyata T(2), Kuwana
M(14), Komuro I(2), Tabara Y(1), Ueda A(3), Isobe M(4), Mimori T(1), Matsuda
F(1).

Author information:
(1)Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
(4)Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(6)Nagasaki University School of Health Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.
(7)Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
(8)Ehime University Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime, Japan.
(9)Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo, Japan.
(10)University of Occupational and Environmental Health School of Medicine,
Kitakyushu, Japan.
(11)Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata,
Japan.
(12)Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(13)Kawasaki Medical School, Kurashiki, Japan.
(14)Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Takayasu arteritis (TAK) is a systemic vasculitis affecting large
arteries and large branches of the aorta. Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a prevalent
autoimmune colitis. Since TAK and UC share HLA-B*52:01 and IL12B as genetic
determinants, and since there are case reports of the co-occurrence of these
diseases, we hypothesized that UC is a common complication of TAK. We undertook
this study to perform a large-scale analysis of TAK, both to evaluate the
prevalence of concurrent cases of TAK and UC and to identify and estimate
susceptibility genes shared between the 2 diseases.
METHODS: We analyzed a total of 470 consecutive patients with TAK from 14
institutions. We characterized patients with TAK and UC by analyzing clinical
manifestations and genetic components. Genetic overlapping of TAK and UC was
evaluated with the use of UC susceptibility single-nucleotide polymorphisms by
comparing risk directions and effect sizes between susceptibility to the 2
diseases.
RESULTS: Thirty of 470 patients with TAK had UC (6.4% [95% confidence interval
4.3-9.0]). This percentage was strikingly higher than that expected from the
prevalence of UC in Japan. Patients with TAK complicated with UC developed TAK
at an earlier stage of life (P = 0.0070) and showed significant enrichment of
HLA-B*52:01 compared to TAK patients without UC (P = 1.0 × 10(-5) ) (odds ratio
12.14 [95% confidence interval 2.96-107.23]). The 110 non-HLA markers of
susceptibility to UC significantly displayed common risk directions with
susceptibility to TAK (P = 0.0054) and showed significant departure of
permutation P values from expected P values (P < 1.0 × 10(-10) ).
CONCLUSION: UC is a major complication of TAK. These 2 diseases share a
significant proportion of their genetic background, and HLA-B*52:01 may play a
central role in their co-occurrence.

© 2015, American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.39157
PMID: 25931203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
