---
reference_id: "PMID:34872983"
title: "Universal Subsidized Continuous Glucose Monitoring Funding for Young People With Type 1 Diabetes: Uptake and Outcomes Over 2 Years, a Population-Based Study."
authors:
- Johnson SR
- Holmes-Walker DJ
- Chee M
- Earnest A
- Jones TW
- "ADDN Study Group:"
- Craig M
- Anderson K
- Ambler G
- Barrett H
- Batch J
- Bergman P
- Cameron F
- Colman P
- Conwell L
- Cooper C
- Couper J
- Davis E
- de Bock M
- Donaghue K
- Fairchild J
- Fegan G
- Fourlanos S
- Glastras S
- Gray L
- Hamblin S
- Hofman P
- Holmes-Walker DJ
- Howard N
- Jack M
- James S
- Jefferies C
- Johnson S
- Kao J
- King BR
- Lafferty A
- Martin M
- McCrossin R
- Pascoe M
- Paul R
- Pawlak D
- Peña A
- Price S
- Price D
- Rodda C
- Simmons D
- Sinnott R
- Sive A
- Smart C
- Stone M
- Stranks S
- Tham E
- Verge C
- Ward G
- Wheeler B
- Williams J
- Woodhead H
- Woolfield N
- Zimmermann A
journal: Diabetes Care
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2337/dc21-1666
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Universal Subsidized Continuous Glucose Monitoring Funding for Young People With Type 1 Diabetes: Uptake and Outcomes Over 2 Years, a Population-Based Study.
**Authors:** Johnson SR, Holmes-Walker DJ, Chee M, Earnest A, Jones TW, ADDN Study Group:, Craig M, Anderson K, Ambler G, Barrett H, Batch J, Bergman P, Cameron F, Colman P, Conwell L, Cooper C, Couper J, Davis E, de Bock M, Donaghue K, Fairchild J, Fegan G, Fourlanos S, Glastras S, Gray L, Hamblin S, Hofman P, Holmes-Walker DJ, Howard N, Jack M, James S, Jefferies C, Johnson S, Kao J, King BR, Lafferty A, Martin M, McCrossin R, Pascoe M, Paul R, Pawlak D, Peña A, Price S, Price D, Rodda C, Simmons D, Sinnott R, Sive A, Smart C, Stone M, Stranks S, Tham E, Verge C, Ward G, Wheeler B, Williams J, Woodhead H, Woolfield N, Zimmermann A
**Journal:** Diabetes Care (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2337/dc21-1666](https://doi.org/10.2337/dc21-1666)

## Content

1. Diabetes Care. 2022 Feb 1;45(2):391-397. doi: 10.2337/dc21-1666.

Universal Subsidized Continuous Glucose Monitoring Funding for Young People With 
Type 1 Diabetes: Uptake and Outcomes Over 2 Years, a Population-Based Study.

Johnson SR(1)(2), Holmes-Walker DJ(3)(4), Chee M(5), Earnest A(6), Jones 
TW(7)(8); ADDN Study Group:; Craig M, Anderson K, Ambler G, Barrett H, Batch J, 
Bergman P, Cameron F, Colman P, Conwell L, Cooper C, Couper J, Davis E, de Bock 
M, Donaghue K, Fairchild J, Fegan G, Fourlanos S, Glastras S, Gray L, Hamblin S, 
Hofman P, Holmes-Walker DJ, Howard N, Jack M, James S, Jefferies C, Johnson S, 
Kao J, King BR, Lafferty A, Martin M, McCrossin R, Pascoe M, Paul R, Pawlak D, 
Peña A, Price S, Price D, Rodda C, Simmons D, Sinnott R, Sive A, Smart C, Stone 
M, Stranks S, Tham E, Verge C, Ward G, Wheeler B, Williams J, Woodhead H, 
Woolfield N, Zimmermann A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Queensland Children's Hospital, 
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Queensland, Herston, Queensland, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New 
South Wales, Australia.
(4)Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(5)JDRF Australia, St Leonard's, New South Wales, Australia.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health 
and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(7)Perth Children's Hospital, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia.
(8)Telethon Kids Institute, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) is increasingly used in type 1 
diabetes management; however, funding models vary. This study determined the 
uptake rate and glycemic outcomes following a change in national health policy 
to introduce universal subsidized CGM funding for people with type 1 diabetes 
aged <21 years.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Longitudinal data from 12 months before the subsidy 
until 24 months after were analyzed. Measures and outcomes included age, 
diabetes duration, HbA1c, episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis and severe 
hypoglycemia, insulin regimen, CGM uptake, and percentage CGM use. Two data 
sources were used: the Australasian Diabetes Database Network (ADDN) registry (a 
prospective diabetes database) and the National Diabetes Service Scheme (NDSS) 
registry that includes almost all individuals with type 1 diabetes nationally.
RESULTS: CGM uptake increased from 5% presubsidy to 79% after 2 years. After CGM 
introduction, the odds ratio (OR) of achieving the HbA1c target of <7.0% 
improved at 12 months (OR 2.5, P < 0.001) and was maintained at 24 months (OR 
2.3, P < 0.001). The OR for suboptimal glycemic control (HbA1c ≥9.0%) decreased 
to 0.34 (P < 0.001) at 24 months. Of CGM users, 65% used CGM >75% of time, and 
had a lower HbA1c at 24 months compared with those with usage <25% (7.8 ± 1.3% 
vs. 8.6 ± 1.8%, respectively, P < 0.001). Diabetic ketoacidosis was also reduced 
in this group (incidence rate ratio 0.49, 95% CI 0.33-0.74, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Following the national subsidy, CGM use was high and associated 
with sustained improvement in glycemic control. This information will inform 
economic analyses and future policy and serve as a model of evaluation diabetes 
technologies.

© 2022 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/dc21-1666
PMCID: PMC8914416
PMID: 34872983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]