---
reference_id: "PMID:39287133"
title: G-quadruplexes in an SVA retrotransposon cause aberrant TAF1 gene expression in X-linked dystonia parkinsonism.
authors:
- Nicoletto G
- Terreri M
- Maurizio I
- Ruggiero E
- Cernilogar FM
- Vaine CA
- Cottini MV
- Shcherbakova I
- Penney EB
- Gallina I
- Monchaud D
- Bragg DC
- Schotta G
- Richter SN
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae797
keywords:
- Humans
- "TATA-Binding Protein Associated Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- G-Quadruplexes
- "Transcription Factor TFIID/genetics, metabolism"
- Dystonic Disorders/genetics
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics, metabolism"
- "Histone Acetyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Retroelements/genetics
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Short Interspersed Nucleotide Elements/genetics
- Neural Stem Cells/metabolism
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Minisatellite Repeats/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# G-quadruplexes in an SVA retrotransposon cause aberrant TAF1 gene expression in X-linked dystonia parkinsonism.
**Authors:** Nicoletto G, Terreri M, Maurizio I, Ruggiero E, Cernilogar FM, Vaine CA, Cottini MV, Shcherbakova I, Penney EB, Gallina I, Monchaud D, Bragg DC, Schotta G, Richter SN
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkae797](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkae797)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2024 Oct 28;52(19):11571-11586. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae797.

G-quadruplexes in an SVA retrotransposon cause aberrant TAF1 gene expression in 
X-linked dystonia parkinsonism.

Nicoletto G(1), Terreri M(1), Maurizio I(1), Ruggiero E(1), Cernilogar FM(2)(3), 
Vaine CA(4), Cottini MV(1), Shcherbakova I(3), Penney EB(4), Gallina I(1), 
Monchaud D(5), Bragg DC(4), Schotta G(3), Richter SN(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padua, via A. Gabelli 
63, 35121 Padua, Italy.
(2)Department of Science and Technological Innovation, University of Piemonte 
Orientale, Viale Teresa Michel 11, 15121, Alessandria, Italy.
(3)Molecular Biology Division, Biomedical Center, Ludwig Maximilian University 
of Munich, Großhaderner Strasse 9, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Building 149 13th 
Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.
(5)Institut de Chimie Moleculaire de l'Université de Bourgogne, ICMUB CNRS 
UMR6302, 9, Rue Alain Savary, 21078 Dijon, France.
(6)Microbiology and Virology Unit, Padua University Hospital, via Giustiniani 
2, 35121 Padua, Italy.

G-quadruplexes (G4s) are non-canonical nucleic acid structures that form in 
guanine (G)-rich genomic regions. X-linked dystonia parkinsonism (XDP) is an 
inherited neurodegenerative disease in which a SINE-VNTR-Alu (SVA) 
retrotransposon, characterised by amplification of a G-rich repeat, is inserted 
into the coding sequence of TAF1, a key partner of RNA polymerase II. XDP SVA 
alters TAF1 expression, but the cause of this outcome in XDP remains unknown. To 
assess whether G4s form in XDP SVA and affect TAF1 expression, we first 
characterised bioinformatically predicted XDP SVA G4s in vitro. We next showed 
that highly stable G4s can form and stop polymerase amplification at the SVA 
region from patient-derived fibroblasts and neural progenitor cells. Using 
chromatin immunoprecipitazion (ChIP) with an anti-G4 antibody coupled 
to sequencing or quantitative PCR, we showed that XDP SVA G4s are folded even 
when embedded in a chromatin context in patient-derived cells. Using the G4 
ligands BRACO-19 and quarfloxin and total RNA-sequencing analysis, we showed 
that stabilisation of the XDP SVA G4s reduces TAF1 transcripts downstream and 
around the SVA, and increases upstream transcripts, while destabilisation using 
the G4 unfolder PhpC increases TAF1 transcripts. Our data indicate that G4 
formation in the XDP SVA is a major cause of aberrant TAF1 expression, opening 
the way for the development of strategies to unfold G4s and potentially target 
the disease.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkae797
PMCID: PMC12053379
PMID: 39287133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]