---
reference_id: "PMID:31576159"
title: Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome and related proteasome-associated autoinflammatory syndromes.
authors:
- Ohmura K
journal: J Inflamm Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2147/JIR.S194098
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome and related proteasome-associated autoinflammatory syndromes.
**Authors:** Ohmura K
**Journal:** J Inflamm Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2147/JIR.S194098](https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S194098)

## Content

1. J Inflamm Res. 2019 Sep 17;12:259-265. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S194098. eCollection
2019.

Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome and related proteasome-associated autoinflammatory
syndromes.

Ohmura K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome (NNS) is a rare hereditary autoinflammatory disorder
with lipodystrophy. This disease is caused by a homozygous mutation of PSMB8
gene, which encodes immunoproteasome subunit β5i. Phenotypes of NNS patients are
periodic fever, pernio-like rash, nodular erythema-like eruptions, and
lipomuscular dystrophy, especially in the upper body, leading to the
characteristic long, clubbed fingers. NNS was considered to be endemic to the
Kansai area of Japan, but patients with similar phenotypes and the mutation of
PSMB8 gene were reported in other countries, and named Chronic atypical
neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and elevated temperature (CANDLE)
syndrome and joint contractures, muscular atrophy, microcytic anemia, and
panniculitis-associated lipodystrophy (JMP) syndrome. These syndromes are now
called proteasome-associated autoinflammatory syndromes (PRAASs), and their main
pathophysiological mechanism seems to be interferonopathy. In this review, the
history, characteristics, and the pathophysiological mechanism of PRAASs will be
discussed, focusing mainly on NNS.

© 2019 Ohmura.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S194098
PMCID: PMC6765212
PMID: 31576159

Conflict of interest statement: The author reports no conflicts of interest in
this work.
