---
reference_id: "PMID:38298759"
title: "Management and outcomes of spontaneous coronary artery dissection: a systematic review of the literature."
authors:
- Petrović M
- Miljković T
- Ilić A
- Kovačević M
- Čanković M
- Dabović D
- Stojšić Milosavljević A
- Čemerlić Maksimović S
- Jaraković M
- Andrić D
- Golubović M
- Bjelobrk M
- Bjelić S
- Tadić S
- Slankamenac J
- Apostolović S
- Djurović V
- Milovančev A
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1276521
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management and outcomes of spontaneous coronary artery dissection: a systematic review of the literature.
**Authors:** Petrović M, Miljković T, Ilić A, Kovačević M, Čanković M, Dabović D, Stojšić Milosavljević A, Čemerlić Maksimović S, Jaraković M, Andrić D, Golubović M, Bjelobrk M, Bjelić S, Tadić S, Slankamenac J, Apostolović S, Djurović V, Milovančev A
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2024.1276521](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2024.1276521)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2024 Jan 16;11:1276521. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1276521. 
eCollection 2024.

Management and outcomes of spontaneous coronary artery dissection: a systematic 
review of the literature.

Petrović M(1)(2), Miljković T(1)(2), Ilić A(1)(2), Kovačević M(1)(2), Čanković 
M(1)(2), Dabović D(1)(2), Stojšić Milosavljević A(1)(2), Čemerlić Maksimović 
S(2), Jaraković M(1)(2), Andrić D(1)(2), Golubović M(1)(2), Bjelobrk M(1)(2), 
Bjelić S(1)(2), Tadić S(1)(2), Slankamenac J(3), Apostolović S(4)(5), Djurović 
V(6), Milovančev A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.
(2)Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases of Vojvodina, Sremska Kamenica, Serbia.
(3)Faculty of Sport and Physical Education, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, 
Serbia.
(4)Medical Faculty, University of Niš, Niš, Serbia.
(5)Clinical Center of Niš, Cardiology Clinic, Niš, Serbia.
(6)Clinic of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, University Clinical Center of 
Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia.

BACKGROUND: Contemporary management of spontaneous coronary artery dissection 
(SCAD) is still controversial. This systematic review of the literature aims to 
explore outcomes in the patients treated with conservative management vs. 
invasive strategy.
METHODS: The PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses) guidelines were followed when we extensively searched three 
electronic databases: PubMed, ScienceDirect, and Web of Science, for studies 
that compared conservative vs. invasive revascularization treatment outcomes for 
patients with SCAD from 2003 to 2023. The outcomes of interest were all-cause 
death and major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), including acute coronary 
syndrome (ACS), heart failure (HF), need for additional revascularization, 
target vessel revascularization (TVR), SCAD recurrence, and stroke.
RESULTS: The systematic review included 13 observational studies evaluating 
1,801 patients with SCAD. The overall mean age was 49.12 +/- 3.41, and 88% were 
females. The overall prevalence of arterial hypertension was 33.2%, 
hyperlipidemia, 26.9%, smoking, 17.8%, and diabetes, 3.9%. Approximately 48.5% 
of the patients were diagnosed with non-ST elevated myocardial infarction 
(NSTEMI), 36.8% with ST elevated myocardial infarction (STEMI), 3.41% with 
unstable angina, 0.56% with stable angina, and 0.11% were diagnosed with various 
types of arrhythmias. The left anterior descending artery (LAD) was the most 
common culprit lesion in 51% of the patients. There were initially 65.2% of 
conservatively treated patients vs. 33.4% that underwent percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI) or 1.28% that underwent coronary artery bypass graft (CABG). 
SCAD-PCI revascularization was associated with a variable range of PCI failure. 
The most common complications were hematoma extension and iatrogenic dissection. 
SCAD-PCI revascularization frequently required three or more stents and had 
residual areas of dissection. The overall reported in-hospital and follow-up 
mortality rates were 1.2% and 1.3%, respectively. The follow-up range across 
studies was 7.3-75.6 months. The authors reported variable prevalence of MACE, 
recurrent SCAD up to 31%, ACS up to 27.4%, TVR up to 30%, repeat 
revascularization up to 14.7%, UA up to 13.3%, HF up to 17.4%, and stroke up to 
3%.
CONCLUSION: Our results highlight that conservative treatment should be the 
preferred method of treatment in patients with SCAD. PCI revascularization is 
associated with a high prevalence of periprocedural complications. SCAD poses a 
considerable risk of MACE, mainly associated with TVR, ACS, and recurrent SCAD.

© 2024 Petrović, Miljković, Ilić, Kovačević, Čanković, Dabović, Stojšić 
Milosavljević, Čemerlić Maksimović, Jaraković, Andrić, Golubović, Bjelobrk, 
Bjelić, Tadić, Slankamenac, Apostolović, Djurović and Milovančev.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1276521
PMCID: PMC10829101
PMID: 38298759

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.