---
reference_id: "PMID:33353966"
title: Overexpression of schizophrenia susceptibility factor human complement C4A promotes excessive synaptic loss and behavioral changes in mice.
authors:
- Yilmaz M
- Yalcin E
- Presumey J
- Aw E
- Ma M
- Whelan CW
- Stevens B
- McCarroll SA
- Carroll MC
journal: Nat Neurosci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41593-020-00763-8
keywords:
- Animals
- "Behavior, Animal"
- "Complement C4/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Dendritic Spines/pathology
- Depression/psychology
- Female
- Gene Dosage
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Microglia/pathology
- Nerve Net/pathology
- Psychomotor Performance
- "Schizophrenia/genetics, pathology"
- Schizophrenic Psychology
- Synapses/pathology
- Synaptosomes/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overexpression of schizophrenia susceptibility factor human complement C4A promotes excessive synaptic loss and behavioral changes in mice.
**Authors:** Yilmaz M, Yalcin E, Presumey J, Aw E, Ma M, Whelan CW, Stevens B, McCarroll SA, Carroll MC
**Journal:** Nat Neurosci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41593-020-00763-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-00763-8)

## Content

1. Nat Neurosci. 2021 Feb;24(2):214-224. doi: 10.1038/s41593-020-00763-8. Epub
2020  Dec 22.

Overexpression of schizophrenia susceptibility factor human complement C4A
promotes excessive synaptic loss and behavioral changes in mice.

Yilmaz M(#)(1), Yalcin E(#)(1), Presumey J(#)(1), Aw E(1), Ma M(1), Whelan
CW(2)(3), Stevens B(3)(4), McCarroll SA(2)(3), Carroll MC(5).

Author information:
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Michael.carroll@childrens.harvard.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Neuroscientist. 2021 Aug;27(4):320-321. doi: 10.1177/10738584211026879.

The complement component 4 (C4) gene is linked to schizophrenia and synaptic
refinement. In humans, greater expression of C4A in the brain is associated with
an increased risk of schizophrenia. To investigate this genetic finding and
address how C4A shapes brain circuits in vivo, here, we generated a mouse model
with primate-lineage-specific isoforms of C4, human C4A and/or C4B. Human C4A
bound synapses more efficiently than C4B. C4A (but not C4B) rescued the visual
system synaptic refinement deficits of C4 knockout mice. Intriguingly, mice
without C4 had normal numbers of cortical synapses, which suggests that
complement is not required for normal developmental synaptic pruning. However,
overexpressing C4A in mice reduced cortical synapse density, increased
microglial engulfment of synapses and altered mouse behavior. These results
suggest that increased C4A-mediated synaptic elimination results in abnormal
brain circuits and behavior. Understanding pathological overpruning mechanisms
has important therapeutic implications in disease conditions such as
schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1038/s41593-020-00763-8
PMCID: PMC8086435
PMID: 33353966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
