---
reference_id: "PMID:25186048"
title: Guidance on the management of diarrhoea during cancer chemotherapy.
authors:
- Andreyev J
- Ross P
- Donnellan C
- Lennan E
- Leonard P
- Waters C
- Wedlake L
- Bridgewater J
- Glynne-Jones R
- Allum W
- Chau I
- Wilson R
- Ferry D
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70006-3
keywords:
- Antidiarrheals/therapeutic use
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Diarrhea/chemically induced, mortality, therapy"
- Female
- Fluid Therapy/methods
- Humans
- Male
- Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- Risk Assessment
- Severity of Illness Index
- Survival Rate
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Guidance on the management of diarrhoea during cancer chemotherapy.
**Authors:** Andreyev J, Ross P, Donnellan C, Lennan E, Leonard P, Waters C, Wedlake L, Bridgewater J, Glynne-Jones R, Allum W, Chau I, Wilson R, Ferry D
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70006-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70006-3)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2014 Sep;15(10):e447-60. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70006-3.

Guidance on the management of diarrhoea during cancer chemotherapy.

Andreyev J(1), Ross P(2), Donnellan C(3), Lennan E(4), Leonard P(5), Waters
C(6), Wedlake L(7), Bridgewater J(8), Glynne-Jones R(9), Allum W(10), Chau
I(11), Wilson R(12), Ferry D(13).

Author information:
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust London and Surrey,
London, UK. Electronic address: J@andreyev.demon.co.uk.
(2)Cancer Services, Guy's Hospital, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK.
(3)Gastrointestinal and Liver Services, Leeds Teaching Hospital NHS Trust,
Leeds, UK.
(4)University Hospitals Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK.
(5)Medical Oncology, Whittington Hospital NHS Trust, London, UK.
(6)Pharmacy, Kent and Medway Cancer Network, Chatham, Kent, UK.
(7)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust
London and Surrey, London, UK.
(8)Cancer Services, University College Hospital, London, UK.
(9)Mount Vernon Cancer Centre, Northwood, Middlesex, UK.
(10)Department of Surgery, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust London and Surrey,
London, UK.
(11)Department of Medicine, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust London and
Surrey, London, UK.
(12)Northern Ireland Cancer Trials Network, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, UK.
(13)Department of Oncology, New Cross Hospital, Wolverhampton, UK.

Diarrhoea induced by chemotherapy in cancer patients is common, causes notable
morbidity and mortality, and is managed inconsistently. Previous management
guidelines were based on poor evidence and neglect physiological causes of
chemotherapy-induced diarrhoea. In the absence of level 1 evidence from
randomised controlled trials, we developed practical guidance for clinicians
based on a literature review by a multidisciplinary team of clinical
oncologists, dietitians, gastroenterologists, medical oncologists, nurses,
pharmacist, and a surgeon. Education of patients and their carers about the
risks associated with, and management of, chemotherapy-induced diarrhoea is the
foundation for optimum treatment of toxic effects. Adequate--and, if necessary,
repeated--assessment, appropriate use of loperamide, and knowledge of fluid
resuscitation requirements of affected patients is the second crucial step. Use
of octreotide and seeking specialist advice early for patients who do not
respond to treatment will reduce morbidity and mortality. In view of the burden
of chemotherapy-induced diarrhoea, appropriate multidisciplinary research to
assess meaningful endpoints is urgently required.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70006-3
PMID: 25186048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
