---
reference_id: "PMID:19578400"
title: "Mitochondrial 2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase deficiency in mice results in severe hypoglycemia with stress intolerance and unimpaired ketogenesis."
authors:
- Miinalainen IJ
- Schmitz W
- Huotari A
- Autio KJ
- Soininen R
- Ver Loren van Themaat E
- Baes M
- Herzig KH
- Conzelmann E
- Hiltunen JK
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000543
keywords:
- Animals
- "Fatty Acids, Unsaturated/metabolism"
- Female
- Glucose/metabolism
- "Hypoglycemia/enzymology, genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Ketone Bodies/biosynthesis
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mitochondria/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Oxidation-Reduction
- "Oxidoreductases Acting on CH-CH Group Donors/deficiency, genetics"
- "Stress, Physiological"
- Triglycerides/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial 2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase deficiency in mice results in severe hypoglycemia with stress intolerance and unimpaired ketogenesis.
**Authors:** Miinalainen IJ, Schmitz W, Huotari A, Autio KJ, Soininen R, Ver Loren van Themaat E, Baes M, Herzig KH, Conzelmann E, Hiltunen JK
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1000543](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000543)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2009 Jul;5(7):e1000543. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000543. Epub
2009  Jul 3.

Mitochondrial 2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase deficiency in mice results in severe 
hypoglycemia with stress intolerance and unimpaired ketogenesis.

Miinalainen IJ(1), Schmitz W, Huotari A, Autio KJ, Soininen R, Ver Loren van 
Themaat E, Baes M, Herzig KH, Conzelmann E, Hiltunen JK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, 
Finland.

The mitochondrial beta-oxidation system is one of the central metabolic pathways 
of energy metabolism in mammals. Enzyme defects in this pathway cause fatty acid 
oxidation disorders. To elucidate the role of 2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase (DECR) 
as an auxiliary enzyme in the mitochondrial beta-oxidation of unsaturated fatty 
acids, we created a DECR-deficient mouse line. In Decr(-/-) mice, the 
mitochondrial beta-oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids with double bonds is 
expected to halt at the level of trans-2, cis/trans-4-dienoyl-CoA intermediates. 
In line with this expectation, fasted Decr(-/-) mice displayed increased serum 
acylcarnitines, especially decadienoylcarnitine, a product of the incomplete 
oxidation of linoleic acid (C(18:2)), urinary excretion of unsaturated 
dicarboxylic acids, and hepatic steatosis, wherein unsaturated fatty acids 
accumulate in liver triacylglycerols. Metabolically challenged Decr(-/-) mice 
turned on ketogenesis, but unexpectedly developed hypoglycemia. Induced 
expression of peroxisomal beta-oxidation and microsomal omega-oxidation enzymes 
reflect the increased lipid load, whereas reduced mRNA levels of PGC-1alpha and 
CREB, as well as enzymes in the gluconeogenetic pathway, can contribute to 
stress-induced hypoglycemia. Furthermore, the thermogenic response was 
perturbed, as demonstrated by intolerance to acute cold exposure. This study 
highlights the necessity of DECR and the breakdown of unsaturated fatty acids in 
the transition of intermediary metabolism from the fed to the fasted state.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000543
PMCID: PMC2697383
PMID: 19578400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.