---
reference_id: "PMID:39615612"
title: Generalized sarcoidosis associated with hypertrophic osteopathy in a Standardbred racehorse.
authors:
- Charles A
- Kerckhove HV
- De Maré L
- Cassart D
- Ficheroulle J
- Pouyade GR
- Tosi I
journal: J Equine Vet Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jevs.2024.105249
keywords:
- Horses
- "Horse Diseases/pathology, diagnosis"
- Animals
- "Sarcoidosis/veterinary, pathology, complications"
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generalized sarcoidosis associated with hypertrophic osteopathy in a Standardbred racehorse.
**Authors:** Charles A, Kerckhove HV, De Maré L, Cassart D, Ficheroulle J, Pouyade GR, Tosi I
**Journal:** J Equine Vet Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jevs.2024.105249](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jevs.2024.105249)

## Content

1. J Equine Vet Sci. 2025 Jan;144:105249. doi: 10.1016/j.jevs.2024.105249. Epub
2024 Nov 28.

Generalized sarcoidosis associated with hypertrophic osteopathy in a
Standardbred racehorse.

Charles A(1), Kerckhove HV(2), De Maré L(2), Cassart D(3), Ficheroulle J(4),
Pouyade GR(5), Tosi I(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences of Equids, Equine Division, Diagnostic
Imaging Section, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, Liège,
Belgium.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences of Equids, Equine Division, Internal Medicine
Section, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(3)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège,
Liège, Belgium.
(4)Teaching and Clinical Department of Companion Animal, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(5)Department of Clinical Sciences of Equids, Equine Division, Surgery and
Orthopedics Section, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine University of Liège, Liège,
Belgium.
(6)Department of Functional Sciences, Equine Division, Sports Medicine Section,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium. Electronic
address: irene.tosi@uliege.be.

A Standardbred racehorse was presented for exercise intolerance, weight loss,
pyrexia and facial deformity. Radiography and ultrasonography revealed
periostitis and regional soft tissue swelling of maxillary bones. Computed
tomography excluded any dental or sinus origin of these abnormalities. Further
deformities on distal limbs and skin lesions appeared during hospitalization.
Radiography identified bilateral periostitis and soft tissue swelling in the
distal radius and metatarsal bones, as observed in the head, suggestive of
hypertrophic osteopathy (HO). Skin biopsies revealed granulomatous dermatitis,
indicating equine sarcoidosis (ES). The horse was euthanized due to rapid
deterioration of his condition. Post-mortem examination and histopathology
revealed splenomegaly, several pulmonary nodules and disseminated granulomatous
lesions. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of generalized ES, or equine
idiopathic systemic granulomatous disease. The concurrent with HO was probably
associated with the intrathoracic pathology. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on
pooled tissues identified equine herpesvirus 5 (EHV-5) DNA.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jevs.2024.105249
PMID: 39615612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None of the
authors has any financial or personal relationships that could inappropriately
influence or bias the content of the paper.
