---
reference_id: "PMID:34234236"
title: SPP1 overexpression is associated with poor outcomes in ALK fusion lung cancer patients without receiving targeted therapy.
authors:
- Ji X
- Liu Y
- Mei F
- Li X
- Zhang M
- Yao B
- Wu R
- You J
- Pei F
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-93484-2
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Disease Management
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Gene Rearrangement
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Osteopontin/genetics
- Prognosis
- Exome Sequencing
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SPP1 overexpression is associated with poor outcomes in ALK fusion lung cancer patients without receiving targeted therapy.
**Authors:** Ji X, Liu Y, Mei F, Li X, Zhang M, Yao B, Wu R, You J, Pei F
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-021-93484-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-93484-2)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2021 Jul 7;11(1):14031. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-93484-2.

SPP1 overexpression is associated with poor outcomes in ALK fusion lung cancer
patients without receiving targeted therapy.

Ji X(#)(1), Liu Y(#)(1), Mei F(#)(1), Li X(1), Zhang M(1), Yao B(1), Wu R(1),
You J(1), Pei F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University Third Hospital, School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, 38 Xue Yuan Road,
Haidian District, Beijing, 100191, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Peking University Third Hospital, School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, 38 Xue Yuan Road,
Haidian District, Beijing, 100191, People's Republic of China.
peifei@bjmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The screening of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumors for anaplastic
lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase (ALK) gene rearrangements is important because
of the dramatically favorable therapy response to ALK inhibitor. However, the
exact mechanism of poor survival in ALK fusion lung cancer patients without
receiving targeted therapy is unclear. In this study, total of 521 tumor
specimens from Chinese patients with lung cancer were screened for ALK fusion by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH). As results, there were no cases of coexisting EGFR and ALK mutations
identified. Fourteen cases (2.7%) harbored ALK fusion, including eight solid
adenocarcinomas with signet ring cell features, four acinar adenocarcinomas with
cribriform pattern containing mucin, one adenosquamous carcinoma and one
micropapillary adenocarcinoma with mucin. Six (42.9%) of fourteen patients with
ALK-positive lung cancer had stage IV disease, and five ALK-positive patients
treated with platinum-based chemotherapy had poor outcome (all patients were
dead and the mean survival time was 12 months), compared to 72 months for
patients with ALK inhibitor therapy. Furthermore, Five ALK-positive cases were
analyzed by whole exome sequencing (WES) and via direct transcript counting
using a digital probe-base (NanoString) to explore the driver genes.
Deregulation of PI3K/AKT signaling pathway in ALK-positive lung cancer was
demonstrated by WES analysis, and significantly increased mRNA of ALK, ROS1,
MET, SPP1 and PI3K signaling pathway was identified by NanoString assay. The
concordance between NanoString, IHC and FISH methodologies for detecting ALK
fusion was 100%. Significant overexpression of SPP1 protein in ALK-positive lung
cancer was confirmed by IHC compared to paired adjacent normal tissues and
ALK-negative cancers. Thus we concluded that SPP1 overexpression is associated
with poor outcomes for patients with ALK fusion lung cancer without receiving
targeted therapy and PI3K/AKT/SPP1 pathway may become the promising targets in
patients with aggressive lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-93484-2
PMCID: PMC8263595
PMID: 34234236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
