---
reference_id: "PMID:25521378"
title: Mutations in KATNB1 cause complex cerebral malformations by disrupting asymmetrically dividing neural progenitors.
authors:
- Mishra-Gorur K
- Çağlayan AO
- Schaffer AE
- Chabu C
- Henegariu O
- Vonhoff F
- Akgümüş GT
- Nishimura S
- Han W
- Tu S
- Baran B
- Gümüş H
- Dilber C
- Zaki MS
- Hossni HA
- Rivière JB
- Kayserili H
- Spencer EG
- Rosti RÖ
- Schroth J
- Per H
- Çağlar C
- Çağlar Ç
- Dölen D
- Baranoski JF
- Kumandaş S
- Minja FJ
- Erson-Omay EZ
- Mane SM
- Lifton RP
- Xu T
- Keshishian H
- Dobyns WB
- Chi NC
- Šestan N
- Louvi A
- Bilgüvar K
- Yasuno K
- Gleeson JG
- Günel M
journal: Neuron
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.014
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics
- Animals
- "Brain/abnormalities, growth & development, pathology"
- Cell Count
- Cell Division/genetics
- Dendrites/genetics
- Drosophila
- Drosophila Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Katanin
- Mice
- "Microcephaly/genetics, pathology"
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Neural Stem Cells/pathology
- Neurogenesis/genetics
- "Optic Lobe, Nonmammalian/abnormalities"
- Spindle Apparatus/genetics
- Zebrafish
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in KATNB1 cause complex cerebral malformations by disrupting asymmetrically dividing neural progenitors.
**Authors:** Mishra-Gorur K, Çağlayan AO, Schaffer AE, Chabu C, Henegariu O, Vonhoff F, Akgümüş GT, Nishimura S, Han W, Tu S, Baran B, Gümüş H, Dilber C, Zaki MS, Hossni HA, Rivière JB, Kayserili H, Spencer EG, Rosti RÖ, Schroth J, Per H, Çağlar C, Çağlar Ç, Dölen D, Baranoski JF, Kumandaş S, Minja FJ, Erson-Omay EZ, Mane SM, Lifton RP, Xu T, Keshishian H, Dobyns WB, Chi NC, Šestan N, Louvi A, Bilgüvar K, Yasuno K, Gleeson JG, Günel M
**Journal:** Neuron (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.014)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2014 Dec 17;84(6):1226-39. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.014.

Mutations in KATNB1 cause complex cerebral malformations by disrupting
asymmetrically dividing neural progenitors.

Mishra-Gorur K(1), Çağlayan AO(1), Schaffer AE(2), Chabu C(3), Henegariu O(1),
Vonhoff F(4), Akgümüş GT(1), Nishimura S(5), Han W(6), Tu S(7), Baran B(1),
Gümüş H(8), Dilber C(9), Zaki MS(10), Hossni HA(11), Rivière JB(12), Kayserili
H(13), Spencer EG(2), Rosti RÖ(2), Schroth J(2), Per H(8), Çağlar C(1), Çağlar
Ç(1), Dölen D(1), Baranoski JF(1), Kumandaş S(8), Minja FJ(14), Erson-Omay
EZ(1), Mane SM(15), Lifton RP(3), Xu T(3), Keshishian H(4), Dobyns WB(16), Chi
NC(7), Šestan N(17), Louvi A(18), Bilgüvar K(15), Yasuno K(1), Gleeson JG(19),
Günel M(20).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA; Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA;
Department of Neurobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA;
Yale Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA.
(2)Neurogenetics Laboratory, Department of Neurosciences, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA;
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA.
(4)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06511, USA.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA; Yale Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA.
(6)Department of Neurobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA; Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.
(8)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Erciyes University
Medical Faculty, Kayseri 38039, Turkey.
(9)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Sütcü Imam
University Medical Faculty, Kahramanmaraş 46100, Turkey.
(10)Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome Research Division,
National Research Center, Cairo 12311, Egypt.
(11)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Neuromotor System, Cairo
12311, Egypt.
(12)Equipe Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, EA 4271, Université de
Bourgogne, 21078 Dijon, France.
(13)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul
University, Istanbul 34093, Turkey.
(14)Department of Radiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(15)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA;
Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA.
(16)Departments of Pediatrics and Neurology, University of Washington and Center
for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle,
Washington 98105, USA.
(17)Department of Neurobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA; Yale Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA; Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(18)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA; Department of Neurobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA; Yale Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA.
(19)Neurogenetics Laboratory, Department of Neurosciences, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
Electronic address: jogleeson@rockefeller.edu.
(20)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA; Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA;
Department of Neurobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA;
Yale Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA. Electronic address: murat.gunel@yale.edu.

Erratum in
    Neuron. 2015 Jan 7;85(1):228.
    Neuron. 2015 Jan 7;85(1):228. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.046.

Exome sequencing analysis of over 2,000 children with complex malformations of
cortical development identified five independent (four homozygous and one
compound heterozygous) deleterious mutations in KATNB1, encoding the regulatory
subunit of the microtubule-severing enzyme Katanin. Mitotic spindle formation is
defective in patient-derived fibroblasts, a consequence of disrupted
interactions of mutant KATNB1 with KATNA1, the catalytic subunit of Katanin, and
other microtubule-associated proteins. Loss of KATNB1 orthologs in zebrafish
(katnb1) and flies (kat80) results in microcephaly, recapitulating the human
phenotype. In the developing Drosophila optic lobe, kat80 loss specifically
affects the asymmetrically dividing neuroblasts, which display supernumerary
centrosomes and spindle abnormalities during mitosis, leading to cell cycle
progression delays and reduced cell numbers. Furthermore, kat80 depletion
results in dendritic arborization defects in sensory and motor neurons,
affecting neural architecture. Taken together, we provide insight into the
mechanisms by which KATNB1 mutations cause human cerebral cortical
malformations, demonstrating its fundamental role during brain development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.014
PMCID: PMC5024344
PMID: 25521378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
