---
reference_id: "PMID:39130917"
title: "Evaluating Therapeutic Plasma Exchange in Pediatric Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis: A Comprehensive Review."
authors:
- Bhardwaj T
- Kumar S
- Parashar N
- Tiwari G
- Hiwale KM
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.64190
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluating Therapeutic Plasma Exchange in Pediatric Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis: A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Bhardwaj T, Kumar S, Parashar N, Tiwari G, Hiwale KM
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.64190](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.64190)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jul 9;16(7):e64190. doi: 10.7759/cureus.64190. eCollection 2024 
Jul.

Evaluating Therapeutic Plasma Exchange in Pediatric Acute Disseminated 
Encephalomyelitis: A Comprehensive Review.

Bhardwaj T(1)(2), Kumar S(2), Parashar N(2), Tiwari G(2), Hiwale KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Pathology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of Higher 
Education and Research, Wardha, IND.
(2)Pathology, Lok Nayak Hospital, Delhi, IND.

Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is a rare autoimmune disorder 
characterized by brain and spinal cord inflammation. In pediatric patients, ADEM 
presents unique challenges due to its potential for rapid progression and 
long-term neurological sequelae. Therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) has emerged 
as a potential treatment option by targeting the underlying autoimmune process 
and modulating the inflammatory response. This comprehensive review evaluates 
the role of TPE in pediatric ADEM, synthesizing evidence from clinical studies 
and providing insights into its efficacy, safety, and potential benefits. The 
review highlights the variability in TPE efficacy based on disease severity and 
patient-specific factors. Implications for clinical practice include considering 
TPE as a therapeutic option, particularly in severe or refractory cases, and 
emphasizing the importance of early intervention. Recommendations for future 
research include long-term prospective studies, comparative effectiveness 
trials, and efforts to standardize TPE protocols. Overall, continued 
investigation and innovation in managing pediatric ADEM are essential for 
improving outcomes and quality of life for affected children and their families.

Copyright © 2024, Bhardwaj et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.64190
PMCID: PMC11315424
PMID: 39130917

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.