---
reference_id: "PMID:22868800"
title: "Lipid peroxidation markers in Crohn's disease: the associations and diagnostic value."
authors:
- Boehm D
- Krzystek-Korpacka M
- Neubauer K
- Matusiewicz M
- Paradowski L
- Gamian A
journal: Clin Chem Lab Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1515/cclm-2011-0817
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lipid peroxidation markers in Crohn's disease: the associations and diagnostic value.
**Authors:** Boehm D, Krzystek-Korpacka M, Neubauer K, Matusiewicz M, Paradowski L, Gamian A
**Journal:** Clin Chem Lab Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1515/cclm-2011-0817](https://doi.org/10.1515/cclm-2011-0817)

## Content

1. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2012 Mar 3;50(8):1359-66. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2011-0817.

Lipid peroxidation markers in Crohn's disease: the associations and diagnostic 
value.

Boehm D(1), Krzystek-Korpacka M, Neubauer K, Matusiewicz M, Paradowski L, Gamian 
A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, 
Poland.

BACKGROUND: Crohn's disease (CD) is an incurable and difficult to diagnose 
condition. While high sensitive C-reactive protein (CRP) remains the best 
biochemical marker, we evaluated the diagnostic usefulness of lipid peroxidation 
indices.
METHODS: Malondialdehyde/thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (MDA/TBARS), 
peroxidation potential (PP), lipid hydroperoxides (ROOH), oxidized-low density 
lipoprotein (oxLDL), and oxLDL antibodies (OLAB) were assessed in 52 CD patients 
and 99 volunteers and referred to clinical activity, inflammation, nutritional 
and antioxidant status.
RESULTS: MDA/TBARS were higher in CD while oxLDL and PP decreased in active 
disease and ROOH and OLAB did not differ. oxLDL and PP negatively and OLAB 
positively correlated with CD activity. MDA/TBARS positively correlated with 
IL-6 and SOD-1 and negatively with catalase. IL-6 and SOD-1 explained 24% in 
MDA/TBARS variability. PP negatively correlated with CRP, platelets, and IL-6 
and positively with glutathione peroxidase-1, paraoxonase-1, cholesterol, 
triglycerides, and albumins. Cholesterol and CRP explained 57% in PP 
variability. oxLDL negatively correlated with IL-1 and IL-6 and positively with 
glutathione peroxidase-1, paraoxonase-1, cholesterol, and albumins. 
Paraoxonase-1 explained 17% of oxLDL variability. OLAB positively correlated 
with IL-1 explaining 10% in its variability and negatively with cholesterol. 
MDA/TBARS were the best predictor of CD, comparable to CRP, with high 
specificity (MDA/TBARS sensitivity and specificity: 75% and 90%; CRP: 76% and 
93%). Combined assessment of MDA/TBARS and CRP improved sensitivity (94%) 
corresponding with acceptable specificity (81%).
CONCLUSIONS: MDA/TBARS are elevated in CD and may help to rule the disease out, 
while the combined evaluation with CRP may serve for CD confirmation. oxLDL and 
PP depended on substrate availability, decreased in CD.

DOI: 10.1515/cclm-2011-0817
PMID: 22868800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]