---
reference_id: "PMID:35771717"
title: "Characterization of unusual iAMP21 B-lymphoblastic leukemia (iAMP21-ALL) from the Mayo Clinic and Children's Oncology Group."
authors:
- Koleilat A
- Smadbeck JB
- Zepeda-Mendoza CJ
- Williamson CM
- Pitel BA
- Golden CL
- Xu X
- Greipp PT
- Ketterling RP
- Hoppman NL
- Peterson JF
- Harrison CJ
- Akkari YMN
- Tsuchiya KD
- Shago M
- Baughn LB
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.23084
keywords:
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit/genetics
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Precursor Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of unusual iAMP21 B-lymphoblastic leukemia (iAMP21-ALL) from the Mayo Clinic and Children's Oncology Group.
**Authors:** Koleilat A, Smadbeck JB, Zepeda-Mendoza CJ, Williamson CM, Pitel BA, Golden CL, Xu X, Greipp PT, Ketterling RP, Hoppman NL, Peterson JF, Harrison CJ, Akkari YMN, Tsuchiya KD, Shago M, Baughn LB
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.23084](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.23084)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2022 Dec;61(12):710-719. doi: 10.1002/gcc.23084.
Epub  2022 Jul 19.

Characterization of unusual iAMP21 B-lymphoblastic leukemia (iAMP21-ALL) from 
the Mayo Clinic and Children's Oncology Group.

Koleilat A(1), Smadbeck JB(2), Zepeda-Mendoza CJ(3), Williamson CM(1), Pitel 
BA(1), Golden CL(1), Xu X(1)(4), Greipp PT(1)(4), Ketterling RP(1)(4), Hoppman 
NL(1), Peterson JF(1)(4), Harrison CJ(5), Akkari YMN(6), Tsuchiya KD(7), Shago 
M(8), Baughn LB(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Laboratory Genetics and Genomics, Department of Laboratory 
Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Division of Computational Biology, Department of Quantitative Health 
Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(4)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(5)Leukaemia Research Cytogenetics Group, Translational and Clinical Research 
Institute, Newcastle University Centre for Cancer, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK.
(6)Cytogenetics and Molecular Pathology, Legacy Health, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(8)Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) with intrachromosomal amplification of 
chromosome 21 (iAMP21-ALL) represents a recurrent high-risk cytogenetic 
abnormality and accurate identification is critical for appropriate clinical 
management. Identification of iAMP21-ALL has historically relied on fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH) using a RUNX1 probe. Current classification 
requires ≥ five copies of RUNX1 per cell and ≥ three additional copies of RUNX1 
on a single abnormal iAMP21-chromosome. We sought to evaluate the performance of 
the RUNX1 probe in the identification of iAMP21-ALL. This study was a 
retrospective evaluation of iAMP21-ALL in the Mayo Clinic and Children's 
Oncology Group cohorts. Of 207 cases of iAMP21-ALL, 188 (91%) were classified as 
"typical" iAMP21-ALL, while 19 (9%) cases were classified as "unusual" 
iAMP21-ALL. The "unusual" iAMP21 cases did not meet the current definition of 
iAMP21 by FISH but were confirmed to have iAMP21 by chromosomal microarray. Half 
of the "unusual" iAMP21-ALL cases had less than five RUNX1 signals, while the 
remainder had ≥ five RUNX1 signals with some located apart from the abnormal 
iAMP21-chromosome. Nine percent of iAMP21-ALL cases fail to meet the FISH 
definition of iAMP21-ALL demonstrating that laboratories are at risk of 
misidentification of iAMP21-ALL when relying only on the RUNX1 FISH probe. 
Incorporation of chromosomal microarray testing circumvents these risks.

© 2022 The Authors. Genes, Chromosomes and Cancer published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.23084
PMCID: PMC9549522
PMID: 35771717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]