---
reference_id: "PMID:38673882"
title: "Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemias: Classifications, Pathophysiology, Diagnoses and Management."
authors:
- Loriamini M
- Cserti-Gazdewich C
- Branch DR
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25084296
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemias: Classifications, Pathophysiology, Diagnoses and Management.
**Authors:** Loriamini M, Cserti-Gazdewich C, Branch DR
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25084296](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25084296)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Apr 12;25(8):4296. doi: 10.3390/ijms25084296.

Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemias: Classifications, Pathophysiology, Diagnoses and 
Management.

Loriamini M(1)(2), Cserti-Gazdewich C(1)(3)(4), Branch DR(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON M5B 1W8, Canada.
(2)Centre for Innovation, Canadian Blood Services, Keenan Research Centre, Room 
420, 30 Bond Street, Toronto, ON M5B 1W8, Canada.
(3)Laboratory Medicine Program, Blood Transfusion Laboratory, University Health 
Network, Toronto, ON M5G 2C4, Canada.
(4)Blood Disorders Program, Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, 
University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G 2C4, Canada.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5B 1W8, Canada.

Autoimmune hemolytic anemias (AIHAs) are conditions involving the production of 
antibodies against one's own red blood cells (RBCs). These can be primary with 
unknown cause or secondary (by association with diseases or infections). There 
are several different categories of AIHAs recognized according to their features 
in the direct antiglobulin test (DAT). (1) Warm-antibody AIHA (wAIHA) exhibits a 
pan-reactive IgG autoantibody recognizing a portion of band 3 (wherein the DAT 
may be positive with IgG, C3d or both). Treatment involves glucocorticoids and 
steroid-sparing agents and may consider IVIG or monoclonal antibodies to CD20, 
CD38 or C1q. (2) Cold-antibody AIHA due to IgMs range from cold agglutinin 
syndrome (CAS) to cold agglutin disease (CAD). These are typically specific to 
the Ii blood group system, with the former (CAS) being polyclonal and the latter 
(CAD) being a more severe and monoclonal entity. The DAT in either case is 
positive only with C3d. Foundationally, the patient is kept warm, though 
treatment for significant complement-related outcomes may, therefore, capitalize 
on monoclonal options against C1q or C5. (3) Mixed AIHA, also called combined 
cold and warm AIHA, has a DAT positive for both IgG and C3d, with treatment 
approaches inclusive of those appropriate for wAIHA and cold AIHA. (4) 
Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (PCH), also termed Donath-Landsteiner 
test-positive AIHA, has a DAT positive only for C3d, driven upstream by a 
biphasic cold-reactive IgG antibody recruiting complement. Although usually 
self-remitting, management may consider monoclonal antibodies to C1q or C5. (5) 
Direct antiglobulin test-negative AIHA (DAT-neg AIHA), due to IgG antibody below 
detection thresholds in the DAT, or by non-detected IgM or IgA antibodies, is 
managed as wAIHA. (6) Drug-induced immune hemolytic anemia (DIIHA) appears as 
wAIHA with DAT IgG and/or C3d. Some cases may resolve after ceasing the 
instigating drug. (7) Passenger lymphocyte syndrome, found after 
transplantation, is caused by B-cells transferred from an antigen-negative donor 
whose antibodies react with a recipient who produces antigen-positive RBCs. This 
comprehensive review will discuss in detail each of these AIHAs and provide 
information on diagnosis, pathophysiology and treatment modalities.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25084296
PMCID: PMC11049952
PMID: 38673882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.