---
reference_id: "PMID:25733449"
title: Molecular mechanisms of congenital hyperinsulinism.
authors:
- Rahman SA
- Nessa A
- Hussain K
journal: J Mol Endocrinol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1530/JME-15-0016
keywords:
- Animals
- "Congenital Hyperinsulinism/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Insulin/metabolism
- Insulin Secretion
- "Models, Biological"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular mechanisms of congenital hyperinsulinism.
**Authors:** Rahman SA, Nessa A, Hussain K
**Journal:** J Mol Endocrinol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1530/JME-15-0016](https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-15-0016)

## Content

1. J Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Apr;54(2):R119-29. doi: 10.1530/JME-15-0016. Epub 2015 
Mar 2.

Molecular mechanisms of congenital hyperinsulinism.

Rahman SA(1), Nessa A(1), Hussain K(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genomic MedicineUCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford 
Street, London WC1N 1EH, UKDepartment of Paediatric EndocrinologyGreat Ormond 
Street Hospital for Children NHS, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
(2)Genetics and Genomic MedicineUCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford 
Street, London WC1N 1EH, UKDepartment of Paediatric EndocrinologyGreat Ormond 
Street Hospital for Children NHS, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK 
Genetics and Genomic MedicineUCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, 
London WC1N 1EH, UKDepartment of Paediatric EndocrinologyGreat Ormond Street 
Hospital for Children NHS, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK 
Khalid.Hussain@ucl.ac.uk.

Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a complex heterogeneous condition in which 
insulin secretion from pancreatic β-cells is unregulated and inappropriate for 
the level of blood glucose. The inappropriate insulin secretion drives glucose 
into the insulin-sensitive tissues, such as the muscle, liver and adipose 
tissue, leading to severe hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH). At a molecular 
level, genetic abnormalities in nine different genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, 
HNF4A, HNF1A, SLC16A1, UCP2 and HADH) have been identified which cause CHI. 
Autosomal recessive and dominant mutations in ABCC8/KCNJ11 are the commonest 
cause of medically unresponsive CHI. Mutations in GLUD1 and HADH lead to 
leucine-induced HH, and these two genes encode the key enzymes glutamate 
dehydrogenase and short chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase which play a key 
role in amino acid and fatty acid regulation of insulin secretion respectively. 
Genetic abnormalities in HNF4A and HNF1A lead to a dual phenotype of HH in the 
newborn period and maturity onset-diabetes later in life. This state of the art 
review provides an update on the molecular basis of CHI.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1530/JME-15-0016
PMID: 25733449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]