---
reference_id: "PMID:26816135"
title: "Childhood and Youth Onset Diabetes: A Single Centre Experience."
authors:
- Jevalikar G
- Kohli C
- Bansal B
- Mishra SK
- Wasir JS
- Singh S
- Ahuja JK
- Kaur P
- Farooqui KJ
- Mithal A
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s12098-015-2009-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Childhood and Youth Onset Diabetes: A Single Centre Experience.
**Authors:** Jevalikar G, Kohli C, Bansal B, Mishra SK, Wasir JS, Singh S, Ahuja JK, Kaur P, Farooqui KJ, Mithal A
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12098-015-2009-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-015-2009-7)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 2016 Aug;83(8):792-8. doi: 10.1007/s12098-015-2009-7. Epub 
2016 Jan 27.

Childhood and Youth Onset Diabetes: A Single Centre Experience.

Jevalikar G(1), Kohli C(2), Bansal B(2), Mishra SK(2), Wasir JS(2), Singh S(2), 
Ahuja JK(2), Kaur P(2), Farooqui KJ(2), Mithal A(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Medanta The Medicity, Sector 38, 
Gurgaon, Haryana, 122 001, India. g_jewlikar@yahoo.co.in.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Medanta The Medicity, Sector 38, 
Gurgaon, Haryana, 122 001, India.

OBJECTIVES: To identify proportion of various types of diabetes and differences 
between type 1 and type 2 diabetes in patients with youth onset diabetes (onset 
below 25 completed years of age). In addition, concurrent autoimmune diseases in 
type 1 diabetes were studied in a subset of patients.
METHODS: A total of 577 patients (192 girls) with diabetes onset at median age 
of 14 y (range 1 mo-25 y) with median duration of 1 y (range day of diagnosis- 
43 y) were included. Clinical details, investigations and complications were 
recorded in a proforma. Diabetes was classified using clinical criteria 
supported by laboratory tests of C peptide and anti GAD-65 antibody in a subset 
of patients.
RESULTS: Type 1 diabetes accounted for 368/421 (87.4 %) patients with age of 
onset <18 y and 99/156 (63.5 %) of patients with onset between 19 and 25 y of 
age. Proportion of type 2 diabetes was 36/421 (8.5 %) and 41/156 (26.2 %) in 
these two groups. Older age at onset, diabetes in one or both parents, absence 
of ketosis /weight loss and presence of acanthosis were significant predictors 
of type 2 diabetes. Hypothyroidism (TSH >10) and biopsy proven celiac disease 
was found in 11.6 and 9.7 % of type 1 diabetes patients respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Type 1 diabetes is the most common type of diabetes in youth, 
however, a significant proportion of youth have type 2 diabetes. In these 
patients a combination of clinical factors, biochemical parameters and course 
over few months helps to guide the diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s12098-015-2009-7
PMID: 26816135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]