---
reference_id: "PMID:32062313"
title: "Lung cancer in never smokers: The role of different risk factors other than tobacco smoking."
authors:
- Corrales L
- Rosell R
- Cardona AF
- Martín C
- Zatarain-Barrón ZL
- Arrieta O
journal: Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2020.102895
keywords:
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/etiology, pathology"
- Radon/adverse effects
- Risk Factors
- Tobacco Smoke Pollution/adverse effects
- Tobacco Smoking
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lung cancer in never smokers: The role of different risk factors other than tobacco smoking.
**Authors:** Corrales L, Rosell R, Cardona AF, Martín C, Zatarain-Barrón ZL, Arrieta O
**Journal:** Crit Rev Oncol Hematol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.critrevonc.2020.102895](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2020.102895)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2020 Apr;148:102895. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2020.102895. Epub 2020 Jan 31.

Lung cancer in never smokers: The role of different risk factors other than
tobacco smoking.

Corrales L(1), Rosell R(2), Cardona AF(3), Martín C(4), Zatarain-Barrón ZL(5),
Arrieta O(6).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación y Manejo del Cáncer (CIMCA), San José, Costa Rica;
Hospital San Juan de Dios, San José, Costa Rica.
(2)Catalan Institute of Oncology, Germans Trias i Pujol Research Institute and
Hospital Campus Can Ruti Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Foundation for Clinical and Applied Cancer Research (FICMAC), Bogotá,
Colombia; Clinical and Traslational Oncology Group, Institute of Oncology,
Clínica del Country, Bogotá, Colombia.
(4)Medical Oncology Department, Thoracic Oncology Section, Instituto Fleming,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Thoracic Oncology Unit, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología, Mexico City,
Mexico.
(6)Hospital San Juan de Dios, San José, Costa Rica. Electronic address:
ogarrieta@gmail.com.

Lung cancer (LC), the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide, is a
complex and highly heterogeneous disease. Additional to its biological
complexity, LC patients are often confronted with a high degree of stigma,
mostly from the association of the disease with tobacco. Nonetheless, a
proportion of LC patients are never-smokers, a population which we are beginning
to comprehensively explore. Several risk factors have been linked to LC in
never-smokers. Studies have consistently shown that radon exposure and domestic
fuel smoke increase LC risk. Additionally, infections such as Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, and Human Papilloma Virus are also risk factors. Other less
conclusive associations include inflammatory diseases such as asthma and
sarcoidosis. Moreover, we are now aware that molecular characteristics of LC
vary widely according to smoking history, with important therapeutic
implications. This review comprehensively assesses the current knowledge in
terms of risk factors and disease characteristics in the never-smoker lung
cancer population.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2020.102895
PMID: 32062313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Dr. Cardona
reports grants from Merck Sharp & Dohme, Boehringer Ingelheim, Roche,
Bristol-Myers Squibb and The Foundation for Clinical and Applied Cancer Research
– FICMAC., other from Pfizer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Astra Zeneca, MSD, BMS,
Celldex, Roche, personal fees from Merck Sharp & Dohme, Boehringer Ingelheim,
Roche, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer, Novartis, Celldex Therapeutics, Foundation
Medicine, Eli Lilly and Foundation for Clinical and Applied Cancer Research –
FICMAC, outside the submitted work. Dr. Arrieta reports personal fees from
Pfizer, grants and personal fees from Astra zeneca, grants and personal fees
from Boehringer Ingelheim, personal fees from Lilly, personal fees from Merck,
personal fees from Bristol Myers Squibb, grants and personal fees from Roche,
outside the submitted work. All the remaining authors declare no conflict of
interest.
