---
reference_id: "PMID:27986877"
title: "Prevalence and incidence of epilepsy: A systematic review and meta-analysis of international studies."
authors:
- Fiest KM
- Sauro KM
- Wiebe S
- Patten SB
- Kwon CS
- Dykeman J
- Pringsheim T
- Lorenzetti DL
- Jetté N
journal: Neurology
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003509
keywords:
- "Databases, Bibliographic/statistics & numerical data"
- Epilepsy/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- International Cooperation
- Male
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and incidence of epilepsy: A systematic review and meta-analysis of international studies.
**Authors:** Fiest KM, Sauro KM, Wiebe S, Patten SB, Kwon CS, Dykeman J, Pringsheim T, Lorenzetti DL, Jetté N
**Journal:** Neurology (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000003509](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000003509)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2017 Jan 17;88(3):296-303. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003509. Epub
2016 Dec 16.

Prevalence and incidence of epilepsy: A systematic review and meta-analysis of
international studies.

Fiest KM(1), Sauro KM(1), Wiebe S(1), Patten SB(1), Kwon CS(1), Dykeman J(1),
Pringsheim T(1), Lorenzetti DL(1), Jetté N(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Community Health Sciences, O'Brien Institute for
Public Health (K.M.F., K.M.S., S.W., S.B.P., T.P., D.L.L., N.J.), and the
Department of Clinical Neurosciences & Hotchkiss Brain Institute (K.M.S., S.W.,
J.D., T.P., N.J.) and Department of Psychiatry, Mathison Centre for Mental
Health Research & Education (S.B.P.), Hotchkiss Brain Institute (K.M.S, S.W.,
S.B.P., T.P., N.J.), Department of Critical Care Medicine (K.M.F.), Cumming
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Canada; Department of Neurosurgery
(C.-S.K.), King's College Hospital, London, UK; and Institute of Health
Economics (D.L.L.), Edmonton, Canada.
(2)From the Department of Community Health Sciences, O'Brien Institute for
Public Health (K.M.F., K.M.S., S.W., S.B.P., T.P., D.L.L., N.J.), and the
Department of Clinical Neurosciences & Hotchkiss Brain Institute (K.M.S., S.W.,
J.D., T.P., N.J.) and Department of Psychiatry, Mathison Centre for Mental
Health Research & Education (S.B.P.), Hotchkiss Brain Institute (K.M.S, S.W.,
S.B.P., T.P., N.J.), Department of Critical Care Medicine (K.M.F.), Cumming
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Canada; Department of Neurosurgery
(C.-S.K.), King's College Hospital, London, UK; and Institute of Health
Economics (D.L.L.), Edmonton, Canada. Nathalie.jette@ahs.ca.

Erratum in
    Neurology. 2017 Aug 8;89(6):642. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004317.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2017 Aug 8;89(6):641. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004205.
    Neurology. 2017 Aug 8;89(6):641-642. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004206.

OBJECTIVE: To review population-based studies of the prevalence and incidence of
epilepsy worldwide and use meta-analytic techniques to explore factors that may
explain heterogeneity between estimates.
METHODS: The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
standards were followed. We searched MEDLINE and EMBASE for articles published
on the prevalence or incidence of epilepsy since 1985. Abstract, full-text
review, and data abstraction were conducted in duplicate. Meta-analyses and
meta-regressions were used to explore the association between prevalence or
incidence, age group, sex, country level income, and study quality.
RESULTS: A total of 222 studies were included (197 on prevalence, 48 on
incidence). The point prevalence of active epilepsy was 6.38 per 1,000 persons
(95% confidence interval [95% CI] 5.57-7.30), while the lifetime prevalence was
7.60 per 1,000 persons (95% CI 6.17-9.38). The annual cumulative incidence of
epilepsy was 67.77 per 100,000 persons (95% CI 56.69-81.03) while the incidence
rate was 61.44 per 100,000 person-years (95% CI 50.75-74.38). The prevalence of
epilepsy did not differ by age group, sex, or study quality. The active annual
period prevalence, lifetime prevalence, and incidence rate of epilepsy were
higher in low to middle income countries. Epilepsies of unknown etiology and
those with generalized seizures had the highest prevalence.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a comprehensive synthesis of the prevalence and
incidence of epilepsy from published international studies and offers insight
into factors that contribute to heterogeneity between estimates. Significant
gaps (e.g., lack of incidence studies, stratification by age groups) were
identified. Standardized reporting of future epidemiologic studies of epilepsy
is needed.

© 2016 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003509
PMCID: PMC5272794
PMID: 27986877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
