---
reference_id: "PMID:26658871"
title: Mitochondrial Superoxide Contributes to Hippocampal Synaptic Dysfunction and Memory Deficits in Angelman Syndrome Model Mice.
authors:
- Santini E
- Turner KL
- Ramaraj AB
- Murphy MP
- Klann E
- Kaphzan H
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2246-15.2015
keywords:
- Analysis of Variance
- Angelman Syndrome/complications
- Animals
- "Conditioning, Psychological"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electric Stimulation
- Fear
- "Hippocampus/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- In Vitro Techniques
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Motor Activity/physiology
- "Movement Disorders/etiology, pathology"
- Organophosphorus Compounds/metabolism
- Superoxides/metabolism
- Synapses/physiology
- "Ubiquinone/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial Superoxide Contributes to Hippocampal Synaptic Dysfunction and Memory Deficits in Angelman Syndrome Model Mice.
**Authors:** Santini E, Turner KL, Ramaraj AB, Murphy MP, Klann E, Kaphzan H
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2246-15.2015](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2246-15.2015)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2015 Dec 9;35(49):16213-20. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2246-15.2015.

Mitochondrial Superoxide Contributes to Hippocampal Synaptic Dysfunction and
Memory Deficits in Angelman Syndrome Model Mice.

Santini E(1), Turner KL(1), Ramaraj AB(1), Murphy MP(2), Klann E(3), Kaphzan
H(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, New York 10003.
(2)MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Cambridge CB2 0XY, United Kingdom, and.
(3)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, New York 10003,
eklann@cns.nyu.edu hkaphzan@univ.haifa.ac.il.
(4)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, New York 10003,
Sagol Department of Neurobiology, University of Haifa, Haifa 3498838, Israel
eklann@cns.nyu.edu hkaphzan@univ.haifa.ac.il.

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder associated with
developmental delay, lack of speech, motor dysfunction, and epilepsy. In the
majority of the patients, AS is caused by the deletion of small portions of
maternal chromosome 15 harboring the UBE3A gene. This results in a lack of
expression of the UBE3A gene because the paternal allele is genetically
imprinted. The UBE3A gene encodes an enzyme termed ubiquitin ligase E3A (E6-AP)
that targets proteins for degradation by the 26S proteasome. Because
neurodegenerative disease and other neurodevelopmental disorders have been
linked to oxidative stress, we asked whether mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species (ROS) played a role in impaired synaptic plasticity and memory deficits
exhibited by AS model mice. We discovered that AS mice have increased levels of
superoxide in area CA1 of the hippocampus that is reduced by MitoQ
10-methanesuflonate (MitoQ), a mitochondria-specific antioxidant. In addition,
we found that MitoQ rescued impairments in hippocampal synaptic plasticity and
deficits in contextual fear memory exhibited by AS model mice. Our findings
suggest that mitochondria-derived oxidative stress contributes to hippocampal
pathophysiology in AS model mice and that targeting mitochondrial ROS
pharmacologically could benefit individuals with AS.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Oxidative stress has been hypothesized to contribute to
the pathophysiology of neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum
disorders and Angelman syndrome (AS). Herein, we report that AS model mice
exhibit elevated levels of mitochondria-derived reactive oxygen species in
pyramidal neurons in hippocampal area CA1. Moreover, we demonstrate that the
administration of MitoQ (MitoQ 10-methanesuflonate), a mitochondria-specific
antioxidant, to AS model mice normalizes synaptic plasticity and restores
memory. Finally, our findings suggest that antioxidants that target the
mitochondria could be used therapeutically to ameliorate synaptic and cognitive
deficits in individuals with AS.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3516213-08$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2246-15.2015
PMCID: PMC4682786
PMID: 26658871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
