---
reference_id: "PMID:24244707"
title: MuSK myasthenia gravis IgG4 disrupts the interaction of LRP4 with MuSK but both IgG4 and IgG1-3 can disperse preformed agrin-independent AChR clusters.
authors:
- Koneczny I
- Cossins J
- Waters P
- Beeson D
- Vincent A
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080695
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MuSK myasthenia gravis IgG4 disrupts the interaction of LRP4 with MuSK but both IgG4 and IgG1-3 can disperse preformed agrin-independent AChR clusters.
**Authors:** Koneczny I, Cossins J, Waters P, Beeson D, Vincent A
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0080695](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0080695)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 7;8(11):e80695. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080695. 
eCollection 2013.

MuSK myasthenia gravis IgG4 disrupts the interaction of LRP4 with MuSK but both 
IgG4 and IgG1-3 can disperse preformed agrin-independent AChR clusters.

Koneczny I(1), Cossins J, Waters P, Beeson D, Vincent A.

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences Group, Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.

A variable proportion of patients with generalized myasthenia gravis (MG) have 
autoantibodies to muscle specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK). During development 
agrin, released from the motor nerve, interacts with low density lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein-4 (LRP4), which then binds to MuSK; MuSK interaction 
with the intracellular protein Dok7 results in clustering of the acetylcholine 
receptors (AChRs) on the postsynaptic membrane. In mature muscle, MuSK helps 
maintain the high density of AChRs at the neuromuscular junction. MuSK 
antibodies are mainly IgG4 subclass, which does not activate complement and can 
be monovalent, thus it is not clear how the antibodies cause disruption of AChR 
numbers or function to cause MG. We hypothesised that MuSK antibodies either 
reduce surface MuSK expression and/or inhibit the interaction with LRP4. We 
prepared MuSK IgG, monovalent Fab fragments, IgG1-3 and IgG4 fractions from 
MuSK-MG plasmas. We asked whether the antibodies caused endocytosis of MuSK in 
MuSK-transfected cells or if they inhibited binding of LRP4 to MuSK in 
co-immunoprecipitation experiments. In parallel, we investigated their ability 
to reduce AChR clusters in C2C12 myotubes induced by a) agrin, reflecting 
neuromuscular development, and b) by Dok7- overexpression, producing AChR 
clusters that more closely resemble the adult neuromuscular synapse. Total IgG, 
IgG4 or IgG1-3 MuSK antibodies were not endocytosed unless cross-linked by 
divalent anti-human IgG. MuSK IgG, Fab fragments and IgG4 inhibited the binding 
of LRP4 to MuSK and reduced agrin-induced AChR clustering in C2C12 cells. By 
contrast, IgG1-3 antibodies did not inhibit LRP4-MuSK binding but, surprisingly, 
did inhibit agrin-induced clustering. Moreover, both IgG4 and IgG1-3 
preparations dispersed agrin-independent AChR clusters in Dok7-overexpressing 
C2C12 cells. Thus interference by IgG4 antibodies of the LRP4-MuSK interaction 
will be one pathogenic mechanism of MuSK antibodies, but IgG1-3 MuSK antibodies 
will also contribute to the reduced AChR density and neuromuscular dysfunction 
in myasthenia patients with MuSK antibodies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080695
PMCID: PMC3820634
PMID: 24244707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and have the following conflicts. The University of Oxford 
holds the following patent for MuSK antibody for diagnosis of myasthenia (with 
the late Dr. W. Hoch, University of Tuebingen) PCT/GB01/02661. Licensed to 
Athena Diagnostics USA who sublicensed to RSR Ltd in 2003; royalties to Oxford 
University. AV is a named inventor and receives a share of royalties. AV also 
receives consulting fees (5K pa) from Athena Diagnostics. This does not alter 
the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials. The other authors have declared that no competing interests exist.