---
reference_id: "PMID:40647396"
title: "NPM1-Mutated AML: Deciphering the Molecular and Clinical Puzzle in the Era of Novel Treatment Strategies."
authors:
- Diamantidis MD
- Vlachou MS
- Katsikavela A
- Kalomoiri S
- Bartzi V
- Ikonomou G
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/cancers17132095
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NPM1-Mutated AML: Deciphering the Molecular and Clinical Puzzle in the Era of Novel Treatment Strategies.
**Authors:** Diamantidis MD, Vlachou MS, Katsikavela A, Kalomoiri S, Bartzi V, Ikonomou G
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers17132095](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers17132095)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2025 Jun 23;17(13):2095. doi: 10.3390/cancers17132095.

NPM1-Mutated AML: Deciphering the Molecular and Clinical Puzzle in the Era of 
Novel Treatment Strategies.

Diamantidis MD(1), Vlachou MS(1), Katsikavela A(1), Kalomoiri S(2), Bartzi V(3), 
Ikonomou G(4).

Author information:
(1)Thalassemia and Sickle Cell Disease Unit, Department of Hematology, General 
Hospital of Larissa, 41221 Larissa, Greece.
(2)Department of Hematology-Lymphoma, Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, 
Evangelismos General Hospital, 10676 Athens, Greece.
(3)First Department of Propaedeutic Internal Medicine, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, Laikon General Hospital, 11527 Athens, Greece.
(4)Thalassemia and Sickle Cell Disease Prevention Unit, General Hospital of 
Larissa, 41221 Larissa, Greece.

The aberrant localization of the mutated nucleophosmin (NPM1) protein in the 
cytoplasm is the hallmark of the development of acute myeloid leukemia (AML); 
the gene, located in the nucleolus, codes for a protein that normally shuttles 
between the nucleus and the cytoplasm of the normal hematopoietic cells. 
Patients harboring NPM1 mutations are diagnosed as having NPM1-mutated AMLs, 
which are types of leukemia with distinct clinical and laboratory 
characteristics. The essential diagnostics for investigating NPM1-mutated AMLs, 
the interactions with concomitant mutations affecting prognosis and the 
therapeutic interventions that the treatment of such patients requires are 
discussed in this review. Novel investigational agents in current clinical 
trials are also highlighted, along with the roles of exportin 1 (XPO1), 
menin-KMT2A inhibitors and immunotherapy in NPM1-mutated AMLs. This review 
focuses on critically evaluating the available data and aims to reveal the 
secrets of NPM1-mutated AMLs.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers17132095
PMCID: PMC12248482
PMID: 40647396

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.