---
reference_id: "PMID:29556093"
title: "Hypertension with diabetes mellitus: physiology and pathology."
authors:
- Ohishi M
journal: Hypertens Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41440-018-0034-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertension with diabetes mellitus: physiology and pathology.
**Authors:** Ohishi M
**Journal:** Hypertens Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41440-018-0034-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41440-018-0034-4)

## Content

1. Hypertens Res. 2018 Jun;41(6):389-393. doi: 10.1038/s41440-018-0034-4. Epub
2018  Mar 19.

Hypertension with diabetes mellitus: physiology and pathology.

Ohishi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine and Hypertension, Graduate School of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan. 
ohishi@m2.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.

Elevated blood pressure is closely related to increased circulatory fluid volume 
and peripheral vascular resistance. Patients with diabetes mellitus experience 
increased peripheral artery resistance caused by vascular remodeling and 
increased body fluid volume associated with insulin resistance-induced 
hyperinsulinemia and hyperglycemia. Both of these mechanisms elevate systemic 
blood pressure. Thus, fully understanding the pathophysiology of hypertension in 
diabetes mellitus requires knowing the natural history of type 2 diabetes. 
Patients exhibit hyperinsulinemia with insulin resistance due to impaired 
glucose tolerance and early-stage diabetes. Hypertension occurs because of 
increased body fluid volume. After reaching mid-stage diabetes the vascular 
remodeling has progressed and peripheral vascular resistance also contributes to 
hypertension. Moreover, vascular remodeling strongly influences diabetic 
complications. Specifically, afferent arteriolar remodeling during diabetic 
nephropathy leads to increased glomerular pressure. Thus, treatment with a 
renin-angiotensin system inhibitor that promotes renal damage regression is 
critical to lowering the systemic blood pressure and dilating efferent 
arterioles to reduce glomerular pressure.

DOI: 10.1038/s41440-018-0034-4
PMID: 29556093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]