---
reference_id: "PMID:38637335"
title: "Application of metagenomic next-generation sequencing in the diagnosis of Bartonella neuroretinitis: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Li P
- Qian Z
- Tao Y
journal: J Ophthalmic Inflamm Infect
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12348-024-00387-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Application of metagenomic next-generation sequencing in the diagnosis of Bartonella neuroretinitis: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Li P, Qian Z, Tao Y
**Journal:** J Ophthalmic Inflamm Infect (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12348-024-00387-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12348-024-00387-0)

## Content

1. J Ophthalmic Inflamm Infect. 2024 Apr 19;14(1):17. doi: 
10.1186/s12348-024-00387-0.

Application of metagenomic next-generation sequencing in the diagnosis of 
Bartonella neuroretinitis: a case report and literature review.

Li P(#)(1), Qian Z(#)(2)(3), Tao Y(#)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Hubei, China. lipengcheng72@126.com.
(2)Beijing GIANTMED Medical Diagnostics Lab, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, No. 8, South Road of Worker's Stadium Chaoyang District, Beijing, 
100020, China.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, No. 8, South Road of Worker's Stadium Chaoyang District, Beijing, 
100020, China. taoyong@bjcyh.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Cat-scratch disease (CSD) is caused by Bartonella henselae 
infection. In atypical cases of CSD, pathogen determination is challenging. We 
report a case of Bartonella neuroretinitis with neither a clear history of 
scratches nor typical general symptoms. The diagnosis was made using metagenomic 
next-generation sequencing (mNGS), a high-throughput sequencing technology.
CASE PRESENTATION: A female patient presented to the ophthalmologist with 
complaint of blurred vision in her right eye. Although with history of raising a 
cat, she reported no clear history of scratches or typical general symptoms, 
except a fever of unknown origin which resolved spontaneously. The best 
corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of the right eye was count fingers. Fundus 
examination showed optic disc oedema, macular exudates and inferior exudative 
retinal detachment. Laboratory examination results showed increased value of 
serum C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Ocular involvement 
of toxoplasmosis, syphilis and tuberculosis were excluded. To identify the 
possible causative pathogen of the disease, mNGS of aqueous humour sample was 
performed and 521 reads of B. henselae were identified. Serological test results 
further showed a positive immunoglobulin G (IgG) titre of 1:64. Taking the 
contact history, clinical manifestations, mNGS and serological results into 
consideration, the diagnosis of Bartonella neuroretinitis (ocular CSD) was made. 
After appropriate treatment, the BCVA of the right eye improved to 20/25 in the 
last follow-up. Fundus examination showed a normal optic disc and macula, and 
the exudates had reduced.
CONCLUSION: mNGS, a fast and unbiased method, can be used to detect B. henselae 
(if present) in intraocular fluid samples.; however, the results should be 
interpreted together with the clinical symptoms and other auxiliary test 
results.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12348-024-00387-0
PMCID: PMC11026355
PMID: 38637335

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.