---
reference_id: "PMID:35454180"
title: "Aquaporin-4 in Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorders: A Target of Autoimmunity in the Central Nervous System."
authors:
- Abe Y
- Yasui M
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/biom12040591
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aquaporin-4 in Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorders: A Target of Autoimmunity in the Central Nervous System.
**Authors:** Abe Y, Yasui M
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom12040591](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom12040591)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2022 Apr 17;12(4):591. doi: 10.3390/biom12040591.

Aquaporin-4 in Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorders: A Target of Autoimmunity 
in the Central Nervous System.

Abe Y(1)(2), Yasui M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 
160-8582, Japan.
(2)Keio University Global Research Institute, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan.

Since the discovery of a specific autoantibody in patients with neuromyelitis 
optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) in 2004, the water channel aquaporin-4 (AQP4) 
has attracted attention as a target of autoimmune diseases of the central 
nervous system. In NMOSD, the autoantibody (NMO-IgG) binds to the extracellular 
loops of AQP4 as expressed in perivascular astrocytic end-feet and disrupts 
astrocytes in a complement-dependent manner. NMO-IgG is an excellent marker for 
distinguishing the disease from other inflammatory demyelinating diseases, such 
as multiple sclerosis. The unique higher-order structure of AQP4-called 
orthogonal arrays of particles (OAPs)-as well as its subcellular localization 
may play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of the disease. Recent studies have 
also demonstrated complement-independent cytotoxic effects of NMO-IgG. 
Antibody-induced endocytosis of AQP4 has been suggested to be involved in this 
mechanism. This review focuses on the binding properties of antibodies that 
recognize the extracellular region of AQP4 and the characteristics of AQP4 that 
are implicated in the pathogenesis of NMOSD.

DOI: 10.3390/biom12040591
PMCID: PMC9030581
PMID: 35454180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding for the research from Suntory Global 
Innovation Center Ltd. (M.Y.).