---
reference_id: "PMID:30513356"
title: Wnt Signaling in vascular eye diseases.
authors:
- Wang Z
- Liu CH
- Huang S
- Chen J
journal: Prog Retin Eye Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2018.11.008
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Retinal Diseases/physiopathology
- Retinal Vessels/physiopathology
- Wnt Signaling Pathway/physiology
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Wnt Signaling in vascular eye diseases.
**Authors:** Wang Z, Liu CH, Huang S, Chen J
**Journal:** Prog Retin Eye Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.preteyeres.2018.11.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.preteyeres.2018.11.008)

## Content

1. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2019 May;70:110-133. doi:
10.1016/j.preteyeres.2018.11.008.  Epub 2018 Dec 1.

Wnt Signaling in vascular eye diseases.

Wang Z(1), Liu CH(1), Huang S(1), Chen J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, United States.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, United States. Electronic 
address: Jing.Chen@childrens.harvard.edu.

The Wnt signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in vascular morphogenesis in 
various organs including the eye. Wnt ligands and receptors are key regulators 
of ocular angiogenesis both during the eye development and in vascular eye 
diseases. Wnt signaling participates in regulating multiple vascular beds in the 
eye including regression of the hyaloid vessels, and development of structured 
layers of vasculature in the retina. Loss-of-function mutations in Wnt signaling 
components cause rare genetic eye diseases in humans such as Norrie disease, and 
familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR) with defective ocular vasculature. 
On the other hand, experimental studies in more prevalent vascular eye diseases, 
such as wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD), diabetic retinopathy (DR), 
retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), and corneal neovascularization, suggest that 
aberrantly increased Wnt signaling is one of the causations for pathological 
ocular neovascularization, indicating the potential of modulating Wnt signaling 
to ameliorate pathological angiogenesis in eye diseases. This review 
recapitulates the key roles of the Wnt signaling pathway during ocular vascular 
development and in vascular eye diseases, and pharmaceutical approaches 
targeting the Wnt signaling as potential treatment options.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2018.11.008
PMCID: PMC6545170
PMID: 30513356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

The retina is one of the most metabolically active tissues in the body with
high-level consumption of nutrients and oxygen. As these high metabolic demands
drive the formation of blood vessels in developing eyes, abnormal retinal metabolic
changes in eye diseases often precede and trigger vascular pathologies (Joyal et al., 2018; Selvam et al., 2018). The transient fetal vasculature of
vitreous develops during early gestation, providing nutrients and oxygen to
developing lens and retina until the retinal vasculature forms and gradually
replaces the role of the fetal vasculature, which then regresses by apoptosis,
usually before birth in humans (Lutty and McLeod,
2018). When fully developed, the adult eyes of most mammals are
vascularized with two distinct and well-organized vascular networks—the
retinal and choroidal vessels (Figure 1). The
retinal vessels nourish the inner two-thirds of the retina, whereas the choroidal
capillary network adjacent to Bruch’s membrane supplies the outer third of
retina, mostly the avascular photoreceptor layer. Vascular formation occurs via
either vasculogenesis or angiogenesis. Vasculogenesis begins with clustering and
differentiation of the endothelial precursor cells into primitive vessels, defining
the patterns of the major vessels and the vessels of endoderm-derived organs (Noden, 1989; Pardanaud et al., 1989). On the other hand, angiogenesis, the formation
of new vessels sprouting from exiting vessels, plays an important role in the
vascularization of ectoderm- and mesoderm-derived organs such as the brain, retina
and kidney (Risau, 1997). Since retinal and
choroidal neovascularization are major causes of vision loss in eye diseases, the
molecular basis for ocular angiogenesis has been intensively studied over the last
several decades. These research studies have identified numerous angiogenic factors
that regulate ocular angiogenesis both during development and in vascular eye
diseases (Chen et al., 2016a; Gariano and Gardner, 2005; Selvam et al., 2018), with hypoxia and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) being the most prominent (Campochiaro, 2015; Das
and McGuire, 2003; Penn et al.,
2008; Witmer et al., 2003). Yet
advances in ocular genetics and experimental studies have also begun to uncover
additional signaling pathways other than VEGF, such as Wnt signaling pathway, which
may influence ocular vascular development and impact vascular eye diseases.

Since it was first discovered by Nusse and Varmus in the early 1980s (Nusse and Varmus, 1982), the Wnt signaling
pathway has been extensively studied in embryogenesis, cancer, bone diseases,
neuropsychiatric diseases and cardiovascular diseases (Logan and Nusse, 2004). Genetic studies linked Wnt
signaling mutations with rare inherited vascular eye diseases, such as Norrie
disease and familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR), suggesting a pivotal role
of Wnt signaling in developmental ocular angiogenesis. Experimental studies in
animal models also implicated Wnt signaling in other more prevalent vascular eye
diseases, including neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD), cornea
neovascularization (NV), diabetic retinopathy (DR), and retinopathy of prematurity
(ROP). Together these vascular eye diseases may account for more than half of global
blindness (Parmalee and Kitajewski, 2008).
This review summarizes recent studies on genetics, pathogenesis, and potential
experimental therapies related to the Wnt signaling pathway in ocular angiogenesis
with a focus on abnormal ocular angiogenesis associated with either deficient or
aberrant Wnt signaling.

The Wnt signaling pathway is fundamentally important in both development and
diseases. Wnt proteins are highly conserved in many species, including humans and
Drosophila, with the name “Wnt” coined as a
combination of a segment polarity gene “Wingless” in
Drosophila and pro-oncogene
“Int1” in humans. Characteristic of secreted
glycoproteins, Wnts are cysteine-rich, highly hydrophobic, and contain a cleavable
N-terminal signal peptide to guide secretion (Nusse
and Clevers, 2017). In mammals, there are 19 different Wnt proteins with
varying lengths of approximately 350-400 amino acids. Wnts activate intracellular
signaling pathways by binding to one of several frizzled (FZD) family receptors and,
in most cases, a co-receptor, such as lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5)
or LRP6 (MacDonald et al., 2009; Nusse and Varmus, 1992).

In general, there are two types of Wnt signaling pathways: the canonical
Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, which acts through β-catenin as a
transcriptional coactivator, and the non-canonical, β-catenin independent Wnt
signaling pathway, which includes the Wnt/Ca2+ pathway and the planar
cell polarity (PCP) pathway (MacDonald et al.,
2009). Of the two, the canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway
is the most well-characterized and elucidated, and the mechanisms underlying
non-canonical receptor activation are not well understood. Several studies support a
role of the non-canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway in vascular
development through regulation of VEGF availability, and vascular remodeling in
response to sheer stress (Franco et al.,
2016; Ju et al., 2010; Korn et al., 2014; Stefater et al., 2011). In addition, non-canonical Wnt
signaling may also inhibit the canonical Wnt pathway in a receptor- and
ligand-dependent manner. For example, the non-canonical ligands Wnt5a and Wnt11 may
inhibit the canonical Wnt pathway, in a Ca2+-dependent and -independent
manner, respectively (Maye et al., 2004;
Mikels and Nusse, 2006). As such, the
canonical and non-canonical Wnt pathways are considered to interact as an integrated
signaling network rather than acting mutually exclusively (Reis and Liebner, 2013). This review focuses on the most
extensively studied canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway (referred to
here as the Wnt signaling pathway), which plays an indispensable role in
developmental and pathological ocular angiogenesis.

The canonical Wnt signaling pathway acts in a two-state mode: off-state
(inactive, without Wnts) and on-state (active, with Wnts). In the absence of Wnt
ligands (off-state), β-catenin is recruited to a destruction complex
consisting of axin, adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), casein kinase 1α
(CK1α), and glycogen synthase kinase-3 β (GSK3β). The
sequential phosphorylation of β-catenin by CK1α and GSK3β
creates a binding site for the ubiquitin E3-ligase βTrCP, targeting
β-catenin for ubiquitination and degradation by proteasome in the
cytoplasm. In the “on-state”, available Wnt ligands bind to their
receptors FZDs and LRP5 (or LRP6), leading to the phosphorylation and activation
of dishevelled (DVL) proteins. Active DVL recruits axin to the cell membrane,
induces axin degradation, and thereby inhibits GSK3β activity. Without
phosphorylation, β-catenin is stabilized and translocated into the
nucleus where it binds to lymphoid enhancer factor/T-cell factor (LEF/TCF)
transcription factors to activate transcription of Wnt target genes (Figure 2) (Nusse and Clevers, 2017).

The number of recognized Wnt target genes currently amounts to more than
100 (Staal et al., 2004; Willert et al., 2002), including the
well-known Yamanaka factors c-Myc (He et al.,
1998), Oct4 (Cole et al.,
2008), Sox2 (Van Raay et al.,
2005), the key cell cycle regulator cyclin D (Tetsu and McCormick, 1999), and angiogenic genes such
as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) (Zhang et al., 2001), twist (Howe et
al., 2003; Li et al., 2014),
and jagged1 (Rodilla et al., 2009). More
recently, genome-wide approaches such as RNA-seq and ChIP-seq allow researchers
to identify more potential Wnt target genes in a tissue-specific manner (Hatzis et al., 2008; Iyer et al., 2018; Schuijers et al., 2014). As such, the broad range of Wnt target
genes reflects the diverse roles of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway
in the regulation of many biological processes throughout development and
disease pathogenesis.

In embryonic developmental stages, the Wnt/β-catenin pathway plays
a crucial role in regulating stem cell fate decision, cell proliferation,
differentiation, and migration (Sato et al.,
2004; ten Berge et al., 2008;
ten Berge et al., 2011). Numerous
studies have shown that systemic homozygous knockouts of most key Wnt components
in mice are embryonic or perinatal lethal, such as Wnt1 (McMahon and Bradley, 1990), Wnt2 (Monkley et al., 1996), Wnt3 (Liu et al., 1999), APC (Robanus-Maandag et al., 2010), β-catenin
(Huelsken et al., 2000),
GSK3β (Hoeflich et al., 2000),
Axin1/2 (Zeng et al., 1997), and TCF4
(Korinek et al., 1998). On the other
hand, studies using tissue/cell type-specific or inducible knockout model of Wnt
signaling components unveiled that, in adults, Wnt pathway also critically
regulates tissue homeostasis (Clevers et al.,
2014; Kretzschmar and Clevers,
2017), angiogenesis (Dejana,
2010), and inflammation (Ma and
Hottiger, 2016). For example, the Wnt/β-catenin pathway is
essential for intestinal homeostasis (Clevers et
al., 2014), hair follicle cycling in skin tissue (Lim and Nusse, 2013), and mammary gland plasticity
(Alexander et al., 2012).

Since the initial discovery that identified Wnt1 as a proto-oncogene in
cancer, a growing number of studies have linked disruption of
Wnt/β-catenin signaling (through either germinal and/or somatic
mutations of Wnt pathway components) with many diseases. Loss-of-function
mutations in Wnts, LRPs, and FZDs cause developmental disorders including eye
and bone defects, whereas upregulated Wnt/β-catenin signaling often leads
to various cancers and is also associated with high bone density, insulin
sensitivity and diabetes (Table 1). Table 1 summarizes Wnt-related diseases in
organs other than the eyes, whereas later sections of this review will discuss
Wnt-related eye diseases specifically in greater details. To name a few,
gain-of-function LRP5 mutations cause high bone density (Boyden et al., 2002; Lara-Castillo and Johnson, 2015; Little et al., 2002; Van Wesenbeeck et al., 2003), and loss-of-function mutations in
LRP5 leads to low bone mass disorder (Ai et al., 2005; Gong et al., 2001b). WNT1 mutation causes
osteogenesis imperfecta (Fahiminiya et al.,
2013; Pyott et al., 2013).
Other rare disorders associated with loss of Wnt signaling exert additional
negative effects on intellectual development such as in Robinow syndrome (Person et al., 2010; White et al., 2018), craniofacial development and
odontogenesis in Williams syndrome (Wang et
al., 1997), and familial tooth agenesis (Lammi et al., 2004), respectively. Upregulated Wnt
signaling resulting from mutations in APC, β-catenin, and axin2 was found
in colorectal cancer (Bass et al., 2011;
Liu et al., 2000; Morin et al., 1997; Nishisho et al., 1991), hepatocellular carcinoma(de La Coste et al., 1998; Huang et al., 1999; Satoh et al., 2000), lung cancer (Sunaga et al., 2001), and pancreatic cancer (Tanaka et al., 2001). Contrarily, skin cancer shows
inactivated Wnt signaling with LEF1 mutation (Takeda et al., 2006). Other diseases are also linked with Wnt
signaling abnormality, such as familial adenomatous polyposis (APC mutation,
upregulated Wnt signaling) (Kinzler et al.,
1991), type II diabetes (TCF4 mutation, down-regulated Wnt signaling)
(Florez et al., 2006; Grant et al., 2006), coronary artery
disease (LRP6 mutation, down-regulated Wnt signaling) (Mani et al., 2007), and late-onset Alzheimer (LRP6
mutation, down-regulated Wnt signaling) (De
Ferrari et al., 2007). Given the strong link between
Wnt/β-catenin signaling and diseases, many of the Wnt components and
regulators are promising pharmaceutical targets by small-molecule inhibitors and
activators, particularly for osteoporosis and cancer therapeutics (Anastas and Moon, 2013; He et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2017; McBride et al.,
2014).

In the developing eye, Wnt signaling is important for proper formation
of both the anterior segment of the eye and neurovascular retina, which has been
summarized in several previous review papers. Wnt signaling is tightly regulated
in multiple developmental processes including the lens, the retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE), the ciliary margin, the dorso-ventral patterning in the optic
cup, and the retinal vascular system (Drenser,
2016; Fujimura, 2016). Wnt
signaling regulates RPE adhesion, morphogenesis, and pigmentation, and
specifically pertains to retinal disease during aging such as age-related
macular degeneration (AMD) (Burke, 2008).
Crucial effects of Wnt signaling were found in lens development, morphogenesis
and fiber differentiation (Bassnett and Sikic,
2017; West-Mays et al.,
2010). Wnt signaling pathway in developing retinal vascularization has
been linked to ROP and fetal development (Drenser, 2016). Moreover, the emerging role of Wnt signaling in
differentiating Muller glial cells to photoreceptors represents an exciting new
direction in retinal regeneration (Yao et al.,
2016; Yao et al., 2018). This
review focuses on the Wnt signaling pathway in ocular vascularization both in
developmental context and in genetic and non-genetic vascular eye diseases.

The essential role of Wnt signaling in the neuro-retina is evidenced by
the broad distribution of conventional Wnt ligands in the retinal cells (de Iongh et al., 2006). Expression of
multiple Wnt ligands has been identified in the developing mouse retina (Liu et al., 2003; Yi et al., 2007). Wnt1, −3, −5a,
−5b, −7b, and −13 (Wnt2b) are expressed in embryonic and
fetal retina, often in a dynamic central-peripheral expression pattern in the
neuroblast layer, while Wnt5a, −5b, −10a, and −13 are
expressed similarly in the adult retina (Liu et
al., 2006; Yi et al., 2007).
In the differentiating postnatal (P7) mouse retina, Wnt5a, Wnt5b, and Wnt13 are
expressed in the inner nuclear layer in amacrine cells. Wnt13 (Wnt2b) is
expressed predominantly in the RPE, and is also detected in the ganglion cells
along with the inner retina (Iwai-Takekoshi et
al., 2018). Similar expression patterns for Wnt5b and Wnt13 are
detected in the adult retina (Liu et al.,
2003). However, it was only after the discovery of the unconventional
Wnt ligand, norrin, that the role of Wnt signaling in retinal vasculature was
finally elucidated.

Although studies in Norrie disease implicated norrin as the protein
product of the disease gene in 1990s (Berger et
al., 1992), it was not until 2004 that a seminal study characterized
norrin as a FZD4 ligand and linked norrin with Wnt signaling and retinal
angiogenesis (Xu et al., 2004). Norrin
is encoded by the NDP (Norrie disease protein) gene, localized
at the short arm of the X chromosome (Bleeker-Wagemakers et al., 1985). As a cysteine-rich secreted
protein, norrin belongs to the superfamily of growth factors containing a
cysteine knot motif (Meitinger et al.,
1993). Although norrin has no sequence homology or structural
similarity to Wnt proteins, it mimics the receptor recognition characteristic of
Wnt proteins (Chang et al., 2015),
displays high specificity of binding affinity for FZD4 (but not other FZDs) with
nanomolar affinity, and is capable of activating the β-catenin-dependent
canonical Wnt signaling pathway in an LRP5 (but not LRP6)-dependent manner
(Xu et al., 2004), to exert a key
function in retinal vasculature development (Ye
et al., 2010). Norrin is secreted mainly by Müller cells
(Seitz et al., 2010; Ye et al., 2011), and partially by
endothelial cells in the retina (Lee et al.,
2013) and is also found in retinal macrophages (Chen et al., 2011b). A recent study discovered that
norrin is a potent trigger of FZD4 ubiquitination and induces internalization of
the norrin receptor complex into the endo-lysosomal compartment (Zhang et al., 2017a). Inhibition of
ubiquitinated cargo transport strongly impaired norrin/FZD4 signaling and
recapitulated central nervous system (CNS) angiogenesis and blood-CNS-barrier
defects caused by impaired vascular β-catenin signaling in mice (Zhang et al., 2017a). In addition,
norrin/FZD4 signaling also requires another membrane protein, tetraspanin 12
(TSPAN12), which acts as an additional co-receptor to amplify Wnt signaling
(Junge et al., 2009; Lai et al., 2017; Luhmann et al., 2005). Together the
norrin/FZD4/LRP5/TSPAN12 pathway exhibits unique and indispensable functions in
governing retinal angiogenesis (Ohlmann and
Tamm, 2012).

Angiogenesis requires coordinated regulation of many extracellular and
intracellular signals. The Wnt signaling pathway is one of the key regulatory
systems in coordinating endothelial cell behavior to govern vascular
morphogenesis (Franco et al., 2009; van de Schans et al., 2008; Zerlin et al., 2008). Various Wnt ligands
may act as a short-range paracrine signal to mediate many aspects of vascular
endothelial cell function and homeostasis. Wnt1 increases proliferation and
capillary stability in vitro (Cheng et al., 2003; Goodwin et al.,
2007; Wright et al., 1999);
Wnt2 is important for endothelial cell differentiation and tubular formation
(Klein et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2007); Wnt3a promotes
proliferation, migration, differentiation, and survival of endothelial cells
(de Jesus Perez et al., 2009; Nimmagadda et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2006); and Wnt7b secreted from
macrophages mediates endothelial cell apoptosis in hyaloid vessel regression
(Lobov et al., 2005).

The importance of Wnt signaling in the development of vasculature is
further evidenced by the high expression levels of various frizzled receptors,
LRP5/6, and Wnt factors in endothelial cells (Goodwin et al., 2006). Activation of Wnt signaling was discovered
during embryonic development in many types of vessels (Corada et al., 2010). Endothelial-specific deletion
of β-catenin impairs the development of the embryonic vasculature,
leading to defective vascular remodeling and diffuse hemorrhages, thereby
resulting in early lethality in utero (Cattelino et al., 2003); this suggests that Wnt
signaling is an important early step of angiogenesis and that loss-of-function
of Wnt signaling impairs angiogenesis. Within the eye, insights into the role of
Wnt signaling in ocular angiogenesis were initially revealed mostly by genetic
studies in rare inherited eye diseases with ocular vascular abnormalities; thus,
in an effort to further understand the role of Wnt signaling in vascular
development and vascular eye diseases, it is necessary to introduce the
development of ocular vasculature.

As a specialized sensory organ consisting of multiple tissues, the eye
requires blood supply to ensure normal development and visual function. The
development of ocular vasculature depends largely on the ocular tissue demands for
oxygen and other nutrients that promote retinal vascular expansion and regression of
hyaloid vasculature.

During embryogenesis, the retina is nourished by a transient embryonic
vascular bed known as the hyaloid vasculature. This structure develops during
embryonic and fetal stages, starting at around 4-6 weeks gestation in humans, to
provide blood supply to the growing eye (Lutty
and McLeod, 2018). The hyaloid artery (HA) sprouts from the primitive
dorsal ophthalmic artery, passing through the fetal fissure into the optic cup
(Anand-Apte, 2011). The hyaloid
vascular system, a dense intraocular circulatory network comprising the vasa
hyaloidea propria (VHP), tunica vasculosa lentis (TVL), and pupillary membrane
(PM), transiently nourishes the primary vitreous, immature retina and lens. The
VHP branches are derived from the HA, and then anteriorly pass through the
vitreous to the lens. The TVL is an arborization of HA that cups the posterior
surface of the lens capsule, and the PM is an anastomosis of the TVL and the
anterior ciliary arteries that cover the anterior surface of the lens (Anand-Apte, 2011; Hobbs, 2013) (Figure
3A). While lacking veins, the hyaloid vasculature accomplishes its
venous drain through the choroidal veins. Along with the lens development, the
TVL reaches the anterior surface of the lens and forms a network of vessels in
the PM (Fruttiger, 2007; Hartnett, 2013; Saint-Geniez and D’Amore, 2004). In the human
embryo, the hyaloid vascular system is complete at approximately the fourth
month of gestation and provides nutrients to the developing eye before the
complete formation of the retinal vascular system. Afterwards, the regression of
the hyaloid vessels starts, coinciding with the development of the retinal
vasculature at this stage (Figure 3B)
(Anand-Apte, 2011).

During embryonic development, the hyaloid vascular system plays a
pivotal role in providing necessary nutrition and oxygen to the retina when the
retinal vasculature is not yet fully developed. In humans, the hyaloid
vasculature starts to regress when the first retinal vessels appear in
mid-gestation. The regression starts with atrophy of the VHP, followed by
capillaries of the TVL and PM, and, lastly the HA (Anand-Apte, 2011; Hobbs, 2013). The vessel occlusion by macrophages is an important
step for initiating atrophy during the regression process(Anand-Apte, 2011). The complete loss of hyaloid
circulation finishes at approximately 35–36 weeks of gestation (Hobbs, 2013). As the hyaloid vasculature
regresses, the primary vitreous retracts, and the collagen fibers and other
components of the extracellular matrix are produced to form the secondary
vitreous. By the sixth month of gestation, the posterior segment is mainly
composed of the secondary vitreous, and the primary vitreous is reduced to a
small central structure extending from the optic disc to the posterior lens
surface, which is referred to as the Cloquet canal (Anand-Apte, 2011; Hobbs, 2013). In mice, where retinal vessel development occurs
postnatally, regression of the hyaloid vascular system begins after birth, from
about postnatal day 4, and finishes by approximately day 21 (Ito and Yoshioka, 1999) (Figure 3A).

Beginning at the fourth month of gestation in human embryo, the first
retinal vessels appear as solid endothelial cords sprouting from the optic nerve
head. By the sixth month of gestation, the vessels begin lumenization and extend
outward radially from the optic disk, migrating peripherally to the ora serrata
and the equator by the seventh to eighth month of gestation (Anand-Apte, 2011). Pericytes or mural cells are
absent from the developing retinal vessels until two months postnatal. The
retinal vascular pattern completely matures by the fifth month after birth
(Hildebrand G. D., 2011). The final
mature retinal vasculature is composed of three distinct layers of vessels: the
superficial capillary in the inner part of the nerve fiber layer, the
intermediate layer in the inner plexiform layer, and the deep vascular layers in
the outer plexiform layer (Figure 1) (Chen et al., 2016a; Dorrell et al., 2002; Liu et al., 2017)

Unlike in humans, where retinal vessels develop before birth, the
retinal vasculature in mice develops postnatally, which provides an ideal time
window for experimental studies. Retinal vessels sprout radically from the optic
nerve at postnatal day 1 and extend to the periphery in the superficial retina
around postnatal day 7-8. From P7 onward, the superficial capillaries start
sprouting vertically to form the deep vascular layer and then the intermediate
vascular plexus. The deep layer vasculature reaches the retinal periphery at
approximately P12, followed by the intermediate plexus between P12 and P15
(Figure 3B) (Chen et al., 2016a; Stahl et al., 2010; Watson et al.,
2012). With substantial remodeling and maturation, the retinal
vasculature of the mouse eye is completely developed at around 3 weeks postnatal
(Chen et al., 2016a; Stahl et al., 2010).

Studies on the retinal vasculature development over the last several
decades have enabled the discovery of basic cellular mechanisms underlying
vascular development, remodeling, and maturation. While vascular endothelium is
a key participant in guiding vascular growth front and the formation of the
blood retinal barrier (Bharadwaj et al.,
2013; Dorrell and Friedlander,
2006), close interaction of vascular endothelial cells with
surrounding neurons, glia, and inflammatory cells is needed to allow coordinated
process of vascular growth, remodeling, and repair (Moran et al., 2016; Selvam et al., 2018; Sun and Smith,
2018). During superficial retinal vessel development, as retinal
neurons and glial cells differentiate and mature, their metabolic demands
increase, creating a radial central-to-peripheral gradient of hypothesized
“physiologic hypoxia” that leads to the development of new vessels
from the center towards the periphery of the retina (Chan-Ling et al., 1995) (Figure 3C). After new vessels have formed, bringing
oxygen and alleviating hypoxia, the vascular growth continues radially towards
the peripheral retina (Gariano and Gardner,
2005).

The remarkable structural alignment among retinal vessels, astrocytes,
and neurons suggests their potential contribution as angiogenic guidance
mechanisms. Prior to the formation of retinal blood vessels, astrocyte glial
cells migrate into the retina from the optic nerve head during embryonic
development (Chu et al., 2001). Astrocyte
growth in the retina follows the path of radially oriented ganglion cell axons
in a platelet-derived growth factor-dependent manner (Dorrell et al., 2002; Gariano et al., 1996) and spatially and temporally
overlaps the pattern of vascular growth. It was initially hypothesized that
astrocyte-secreted VEGF may guide the filopodia of sprouting endothelial cells
(Dorrell et al., 2002; Gariano et al., 1996; Gerhardt et al., 2003; Watanabe and Raff, 1988) (Figure 3C), yet more recent findings found no
developmental vascular disruption after astrocyte-specific deletion of VEGF
(Scott et al., 2010; Weidemann et al., 2010). This suggests
that astrocytic VEGF is likely more critical for vascular maintenance in
pathologic conditions than in development. Other cells surrounding blood
vessels, such as retinal neurons and inflammatory cells, may also be capable of
governing retinal vascular development. Indeed, neuronal deletion of VEGFR2 in
the retina leads to misdirected retinal angiogenesis, suggesting that retinal
neurons may titrate VEGF availability to limit angiogenesis (Okabe et al., 2014).

Within the vascular endothelium, the growth and expansion of the
superficial vessels depend largely on the interaction between stalk cells, which
are mainly responsible for endothelial cell proliferation, and the more motile
tip cells, which use filopodia to sense the growth factor gradients to lead cell
migration. The NOTCH pathway is crucial in establishing the tip cell phenotype
and balancing of the tip/stalk cells in a toggle mechanism tightly integrated
with VEGF signaling (Figure 3D) (Benedito et al., 2009; Blanco and Gerhardt, 2013; Hellstrom et al., 2007). Once the superficial
vascular layer is fully developed, vertical sprouts start to form and dive
towards the outer retina, first to develop the deep vascular layers and then the
intermediate vascular layers afterwards (Figure
3B). Development of these deeper vascular layers, however, appears to
rely on mechanisms separate from VEGF and NOTCH, with Wnt signaling emerging as
one of the most critical pathways based on observations from studies of both
human genetics and experimental models.

The choroid, a thin and highly vascularized membrane between the retina
and the sclera, covers the posterior five-sixths of the human eye. Unlike the
retinal vasculature, the choroidal vasculature arises from posterior ciliary
arteries, which originate from the ophthalmic artery (Hartnett, 2013). Starting from the fourth week of
gestation in humans, the precursors of the choriocapillaris begin to
differentiate and form endothelial cells adjacent to the RPE, followed by the
formation of a large plexus of primitive vessels and the extension of vascular
plexus along the entire exterior surface of the optic cup (Hartnett, 2013; Saint-Geniez and D’Amore, 2004). By the eighth week, the
choroidal capillary network is organized through connections to the short
posterior ciliary arteries. The choroidal vasculature matures by the fourth
month of gestation (Anand-Apte, 2011). As
a sinusoidal vascular plexus with highly fenestrated endothelium, the
choriocapillaris is the site of the greatest blood flow in the body (Henkind
1979), as it provides 65-85% of the blood volume in the eye. Through diffusion,
it nourishes the outer portion of the retina (Bela Anand-Apte, 2011), including photoreceptors and RPE, as well as
the fovea, which contains only photoreceptors for high acuity central vision and
is devoid of vessels and other retinal neurons.

Several inter-related inherited eye diseases, including Norrie disease,
familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR), osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome
(OPPG), and Coats’ disease, share common pathological features of disturbed
ocular angiogenesis. Studies on these diseases identified genetic variations
involving different components of the Wnt signaling pathway, such as the ligand
norrin or the receptors FZD4, LRP5, and TSPAN12. These studies substantially
enhanced our understanding of the role that Wnt signaling plays in ocular angiogenic
processes. A summary of ocular vascular diseases related to genetic deficiency in
Wnt signaling is listed in Table 2.

Norrie disease is an X-linked recessive disorder, hence affecting
primarily male infants, with females diagnosed only in very rare occasions.
Norrie disease is a sporadic disease with only about 400 cases reported. First
described by a Danish ophthalmologist, Gordon Norrie in 1927 (Andersen and Warburg, 1961), the responsible disease
gene (Norrie Disease Protein or NDP), which encodes norrin, was
not discovered until much later, in the 1990s (Berger et al., 1992). Mutations in NDP cause
inactivation of the Wnt signaling pathway (Xu
et al., 2004). Norrie disease is characterized by the ocular
manifestations of incomplete peripheral retinal vasculature, lack of deep
retinal vascular layers, and persistent hyaloid vessels (Berger et al., 1992; Drenser et al., 2007). Patients with the disease generally become
bilaterally blind with retinal scaring and retraction accompanied by persistent
hyaloid vessels. Histopathological abnormalities did not manifest in eyes of an
11-week old fetus with known NDP mutations (Parsons et al., 1992); however, retinal detachments
could be found in the late third trimester by obstetric ultrasonography (Redmond et al., 1993; Wu et al., 2017), suggesting that the disease process
in the eye likely occurs in late gestation. Other than ocular symptoms, about
50% of patients show some degree of progressive mental disorder, often with
psychotic features, and approximately one-third of patients develop
sensorineural deafness in the second decade of life. In addition, some patients
have more complex symptoms, including growth failure and seizures (Berger et al., 1992).

FEVR is another rare hereditary eye disorder with progressive vision
loss and was first described in 1969 (Criswick
and Schepens, 1969). Patients with FEVR show similar but milder and
more variable clinical presentations compared with Norrie disease, and the
prevalence for FEVR is higher than that in Norrie disease. Additionally, FEVR
can often be asymptomatic in patients and may thus go unreported. The symptoms
of FEVR can vary widely, including clinically asymptomatic, minimal vascular
changes in the peripheral retina, and extensive neovascularization, exudation,
and retinal detachments (Figure 4) (Yonekawa et al., 2015). This varying
degree of penetrance likely reflects in part the genetically heterogeneous
nature of FEVR. The inheritance patterns of FEVR include autosomal dominant,
autosomal recessive, and X-linked recessive forms, and they differ depending on
in part on the involved genes (de Crecchio et
al., 1998; Laqua, 1980; Shastry et al., 1995). The autosomal
dominant form is the most common form associated with genetic mutations in
FZD4 (Robitaille et al.,
2002), LRP5 (Toomes
et al., 2004), and TSPAN12 (Poulter et al., 2010). Mutations in autosomal
recessive FEVR mostly occur in the region containing the gene for
LRP5 (Jiao et al.,
2004), whereas X-linked FEVR is largely due to mutations in the
NDP gene, similar to Norrie disease (Fullwood et al., 1993; Shastry et al., 1995). Each of these reflects
loss-of-function mutations, leading to pathological inactivation of the Wnt
signaling pathway, thereby hindering ocular vessel development.

OPPG is a rare autosomal recessive disorder which occurs approximately
in one in two million people (Neuhauser et al.,
1976), and is sometimes considered a special subtype of FEVR. The
disease is characterized by skeletal fragility, which is often recognized during
childhood, and by congenital or infancy-onset visual loss due to abnormal blood
vessel development in the eye. Affected individuals often have severe bone
thinning or osteoporosis, resulting in multiple fractures in bones including
vertebrae, and sometimes skull softening. The physical phenotype of OPPG often
resembles eye tumors (retinal glioma), hence the name pseudoglioma. Cognitive
impairment was also reported in ~25% of patients with OPPG. OPPG is
caused by inactivating mutations in LRP5 (Baron and Kneissel, 2013; Gong et al., 2001b), and hence inactivation of Wnt
signaling, which is essential for the development of both bone and retinas.

The LRP5 gene plays a crucial role in the osteogenesis,
with abnormalities linked to both loss- and gain-of-function mutations (Cui et al., 2011; Williams, 2017). Loss-of-function mutations in
LRP5 result in low bone mass disorder in OPPG (Ai et al., 2005; Gong et al., 2001b), while heterozygous missense
mutations in LRP5 have been observed in individuals with
dominantly inherited high bone mass, largely due to increased and uninhibited
Wnt signaling (Boyden et al., 2002; Lara-Castillo and Johnson, 2015; Little et al., 2002; Van Wesenbeeck et al., 2003). Moreover, studies have
found that LRP5 functions not only through the Wnt signaling pathway, but also
through other pathways including fatty acid β-oxidation enzyme
upregulation (Frey et al., 2015), and
Rac1 signaling upregulation to induce activation of mTORC2-AKT signaling in a
β-catenin-independent manner in osteoblasts (Esen et al., 2013). Given that Wnt signaling has
recently been shown to act in a GSK3β-dependent, but
β-catenin-independent manner to regulate the stability of numerous
proteins including Wnt signaling related proteins, metabolic enzymes, signaling
molecules and transcription factors (Huang et
al., 2015; Koch et al., 2015;
Xu et al., 2009), it is possible
that LRP5 regulates osteogenesis or potentially even angiogenesis through
multiple, cross-linked signaling pathways during development.

Another retinal vascular disease genetically linked to Wnt abnormalities
is Coats’ disease, or exudative retinitis. Children with Coats’
disease show progressive development of retinal vascular telangiectasia,
microaneurysms, extensive intraretinal and subretinal lipid exudates, and
possible exudative retinal detachments. Coats’ disease is unilateral in
~90% of the cases, which are mostly isolated, and affects predominantly
young males without other systemic symptoms. The genetic causes of the disease
are still largely unclear, although Black et al. demonstrated a
somatic mutation in the NDP that was not present within the
non-retinal tissue, indicating the possibility of a somatic, locally acquired
mutation contributing to this disease process (Black et al., 1999). More recently, Robitaille et
al. found that loss-of-function mutations of FZD4
may also contribute to Coats’ disease in an autosomal recessive way
(Robitaille et al., 2011), and Wu
et al. discovered haploinsufficiency of
RCBTB1 in both Coats’ disease and FEVR (Wu et al., 2016), which is associated with
β-catenin stabilization in norrin-Wnt signaling, further indicating the
link of Wnt/β-catenin signaling to vascular abnormalities in
Coats’ disease and vitreoretinopathies.

To study the pathogenesis of FEVR and Norrie disease, mice with genetic
knockout of diseased genes have been investigated. In both humans and mice, the
norrin/FZD4/LRP5 signaling pathway shows direct influence in developing retinal
vasculature, as mutations in NDP gene cause impaired outgrowth
of capillaries from the superficial vascular layer of the retina and lack of
intraretinal vessels (Luhmann et al.,
2005; Ohlmann et al., 2005;
Rehm et al., 2002; Richter et al., 1998). Moreover, the norrin-deficient
(Ndpy/−) mice modeling
Norrie disease reveals persistent hyaloid vessels, which fail to regress
postnatally (Rehm et al., 2002; Richter et al., 1998). Similar vascular
phenotypes were reported in related
Fzd4−/− and
Lrp5−/− mouse models of FEVR
(Kato et al., 2002; Xia et al., 2008; Xu
et al., 2004), indicating an essential function of
norrin-Wnt/β-catenin signaling in retinal vasculature development.

Together, mice with genetic deficiency in Lrp5
(Lrp5−/−), Ndp
(Ndpy/−),
Fzd4 (Fzd4−/−)
and Tspan12
(Tspan12−/−) all demonstrate
similar ocular vascular abnormalities resembling human phenotypes of FEVR and
Norrie disease (Chen et al., 2012; Gal et al., 2014; Hsieh et al., 2005; Kato et al., 2002; Luhmann et al.,
2005; Rehm et al., 2002;
Robitaille et al., 2002; Toomes et al., 2004; Xia et al., 2008; Xu
et al., 2004). Similar to
Lrp5−/− mice (Figure 5A-D) (Wang et
al., 2016), these Wnt-deficient mice all have delayed primary retinal
angiogenesis, with more sparse vascular coverage at an early stage of retinal
development (postnatal day 7), complete absence of secondary and tertiary
vasculature, and persistent hyaloid vessels in adults (Chen et al., 2011b; Chen et al., 2012; Wang et al.,
2016; Ye et al., 2009). The
absence of inner retinal vessels in
Ndpy/− and
Lrp5−/− mice results in consequent
retinal hypoxia, which induces increased Vegfa, and leads to
pathologic glomeruloid vascular structures in the superficial plexus (Luhmann et al., 2005; Rattner et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2016). The abnormal ocular vasculature
and the hypoxic microenvironment are associated with malfunction of inner
retinal neurons (Schmidt et al., 2008),
and hence impaired visual function in
Ndpy/−,
Fzd4−/− and
Lrp5−/− mice, as evidenced by
diminished b-wave in electroretinography (Beck
et al., 2017; Wang et al.,
2016; Xia et al., 2010; Ye et al., 2009). In addition to the
defects in retinal vessel growth,
Ndpy/− mice also have
defective vascular patterning in the inner ear, consistent with hearing loss in
mice and in humans with Norrie disease (Rehm et
al., 2002). Lrp5−/− mice
also have reduced bone mass, which reflects the abnormalities in osteoblast
growth as seen in OPPG patients (Gong et al.,
2001a).

Mutations in other Wnt signaling inhibitors, such as ERG and Apcdd1, may
cause vascular phenotypes resembling the Wnt-deficient mice. ERG is the ETS (E26
transformation-specific) related gene, which activates the Wnt pathway by
promoting β-catenin stability through signals mediated by VE-cadherin and
the Wnt receptor FZD4. ERG-deficient endothelial cells show decreased Wnt
signaling and defective vascular development in the retina, whereas
overexpression of ERG reduces permeability and increases stability of
VEGF-induced blood vessels (Birdsey et al.,
2015). Adenomatous polyposis coli downregulated 1 (APCDD1), a
membrane-bound glycoprotein and a downstream Wnt target, shows decreased mRNA
levels in both Ndpy/− and
Lrp5−/− retinas (Chen et al., 2012). It also functions as an inhibitor
of the Wnt signaling pathway by blocking the interaction between Wnt3a and LRP5
(Shimomura et al., 2010; Takahashi et al., 2002). APCDD1-deficient
mice exhibit delayed vessel pruning, and APCDD1 mutant endothelial cells
precociously form the paracellular component of the barrier, whereas
overexpression of APCDD1 in retinal endothelial cells shows reduced vessel
density but increased paracellular barrier permeability. Taken together, the Wnt
signaling is essential in guiding and maintaining a stable vascular
microenvironment. Both loss- of and gain- of function mutations of the Wnt
signaling pathway may lead to aberrant endothelial cell activity and abnormal
proliferation of vessels.

In the retina, both FZD4 and LRP5 are expressed in vascular endothelial
cells (Chen et al., 2011b; Ye et al., 2009), suggesting direct
Wnt-mediated angiogenic effects on the vessel endothelium (Figure 5E) (Wang et
al., 2016). Additional expression of LRP5 was also reported in Muller
cells (Xia et al., 2010), where the
function of LRP5 is still unclear. While it is generally accepted that the
development of superficial layer of retinal vasculature follows a gradient of
growth factors such as VEGF, it is unlikely that norrin forms a gradient to
guide either superficial or deep vessel formation in the retina, because ectopic
expression of norrin driven by a lens promoter completely restored the defective
ocular vasculature in Norrie disease mice (Ohlmann et al., 2005). These observations suggest that
norrin/FZD4/LRP5 signaling more likely acts as a switch that needs to be turned
on to enable angiogenic processes regulated by other factors, particularly in
the deep layer network formation, where increased levels of hypoxia-induced VEGF
are not sufficient to overcome suppression of deeper vascular network formation
in the absence of Wnt signaling (Luhmann et
al., 2005; Rattner et al.,
2014; Wang et al., 2016).

Substantial efforts have been directed towards elucidating the
mechanisms of Wnt-related ocular angiogenic disorders. The absence of
norrin/FZD4 pathway results in reduced expression of SoxF family including Sox7,
Sox17, and Sox18 in the developing retina (Zhou
et al., 2015), with Sox17 suggested to be a genetic controller of the
angiogenic program (Ye et al., 2009;
Zhang et al., 2017b; Zhou et al., 2015). The single deletion of
any of these SoxF members does not affect vascular development in the retina,
whereas combined deletion of Sox7, Sox17, and Sox18 leads to a dense capillary
plexus with a dramatic loss of radial arteries and veins without reproducing the
Wnt-deficient vascular phenotype, and the presence of a single Sox17 allele
largely restores arterial identity (Zhou et
al., 2015). On the other hand, suppression of claudin-5, a
tight-junction protein down-regulated in both
Ndpy/− and
Lrp5−/− retinas (Chen et al., 2012; Schafer et al., 2009), partially suppresses developmental retinal
angiogenesis (Chen et al., 2011b),
however, it is not yet clear whether claudin-5 deficient mice, which show
size-dependent loosening of brain vascular integrity (Nitta et al., 2003), may recapitulate the defective
ocular vasculature in Ndpy/−
and Lrp5−/− retinas.

Gene expression analysis has identified multiple common down-stream
genes dysregulated in both
Ndpy/− and
Lrp5−/− retinas (Chen et al., 2012; Schafer et al., 2009), including down regulation of claudin-5 and
upregulation of PLVAP, endothelial markers for vascular leakage, reflecting
increased retinal and brain vascular permeability in these mice (Chen et al., 2011b; Wang et al., 2012; Zhang et al.,
2017a), which is consistent with the suggested role of Wnt signaling
in regulating blood-brain barrier (Daneman et
al., 2009; Liebner et al.,
2008; Ma et al., 2017; Stenman et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2017a). It is important to note that
Sox7, Sox17, and Sox18 are also crucial in maintaining blood vessel integrity in
adulthood, as adult onset vascular endothelial-specific deletion of all three
SoxF genes leads to massive edema despite nearly normal vascular architecture
(Zhou et al., 2015). Other common
genes dysregulated in both
Ndpy/− and
Lrp5−/− retinas include an amino
acid transporter SLC38A5, apolipoprotein D and aderenomedullin (Chen et al., 2012; Schafer et al., 2009), yet whether these or other proteins mediate
Wnt-dependent ocular angiogenesis is not fully clear and awaits further
studies.

Other Wnt signaling related pathways, or co-receptors, may also
participate in the regulation of retinal angiogenesis. In addition to FZD4, FZD7
is also expressed by endothelial cells and drives retinal angiogenesis via
activation of DVL/β-catenin signaling (Peghaire et al., 2016). FZD7, which controls the crosstalk between
Wnt and Notch signaling pathways during postnatal angiogenesis (Peghaire et al., 2016), may function as a coreceptor
in concert with FZD4 to interact with secreted Frizzled-related protein-1
(sFRP-1), a proposed Wnt signaling inhibitor, to promote angiogenesis after an
ischemic event (Dufourcq et al., 2008).
Another potential Wnt-coreceptor is GPR124, an orphan G protein-coupled
receptor. GPR124 and RECK, a glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored protein,
have been shown to serve as receptors for Wnt7 in collaboration with FZD and LRP
co-receptors (Eubelen et al., 2018; Vallon et al., 2018). GPR124/RECK/Wnt7
were found to function in collaboration with norrin/FZD4 signaling to control
CNS vascular development and brain-blood barrier regulation (Chang et al., 2017; Cho et al., 2017; Zhou and Nathans,
2014). Considering the close connection and the anatomical similarity
between the eye and the brain (London et al.,
2013), the GPR124/RECK/Wnt7 signaling may also be relevant in the
retinal vascular development. In addition, very low density lipoprotein receptor
(VLDLR) was suggested to negatively inhibit the Wnt signaling pathway by
targeting LRP6 and thereby suppressing retinal angiogenesis (Chen et al., 2007), yet VLDLR may also function
through other Wnt-independent mechanisms, including influencing photoreceptor
lipid and glucose energy metabolism (Joyal et
al., 2016) and c-Fos induced inflammation (Sun et al., 2017). Moreover, Hippo effectors YAP and
TAZ have been shown to interact with DVL to inhibit Wnt/β-catenin (Varelas et al., 2010), and regulate
endothelial cell migration through controlling the Rho family GTPase CDC42
activity (Sakabe et al., 2017).

It is important to note that defects in several other signaling pathways
unrelated to Wnt signaling, such as angiopoietin and transforming growth
factor-β (TGF-β), lead to similar ocular vascular phenotypes as
observed in Wnt-deficient mouse models. Loss of angiopoietin-2 in mice delays
development of the superficial plexus and causes complete absence of deeper
vascular layers, as well as persistent hyaloid (Hackett et al., 2002), similar to norrin/FZD4/LRP5 deficient mice.
Similarly, deletion of TGF-β! or vascular endothelium specific knockout
of TGF-β receptor causes incomplete formation of superficial retinal
vasculature and disruption of deep vascular layers in the retina (Allinson et al., 2012; Arnold et al., 2012). In addition, genetic deletion
of girdin, an AKT substrate functioning as an actin-binding protein, also leads
to more sparse superficial vasculature coverage, and incomplete formation of
intermediate and deep vascular layers (Ito et
al., 2013; Kitamura et al.,
2008). Girdin is important in VEGF-dependent endothelial cell
migration and tubular formation (Anai et al.,
2005; Enomoto et al., 2005;
Wang et al., 2017). Given these
observations, it is tempting to speculate that these different pathways:
norrin/FZD4/LRP5, angiopoietin, TGFβ and girdin, may somehow converge to
coordinate angiogenic processes. Supporting this notion is the observation that
angiopoetin-2 is induced in norrin-treated vascular endothelial cells (Ohlmann et al., 2010). In addition, norrin
has weak sequence homology with TGF-β family proteins, and maternal
Xenopus norrin is suggested as an antagonist of BMP4/TGF-β activities
(Xu et al., 2012). Cross-inhibition
of norrin and TGF-β was also reported in transgenic mice over-expressing
either norrin or TGF-β in the lens (Seitz et al., 2018), suggesting that loss of inhibition of
TGF-β may contribute in part to Norrie disease (Xu et al., 2012). So far no genetic mutations in
either angiopoetin-2 or TGF-β mutations have been linked with human FEVR.
Additional work may shed further light on the cross interaction of these
signaling pathways to help uncover the exact molecular mechanisms underlying Wnt
signaling that guides the retinal angiogenesis.

In addition to affecting retinal vasculature, Wnt signaling also
influences hyaloid vessel regression. Wnt7b, which activates canonical Wnt
signaling, is critical for proper regression of hyaloid vessels (Lobov et al., 2005). In the developing
eye, macrophages around hyaloid secret Wnt7b, which activates
Wnt/β-catenin signaling in adjacent hyaloidal endothelial cells, later
stimulating cell cycle entry through FZD4-LRP5, causing programmed cell death,
thereby resulting in hyaloid vascular regression. As a result, transgenic mice
carrying mutations in Wnt7b
(Wnt7bdl/dl) have
persistence of hyaloid vessels (Lobov et al.,
2005). Similar to Wnt7b, the binding of norrin to FZD4-LRP5 also
plays an important role in the induction of hyaloid vascular regression during
development. Ndpy/−,
Fzd4−/− and
Lrp5−/− mice all show delayed
regression of hyaloid vessels supporting this notion (Chen et al., 2012; Kato et al., 2002; Ohlmann et al.,
2004; Xia et al., 2008; Xu et al., 2004; Ye et al., 2009). A recent study discovered two genes
downstream of Wnt/β-catenin signaling, c-Myc and the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor Cdkn1a, were required for
hyaloid regression through regulation of cell cycle progression and cell death
(Nayak et al., 2018). Additionally,
the co-receptors LRP5 and LRP6 have overlapping functions on mediating
Wnt/β-catenin signaling in hyaloid vascular endothelial cells (Nayak et al., 2018). Since hyaloid
regression and incomplete retinal vessel development often go hand-in-hand,
incomplete retinal vascularization in Wnt-deficient retinas can result in
retinal tissue hypoxia and elevated VEGF levels (Luhmann et al., 2005; Rattner et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2016), which may contribute to
persistence of the hyaloid vasculature. Supporting this VEGF-dependent notion is
the observation from mice with retinal neuronal deletion of VEGFR2, which
demonstrates massive persistent hyaloid vessels due to excessive VEGF from lack
of sequestration by VEGFR2 (Yoshikawa et al.,
2016).

In addition to inherited eye diseases with Wnt-related mutations, aberrantly
upregulated Wnt signaling was also suggested as pathogenic in several experimental
models of more prevalent eye diseases including retinopathies and age-related
macular degeneration, indicating a broad role of Wnt signaling in non-genetic
vascular eye diseases.

ROP affects pre-term infants with low birth weight and exposure to high
oxygen supplementation. The pathologic progress of ROP starts with arrest of
immature retinal development of both vessels and neurons by premature birth
(phase I), followed by tissue ischemia, thereby resulting in hypoxia-induced
neovascularization (phase II) (Chen and Smith,
2007; Chen et al., 2011a;
Hellstrom et al., 2013). In addition
to prematurity, hyperoxia (room oxygen level after birth compared with
in utero, combined with supplemental oxygen) also
contributes to the initial delay of vascular growth in both humans and mouse
models (Connor et al., 2009; Hartnett and Penn, 2012; Smith et al., 1994), due to suppression of
oxygen-regulated angiogenic growth factors, particularly VEGF (Pierce et al., 1995) and erythropoietin (Chen et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2009a). As the retina grows with
increased metabolic demands, ischemic retinas become hypoxic and drive increased
angiogenic growth factors such as VEGF and erythropoietin, leading to the second
proliferative phase (Aiello et al., 1995;
Watanabe et al., 2005), which may
cause exudates, fibrous scar formation and tractional retinal detachment (Chan-Ling et al., 2018; Fulton et al., 2009; Hansen et al., 2017).

Whereas prematurity itself and oxygen exposure are the major risk
factors of ROP, genetic predisposition may also contribute to some cases of ROP.
Many signaling pathways were investigated with regard to their roles in the
pathogenesis of ROP, most of which relate to hypoxia and inflammation. Among
those, a relationship between ROP and the Wnt signaling pathway was discovered
through genetic studies. Mutations in NDP,
FZD4 and LRP5 have all been associated
with ROP (Dailey et al., 2015; Drenser, 2016; Ells et al., 2010; Hutcheson et al., 2005; Shastry,
2010). Some studies have demonstrated mutations in
NDP in patients with advanced ROP (Dickinson et al., 2006; Shastry et al., 1997), which may account for 3% of
patients with severe ROP (Hiraoka et al.,
2001). Yet some limitations may exist for these studies linking Wnt
pathway genetic variations with predisposition to ROP. Genetic testing was not
always done on all ROP patients, and clinically it is possible to misdiagnose
FEVR, or Norrie disease as ROP, due to the similarities in their clinical
manifestations (Drenser, 2016; Yonekawa et al., 2017).

In experimental studies of ROP, ectopic over-expression of norrin from
either the lens or the RPE promotes physiological vascular regrowth and thereby
suppresses pathological vessel growth in a mouse oxygen-induced retinopathy
(OIR) model (Ohlmann et al., 2010), a
well-established animal model to represent ROP in humans (Figure 6A) (Smith et
al., 1994). The effects of norrin in OIR may be exerted by the
expression of angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) downstream of norrin, and
reflect a norrin-specific regulatory mechanism by Ang-2, since
Wnt-driven β-catenin signaling does not lead to Ang-2
up-regulation (Ohlmann et al., 2010;
Reis et al., 2012). On the other
hand, several studies found that aberrant activation of Wnt signaling in OIR
retinas was a major pathogenic mechanism for retinal neovascularization (Chen et al., 2011b; Chen et al., 2009b; Liu et al., 2013a; Takahashi et
al., 2015; Wang et al., 2015;
Wang et al., 2014). Our group
previously found that up-regulated levels of Wnt ligands, receptors (FZD4 and
LRP5) and Wnt/β-catenin activity during the proliferative stage in the
retinas of OIR mice (Figure 6B&C), and
that genetic loss of LRP5 or DVL2 significantly suppressed neovascularization in
OIR (Chen et al., 2011b). Furthermore,
suppression of the aberrantly activated Wnt signaling rescues the phenotypes of
the OIR retinas, providing pharmaceutical targets to treat ocular
neovascularization diseases (Chen et al.,
2011b; Chen et al., 2009b;
Takahashi et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2014). For example, blocking Wnt target
protein claudin5 significantly suppresses Wnt pathway-driven endothelial cell
sprouting in vitro and developmental and pathological vascular
growth in OIR in vivo (Chen et
al., 2011b). Targeting very low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR),
an inhibitor of Wnt signaling and retinal neovascularization (Chen et al., 2016b; Chen et al., 2007; Lee et al.,
2014), via using the VLDLR N-terminal ectodomain also leads to
suppression of OIR vascular response via the inhibition of Wnt signaling (Wang et al., 2015). These studies suggest
that Wnt signaling may play dual angiogenic roles in a time-dependent manner
during different phases of retinopathy.

AMD is a common cause of irreversible blindness in the elderly (Gehrs et al., 2006), with progressive loss
of central fine color vision in the macula (Ardeljan and Chan, 2013). The “dry” or atrophic form
features significant RPE degeneration leading to photoreceptor loss. The
“wet” or neovascular form of AMD is characterized by choroidal
neovascularization (CNV), which invades into the subretinal space and leads to
exudation and acute vision loss. Although “wet” AMD only
constitutes 10-15% of AMD patients, it accounts for 90% of the AMD-associated
vision impairment. The neovascularization in AMD has two etiologic patterns: (1)
the most common pattern of CNV refers to the new vessels sprouting from the
choroidal vessels, penetrating Bruch’s membrane and growing into the
subretinal space (Green, 1999); and (2)
abnormal intraretinal vessels derived from the retinal vasculature in a process
called retinal angiomatous proliferations (RAP), a special subtype of wet AMD
(Brancato et al., 2002). In RAP, new
retinal vessels develop from the neurosensory retina and extend outward into the
subretinal space, sometimes anastomosing with the choroid-derived vessels (Lafaut et al., 2000). The mechanisms and
factors regulating CNV development and formation in “wet” AMD are
extensively studied with VEGF identified as a major factor (Grisanti and Tatar, 2008; Krzystolik et al., 2002), and anti-VEGF therapies
have become the most common and effective treatment for neovascular AMD (Schmidt-Erfurth and Pruente, 2007).

Various animal models have been used to study AMD (Grossniklaus et al., 2010), and some studies have
suggested that aberrantly activated Wnt signaling may be another pathogenic
factor in AMD (Zhou et al., 2010).
Activated canonical Wnt signaling pathway was found in both human macular
tissues from AMD patients (Tuo et al.,
2015), and in a murine laser-induced CNV model (Hu et al., 2013), which is often used to study the
angiogenic aspect of wet AMD. Specifically, phosphorylated LRP6 and
non-phosphorylated-β-catenin (active form) are up-regulated both in
laser-induced CNV model (Hu et al.,
2013) and very low density lipoprotein receptor gene knock-out
(Vldlr−/−) mice that model RAP, a
form of AMD with abnormal intraretinal vessels (Chen et al., 2007). Suppression of Wnt/β-catenin signaling
with either an anti-LRP6 antibody or Wnt inhibitor DKK1 arrests the neovascular
lesions in both murine models of CNV and
Vldlr−/− (Chen et al., 2007; Hu et al., 2013). Wnt7a and Wnt7b also stimulated vascular sprouting
from mouse choroidal explants and deletion of both genes decreases the severity
of laser-induced CNV (Lin et al.,
2018).

More evidence linking Wnt signaling with AMD comes from studies of other
Wnt modulators including kallistatin, an inhibitor of the Wnt signaling pathway.
Kallistatin is an endogenous anti-angiogenic and anti-inflammatory factor in the
serine proteinase inhibitor (SERPIN) family (Zhang et al., 2013), and it inhibits the Wnt signaling pathway by
binding to LRP6 (McBride et al., 2014).
Circulating levels of kallistatin are down-regulated in the plasma of AMD
patients compared to non-AMD subjects (Tuo et
al., 2015). On the other hand, some other Wnt signaling modulators,
such as WIF-1 and DKK3 exhibit significantly higher levels in the aqueous humor
of neovascular AMD patients (Park et al.,
2014), whereas DKK1 levels are decreased in the circulation in
patients with wet AMD (Qiu et al.,
2017a). Cell metabolism is also affected in patients with AMD, as Vallee
et al. found that up-regulated Wnt signaling was involved
in the activation of aerobic glycolysis for production of angiogenic factors in
wet AMD patients (Vallee et al., 2017).
Wnt signaling is also linked with an RPE epithelial phenotype, especially during
aging. The impaired organelle motility with aging may raise low levels of stress
which was accompanied with RPE morphology changes, and eventually contributing
to aging retinal disease such as AMD (Burke,
2008). Together these findings support a pathogenic role of Wnt
signaling in both dry and wet AMD. Suppressing the abnormally activated Wnt
signaling pathway in neovascular AMD patients may be a potential way to treat or
inhibit the exudative CNV lesions.

DR is a common microvascular complication of diabetes, and a leading
cause of blindness in the working age population in developed countries. Based
on the vascular progression, DR is classified into two stages: non-proliferative
DR and proliferative DR (Antonetti et al.,
2012; Cheung et al., 2010).
Non-proliferative DR is featured with the presence of microaneurysms,
hemorrhages, hard exudates, cotton wool spots, venous dilation and beading,
while proliferative DR is characterized by neovascularization, pre-retinal
hemorrhage, or vitreous hemorrhage (Antonetti et
al., 2012). Multiple microvascular pathological changes take place in
DR, including leukostasis, pericyte loss, acellular capillaries, progressive
vascular occlusions, increased vascular permeability, macular edema, and
neovascularization, which ultimately proliferates into the vitreous (Durham and Herman, 2011).

Up-regulated Wnt signaling components have been observed in DR in
several studies (Chen and Ma, 2017).
Elevated levels of β-catenin in the retinal sections of patients with DR
were found compared to non-diabetic controls, indicating an aberrant activation
of Wnt signaling in DR (Chen et al.,
2009b). Additionally, β-catenin and LRP5/6 levels are
up-regulated in two type I diabetic animal models - Akita mice and
streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats, as well as OIR model which is
commonly used to mimic proliferative stage of DR (Chen et al., 2009b). Elevated LRP6 levels in the
vitreous of proliferative DR patients correlate with increased vitreous VEGF
levels (Gao et al., 2015; Wirostko et al., 2008). In addition,
plasma and vitreous fluid levels of a Wnt inhibitor DKK1 are lower in patients
with DR compared with those from non-diabetic patients or diabetic patients
without DR (Chen et al., 2009b; Qiu et al., 2014), DKK1 also reduces
vascular leakage and neovascularization in OIR model and STZ-induced diabetic
models (Chen et al., 2009b). In addition
to DKK1, several Wnt signaling inhibitors were evaluated in different animal
models of DR to investigate the benefits of blocking the aberrant Wnt signaling.
Kallistatin exerts anti-angiogenic and anti-neuroinflammatory effects in Akita
mice and OIR mice (Liu et al., 2013b). A
monoclonal antibody termed Mab2F1 targeting LRP6 inhibits vascular leakage, and
inflammation in three diabetic retinopathy models: OIR model, STZ-induced
diabetic model and lens-capsulotomy-induced retinal degeneration in Akita mice
(Hombrebueno et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2012). Serine protease
inhibitor A3K (SERPINA3K) reduces fibrogenic activity by attenuating the
connective tissue growth factor and fibronectin overexpression in retinas of
STZ-induced diabetic rats (Zhang et al.,
2010b). Finally, interruption of Wnt signaling in Müller cells
(conditional β-catenin knockout (KO) in Muller cells) ameliorates
ischemia-induced retinal neovascularization in OIR and STZ-induced diabetic
model (Zhou et al., 2014a). Together,
these Wnt signaling inhibitors improves neovascularization and inflammation in
DR, further confirming the causative role of the Wnt signaling in the
pathological process of DR.

The avascular nature of the cornea is crucial to maintaining corneal
transparency, vision clarity and its angiogenic and lymphangiogenic privilege
(Ellenberg et al., 2010). Studies
using transgenic mice, which traced fluorescence-labeled angioblasts and blood
vessels, show that the cornea is never vascularized during development (Kwiatkowski et al., 2013). Both
proangiogenic factors such as VEGF, fibroblast growth factor (FGF),
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and antiangiogenic factors including the
semaphorins and netrins, are expressed in the anterior eye (Kwiatkowski et al., 2013). Although the interplay
between these factors in the cornea is not completely understood, soluble VEGF
receptor-1 (sVEGFR1; also known as sFlt-1), which is highly expressed in the
cornea serving as an endogenous VEGF-A trap (Ambati et al., 2006; Kendall and
Thomas, 1993), and ectopic expression of VEGFR-3 (Flt-4) by the
epithelium (Cursiefen et al., 2006), are
both suggested as key modulators inhibiting the invasion of blood vessels into
the corneal stroma. In addition, the antiangiogenic factor semaphorin3A also
prevents VEGF-induced vascularization in the developing cornea (McKenna et al., 2014). As a key pathway involved in
many processes during eye development, the Wnt signaling pathway plays a
critical role in epithelial stratification during corneal morphogenesis (Nakatsu et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2015). Although Wnt signaling is a
major regulator of VEGF, its immediate role in the regulation of VEGF-dependent
corneal avascularity during normal ocular development remains to be determined.
However, several studies have observed the activity of Wnt signaling in corneal
neovascularization models (Wang et al.,
2015; Zhou et al., 2014b),
demonstrating the essential role of the Wnt signaling in maintaining the
avascularity of the cornea in disease.

Corneal neovascularization, a sight-threatening condition, refers to the
formation of new vessels from the pericorneal plexus into the normally avascular
corneal tissue as a result of oxygen deprivation (Abdelfattah et al., 2015). Maintaining avascularity of the corneal
stroma is an important aspect of corneal pathophysiology for corneal
transparency and optimal vision. Diseases associated with corneal
neovascularization include inflammatory disorders, corneal graft rejection,
infectious keratitis, contact lens–related hypoxia, alkali burns, stromal
ulceration, aniridia, and limbal stem cell deficiency (Beebe, 2008; Ma et
al., 2006). Several animal models have been established to study
corneal neovascularization, including the chemical (alkali) burn model, suture
injury model, and some genetic spontaneous corneal neovascularization models
(Liu et al., 2017). In these models,
phosphorylation of LRP6 and active β-catenin is increased in the corneas
of mice and rats after chemical burns (Wang et
al., 2015). Additionally, the FZD4 receptor is upregulated in the
corneas of rats after corneal suture surgery (Zong et al., 2016). Whereas overexpression of PAX6 produces an
abnormal cornea with altered epithelial cell morphology and neovascularization
in mice (Davis and Piatigorsky, 2011),
Wnt7a controls the corneal epithelium differentiation and avascular feature of
cornea through PAX6 (Ouyang et al.,
2014). Further, PAX6 is also an important regulator of the Wnt signaling
through its interaction with β-catenin and DKK3 (Forsdahl et al., 2014; Fujimura et al., 2015). Therefore, Wnt signaling
appears to be closely intertwined with PAX6 to mediate the pathological process
of corneal neovascularization.

Inhibiting the aberrant Wnt signaling pathway in the vascularized cornea
may provide a feasible approach to reduce neovessel growth. A soluble VLDLR
N-terminal ectodomain reduces pathological corneal neovascularization in alkali
burn model by blocking the phosphorylation of the receptor LRP6 (Wang et al., 2015). Serine proteinase
inhibitor SERPINA3K (Zhou et al., 2014b;
Zhu et al., 2014) and curcumin
(Kim et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2017c) also suppress corneal
neovascularization via the inhibition of Wnt Signaling and VEGF in corneal
suture models. In addition, SERPINA3K ameliorates the corneal oxidative injury
induced by 4-hydroxynonenal through the inhibition of the ROS system and Wnt
signaling pathway (Zhang et al., 2010a;
Zheng et al., 2017). The monoclonal
antibody Mab2F1 and its humanized version H1L1 targeting LRP6 reduce the area of
corneal neovascularization and opacity (Qiu et
al., 2018). Taken together, activated Wnt signaling plays a pivotal
role in the formation of corneal neovascularization, providing a potential
molecular target for prevention.

Due to the involvement of Wnt signaling in cancer, bone diseases and
other diseases, development of therapeutics targeting Wnt signaling has received
great interests (Humphries and Mlodzik,
2017; Katoh, 2017; Krishnamurthy and Kurzrock, 2018). Wnt
signaling is abnormally active in most cancer, therefore anti-Wnt therapies are
potential candidates for development of treatment in oncology. Some of these
include targeting Wnt ligands, receptors, tankyrase (ADP-ribosyl transferase
that promotes axin degradation), or β-catenin (Gurney et al., 2012; Katoh, 2017). On the other hand, since Wnt signaling is deficient in
osteoporosis, pro-Wnt signaling is thereby needed for osteoporotic patients by
targeting Wnt antagonists such as DKK1, SOST (sclerostin), or GSK3β, with
current clinical trials focusing mostly on SOST-targeting therapies (McClung et al., 2014). In the eyes, as
deficiency of norrin/Wnt signaling leads to FEVR and Norrie disease, and
aberrant upregulation of Wnt signaling detrimentally affects other eye diseases
including proliferative retinopathies and AMD, fine tuning of the Wnt signaling
cascade in a disease- and context-dependent manner will be necessary for future
development of potential treatment approaches.

Eye diseases with deficient Wnt signaling such as Norrie disease and
FEVR are characterized with severe defects in vessel morphology and visual
impairment. Currently, there are no effective therapies available to prevent or
treat the defective intra-retina vasculature in these diseases. Because the
disease mutations occur on the ligand and receptor levels, one potential
therapeutic approach is to target downstream Wnt signaling factors, thereby
bypassing the genetic defects. In our previous study, a well-known Wnt signaling
downstream activator, lithium, which functions as a GSK3β inhibitor, was
used to bypass the genetic defects of
Lrp5−/− mice, and successfully
reverses the vascular and visual dysfunction in
Lrp5−/− eyes partially (Wang et al., 2016). Intraperitoneal
injection of lithium restores Wnt signaling back to normal levels in the
Lrp5−/− retina, which accelerates
the development of retinal vasculature, restores intra-retinal vessel network,
and promotes hyaloid vessel regression (Figure
7A-C). Lithium also partially rescues visual function in the
Lrp5−/− retina with increased
b-wave sensitivity in electroretinogram (Figure 7D). The successful normalization of ocular
vessels in Lrp5−/− mice suggests the
possibility of a pro-Wnt signaling approach in treating Wnt-deficient vascular
eye diseases by adapting existing Wnt activators such as lithium, which is
FDA-approved for treating mental disorders.

Similarly, exogenous norrin has shown great value in promoting retinal
vascular growth. Genetic overexpression of norrin driven by lens promoter
restores the vascular defects in the retinas of mice with Norrie disease (Ohlmann et al., 2005), and also promotes
vascular regrowth and inhibits pathological neovascularization in OIR mice
(Ohlmann et al., 2010). Recombinant
norrin treatment also reduces avascular area and neovascularization in OIR mice
(Ohlmann et al., 2010; Tokunaga et al., 2013; Zeilbeck et al., 2016).

The protective effects of Wnt signaling extend beyond retinal vascular
repair to neuroprotection in the retina as well (Hackam, 2005; Ohlmann and Tamm, 2012; Yi et al.,
2007). Wnt3a protects retinal ganglion cells (RGC) from elevated eye
pressure (Fragoso et al., 2011), and
protects photoreceptors in a mouse model of inherited retinal degeneration
(Patel et al., 2015). Wnt14 inhibits
death of retinal precursor cells (Mizukami et
al., 2009). Norrin promotes RGC survival by increasing the number of
surviving RGC axons in the optic nerve and decreasing apoptotic death of retinal
neurons in staurosporine and NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate)-induced RGC damage
models (Dailey et al., 2017a; Lin et al., 2009; Seitz et al., 2010). Early phase recombinant norrin
treatment also improves RGC survival in OIR model (Dailey et al., 2017a, b). Together Wnt signaling may serve as promising targets to develop
strategies that induce intraretinal vessel formation in ischemic retinopathies,
or promote RGC survival in retinal neuronal diseases such as glaucoma (Hackam, 2005; Ohlmann and Tamm, 2012; Yi et al., 2007).

For retinopathies with pathologically over-activated Wnt signaling,
inhibitors of Wnt signaling may be beneficial in treating vascular abnormalities
in OIR, AMD, DR or corneal neovascularization (Zhang and Ma, 2010). These inhibitors include endogenous proteins,
such as DKK1 (Chen et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2009b), kallistatin (Liu et al., 2013b; McBride et al., 2017), VLDLR (Chen et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2015), pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) (Park et al., 2011), peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-α (PPARa) (Cheng et al., 2016), antibodies targeting Wnt
signaling receptors such as Mab2F1 (anti-LRP6) (Lee et al., 2012), 1.99.25 (anti-FZD4) (Paes et al., 2011), and Ab 2D10 (anti-TSPAN12) (Bucher et al., 2018; Bucher et al., 2017), and microRNAs such as miRNA-150
(Liu et al., 2015) and miRNA-184
(Takahashi et al., 2015). Endogenous
angiogenic inhibitors constitute a major category in ocular neovascularization
therapy since the imbalance between angiogenic stimulators and inhibitors is a
major contributor to the pathological ocular angiogenesis induced by various
stressors, such as hypoxia or ischemia, inflammation and tumor (Zhang and Ma, 2007). Monoclonal antibodies targeting
Wnt components may bind to their targets with high specificity. This class of
therapeutics possesses many clinical benefits for treating angiogenic and
inflammatory ocular diseases (Rodrigues et al.,
2009). MicroRNAs (miRNAs) also play a critical role in the
pathogenesis of angiogenesis (Mastropasqua et
al., 2014), and those microRNAs targeting Wnt signaling components
are potential candidates to develop as therapeutics for vascular eye
diseases.

In Table 3, we summarized and
categorized different Wnt signaling regulators into 3 groups, by the signaling
components they target and intercept as follows: extracellular modulators
targeting ligand/receptor complex, intracellular modulators targeting
GSK3β/axin/APC complex, and inner nuclear modulators targeting
transcription factor TCF/LEF-1. Extracellular inhibitors usually block the first
step of Wnt signaling activation, by interacting with either Wnt ligands or
receptors. Wnt inhibitory factor 1/2 (WIF-1/2), SFRPs and cerberus (CER1) all
bind Wnt ligands to prevent their binding to receptors FZD and LRP5/6 (Hsieh et al., 1999; Kawano and Kypta, 2003; Piccolo et al., 1999), whereas sclerostin binds the
receptor LRP5/6 to compete with the Wnt ligands binding (Li et al., 2005; Semenov and He, 2006). However, these inhibitors are not evaluated
in ocular vascular diseases and their efficacy remains to be determined.

The DKK family also interacts with LRP6 and another transmembrane
protein Kremen1/2 (Krm1/2) to form a complex, which facilitates the
internalization and degradation of LRP6, blocking its binding to Wnt ligands
(Bafico et al., 2001; Mao et al., 2002; Niehrs, 2006). DKK1 was evaluated in OIR, STZ-induced
diabetes model and Vldlr−/− mice. DKK1
inhibits increased Wnt signaling and reduces pathological neovascularization and
inflammation in those animal models (Chen et
al., 2007; Chen et al., 2009b;
Tokunaga et al., 2013).
Interestingly, DKK2 plays an opposite role by promoting angiogenesis via a
signaling cascade involving LRP6-mediated APC/Asef2/Cdc42 activation (Min et al., 2011). In addition, a human
serine proteinase inhibitor, kallistatin, is recognized as a novel inhibitor for
LRP6, and significantly suppresses retinal neovascularization and inflammation
in OIR mice (Liu et al., 2013b; Zhang et al., 2013). Kallistatin also
inhibits retinal neuroinflammation and vascular leakage in Akita mice, a type I
diabetes model (Liu et al., 2013b).
SERPINA3K, another novel inhibitor targeting LRP6, ameliorates inflammation and
retinal neovascularization in OIR model (Zhang
et al., 2009; Zhang et al.,
2010b; Zhou et al., 2014b).
PEDF, an anti-angiogenic factor (Longeras et
al., 2012), is a novel canonical Wnt inhibitor via binding to LRP6
(Park et al., 2011). Additionally, a
PEDF-derived peptide reduces retinal neovascularization through blocking the
mobilization of bone marrow-derived endothelial progenitor cells (Barnstable and Tombran-Tink, 2004). PPARa,
another LRP6 inhibitor, reduces ocular neovascularization, neuronal death and
pericyte loss in rodent models of OIR, STZ-induced diabetic retinopathy, and
laser-induced CNV (Chen et al., 2013;
Cheng et al., 2016; Deng et al., 2017; Ding et al., 2014; Moran et al.,
2014; Moran and Ma, 2015;
Qiu et al., 2017b; Wang et al., 2014). Curcumin reduces corneal
neovascularization in a suture model via the inhibition of LRP6 activity (Kim et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2017c). The key effects of VLDLR in
retinal vascular development are well-established by the pathologic subretinal
vessel growth in Vldlr−/− mice.
Upregulation of Wnt signaling in
Vldlr−/− retinas was suggested to
be partially responsible for its abnormal neovascularization (Chen et al., 2007). VLDLR and its N-terminal
exocellular domain function as inhibitors for LRP6, and inhibit abnormal vessel
formation in models of OIR and alkali-burned corneal neovascularization (Chen et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2015).

In addition to Wnt inhibitors, several neutralizing antibodies against
Wnt receptors were developed to inhibit Wnt signaling activity in certain eye
vascular diseases. Some examples include Mab2F1 targeting LRP6 (Lee et al., 2012), 1.99.25 targeting FZD4 (Paes et al., 2011), and Ab 2D10 targeting
TSPAN12 (Bucher et al., 2018; Bucher et al., 2017). These antibodies were
evaluated in mice in separate studies using OIR model, STZ-induced diabetes
model, lens-capsulotomy-induced retinal degeneration in Akita mice, and
Vldlr−/− mice models, and have
significant vaso-suppressive effects in both OIR and
Vldlr−/− mice (Bucher et al., 2017; Hombrebueno et al., 2018; Paes et
al., 2011), inhibition of vascular leakage and leukostasis in
diabetic retinopathy model (Lee et al.,
2012), and suppression of inflammation and protection against
neuronal degeneration in Akita mice with lens capsulotomy (Hombrebueno et al., 2018). In addition to antibodies,
miRNAs have been widely investigated and hold potential as ocular therapeutics
(Mastropasqua et al., 2014). MiRNAs
are single-stranded, small (19~24 nucleotides) non-coding RNA molecules
(Landgraf et al., 2007) and serve as
negative regulators of gene expression at the post-transcriptional level by
partially binding complementary to the 3’ untranslated region
(3’UTR) of target mRNAs (Xu,
2009). Several miRNAs have been shown to negatively modulate Wnt
receptors in experimental models. MiR-150 and miR-184 inhibit Wnt receptors FZD4
and FZD7 expression, respectively, and both miRNAs suppress pathologic
neovascularization in animal models (Liu et
al., 2015; Takahashi et al.,
2015). Because miRNAs may target multiple target mRNAs, it is worth
noting that the effects of these miRNAs may also act through additional targets
other than FZD receptors.

The intracellular Wnt antagonists act mainly on factors downstream of
the Wnt signaling cascade in the cytoplasm or nucleus. GSK3β, axin and
APC form the secondary Wnt signaling complex which leads to β-catenin
phosphorylation and degradation, thus preventing its translocation into the
nucleus (Kimelman and Xu, 2006). This
secondary complex also provides an optimal pharmaceutical target for potential
Wnt modulators, such as endostatin. For eye diseases related with over-activated
Wnt signaling such as AMD and DR, endostatin directly inhibits β-catenin
to reduce VEGF-dependent retinal vascular permeability, neovascularization and
retinal detachment (Dixelius et al.,
2003; Takahashi et al., 2003).
Lastly, other factors such as Chibby in the nucleus may act on the interaction
between β-catenin and the transcription factor TCF/LEF-1 to inhibit the
target gene expression (Takemaru et al.,
2003). Whether such inhibitors have therapeutic effects on ocular
vascular diseases awaits further studies.

Together, a large number of studies provide compelling evidence
supporting both pro-Wnt and anti-Wnt approaches as potential therapeutics for
vascular eye diseases in a disease- and disease phase-dependent context. The Wnt
signaling pathway is indispensable for normal development of ocular vasculature,
and mutations in Wnt components are genetically linked with multiple pediatric
vascular eye diseases. As such pro-Wnt signaling will be beneficial in these
circumstances and also in the early vaso-obliterative phase of ischemic
retinopathy. On the other hand, aberrant activation of Wnt signaling is
associated with pathological neovascularization in proliferative retinopathies
and AMD, and thus anti-Wnt signaling may offer a new therapeutic strategy for
treating these diseases.

The development and homeostasis of ocular vasculature rely on multiple
growth factors controlled by their respective signaling pathways, including VEGF,
angiopoietin, TGFβ, NOTCH and Wnt. This review focuses on the Wnt signaling
pathway, an indispensable pathway regulating physiological and pathological vessels
in the eye. Loss-of-function in Wnt signaling causes impaired intra-retinal
vasculature, delayed vessel pruning, secondary pathologic vascular proliferation,
and persistent hyaloid vessels in congenital diseases such as FEVR and Norrie
disease. Whereas the development of superficial retinal vascular plexus is
relatively well understood, it is still a challenge to fully elucidate the molecular
mechanisms driving the formation of deeper vascular networks in the retina, where
Wnt signaling plays a critical role. Which factors are downstream of Wnt signaling
and essential for the deeper retinal vessel formation? Does Wnt signaling converge
or intersect with other signaling pathways to coordinate this process? These
questions await further studies. Additional work in both experimental models and
potential discovery of new disease genes linked to FEVR may provide new insight. On
the translational aspect, although our studies showed that pro-Wnt signaling lithium
treatment partially rescues the FEVR phenotype in the mouse model, potential
translation of this work into humans may face considerable challenges. Whether
effective treatments in mouse models will be effective in humans is a major
question. Another obstacle is the proper time window of pro-Wnt treatment, because
the development of retinal vessels in humans occurs in utero,
unlike in mice where it happens after birth. Nevertheless, evaluating similar
concepts of pro-Wnt treatment in the Norrie disease model may offer additional
benefits in restoring chronic hearing loss to improve patient’s quality of
life.

In addition to impaired retinal angiogenesis, deficient Wnt signaling also
leads to breakdown of blood-retinal barrier, hence increased vascular leakage and
hemorrhage. This also occurs in the central nervous system where the integrity of
blood-brain barrier is regulated in part by Wnt signaling. Further investigation of
Wnt signaling may help provide clues to the molecular basis controlling
blood-retinal barrier, which is highly relevant for retinal edema. As a protective
barrier to exclude potential pathogen and toxins, the existence of blood-retinal and
blood-brain barrier also represents a major obstacle for drug delivery to reach the
retina or the brain to treat diseases affecting these regions. Future work on
potential ways to modulate Wnt pathway and temporarily opening up blood-retinal or
blood-brain barrier may help facilitate drug delivery to the retina and brain.

In ischemic proliferative retinopathies and AMD, on the other hand,
pathological activation of the Wnt signaling often results in excessive pathological
neovascularization and ocular inflammation. Inhibition of Wnt signaling in these
conditions has been largely effective in experimental models. These studies
necessitate precise targeting of Wnt signaling to fine tune its proper levels in
order to treat different eye diseases or different phases of diseases. For example,
a pro-Wnt signaling approach is needed when Wnt signaling is deficient during
incomplete developmental angiogenesis and during vaso-obliteration phase in
retinopathy; however, an anti-Wnt signaling approach is necessary for direct
inhibition of pathological neovascularization. With many Wnt modulators developed
and currently in clinical trials for cancer and osteoporosis application, it is
tempting to adapt some of these molecules to assess their efficacy in the ocular
setting, in addition to those being developed specifically for vascular eye
diseases. Among those, antibodies against Wnt receptors seem to hold great promise
as they are well tolerated and longer lasting. Future advances in ocular drug
delivery including potential cell-penetrating topical drug delivery formulation for
small molecule modulators, and slow-release system or longer-lasting formulas may
offer additional advantage that will allow us to better treat and manage the
vascular eye diseases impacting the vision of both children and adults.