---
reference_id: "PMID:36724016"
title: "Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 +49A/G polymorphism in Down syndrome children with Hashimoto's thyroiditis."
authors:
- Faizi M
- Rochmah N
- Hisbiyah Y
- Perwitasari RK
- Putri QAN
- Basuki S
- Endaryanto A
- Soetjipto S
journal: Biomol Biomed
year: '2023'
doi: 10.17305/bb.2022.7869
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 +49A/G polymorphism in Down syndrome children with Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
**Authors:** Faizi M, Rochmah N, Hisbiyah Y, Perwitasari RK, Putri QAN, Basuki S, Endaryanto A, Soetjipto S
**Journal:** Biomol Biomed (2023)
**DOI:** [10.17305/bb.2022.7869](https://doi.org/10.17305/bb.2022.7869)

## Content

1. Biomol Biomed. 2023 Jul 3;23(4):634-639. doi: 10.17305/bb.2022.7869.

Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 +49A/G polymorphism in Down syndrome 
children with Hashimoto's thyroiditis.

Faizi M(1), Rochmah N(1), Hisbiyah Y(1), Perwitasari RK(1), Putri QAN(2), Basuki 
S(3), Endaryanto A(1), Soetjipto S(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Child Health, Dr. Soetomo General 
Hospital, Universitas Airlangga, Surabaya, East Java, Indonesia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Airlangga, Surabaya, East Java, Indonesia.
(3)Institute of Tropical Disease, Universitas Airlangga, Surabaya, East Java, 
Indonesia.
(4)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas 
Airlangga, Surabaya, East Java, Indonesia.

Thyroid dysfunction is the most common endocrine disorder in Down syndrome (DS) 
children. Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) is one of the 
immune regulatory genes that correlates with Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT). 
However, studies on CTLA-4 +49A/G in DS children with HT are still limited. We 
aimed to evaluate CTLA-4 +49A/G gene polymorphism in DS children with HT. This 
case-control study, conducted from February 2020 to February 2022 at Dr. Soetomo 
General Hospital, Surabaya, enrolled 40 DS children with HT and 50 healthy 
children. The DNA sequencing was performed to identify the polymorphism (Sanger 
sequencing). Thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPOAb), thyroglobulin antibodies 
(TgAb), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and free thyroxine (FT4) levels were 
analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The mean age of DS 
children with HT was 1.78 years. Males predominated in the study population. 
Subjects with GG genotype were diagnosed earliest with hypothyroidism (8 months) 
compared with other studies. The most common thyroid dysfunction was central 
hypothyroidism, with TgAb positivity present in all patients. The AA genotype 
(odds ratio [OR] 0.265, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.094-0.746; P = 0.012) and 
A allele (OR 0.472, 95% CI 0.309-0.721; P = 0.0002) were significantly more 
frequent in the control group. The AG genotype (OR 2.65, 95% CI 0.094-0.746; P = 
0.003) and G allele (OR 2.116, 95% CI 1.386-3.23; P = 0.003) were more frequent 
in the DS with HT group. The age of the subjects in this study was younger than 
in previous studies. The AG genotype and the G allele were more prevalent in the 
DS with HT group and may be a risk factor in HT development in DS children. 
Furthermore, the AA genotype may act as a protective factor against HT in DS 
children.

DOI: 10.17305/bb.2022.7869
PMCID: PMC10351086
PMID: 36724016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: Authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.