---
reference_id: "PMID:16884947"
title: "The polymorphisms of GSTM1, GSTT1, HYL1*2, and XRCC1, and aflatoxin B1-related hepatocellular carcinoma in Guangxi population, China."
authors:
- Long XD
- Ma Y
- Wei YP
- Deng ZL
journal: Hepatol Res
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.hepres.2006.06.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The polymorphisms of GSTM1, GSTT1, HYL1*2, and XRCC1, and aflatoxin B1-related hepatocellular carcinoma in Guangxi population, China.
**Authors:** Long XD, Ma Y, Wei YP, Deng ZL
**Journal:** Hepatol Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hepres.2006.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hepres.2006.06.004)

## Content

1. Hepatol Res. 2006 Sep;36(1):48-55. doi: 10.1016/j.hepres.2006.06.004. Epub
2006  Aug 1.

The polymorphisms of GSTM1, GSTT1, HYL1*2, and XRCC1, and aflatoxin B1-related
hepatocellular carcinoma in Guangxi population, China.

Long XD(1), Ma Y, Wei YP, Deng ZL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Youjiang Medical College for Nationalitics, Baise
533000, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China.

AIM: High incidence rates of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in Guangxi, China,
are primarily due to heavy aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) exposure via corn and groundnut
consumption. This study was designed to examine the polymorphisms associated of
three carcinogen-metabolizing genes (namely: GSTM1, GSTT1, and HYL1*2) and one
DNA-repair gene (namely: XRCC1), and investigate their role as susceptibility
markers for HCC.
METHODS: We conducted a case-control study including 257 cases of cancer and 649
hospital-based age, sex, ethnicity, and hepatitis B virus infection-matched
controls to examine the role of genetic polymorphisms of four genes (GSTM1,
GSTT1, HYL1*2, and XRCC1) in the context of HCC risk for the Guangxi population.
Genomic DNA isolated from 2ml whole blood was used to genotype GSTM1, GSTT1,
HYL1*2, and XRCC1 by means of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction
fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis.
RESULTS: GSTT1-null genotype was not significantly associated with the risk of
HCC, but GSTM1-null genotype [adjusted odds ratio (OR)=2.29, 95% confidence
interval (CI)=1.59-3.31], HYL1*2 genotypes with 113 His allele (namely: YH/HH,
adjusted OR=2.55, CI=1.78-3.65), and XRCC1 genotypes with 399 Gln allele
(namely: AG/GG, adjusted OR=2.47, CI=1.72-3.54) increased the HCC risk. Compared
with those individuals who did not express any putative risk genotypes as
reference (OR=1), individuals featuring all of the putative risk genotypes
[GSTM1-null, HYL1*2-YH/HH, and XRCC1-AG/GG] did experience a significantly
greater cancer risk (adjusted OR=10.83, CI=5.44-21.59, P(interaction)<0.01).
Additionally, the risk of HCC did appear to differ more significantly among
individuals featuring risk genotypes and high-level or long-term AFB1 exposure,
whose adjusted ORs (CIs) were 52.44 (17.51-157.08) and 326.93 (38.58-2770.52),
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that carcinogen metabolism and DNA-repair
pathways may simultaneously modulate the risk of HCC for Guangxi population,
and, particularly for these having high-level or long-term AFB1 exposure.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hepres.2006.06.004
PMID: 16884947
