---
reference_id: "PMID:36258095"
title: "What may surprise a rhinologist in everyday clinical practice: silent sinus syndrome or pneumosinus dilatans/pneumocele? Literature review and own experience."
authors:
- Stryjewska-Makuch G
- Kokoszka M
- Goroszkiewicz K
- Karłowska-Bijak O
- Kolebacz B
- Misiołek M
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-022-07697-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Paranasal Sinus Diseases/complications, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Frontal Sinus/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Comorbidity
- Endoscopy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What may surprise a rhinologist in everyday clinical practice: silent sinus syndrome or pneumosinus dilatans/pneumocele? Literature review and own experience.
**Authors:** Stryjewska-Makuch G, Kokoszka M, Goroszkiewicz K, Karłowska-Bijak O, Kolebacz B, Misiołek M
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-022-07697-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-022-07697-w)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2023 Feb;280(2):519-527. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-022-07697-w. Epub 2022 Oct 18.

What may surprise a rhinologist in everyday clinical practice: silent sinus 
syndrome or pneumosinus dilatans/pneumocele? Literature review and own 
experience.

Stryjewska-Makuch G(1), Kokoszka M(2), Goroszkiewicz K(1)(3), Karłowska-Bijak 
O(3), Kolebacz B(1), Misiołek M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laryngology and Laryngological Oncology, Leszek Giec 
Upper-Silesian Medical Centre of the Silesian Medical University, Katowice, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Paediatric Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Department of 
Paediatric Surgery, Upper Silesian Child Health Centre, School of Medicine in 
Katowice, Medical University of Silesia in Katowice, Katowice, Poland. 
mgkokoszka@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Laryngological Oncology in Zabrze, 
Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The aim of the study was to present rare sinus syndromes known as 
silent sinus syndrome (SSS) and frontal sinus syndrome with excessive 
pneumatization and bone defects in the wall (pneumocele). The available 
literature describing pneumocele cases was reviewed.
METHODOLOGY: PubMed and Science Direct databases were searched by two 
independent reviewers. The primary outcome was finding descriptions of the sinus 
pneumocele. In the end, papers on frontal sinus pneumocele that was not the 
result of trauma, congenital defects or comorbidities were selected. Moreover, 
the authors presented their own cases of SSS and pneumocele.
RESULTS: Twelve case reports of frontal sinus pneumocele were found, one own 
case was presented. In addition, 8 subjects with SSS, diagnosed and treated in 
the period from September 2017 to May 2022, were described.
CONCLUSIONS: With the increasing number of patients suffering from sinus 
diseases and the growing number of endoscopic surgeries, the knowledge of rare 
sinus syndromes will increase the safety of the procedures performed.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-022-07697-w
PMCID: PMC9849284
PMID: 36258095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.