---
reference_id: "PMID:35357725"
title: "Prevalence and determinants of pain in chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy: Results from the German INHIBIT registry."
authors:
- Mork H
- Motte J
- Fisse AL
- Grüter T
- Brünger J
- Stoykova Z
- Bulut Y
- Athanasopoulos D
- Sturm D
- Tegenthoff M
- Gold R
- Enax-Krumova E
- Pitarokoili K
journal: Eur J Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/ene.15341
keywords:
- Fatigue/complications
- Humans
- Neuralgia/epidemiology
- "Polyradiculoneuropathy, Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Prevalence
- Prospective Studies
- Quality of Life
- Registries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and determinants of pain in chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy: Results from the German INHIBIT registry.
**Authors:** Mork H, Motte J, Fisse AL, Grüter T, Brünger J, Stoykova Z, Bulut Y, Athanasopoulos D, Sturm D, Tegenthoff M, Gold R, Enax-Krumova E, Pitarokoili K
**Journal:** Eur J Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ene.15341](https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.15341)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurol. 2022 Jul;29(7):2109-2120. doi: 10.1111/ene.15341. Epub 2022 Apr
12.

Prevalence and determinants of pain in chronic inflammatory demyelinating
polyneuropathy: Results from the German INHIBIT registry.

Mork H(1)(2), Motte J(1)(2), Fisse AL(1)(2), Grüter T(1)(2), Brünger J(1)(2),
Stoykova Z(1)(2), Bulut Y(1)(2), Athanasopoulos D(1)(2), Sturm D(2)(3),
Tegenthoff M(2)(3), Gold R(1)(2), Enax-Krumova E(2)(3), Pitarokoili K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, St. Josef-Hospital - University Hospital,
Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(2)Immune-mediated Neuropathies Biobank (INHIBIT), Ruhr-University Bochum,
Bochum, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Bergmannsheil University Hospital, Ruhr University,
Bochum, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Pain, fatigue and depression in chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) are often underestimated, as the focus lies
on sensorimotor dysfunction and gait instability. The aim of this study was to
investigate their prevalence, characteristics and contribution to disability in
a prospective cohort of 84 patients with CIDP.
METHODS: Pain, fatigue, depression and quality of life were measured using the
Pain Detect Questionnaire, Krupp's Fatigue Severity Scale, Beck Depression
Inventory II and the German Short-Form 36 Health Survey. Sensorimotor deficits
and disability were assessed using the Inflammatory Neuropathy Cause and
Treatment overall disability score, the Rasch-built Overall Disability Scale,
the Medical Research Council sum score and the Inflammatory Neuropathy Cause and
Treatment sensory sum score. The interrelation between the five factors was
assessed using analysis of variance and linear regression analysis.
RESULTS: Pain was reported in 62%, mostly of moderate and severe intensity,
whereas pain characteristics indicated neuropathic pain (NP) in 29%. Sensory
dysfunction was stronger in NP patients compared to pain-free patients
(p = 0.001). Pain of any type, especially NP, was associated with more
pronounced fatigue symptoms (p = 0.010). Depressive symptoms were more frequent
in patients with pain compared to the pain-free patients (61% vs. 33%, p = 0.02)
and were more severe and frequent in NP than in non-NP patients (p = 0.005).
Patients with pain had a worse physical quality of life than pain-free patients
(p = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Pain, depression and fatigue are relevant disability factors in CIDP
affecting quality of life. Sensory dysfunction is associated with NP. Therefore,
evaluation of CIDP-related disability should include pain and sensory function
for adequate monitoring of therapeutic interventions.

© 2022 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.15341
PMID: 35357725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
