---
reference_id: "PMID:38547025"
title: "Birth Prevalence of Sickle Cell Disease and County-Level Social Vulnerability - Sickle Cell Data Collection Program, 11 States, 2016-2020."
authors:
- Kayle M
- Blewer AL
- Pan W
- Rothman JA
- Polick CS
- Rivenbark J
- Fisher E
- Reyes C
- Strouse JJ
- Weeks S
- Desai JR
- Snyder AB
- Zhou M
- Sutaria A
- Valle J
- Horiuchi SS
- Sontag MK
- Miller JI
- Singh A
- Dasgupta M
- Janson IA
- Galadanci N
- Reeves SL
- Latta K
- Hurden I
- Cromartie SJ
- Plaxco AP
- Mukhopadhyay A
- Smeltzer MP
- Hulihan M
journal: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7312a1
keywords:
- Female
- Child
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- United States/epidemiology
- Ethnicity
- Prevalence
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Social Vulnerability
- Minority Groups
- "Anemia, Sickle Cell/epidemiology, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Birth Prevalence of Sickle Cell Disease and County-Level Social Vulnerability - Sickle Cell Data Collection Program, 11 States, 2016-2020.
**Authors:** Kayle M, Blewer AL, Pan W, Rothman JA, Polick CS, Rivenbark J, Fisher E, Reyes C, Strouse JJ, Weeks S, Desai JR, Snyder AB, Zhou M, Sutaria A, Valle J, Horiuchi SS, Sontag MK, Miller JI, Singh A, Dasgupta M, Janson IA, Galadanci N, Reeves SL, Latta K, Hurden I, Cromartie SJ, Plaxco AP, Mukhopadhyay A, Smeltzer MP, Hulihan M
**Journal:** MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.15585/mmwr.mm7312a1](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7312a1)

## Content

1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2024 Mar 28;73(12):248-254. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm7312a1.

Birth Prevalence of Sickle Cell Disease and County-Level Social Vulnerability -
Sickle Cell Data Collection Program, 11 States, 2016-2020.

Kayle M, Blewer AL, Pan W, Rothman JA, Polick CS, Rivenbark J, Fisher E, Reyes
C, Strouse JJ, Weeks S, Desai JR, Snyder AB, Zhou M, Sutaria A, Valle J,
Horiuchi SS, Sontag MK, Miller JI, Singh A, Dasgupta M, Janson IA, Galadanci N,
Reeves SL, Latta K, Hurden I, Cromartie SJ, Plaxco AP, Mukhopadhyay A, Smeltzer
MP, Hulihan M.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) remains a public health priority in the United States
because of its association with complex health needs, reduced life expectancy,
lifelong disabilities, and high cost of care. A cross-sectional analysis was
conducted to calculate the crude and race-specific birth prevalence for SCD
using state newborn screening program records during 2016-2020 from 11 Sickle
Cell Data Collection program states. The percentage distribution of birth mother
residence within Social Vulnerability Index quartiles was derived. Among 3,305
newborns with confirmed SCD (including 57% with homozygous hemoglobin S or
sickle β-null thalassemia across 11 states, 90% of whom were Black or African
American [Black], and 4% of whom were Hispanic or Latino), the crude SCD birth
prevalence was 4.83 per 10,000 (one in every 2,070) live births and 28.54 per
10,000 (one in every 350) non-Hispanic Black newborns. Approximately two thirds
(67%) of mothers of newborns with SCD lived in counties with high or very high
levels of social vulnerability; most mothers lived in counties with high or very
high levels of vulnerability for racial and ethnic minority status (89%) and
housing type and transportation (64%) themes. These findings can guide public
health, health care systems, and community program planning and implementation
that address social determinants of health for infants with SCD. Implementation
of tailored interventions, including increasing access to transportation,
improving housing, and advancing equity in high vulnerability areas, could
facilitate care and improve health outcomes for children with SCD.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7312a1
PMCID: PMC10986820
PMID: 38547025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. Sophia S. Horiuchi reports ownership of Natera
stock and stock options and of Roche stock by her spouse. Mariam Kayle reports
institutional support from Agios Medical Education Program and Novo Nordisk
Independent Medical Education Activity to support the 11th Annual Sickle Cell
Conference, September 8–9, 2023; receipt of consulting fees from Loyola
University; receipt of honorarium for being an ad hoc reviewer from the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), Center for Scientific Review, Social and
Environmental Determinants of Health Study Section; and uncompensated membership
in the American Society of Hematology Research Collaborative Data Hub Oversight
Group, Sickle Cell Disease Subcommittee. Carri S. Polick reports support from
the Veterans Administration and Duke University Clinical and Translational
Science Institute. Ashima Singh reports institutional support from NIH, National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, and the Health Resources and Services Administration
(HRSA) Sickle Cell Treatment Demonstration Program. John J. Strouse reports
institutional support from the HRSA Southeast Region Coordinating Center Sickle
Cell Treatment Demonstration Program and the North Carolina State Department of
Health Sickle Cell Syndrome Program for the Duke Adult and Pediatric Sickle Cell
Program; royalties from UpToDate for preparation of guidance on the use of
hydroxyurea for sickle cell disease (SCD); consulting fees for GLG telephone
consultation on SCD and Guidepoint telephone consultation on SCD; receipt of
honoraria from the University of Rochester-Equity in Sickle Cell Disease Care;
payment for medical legal expert testimony from Emory University in a case
involving emergency department care of an adult with sickle beta thalassemia;
travel support from the American Society of Hematology Sickle Cell Learning
Community Meeting and Sickle Cell Disease Association of America Meeting to
speak on behalf of the American Society of Hematology and travel support from
the American Thrombosis Hemostasis Network Data Summit as an invited speaker on
gene therapy for SCD: Design for Equity; payment for participation on a data
safety monitoring board for disc medicines for phase 1 trial planning for
bitopertin for SCD; and service as vice president of the Sickle Cell Adult
Provider Network. No other potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.
