---
reference_id: "PMID:36385529"
title: APOE4 impairs myelination via cholesterol dysregulation in oligodendrocytes.
authors:
- Blanchard JW
- Akay LA
- Davila-Velderrain J
- von Maydell D
- Mathys H
- Davidson SM
- Effenberger A
- Chen CY
- Maner-Smith K
- Hajjar I
- Ortlund EA
- Bula M
- Agbas E
- Ng A
- Jiang X
- Kahn M
- Blanco-Duque C
- Lavoie N
- Liu L
- Reyes R
- Lin YT
- Ko T
- "R'Bibo L"
- Ralvenius WT
- Bennett DA
- Cam HP
- Kellis M
- Tsai LH
journal: Nature
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05439-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# APOE4 impairs myelination via cholesterol dysregulation in oligodendrocytes.
**Authors:** Blanchard JW, Akay LA, Davila-Velderrain J, von Maydell D, Mathys H, Davidson SM, Effenberger A, Chen CY, Maner-Smith K, Hajjar I, Ortlund EA, Bula M, Agbas E, Ng A, Jiang X, Kahn M, Blanco-Duque C, Lavoie N, Liu L, Reyes R, Lin YT, Ko T, R'Bibo L, Ralvenius WT, Bennett DA, Cam HP, Kellis M, Tsai LH
**Journal:** Nature (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-022-05439-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05439-w)

## Content

1. Nature. 2022 Nov;611(7937):769-779. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05439-w. Epub 2022
 Nov 16.

APOE4 impairs myelination via cholesterol dysregulation in oligodendrocytes.

Blanchard JW(#)(1)(2)(3), Akay LA(#)(1)(2)(4), Davila-Velderrain J(#)(4)(5), von 
Maydell D(#)(1)(2)(4), Mathys H(1)(2)(6), Davidson SM(7), Effenberger A(1)(2), 
Chen CY(8), Maner-Smith K(8), Hajjar I(9), Ortlund EA(8)(10), Bula M(1)(2), 
Agbas E(1)(2), Ng A(1)(2), Jiang X(1)(2), Kahn M(1)(2), Blanco-Duque C(1)(2), 
Lavoie N(1)(2), Liu L(1)(2), Reyes R(3), Lin YT(1)(2), Ko T(1), R'Bibo L(3), 
Ralvenius WT(1)(2), Bennett DA(11), Cam HP(1)(2), Kellis M(12)(13), Tsai 
LH(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Black Family Stem Cell Institute, 
Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's Disease, Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mt Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(4)MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(5)Human Technopole, Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(7)Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, Emory Integrated Metabolomics and Lipidomics Core, 
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.
(10)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
GA, USA.
(11)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL, USA.
(12)MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, 
USA. manoli@mit.edu.
(13)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. manoli@mit.edu.
(14)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. lhtsai@mit.edu.
(15)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. lhtsai@mit.edu.
(16)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. lhtsai@mit.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nature. 2024 Dec;636(8043):E9. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08434-5.

Comment in
    Nature. 2022 Nov;611(7937):670-671. doi: 10.1038/d41586-022-03371-7.
    Nature. 2022 Nov;611(7937):649. doi: 10.1038/d41586-022-03724-2.

APOE4 is the strongest genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease1-3. However, 
the effects of APOE4 on the human brain are not fully understood, limiting 
opportunities to develop targeted therapeutics for individuals carrying APOE4 
and other risk factors for Alzheimer's disease4-8. Here, to gain more 
comprehensive insights into the impact of APOE4 on the human brain, we performed 
single-cell transcriptomics profiling of post-mortem human brains from APOE4 
carriers compared with non-carriers. This revealed that APOE4 is associated with 
widespread gene expression changes across all cell types of the human brain. 
Consistent with the biological function of APOE2-6, APOE4 significantly altered 
signalling pathways associated with cholesterol homeostasis and transport. 
Confirming these findings with histological and lipidomic analysis of the 
post-mortem human brain, induced pluripotent stem-cell-derived cells and 
targeted-replacement mice, we show that cholesterol is aberrantly deposited in 
oligodendrocytes-myelinating cells that are responsible for insulating and 
promoting the electrical activity of neurons. We show that altered cholesterol 
localization in the APOE4 brain coincides with reduced myelination. 
Pharmacologically facilitating cholesterol transport increases axonal 
myelination and improves learning and memory in APOE4 mice. We provide a 
single-cell atlas describing the transcriptional effects of APOE4 on the aging 
human brain and establish a functional link between APOE4, cholesterol, 
myelination and memory, offering therapeutic opportunities for Alzheimer's 
disease.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-022-05439-w
PMCID: PMC9870060
PMID: 36385529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors filed a patent 
application based on the findings.