---
reference_id: "PMID:23967498"
title: Urofacial Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Newman WG
- Woolf AS
- Beaman GM
- Roberts NA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urofacial Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Newman WG, Woolf AS, Beaman GM, Roberts NA

## Content

1. Urofacial Syndrome.

Newman WG(1), Woolf AS(2), Beaman GM(1), Roberts NA(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2013 Aug 22 [updated 2023 Sep 28].

Author information:
(1)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Evolution, Infection and Genomics, 
University of Manchester and Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, 
Manchester, United Kingdom
(2)Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Urofacial syndrome (UFS; also known as Ochoa syndrome) 
is characterized by prenatal or childhood onset of urinary bladder voiding 
dysfunction, abnormal facial movement with expression (resulting from abnormal 
co-contraction of the corners of the mouth and eyes), and often bowel 
dysfunction (constipation and/or encopresis). Bladder voiding dysfunction can 
present before birth as megacystis. In infancy and later childhood, UFS can 
present with a poor urinary stream and dribbling incontinence; incomplete 
bladder emptying can lead to urinary infection with progressive kidney failure. 
Investigations after birth can show abnormal bladder contractility and 
vesicoureteral reflux of urine into the ureter and renal pelvis. Nocturnal 
lagophthalmos (incomplete closing of the eyes during sleep) has also been 
documented.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of UFS can be established in an 
individual with urinary tract dysfunction and characteristic facial movement 
with expression, or the molecular diagnosis can be established in an individual 
with characteristic features and biallelic pathogenic variants in either HPSE2 
or LRIG2 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Rapid and complete antibiotic therapy 
for acute urinary tract infections. Anticholinergic and alpha-1 adrenergic 
blocking medications can respectively lower raised pressure within the bladder 
and enhance voiding of urine. Drug treatment can be complemented by intermittent 
catheterization per urethra or through vesicostomy. Management of kidney disease 
per nephrology; management of severe kidney failure may warrant long-term 
dialysis and kidney transplantation. Lubricant eye drops during the day and eye 
ointment at night under the care of an ophthalmologist for nocturnal 
lagophthalmos; standard management for constipation and encopresis. 
Surveillance: Ultrasonography to monitor for evidence of urinary tract 
dysfunction including incomplete bladder emptying and hydroureteronephrosis. 
Kidney excretory function should be monitored, initially by measuring plasma 
creatinine at intervals determined by urinary tract features at presentation and 
their subsequent progression. Ophthalmology examinations to assess for corneal 
involvement; assessment for bowel dysfunction annually or at each visit. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Nephrotoxic substances. Evaluation of relatives 
at risk: At-risk sibs: it is appropriate to examine sibs of an affected 
individual as soon as possible after birth to determine if facial and/or urinary 
tract manifestations of UFS are present to allow prompt evaluation of the 
urinary tract and renal function and initiation of necessary treatment. At-risk 
fetus: although no guidelines for prenatal management of UFS exist, it seems 
appropriate to perform ultrasound examination of pregnancies at risk (in the 
second and third trimesters) to determine if urinary tract involvement of UFS is 
present, as this may influence the timing and/or location of delivery (e.g., in 
a tertiary medical center that could manage renal/urinary complications 
immediately after birth).
GENETIC COUNSELING: UFS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for a UFS-related pathogenic variant, each 
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, 
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the UFS-related pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives 
and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 23967498