---
reference_id: "PMID:36052466"
title: Persistent Circulating Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Spike Is Associated With Post-acute Coronavirus Disease 2019 Sequelae.
authors:
- Swank Z
- Senussi Y
- Manickas-Hill Z
- Yu XG
- Li JZ
- Alter G
- Walt DR
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciac722
keywords:
- Humans
- "Antigens, Viral/blood, immunology"
- "COVID-19/blood, complications, immunology"
- Disease Progression
- SARS-CoV-2
- "Post-Acute COVID-19 Syndrome/blood, diagnosis, immunology"
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Spike Glycoprotein, Coronavirus/blood"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Persistent Circulating Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Spike Is Associated With Post-acute Coronavirus Disease 2019 Sequelae.
**Authors:** Swank Z, Senussi Y, Manickas-Hill Z, Yu XG, Li JZ, Alter G, Walt DR
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciac722](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciac722)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2023 Feb 8;76(3):e487-e490. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciac722.

Persistent Circulating Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Spike Is
Associated With Post-acute Coronavirus Disease 2019 Sequelae.

Swank Z(1)(2)(3), Senussi Y(1)(2)(3), Manickas-Hill Z(4), Yu XG(1)(4)(5), Li
JZ(1)(5), Alter G(4)(6), Walt DR(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(3)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Hum Cell. 2023 Jan;36(1):483-485. doi: 10.1007/s13577-022-00809-y.

The diagnosis of postacute sequelae of coronavirus disease 2019 (PASC) poses an
ongoing medical challenge. To identify biomarkers associated with PASC we
analyzed plasma samples collected from PASC and coronavirus disease 2019
patients to quantify viral antigens and inflammatory markers. We detect severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 spike predominantly in PASC patients up
to 12 months after diagnosis.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciac722
PMCID: PMC10169416
PMID: 36052466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. D. W. has a
financial interest in Quanterix Corporation, a company that develops an
ultra-sensitive digital immunoassay platform. He is an inventor of the single
molecule array technology, a founder of the company and also serves on its Board
of Directors. D. W.'s interests were reviewed and are managed by Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Partners Healthcare in accordance with their conflict of
interest policies. He also holds stock and stock options for Quanterix
Corporation. G. A. reports grants or contracts from Biontech, Merck, and BMS;
consulting fees from Sanofi and Moderna, payment or honoraria for lectures,
presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational events from
GSK and Astrazeneca; patents from REFORM—Antibody Engineering—MGH; CAPRISA
CAP276 HIV monoclonal DSMB; is a part of the Sanofi Scientific Advisory Board;
and holds stock or stock options for Systems Seromyx and Leyden Labs. All other
authors report no potential conflicts. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form
for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors
consider relevant to the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.
