---
reference_id: "PMID:27546846"
title: Heritable Gastrointestinal Cancer Syndromes.
authors:
- Stoffel EM
journal: Gastroenterol Clin North Am
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.gtc.2016.04.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heritable Gastrointestinal Cancer Syndromes.
**Authors:** Stoffel EM
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Clin North Am (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gtc.2016.04.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gtc.2016.04.008)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2016 Sep;45(3):509-27. doi: 
10.1016/j.gtc.2016.04.008.

Heritable Gastrointestinal Cancer Syndromes.

Stoffel EM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan Health System, 2150A Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 
Electronic address: estoffel@med.umich.edu.

Although almost all gastrointestinal cancers develop from sporadic genomic 
events, approximately 5% arise from germline mutations in genes associated with 
cancer predisposition. The number of these genes continues to increase. Tumor 
phenotypes and family history provide the framework for identifying at-risk 
individuals. The diagnosis of a hereditary cancer syndrome has implications for 
management of patients and their families. Systematic approaches that integrate 
family history and molecular characterization of tumors and polyps facilitate 
identification of individuals with this genetic predisposition. This article 
summarizes diagnosis and management of hereditary cancer syndromes associated 
with gastrointestinal cancers.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gtc.2016.04.008
PMID: 27546846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]