---
reference_id: "PMID:37028992"
title: Recent insights into lysosomal acid lipase deficiency.
authors:
- Korbelius M
- Kuentzel KB
- Bradić I
- Vujić N
- Kratky D
journal: Trends Mol Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2023.03.001
keywords:
- Humans
- "Wolman Disease/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Sterol Esterase/genetics, metabolism"
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Lipids/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent insights into lysosomal acid lipase deficiency.
**Authors:** Korbelius M, Kuentzel KB, Bradić I, Vujić N, Kratky D
**Journal:** Trends Mol Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molmed.2023.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2023.03.001)

## Content

1. Trends Mol Med. 2023 Jun;29(6):425-438. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2023.03.001.
Epub  2023 Apr 5.

Recent insights into lysosomal acid lipase deficiency.

Korbelius M(1), Kuentzel KB(1), Bradić I(1), Vujić N(1), Kratky D(2).

Author information:
(1)Gottfried Schatz Research Center, Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Medical 
University of Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(2)Gottfried Schatz Research Center, Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Medical 
University of Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria. Electronic address: 
dagmar.kratky@medunigraz.at.

Lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) is the sole enzyme known to degrade neutral lipids 
in the lysosome. Mutations in the LAL-encoding LIPA gene lead to rare lysosomal 
lipid storage disorders with complete or partial absence of LAL activity. This 
review discusses the consequences of defective LAL-mediated lipid hydrolysis on 
cellular lipid homeostasis, epidemiology, and clinical presentation. Early 
detection of LAL deficiency (LAL-D) is essential for disease management and 
survival. LAL-D must be considered in patients with dyslipidemia and elevated 
aminotransferase concentrations of unknown etiology. Enzyme replacement therapy, 
sometimes in combination with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), is 
currently the only therapy for LAL-D. New technologies based on mRNA and viral 
vector gene transfer are recent efforts to provide other effective therapeutic 
strategies.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmed.2023.03.001
PMCID: PMC7614602
PMID: 37028992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests No interests are 
declared.