---
reference_id: "PMID:26438050"
title: Immunopathogenic Background of Pars Planitis.
authors:
- Przeździecka-Dołyk J
- Węgrzyn A
- Turno-Kręcicka A
- Misiuk-Hojło M
journal: Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz)
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00005-015-0361-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunopathogenic Background of Pars Planitis.
**Authors:** Przeździecka-Dołyk J, Węgrzyn A, Turno-Kręcicka A, Misiuk-Hojło M
**Journal:** Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz) (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00005-015-0361-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00005-015-0361-y)

## Content

1. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 2016 Apr;64(2):127-37. doi: 
10.1007/s00005-015-0361-y. Epub 2015 Oct 5.

Immunopathogenic Background of Pars Planitis.

Przeździecka-Dołyk J(1), Węgrzyn A(2), Turno-Kręcicka A(3), Misiuk-Hojło M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department and Clinic of Ophthalmology, Wroclaw Medical University, Borowska 
213, 50-556, Wrocław, Poland. arie_l@wp.pl.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland.
(3)Department and Clinic of Ophthalmology, Wroclaw Medical University, Borowska 
213, 50-556, Wrocław, Poland.

Pars planitis is defined as an intermediate uveitis of unknown background of 
systemic disease with characteristic formations such as vitreous snowballs, 
snowbanks and changes in peripheral retina. The incidence of pars planitis 
varies 2.4-15.4 % of the uveitis patients. The pathogenesis of the disease is to 
be determined in future. Clinical and histopathological findings suggest an 
autoimmune etiology, most likely as a reaction to endogenous antigen of unknown 
source, with T cells predominant in both vitreous and pars plana infiltrations. 
T cells subsets play an important role as a memory-effector peripheral cell. 
Snowbanks are formed as an effect of post inflammatory glial proliferation of 
fibrous astrocytes. There is also a genetic predisposition for pars planitis by 
human leukocyte antigen and several other genes. A coexistence of multiple 
sclerosis and optic neuritis has been described in numerous studies. Epiretinal 
membrane, cataract, cystoid macular edema, retinal detachment, retinal 
vasculitis, neovascularization, vitreous peripheral traction, peripheral hole 
formation, vitreous hemorrhage, disc edema are common complications observed in 
pars planitis. There is a need to expand the knowledge of the pathogenic and 
immunologic background of the pars planitis to create an accurate 
pharmacological treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00005-015-0361-y
PMCID: PMC4805694
PMID: 26438050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]