---
reference_id: "PMID:18470948"
title: Genotype-phenotype correlations in MYCN-related Feingold syndrome.
authors:
- Marcelis CL
- Hol FA
- Graham GE
- Rieu PN
- Kellermayer R
- Meijer RP
- Lugtenberg D
- Scheffer H
- van Bokhoven H
- Brunner HG
- de Brouwer AP
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20750
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Digestive System Abnormalities/genetics
- Family Health
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genotype
- Intestinal Atresia/genetics
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Mutation
- N-Myc Proto-Oncogene Protein
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- Syndactyly/genetics
- Syndrome
- Toes/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype correlations in MYCN-related Feingold syndrome.
**Authors:** Marcelis CL, Hol FA, Graham GE, Rieu PN, Kellermayer R, Meijer RP, Lugtenberg D, Scheffer H, van Bokhoven H, Brunner HG, de Brouwer AP
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20750](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20750)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2008 Sep;29(9):1125-32. doi: 10.1002/humu.20750.

Genotype-phenotype correlations in MYCN-related Feingold syndrome.

Marcelis CL(1), Hol FA, Graham GE, Rieu PN, Kellermayer R, Meijer RP, Lugtenberg 
D, Scheffer H, van Bokhoven H, Brunner HG, de Brouwer AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands. c.marcelis@antrg.umcn.nl

Feingold syndrome (FS) is the most frequent cause of familial syndromic 
gastrointestinal atresia and follows autosomal dominant inheritance. FS is 
caused by germline mutations in or deletions of the MYCN gene. Previously, 12 
different heterozygous MYCN mutations and two deletions containing multiple 
genes including MYCN were described. All these mutations result in 
haploinsufficiency of both the canonical MYCN protein and the shorter isoform, 
DeltaMYCN. We report 11 novel mutations including seven mutations in exon 2 that 
result in a premature termination codon (PTC) in the long MYCN transcript. 
Moreover, we have identified a PTC in exon 1 that only affects the DeltaMYCN 
isoform, without a phenotypic effect. This suggests that mutations in only 
DeltaMYCN do not contribute to the FS. Additionally, we found three novel 
deletions encompassing MYCN. Together with our previous report we now have a 
total of four missense mutations in the DNA binding domain, 19 PTCs of which six 
render the transcript subject to nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), and five larger 
deletions in a total of 77 patients. We have reviewed the clinical features of 
these patients, and found that digital anomalies, e.g., brachymesophalangy and 
toe syndactyly, are the most consistent features, present in 100% and 97% of the 
patients, respectively. Small head circumference was present in 89% of the 
cases. Gastrointestinal atresia remains the most important major congenital 
anomaly (55%), but cardiac and renal anomalies are also frequent. We suggest 
that the presence of brachymesophalangy and toe syndactyly in combination with 
microcephaly is enough to justify MYCN analysis.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20750
PMID: 18470948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]