---
reference_id: "PMID:37454964"
title: Identification of potential non-invasive biomarkers in diastrophic dysplasia.
authors:
- Paganini C
- Carroll RS
- Gramegna Tota C
- Schelhaas AJ
- Leone A
- Duker AL
- "O'Connell DA"
- Coghlan RF
- Johnstone B
- Ferreira CR
- Peressini S
- Albertini R
- Forlino A
- Bonafé L
- Campos-Xavier AB
- Superti-Furga A
- Zankl A
- Rossi A
- Bober MB
journal: Bone
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2023.116838
keywords:
- Sulfates/metabolism
- Sulfate Transporters
- Glycosaminoglycans
- Biomarkers
- Achondroplasia
- Anion Transport Proteins/genetics
- Dwarfism
- Collagen/metabolism
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of potential non-invasive biomarkers in diastrophic dysplasia.
**Authors:** Paganini C, Carroll RS, Gramegna Tota C, Schelhaas AJ, Leone A, Duker AL, O'Connell DA, Coghlan RF, Johnstone B, Ferreira CR, Peressini S, Albertini R, Forlino A, Bonafé L, Campos-Xavier AB, Superti-Furga A, Zankl A, Rossi A, Bober MB
**Journal:** Bone (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2023.116838](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2023.116838)

## Content

1. Bone. 2023 Oct;175:116838. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2023.116838. Epub 2023 Jul 16.

Identification of potential non-invasive biomarkers in diastrophic dysplasia.

Paganini C(1), Carroll RS(2), Gramegna Tota C(1), Schelhaas AJ(3), Leone A(4), 
Duker AL(3), O'Connell DA(5), Coghlan RF(6), Johnstone B(7), Ferreira CR(8), 
Peressini S(9), Albertini R(9), Forlino A(1), Bonafé L(10), Campos-Xavier 
AB(10), Superti-Furga A(10), Zankl A(11), Rossi A(12), Bober MB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Unit of Biochemistry, University of Pavia, 
Pavia, Italy.
(2)Nemours Children's Hospital, Wilmington, DE, USA; Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Nemours Children's Hospital, Wilmington, DE, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, Unit of Biochemistry, University of Pavia, 
Pavia, Italy; University School for Advanced Studies Pavia, IUSS Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
(5)Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Shriners Hospitals for Children, Portland, OR, USA.
(7)Shriners Hospitals for Children, Portland, OR, USA; Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(8)National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(9)Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 
Pavia, Italy.
(10)Division of Genetic Medicine, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, 
University of Lausanne, Switzerland.
(11)University of Sydney, The Children's Hospital at Westmead and Garvan 
Institute for Medical Research, Sydney, Australia.
(12)Department of Molecular Medicine, Unit of Biochemistry, University of Pavia, 
Pavia, Italy. Electronic address: antrossi@unipv.it.

Diastrophic dysplasia (DTD) is a recessive chondrodysplasia caused by pathogenic 
variants in the SLC26A2 gene encoding for a cell membrane sulfate/chloride 
antiporter crucial for sulfate uptake and glycosaminoglycan (GAG) sulfation. 
Research on a DTD animal model has suggested possible pharmacological treatment 
approaches. In view of future clinical trials, the identification of 
non-invasive biomarkers is crucial to assess the efficacy of treatments. Urinary 
GAG composition has been analyzed in several metabolic disorders including 
mucopolysaccharidoses. Moreover, the N-terminal fragment of collagen X, known as 
collagen X marker (CXM), is considered a real-time marker of endochondral 
ossification and growth velocity and was studied in individuals with 
achondroplasia and osteogenesis imperfecta. In this work, urinary GAG sulfation 
and blood CXM levels were investigated as potential biomarkers for individuals 
affected by DTD. Chondroitin sulfate disaccharide analysis was performed on GAGs 
isolated from urine by HPLC after GAG digestion with chondroitinase ABC and 
ACII, while CXM was assessed in dried blood spots. Results from DTD patients 
were compared with an age-matched control population. Undersulfation of urinary 
GAGs was observed in DTD patients with some relationship to the clinical 
severity and underlying SLC26A2 variants. Lower than normal CXM levels were 
observed in most patients, even if the marker did not show a clear pattern in 
our small patient cohort because CXM values are highly dependent on age, gender 
and growth velocity. In summary, both non-invasive biomarkers are promising 
assays targeting various aspects of the disorder including overall metabolism of 
sulfated GAGs and endochondral ossification.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2023.116838
PMCID: PMC11638977
PMID: 37454964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest R.F. Coghlan 
declares an interest as an inventor of the CXM ELISA assay and receives 
royalties on the technology; other Authors report no conflict of interest.