---
reference_id: "PMID:32840329"
title: Long-chain fatty acid oxidation disorders and current management strategies.
authors:
- Vockley J
journal: Am J Manag Care
year: '2020'
doi: 10.37765/ajmc.2020.88480
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-chain fatty acid oxidation disorders and current management strategies.
**Authors:** Vockley J
**Journal:** Am J Manag Care (2020)
**DOI:** [10.37765/ajmc.2020.88480](https://doi.org/10.37765/ajmc.2020.88480)

## Content

1. Am J Manag Care. 2020 Aug;26(7 Suppl):S147-S154. doi:
10.37765/ajmc.2020.88480.

Long-chain fatty acid oxidation disorders and current management strategies.

Vockley J(1).

Author information:
(1)Chief of the Division of Medical Genetics and Director of The Center for Rare 
Disease Therapy, UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh; and Cleveland Family 
Endowed Chair in Pediatric Research and Professor of Human Genetics, University 
of Pittsburgh, both in Pittsburgh, PA. Email: gerard.vockley@chp.edu.

Long-chain fatty acid oxidation disorders (LC-FAODs) are rare, life-threatening, 
autosomal recessive genetic disorders characterized by acute crises of energy 
production and chronic energy deficiency. Patients may present with 
rhabdomyolysis induced by exercise; fasting or illness; hepatic dysfunction, 
including severe hypoglycemia and hyperammonemia; and cardiomyopathy. These 
clinical manifestations can lead to frequent hospitalizations and premature 
death. LC-FAODs are caused by mutations in nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial 
enzymes involved in the conversion of dietary long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs) 
into energy during times of fasting and physiologic stress. Despite newborn 
screening, current management options leave many patients continuing to 
experience major clinical events, and mortality rates remain elevated. The 
current standard therapy for LC-FAODs is avoidance of fasting and 
supplementation of medium-chain triglyceride oil, an even, medium-chain fatty 
acid that does not require the typical steps of LC-FAOD for metabolism. Despite 
this therapy, patients with LC-FAODs continue to experience recurring 
hospitalizations, and high morbidity and mortality rates. In recent years, the 
use of medium, odd-chain fatty acids, such as triheptanoin, have been studied as 
a treatment of LC-FAODs due to its anaplerotic properties. Due to favorable 
safety and efficacy data from clinical trials, this novel agent has the 
potential to transform the treatment of LC-FAODs and improve patient outcomes in 
this patient population. This article provides an overview of the epidemiology, 
pathophysiology, clinical manifestations, and current management approaches for 
the diagnosis and management of LC-FAODs. It also provides the most recent 
clinical safety and efficacy data for triheptanoin and other therapies under 
investigation.

DOI: 10.37765/ajmc.2020.88480
PMCID: PMC9850137
PMID: 32840329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]