---
reference_id: "PMID:37365635"
title: Clinical and genetic analysis of a case of late onset carbamoyl phosphate synthase I deficiency caused by CPS1 mutation and literature review.
authors:
- Wang S
- Chen J
- Zhu X
- Huang T
- Xu H
- Ying G
- Qian H
- Lin W
- Tung Y
- Khan KU
- Guo H
- Zheng G
- Lu H
- Zhang G
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-023-01569-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic analysis of a case of late onset carbamoyl phosphate synthase I deficiency caused by CPS1 mutation and literature review.
**Authors:** Wang S, Chen J, Zhu X, Huang T, Xu H, Ying G, Qian H, Lin W, Tung Y, Khan KU, Guo H, Zheng G, Lu H, Zhang G
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-023-01569-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-023-01569-w)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2023 Jun 26;16(1):145. doi: 10.1186/s12920-023-01569-w.

Clinical and genetic analysis of a case of late onset carbamoyl phosphate 
synthase I deficiency caused by CPS1 mutation and literature review.

Wang S(#)(1), Chen J(#)(2), Zhu X(#)(2), Huang T(1), Xu H(1), Ying G(1), Qian 
H(1), Lin W(1), Tung Y(1), Khan KU(1), Guo H(1), Zheng G(1), Lu H(1), Zhang 
G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 
No.72 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 
No.72 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. zhanggangnjmu@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I defect (CPS1D) is a rare disease 
with clinical case reports mainly in early neonates or adults, with few reports 
of first onset in late neonatal to childhood. We studied the clinical and 
genotypic characteristics of children with childhood onset CPS1D caused by two 
loci mutations (one of these is a rarely reported non-frame shift mutation) in 
the CPS1.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a rare case of adolescent-onset CPS1D that had 
been misdiagnosed due to atypical clinical features, and further investigations 
revealed severe hyperammonemia (287µmol/L; reference range 11.2 ~ 48.2umol/L). 
MRI of the brain showed diffuse white matter lesions. Blood genetic metabolic 
screening showed elevated blood alanine (757.06umol/L; reference range 
148.8 ~ 739.74umol/L) and decreased blood citrulline (4.26umol/L; reference 
range 5.45 ~ 36.77umol/L). Urine metabolic screening showed normal whey acids 
and uracil. Whole-exome sequencing revealed compound heterozygous mutations in 
the CPS1, a missense mutation (c.1145 C > T) and an unreported de novo non-frame 
shift mutation (c.4080_c.4091delAGGCATCCTGAT), respectively, which provided a 
clinical diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: A comprehensive description of the clinical and genetic features of 
this patient, who has a rare age of onset and a relatively atypical clinical 
presentation, will facilitate the early diagnosis and management of this type of 
late onset CPS1D and reduce misdiagnosis, thus helping to reduce mortality and 
improve prognosis. It also provides a preliminary understanding of the 
relationship between genotype and phenotype, based on a summary of previous 
studies, which reminds us that it may help to explore the pathogenesis of the 
disease and contribute to genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-023-01569-w
PMCID: PMC10291795
PMID: 37365635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.