---
reference_id: "PMID:39301689"
title: Neuromuscular junction dysfunction in Lafora disease.
authors:
- Shukla M
- Chugh D
- Ganesh S
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.050905
keywords:
- Animals
- "Lafora Disease/pathology, physiopathology, genetics"
- "Neuromuscular Junction/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor/genetics, metabolism, deficiency"
- Mice
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/metabolism, genetics, deficiency"
- Motor Neurons/pathology
- Synaptic Transmission
- "Myofibrils/pathology, metabolism"
- "Spinal Cord/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuromuscular junction dysfunction in Lafora disease.
**Authors:** Shukla M, Chugh D, Ganesh S
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.050905](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.050905)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2024 Oct 1;17(10):dmm050905. doi: 10.1242/dmm.050905. Epub
2024  Oct 14.

Neuromuscular junction dysfunction in Lafora disease.

Shukla M(1), Chugh D(1), Ganesh S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology, Kanpur 208016, India.
(2)Mehta Family Centre for Engineering in Medicine, Indian Institute of 
Technology, Kanpur 208016, India.
(3)Gangwal School of Medical Sciences and Technology, Indian Institute of 
Technology, Kanpur 208016, India.

Lafora disease (LD), a fatal neurodegenerative disorder, is caused by mutations 
in the EPM2A gene encoding laforin phosphatase or NHLRC1 gene encoding malin 
ubiquitin ligase. LD symptoms include epileptic seizures, ataxia, dementia and 
cognitive decline. Studies on LD have primarily concentrated on the 
pathophysiology in the brain. A few studies have reported motor symptoms, muscle 
weakness and muscle atrophy. Intriguingly, skeletal muscles are known to 
accumulate Lafora polyglucosan bodies. Using laforin-deficient mice, an 
established model for LD, we demonstrate that LD pathology correlated with 
structural and functional impairments in the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). 
Specifically, we found impairment in NMJ transmission, which coincided with 
altered expression of NMJ-associated genes and reduced motor endplate area, 
fragmented junctions and loss of fully innervated junctions at the NMJ. We also 
observed a reduction in alpha-motor neurons in the lumbar spinal cord, with 
significant presynaptic morphological alterations. Disorganised myofibrillar 
patterns, slight z-line streaming and muscle atrophy were also evident in LD 
animals. In summary, our study offers insight into the neuropathic and myopathic 
alterations leading to motor deficits in LD.

© 2024. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.050905
PMCID: PMC11512103
PMID: 39301689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.