---
reference_id: "PMID:27282200"
title: "Temple-Baraitser Syndrome and Zimmermann-Laband Syndrome: one clinical entity?"
authors:
- Mégarbané A
- Al-Ali R
- Choucair N
- Lek M
- Wang E
- Ladjimi M
- Rose CM
- Hobeika R
- Macary Y
- Temanni R
- Jithesh PV
- Chouchane A
- Sastry KS
- Thomas R
- Tomei S
- Liu W
- Marincola FM
- MacArthur D
- Chouchane L
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-016-0304-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Temple-Baraitser Syndrome and Zimmermann-Laband Syndrome: one clinical entity?
**Authors:** Mégarbané A, Al-Ali R, Choucair N, Lek M, Wang E, Ladjimi M, Rose CM, Hobeika R, Macary Y, Temanni R, Jithesh PV, Chouchane A, Sastry KS, Thomas R, Tomei S, Liu W, Marincola FM, MacArthur D, Chouchane L
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-016-0304-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-016-0304-4)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2016 Jun 10;17(1):42. doi: 10.1186/s12881-016-0304-4.

Temple-Baraitser Syndrome and Zimmermann-Laband Syndrome: one clinical entity?

Mégarbané A(1), Al-Ali R(2), Choucair N(3), Lek M(4), Wang E(5), Ladjimi M(6), 
Rose CM(7), Hobeika R(3), Macary Y(3), Temanni R(2), Jithesh PV(2), Chouchane 
A(8), Sastry KS(8), Thomas R(9), Tomei S(5), Liu W(5), Marincola FM(10), 
MacArthur D(4), Chouchane L(11).

Author information:
(1)Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France. andre.megarbane@yahoo.fr.
(2)Bioinformatics Division, Sidra Medical & Research Center, Doha, Qatar.
(3)Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France.
(4)Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, USA.
(5)Genomics Core Laboratory, Translational Medicine Division, Sidra Medical & 
Research Center, Doha, Qatar.
(6)Laboratory of Protein Chemistry, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, Doha, Qatar.
(7)POSSUMweb, Victorian Clinical Genetics Service and Murdoch Childrens Research 
Institute, The Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(8)Dermatology Research Group, Translational Medicine Division, Sidra Medical & 
Research Center, Doha, Qatar.
(9)Laboratory of Genetic Medicine and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, 
Education City, Qatar Foundation, Doha, Qatar.
(10)Research Office, Sidra Medical & Research Center, Doha, Qatar.
(11)Laboratory of Genetic Medicine and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, 
Education City, Qatar Foundation, Doha, Qatar. loc2008@qatar-med.cornell.edu.

BACKGROUND: KCNH1 encodes a voltage-gated potassium channel that is 
predominantly expressed in the central nervous system. Mutations in this gene 
were recently found to be responsible for Temple-Baraitser Syndrome (TMBTS) and 
Zimmermann-Laband syndrome (ZLS).
METHODS: Here, we report a new case of TMBTS diagnosed in a Lebanese child. 
Whole genome sequencing was carried out on DNA samples of the proband and his 
parents to identify mutations associated with this disease. Sanger sequencing 
was performed to confirm the presence of detected variants.
RESULTS: Whole genome sequencing revealed three missense mutations in TMBTS 
patient: c.1042G > A in KCNH1, c.2131 T > C in STK36, and c.726C > A in ZNF517. 
According to all predictors, mutation in KCNH1 is damaging de novo mutation that 
results in substitution of Glycine by Arginine, i.e., p.(Gly348Arg). This 
mutation was already reported in a patient with ZLS that could affect the 
connecting loop between helices S4-S5 of KCNH1 with a gain of function effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that KCNH1 mutations cause TMBTS and 
expand the mutational spectrum of KCNH1 in TMBTS. In addition, all cases of 
TMBTS were reviewed and compared to ZLS. We suggest that the two syndromes are a 
continuum and that the variability in the phenotypes is the result of the 
involvement of genetic modifiers.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-016-0304-4
PMCID: PMC4901505
PMID: 27282200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]