---
reference_id: "PMID:23743993"
title: "[Regional treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma: results from the tumor centre Regensburg]."
authors:
- Ried M
- Speth U
- Potzger T
- Neu R
- Diez C
- Klinkhammer-Schalke M
- Hofmann HS
journal: Chirurg
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00104-013-2518-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Regional treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma: results from the tumor centre Regensburg].
**Authors:** Ried M, Speth U, Potzger T, Neu R, Diez C, Klinkhammer-Schalke M, Hofmann HS
**Journal:** Chirurg (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00104-013-2518-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00104-013-2518-8)

## Content

1. Chirurg. 2013 Nov;84(11):987-93. doi: 10.1007/s00104-013-2518-8.

[Regional treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma: results from the tumor 
centre Regensburg].

[Article in German]

Ried M(1), Speth U, Potzger T, Neu R, Diez C, Klinkhammer-Schalke M, Hofmann HS.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Thoraxchirurgie, Universitätsklinikum Regensburg, 
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93053, Regensburg, Deutschland, 
micha.ried@t-online.de.

INTRODUCTION: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is an aggressive, malignant 
tumor of the pleural surface and is strongly associated with asbestos exposure. 
Incidence of MPM will reach its peak over the coming years. Most patients 
present with advanced tumor stages and therefore surgical options are limited.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Retrospective analysis of all patients with MPM reported 
to the tumor centre Regensburg between January 1998 and August 2011.
RESULTS: A total of 118 patients (85 % male) with cytologically or 
histologically confirmed MPM were reported. The mean age at diagnosis was 67 
years (range 45-84 years) and 65 % of patients had a history of asbestos 
exposure. The incidence of MPM at the tumor centre Regensburg was 0.8/100,000 
inhabitants with obvious regional differences depending on asbestos exposure. 
Staging was completed in 81 patients (67 %): stage I 9 %, stage II 22 %, stage 
III 23 % and stage IV 46 %. Of the patients 87 (74 %) underwent at least one 
surgical procedure: diagnostic thoracoscopy with biopsy (n = 37, 43 %), 
debulking surgery or talcum pleurodesis (n = 33, 38 %) and potentially curative 
resection (n = 17, 19 %). After a mean follow-up of 20 months the overall median 
survival was 14 months (1 year survival rate 62 %, 3 year survival rate 15 %). 
Patients had a significantly better median survival of 18 months after curative 
resection.
CONCLUSIONS: The distribution of MPM varies according to regional and industrial 
asbestos exposure. Screening and diagnostics should concentrate on locations 
with higher incidence of MPM to facilitate surgical therapy in a multimodal 
treatment regime.

DOI: 10.1007/s00104-013-2518-8
PMID: 23743993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]