---
reference_id: "PMID:37761826"
title: Genetic Modifiers of Mendelian Monogenic Collagen IV Nephropathies in Humans and Mice.
authors:
- Deltas C
- Papagregoriou G
- Louka SF
- Malatras A
- Flinter F
- Gale DP
- Gear S
- Gross O
- Hoefele J
- Lennon R
- Miner JH
- Renieri A
- Savige J
- Turner AN
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14091686
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Hematuria/genetics
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics"
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Renal Insufficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Modifiers of Mendelian Monogenic Collagen IV Nephropathies in Humans and Mice.
**Authors:** Deltas C, Papagregoriou G, Louka SF, Malatras A, Flinter F, Gale DP, Gear S, Gross O, Hoefele J, Lennon R, Miner JH, Renieri A, Savige J, Turner AN
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14091686](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14091686)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Aug 25;14(9):1686. doi: 10.3390/genes14091686.

Genetic Modifiers of Mendelian Monogenic Collagen IV Nephropathies in Humans and 
Mice.

Deltas C(1)(2), Papagregoriou G(2), Louka SF(2), Malatras A(2), Flinter F(3), 
Gale DP(4), Gear S(5), Gross O(6), Hoefele J(7), Lennon R(8), Miner JH(9), 
Renieri A(10)(11)(12), Savige J(13), Turner AN(14).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University of Cyprus, Nicosia 2109, Cyprus.
(2)biobank.cy Center of Excellence in Biobanking and Biomedical Research, 
University of Cyprus, Nicosia 2109, Cyprus.
(3)Clinical Genetics Department, Guy's & St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London 
SE1 9RT, UK.
(4)Department of Renal Medicine, University College London, London NW3 2PF, UK.
(5)Alport UK, Tetbury GL8 0AW, UK.
(6)Clinic for Nephrology and Rheumatology, University Medicine Goettingen, 37075 
Goettingen, Germany.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, School of Medicine & 
Health, Technical University Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany.
(8)Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, 
Manchester M13 9WU, UK.
(9)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(10)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy.
(11)Med Biotech Hub and Competence Center, Department of Medical 
Biotechnologies, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy.
(12)Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Senese, 53100 Siena, 
Italy.
(13)Department of Medicine (Melbourne Health and Northern Health), The 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.
(14)Renal Medicine, Royal Infirmary, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 
4UX, UK.

Familial hematuria is a clinical sign of a genetically heterogeneous group of 
conditions, accompanied by broad inter- and intrafamilial variable expressivity. 
The most frequent condition is caused by pathogenic (or likely pathogenic) 
variants in the collagen-IV genes, COL4A3/A4/A5. Pathogenic variants in COL4A5 
are responsible for the severe X-linked glomerulopathy, Alport syndrome (AS), 
while homozygous or compound heterozygous variants in the COL4A3 or the COL4A4 
gene cause autosomal recessive AS. AS usually leads to progressive kidney 
failure before the age of 40-years when left untreated. People who inherit 
heterozygous COL4A3/A4 variants are at-risk of a slowly progressive form of the 
disease, starting with microscopic hematuria in early childhood, developing 
Alport spectrum nephropathy. Sometimes, they are diagnosed with benign familial 
hematuria, and sometimes with autosomal dominant AS. At diagnosis, they often 
show thin basement membrane nephropathy, reflecting the uniform thin glomerular 
basement membrane lesion, inherited as an autosomal dominant condition. On a 
long follow-up, most patients will retain normal or mildly affected kidney 
function, while a substantial proportion will develop chronic kidney disease 
(CKD), even kidney failure at an average age of 55-years. A question that 
remains unanswered is how to distinguish those patients with AS or with 
heterozygous COL4A3/A4 variants who will manifest a more aggressive kidney 
function decline, requiring prompt medical intervention. The hypothesis that a 
subgroup of patients coinherit additional genetic modifiers that exacerbate 
their clinical course has been investigated by several researchers. Here, we 
review all publications that describe the potential role of candidate genetic 
modifiers in patients and include a summary of studies in AS mouse models.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14091686
PMCID: PMC10530214
PMID: 37761826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.