---
reference_id: "PMID:39991440"
title: Changes in glycosphingolipid levels in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid of individuals with Lysosomal Free Sialic Acid Storage Disorder.
authors:
- Sabir MS
- Wolfe L
- Adams DR
- Ciccone C
- Porter FD
- Gahl WA
- Huizing M
- Platt FM
- Malicdan MCV
journal: Rare
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.rare.2025.100065
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Changes in glycosphingolipid levels in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid of individuals with Lysosomal Free Sialic Acid Storage Disorder.
**Authors:** Sabir MS, Wolfe L, Adams DR, Ciccone C, Porter FD, Gahl WA, Huizing M, Platt FM, Malicdan MCV
**Journal:** Rare (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rare.2025.100065](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rare.2025.100065)

## Content

1. Rare. 2025;3:100065. doi: 10.1016/j.rare.2025.100065. Epub 2025 Jan 31.

Changes in glycosphingolipid levels in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid of 
individuals with Lysosomal Free Sialic Acid Storage Disorder.

Sabir MS(1)(2), Wolfe L(1), Adams DR(1)(3), Ciccone C(4), Porter FD(5), Gahl 
WA(1)(4), Huizing M(4), Platt FM(6), Malicdan MCV(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)NIH Oxford-Cambridge Scholars Program, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Office of the Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Human Biochemical Genetics Section, Medical Genetics Branch, National Human 
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Section on Molecular Dysmorphology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Lysosomal free sialic acid storage disorder (FSASD) is a rare, multisystem 
disease caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in SLC17A5, encoding the 
lysosomal transmembrane sialic acid exporter, sialin. Defective sialin function 
leads to sialic acid accumulation in lysosomes, contributing to 
neurodegeneration. While glycosphingolipid (GSL) metabolism is altered in other 
lysosomal storage disorders, its role in FSASD remains poorly understood, 
especially due to the restricted availability of biospecimens. This study 
investigated GSL levels in FSASD plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) using two 
normal-phase high-performance liquid chromatography assays. In plasma, GM1a was 
significantly elevated, while GM2 was decreased, with no significant alterations 
in other GSL species. In CSF, total GSLs, GM1a, GM3, GD3, GD1a, and GD1b were 
significantly elevated compared to comparison samples. These results reveal 
dysregulated GSL metabolism and suggest the potential of gangliosides as 
biomarkers. Further research is warranted to elucidate the biological 
implications of these alterations and their contributions to FSASD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rare.2025.100065
PMCID: PMC11845233
PMID: 39991440

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests All authors have 
nothing to declare. Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declare that 
they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that 
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.