---
reference_id: "PMID:38427603"
title: A rare germline BMP15 missense mutation causes hereditary ovarian immature teratoma in human.
authors:
- Liu Y
- Fan H
- Kang X
- Hao Y
- Wang N
- Zheng H
- Li Y
- Kang S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2310409121
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Mice
- Animals
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Oocytes/physiology
- Ovary
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 15/genetics
- Teratoma/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare germline BMP15 missense mutation causes hereditary ovarian immature teratoma in human.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Fan H, Kang X, Hao Y, Wang N, Zheng H, Li Y, Kang S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2310409121](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2310409121)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2024 Mar 5;121(10):e2310409121. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2310409121. Epub 2024 Mar 1.

A rare germline BMP15 missense mutation causes hereditary ovarian immature 
teratoma in human.

Liu Y(#)(1), Fan H(#)(1), Kang X(2), Hao Y(1), Wang N(3), Zheng H(4), Li Y(3), 
Kang S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology, Fourth Hospital, Hebei Medical University, 
Shijiazhuang 050011, China.
(2)Department of Surgery, Fourth Hospital, Hebei Medical University, 
Shijiazhuang 050011, China.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Fourth Hospital, Hebei Medical University, 
Shijiazhuang 050011, China.
(4)Nanjing Personal Oncology Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Nanjing, Jiangsu 211103, 
China.
(#)Contributed equally

Ovarian immature teratomas (OITs) are malignant tumors originating from the 
ovarian germ cells that mainly occur during the first 30 y of a female's life. 
Early age of onset strongly suggests the presence of susceptibility gene 
mutations for the disease yet to be discovered. Whole exon sequencing was used 
to screen pathogenic mutations from pedigrees with OITs. A rare missense 
germline mutation (C262T) in the first exon of the BMP15 gene was identified. In 
silico calculation suggested that the mutation could impair the formation of 
mature peptides. In vitro experiments on cell lines confirmed that the mutation 
caused an 84.7% reduction in the secretion of mature BMP15. Clinical samples 
from OIT patients also showed a similar pattern of decrease in the BMP15 
expression. In the transgenic mouse model, the spontaneous parthenogenetic 
activation significantly increased in oocytes carrying the T allele. Remarkably, 
a mouse carrying the T allele developed the phenotype of OIT. Oocyte-specific 
RNA sequencing revealed that abnormal activation of the H-Ras/MAPK pathway might 
contribute to the development of OIT. BMP15 was identified as a pathogenic gene 
for OIT which improved our understanding of the etiology of OIT and provided a 
potential biomarker for genetic screening of this disorder.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2310409121
PMCID: PMC10927523
PMID: 38427603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:The authors 
declare no competing interest.