---
reference_id: "PMID:15363638"
title: "Carnitine palmitoyltransferases 1 and 2: biochemical, molecular and medical aspects."
authors:
- Bonnefont JP
- Djouadi F
- Prip-Buus C
- Gobin S
- Munnich A
- Bastin J
journal: Mol Aspects Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2004.06.004
keywords:
- Animals
- "Carnitine O-Palmitoyltransferase/chemistry, deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic"
- Humans
- "Metabolic Diseases/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Carnitine palmitoyltransferases 1 and 2: biochemical, molecular and medical aspects.
**Authors:** Bonnefont JP, Djouadi F, Prip-Buus C, Gobin S, Munnich A, Bastin J
**Journal:** Mol Aspects Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mam.2004.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mam.2004.06.004)

## Content

1. Mol Aspects Med. 2004 Oct-Dec;25(5-6):495-520. doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2004.06.004.

Carnitine palmitoyltransferases 1 and 2: biochemical, molecular and medical 
aspects.

Bonnefont JP(1), Djouadi F, Prip-Buus C, Gobin S, Munnich A, Bastin J.

Author information:
(1)INSERM Unit U393, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, CHU Necker-Enfants 
Malades, Tour Lavoisier 2 étage, 149 rue de Sèvres, 75743 Paris Cedex 15, 
France. bonnefon@necker.fr

Carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT) deficiencies are common disorders of 
mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation. The CPT system is made up of two separate 
proteins located in the outer (CPT1) and inner (CPT2) mitochondrial membranes. 
While CPT2 is an ubiquitous protein, three tissue-specific CPT1 isoforms--the 
so-called "liver" (CPT1-A), "muscle" (CPT1B) and <<brain>> (CPT1-C) CPT1s--have 
been shown to exist. Amino acid and cDNA nucleotide sequences have been 
identified for all of these proteins. CPT1-A deficiency presents as recurrent 
attacks of fasting hypoketotic hypoglycemia. Twenty four CPT1A mutations have 
been reported to date. CPT1-B and -C deficiencies have not been hitherto 
identified. CPT2 deficiency has several clinical presentations. The "benign" 
adult form (more than 200 families reported) is characterized by episodes of 
rhabdomyolysis triggered by prolonged exercise. The prevalent S113L mutation is 
found in about 50% of mutant alleles. The infantile-type CPT2 presents as severe 
attacks of hypoketotic hypoglycemia, occasionally associated with cardiac damage 
commonly responsible for sudden death before 1 year of age. In addition to these 
symptoms, features of brain and kidney dysorganogenesis are frequently seen in 
the neonatal-onset CPT2 deficiency, almost always lethal during the first month 
of life. Around 40 CPT2 mutations (private missense or truncating mutations) 
have hitherto been detected. Treatment is based upon avoidance of fasting and/or 
exercise, a low fat diet enriched with medium chain triglycerides and carnitine. 
Prenatal diagnosis may be offered for pregnancies at a 1/4 risk of 
infantile/severe-type CPT2 deficiency.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mam.2004.06.004
PMID: 15363638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]