---
reference_id: "PMID:29808590"
title: "Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome: review of clinical and molecular aspects."
authors:
- AlSabbagh MM
- Baqi MA
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/ijd.14065
keywords:
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/complications, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/complications, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Keratosis/complications
- Nervous System Diseases/complications
- "Skin Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome: review of clinical and molecular aspects.
**Authors:** AlSabbagh MM, Baqi MA
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijd.14065](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.14065)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2018 Sep;57(9):1102-1106. doi: 10.1111/ijd.14065. Epub 2018
May  28.

Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome: review of clinical and molecular aspects.

AlSabbagh MM(1), Baqi MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Junior Dermatology Resident, Salmaniya Medical Complex, Manama, Bahrain.
(2)Consultant Dermatologist, Salmaniya Medical Complex, Manama, Bahrain.

Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome is a rare genodermatosis that manifests with the
classical triad of basal cell carcinoma, follicular atrophoderma, and
hypotrichosis; yet it may be accompanied by milia, ichthyosis, neurological
symptoms, and visceral malignancies. Symptom onset is nonsimultaneous, and hence
the diagnosis is often made late and the opportunity of counseling and following
up is missed. This article aims toward providing a comprehensive review of the
clinical perspective of Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome, highlighting the major
clinical variants to facilitate reaching a prompt diagnosis. In addition, the
molecular aspects are discussed. Though the gene responsible for this syndrome
is yet nonspecified, it is confirmed to be localized to the long arm of
chromosome X.

© 2018 The International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.14065
PMID: 29808590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
