---
reference_id: "PMID:39520827"
title: "Very-late-onset multiple Acyl-coenzyme a dehydrogenase deficiency with elevated GDF-15 and Aldolase: a case report."
authors:
- Gaini R
- Chamberlin G
- Wang SJ
- Morena J
journal: Neuromuscul Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2024.105213
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Very-late-onset multiple Acyl-coenzyme a dehydrogenase deficiency with elevated GDF-15 and Aldolase: a case report.
**Authors:** Gaini R, Chamberlin G, Wang SJ, Morena J
**Journal:** Neuromuscul Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nmd.2024.105213](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmd.2024.105213)

## Content

1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2024 Dec;45:105213. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2024.105213. Epub 
2024 Oct 18.

Very-late-onset multiple Acyl-coenzyme a dehydrogenase deficiency with elevated 
GDF-15 and Aldolase: a case report.

Gaini R(1), Chamberlin G(2), Wang SJ(3), Morena J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology at Duke University. Electronic address: 
rahul.gaini@duke.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology at Duke University.
(3)Department of Neurology at Duke University; Department of Pathology at Duke 
University.
(4)Department of Neurology at Duke University.

A 72-year-old woman on sertraline and levothyroxine (Levoxyl) presented to 
clinic with progressive proximal > distal and left > right upper and lower 
extremity weakness. She had length-dependent paresthesias and sensory deficits. 
Aldolase was elevated but CK was normal. EMG/NCS showed myopathic motor units. 
Muscle biopsy revealed numerous muscle fibers with markedly increased lipid 
content. Additional bloodwork showed elevated plasma acylcarnitine species of 
all chain lengths, concerning for multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency 
(MADD), along with elevated Growth Differentiation Factor 15 (GDF-15). Metabolic 
and mitochondrial genetic testing followed by whole exome sequencing was 
negative. The patient started riboflavin 400 mg daily and improved from 
requiring a wheelchair to independent ambulation. She was diagnosed with 
very-late-onset riboflavin-responsive MADD. This case adds to the growing 
literature on the clinical heterogeneity of VLO-MADD, comments on the potential 
for non-genetic, pharmacologic triggers like sertraline, and highlights that 
GDF-15 and aldolase can be elevated with normal CK.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2024.105213
PMID: 39520827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no competing interests.