---
reference_id: "PMID:32896657"
title: "Whipple disease: a 15-year retrospective study on 36 patients with positive polymerase chain reaction for Tropheryma whipplei."
authors:
- Duss FR
- Jaton K
- Vollenweider P
- Troillet N
- Greub G
journal: Clin Microbiol Infect
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2020.08.036
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple disease: a 15-year retrospective study on 36 patients with positive polymerase chain reaction for Tropheryma whipplei.
**Authors:** Duss FR, Jaton K, Vollenweider P, Troillet N, Greub G
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Infect (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cmi.2020.08.036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2020.08.036)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2021 Jun;27(6):910.e9-910.e13. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmi.2020.08.036. Epub 2020 Sep 4.

Whipple disease: a 15-year retrospective study on 36 patients with positive 
polymerase chain reaction for Tropheryma whipplei.

Duss FR(1), Jaton K(2), Vollenweider P(1), Troillet N(3), Greub G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases Valais Hospital, Sion, Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Microbiology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: gilbert.greub@chuv.ch.

Our institution has performed microbiological diagnosis of Tropheryma whipplei 
since 2001, initially with a PCR targeting 16S rRNA before the development of a 
quantitative PCR in 2012. Here we report the clinical characteristics of a 
cohort of patients suffering from Whipple disease (WD) and evaluate the impact 
of these molecular techniques. Patients with a positive PCR for T. whipplei 
between 2001 and 2016 were retrospectively collected from microbiological 
databases. Two infectious diseases specialists reviewed their medical records 
and classified them as definite WD, probable WD or carriage of T. whipplei 
without disease. A total of 1153 samples were tested for T. whipplei; 76 samples 
taken from 36 patients were positive. Fifteen were considered as presenting a 
definite WD, seven as a probable WD and 14 as carriers. Median age was 
56.4 years (extremes, 6.6-76.1). Median time from symptoms to diagnosis was 
3 years (2.5 months to 13.3 years). About 60% were immunosuppressed. The most 
frequent clinical presentations were joint pain (16/22), weight loss (15/22) 
and/or digestive tract disorder (15/22); 41% had neurological manifestations, 
32% pulmonary involvement and 32% lymphadenopathies. Bacterial load in faeces or 
saliva were 88 425 copies/mL (IQR 6175-292 725) in definite and probable WD and 
311 copies/mL (IQR 253-2090) in carriers, respectively. We observed a 90% PPV 
above 32 200 copies/mL in faeces. WD is a chronic multisystemic disease with 
frequent pulmonary involvement. Underlying immunodeficiency is commonly observed 
leading to more complex clinical presentation. Positive T. whipplei PCR in both 
stool and saliva has a high positive predictive value. Moreover, patients with 
WD present higher bacterial load in faeces with a threshold of >32 200 copies/mL 
predicting ongoing infection.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2020.08.036
PMID: 32896657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]