---
reference_id: "PMID:23522784"
title: Mutations in EOGT confirm the genetic heterogeneity of autosomal-recessive Adams-Oliver syndrome.
authors:
- Shaheen R
- Aglan M
- Keppler-Noreuil K
- Faqeih E
- Ansari S
- Horton K
- Ashour A
- Zaki MS
- Al-Zahrani F
- Cueto-González AM
- Abdel-Salam G
- Temtamy S
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.012
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/etiology
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- In Situ Hybridization
- Infant
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/etiology"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferases/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Scalp Dermatoses/congenital, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in EOGT confirm the genetic heterogeneity of autosomal-recessive Adams-Oliver syndrome.
**Authors:** Shaheen R, Aglan M, Keppler-Noreuil K, Faqeih E, Ansari S, Horton K, Ashour A, Zaki MS, Al-Zahrani F, Cueto-González AM, Abdel-Salam G, Temtamy S, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.012)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Apr 4;92(4):598-604. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.012.
Epub  2013 Mar 21.

Mutations in EOGT confirm the genetic heterogeneity of autosomal-recessive 
Adams-Oliver syndrome.

Shaheen R(1), Aglan M, Keppler-Noreuil K, Faqeih E, Ansari S, Horton K, Ashour 
A, Zaki MS, Al-Zahrani F, Cueto-González AM, Abdel-Salam G, Temtamy S, Alkuraya 
FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
PO Box 3354, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia.

Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare, autosomal-dominant or -recessive disorder 
characterized primarily by aplasia cutis congenita and terminal transverse limb 
defects. Recently, we demonstrated that homozygous mutations in DOCK6 cause an 
autosomal-recessive form of AOS. In this study, we sought to determine the 
contribution of DOCK6 mutations to the etiology of AOS in several consanguineous 
families. In two of the five families studied, we identified two homozygous 
truncating mutations (a splice-site mutation and a frameshift duplication). 
DOCK6 sequencing revealed no mutation in the remaining three families, 
consistent with their autozygosity mapping and linkage-analysis results, which 
revealed a single candidate locus in 3p14.1 on three different haplotype 
backgrounds in the three families. Indeed, exome sequencing in one family 
revealed one missense mutation in EOGT (C3orf64), and subsequent targeted 
sequencing of this gene revealed a homozygous missense mutation and a homozygous 
frameshift deletion mutation in the other two families. EOGT encodes 
EGF-domain-specific O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) transferase, which 
is involved in the O-GlcNAcylation (attachment of O-GlcNAc to serine and 
threonine residues) of a subset of extracellular EGF-domain-containing proteins. 
It has a documented role in epithelial-cell-matrix interactions in Drosophila, 
in which deficiency of its ortholog causes wing blistering. Our findings 
highlight a developmental role of O-GlcNAcylation in humans and expand the 
genetic heterogeneity of autosomal-recessive AOS.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.012
PMCID: PMC3617382
PMID: 23522784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]