---
reference_id: "PMID:21595313"
title: "[Rationale and clinical evidence for the use of rituximab in glomerular diseases]."
authors:
- Mani LY
- Vogt B
- Burnier M
- Golshayan D
journal: Rev Med Suisse
year: '2011'
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived/adverse effects, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Antigens, CD20/immunology"
- "Autoimmune Diseases/drug therapy, immunology"
- B-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Chronic Disease
- Humans
- "Immunologic Factors/adverse effects, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Kidney Diseases/drug therapy, immunology"
- "Kidney Glomerulus/drug effects, pathology"
- Rituximab
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Rationale and clinical evidence for the use of rituximab in glomerular diseases].
**Authors:** Mani LY, Vogt B, Burnier M, Golshayan D
**Journal:** Rev Med Suisse (2011)

## Content

1. Rev Med Suisse. 2011 Apr 13;7(290):819-24.

[Rationale and clinical evidence for the use of rituximab in glomerular
diseases].

[Article in French]

Mani LY(1), Vogt B, Burnier M, Golshayan D.

Author information:
(1)Service de néphrologie et consultation d'hypertension, Département de
médecine, CHUV, 1011 Lausanne. laila-yasmin.mani@chuv.ch

Autoimmune glomerulopathies are an important cause of chronic kidney disease.
Conventional treatments based on steroids, antiproliferative and cytotoxic
agents are efficacious, but highly toxic. Because of their central role in the
pathogenesis of autoimmunity, B cells have become an attractive therapeutic
target. Rituximab is a monoclonal antibody directed against CD20 expressed on
the surface of B cells, inducing profound depletion of B cells in the peripheral
blood. In spite of encouraging results regarding the off-label use of Rituximab
in membranous nephropathy, systemic lupus erythematosus and small vessel
vasculitis, controlled, long-term data, and data with specific renal endpoints
are currently lacking.

PMID: 21595313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
