---
reference_id: "PMID:22029523"
title: "Bacterial meningitis: current therapy and possible future treatment options."
authors:
- Woehrl B
- Klein M
- Grandgirard D
- Koedel U
- Leib S
journal: Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1586/eri.11.129
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial meningitis: current therapy and possible future treatment options.
**Authors:** Woehrl B, Klein M, Grandgirard D, Koedel U, Leib S
**Journal:** Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1586/eri.11.129](https://doi.org/10.1586/eri.11.129)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2011 Nov;9(11):1053-65. doi: 10.1586/eri.11.129.

Bacterial meningitis: current therapy and possible future treatment options.

Woehrl B(1), Klein M, Grandgirard D, Koedel U, Leib S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Klinikum Grosshadern, Ludwig Maximilians University, 
Munich, Germany.

Despite targeted therapy, case-fatality rates and neurologic sequelae of 
bacterial meningitis remain unacceptably high. The poor outcome is mainly due to 
secondary systemic and intracranial complications. These complications seem to 
be both a consequence of the inflammatory response to the invading pathogen and 
release of bacterial components by the pathogen itself. Therefore, within the 
last decades, research has focused on the mechanism underlying immune regulation 
and the inhibition of bacterial lysis in order to identify new targets for 
adjuvant therapy. The scope of this article is to give an overview on current 
treatment strategies of bacterial meningitis, to summarize new insights on the 
pathophysiology of bacterial meningitis, and to give an outlook on new treatment 
strategies derived from experimental models.

DOI: 10.1586/eri.11.129
PMID: 22029523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]