---
reference_id: "PMID:35168097"
title: Generation of an induced pluripotent stem cell line ATCi002-A from a two-year-old chinese boy with Keipert syndrome.
authors:
- Lu X
- Mai J
- Liu L
- Chen X
- Shen Y
journal: Stem Cell Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2022.102706
keywords:
- Cell Differentiation
- Cellular Reprogramming
- "Child, Preschool"
- China
- Deafness/congenital
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/metabolism"
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Lower Extremity Deformities, Congenital/metabolism"
- Male
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generation of an induced pluripotent stem cell line ATCi002-A from a two-year-old chinese boy with Keipert syndrome.
**Authors:** Lu X, Mai J, Liu L, Chen X, Shen Y
**Journal:** Stem Cell Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scr.2022.102706](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scr.2022.102706)

## Content

1. Stem Cell Res. 2022 Apr;60:102706. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2022.102706. Epub 2022
Feb  10.

Generation of an induced pluripotent stem cell line ATCi002-A from a 
two-year-old chinese boy with Keipert syndrome.

Lu X(1), Mai J(1), Liu L(1), Chen X(1), Shen Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shenzhen Children's Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 
China.
(2)Aegicare (Shenzhen) Technology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen 518060, China. Electronic 
address: sys211yunnan@163.com.

Keipert syndrome（KS, OMIM:301026) is a rare X-linked recessive inherited 
disorder characterized by distinctive facial appearance and digital 
abnormalities, and the disease is caused by hemizygous mutations in the GPC4 
gene encoding the heparan sulfate proteoglycan glypican 4. We first established 
an induced pluripotent stem cell line (ATCi002-A) from PBMCs collected from a 
two-year-old boy patient with c.877 + 1G > A variant in the GPC4 gene, via 
reprogramming with KLF4, SOX2, OCT3/4, and c-MYC. Through identification 
examination, the iPSCs (ATCi002-A) stably expressed pluripotency-associated stem 
cell markers, and maintained a normal karyotype, and showed proliferative 
potential for differentiation of the three-germ layer.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2022.102706
PMID: 35168097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]