---
reference_id: "PMID:10972423"
title: Abnormal myelin formation in rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 2 (DHAPAT-deficiency).
authors:
- Sztriha L
- Al-Gazali LI
- Wanders RJ
- Ofman R
- Nork M
- Lestringant GG
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1017/s0012162200000918
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal myelin formation in rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 2 (DHAPAT-deficiency).
**Authors:** Sztriha L, Al-Gazali LI, Wanders RJ, Ofman R, Nork M, Lestringant GG
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1017/s0012162200000918](https://doi.org/10.1017/s0012162200000918)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2000 Jul;42(7):492-5. doi: 10.1017/s0012162200000918.

Abnormal myelin formation in rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 2 
(DHAPAT-deficiency).

Sztriha L(1), Al-Gazali LI, Wanders RJ, Ofman R, Nork M, Lestringant GG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, United 
Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain. sztriha@uaeu.ac.ae

The case of a Yemeni girl with isolated peroxisomal 
acyl-CoA:dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase (DHAPAT) deficiency is 
reported. She had rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, microcephaly, failure to 
thrive, delayed motor and mental development, and spastic quadriplegia. 
Deficient de novo plasmalogen synthesis in her fibroblasts as a result of low 
DHAPAT activity was found, while her very-long-chain fatty acid profile, 
phytanic acid concentration, alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase 
(alkyl-DHAP synthase) activity, and peroxisomal 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase protein 
were normal. A mutation in her DHAPAT complementary DNA resulted in the 
substitution of an arginine residue in the protein at position 211 by a 
histidine (R211H). Magnetic resonance imaging showed abnormal white matter 
signal in the centrum semiovale involving the arcuate fibers, while the corpus 
callosum was normal. DHAPAT and alkyl-DHAP synthase initiate the synthesis of 
plasmalogens, which are major constituents of myelin phospholipids. The reported 
girl's abnormal formation of myelin is probably related to the inadequacy of 
plasmalogen biosynthesis, which is likely to be due to deficient DHAPAT 
activity.

DOI: 10.1017/s0012162200000918
PMID: 10972423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]