---
reference_id: "PMID:37731560"
title: "Efficacy of abatacept treatment in a patient with enteropathy carrying a variant of unsignificance in CTLA4 gene: A case report."
authors:
- Musabak U
- Erdoğan T
- Ceylaner S
- Özbek E
- Suna N
- Özdemir BH
journal: World J Clin Cases
year: '2023'
doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v11.i26.6176
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of abatacept treatment in a patient with enteropathy carrying a variant of unsignificance in CTLA4 gene: A case report.
**Authors:** Musabak U, Erdoğan T, Ceylaner S, Özbek E, Suna N, Özdemir BH
**Journal:** World J Clin Cases (2023)
**DOI:** [10.12998/wjcc.v11.i26.6176](https://doi.org/10.12998/wjcc.v11.i26.6176)

## Content

1. World J Clin Cases. 2023 Sep 16;11(26):6176-6182. doi: 
10.12998/wjcc.v11.i26.6176.

Efficacy of abatacept treatment in a patient with enteropathy carrying a variant 
of unsignificance in CTLA4 gene: A case report.

Musabak U(1), Erdoğan T(1), Ceylaner S(2)(3), Özbek E(4), Suna N(5), Özdemir 
BH(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Allergy, Baskent University School of Medicine, 
Ankara 06490, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Lokman Hekim University, Ankara 06000, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Intergen Genetic and Rare Disease Diagnosis 
and Reseach Center, Ankara 06000, Turkey.
(4)Department of Immunology-Allergy, Etlik City Hospital, Ankara 06490, Ankara, 
Turkey. emreozbek55@yahoo.com.tr.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, Baskent University School of Medicine, Ankara 
06000, Turkey.
(6)Department of Pathology, Baskent University, Ankara 06000, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte Antigen-4 (CTLA4) deficiency is a genetic 
defect that causes a common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) clinical phenotype. 
Several studies have reported an association between CTLA mutations or variants 
and various autoimmune diseases. Targeted therapy models, which have become 
increasingly popular in recent years, have been successful in treating CTLA4 
deficiency. In this article, we discuss the clinical outcomes of abatacept 
treatment in a patient with CTLA4 and lipopolysaccharide-responsive beige-like 
anchor (LRBA) variants that was previously diagnosed with CVID.
CASE SUMMARY: A 25-year-old female patient, who was visibly cachectic, visited 
our clinic over the course of five years, complaining of diarrhea. The patient 
was diagnosed with ulcerative colitis in the centers she had visited previously, 
and various treatments were administered; however, clinical improvement could 
not be achieved. Severe hypokalemia was detected during an examination. Her 
serum immunoglobulin levels, CD19+ B-cell percentage, and CD4/CD8 ratio were 
low. An endoscopic examination revealed erosive gastritis, nodular duodenitis, 
and pancolitis. Histopathological findings supported the presence of immune 
mediated enteropathy. When the patient was examined carefully, she was diagnosed 
with CVID, and intravenous immunoglobulin treatment was initiated. Peroral and 
rectal therapeutic drugs including steroid therapy episodes were administered to 
treat the immune mediated enteropathy. Strict follow-ups and treatment were 
performed due to the hypokalemia. After conducting genetic analyses, the CTLA4 
and LRBA variants were identified and abatacept treatment was initiated. With 
targeted therapy, the patient's clinical and laboratory findings rapidly 
regressed, and there was an increase in weight.
CONCLUSION: The heterozygous CTLA4 variant identified in the patient has been 
previously shown to be associated with various autoimmune diseases. The 
successful clinical outcome of abatacept treatment in this patient supports the 
idea that this variant plays a role in the immunopathogenesis of the disease. In 
the presence of severe disease, abatacept therapy should be considered until 
further testing can be conducted.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v11.i26.6176
PMCID: PMC10507547
PMID: 37731560

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.