---
reference_id: "PMID:10700177"
title: "Mutations in ACTN4, encoding alpha-actinin-4, cause familial focal segmental glomerulosclerosis."
authors:
- Kaplan JM
- Kim SH
- North KN
- Rennke H
- Correia LA
- Tong HQ
- Mathis BJ
- Rodríguez-Pérez JC
- Allen PG
- Beggs AH
- Pollak MR
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/73456
keywords:
- "Actinin/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Actins/metabolism
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 19/genetics"
- "Cytoskeleton/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Fluorescent Antibody Technique, Indirect"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/genetics"
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/etiology, genetics"
- Male
- Microfilament Proteins
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in ACTN4, encoding alpha-actinin-4, cause familial focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
**Authors:** Kaplan JM, Kim SH, North KN, Rennke H, Correia LA, Tong HQ, Mathis BJ, Rodríguez-Pérez JC, Allen PG, Beggs AH, Pollak MR
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/73456](https://doi.org/10.1038/73456)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Mar;24(3):251-6. doi: 10.1038/73456.

Mutations in ACTN4, encoding alpha-actinin-4, cause familial focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis.

Kaplan JM(1), Kim SH, North KN, Rennke H, Correia LA, Tong HQ, Mathis BJ, 
Rodríguez-Pérez JC, Allen PG, Beggs AH, Pollak MR.

Author information:
(1)Renal and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

Focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a common, non-specific renal 
lesion. Although it is often secondary to other disorders, including HIV 
infection, obesity, hypertension and diabetes, FSGS also appears as an isolated, 
idiopathic condition. FSGS is characterized by increased urinary protein 
excretion and decreasing kidney function. Often, renal insufficiency in affected 
patients progresses to end-stage renal failure, a highly morbid state requiring 
either dialysis therapy or kidney transplantation. Here we present evidence 
implicating mutations in the gene encoding alpha-actinin-4 (ACTN4; ref. 2), an 
actin-filament crosslinking protein, as the cause of disease in three families 
with an autosomal dominant form of FSGS. In vitro, mutant alpha-actinin-4 binds 
filamentous actin (F-actin) more strongly than does wild-type alpha-actinin-4. 
Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton of glomerular podocytes may be altered in 
this group of patients. Our results have implications for understanding the role 
of the cytoskeleton in the pathophysiology of kidney disease and may lead to a 
better understanding of the genetic basis of susceptibility to kidney damage.

DOI: 10.1038/73456
PMID: 10700177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]