---
reference_id: "PMID:37544998"
title: Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment of congenital parvovirus B19 induced anemia - a case report.
authors:
- Aronson ST
- Celiker MY
- Guarini L
- Agha R
journal: Matern Health Neonatol Perinatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s40748-023-00164-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment of congenital parvovirus B19 induced anemia - a case report.
**Authors:** Aronson ST, Celiker MY, Guarini L, Agha R
**Journal:** Matern Health Neonatol Perinatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40748-023-00164-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40748-023-00164-2)

## Content

1. Matern Health Neonatol Perinatol. 2023 Aug 7;9(1):10. doi: 
10.1186/s40748-023-00164-2.

Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment of congenital parvovirus B19 induced anemia 
- a case report.

Aronson ST(1), Celiker MY(2), Guarini L(3), Agha R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Maimonides Children's Hospital, 4802 10th Avenue, 
11219, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Department of Pediatrics, 
Maimonides Children's Hospital, 4802 10th Avenue, 11219, Brooklyn, NY, USA. 
mceliker@maimonidesmed.org.
(3)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Department of Pediatrics, 
Maimonides Children's Hospital, 4802 10th Avenue, 11219, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(4)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, 
Maimonides Children's Hospital, 4802 10th Avenue, 11219, Brooklyn, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Parvovirus is a common childhood infection that could be very 
dangerous to the fetus, if pregnant women become infected. The spectrum of 
effects range from pure red blood cell aplasia with hydrops fetalis to 
meningoencephalitis, with many symptoms in between. Severe anemia in the setting 
of pure red blood cell aplasia is one of the more common effects that neonatal 
experience (if infected intrapartum), with the current gold standard treatment 
being intrauterine or postnatal packed red blood cell (PRBC) transfusions, yet 
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) may be a superior treatment option.
CASE PRESENTATION: A preterm infant was born at 26th week of gestational age via 
emergency Cesarean section due to hydrops fetalis, with parvovirus B19 exposure 
one month prior. The infant tested positive for IgM antibodies against 
parvovirus B19. Among many other serious complications of both hydrops fetalis 
and premature delivery, the infant had severe unremitting anemia, and received 
many PRBC transfusion over the course of his 71-day-long neonatal intensive care 
unit stay. During a follow up appointments as outpatient, his blood tests showed 
persistent high copies of parvovirus B19. He was then supported with PRBC 
transfusions and treated with IVIG. After three doses of IVIG, the infant's 
parvovirus B19 viral copy numbers have dramatically reduced and the infant did 
not require any more PRBC transfusions.
CONCLUSIONS: IVIG infusion effectively treated the parvovirus B19 infection and 
restored erythropoiesis making the child transfusion independent. Furthermore, 
since IVIG is safe and readily crosses the placenta, further studies are needed 
to determine if IVIG should be considered as an alternative prenatal treatment 
for congenital parvovirus B19 infection.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s40748-023-00164-2
PMCID: PMC10405454
PMID: 37544998

Conflict of interest statement: SA has no competing interests. MC has no 
competing interests. LG has no competing interests. RA has no competing 
interests.