---
reference_id: "PMID:20301503"
title: Disorders of Intracellular Cobalamin Metabolism.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Sloan JL
- Carrillo N
- Adams D
- Venditti CP
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disorders of Intracellular Cobalamin Metabolism.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Sloan JL, Carrillo N, Adams D, Venditti CP

## Content

1. Disorders of Intracellular Cobalamin Metabolism.

Sloan JL(1), Carrillo N(2), Adams D(2), Venditti CP(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2008 Feb 25 [updated 2021 Dec 16].

Author information:
(1)Medical Genomics and Metabolic Genetics Branch, National Human Genome 
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(2)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism have a 
variable phenotype and age of onset that are influenced by the severity and 
location within the pathway of the defect. The prototype and best understood 
phenotype is cblC; it is also the most common of these disorders. The age of 
initial presentation of cblC spans a wide range: In utero with fetal 
presentation of nonimmune hydrops, cardiomyopathy, and intrauterine growth 
restriction. Newborns, who can have microcephaly, poor feeding, and 
encephalopathy. Infants, who can have poor feeding and slow growth, neurologic 
abnormality, and, rarely, hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS). Toddlers, who can 
have poor growth, progressive microcephaly, cytopenias (including megaloblastic 
anemia), global developmental delay, encephalopathy, and neurologic signs such 
as hypotonia and seizures. Adolescents and adults, who can have neuropsychiatric 
symptoms, progressive cognitive decline, thromboembolic complications, and/or 
subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a disorder of intracellular cobalamin 
metabolism in a symptomatic individual is based on clinical, biochemical, and 
molecular genetic data. Evaluation of the methylmalonic acid (MMA) level in 
urine and blood and plasma total homocysteine (tHcy) level are the mainstays of 
biochemical testing. Diagnosis is confirmed by identification of biallelic 
pathogenic variants in one of the following genes (associated complementation 
groups indicated in parentheses): MMACHC (cblC), MMADHC (cblD-combined and 
cblD-homocystinuria), MTRR (cblE), LMBRD1 (cblF), MTR (cblG), ABCD4 (cblJ), 
THAP11(cblX-like), ZNF143(cblX-like), or a hemizygous variant in HCFC1 (cblX, 
which can show a cblC complementation class).
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Critically ill individuals must be 
stabilized, preferably in consultation with a metabolic specialist, by treating 
acidosis, reversing catabolism, and initiating parenteral hydroxocobalamin. 
Treatment of thromboembolic complications (e.g., HUS and thrombotic 
microangiopathy) includes initiation of hydroxocobalamin (OHCbl) and betaine or 
an increase in their doses. Long-term management focuses on improving the 
metabolic derangement by lowering plasma tHcy and MMA concentrations and 
maintaining plasma methionine concentrations within the normal range. 
Gastrostomy tube placement for feeding may be required; infantile spasms, 
seizures, congenital heart malformations, and hydrocephalus are treated using 
standard protocols. Prevention of primary manifestations: Early institution of 
injectable hydroxocobalamin improves survival and may reduce but not completely 
prevent primary manifestations. To prevent metabolic decompensations, affected 
persons are advised to avoid situations that result in catabolism, such as 
prolonged fasting and dehydration, and always remain on a weight-appropriate 
dose of hydroxocobalamin. Surveillance: During the first year of life, infants 
may need to be evaluated once or twice a month by a metabolic specialist to 
assess growth, nutritional status, feeding ability, and developmental and 
neurocognitive progress. Toddlers and school-age children should be evaluated at 
least twice a year to adjust medication dosing (hydroxocobalamin, betaine) 
during growth and evaluate nutritional status. Teens and adults may be seen on a 
yearly basis. Routine ophthalmologic, neurologic, and cardiac evaluations may 
also be appropriate. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Prolonged fasting (longer 
than overnight without dextrose-containing intravenous fluids); dietary protein 
intake below the recommended dietary allowance for age or more than that 
prescribed by a metabolic specialist; methionine restriction including use of 
medical foods that do not contain methionine; and the anesthetic nitrous oxide. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: If the pathogenic variants in the family are 
known, at-risk sibs may be tested prenatally to allow initiation of treatment in 
utero or as soon as possible after birth. If the newborn sib of an affected 
individual has not undergone prenatal testing, molecular genetic testing can be 
performed in the first week of life if the pathogenic variants in the family are 
known. Otherwise, evaluation of urine organic acids and plasma amino acids, 
measurement of total plasma homocysteine, serum methylmalonic acid analysis, and 
acylcarnitine profile analysis can be used for the purpose of early diagnosis 
and treatment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: The majority of disorders of intracellular cobalamin 
metabolism are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At conception, each 
sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance 
of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a 
carrier. The disorder of intracellular cobalamin metabolism caused by pathogenic 
variants in HCFC1 is inherited in an X-linked manner. The risk to sibs depends 
on the genetic status of the mother. If the mother of the proband has an HCFC1 
pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting it in each pregnancy is 50%. 
Males who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected. Females who inherit 
the pathogenic variant will be heterozygous and will usually not be affected (no 
affected females have been described to date). Once the pathogenic variant(s) 
have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives, molecular genetic prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, 
and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301503