---
reference_id: "PMID:37895404"
title: "The Successful Management of Primary Amenorrhea in Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome: A Case Report and a Literature Review."
authors:
- Bakhsh H
- Alqntash N
- Almajed E
journal: Life (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/life13102022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Successful Management of Primary Amenorrhea in Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome: A Case Report and a Literature Review.
**Authors:** Bakhsh H, Alqntash N, Almajed E
**Journal:** Life (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/life13102022](https://doi.org/10.3390/life13102022)

## Content

1. Life (Basel). 2023 Oct 7;13(10):2022. doi: 10.3390/life13102022.

The Successful Management of Primary Amenorrhea in Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome: A 
Case Report and a Literature Review.

Bakhsh H(1)(2), Alqntash N(1), Almajed E(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Sciences Department, College of Medicine, Princess Nourah Bint 
Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 11564, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz 
University Hospital, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 11564, 
Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome (WSS) is a rare multisystemic disease 
resulting from an autosomal recessive gene mutation characterized by distinctive 
facial appearance, alopecia, impaired HbA1c, and hypogonadism.
PURPOSE: To present the successful management of primary amenorrhea in a WSS 
patient.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a 19-year-old Saudi female referred to the 
gynecology clinic at the age of 16 as a case of primary amenorrhea. The patient 
underwent a genetic analysis, which revealed mutations in the DCAF17 gene, 
confirming the diagnosis of WSS. Treatment includes hormonal replacement therapy 
for the induction of puberty.
CONCLUSIONS: Careful and detailed medical and physical examination led to 
appropriate testing confirming the WSS diagnosis. Genetic tests for family 
members and the offspring of the patient are strongly recommended. Treatment 
timing and dosage are determined by the patient's individual needs, which take 
into consideration the patient's potential for growth, the family's readiness, 
and any comorbidities.

DOI: 10.3390/life13102022
PMCID: PMC10608343
PMID: 37895404

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.