---
reference_id: "PMID:37916284"
title: "Wilms' tumor gene 1: lessons from the interface between kidney development and cancer."
authors:
- Torban E
- Goodyer P
journal: Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00248.2023
keywords:
- "Wilms Tumor/genetics, metabolism"
- "WT1 Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Genes, Wilms Tumor"
- "Kidney/metabolism, embryology"
- Mutation
- "Kidney Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism"
- Embryonic Structures
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilms' tumor gene 1: lessons from the interface between kidney development and cancer.
**Authors:** Torban E, Goodyer P
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Renal Physiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.00248.2023](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.00248.2023)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2024 Jan 1;326(1):F3-F19. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00248.2023. Epub 2023 Nov 2.

Wilms' tumor gene 1: lessons from the interface between kidney development and 
cancer.

Torban E(1), Goodyer P(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University and Research Institute of McGill 
University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Montreal Children's Hospital and McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Montreal Children's Hospital and McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

In 1990, mutations of the Wilms' tumor-1 gene (WT1), encoding a transcription 
factor in the embryonic kidney, were found in 10-15% of Wilms' tumors; germline 
WT1 mutations were associated with hereditary syndromes involving glomerular and 
reproductive tract dysplasia. For more than three decades, these discoveries 
prompted investigators to explore the embryonic role of WT1 and the mechanisms 
by which loss of WT1 leads to malignant transformation. Here, we discuss how 
alternative splicing of WT1 generates isoforms that act in a context-specific 
manner to activate or repress target gene transcription. WT1 also regulates 
posttranscriptional regulation, alters the epigenetic landscape, and activates 
miRNA expression. WT1 functions at multiple stages of kidney development, 
including the transition from resting stem cells to committed nephron 
progenitor, which it primes to respond to WNT9b signals from the ureteric bud. 
WT1 then drives nephrogenesis by activating WNT4 expression and directing the 
development of glomerular podocytes. We review the WT1 mutations that account 
for Denys-Drash syndrome, Frasier syndrome, and WAGR syndrome. Although the WT1 
story began with Wilms' tumors, an understanding of the pathways that link 
aberrant kidney development to malignant transformation still has some important 
gaps. Loss of WT1 in nephrogenic rests may leave these premalignant clones with 
inadequate DNA repair enzymes and may disturb the epigenetic landscape. Yet none 
of these observations provide a complete picture of Wilms' tumor pathogenesis. 
It appears that the WT1 odyssey is unfinished and still holds a great deal of 
untilled ground to be explored.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00248.2023
PMID: 37916284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]