---
reference_id: "PMID:10632100"
title: Randomized trials of dichlorphenamide in the periodic paralyses. Working Group on Periodic Paralysis.
authors:
- Tawil R
- McDermott MP
- Brown R Jr
- Shapiro BC
- Ptacek LJ
- McManis PG
- Dalakas MC
- Spector SA
- Mendell JR
- Hahn AF
- Griggs RC
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2000'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- Dichlorphenamide/therapeutic use
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Paralysis/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Prognosis
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized trials of dichlorphenamide in the periodic paralyses. Working Group on Periodic Paralysis.
**Authors:** Tawil R, McDermott MP, Brown R Jr, Shapiro BC, Ptacek LJ, McManis PG, Dalakas MC, Spector SA, Mendell JR, Hahn AF, Griggs RC
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2000)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2000 Jan;47(1):46-53.

Randomized trials of dichlorphenamide in the periodic paralyses. Working Group
on Periodic Paralysis.

Tawil R(1), McDermott MP, Brown R Jr, Shapiro BC, Ptacek LJ, McManis PG, Dalakas
MC, Spector SA, Mendell JR, Hahn AF, Griggs RC.

Author information:
(1)University of Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Although the carbonic anhydrase inhibitors have been used in the treatment of
the primary periodic paralyses (PPs), their efficacy has not been demonstrated
in double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. Therefore, we tested the efficacy of
dichlorphenamide (DCP; Daranide), a potent carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, in the
treatment of episodic weakness in the primary PPs. We performed two multicenter,
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover trials, one involving 42
subjects with hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP) and the other involving 31
subjects with potassium-sensitive periodic paralysis (PSPP). In each trial, two
8-week treatment periods were separated by an active washout period of at least
9 weeks. The primary outcome variable in the HypoPP trial was the occurrence of
an intolerable increase in attack severity or frequency (end point). The primary
outcome variable in the PSPP trial was the number of attacks per week. In the
HypoPP trial, there were 13 subjects who exhibited a preference (in terms of the
end point) for either DCP or placebo, and 11 of these preferred DCP. In the PSPP
trial, DCP significantly reduced attack rates relative to placebo. DCP also
significantly reduced attack rates relative to placebo in the HypoPP subjects.
We conclude that DCP is effective in the prevention of episodic weakness in both
HypoPP and PSPP.

PMID: 10632100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
