---
reference_id: "PMID:34187738"
title: "Ludwig's angina in Nigeria: The disease of the poor and health inequality!"
authors:
- Osaghae IP
- Adebola AR
- Amole IO
- Olaitan AA
- Salami YA
- Kuye O
- Ayoub A
journal: Surgeon
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.surge.2021.05.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ludwig's angina in Nigeria: The disease of the poor and health inequality!
**Authors:** Osaghae IP, Adebola AR, Amole IO, Olaitan AA, Salami YA, Kuye O, Ayoub A
**Journal:** Surgeon (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.surge.2021.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surge.2021.05.007)

## Content

1. Surgeon. 2022 Aug;20(4):e129-e133. doi: 10.1016/j.surge.2021.05.007. Epub 2021
 Jun 27.

Ludwig's angina in Nigeria: The disease of the poor and health inequality!

Osaghae IP(1), Adebola AR(2), Amole IO(2), Olaitan AA(3), Salami YA(3), Kuye 
O(3), Ayoub A(4).

Author information:
(1)Oral & Maxillofacial Surgeon, Central Hospital, Benin City, Nigeria.
(2)Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, Bayero University and Aminu Kano Teaching 
Hospital, Kano, Nigeria.
(3)Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, Lagos State University Teaching Hospital, Ikeja 
Lagos State, Nigeria.
(4)Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, The University of Glasgow Dental Hospital & 
School, United Kingdom. Electronic address: ashraf.ayoub@glasgow.ac.uk.

AIM: highlight the health inequality and identify opportunities to improve the 
care delivered to the patients who suffer from Ludwig's angina which could have 
national and international clinical impact.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data was collected from three major oral and 
maxillofacial centers, in Nigeria including Benin, Lagos and Kano. A protocol 
was developed for data collection which included demographic details, 
socio-economic status, management of the air way, the associated morbidities and 
mortalities.
RESULTS: Forty-nine were managed in Benin, 57 in Lagos and 66 in Kano. Diabetes 
was the most prevalent underlying systematic condition, affecting 21% of the 
Ludwig's angina patients in Lagos. Poverty was a common denominator, 90% of the 
patients from Kano were unemployed compared to 23% and 8% from Lagos and Benin 
respectively. For most of the patients, the airway was monitored. Incision and 
drainage were carried out in most of the cases at Benin and Lagos, but it was 
only considered in 50% of the cases in Kano. Mortality ranged from 4% in Benin 
to 12% in Lagos and it was as high as 19% in Kano.
CONCLUSION: poor access to oral healthcare, unemployment and low socio-economic 
status are important predisposing factors of Ludwig's angina.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.surge.2021.05.007
PMID: 34187738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]