---
reference_id: "PMID:35192759"
title: Algorithm for laboratory diagnostics of parvoviral infection in risk groups.
authors:
- Khamitova IV
- Lavrentieva IN
- Semenov AV
journal: Klin Lab Diagn
year: '2022'
doi: 10.51620/0869-2084-2022-67-2-115-122
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Algorithm for laboratory diagnostics of parvoviral infection in risk groups.
**Authors:** Khamitova IV, Lavrentieva IN, Semenov AV
**Journal:** Klin Lab Diagn (2022)
**DOI:** [10.51620/0869-2084-2022-67-2-115-122](https://doi.org/10.51620/0869-2084-2022-67-2-115-122)

## Content

1. Klin Lab Diagn. 2022 Feb 23;67(2):115-122. doi: 
10.51620/0869-2084-2022-67-2-115-122.

Algorithm for laboratory diagnostics of parvoviral infection in risk groups.

[Article in English]

Khamitova IV(1), Lavrentieva IN(1), Semenov AV(2).

Author information:
(1)Saint-Petersburg Pasteur Institute.
(2)Ekaterinburg Research Institute of Viral Infections.

Parvovirus infection (PVI) is widespread, characterized by airborne, bloodborne 
and vertical transmission routes. Parvovirus B19 (PVB19) exhibits tropism to 
erythropoietic cells. According to the increased likelihood principle of PVB19 
infection and the severity of the consequences, immunocompromised individuals, 
especially those with hematological manifestations of diseases, are in increased 
risk group. Based on the own research results and analysis of the published 
data, we have proposed specific algorithms for PVI laboratory testing in 
individual risk groups, taking into account the peculiarities of the development 
and infection manifestation in each group: in HIV-infected patients, in 
oncohematological patients with to whom allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (allo-HSCT) have been prescribed (blood and bone marrow 
recipients), as well as in patients with chronic anemia of parasitic etiology. 
For each group, the main clinical or laboratory marker, treatment procedure, or 
patient physiological parameters have been determined, based on which it was 
recommended to test for PVI. For HIV-infected patients, the main criterion for 
PVI testing is persistent anemia. For oncohematological patients, the basis for 
PVI testing is allo-HSCT procedure, which is planned or performed for this 
particular patient. For malaria patients, the patient's age was considered as 
major criterion, since in malaria and PVI coinfected young children can lead to 
a fatal outcome. The proposed PVI diagnostics algorithms usein risk groups can 
help to predict the severe course of underlying disease associated with PVB19 
infection, and timely correct the therapy used.

DOI: 10.51620/0869-2084-2022-67-2-115-122
PMID: 35192759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.