---
reference_id: "PMID:21225272"
title: Motor neuron disease clinically limited to the lower motor neuron is a diffuse TDP-43 proteinopathy.
authors:
- Geser F
- Stein B
- Partain M
- Elman LB
- McCluskey LF
- Xie SX
- Van Deerlin VM
- Kwong LK
- Lee VM
- Trojanowski JQ
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-011-0797-z
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Brain/pathology
- Cell Count/methods
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Motor Neuron Disease/classification, pathology"
- "Motor Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- "Statistics, Nonparametric"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Motor neuron disease clinically limited to the lower motor neuron is a diffuse TDP-43 proteinopathy.
**Authors:** Geser F, Stein B, Partain M, Elman LB, McCluskey LF, Xie SX, Van Deerlin VM, Kwong LK, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-011-0797-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-011-0797-z)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2011 Apr;121(4):509-17. doi: 10.1007/s00401-011-0797-z. Epub
 2011 Jan 12.

Motor neuron disease clinically limited to the lower motor neuron is a diffuse 
TDP-43 proteinopathy.

Geser F(1), Stein B, Partain M, Elman LB, McCluskey LF, Xie SX, Van Deerlin VM, 
Kwong LK, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for Neurodegenerative 
Disease Research, Alzheimer's Disease Core Center, Institute on Aging, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4283, USA.

Motor neuron disease (MND) may present as an isolated lower motor neuron (LMN) 
disorder. Although the significance of pathological 43 kDa transactive 
responsive sequence DNA binding protein (TDP-43) for amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) was appreciated only recently, the topographical distribution of 
TDP-43 pathology in MND clinically isolated to the LMN versus normal controls 
(COs) is only incompletely described. Therefore, we performed longitudinal 
clinical evaluation and retrospective chart review of autopsied patients 
diagnosed with isolated LMN disease. Cases with a disease duration over 4 years 
were designated as progressive muscular atrophy (PMA), and those with a more 
rapid course as MND/LMN. Immunohistochemistry was employed to identify neuronal 
and glial TDP-43 pathology in the central nervous system (CNS) in patients and 
COs. We examined 19 subjects including six patients (i.e., four with MND/LMN and 
two with PMA) and 13 COs. All patients showed significant TDP-43 linked 
degeneration of LMNs, and five cases showed a lesser degree of motor cortex 
degeneration. Additional brain areas were affected in varying degrees, ranging 
from predominantly brainstem pathology to significant involvement of the whole 
CNS including neocortical and limbic areas. Pathological TDP-43 was present only 
rarely in the CO group. We conclude that MND limited to the LMN and PMA is part 
of a disease continuum that includes ALS and FTLD-TDP, all of which are 
characterized by widespread TDP-43 pathology. Hence, we suggest that the next 
revision of the El Escorial criteria for the diagnosis of ALS include MND 
patients with disease clinically limited to the LMN and PMA as variants of ALS, 
which like classical ALS, are TDP-43 proteinopathies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-011-0797-z
PMCID: PMC3125638
PMID: 21225272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]