---
reference_id: "PMID:22151899"
title: Laryngo-tracheo-oesophageal clefts.
authors:
- Leboulanger N
- Garabédian EN
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-81
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laryngo-tracheo-oesophageal clefts.
**Authors:** Leboulanger N, Garabédian EN
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-6-81](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-6-81)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2011 Dec 7;6:81. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-81.

Laryngo-tracheo-oesophageal clefts.

Leboulanger N(1), Garabédian EN.

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Otolaryngology-Head and Neck surgery Department, UPMC-Paris VI 
University, Armand-Trousseau Children's Hospital, Paris, France. 
nicolas.leboulanger@trs.aphp.fr

A laryngo-tracheo-esophageal cleft (LC) is a congenital malformation 
characterized by an abnormal, posterior, sagittal communication between the 
larynx and the pharynx, possibly extending downward between the trachea and the 
esophagus. The estimated annual incidence of LC is 1/10,000 to 1/20,000 live 
births, accounting for 0.2% to 1.5% of congenital malformations of the larynx. 
These incidence rates may however be underestimated due to difficulty in 
diagnosing minor forms and a high mortality rate in severe forms. A slightly 
higher incidence has been reported in boys than in girls. No specific geographic 
distribution has been found. Depending on the severity of the malformation, 
patients may present with stridor, hoarse cry, swallowing difficulties, 
aspirations, cough, dyspnea and cyanosis through to early respiratory distress. 
Five types of laryngo-tracheo-esophageal cleft have been described based on the 
downward extension of the cleft, which typically correlates with the severity of 
symptoms: Type 0 laryngo-tracheo-esophageal cleft to Type 4 
laryngo-tracheo-esophageal cleft. LC is often associated with other congenital 
abnormalities/anomalies (16% to 68%), mainly involving the gastro-intestinal 
tract, which include laryngomalacia, tracheo-bronchial dyskinesia, 
tracheo-bronchomalacia (mostly in types 3 and 4), and gastro-esophageal reflux 
disease (GERD). The syndromes most frequently associated with an LC are 
Opitz/BBB syndrome, Pallister Hall syndrome, VACTERL/VATER association, and 
CHARGE syndrome. Laryngeal clefts result from failure of fusion of the posterior 
cricoid lamina and abnormal development of the tracheo-esophageal septum. The 
causes of the embryological developmental anomalies leading to LC are not known 
but are thought to be multifactorial. LC appears to be mostly sporadic although 
some familial cases with suspected autosomal dominant transmission have been 
reported. The age of diagnosis depends mainly on the severity of the clinical 
symptoms and therefore on the extent of the LC. Diagnosis is made either based 
on clinical manifestations or on investigations, such as endoscopy, X-ray, CT 
scan, performed for other conditions. Differential diagnoses include 
tracheo-bronchial fistula, gastro-esophageal reflux disease and neurological 
swallowing disorders, as well as laryngomalacia and laryngeal palsy. Prenatal 
diagnosis of LC has never been reported, although associated anomalies may be 
detected on fetal ultrasonography. Once the cleft is diagnosed, it is essential 
to determine its length to orient the management and treatment approach. 
Management involves maintenance of satisfactory ventilation, prevention of 
secondary pulmonary complications as a result of repeated aspirations, and 
adequate feeding. Endotracheal intubation may be required for respiratory 
distress in severe cases. Treatment requires endoscopic or external surgery to 
close the cleft. Surgery should be performed as early as possible to avoid 
complications related to aspiration and gastric reflux, except in type 0 and 
type 1 cases in which conservative measures must first be attempted. The 
prognosis is variable depending on the severity of the LC and associated 
malformations. Early diagnosis and appropriate treatment and management help to 
reduce mortality and morbidity.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-81
PMCID: PMC3261097
PMID: 22151899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]