---
reference_id: "PMID:35689291"
title: "So, and if it is not congenital adrenal hyperplasia? Addressing an undiagnosed case of genital ambiguity."
authors:
- de Omena Filho RL
- Petroli RJ
- Soardi FC
- de Paula Michelatto D
- Mazzola TN
- Fabbri-Scallet H
- de Mello MP
- Zanotti SV
- Gubert IC
- Monlleo I
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-022-01284-9
keywords:
- "Adrenal Hyperplasia, Congenital/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- Consanguinity
- Disorders of Sex Development
- Exons
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# So, and if it is not congenital adrenal hyperplasia? Addressing an undiagnosed case of genital ambiguity.
**Authors:** de Omena Filho RL, Petroli RJ, Soardi FC, de Paula Michelatto D, Mazzola TN, Fabbri-Scallet H, de Mello MP, Zanotti SV, Gubert IC, Monlleo I
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-022-01284-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-022-01284-9)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2022 Jun 10;48(1):89. doi: 10.1186/s13052-022-01284-9.

So, and if it is not congenital adrenal hyperplasia? Addressing an undiagnosed
case of genital ambiguity.

de Omena Filho RL(1), Petroli RJ(2), Soardi FC(3), de Paula Michelatto D(2),
Mazzola TN(3), Fabbri-Scallet H(3), de Mello MP(3), Zanotti SV(4), Gubert IC(5),
Monlleo I(6).

Author information:
(1)Maternal, Child and Adolescent Health Center, State University of Health
Sciences of Alagoas, Postgraduate Program in Health Sciences of the Institute of
Biological and Health Sciences of the Federal University of Alagoas, Maceió,
Brazil.
(2)Medical Genetics Sector, Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Alagoas,
Maceió, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Center of Molecular Biology and
Genetic Engineering, State University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil.
(4)Institute of Psychology, Federal University of Alagoas, Maceió, Brazil.
(5)Internal Review Board, Federal University of Parana, Curitiba, Brazil.
(6)Clinical Genetics Service, Medical Genetics Sector, Faculty of Medicine,
University Hospital, Federal University of Alagoas, Avenida Lourival Melo Mota,
S/N, Tabuleiro 23 do Martins, 57072-970, Maceió, Alagoas, Brasil.
isabella.monlleo@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia due to 21 hydroxylase deficiency
is the most common cause of genital ambiguity in persons with XX sexual
chromosomes. Genital ambiguity among persons with XY sexual chromosomes
comprises diverse and rare etiologies. The deficiency of 17-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 3 enzyme (HSD17B3) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder due
to functionally altered variants of the HSD17B3 gene. In this
disorder/difference of sex development, the conversion of androstenedione into
testosterone is impaired. The appearance of external genitalia of 46,XY
individuals varies from typically male to almost female.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report on a child presenting severe ambiguous genitalia.
Due to access constraints, specialized care did not start until the child was
10 months old. Parents are consanguineous and were born in an area of high
isonymy that is a cluster for rare recessive diseases. A new homozygous missense
variant c.785G > T was found in exon 10 of the HSD17B3 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Researchers-clinicians and researchers-researchers collaborative
efforts to elucidate the genetic basis of this disease were critical since this
etiologic investigation is not available through the public health system. This
case exemplifies the families' pilgrimage in cases of genital ambiguity due to a
rare genetic condition. Recognizing the etiology was the baseline to provide
information on prognosis and treatment options, and to shelter family and child
doubts and hopes in order to better support their decisions.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-022-01284-9
PMCID: PMC9188102
PMID: 35689291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
