---
reference_id: "PMID:19464397"
title: Brachydactyly type A1 associated with unusual radiological findings and a novel Arg158Cys mutation in the Indian hedgehog (IHH) gene.
authors:
- Stattin EL
- Lindén B
- Lönnerholm T
- Schuster J
- Dahl N
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.05.008
keywords:
- Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Case-Control Studies
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 5"
- Cysteine/metabolism
- "DNA/genetics, isolation & purification"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genetic Markers
- "Hedgehog Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Middle Aged
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Protein Conformation
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Radiography
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Sweden
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brachydactyly type A1 associated with unusual radiological findings and a novel Arg158Cys mutation in the Indian hedgehog (IHH) gene.
**Authors:** Stattin EL, Lindén B, Lönnerholm T, Schuster J, Dahl N
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.05.008)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2009 Sep-Oct;52(5):297-302. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.05.008. 
Epub 2009 May 21.

Brachydactyly type A1 associated with unusual radiological findings and a novel 
Arg158Cys mutation in the Indian hedgehog (IHH) gene.

Stattin EL(1), Lindén B, Lönnerholm T, Schuster J, Dahl N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biosciences, Medical and Clinical genetics, Umeå 
University, Umeå, Sweden. evalena.stattin@medbio.umu.se

Brachydactyly type A1 (BDA1; MIM 112500) is characterized by shortness or 
absence of the middle phalanx of the hands and feet. The condition is caused by 
heterozygous mutations in the Indian hedgehog (IHH) gene or a yet unidentified 
gene on chromosome 5p13. We investigated six affected members of a large Swedish 
family segregating autosomal dominant brachymesophalangia. Affected individuals 
show hypoplasia of the ulnar styloid processes, ulna minus, osteoarthritis, 
normal length of all distal phalanges and shortening or absence of the middle 
phalanges. Stationary ossicles or sesamoid bones were observed at the metacarpal 
heads in all patients. Genetic analysis of the family showed that the IHH-gene 
was linked to the disease (Z(max) 3.42 at theta 0.00) and sequence analysis of 
IHH revealed a novel c.472C > T transition in all affected family members. The 
mutation results in a p.158Arg > Cys substitution located in the highly 
conserved amino-terminal domain of IHH. This domain is of importance for the 
interaction between IHH and the Patched receptor. Our combined findings add 
radiological findings to the BDA1 phenotype and confirm a critical functional 
domain of IHH.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.05.008
PMID: 19464397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]