---
reference_id: "PMID:39469307"
title: "Carbamoly-phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) deficiency: A tertiary center retrospective cohort study and literature review."
authors:
- Noori M
- Jarrah O
- Al Shamsi A
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101156
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carbamoly-phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) deficiency: A tertiary center retrospective cohort study and literature review.
**Authors:** Noori M, Jarrah O, Al Shamsi A
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101156](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101156)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2024 Oct 18;41:101156. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101156. 
eCollection 2024 Dec.

Carbamoly-phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) deficiency: A tertiary center 
retrospective cohort study and literature review.

Noori M(1), Jarrah O(1), Al Shamsi A(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics Department, Tawam Hospital, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Genetic Metabolic Division, Pediatrics Department, Tawam Hospital, Al Ain, 
United Arab Emirates.

BACKGROUND: Protein metabolism and urea production maintain protein and amino 
acid homeostasis in normal status. Ammonia results from amino acid turnover and 
is produced by intestinal urease-positive bacteria. Ammonia must be detoxified, 
and the urea cycle converts ammonia into urea. CPS1 is an enzyme in the urea 
cycle that catalyzes ammonia and bicarbonate condensation. CPS1 deficiency 
presents in the neonatal period with hyperammonemia, resulting in death or 
neurological sequelae if patients survive.
OBJECTIVES/AIMS: To share the experience of patients with CPS1 deficiency from 
Tawam Hospital and to shed light on the spectrum of variants found in those 
patients.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review was done. All patients with CPS1 
deficiency admitted to Tawam Hospital from 2010 to 2023 were included. Collected 
data included age and ammonia level at presentation, the time needed to drop 
ammonia level below 100 μmol/L, acute management modality provided, long-term 
neurological sequelae, sequence variants, severity, and duration of 
hyperammonemia encephalopathy, age at last follow-up, and, if applicable, 
survival for at least six months.
RESULTS: Only five patients with CPS1 deficiency over 13 years were found; two 
males and three females. Three patients are doing relatively well at 18 months, 
7, and 9 years of age. The presented age was in the neonatal period except in 
one patient. One patient was found to have frameshift, resulting in a premature 
stop codon in the CPS1 gene, had a devastating course that ended with death. One 
patient had recurrent hyperammonemia episodes in her first year of life, which 
led to microcephaly and global developmental delay. One patient underwent 
hemodialysis, and one patient underwent peritoneal dialysis. All patients except 
one were on Carglumic acid which could contribute to their survival and disease 
control. All variants reported here are novel except one.
CONCLUSION: Although the presentation was different in severity, three patients 
are doing relatively well and approaching their developmental milestones. Thus, 
early recognition, prompt actions to drop high ammonia level, and good follow-up 
plans are emphasized. Further studies are needed to correlate the 
genotype-phenotype of reported variants here, which can help predict the 
severity of CPS1 deficiency.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101156
PMCID: PMC11513499
PMID: 39469307

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.