---
reference_id: "PMID:38391765"
title: "Waardenburg Syndrome: The Contribution of Next-Generation Sequencing to the Identification of Novel Causative Variants."
authors:
- Bertani-Torres W
- Lezirovitz K
- Alencar-Coutinho D
- Pardono E
- da Costa SS
- Antunes LDN
- de Oliveira J
- Otto PA
- Pingault V
- Mingroni-Netto RC
journal: Audiol Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/audiolres14010002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Waardenburg Syndrome: The Contribution of Next-Generation Sequencing to the Identification of Novel Causative Variants.
**Authors:** Bertani-Torres W, Lezirovitz K, Alencar-Coutinho D, Pardono E, da Costa SS, Antunes LDN, de Oliveira J, Otto PA, Pingault V, Mingroni-Netto RC
**Journal:** Audiol Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/audiolres14010002](https://doi.org/10.3390/audiolres14010002)

## Content

1. Audiol Res. 2023 Dec 21;14(1):9-25. doi: 10.3390/audiolres14010002.

Waardenburg Syndrome: The Contribution of Next-Generation Sequencing to the 
Identification of Novel Causative Variants.

Bertani-Torres W(1)(2), Lezirovitz K(3), Alencar-Coutinho D(3), Pardono E(4)(5), 
da Costa SS(1), Antunes LDN(1), de Oliveira J(6), Otto PA(1), Pingault V(2)(6), 
Mingroni-Netto RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Estudos sobre o Genoma Humano e Células Tronco, Departamento de 
Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São 
Paulo, São Paulo 05508-090, Brazil.
(2)Department of Embryology and Genetics of Malformations, INSERM (Institut 
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale) UMR (Unité Mixte de Recherche) 
1163, Université Paris-Cité and Institut Imagine, 75015 Paris, France.
(3)Otorhinolaryngology Lab-LIM 32, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo 01246-000, Brazil.
(4)Instituto de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Paulista UNIP, São Paulo 
04026-002, Brazil.
(5)Colégio Miguel de Cervantes, São Paulo 05618-001, Brazil.
(6)Médecine Génomique des Maladies Rares, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 
75015 Paris, France.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is characterized by hearing loss and pigmentary 
abnormalities of the eyes, hair, and skin. The condition is genetically 
heterogeneous, and is classified into four clinical types differentiated by the 
presence of dystopia canthorum in type 1 and its absence in type 2. 
Additionally, limb musculoskeletal abnormalities and Hirschsprung disease 
differentiate types 3 and 4, respectively. Genes PAX3, MITF, SOX10, KITLG, 
EDNRB, and EDN3 are already known to be associated with WS. In WS, a certain 
degree of molecularly undetected patients remains, especially in type 2. This 
study aims to pinpoint causative variants using different NGS approaches in a 
cohort of 26 Brazilian probands with possible/probable diagnosis of WS1 (8) or 
WS2 (18). DNA from the patients was first analyzed by exome sequencing. Seven of 
these families were submitted to trio analysis. For inconclusive cases, we 
applied a targeted NGS panel targeting WS/neurocristopathies genes. Causative 
variants were detected in 20 of the 26 probands analyzed, these being five in 
PAX3, eight in MITF, two in SOX10, four in EDNRB, and one in ACTG1 (type 2 
Baraitser-Winter syndrome, BWS2). In conclusion, in our cohort of patients, the 
detection rate of the causative variant was 77%, confirming the superior 
detection power of NGS in genetically heterogeneous diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/audiolres14010002
PMCID: PMC10886116
PMID: 38391765

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.