---
reference_id: "PMID:22843502"
title: Disruption of a Sox9-β-catenin circuit by mutant Fgfr3 in thanatophoric dysplasia type II.
authors:
- Shung CY
- Ota S
- Zhou ZQ
- Keene DR
- Hurlin PJ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds305
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- "Chondrocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Growth Plate/cytology, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Joints/growth & development, metabolism"
- Mice
- Mutation
- Osteogenesis/genetics
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics, metabolism"
- "SOX9 Transcription Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- "Skull/abnormalities, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "beta Catenin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of a Sox9-β-catenin circuit by mutant Fgfr3 in thanatophoric dysplasia type II.
**Authors:** Shung CY, Ota S, Zhou ZQ, Keene DR, Hurlin PJ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/dds305](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds305)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Nov 1;21(21):4628-44. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds305. Epub 2012
Jul  26.

Disruption of a Sox9-β-catenin circuit by mutant Fgfr3 in thanatophoric 
dysplasia type II.

Shung CY(1), Ota S, Zhou ZQ, Keene DR, Hurlin PJ.

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospitals for Children Portland, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Mutations in fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptors are responsible for a 
variety of skeletal birth defects, but the underlying mechanisms responsible 
remain unclear. Using a mouse model of thanatophoric dysplasia type II in which 
FGFR3(K650E) expression was directed to the appendicular skeleton, we show that 
the mutant receptor caused a block in chondrocyte differentiation specifically 
at the prehypertrophic stage. The differentiation block led to a severe 
reduction in hypertrophic chondrocytes that normally produce vascular 
endothelial growth factor, which in turn was associated with poor 
vascularization of primary ossification centers and disrupted endochondral 
ossification. We show that the differentiation block and defects in joint 
formation are associated with persistent expression of the chondrogenic factor 
Sox9 and down-regulation of β-catenin levels and activity in growth plate 
chondrocytes. Consistent with these in vivo results, FGFR3(K650E) expression was 
found to increase Sox9 and decrease β-catenin levels and transcriptional 
activity in cultured mesenchymal cells. Coexpression of Fgfr3(K650E) and Sox9 in 
cells resulted in very high levels of Sox9 and cooperative suppression of 
β-catenin-dependent transcription. Fgfr3(K650E) had opposing effects on Sox9 and 
β-catenin protein stability with it promoting Sox9 stabilization and β-catenin 
degradation. Since both Sox9 overexpression and β-catenin deletion independently 
blocks hypertrophic differentiation of chondrocytes and cause chondrodysplasias 
similar to those caused by mutations in FGFR3, our results suggest that 
dysregulation of Sox9 and β-catenin levels and activity in growth plate 
chondrocytes is an important underlying mechanism in skeletal diseases caused by 
mutations in FGFR3.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds305
PMID: 22843502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]