---
reference_id: "PMID:36647077"
title: "Quality of life improvements following one year of setmelanotide in children and adult patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome: phase 3 trial results."
authors:
- Forsythe E
- Haws RM
- Argente J
- Beales P
- Martos-Moreno GÁ
- Dollfus H
- Chirila C
- Gnanasakthy A
- Buckley BC
- Mallya UG
- Clément K
- Haqq AM
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02602-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quality of life improvements following one year of setmelanotide in children and adult patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome: phase 3 trial results.
**Authors:** Forsythe E, Haws RM, Argente J, Beales P, Martos-Moreno GÁ, Dollfus H, Chirila C, Gnanasakthy A, Buckley BC, Mallya UG, Clément K, Haqq AM
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02602-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02602-4)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Jan 16;18(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02602-4.

Quality of life improvements following one year of setmelanotide in children and 
adult patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome: phase 3 trial results.

Forsythe E(1), Haws RM(2), Argente J(3)(4)(5), Beales P(1), Martos-Moreno 
GÁ(3)(4), Dollfus H(6), Chirila C(7), Gnanasakthy A(7), Buckley BC(8), Mallya 
UG(8), Clément K(9)(10), Haqq AM(11).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genomics Medicine Programme, University College London Great 
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(2)Marshfield Clinic Research Institute, Marshfield, WI, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Endocrinology, Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, University Hospital Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain.
(4)CIBER "Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición" (CIBEROBN), Instituto de 
Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(5)IMDEA Food Institute, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, CARGO and Department of Medical 
Genetics, Strasbourg, France.
(7)RTI Health Solutions, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(8)Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Nutrition Department, 
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France.
(10)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, NutriOmics Research Unit, Paris, France.
(11)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, University of Alberta, 6-002E Li Ka 
Shing Centre for Health Research Innovation, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E1, Canada. 
haqq@ualberta.ca.

BACKGROUND: Bardet-Biedl syndrome is a rare genetic disease associated with 
hyperphagia and early-onset, severe obesity. There is limited evidence on how 
hyperphagia and obesity affect health-related quality of life in patients with 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, and on how management of these symptoms may influence 
disease burden. This analysis evaluated changes in health-related quality of 
life in adults and children with Bardet-Biedl syndrome in a Phase 3 trial 
following 1 year of setmelanotide treatment (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: 
NCT03746522).
METHODS: Patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome and obesity received 52 weeks of 
treatment with setmelanotide and completed various self-reported health-related 
quality of life measures. Patients aged < 18 years or their caregiver completed 
the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL; meaningful improvement, 
4.4-point change); adults aged ≥ 18 years completed the Impact of Weight on 
Quality of Life Questionnaire-Lite (IWQOL-Lite; meaningful improvement range, 
7.7-12-point change). Descriptive outcomes were reported in patients with data 
both at active treatment baseline and after 52 weeks of treatment.
RESULTS: Twenty patients (< 18 years, n = 9; ≥ 18 years, n = 11) reported 
health-related quality of life at baseline and 52 weeks. For children and 
adolescents, PedsQL score mean change from baseline after 52 weeks was + 11.2; 
all patients with PedsQL impairment at baseline (n = 4) experienced clinically 
meaningful improvement. In adults, IWQOL-Lite score mean change from baseline 
was + 12.0. Of adults with IWQOL-Lite impairment at baseline (n = 8), 62.5% 
experienced clinically meaningful improvement. In adults, IWQOL-Lite score was 
significantly correlated with changes in percent body weight (P = 0.0037) and 
body mass index (P = 0.0098).
CONCLUSIONS: After 1 year of setmelanotide, patients reported clinically 
meaningful improvements across multiple health-related quality of life measures. 
This study highlights the need to address the impaired health-related quality of 
life in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, and supports utility of setmelanotide for 
reducing this burden. Trial Registration NCT03746522. Registered November 19, 
2018, https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03746522 .

© 2023. Rhythm Pharmaceuticals.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02602-4
PMCID: PMC9841937
PMID: 36647077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EF has received consulting fees from Rhythm 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and participated in the BBS advisory board for Rhythm 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and she is a clinical investigator for clinical trials of 
setmelanotide in BBS for Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. RMH has received study 
drugs, grant support for clinical trials of setmelanotide in obesity, payments 
for lectures, and support for attending meetings from Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, 
Inc., as well as consulting fees from Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and Axovia 
Therapeutics, LLC, and he participated in the data safety monitoring board for 
setmelanotide clinical trials for Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. JA has received 
payment for lectures from and participated in the BBS advisory board for Rhythm 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. PB is an NIHR senior investigator. GÁMM has received 
payment for lectures from and participated in the BBS advisory board for Rhythm 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. HD received consulting fees once from Rhythm 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc, and she has participated in the BBS advisory board for 
Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. CC’s institution received funding for this research 
from Rhythm Pharmaceuticals. AG’s institution received funding for this research 
from Rhythm Pharmaceuticals. BCB is an employee of and stockholder in Rhythm 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. UGM is an employee of and stockholder in Rhythm 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. KC has received grant funding from Ysopia Bioscience, 
Integrative Phenomics, and Confo Therapeutics and is a clinical investigator for 
clinical trials of setmelanotide in BBS for Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. AMH has 
received grant funding from the Weston Family Microbiome Initiative and Canadian 
Institutes of Health Research, has received payment as a speaker for Pfizer 
Canada, Inc., is a member of the BBS advisory board for Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, 
Inc., and is a member of the 2022 somatrogon advisory board for Pfizer, Inc.