---
reference_id: "PMID:28972277"
title: High sensitivity and specificity in proposed clinical diagnostic criteria for anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis.
authors:
- Ho ACC
- Mohammad SS
- Pillai SC
- Tantsis E
- Jones H
- Ho R
- Lim M
- Hacohen Y
- Vincent A
- Dale RC
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/dmcn.13579
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor Encephalitis/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- Electroencephalography
- Humans
- Practice Guidelines as Topic/standards
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High sensitivity and specificity in proposed clinical diagnostic criteria for anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis.
**Authors:** Ho ACC, Mohammad SS, Pillai SC, Tantsis E, Jones H, Ho R, Lim M, Hacohen Y, Vincent A, Dale RC
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dmcn.13579](https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.13579)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2017 Dec;59(12):1256-1260. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.13579. Epub
 2017 Oct 3.

High sensitivity and specificity in proposed clinical diagnostic criteria for 
anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis.

Ho ACC(1)(2)(3), Mohammad SS(1)(2), Pillai SC(4), Tantsis E(1)(2), Jones 
H(1)(5), Ho R(5), Lim M(6), Hacohen Y(7), Vincent A(7), Dale RC(1)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)The Children's Hospital at Westmead Clinical School, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)Neuroimmunology Group, Institute for Neuroscience and Muscle Research, The 
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(4)Department of Neurology, Sydney Children's Hospital and University of New 
South Wales, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia.
(5)Starship Children's Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(6)Evelina London Children's Hospital, St. Thomas' Hospital, Children's 
Neurosciences Centre, London, UK.
(7)Department of Clinical Neurology, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(8)Brain and Mind Centre Westmead, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.

Comment in
    Dev Med Child Neurol. 2017 Dec;59(12):1211-1212. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.13593.

AIM: To determine the validity of the proposed clinical diagnostic criteria for 
anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) encephalitis in paediatric patients.
METHOD: The diagnostic criteria for anti-NMDAR encephalitis proposed by Graus 
et al. (2016) use clinical features and conventional investigations to 
facilitate early immunotherapy before antibody status is available. The criteria 
are satisfied if patients develop four out of six symptom groups within 
3 months, together with at least one abnormal investigation 
(electroencephalography/cerebrospinal fluid) and reasonable exclusion of other 
disorders. We evaluated the validity of the criteria using a retrospective 
cohort of paediatric patients with encephalitis. Twenty-nine patients with 
anti-NMDAR encephalitis and 74 comparison children with encephalitis were 
included.
RESULTS: As expected, the percentage of patients with anti-NMDAR encephalitis 
who fulfilled the clinical criteria increased over time. During the hospital 
inpatient admission, most patients (26/29, 90%) with anti-NMDAR encephalitis 
fulfilled the criteria, significantly more than the comparison group (3/74, 4%) 
(p<0.001). The median time of fulfilling the criteria in patients with 
anti-NMDAR encephalitis was 2 weeks from first symptom onset (range 1-6). The 
sensitivity of the criteria was 90% (95% confidence interval 73-98) and the 
specificity was 96% (95% confidence interval 89-99).
INTERPRETATION: The proposed diagnostic criteria for anti-NMDAR encephalitis 
have good sensitivity and specificity. Incomplete criteria do not exclude the 
diagnosis.
WHAT THIS PAPER ADDS: The proposed clinical diagnostic criteria for 
anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) encephalitis by Graus et al. (2016) 
have high sensitivity and specificity in paediatric patients. The median time of 
fulfilling the criteria in patients with anti-NMDAR was 2 weeks from first 
symptom onset.

© 2017 Mac Keith Press.

DOI: 10.1111/dmcn.13579
PMID: 28972277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]