---
reference_id: "PMID:20536932"
title: Bone cancer pain.
authors:
- Jimenez-Andrade JM
- Mantyh WG
- Bloom AP
- Ferng AS
- Geffre CP
- Mantyh PW
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05429.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone cancer pain.
**Authors:** Jimenez-Andrade JM, Mantyh WG, Bloom AP, Ferng AS, Geffre CP, Mantyh PW
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05429.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05429.x)

## Content

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Jun;1198:173-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05429.x.

Bone cancer pain.

Jimenez-Andrade JM(1), Mantyh WG, Bloom AP, Ferng AS, Geffre CP, Mantyh PW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA.

In the United States, cancer is the second most common cause of death and it is 
expected that about 562,340 Americans will have died of cancer in 2009. Bone 
cancer pain is common in patients with advanced breast, prostate, and lung 
cancer as these tumors have a remarkable affinity to metastasize to bone. Once 
tumors metastasize to bone, they are a major cause of morbidity and mortality as 
the tumor induces significant skeletal remodeling, fractures, pain, and anemia. 
Currently, the factors that drive cancer pain are poorly understood. However, 
several recently introduced models of bone cancer pain, which closely mirror the 
human condition, are providing insight into the mechanisms that drive bone 
cancer pain and guide the development of mechanism-based therapies to treat the 
cancer pain. Several of these mechanism-based therapies have now entered human 
clinical trials. If successful, these therapies have the potential to 
significantly enlarge the repertoire of modalities that can be used to treat 
bone cancer pain and improve the quality of life, functional status, and 
survival of patients with bone cancer.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05429.x
PMCID: PMC5642911
PMID: 20536932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.