---
reference_id: "PMID:27997683"
title: "Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome: Epidemiology and therapeutic response in the national veterans affairs population."
authors:
- Abenroth DC
- Smith AG
- Greenlee JE
- Austin SD
- Clardy SL
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/mus.25520
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- "Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome/epidemiology, therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Plasmapheresis/trends
- Population Surveillance/methods
- Potassium Channel Blockers/therapeutic use
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- United States/epidemiology
- United States Department of Veterans Affairs/trends
- Veterans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome: Epidemiology and therapeutic response in the national veterans affairs population.
**Authors:** Abenroth DC, Smith AG, Greenlee JE, Austin SD, Clardy SL
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.25520](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.25520)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2017 Sep;56(3):421-426. doi: 10.1002/mus.25520. Epub 2017 Mar
17.

Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome: Epidemiology and therapeutic response in the 
national veterans affairs population.

Abenroth DC(1)(2), Smith AG(2), Greenlee JE(1)(2), Austin SD(3), Clardy 
SL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Salt Lake City, 
Utah, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Utah Health, 729 Arapeen Drive, Salt 
Lake City, Utah, 84108, USA.
(3)Department of Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Salt Lake City, 
Utah, USA.

INTRODUCTION: One nationwide study (The Netherlands) of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome (LEMS) has been published. We report LEMS epidemiology and its 
therapeutic response in the United States Veterans Affairs (VA) population.
METHODS: Medical records for all active patients (12.5 million) in the VA health 
system were queried for relevant ICD-9 codes for the period October 1, 1999 to 
September 30, 2013. Clinical, electrophysiologic, and serologic features were 
evaluated to confirm diagnosis; epidemiologic and treatment data were collected.
RESULTS: Point prevalence was estimated at 2.6 per 1,000,000 (confirmed cases) 
and 3.3 per 1,000,000 (combined confirmed and probable cases). Crude prevalence 
was similarly estimated at 9.2 and 10.9 per 1,000,000 respectively. A total of 
18 of 48 (38%) patients received 3,4-diaminopyridine (3,4-DAP); 14 of 18 (78%) 
improved.
CONCLUSIONS: This investigation was a large North American epidemiologic study 
of LEMS. LEMS prevalence in the national VA population was found to be similar 
to previously published rates in other large international populations. Most 
patients experienced improvement with therapy, including a majority with 
3,4-DAP. Muscle Nerve 56: 421-426, 2017.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.25520
PMID: 27997683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]