---
reference_id: "PMID:28726122"
title: Beta-Ketothiolase Deficiency Presenting with Metabolic Stroke After a Normal Newborn Screen in Two Individuals.
authors:
- Wojcik MH
- Wierenga KJ
- Rodan LH
- Sahai I
- Ferdinandusse S
- Genetti CA
- Towne MC
- Peake RWA
- James PM
- Beggs AH
- Brownstein CA
- Berry GT
- Agrawal PB
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2017_45
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beta-Ketothiolase Deficiency Presenting with Metabolic Stroke After a Normal Newborn Screen in Two Individuals.
**Authors:** Wojcik MH, Wierenga KJ, Rodan LH, Sahai I, Ferdinandusse S, Genetti CA, Towne MC, Peake RWA, James PM, Beggs AH, Brownstein CA, Berry GT, Agrawal PB
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2017_45](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2017_45)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2018;39:45-54. doi: 10.1007/8904_2017_45. Epub 2017 Jul 20.

Beta-Ketothiolase Deficiency Presenting with Metabolic Stroke After a Normal
Newborn Screen in Two Individuals.

Wojcik MH(1)(2)(3), Wierenga KJ(4), Rodan LH(5)(6), Sahai I(7), Ferdinandusse
S(8), Genetti CA(5)(6), Towne MC(5)(6), Peake RWA(5), James PM(5)(9), Beggs
AH(5)(6), Brownstein CA(5)(6), Berry GT(5)(6), Agrawal PB(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
monica.wojcik@childrens.harvard.edu.
(2)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. monica.wojcik@childrens.harvard.edu.
(3)The Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston Children's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. monica.wojcik@childrens.harvard.edu.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Genetics, Oklahoma University Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(5)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)The Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston Children's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)New England Newborn Screening Program, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(8)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Department of Clinical Chemistry,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Phoenix Children's Hospital, Phoenix,
AZ, USA.
(10)Division of Newborn Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
pagrawal@enders.tch.harvard.edu.
(11)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. pagrawal@enders.tch.harvard.edu.
(12)The Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston Children's Hospital
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. pagrawal@enders.tch.harvard.edu.

Beta-ketothiolase (mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase) deficiency is a
genetic disorder characterized by impaired isoleucine catabolism and ketone body
utilization that predisposes to episodic ketoacidosis. It results from biallelic
pathogenic variants in the ACAT1 gene, encoding mitochondrial beta-ketothiolase.
We report two cases of beta-ketothiolase deficiency presenting with acute
ketoacidosis and "metabolic stroke." The first patient presented at 28 months of
age with metabolic acidosis and pallidal stroke in the setting of a febrile
gastrointestinal illness. Although 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyric acid and trace
quantities of tiglylglycine were present in urine, a diagnosis of glutaric
acidemia type I was initially suspected due to the presence of glutaric and
3-hydroxyglutaric acids. A diagnosis of beta-ketothiolase deficiency was
ultimately made through whole exome sequencing which revealed compound
heterozygous variants in ACAT1. Fibroblast studies for beta-ketothiolase enzyme
activity were confirmatory. The second patient presented at 6 months of age with
ketoacidosis, and was found to have elevations of urinary
2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyric acid, 2-methylacetoacetic acid, and tiglylglycine.
Sequencing of ACAT1 demonstrated compound heterozygous presumed causative
variants. The patient exhibited choreoathethosis 2 months after the acute
metabolic decompensation. These cases highlight that, similar to a number of
other organic acidemias and mitochondrial disorders, beta-ketothiolase
deficiency can present with metabolic stroke. They also illustrate the
variability in clinical presentation, imaging, and biochemical evaluation that
make screening for and diagnosis of this rare disorder challenging, and further
demonstrate the value of whole exome sequencing in the diagnosis of metabolic
disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2017_45
PMCID: PMC5953889
PMID: 28726122
