---
reference_id: "PMID:34459232"
title: "Association of Fibromuscular Dysplasia and Pulsatile Tinnitus: A Report of the US Registry for Fibromuscular Dysplasia."
authors:
- Dicks AB
- Gornik HL
- Gu X
- Bacharach JM
- Fendrikova Mahlay N
- Froehlich JB
- Gupta K
- Gray BH
- Kim ESH
- Mahmood R
- Sharma AM
- Wells BJ
- Olin JW
- Weinberg I
journal: J Am Heart Assoc
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.121.021962
keywords:
- Carotid Arteries
- "Fibromuscular Dysplasia/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Registries
- "Tinnitus/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of Fibromuscular Dysplasia and Pulsatile Tinnitus: A Report of the US Registry for Fibromuscular Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Dicks AB, Gornik HL, Gu X, Bacharach JM, Fendrikova Mahlay N, Froehlich JB, Gupta K, Gray BH, Kim ESH, Mahmood R, Sharma AM, Wells BJ, Olin JW, Weinberg I
**Journal:** J Am Heart Assoc (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1161/JAHA.121.021962](https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.121.021962)

## Content

1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021 Sep 7;10(17):e021962. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.121.021962.
Epub  2021 Aug 28.

Association of Fibromuscular Dysplasia and Pulsatile Tinnitus: A Report of the 
US Registry for Fibromuscular Dysplasia.

Dicks AB(1), Gornik HL(2), Gu X(3), Bacharach JM(4), Fendrikova Mahlay N(5), 
Froehlich JB(2), Gupta K(6), Gray BH(7), Kim ESH(8), Mahmood R(9), Sharma 
AM(10), Wells BJ(11), Olin JW(12), Weinberg I(1).

Author information:
(1)Fireman Vascular Center Massachusetts General Hospital Boston MA.
(2)Harrington Heart and Vascular InstituteUniversity Hospitals Cleveland OH.
(3)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine Department of Medicine University of 
Michigan Health System Ann Arbor MI.
(4)North Central Heart - A Division of Avera Heart Hospital Sioux Falls SD.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine Cleveland Clinic Heart, Vascular and 
Thoracic Institute Cleveland OH.
(6)University of Kansas School of Medicine Kansas City KS.
(7)Department of Surgery Prisma Health SystemUniversity of South Carolina School 
of Medicine Greenville SC.
(8)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine Department of Medicine Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center Nashville TN.
(9)Wellstar Hospital Marietta GA.
(10)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine University of Virginia Charlottesville 
VA.
(11)Emory University School of Medicine Atlanta GA.
(12)Zena and Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute and Marie-Joseé and 
Henry R. Kravis Center for Cardiovascular Health Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai New York NY.

Background Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is a nonatherosclerotic arterial 
disease that has a variable presentation including pulsatile tinnitus (PT). The 
frequency and characteristics of PT in FMD are not well understood. The 
objective of this study was to evaluate the frequency of PT in FMD and compare 
characteristics between patients with and without PT. Methods and Results Data 
were queried from the US Registry for FMD from 2009 to 2020. The primary 
outcomes were frequency of PT among the FMD population and prevalence of 
baseline characteristics, signs/symptoms, and vascular bed involvement in 
patients with and without PT. Of 2613 patients with FMD who were included in the 
analysis, 972 (37.2%) reported PT. Univariable analysis and multivariable 
logistic regression were performed to explore factors associated with PT. 
Compared with those without PT, patients with PT were more likely to have 
involvement of the extracranial carotid artery (90.0% versus 78.6%; odds ratio, 
1.49; P=0.005) and to have higher prevalence of other neurovascular 
signs/symptoms including headache (82.5% versus 62.7%; odds ratio, 1.82; 
P<0.001), dizziness (44.9% versus 22.9%; odds ratio, 2.01; P<0.001), and 
cervical bruit (37.5% versus 15.8%; odds ratio, 2.73; P<0.001) compared with 
those without PT. Conclusions PT is common among patients with FMD. Patients 
with FMD who present with PT have higher rates of neurovascular signs/symptoms, 
cervical bruit, and involvement of the extracranial carotid arteries. The 
coexistence of the 2 conditions should be recognized, and providers who evaluate 
patients with PT should be aware of FMD as a potential cause.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.121.021962
PMCID: PMC8649251
PMID: 34459232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Drs Gornik and Olin are members of the Medical 
Advisory Board of the Fibromuscular Dysplasia Society of America, a nonprofit 
organization. Dr Froehlich is a consultant for Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen 
Biotech, Johnson & Johnson Health Care Systems Inc., and Pfizer. Dr Gray is a 
consultant for Surmodics, Inc. and an independent contractor for data and safety 
monitoring for Terumo BCT, Inc. Dr Weinberg is a consultant for Magneto 
Thrombectomy Solutions, Penumbra Inc., ‐ National PI. The remaining authors have 
no disclosures to report.