---
reference_id: "PMID:21865213"
title: Genetic basis of Bartter syndrome in Korea.
authors:
- Lee BH
- Cho HY
- Lee H
- Han KH
- Kang HG
- Ha IS
- Lee JH
- Park YS
- Shin JI
- Lee DY
- Kim SY
- Choi Y
- Cheong HI
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfr475
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Bartter Syndrome/genetics
- Child
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- DNA/genetics
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Prognosis
- Republic of Korea
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic basis of Bartter syndrome in Korea.
**Authors:** Lee BH, Cho HY, Lee H, Han KH, Kang HG, Ha IS, Lee JH, Park YS, Shin JI, Lee DY, Kim SY, Choi Y, Cheong HI
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfr475](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfr475)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012 Apr;27(4):1516-21. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfr475. Epub
 2011 Aug 23.

Genetic basis of Bartter syndrome in Korea.

Lee BH(1), Cho HY, Lee H, Han KH, Kang HG, Ha IS, Lee JH, Park YS, Shin JI, Lee
DY, Kim SY, Choi Y, Cheong HI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Children's Hospital, and
Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Bartter syndrome (BS) is clinically classified into antenatal or
neonatal BS (aBS) and classic BS (cBS) as well as five subtypes based on the
underlying mutant gene; SLC12A1 (BS I), KCNJ1 (BS II), CLCNKB (BS III), BSND (BS
IV) and CASR (BS V).
METHODS: Clinico-genetic features of a nationwide cohort of 26 Korean children
with BS were investigated.
RESULTS: The clinical diagnosis was aBS in 8 (30.8%), cBS in 15 (57.7%) and
mixed Bartter-Gitelman phenotype in 3 cases (11.5%). Five of eight patients with
aBS and all 18 patients with either cBS or mixed Bartter-Gitelman phenotype had
CLCNKB mutations. Among the 23 patients (46 alleles) with CLCNKB mutations,
p.W610X and large deletions were detected in 25 (54.3%) and 10 (21.7%) alleles,
respectively. There was no genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with
CLCNKB mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Twenty-three (88.5%) of the 26 BS patients involved in this study
had CLCNKB mutations. The p.W610X mutation and large deletion were two common
types of mutations in CLCNKB. The clinical manifestations of BS III were
heterogeneous without a genotype-phenotype correlation, typically manifesting
cBS phenotype but also aBS or mixed Bartter-Gitelman phenotypes. The molecular
diagnostic steps for patients with BS in our population should be designed
taking these peculiar genotype distributions into consideration, and a new more
clinically relevant classification including BS and Gitelman syndrome is
required.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfr475
PMID: 21865213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
