---
reference_id: "PMID:36639850"
title: "Mechanisms of cholera transmission via environment in India and Bangladesh: state of the science review."
authors:
- Shackleton D
- Memon FA
- Nichols G
- Phalkey R
- Chen AS
journal: Rev Environ Health
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1515/reveh-2022-0201
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of cholera transmission via environment in India and Bangladesh: state of the science review.
**Authors:** Shackleton D, Memon FA, Nichols G, Phalkey R, Chen AS
**Journal:** Rev Environ Health (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1515/reveh-2022-0201](https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2022-0201)

## Content

1. Rev Environ Health. 2023 Jan 16;39(2):313-329. doi: 10.1515/reveh-2022-0201. 
Print 2024 Jun 25.

Mechanisms of cholera transmission via environment in India and Bangladesh: 
state of the science review.

Shackleton D(1), Memon FA(1), Nichols G(2)(3), Phalkey R(4)(5)(6), Chen AS(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Engineering, Mathematics, and Physical Sciences, University of 
Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QF, UK.
(2)European Centre for Environment and Human Health, University of Exeter 
Medical School, Knowledge Spa, Royal Cornwall Hospital, Truro, Cornwall, UK.
(3)University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK.
(4)Climate Change and Health Group, UK Health Security Agency, London, UK.
(5)Heidelberg Institute of Global Health, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(6)Division of Epidemiology and Public Health, School of Medicine, University of 
Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Cholera has a long history in India and Bangladesh, the region where 
six out of the past seven global pandemics have been seeded. The changing 
climate and growing population have led to global cholera cases remaining high 
despite a consistent improvement in the access to clean water and sanitation. We 
aim to provide a holistic overview of variables influencing environmental 
cholera transmission within the context of India and Bangladesh, with a focus on 
the mechanisms by which they act.
CONTENT: We identified 56 relevant texts (Bangladesh n = 40, India n = 7, Other 
n = 5). The results of the review found that cholera transmission is associated 
with several socio-economic and environmental factors, each associated variable 
is suggested to have at least one mediating mechanism. Increases in ambient 
temperature and coastal sea surface temperature support cholera transmission via 
increases in plankton and a preference of Vibrio cholerae for warmer waters. 
Increased rainfall can potentially support or reduce transmission via several 
mechanisms.
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK: Common issues in the literature are co-variance of seasonal 
factors, limited access to high quality cholera data, high research bias towards 
research in Dhaka and Matlab (Bangladesh). A specific and detailed understanding 
of the relationship between SST and cholera incidence remains unclear.

© 2023 the author(s), published by De Gruyter, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/reveh-2022-0201
PMID: 36639850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]