---
reference_id: "PMID:21217607"
title: The spectrum of the behavioral phenotype in boys and adolescents 47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome).
authors:
- Tartaglia N
- Cordeiro L
- Howell S
- Wilson R
- Janusz J
journal: Pediatr Endocrinol Rev
year: '2010'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The spectrum of the behavioral phenotype in boys and adolescents 47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome).
**Authors:** Tartaglia N, Cordeiro L, Howell S, Wilson R, Janusz J
**Journal:** Pediatr Endocrinol Rev (2010)

## Content

1. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2010 Dec;8 Suppl 1(0 1):151-9.

The spectrum of the behavioral phenotype in boys and adolescents 47,XXY 
(Klinefelter syndrome).

Tartaglia N(1), Cordeiro L, Howell S, Wilson R, Janusz J.

Author information:
(1)University of Colorado School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, and 
Child Development Unit, The Children's Hospital, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. 
Tartaglia.nicole@tchden.org

The behavioral phenotype of 47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome) includes increased 
risks for developmental delays, language-based learning disabilities, executive 
dysfunction/ADHD, and socialemotional difficulties. However there is significant 
variability between individuals with 47,XXY, and many children and adolescents 
have minimal or no behavioral features while others have quite significant 
involvement. This paper describes behavioral features in a cohort of 57 children 
and adolescents with 47,XXY, including results on standardized measures of 
behavior (BASC-2), attention (Conner's Rating Scales), and social skills (Social 
Responsiveness Scale). A subset was directly assessed for autism spectrum 
disorders using the ADOS and ADIR. We discuss our results within the context of 
previous literature, including implications for genetic counseling, 
recommendations for care, and areas for future research.

PMCID: PMC3740580
PMID: 21217607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors of this article declare 
no conflict of interest.