---
reference_id: "PMID:12709002"
title: Melanocyte-keratinocyte cell transplantation for stable vitiligo.
authors:
- Mulekar SV
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-4362.2003.01628.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Melanocyte-keratinocyte cell transplantation for stable vitiligo.
**Authors:** Mulekar SV
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-4362.2003.01628.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-4362.2003.01628.x)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2003 Feb;42(2):132-6. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-4362.2003.01628.x.

Melanocyte-keratinocyte cell transplantation for stable vitiligo.

Mulekar SV(1).

Author information:
(1)Noble Clinic, Pune, India. dr_mulekar@vsnl.com

BACKGROUND: Vitiligo is a common disorder with a worldwide prevalence of 1-2%. 
In India the psychological and social impact of the disease is significant and 
is detrimental to patients.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the usefulness of epidermal cell transplantation in the 
treatment of vitiligo.
METHODS: A simpler and modified method based on that of Olsson and Juhlin has 
been used. It utilizes a shave biopsy skin sample of up to one-tenth the size of 
the recipient area. The skin sample is incubated, the cells mechanically 
separated using trypsin EDTA solution, and then centrifuged to prepare a 
suspension. The cell suspension is then applied to the derm-abraded depigmented 
skin area and collagen dressing is applied to keep it in place.
RESULTS: One hundred and twenty-two patients with generalized vitiligo, 43 with 
segmental and 19 with focal vitiligo were treated and observed for a period of 1 
year. In the generalized vitiligo group 65 (53%) showed excellent pigmentation, 
10 (8%) showed good pigmentation, 11 (9%) showed fair pigmentation and 28 (23%) 
patients showed poor pigmentation. Eight (7%) patients did not follow up. 
Thirty-six (84%), five (12%) and two (4%) patients showed excellent, good and 
poor pigmentation, respectively, in the segmental vitiligo group. Thirteen (69%) 
and five (26%) patients showed excellent and poor results, respectively, in the 
focal vitiligo group. One (5%) patient did not appear for follow up. Recurrence 
was observed in 15 patents.
CONCLUSION: This surgical treatment gives its best results in segmental and 
focal vitiligo, even with large affected areas, and in at least 50% of patients 
with generalized vitiligo, thus improving their appearance.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-4362.2003.01628.x
PMID: 12709002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]