---
reference_id: "PMID:28803492"
title: "Rifampin vs. rifapentine: what is the preferred rifamycin for tuberculosis?"
authors:
- Alfarisi O
- Alghamdi WA
- Al-Shaer MH
- Dooley KE
- Peloquin CA
journal: Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/17512433.2017.1366311
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rifampin vs. rifapentine: what is the preferred rifamycin for tuberculosis?
**Authors:** Alfarisi O, Alghamdi WA, Al-Shaer MH, Dooley KE, Peloquin CA
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17512433.2017.1366311](https://doi.org/10.1080/17512433.2017.1366311)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2017 Oct;10(10):1027-1036. doi: 
10.1080/17512433.2017.1366311. Epub 2017 Aug 18.

Rifampin vs. rifapentine: what is the preferred rifamycin for tuberculosis?

Alfarisi O(1), Alghamdi WA(2)(3), Al-Shaer MH(2)(3), Dooley KE(1), Peloquin 
CA(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Medicine , Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , 
Baltimore , MD , USA.
(2)b Department of Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research , University of 
Florida, College of Pharmacy , Gainesville , FL , USA.
(3)c Infectious Disease Pharmacokinetics Laboratory , University of Florida , 
Gainesville , FL , USA.

One-third of the world's population is infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
(M.tb.). Latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) can progress to tuberculosis 
disease, the leading cause of death by infection. Rifamycin antibiotics, like 
rifampin and rifapentine, have unique sterilizing activity against M.tb. What 
are the advantages of each for LTBI or tuberculosis treatment? Areas covered: We 
review studies assessing the pharmacokinetics (PK), pharmacodynamics (PD), drug 
interaction risk, safety, and efficacy of rifampin and rifapentine and provide 
basis for comparing them. Expert commentary: Rifampin has shorter half-life, 
higher MIC against M.tb, lower protein binding, and better distribution into 
cavitary contents than rifapentine. Drug interactions for the two drugs maybe 
similar in magnitude. For LTBI, rifapentine is effective as convenient, 
once-weekly, 12-week course of treatment. Rifampin is also effective for LTBI, 
but must be given daily for four months, therefore, drug interactions are more 
problematic. For drug-sensitive tuberculosis disease, rifampin remains the 
standard of care. Safety profile of rifampin is better-described; adverse events 
differ somewhat for the two drugs. The registered once-weekly rifapentine 
regimen is inadequate, but higher doses of either drugs may shorten the 
treatment duration required for effective management of TB. Results of clinical 
trials evaluating high-dose rifamycin regimens are eagerly awaited.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2017.1366311
PMID: 28803492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]