---
reference_id: "PMID:23312829"
title: "Everolimus for angiomyolipoma associated with tuberous sclerosis complex or sporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis (EXIST-2): a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial."
authors:
- Bissler JJ
- Kingswood JC
- Radzikowska E
- Zonnenberg BA
- Frost M
- Belousova E
- Sauter M
- Nonomura N
- Brakemeier S
- de Vries PJ
- Whittemore VH
- Chen D
- Sahmoud T
- Shah G
- Lincy J
- Lebwohl D
- Budde K
journal: Lancet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61767-X
keywords:
- Adult
- "Angiomyolipoma/complications, drug therapy"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Double-Blind Method
- Everolimus
- Female
- Humans
- Lymphangioleiomyomatosis/complications
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- "Sirolimus/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Tuberous Sclerosis/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Everolimus for angiomyolipoma associated with tuberous sclerosis complex or sporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis (EXIST-2): a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
**Authors:** Bissler JJ, Kingswood JC, Radzikowska E, Zonnenberg BA, Frost M, Belousova E, Sauter M, Nonomura N, Brakemeier S, de Vries PJ, Whittemore VH, Chen D, Sahmoud T, Shah G, Lincy J, Lebwohl D, Budde K
**Journal:** Lancet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61767-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61767-X)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2013 Mar 9;381(9869):817-24. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61767-X.

Everolimus for angiomyolipoma associated with tuberous sclerosis complex or 
sporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis (EXIST-2): a multicentre, randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Bissler JJ(1), Kingswood JC, Radzikowska E, Zonnenberg BA, Frost M, Belousova E, 
Sauter M, Nonomura N, Brakemeier S, de Vries PJ, Whittemore VH, Chen D, Sahmoud 
T, Shah G, Lincy J, Lebwohl D, Budde K.

Author information:
(1)Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, 
USA. john.bissler@cchmc.org

Comment in
    Lancet. 2013 Mar 9;381(9869):783-5. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61954-0.
    Urology. 2013 Aug;82(2):278-9. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2013.02.037.
    J Urol. 2014 Mar;191(3):626-7. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.11.045.

BACKGROUND: Angiomyolipomas are slow-growing tumours associated with 
constitutive activation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), and are common 
in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex and sporadic 
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. The insidious growth of these tumours predisposes 
patients to serious complications including retroperitoneal haemorrhage and 
impaired renal function. Everolimus, a rapamycin derivative, inhibits the mTOR 
pathway by acting on the mTOR complex 1. We compared the angiomyolipoma response 
rate on everolimus with placebo in patients with tuberous sclerosis or sporadic 
lymphanioleiomyomatosis-associated angiomyolipomata.
METHODS: In this double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial, patients aged 
18 years or older with at least one angiomyolipoma 3 cm or larger in its longest 
diameter (defined by radiological assessment) and a definite diagnosis of 
tuberous sclerosis or sporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis were randomly assigned, 
in a 2:1 fashion with the use of an interactive web response system, to receive 
oral everolimus 10 mg per day or placebo. The primary efficacy endpoint was the 
proportion of patients with confirmed angiomyolipoma response of at least a 50% 
reduction in total volume of target angiomyolipomas relative to baseline. This 
study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov number NCT00790400.
RESULTS: 118 patients (median age 31·0 years; IQR 18·0–61·0) from 24 centres in 
11 countries were randomly assigned to receive everolimus (n=79) or placebo 
(n=39). At the data cutoff, double-blind treatment was ongoing for 98 patients; 
two main reasons for discontination were disease progression (nine placebo 
patients) followed by adverse events (two everolimus patients; four placebo 
patients). The angiomyolipoma response rate was 42% (33 of 79 [95% CI 31–53%]) 
for everolimus and 0% (0 of 39 [0–9%]) for placebo (response rate difference 42% 
[24–58%]; one-sided Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test p<0·0001). The most common 
adverse events in the everolimus and placebo groups were stomatitis (48% [38 of 
79], 8% [3 of 39], respectively), nasopharyngitis (24% [19 of 79] and 31% [12 of 
39]), and acne-like skin lesions (22% [17 of 79] and 5% [2 of 39]).
INTERPRETATION: Everolimus reduced angiomyolipoma volume with an acceptable 
safety profile, suggesting it could be a potential treatment for angiomyolipomas 
associated with tuberous sclerosis.
FUNDING: Novartis Pharmaceuticals.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61767-X
PMID: 23312829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]