---
reference_id: "PMID:36249295"
title: "PEX6 Mutations in Peroxisomal Biogenesis Disorders: An Usher Syndrome Mimic."
authors:
- Benson MD
- Papp KM
- Casey GA
- Radziwon A
- St Laurent CD
- Doucette LP
- MacDonald IM
journal: Ophthalmol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.xops.2021.100028
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PEX6 Mutations in Peroxisomal Biogenesis Disorders: An Usher Syndrome Mimic.
**Authors:** Benson MD, Papp KM, Casey GA, Radziwon A, St Laurent CD, Doucette LP, MacDonald IM
**Journal:** Ophthalmol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xops.2021.100028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xops.2021.100028)

## Content

1. Ophthalmol Sci. 2021 May 25;1(2):100028. doi: 10.1016/j.xops.2021.100028. 
eCollection 2021 Jun.

PEX6 Mutations in Peroxisomal Biogenesis Disorders: An Usher Syndrome Mimic.

Benson MD(1), Papp KM(1), Casey GA(2), Radziwon A(1), St Laurent CD(1), Doucette 
LP(1), MacDonald IM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

PURPOSE: Peroxisomal biogenesis disorders (PBDs) represent a spectrum of 
conditions that result in vision loss, sensorineural hearing loss, neurologic 
dysfunction, and other abnormalities resulting from aberrant peroxisomal 
function caused by mutations in PEX genes. With no treatments currently 
available, we sought to investigate the disease mechanism in a patient with a 
PBD caused by defects in PEX6 and to probe whether overexpression of PEX6 could 
restore peroxisome function and potentially offer therapeutic benefit.
DESIGN: Laboratory-based study.
PARTICIPANTS: A 12-year-old boy sought treatment with hearing loss and 
retinopathy. After negative results in an Usher syndrome panel, targeted genetic 
testing revealed compound heterozygous mutations in PEX6. These included a 
14-nucleotide deletion (c.802_815del: p.(Asp268Cysfs∗8)) and a milder missense 
variant (c.35T→C:(p.Phe12Ser)).
METHODS: Patient-derived skin fibroblasts were cultured, and a PEX6 knockout 
cell line was developed using clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic 
repeats and Cas9 technology in HEK293T cells to emulate a more severe disease 
phenotype. Immunoblot analysis of whole cell lysates was performed to assess 
peroxisome number. Immunofluorescence studies used antibodies against components 
of the peroxisomal protein import pathway to interrogate the effects of 
mutations in PEX6 on protein trafficking.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Primary outcome measures were peroxisome abundance and 
matrix protein import.
RESULTS: Peroxisome number was not significantly different between control 
fibroblasts and patient fibroblasts; however, fewer peroxisomes were observed in 
PEX6 knockout cells compared with wild-type cells (P = 0.04). Analysis by 
immunofluorescent microscopy showed significantly impaired peroxisomal targeting 
signal 1- and peroxisomal targeting signal 2-mediated matrix protein import in 
both patient fibroblasts and PEX6 knockout cells. Overexpressing PEX6 resulted 
in improved matrix protein import in PEX6 knockout cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in PEX6 were responsible for combined hearing loss and 
retinopathy in our patient. The primary peroxisomal defect in our patient's skin 
fibroblasts was impaired peroxisomal protein import as opposed to reduction in 
the number of peroxisomes. Genetic strategies that introduce wild-type PEX6 into 
cells deficient in PEX6 protein show promise in restoring peroxisome function. 
Future studies of patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cell-derived retinal 
pigment epithelium cells may clarify the role of PEX6 in the retina and the 
potential for gene therapy in these patients.

© 2021 by the American Academy of Ophthalmology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xops.2021.100028
PMCID: PMC9559095
PMID: 36249295