---
reference_id: "PMID:36645400"
title: News in the classification of WHO 2022 testicular tumours.
authors:
- Colecchia M
- Bremmer F
- Pini GM
journal: Pathologica
year: '2022'
doi: 10.32074/1591-951X-825
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Testicular Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Sertoli Cell Tumor/diagnosis, pathology"
- Sex Cord-Gonadal Stromal Tumors
- Neuroendocrine Tumors
- World Health Organization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# News in the classification of WHO 2022 testicular tumours.
**Authors:** Colecchia M, Bremmer F, Pini GM
**Journal:** Pathologica (2022)
**DOI:** [10.32074/1591-951X-825](https://doi.org/10.32074/1591-951X-825)

## Content

1. Pathologica. 2022 Feb;115(1):3-7. doi: 10.32074/1591-951X-825. Epub 2023 Jan
16.

News in the classification of WHO 2022 testicular tumours.

Colecchia M(1), Bremmer F(2), Pini GM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, "Vita-Salute" 
University, Milan, Italy.
(2)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Pathology, Azienda Ospedaliera SS Antonio e Biagio e Cesare 
Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy.

The novelties in WHO 5th edition classification of genitourinary tumours are: a) 
nomenclature changes, including the replacement of the term "primitive 
neuroectodermal tumour" with "embryonic-type neuroectodermal tumour" and of 
"carcinoid" with "neuroendocrine tumour". Also, seminoma is now placed in a 
"germinoma" family of tumours, while sertoliform cystoadenoma was moved from 
adnexal tumours to Sertoli cell tumours; b) new entities, specifically signet 
ring stromal tumour, myoid gonadal stromal tumour and well-differentiated 
papillary mesothelial tumour.

Copyright © 2023 Società Italiana di Anatomia Patologica e Citopatologia 
Diagnostica, Divisione Italiana della International Academy of Pathology.

DOI: 10.32074/1591-951X-825
PMCID: PMC10342218
PMID: 36645400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.