---
reference_id: "PMID:29854017"
title: "Social Cognition Dysfunctions in Neurodegenerative Diseases: Neuroanatomical Correlates and Clinical Implications."
authors:
- Christidi F
- Migliaccio R
- Santamaría-García H
- Santangelo G
- Trojsi F
journal: Behav Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1155/2018/1849794
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Social Cognition Dysfunctions in Neurodegenerative Diseases: Neuroanatomical Correlates and Clinical Implications.
**Authors:** Christidi F, Migliaccio R, Santamaría-García H, Santangelo G, Trojsi F
**Journal:** Behav Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2018/1849794](https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/1849794)

## Content

1. Behav Neurol. 2018 Apr 26;2018:1849794. doi: 10.1155/2018/1849794. eCollection
 2018.

Social Cognition Dysfunctions in Neurodegenerative Diseases: Neuroanatomical 
Correlates and Clinical Implications.

Christidi F(1), Migliaccio R(2), Santamaría-García H(3), Santangelo G(4), Trojsi 
F(5).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Neurology, Aeginition Hospital, Medical School, National 
and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(2)INSERM U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, and Université Pierre et 
Marie Curie-Paris 6, UMRS 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière 
(ICM), 75013 Paris, France.
(3)Pontificia Universidad Javeriana Bogotá, Colombia, Centro de Memoria y 
Cognición Intellectus Hospital Universitario San Ignacio, Bogotá, Colombia.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Caserta, 
Italy.
(5)Department of Medical, Surgical, Neurological, Metabolic, and Aging Sciences, 
University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.

Social cognitive function, involved in the perception, processing, and 
interpretation of social information, has been shown to be crucial for 
successful communication and interpersonal relationships, thereby significantly 
impacting mental health, well-being, and quality of life. In this regard, 
assessment of social cognition, mainly focusing on four key domains, such as 
theory of mind (ToM), emotional empathy, and social perception and behavior, has 
been increasingly evaluated in clinical settings, given the potential 
implications of impairments of these skills for therapeutic decision-making. 
With regard to neurodegenerative diseases (NDs), most disorders, characterized 
by variable disease phenotypes and progression, although similar for the 
unfavorable prognosis, are associated to impairments of social cognitive 
function, with consequent negative effects on patients' management. 
Specifically, in some NDs these deficits may represent core diagnostic criteria, 
such as for behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), or may emerge 
during the disease course as critical aspects, such as for Parkinson's and 
Alzheimer's diseases. On this background, we aimed to revise the most updated 
evidence on the neurobiological hypotheses derived from network-based 
approaches, clinical manifestations, and assessment tools of social cognitive 
dysfunctions in NDs, also prospecting potential benefits on patients' 
well-being, quality of life, and outcome derived from potential therapeutic 
perspectives of these deficits.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/1849794
PMCID: PMC5944290
PMID: 29854017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]