---
reference_id: "PMID:28275241"
title: Characterization of contiguous gene deletions in COL4A6 and COL4A5 in Alport syndrome-diffuse leiomyomatosis.
authors:
- Nozu K
- Minamikawa S
- Yamada S
- Oka M
- Yanagita M
- Morisada N
- Fujinaga S
- Nagano C
- Gotoh Y
- Takahashi E
- Morishita T
- Yamamura T
- Ninchoji T
- Kaito H
- Morioka I
- Nakanishi K
- Vorechovsky I
- Iijima K
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/jhg.2017.28
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- "Leiomyomatosis/complications, genetics"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of contiguous gene deletions in COL4A6 and COL4A5 in Alport syndrome-diffuse leiomyomatosis.
**Authors:** Nozu K, Minamikawa S, Yamada S, Oka M, Yanagita M, Morisada N, Fujinaga S, Nagano C, Gotoh Y, Takahashi E, Morishita T, Yamamura T, Ninchoji T, Kaito H, Morioka I, Nakanishi K, Vorechovsky I, Iijima K
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jhg.2017.28](https://doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2017.28)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2017 Jul;62(7):733-735. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2017.28. Epub 2017 Mar
9.

Characterization of contiguous gene deletions in COL4A6 and COL4A5 in Alport
syndrome-diffuse leiomyomatosis.

Nozu K(1), Minamikawa S(1), Yamada S(2)(3), Oka M(1), Yanagita M(4), Morisada
N(1), Fujinaga S(5), Nagano C(6), Gotoh Y(6), Takahashi E(7), Morishita T(8),
Yamamura T(1), Ninchoji T(1), Kaito H(1), Morioka I(1), Nakanishi K(9),
Vorechovsky I(10), Iijima K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,
Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Tokai University Oiso Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Division of Human Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Saitama City,
Saitama, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Japanese Red Cross Nagoya Daini Hospital,
Nagoya, Japan.
(7)Department of Nephrology, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama,
Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University of Occupational and Environmental
Health, Fukuoka, Japan.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan.
(10)University of Southampton Faculty of Medicine, Southampton, UK.

Alport syndrome-diffuse leiomyomatosis (AS-DL, OMIM: 308940) is a rare variant
of the X-linked Alport syndrome that shows overgrowth of visceral smooth muscles
in the gastrointestinal, respiratory and female reproductive tracts in addition
to renal symptoms. AS-DL results from deletions that encompass the 5' ends of
the COL4A5 and COL4A6 genes, but deletion breakpoints between COL4A5 and COL4A6
have been determined in only four cases. Here, we characterize deletion
breakpoints in five AS-DL patients and show a contiguous COL4A6/COL4A5 deletion
in each case. We also demonstrate that eight out of nine deletion alleles
involved sequences homologous between COL4A5 and COL4A6. Most breakpoints took
place in recognizable transposed elements, including long and short interspersed
repeats, DNA transposons and long-terminal repeat retrotransposons. Because
deletions involved the bidirectional promoter region in each case, we suggest
that the occurrence of leiomyomatosis in AS-DL requires inactivation of both
genes. Altogether, our study highlights the importance of homologous
recombination involving multiple transposed elements for the development of this
continuous gene syndrome and other atypical loss-of-function phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2017.28
PMID: 28275241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
