---
reference_id: "PMID:21584767"
title: Insulin therapy.
authors:
- Lechleitner M
- Hoppichler F
journal: Wien Med Wochenschr
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s10354-011-0889-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insulin therapy.
**Authors:** Lechleitner M, Hoppichler F
**Journal:** Wien Med Wochenschr (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10354-011-0889-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10354-011-0889-3)

## Content

1. Wien Med Wochenschr. 2011 Jun;161(11-12):300-4. doi:
10.1007/s10354-011-0889-3.  Epub 2011 May 23.

Insulin therapy.

Lechleitner M(1), Hoppichler F.

Author information:
(1)Landeskrankenhaus Hochzirl, Anna Dengel-Haus, Zirl, Austria. 
monika.lechleitner@tilak.at

Insulin therapy is a vital hormone replacement therapy in type 1 diabetes 
mellitus. In type 2 diabetes, insulin is indicated if glycaemic goals are not 
reached by oral anti diabetics, as well as for metabolic detoriation, 
co-morbidities, surgery, pregnancy or contradictions against oral anti 
diabetics. Insulin preparations are characterized by the onset of the insulin 
action, the peak profile and duration of action. Available are short acting, 
long-acting and premixed preparations of human insulin, and insulin analogues. 
The gold standard of insulin therapy in type 1 diabetes is functional insulin 
therapy with a basal-bolus insulin regimen and control and adaption of the 
therapy by the patient. Various insulin regimens are available for treating 
patients with type 2 diabetes, including basal insulin supported oral therapy, 
supplementary mealtime injection of short acting insulin or insulin analogues, 
conventional insulin therapy or a basal bolus procedure. The various insulin 
preparations and regimens make it possible to adapt the therapy according to the 
patient's individual need.

DOI: 10.1007/s10354-011-0889-3
PMID: 21584767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]