---
reference_id: "PMID:25575635"
title: Mitochondrial energy failure in HSD10 disease is due to defective mtDNA transcript processing.
authors:
- Chatfield KC
- Coughlin CR 2nd
- Friederich MW
- Gallagher RC
- Hesselberth JR
- Lovell MA
- Ofman R
- Swanson MA
- Thomas JA
- Wanders RJ
- Wartchow EP
- Van Hove JL
journal: Mitochondrion
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2014.12.005
keywords:
- "3-Hydroxyacyl CoA Dehydrogenases/genetics, metabolism"
- Acetyl-CoA C-Acetyltransferase/deficiency
- Cell Respiration
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/metabolism"
- Dyskinesias
- Electron Transport
- Energy Metabolism
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/physiopathology"
- Liver/pathology
- Male
- X-Linked Intellectual Disability
- "Mitochondria/genetics, physiology"
- Muscles/pathology
- Myocardium/pathology
- "RNA Processing, Post-Transcriptional"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial energy failure in HSD10 disease is due to defective mtDNA transcript processing.
**Authors:** Chatfield KC, Coughlin CR 2nd, Friederich MW, Gallagher RC, Hesselberth JR, Lovell MA, Ofman R, Swanson MA, Thomas JA, Wanders RJ, Wartchow EP, Van Hove JL
**Journal:** Mitochondrion (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mito.2014.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mito.2014.12.005)

## Content

1. Mitochondrion. 2015 Mar;21:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2014.12.005. Epub 2015
Jan  6.

Mitochondrial energy failure in HSD10 disease is due to defective mtDNA 
transcript processing.

Chatfield KC(1), Coughlin CR 2nd(2), Friederich MW(2), Gallagher RC(2), 
Hesselberth JR(3), Lovell MA(4), Ofman R(5), Swanson MA(2), Thomas JA(2), 
Wanders RJ(5), Wartchow EP(6), Van Hove JL(7).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Colorado, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, 
University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Program in Molecular 
Biology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA; Department 
of Pathology, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, 
University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA. Electronic address: 
Johan.Vanhove@ucdenver.edu.

Muscle, heart and liver were analyzed in a male subject who succumbed to HSD10 
disease. Respiratory chain enzyme analysis and BN-PAGE showed reduced activities 
and assembly of complexes I, III, IV, and V. The mRNAs of all RNase P subunits 
were preserved in heart and overexpressed in muscle, but MRPP2 protein was 
severely decreased. RNase P upregulation correlated with increased expression of 
mitochondrial biogenesis factors and preserved mitochondrial enzymes in muscle, 
but not in heart where this compensatory mechanism was incomplete. We 
demonstrate elevated amounts of unprocessed pre-tRNAs and mRNA transcripts 
encoding mitochondrial subunits indicating deficient RNase P activity. This 
study provides evidence of abnormal mitochondrial RNA processing causing 
mitochondrial energy failure in HSD10 disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights 
reserved. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mito.2014.12.005
PMCID: PMC4355277
PMID: 25575635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts to declare.