---
reference_id: "PMID:33742130"
title: Glioma pathogenesis-related protein 1 performs dual functions in tumor cells.
authors:
- Wang J
- Li Z
- Yin F
- Zhang R
- Zhang Y
- Wang Z
- Sheng X
journal: Cancer Gene Ther
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41417-021-00321-9
keywords:
- Glioma
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, therapy"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Nuclear Proteins
- Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glioma pathogenesis-related protein 1 performs dual functions in tumor cells.
**Authors:** Wang J, Li Z, Yin F, Zhang R, Zhang Y, Wang Z, Sheng X
**Journal:** Cancer Gene Ther (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41417-021-00321-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41417-021-00321-9)

## Content

1. Cancer Gene Ther. 2022 Mar;29(3-4):253-263. doi: 10.1038/s41417-021-00321-9. 
Epub 2021 Mar 19.

Glioma pathogenesis-related protein 1 performs dual functions in tumor cells.

Wang J(1), Li Z(2), Yin F(2), Zhang R(2), Zhang Y(2), Wang Z(3), Sheng X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Jiangsu University School of Medicine, 
Zhenjiang, 212013, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Jiangsu University School 
of Medicine, Zhenjiang, 212013, Jiangsu, China.
(3)The Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutic Development, Department of 
Biological Sciences, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, GA, 30314, USA. 
zwang@cau.edu.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Jiangsu University School 
of Medicine, Zhenjiang, 212013, Jiangsu, China. shengxiumei@ujs.edu.cn.

Glioma pathogenesis-related protein 1 (GLIPR1) was identified as an oncoprotein 
in some cancer types including gliomas, breast cancers, melanoma cancers, and 
Wilms tumors, but as a tumor suppressor in some other types of cancers, such as 
prostate cancers, lung cancers, bladder cancers, and thyroid cancers. In 
gliomas, GLIPR1 promotes the migration and invasion of glioma cells by 
interaction with the actin polymerization regulator Neural Wiskott-Aldrich 
syndrome protein (N-WASP) and then abolishes the negative effects of 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonuclear protein K (hnRNPK). In prostate cancers, high 
levels of GLIPR1 induce apoptosis and destruction of oncoproteins. In lung 
cancers, overexpression of GLIPR1 inhibits the growth of lung cancer cells 
partially through inhibiting the V-ErbB avian erythroblastic leukemia viral 
oncogene homolog3 (ErbB3) pathway. However, the mechanisms that GLIPR1 performs 
its function in other tumors still remain unclear. The tumor suppressing role of 
GLIPR1 has been explored to the cancer treatment. The adenoviral vector-mediated 
Glipr1 (AdGlipr1) gene therapy and the GLIPR1-transmembrane domain deleted 
(GLIPR1-ΔTM) protein therapy both showed antitumor activities and stimulated 
immune response in prostate cancers. Whether GLPIR1 can be used to treat other 
tumors is an important topic to be explored. Among which, whether GLPIR1 can be 
used to treat lung cancer by atomizing inhalation is the key topic we care 
about. If it does, this therapy has a wide application prospect and is a great 
progression in lung cancer treatment.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41417-021-00321-9
PMID: 33742130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]