---
reference_id: "PMID:29458880"
title: Prenatal diagnosis of hydrancephaly and enlarged cerebellum and cisterna magna in a fetus with thanatophoric dysplasia type II and a review of prenatal diagnosis of brain anomalies associated with thanatophoric dysplasia.
authors:
- Chen CP
- Chang TY
- Lin TW
- Chern SR
- Chen SW
- Lai ST
- Chuang TY
- Wang W
journal: Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.tjog.2017.12.020
keywords:
- Amniocentesis/methods
- "Cerebellum/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Cisterna Magna/diagnostic imaging
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Hydranencephaly/diagnostic imaging
- Karyotype
- Mutation
- Pregnancy
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- "Skull/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Thanatophoric Dysplasia/diagnostic imaging
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal diagnosis of hydrancephaly and enlarged cerebellum and cisterna magna in a fetus with thanatophoric dysplasia type II and a review of prenatal diagnosis of brain anomalies associated with thanatophoric dysplasia.
**Authors:** Chen CP, Chang TY, Lin TW, Chern SR, Chen SW, Lai ST, Chuang TY, Wang W
**Journal:** Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tjog.2017.12.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tjog.2017.12.020)

## Content

1. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2018 Feb;57(1):119-122. doi: 
10.1016/j.tjog.2017.12.020.

Prenatal diagnosis of hydrancephaly and enlarged cerebellum and cisterna magna 
in a fetus with thanatophoric dysplasia type II and a review of prenatal 
diagnosis of brain anomalies associated with thanatophoric dysplasia.

Chen CP(1), Chang TY(2), Lin TW(2), Chern SR(3), Chen SW(4), Lai ST(4), Chuang 
TY(4), Wang W(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Department of Medical Research, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Department of Medicine, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei City, Taiwan; 
Department of Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan; School of 
Chinese Medicine, College of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan; Institute of Clinical and Community Health Nursing, National 
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic 
address: cpc_mmh@yahoo.com.
(2)Taiji Fetal Medicine Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medical Research, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Medical Research, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Department of Bioengineering, Tatung University, Taipei, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: We present prenatal diagnosis of hydrancephaly and enlarged 
cerebellum and cisterna magna in a fetus with thanatophoric dysplasia type II 
(TD2) and a review of prenatal diagnosis of brain anomalies associated with TD.
CASE REPORT: A 33-year-old woman was referred for genetic counseling at 25 weeks 
of gestation because of fetal ultrasound abnormalities. Prenatal ultrasound at 
14 weeks of gestation revealed an increased nuchal translucency (NT) and 
hydrocephalus. Level II ultrasound examination at 25 weeks of gestation revealed 
hydrancephaly, macrocephaly, a cloverleaf skull, frontal bossing, enlarged 
cerebellum and cisterna magna, a narrow chest, small ribs, short straight limbs. 
Amniocentesis revealed a karyotype of 46,XX. FGFR3 mutation analysis using the 
DNA extracted from uncultured amniocytes revealed a genotype of WT/c.1948A>G 
(p.Lys650Glu). The result was consistent with a K650E mutation in FGFR3 and TD2. 
The pregnancy was subsequently terminated.
CONCLUSION: Fetuses with TD2 may present increased NT, early onset 
hydrocephalus, enlarged cerebellum and cisterna magna, and hydrancephaly on 
prenatal ultrasound.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tjog.2017.12.020
PMID: 29458880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]