---
reference_id: "PMID:21909825"
title: "The mitral valve in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: old versus new concepts."
authors:
- Hagège AA
- Bruneval P
- Levine RA
- Desnos M
- Neamatalla H
- Judge DP
journal: J Cardiovasc Transl Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s12265-011-9319-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The mitral valve in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: old versus new concepts.
**Authors:** Hagège AA, Bruneval P, Levine RA, Desnos M, Neamatalla H, Judge DP
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Transl Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12265-011-9319-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12265-011-9319-6)

## Content

1. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2011 Dec;4(6):757-66. doi: 10.1007/s12265-011-9319-6.
 Epub 2011 Sep 10.

The mitral valve in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: old versus new concepts.

Hagège AA(1), Bruneval P, Levine RA, Desnos M, Neamatalla H, Judge DP.

Author information:
(1)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, 
Department of Cardiology, Paris, France. albert.hagege@egp.aphp.fr

Elongation and pathological thickening of the mitral valve (MV) is commonly seen 
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), and its pathogenic basis is poorly 
understood. Associated features include mal-positioning of the papillary muscles 
and MV, as well as systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the MV leaflets, which can 
worsen the turbulence and dynamic left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) 
gradient. Coaptation of the MV leaflets depends on both anterior and posterior 
leaflet length and position, and failure of either to optimally adapt in this 
setting can result in mitral regurgitation or worsened LVOT obstruction. The 
cause of MV enlargement in HCM is not currently understood, and several 
different hypotheses may be relevant. The lack of correlation between MV size 
and the severity of left ventricular hypertrophy, as well as the early findings 
in genetically predisposed individuals with sarcomere mutations, suggest that it 
may be an intrinsic aspect of HCM in certain individuals. Other evidence points 
to a reactive process in the setting of excess production of paracrine growth 
factors in diseased myocardium that may influence valve overgrowth. Improved 
understanding of the responsible adaptive mechanisms will pave the way for 
studies targeted on the prevention and treatment of MV disease in HCM.

DOI: 10.1007/s12265-011-9319-6
PMID: 21909825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]