---
reference_id: "PMID:40696870"
title: Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV)-Related Hospitalization and Increased Rate of Cardiovascular Events in Older Adults.
authors:
- Verschoor CP
- Cerasuolo JO
- Caswell JM
- Tatangelo M
- Costa-Vitali A
- Savage DW
- Kwong JC
journal: J Am Geriatr Soc
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/jgs.19591
keywords:
- Humans
- Aged
- Male
- "Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections/complications, epidemiology"
- "Hospitalization/statistics & numerical data"
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- Ontario/epidemiology
- Cardiovascular Diseases/epidemiology
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Influenza, Human/epidemiology"
- Urinary Tract Infections/epidemiology
- "Fractures, Bone/epidemiology"
- Heart Failure/epidemiology
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV)-Related Hospitalization and Increased Rate of Cardiovascular Events in Older Adults.
**Authors:** Verschoor CP, Cerasuolo JO, Caswell JM, Tatangelo M, Costa-Vitali A, Savage DW, Kwong JC
**Journal:** J Am Geriatr Soc (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jgs.19591](https://doi.org/10.1111/jgs.19591)

## Content

1. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2025 Sep;73(9):2685-2694. doi: 10.1111/jgs.19591. Epub 2025 
Jul 23.

Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV)-Related Hospitalization and Increased Rate of 
Cardiovascular Events in Older Adults.

Verschoor CP(1)(2)(3), Cerasuolo JO(4), Caswell JM(1)(4), Tatangelo M(1)(4), 
Costa-Vitali A(1)(2), Savage DW(1)(2)(4), Kwong JC(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Health Sciences North Research Institute, Sudbury, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Northern Ontario School of Medicine University, Sudbury, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(4)ICES North, Sudbury, Ontario, Canada.
(5)ICES, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Public Health Ontario, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Department of Family and Community Medicine and Dalla Lana School of Public 
Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies suggest that respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) can 
cause severe illness in terms of in-hospital outcomes and mortality. The degree 
to which RSV hospitalization is associated with cardiovascular outcomes, 
particularly those known to occur following acute respiratory infections, is 
poorly described.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study of adults aged ≥ 65 years 
hospitalized with a diagnosis of RSV, influenza, urinary tract infection (UTI), 
or fracture between 2011 and 2020 in Ontario, Canada. Outcomes included 
subsequent heart failure, myocardial infarction, stroke, or atrial fibrillation 
events up to 1-year post-discharge, as well as in-hospital and acute outcomes.
RESULTS: Cardiovascular events were subsequently identified in 18.5% 
(n = 474/2558) of patients who had an RSV-related hospitalization, compared to 
17.7% (2961/16,688), 12.1% (8908/73,587), and 8.4% (941/11,262) of patients 
initially hospitalized with influenza, UTI, or fracture, respectively. In 
matched analyses, RSV hospitalization was associated with a greater rate of 
subsequent heart failure events relative to all other patient groups (HR range, 
1.48-3.74), both in patients with or without pre-existing cardiovascular 
conditions. The rate of atrial fibrillation events was also higher in RSV 
patients, although this was dependent on pre-existing cardiovascular conditions 
and the comparator group considered. RSV patients were also more likely to be 
transferred to intensive care (OR range, 1.48-3.55) and had a higher rate of 
mortality (HR range, 1.49-3.98).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that RSV is an important determinant of serious 
post-discharge cardiovascular outcomes in older adults. Further, they underline 
the importance of vaccination in this population, regardless of pre-existing 
risk factors.

© 2025 The Author(s). Journal of the American Geriatrics Society published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of The American Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jgs.19591
PMCID: PMC12460985
PMID: 40696870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.