---
reference_id: "PMID:20691405"
title: "Mutations in PVRL4, encoding cell adhesion molecule nectin-4, cause ectodermal dysplasia-syndactyly syndrome."
authors:
- Brancati F
- Fortugno P
- Bottillo I
- Lopez M
- Josselin E
- Boudghene-Stambouli O
- Agolini E
- Bernardini L
- Bellacchio E
- Iannicelli M
- Rossi A
- Dib-Lachachi A
- Stuppia L
- Palka G
- Mundlos S
- Stricker S
- Kornak U
- Zambruno G
- Dallapiccola B
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.003
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Cell Adhesion Molecules/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/complications, genetics"
- Extremities/embryology
- Family
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Hair/pathology
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Protein Transport
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Skin/pathology
- "Syndactyly/complications, genetics"
- Syndrome
- Nectins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in PVRL4, encoding cell adhesion molecule nectin-4, cause ectodermal dysplasia-syndactyly syndrome.
**Authors:** Brancati F, Fortugno P, Bottillo I, Lopez M, Josselin E, Boudghene-Stambouli O, Agolini E, Bernardini L, Bellacchio E, Iannicelli M, Rossi A, Dib-Lachachi A, Stuppia L, Palka G, Mundlos S, Stricker S, Kornak U, Zambruno G, Dallapiccola B
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.003)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Aug 13;87(2):265-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.003.

Mutations in PVRL4, encoding cell adhesion molecule nectin-4, cause ectodermal 
dysplasia-syndactyly syndrome.

Brancati F(1), Fortugno P, Bottillo I, Lopez M, Josselin E, Boudghene-Stambouli 
O, Agolini E, Bernardini L, Bellacchio E, Iannicelli M, Rossi A, Dib-Lachachi A, 
Stuppia L, Palka G, Mundlos S, Stricker S, Kornak U, Zambruno G, Dallapiccola B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Gabriele d'Annunzio University, Chieti, 
Italy. f.brancati@css-mendel.it

Ectodermal dysplasias form a large disease family with more than 200 members. 
The combination of hair and tooth abnormalities, alopecia, and cutaneous 
syndactyly is characteristic of ectodermal dysplasia-syndactyly syndrome (EDSS). 
We used a homozygosity mapping approach to map the EDSS locus to 1q23 in a 
consanguineous Algerian family. By candidate gene analysis, we identified a 
homozygous mutation in the PVRL4 gene that not only evoked an amino acid change 
but also led to exon skipping. In an Italian family with two siblings affected 
by EDSS, we further detected a missense and a frameshift mutation. PVRL4 encodes 
for nectin-4, a cell adhesion molecule mainly implicated in the formation of 
cadherin-based adherens junctions. We demonstrated high nectin-4 expression in 
hair follicle structures, as well as in the separating digits of murine embryos, 
the tissues mainly affected by the EDSS phenotype. In patient keratinocytes, 
mutated nectin-4 lost its capability to bind nectin-1. Additionally, in discrete 
structures of the hair follicle, we found alterations of the membrane 
localization of nectin-afadin and cadherin-catenin complexes, which are 
essential for adherens junction formation, and we found reorganization of actin 
cytoskeleton. Together with cleft lip and/or palate ectodermal dysplasia 
(CLPED1, or Zlotogora-Ogur syndrome) due to an impaired function of nectin-1, 
EDSS is the second known "nectinopathy" caused by mutations in a nectin adhesion 
molecule.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.003
PMCID: PMC2917716
PMID: 20691405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]