---
reference_id: "PMID:20301344"
title: Myotonic Dystrophy Type 1.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Bird TD
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myotonic Dystrophy Type 1.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bird TD

## Content

1. Myotonic Dystrophy Type 1.

Bird TD(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
1999 Sep 17 [updated 2024 Nov 14].

Author information:
(1)Seattle VA Medical Center;, Departments of Neurology and Medicine, University
of Washington, Seattle, Washington

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is a multisystem
disorder that affects skeletal and smooth muscle as well as the eye, heart,
endocrine system, and central nervous system. The clinical findings, which span
a continuum from mild to severe, have been categorized into three somewhat
overlapping phenotypes: mild, classic, and congenital. Mild DM1 is characterized
by cataract and mild myotonia (sustained muscle contraction); life span is
normal. Classic DM1 is characterized by muscle weakness and wasting, myotonia,
cataract, and often cardiac conduction abnormalities; adults may become
physically disabled and may have a shortened life span. Congenital DM1 is
characterized by hypotonia and severe generalized weakness at birth, often with
respiratory insufficiency and early death; intellectual disability is common.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: DM1 is caused by expansion of a CTG trinucleotide repeat in
the noncoding region of DMPK. The diagnosis of DM1 is suspected in individuals
with characteristic muscle weakness and is confirmed by molecular genetic
testing of DMPK. CTG repeat length exceeding 34 repeats is abnormal. Molecular
genetic testing detects pathogenic variants in nearly 100% of affected
individuals.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Use of ankle-foot orthoses,
wheelchairs, or other assistive devices; special education support for affected
children; treatment of hypothyroidism; management of pain; consultation with a
cardiologist for symptoms or EKG evidence of arrhythmia; removal of cataracts if
vision is impaired; hormone replacement therapy for males with hypogonadism;
surgical excision of pilomatrixoma and basal cell carcinomas. Prevention of
secondary complications: Choice of induction agents, airway care, local
anesthesia, and neuromuscular blockade to minimize complications during surgery;
cardiac pacemakers or implantable cardioverter-defibrillators may prevent
life-threatening arrhythmias; continue physical activity and maintain
appropriate weight. Surveillance: Annual EKG or 24-hour Holter monitoring;
annual measurement of fasting serum glucose concentration and glycosylated
hemoglobin concentration; ophthalmology examination every two years; attention
to nutritional status; polysomnography for sleep disturbances.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Cholesterol-lowering medications (i.e., statins),
which can cause muscle pain and weakness; the anesthetic agent vecuronium;
succinylcholine, propofol, and doxorubicin; smoking; obesity; illicit drug use;
excessive alcohol intake. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Molecular genetic
testing for early diagnosis of relatives at risk to allow treatment of cardiac
manifestations, diabetes mellitus, and cataracts.
GENETIC COUNSELING: DM1 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Offspring
of an affected individual have a 50% chance of inheriting the expanded allele.
Pathogenic alleles may expand in length during gametogenesis, resulting in the
transmission of longer trinucleotide repeat alleles that may be associated with
earlier onset and more severe disease than that observed in the parent. Prenatal
testing and preimplantation genetic testing are possible when the diagnosis of
DM1 has been confirmed by molecular genetic testing in an affected family
member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301344
