---
reference_id: "PMID:32206904"
title: "The current clinical picture of cerebral proliferative angiopathy: systematic review."
authors:
- Yamaki VN
- Solla DJF
- Telles JPM
- Liem GLJ
- da Silva SA
- Caldas JGMP
- Teixeira MJ
- Paschoal EHA
- Figueiredo EG
journal: Acta Neurochir (Wien)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00701-020-04289-7
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Female
- Headache/epidemiology
- Humans
- "Intracranial Arteriovenous Malformations/complications, epidemiology, pathology, surgery"
- "Ischemic Attack, Transient/epidemiology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Radiosurgery/methods
- Seizures/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The current clinical picture of cerebral proliferative angiopathy: systematic review.
**Authors:** Yamaki VN, Solla DJF, Telles JPM, Liem GLJ, da Silva SA, Caldas JGMP, Teixeira MJ, Paschoal EHA, Figueiredo EG
**Journal:** Acta Neurochir (Wien) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00701-020-04289-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00701-020-04289-7)

## Content

1. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 2020 Jul;162(7):1727-1733. doi: 
10.1007/s00701-020-04289-7. Epub 2020 Mar 23.

The current clinical picture of cerebral proliferative angiopathy: systematic 
review.

Yamaki VN(1), Solla DJF(1), Telles JPM(2), Liem GLJ(3), da Silva SA(1), Caldas 
JGMP(4), Teixeira MJ(1), Paschoal EHA(5)(6)(7), Figueiredo EG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, School of Medicine, Universidade de Sao 
Paulo, Rua Dr Eneas de Carvalho Aguiar, 255 - Pinheiros, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Department of Neurological Surgery, School of Medicine, Universidade de Sao 
Paulo, Rua Dr Eneas de Carvalho Aguiar, 255 - Pinheiros, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. 
joao.telles@fm.usp.br.
(3)Department of Neurosugery, Hospital Ophir Loyola, Belem, PA, Brazil.
(4)Department of Radiology, School of Medicine, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao 
Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(5)Department of Neurological Surgery, School of Medicine, Universidade de Sao 
Paulo, Rua Dr Eneas de Carvalho Aguiar, 255 - Pinheiros, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. 
ericpaschoal@yahoo.com.br.
(6)Department of Neurosugery, Hospital Ophir Loyola, Belem, PA, Brazil. 
ericpaschoal@yahoo.com.br.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, Universidade Federal do Para, Belem, PA, Brazil. 
ericpaschoal@yahoo.com.br.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral proliferative angiopathy (CPA) is a rare subset of 
arteriovenous malformations (AVM). It has unique clinical presentation, 
angiographic characteristics, and pathophysiology which often brings challenges 
for the treatment. We aimed to define its epidemiology, pathophysiology are 
unknown, and best management strategies.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted according to the PRISMA guidelines. 
MEDLINE was searched for articles regarding CPA. Extracted data included 
epidemiological, clinical, and angiographical characteristics, treatment, and 
outcomes. Treatment was classified as conservative, radiosurgery, endovascular, 
decompression, and indirect vascularization. A meta-analytical approach was 
employed for description of the data as study-size adjusted percentages or 
weighted means, as appropriate.
RESULTS: Thirty-three studies were analyzed, rendering a total 95 cases-half of 
which came from a single study. Patients were predominantly young (mean 23 years 
old) and female (60.0%) presenting with headaches (44.9%), seizures (37.1%), or 
transient ischemic attacks (33.7%). Hemorrhage was present in 18.0%, but 
rebleeding rates were as high as 67%. The majority of nidus were > 6 cm (52.5%) 
with hemispheric extension (73.0%). Capillary angioectatic appearance (85.7%), 
transdural supply (62.5%), and deep venous drainage (73.0%) were also frequent 
features. Most patients were treated conservatively (54.4%), followed by 
endovascular (34.2%). Indirect vascularization and radiosurgery were attempted 
in five and two patients, respectively. Mean follow-up was 110.8 patient-years. 
Neurological status improved in 50.7%, remained stable in 40.2%, and worsened in 
9.0%.
CONCLUSIONS: Conservative and endovascular treatments seem adequate 
interventions, despite limited evidence. Complementary techniques can be used in 
patients throughout disease history, according to symptom-based, individualized 
approach. More studies are required for choosing interventions based on reliable 
long-term results.

DOI: 10.1007/s00701-020-04289-7
PMID: 32206904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]