---
reference_id: "PMID:37688927"
title: Serum neurofilament and glial fibrillary acidic protein in idiopathic and seropositive transverse myelitis.
authors:
- Lee HL
- Seok JM
- Chung YH
- Min JH
- Baek SH
- Kim SM
- Sohn E
- Kim J
- Kang SY
- Hong YH
- Shin HY
- Cho JY
- Oh J
- Lee SS
- Kim S
- Kim SH
- Kim HJ
- Kim BJ
- Kim BJ
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2023.104957
keywords:
- Humans
- "Myelitis, Transverse"
- Multiple Sclerosis
- Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein
- Intermediate Filaments
- Aquaporin 4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum neurofilament and glial fibrillary acidic protein in idiopathic and seropositive transverse myelitis.
**Authors:** Lee HL, Seok JM, Chung YH, Min JH, Baek SH, Kim SM, Sohn E, Kim J, Kang SY, Hong YH, Shin HY, Cho JY, Oh J, Lee SS, Kim S, Kim SH, Kim HJ, Kim BJ, Kim BJ
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2023.104957](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2023.104957)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2023 Nov;79:104957. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2023.104957.
 Epub 2023 Sep 1.

Serum neurofilament and glial fibrillary acidic protein in idiopathic and 
seropositive transverse myelitis.

Lee HL(1), Seok JM(2), Chung YH(3), Min JH(3), Baek SH(1), Kim SM(4), Sohn E(5), 
Kim J(6), Kang SY(7), Hong YH(4), Shin HY(8), Cho JY(9), Oh J(10), Lee SS(11), 
Kim S(12), Kim SH(13), Kim HJ(13), Kim BJ(14), Kim BJ(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Korea University, College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Soonchunhyang University Hospital Cheonan, 
Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine, Cheonan, Korea.
(3)Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Neuroscience Center, Samsung Medical Center, 
Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Neurology, Seoul National University, College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Neurology, Chungnam National University, College of Medicine, 
Daejeon, Korea.
(6)Department of Neurology, Gyeongsang Institute of Health Science, Gyeongsang 
National University, College of Medicine, Jinju, Korea.
(7)Department of Neurology, Jeju National University, College of Medicine, Jeju, 
Korea.
(8)Department of Neurology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(9)Department of Neurology, Ilsan Paik Hospital, Inje University College of 
Medicine, Goyang, Korea.
(10)Department of Neurology, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Konkuk 
University Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(11)Department of Neurology, Chungbuk National University, College of Medicine, 
Chungbuk, Korea.
(12)Department of Neurology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Ulsan 
University Hospital, Ulsan, Korea.
(13)Department of Neurology, Research Institute and Hospital of National Cancer 
Center, Goyang, Korea.
(14)Department of Neurology, Korea University, College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea. Electronic address: bjkim@skku.edu.
(15)Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Neuroscience Center, Samsung Medical Center, 
Seoul, Korea. Electronic address: nukbj@korea.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Serum levels of neurofilament light chain (NfL) and glial fibrillary 
acidic protein (GFAP) reflect the disease activity and disability in central 
nervous system (CNS) demyelinating diseases. However, the clinical significance 
of NfL and GFAP in idiopathic transverse myelitis (iTM), an inflammatory spinal 
cord disease with unknown underlying causes, remains unclear. This study aimed 
to investigate NfL and GFAP levels in iTM and their association with the 
clinical parameters compared with those in TM with disease-specific antibodies 
such as anti-aquaporin 4 or myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies 
(sTM).
METHODS: We collected serum and clinical data of 365 patients with CNS 
inflammatory diseases from 12 hospitals. The serum NfL and GFAP levels were 
measured in patients with iTM (n = 37) and sTM (n = 39) using ultrasensitive 
single-molecule array assays. Regression analysis was performed to investigate 
the associations between serum levels of NfL and GFAP and the clinical 
parameters such as higher EDSS scores (EDSS ≥ 4.0).
RESULTS: Mean NfL levels were not significantly different between iTM 
(50.29 pg/ml) and sTM (63.18 pg/ml) (p = 0.824). GFAP levels were significantly 
lower in iTM (112.34 pg/ml) than in sTM (3814.20 pg/ml) (p = 0.006). NfL levels 
correlated with expanded disability status scale (EDSS) scores in sTM 
(p = 0.001) but not in iTM (p = 0.824). Disease duration also correlated with 
higher EDSS scores in sTM (p = 0.017).
CONCLUSION: NfL levels and disease duration correlated with EDSS scores in sTM, 
and GFAP levels could be a promising biomarker to differentiate iTM from sTM.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2023.104957
PMID: 37688927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
have no conflicts of interest to disclose.