---
reference_id: "PMID:15627202"
title: "PLP1-related inherited dysmyelinating disorders: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease and spastic paraplegia type 2."
authors:
- Inoue K
journal: Neurogenetics
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s10048-004-0207-y
keywords:
- Gene Duplication
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Myelin Proteolipid Protein/genetics
- Myelin Sheath/genetics
- Paraplegia/genetics
- Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease/genetics
- Point Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PLP1-related inherited dysmyelinating disorders: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease and spastic paraplegia type 2.
**Authors:** Inoue K
**Journal:** Neurogenetics (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10048-004-0207-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10048-004-0207-y)

## Content

1. Neurogenetics. 2005 Feb;6(1):1-16. doi: 10.1007/s10048-004-0207-y. Epub 2004
Dec  31.

PLP1-related inherited dysmyelinating disorders: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease 
and spastic paraplegia type 2.

Inoue K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National 
Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry (NCNP), 
4-1-1 Ogawahigashi, Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan. kinoue@ncnp.go.jp

Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) and its allelic disorder, spastic paraplegia 
type 2 (SPG2), are among the best-characterized dysmyelinating leukodystrophies 
of the central nervous system (CNS). Both PMD and SPG2 are caused by mutations 
in the proteolipid protein 1 (PLP1) gene, which encodes a major component of CNS 
myelin proteins. Distinct types of mutations, including point mutations and 
genomic duplications and deletions, have been identified as causes of PMD/SPG2 
that act through different molecular mechanisms. Studies of various PLP1 mutants 
in humans and animal models have shed light on the genomic, molecular, and 
cellular pathogeneses of PMD/SPG2. Recent discoveries include complex mutational 
mechanisms and associated disease phenotypes, novel cellular pathways that lead 
to the degeneration of oligodendrocytes, and genomic architectural features that 
result in unique chromosomal rearrangements. Here, I review the previous and 
current knowledge of the molecular pathogenesis of PMD/SPG2 and delineate future 
directions for PMD/SPG2 studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-004-0207-y
PMID: 15627202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]