---
reference_id: "PMID:24447879"
title: Association study of human leukocyte antigen-DRB1 alleles with rheumatoid arthritis in Algerian patients.
authors:
- Djidjik R
- Allam I
- Douaoui S
- Meddour Y
- Cherguelaîne K
- Tahiat A
- Raaf N
- Abdessemed A
- Khaldoun N
- Bahaz N
- Chaib S
- Ladjouze-Rezig A
- Ghaffor M
journal: Int J Rheum Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12272
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association study of human leukocyte antigen-DRB1 alleles with rheumatoid arthritis in Algerian patients.
**Authors:** Djidjik R, Allam I, Douaoui S, Meddour Y, Cherguelaîne K, Tahiat A, Raaf N, Abdessemed A, Khaldoun N, Bahaz N, Chaib S, Ladjouze-Rezig A, Ghaffor M
**Journal:** Int J Rheum Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1756-185X.12272](https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-185X.12272)

## Content

1. Int J Rheum Dis. 2017 Dec;20(12):1993-1997. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12272. Epub
 2014 Jan 22.

Association study of human leukocyte antigen-DRB1 alleles with rheumatoid 
arthritis in Algerian patients.

Djidjik R(1), Allam I(1), Douaoui S(1), Meddour Y(2), Cherguelaîne K(1), Tahiat 
A(1), Raaf N(1), Abdessemed A(3), Khaldoun N(3), Bahaz N(4), Chaib S(2), 
Ladjouze-Rezig A(3), Ghaffor M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, CHU Béni-Messous, Algiers, Algeria.
(2)Department of Immunology, Central Hospital of Army, Algiers, Algeria.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, EPH Benaknoun, Algiers, Algeria.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, CHU Béni-Messous, Algiers, Algeria.

INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, systemic, inflammatory and 
multifactorial disease. Genetic predisposition seems to play an important role. 
The aim of this study is to explore the relationship between human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA)-DRB1 alleles and susceptibility, clinical and biological features 
of RA in an Algerian patient population.
METHODS: Using polymerase chain reaction - sequence specific primers (SSP), 134 
RA patients and 132 healthy controls were genotyped for HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DRB1*04 
subtypes.
RESULTS: HLA-DRB1*04 was found to have increased frequency in the RA group 
compared to controls (P < 0.001, OR = 3.14), and was associated with 
anti-citrullinated protein antibodies positivity (ACPA) (P = 0.01, OR = 2.35). 
In contrast, HLA-DRB1*07 was found to have a decreased frequency in patients 
compared to controls (P = 0.003, OR = 0.44) and significant decrease was 
observed in patients with the rheumatoid factor (RF) positivity subgroup 
(P = 0.009, OR = 0.29). HLA-DRB1*04:05 was associated with RA (P = 0.005, 
OR = 3.41), whereas, HLA-DRB1*04:02 showed a protective effect against RA 
(P = 0.003, OR = 0.20).
CONCLUSIONS: HLA-DRB1*04 was associated with increased risk for RA and ACPA 
positivity, while HLA-DRB1*07 was associated with reduced risk for RA and RF 
synthesis in Algerian patients.

© 2014 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Wiley Publishing 
Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1756-185X.12272
PMID: 24447879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]