---
reference_id: "PMID:29299063"
title: Haploinsufficiency of BMP4 and OTX2 in the Foetus with an abnormal facial profile detected in the first trimester of pregnancy.
authors:
- Capkova P
- Santava A
- Markova I
- Stefekova A
- Srovnal J
- Staffova K
- Durdová V
journal: Mol Cytogenet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13039-017-0351-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haploinsufficiency of BMP4 and OTX2 in the Foetus with an abnormal facial profile detected in the first trimester of pregnancy.
**Authors:** Capkova P, Santava A, Markova I, Stefekova A, Srovnal J, Staffova K, Durdová V
**Journal:** Mol Cytogenet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13039-017-0351-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13039-017-0351-3)

## Content

1. Mol Cytogenet. 2017 Dec 28;10:47. doi: 10.1186/s13039-017-0351-3. eCollection 
2017.

Haploinsufficiency of BMP4 and OTX2 in the Foetus with an abnormal facial 
profile detected in the first trimester of pregnancy.

Capkova P(1), Santava A(1), Markova I(2), Stefekova A(1), Srovnal J(3), Staffova 
K(3), Durdová V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Olomouc, I.P.Pavlova 6, 
Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Hospital Olomouc, 
Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: Interstitial microdeletion 14q22q23 is a rare chromosomal syndrome 
associated with variable defects: microphthalmia/anophthalmia, pituitary 
anomalies, polydactyly/syndactyly of hands and feet, micrognathia/retrognathia. 
The reports of the microdeletion 14q22q23 detected in the prenatal stages are 
limited and the range of clinical features reveals a quite high variability.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a detection of the microdeletion 14q22.1q23.1 
spanning 7,7 Mb and involving the genes BMP4 and OTX2 in the foetus by multiplex 
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and verified by microarray 
subsequently. The pregnancy was referred to the genetic counselling for abnormal 
facial profile observed in the first trimester ultrasound scan and micrognathia 
(suspicion of Pierre Robin sequence), hypoplasia nasal bone and polydactyly in 
the second trimester ultrasound scan. The pregnancy was terminated on request of 
the parents.
CONCLUSION: An abnormal facial profile detected on prenatal scan can provide a 
clue to the presence of rare chromosomal abnormalities in the first trimester of 
pregnancy despite the normal result of the first trimester screening test. The 
patients should be provided with genetic counselling. Usage of quick and 
sensitive methods (MLPA, microarray) is preferable for discovering a causal 
aberration because some of the CNVs cannot be detected with conventional 
karyotyping in these cases. To the best of our knowledge, this is the earliest 
detection of this microdeletion (occurred de novo), the first case detected by 
MLPA and confirmed by microarray. Literature review of the genotype-phenotype 
correlation in similar reports leads us to the conclusion that dosage imbalance 
of the chromosomal segment 14q22q23 (especially haploinsuffiency of the genes 
BMP4 and OTX2) contributes significantly to orofacial abnormalities. Association 
of the region with the Pierre Robin sequence appears to be plausible.

DOI: 10.1186/s13039-017-0351-3
PMCID: PMC5745897
PMID: 29299063

Conflict of interest statement: Study approval was obtained from the 
Institutional Review Board of the University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine 
and Dentistry Palacky University Olomouc. All procedures were conducted in 
accordance with the declaration of Helsinki.Written informed consent was 
obtained from the prospective parents for anonymous publication of the case.All 
authors declared that they have no competing interests.Springer Nature remains 
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.