---
reference_id: "PMID:26195652"
title: "Vedolizumab: An integrin-receptor antagonist for treatment of Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis."
authors:
- Hahn L
- Beggs A
- Wahaib K
- Kodali L
- Kirkwood V
journal: Am J Health Syst Pharm
year: '2015'
doi: 10.2146/ajhp140449
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vedolizumab: An integrin-receptor antagonist for treatment of Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis.
**Authors:** Hahn L, Beggs A, Wahaib K, Kodali L, Kirkwood V
**Journal:** Am J Health Syst Pharm (2015)
**DOI:** [10.2146/ajhp140449](https://doi.org/10.2146/ajhp140449)

## Content

1. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2015 Aug 1;72(15):1271-8. doi: 10.2146/ajhp140449.

Vedolizumab: An integrin-receptor antagonist for treatment of Crohn's disease 
and ulcerative colitis.

Hahn L(1), Beggs A(1), Wahaib K(1), Kodali L(1), Kirkwood V(1).

Author information:
(1)Lindsay Hahn, Pharm.D., BCPS, is Assistant Professor of Pharmacy Practice; 
Ashton Beggs, Pharm.D., BCACP, is Assistant Professor of Pharmacy Practice; 
Kristy Wahaib, Pharm.D., BCPS, is Assistant Professor of Pharmacy Practice; 
Leela Kodali, Pharm.D., BCACP, is Assistant Professor of Pharmacy Practice; and 
Vanessa Kirkwood is a Pharm.D. student, College of Pharmacy, Belmont University, 
Nashville, TN.

PURPOSE: The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, safety, efficacy, and dosing 
recommendations of vedolizumab, an integrin-receptor antagonist for the 
treatment of Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), are reviewed.
SUMMARY: Vedolizumab is an integrin-receptor antagonist for the treatment of CD 
and UC in adults with moderately to severely active disease who have had an 
inadequate response with, lost response to, or were intolerant to anti-tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF) agents or immunomodulators or had an inadequate response 
with, were intolerant to, or demonstrated dependence on corticosteroids. Phase 
III clinical trials have demonstrated efficacy in achieving remission as 
induction and maintenance therapy in CD and UC. Remission was also achieved at 
week 10 in patients with CD in whom previous treatment with anti-TNF agents had 
failed. Adverse effects of vedolizumab include nasopharyngitis, headache, 
arthralgia, nausea, pyrexia, upper respiratory tract infection, fatigue, cough, 
bronchitis, influenza, back pain, rash, pruritus, sinusitis, oropharyngeal pain, 
and pain in the extremities. To date, no cases of progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy (PML) have been reported. The recommended dose of 
vedolizumab in adults with UC or CD is 300 mg administered via intravenous 
infusion at zero, two, and six weeks, followed by every eight weeks. The average 
wholesale unit price is $5782.80, but a patient assistance program is available.
CONCLUSION: Vedolizumab is a new alternative for patients with 
moderate-to-severe UC or CD, as well as patients who have not responded to 
anti-TNF agents. The current safety profile and lack of reported PML make it a 
promising addition to the treatment of these conditions.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.2146/ajhp140449
PMID: 26195652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]