---
reference_id: "PMID:21349541"
title: "Giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia in early childhood: long-term outcome in 16 children."
authors:
- Maggiore G
- Sciveres M
- Fabre M
- Gori L
- Pacifico L
- Resti M
- Choulot JJ
- Jacquemin E
- Bernard O
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.12.050
keywords:
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Autoimmune/complications, mortality, therapy"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived/therapeutic use"
- Azathioprine/therapeutic use
- Bilirubin/blood
- Coombs Test
- Cyclosporine/therapeutic use
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Giant Cells/pathology
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- "Hepatitis/complications, mortality, therapy"
- Hepatocytes/pathology
- Hepatomegaly/etiology
- Humans
- Immunologic Factors/therapeutic use
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Infant
- Jaundice/etiology
- Liver/pathology
- Liver Transplantation
- Male
- Multiple Organ Failure/mortality
- Prednisone/therapeutic use
- Recurrence
- Remission Induction
- Rituximab
- Sepsis/mortality
- Splenectomy
- Splenomegaly/etiology
- Transaminases/blood
- Treatment Outcome
- gamma-Globulins/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia in early childhood: long-term outcome in 16 children.
**Authors:** Maggiore G, Sciveres M, Fabre M, Gori L, Pacifico L, Resti M, Choulot JJ, Jacquemin E, Bernard O
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.12.050](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.12.050)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2011 Jul;159(1):127-132.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.12.050. Epub 
2011 Feb 24.

Giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia in early childhood: 
long-term outcome in 16 children.

Maggiore G(1), Sciveres M, Fabre M, Gori L, Pacifico L, Resti M, Choulot JJ, 
Jacquemin E, Bernard O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, University Hospital Santa Chiara, Pisa, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the outcome of giant cell hepatitis combined with 
autoimmune hemolytic anemia in early childhood.
STUDY DESIGN: We report on 16 children with this disease evaluated over a 
28-year period.
RESULTS: Children (nine boys; median age, 6 months) presented with jaundice, 
hepatomegaly, elevated aminotransferases, a positive Coombs test, and diffuse 
giant-cell transformation of hepatocytes on histology. Treatment with prednisone 
and azathioprine, plus, in three children, cyclosporine, resulted in complete 
remission in eight, partial remission in six, and failure in two. Relapses of 
hepatitis and/or anemia occurred in 11 and 10 children, respectively, requiring 
prolonged high levels of immunosuppression, and splenectomy or Rituximab, 
respectively. Treatment was stopped after a mean duration of 6 years, with no 
relapse, in seven children, with a median follow-up of 14 years. One child is 
alive 9 years after liver transplantation. Four children died of sepsis or 
multiple organ failure.
CONCLUSIONS: Giant cell hepatitis combined with autoimmune hemolytic anemia 
requires rigorous treatment. Immunosuppressive therapy results in remission in 
most cases. A complete cure can be expected after several years of intensive 
treatment. Liver transplantation may be associated with prolonged survival.

Copyright © 2011 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.12.050
PMID: 21349541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]