---
reference_id: "PMID:23758760"
title: Prospective investigation of autism and genotype-phenotype correlations in 22q13 deletion syndrome and SHANK3 deficiency.
authors:
- Soorya L
- Kolevzon A
- Zweifach J
- Lim T
- Dobry Y
- Schwartz L
- Frank Y
- Wang AT
- Cai G
- Parkhomenko E
- Halpern D
- Grodberg D
- Angarita B
- Willner JP
- Yang A
- Canitano R
- Chaplin W
- Betancur C
- Buxbaum JD
journal: Mol Autism
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-4-18
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prospective investigation of autism and genotype-phenotype correlations in 22q13 deletion syndrome and SHANK3 deficiency.
**Authors:** Soorya L, Kolevzon A, Zweifach J, Lim T, Dobry Y, Schwartz L, Frank Y, Wang AT, Cai G, Parkhomenko E, Halpern D, Grodberg D, Angarita B, Willner JP, Yang A, Canitano R, Chaplin W, Betancur C, Buxbaum JD
**Journal:** Mol Autism (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2040-2392-4-18](https://doi.org/10.1186/2040-2392-4-18)

## Content

1. Mol Autism. 2013 Jun 11;4(1):18. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-4-18.

Prospective investigation of autism and genotype-phenotype correlations in 22q13 
deletion syndrome and SHANK3 deficiency.

Soorya L(1), Kolevzon A, Zweifach J, Lim T, Dobry Y, Schwartz L, Frank Y, Wang 
AT, Cai G, Parkhomenko E, Halpern D, Grodberg D, Angarita B, Willner JP, Yang A, 
Canitano R, Chaplin W, Betancur C, Buxbaum JD.

Author information:
(1)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. alexander.kolevzon@mssm.edu.

BACKGROUND: 22q13 deletion syndrome, also known as Phelan-McDermid syndrome, is 
a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by intellectual disability, 
hypotonia, delayed or absent speech, and autistic features. SHANK3 has been 
identified as the critical gene in the neurological and behavioral aspects of 
this syndrome. The phenotype of SHANK3 deficiency has been described primarily 
from case studies, with limited evaluation of behavioral and cognitive deficits. 
The present study used a prospective design and inter-disciplinary clinical 
evaluations to assess patients with SHANK3 deficiency, with the goal of 
providing a comprehensive picture of the medical and behavioral profile of the 
syndrome.
METHODS: A serially ascertained sample of patients with SHANK3 deficiency (n = 
32) was evaluated by a team of child psychiatrists, neurologists, clinical 
geneticists, molecular geneticists and psychologists. Patients were evaluated 
for autism spectrum disorder using the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised and 
the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-G.
RESULTS: Thirty participants with 22q13.3 deletions ranging in size from 101 kb 
to 8.45 Mb and two participants with de novo SHANK3 mutations were included. The 
sample was characterized by high rates of autism spectrum disorder: 27 (84%) met 
criteria for autism spectrum disorder and 24 (75%) for autistic disorder. Most 
patients (77%) exhibited severe to profound intellectual disability and only 
five (19%) used some words spontaneously to communicate. Dysmorphic features, 
hypotonia, gait disturbance, recurring upper respiratory tract infections, 
gastroesophageal reflux and seizures were also common. Analysis of 
genotype-phenotype correlations indicated that larger deletions were associated 
with increased levels of dysmorphic features, medical comorbidities and social 
communication impairments related to autism. Analyses of individuals with small 
deletions or point mutations identified features related to SHANK3 
haploinsufficiency, including ASD, seizures and abnormal EEG, hypotonia, sleep 
disturbances, abnormal brain MRI, gastroesophageal reflux, and certain 
dysmorphic features.
CONCLUSIONS: This study supports findings from previous research on the severity 
of intellectual, motor, and speech impairments seen in SHANK3 deficiency, and 
highlights the prominence of autism spectrum disorder in the syndrome. 
Limitations of existing evaluation tools are discussed, along with the need for 
natural history studies to inform clinical monitoring and treatment development 
in SHANK3 deficiency.

DOI: 10.1186/2040-2392-4-18
PMCID: PMC3707861
PMID: 23758760