---
reference_id: "PMID:31971710"
title: Ritscher-Schinzel Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Elliott AM
- Chudley A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ritscher-Schinzel Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Elliott AM, Chudley A

## Content

1. Ritscher-Schinzel Syndrome.

Elliott AM(1), Chudley A(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2020 Jan 23.

Author information:
(1)University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
(2)University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome (RSS) is a clinically 
recognizable condition that includes the cardinal findings of craniofacial 
features, cerebellar defects, and cardiovascular malformations resulting in the 
alternate diagnostic name of 3C syndrome. Dysmorphic facial features may include 
brachycephaly, hypotonic face with protruding tongue, flat appearance of the 
face on profile view, short midface, widely spaced eyes, downslanted palpebral 
fissures, low-set ears with overfolding of the upper helix, smooth or short 
philtrum, and high or cleft palate. Affected individuals also typically have a 
characteristic metacarpal phalangeal profile showing a consistent wavy pattern 
on hand radiographs. RSS is associated with variable degrees of developmental 
delay and intellectual disability. Eye anomalies and hypercholesterolemia may be 
variably present.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome is established in 
a proband with suggestive clinical findings, including characteristic dysmorphic 
facial features, and/or by the identification of biallelic pathogenic variants 
in WASHC5 in a male or female or a hemizygous pathogenic variant in CCDC22 in a 
male by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Standard treatment for obesity, 
obstructive sleep apnea, cleft palate, congenital heart defects, 
hypercholesterolemia, renal anomalies, immunodeficiency, and developmental 
delay / intellectual disability. Surveillance: Measurement of growth parameters 
(particularly weight); assessment of developmental progress, mobility, self-help 
skills, and educational needs; and monitoring for symptoms of obstructive sleep 
apnea at each visit; ophthalmology evaluation annually or as clinically 
indicated; measurement of lipid profile periodically starting in childhood.
GENETIC COUNSELING: WASHC5-related RSS is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner; CCDC22-related RSS is inherited in an X-linked manner. Autosomal 
recessive inheritance. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 
25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and 
a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. X-linked inheritance. If the 
mother of the proband has a CCDC22 pathogenic variant, the chance of 
transmitting it in each pregnancy is 50%. Males who inherit the pathogenic 
variant will be affected; females who inherit the pathogenic variant will be 
heterozygotes (carriers) and will usually not be affected. Once the causative 
pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member, 
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 31971710