---
reference_id: PMID:28421844
title: Accuracy of the paracetamol-aminotransferase multiplication product to predict hepatotoxicity in modified-release paracetamol overdose.
authors:
- Wong A
- Sivilotti MLA
- Graudins A
journal: Clin Toxicol (Phila)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/15563650.2017.1290253
keywords:
- "Acetaminophen/blood, poisoning"
- Acetylcysteine/therapeutic use
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Alanine Transaminase/blood
- "Analgesics, Non-Narcotic/blood, poisoning"
- "Chemical and Drug Induced Liver Injury/blood, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Drug Overdose/blood, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Accuracy of the paracetamol-aminotransferase multiplication product to predict hepatotoxicity in modified-release paracetamol overdose.
**Authors:** Wong A, Sivilotti MLA, Graudins A
**Journal:** Clin Toxicol (Phila) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15563650.2017.1290253](https://doi.org/10.1080/15563650.2017.1290253)

## Content

1. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2017 Jun;55(5):346-351. doi: 
10.1080/15563650.2017.1290253. Epub 2017 Feb 15.

Accuracy of the paracetamol-aminotransferase multiplication product to predict 
hepatotoxicity in modified-release paracetamol overdose.

Wong A(1)(2), Sivilotti MLA(3), Graudins A(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)a Victorian Poisons Information Centre and Austin Toxicology Service , 
Heidelberg , Australia.
(2)b School of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health 
Sciences , Monash University , Clayton , Australia.
(3)c Departments of Emergency Medicine and of Biomedical & Molecular Sciences , 
Queen's University , Kingston , Canada.
(4)d Emergency Medicine and Toxicology Research , Monash Health , Victoria , 
Australia.

CONTEXT: The paracetamol-aminotransferase multiplication product (APAP × ALT) is 
a risk predictor of hepatotoxicity that is somewhat independent of time and type 
of ingestion. However, its accuracy following ingestion of modified-release 
formulations is not known, as the product has been derived and validated after 
immediate-release paracetamol overdoses.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this retrospective cohort study was to evaluate the 
accuracy of the multiplication product to predict hepatotoxicity in a cohort of 
patients with modified-release paracetamol overdose.
METHODS: We assessed all patients with modified-release paracetamol overdose 
presenting to our hospital network from October 2009 to July 2016. Ingestion of 
a modified-release formulation was identified by patient self-report or 
retrieval of the original container. Hepatotoxicity was defined as peak alanine 
aminotransferase ≥1000 IU/L, and acute liver injury (ALI) as a doubling of 
baseline ALT to more than 50 IU/L.
RESULTS: Of 1989 paracetamol overdose presentations, we identified 73 
modified-release paracetamol exposures treated with acetylcysteine. Five 
patients developed hepatotoxicity, including one who received acetylcysteine 
within eight hours of an acute ingestion. No patient with an initial 
multiplication product <10,000 mg/L × IU/L developed hepatotoxicity (sensitivity 
100% [95%CI 48%, 100%], specificity 97% [90%, 100%]). Specificity fell to 54% 
(95%CI: 34, 59%) at a product cut-off point <1500 mg/L × IU/L. When calculated 
within eight hours of ingestion, mild elevations of the multiplication product 
fell quickly on repeat testing in patients without ALI or hepatotoxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: In modified-release paracetamol overdose treated with 
acetylcysteine, the paracetamol-aminotransferase multiplication product 
demonstrated similar accuracy and temporal profile to previous reports involving 
mostly immediate-release formulations. Above a cut-point of 10,000 mg/L × IU/L, 
it was very strongly associated with the development of acute liver injury and 
hepatotoxicity, especially when calculated more than eight hours post-ingestion. 
When below 1500 mg/L × IU/L the likelihood of developing hepatotoxicity was very 
low. Persistently high serial multiplication product calculations were 
associated with the greatest risk of hepatotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1080/15563650.2017.1290253
PMID: 28421844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]