---
reference_id: "PMID:10961585"
title: Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Asherson RA
- Cervera R
journal: Curr Opin Hematol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1097/00062752-200009000-00012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Asherson RA, Cervera R
**Journal:** Curr Opin Hematol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00062752-200009000-00012](https://doi.org/10.1097/00062752-200009000-00012)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Hematol. 2000 Sep;7(5):325-9. doi: 10.1097/00062752-200009000-00012.

Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome.

Asherson RA(1), Cervera R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, The Groote School Hospital, University of Cape Town 
School of Medicine, South Africa. ashspot@icon.co.za

In its classic presentation, the antiphospholipid syndrome manifests a 
combination of venous or arterial thrombosis and fetal loss, accompanied by 
elevations of antibodies directed toward negatively charged phospholipids, as 
measured by anticardiolipin antibody assays and/or positive lupus anticoagulant 
tests. The manifestations often include a moderate thrombocytopenia and, less 
commonly, hemolysis. In contrast, a less frequently encountered subset of the 
antiphospholipid syndrome, termed the "catastrophic" antiphospholipid syndrome, 
affects mainly small vessels predominantly supplying organs. The 
thrombocytopenia is usually marked, and a Coombs positive microangiopathic-type 
anemia may accompany the condition. Features of disseminated intravascular 
coagulation may be evident in some patients. It is fatal in approximately 50% of 
cases reported. Treatment should include not only adequate anticoagulation with 
intravenous heparin but also full doses of intravenous corticosteroids, to 
offset the systemic inflammatory response syndrome that occurs as a result of 
the extensive tissue damage, and plasmapheresis, using fresh frozen plasma. 
Parenteral antibiotics should be administered early if infection is suspected.

DOI: 10.1097/00062752-200009000-00012
PMID: 10961585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]