---
reference_id: "PMID:18753647"
title: Bortezomib plus melphalan and prednisone for initial treatment of multiple myeloma.
authors:
- San Miguel JF
- Schlag R
- Khuageva NK
- Dimopoulos MA
- Shpilberg O
- Kropff M
- Spicka I
- Petrucci MT
- Palumbo A
- Samoilova OS
- Dmoszynska A
- Abdulkadyrov KM
- Schots R
- Jiang B
- Mateos MV
- Anderson KC
- Esseltine DL
- Liu K
- Cakana A
- van de Velde H
- Richardson PG
- VISTA Trial Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0801479
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bortezomib plus melphalan and prednisone for initial treatment of multiple myeloma.
**Authors:** San Miguel JF, Schlag R, Khuageva NK, Dimopoulos MA, Shpilberg O, Kropff M, Spicka I, Petrucci MT, Palumbo A, Samoilova OS, Dmoszynska A, Abdulkadyrov KM, Schots R, Jiang B, Mateos MV, Anderson KC, Esseltine DL, Liu K, Cakana A, van de Velde H, Richardson PG, VISTA Trial Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa0801479](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0801479)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2008 Aug 28;359(9):906-17. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0801479.

Bortezomib plus melphalan and prednisone for initial treatment of multiple 
myeloma.

San Miguel JF(1), Schlag R, Khuageva NK, Dimopoulos MA, Shpilberg O, Kropff M, 
Spicka I, Petrucci MT, Palumbo A, Samoilova OS, Dmoszynska A, Abdulkadyrov KM, 
Schots R, Jiang B, Mateos MV, Anderson KC, Esseltine DL, Liu K, Cakana A, van de 
Velde H, Richardson PG; VISTA Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Corrado C, Fantl D, Garcia J, Klein G, Riveros D, Hermann R, 
Hertzberg M, Horvath N, Marlton P, Spencer A, Drach J, Gisslinger H, Greil R, 
Gunsilius E, Linkisch W, Petzer A, Thaler J, Andre M, Beguin Y, Bron D, Demuynck 
H, De Prijck B, Delforge M, Doyen C, Ferrant A, Feremans W, Janssens A, Van de 
Velde A, Van Droogenbroeck J, Vermeulen P, Zachee P, Bahlis N, Belch A, Dolan S, 
Fox S, Lavoie A, Voralia M, Ai H, Hou J, Meng F, Shen Z, Zhao Y, Hajek R, 
Maisnar V, Koivunen E, Remes K, Sikiö A, Vanhatalo S, Attal M, Harousseau J, 
Hulin C, Michallet M, Salles G, Durk H, Engelhardt M, Gabor C, Goldschmidt H, 
Haenel M, Hess G, Knauf W, Schlag M, Welslau M, Zervas K, Zoumbos N, Borbényi Z, 
Fekete S, Illes A, Masszi T, Radvanyi G, Tarkovacs G, Ben-Yehuda D, Berrebi A, 
Nagler A, Rowe J, Boccadoro M, Cavo M, De Fabritiis P, Foa R, Lazzarino M, 
Liberati A, Morra E, Musto P, Pinto A, Kim K, Min C, Min Y, Suh C, Yoon S, 
Gibbons S, Hellmann A, Holowiecki J, Kloczko J, Kuliczkowski K, Komarnicki M, 
Robak T, Sulek K, Alexeeva J, Biakhov M, Domnikova N, Dunaev Y, Gaisarova G, 
Golenkov A, Loginov A, Patrin V, Pavlov V, Rossiev V, Rukavitsyn O, Savchenko V, 
Suvorov A, Yablokova V, Alegre A, Bladé J, De la Rubia J, Diaz-Mediavilla J, 
Hernandez J, Palomera L, Sureda A, Björkstrand B, Gruber A, Chao T, Huang S, 
Kuan-Der Lee C, Kuo C, Shih L, Cavet J, Kazmi M, Littlewood T, O'Dwyer M, Rule 
S, Russell N, Berdeja J, Bruetman D, Butler F, Callander N, Glass J, Gurtler J, 
Hanna W, Holladay C, Irwin D, Lewis R, Morrison V, Noga S, Roberts T, Schiller 
G.

Author information:
(1)Hospital Universitario Salamanca, CIC, IBMCC (USAL-CSIC), Salamanca, Spain. 
sanmigiz@usal.es

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Aug 28;359(9):964-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe0805176.
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Dec 11;359(24):2613; author reply 2613-4. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc086420.
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Dec 11;359(24):2613; author reply 2613-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Dec 11;359(24):2613; author reply 2613-4.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2009 May;6(5):255-6. doi: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2009.47.

BACKGROUND: The standard treatment for patients with multiple myeloma who are 
not candidates for high-dose therapy is melphalan and prednisone. This phase 3 
study compared the use of melphalan and prednisone with or without bortezomib in 
previously untreated patients with multiple myeloma who were ineligible for 
high-dose therapy.
METHODS: We randomly assigned 682 patients to receive nine 6-week cycles of 
melphalan (at a dose of 9 mg per square meter of body-surface area) and 
prednisone (at a dose of 60 mg per square meter) on days 1 to 4, either alone or 
with bortezomib (at a dose of 1.3 mg per square meter) on days 1, 4, 8, 11, 22, 
25, 29, and 32 during cycles 1 to 4 and on days 1, 8, 22, and 29 during cycles 5 
to 9. The primary end point was the time to disease progression.
RESULTS: The time to progression among patients receiving bortezomib plus 
melphalan-prednisone (bortezomib group) was 24.0 months, as compared with 16.6 
months among those receiving melphalan-prednisone alone (control group) (hazard 
ratio for the bortezomib group, 0.48; P<0.001). The proportions of patients with 
a partial response or better were 71% in the bortezomib group and 35% in the 
control group; complete-response rates were 30% and 4%, respectively (P<0.001). 
The median duration of the response was 19.9 months in the bortezomib group and 
13.1 months in the control group. The hazard ratio for overall survival was 0.61 
for the bortezomib group (P=0.008). Adverse events were consistent with 
established profiles of toxic events associated with bortezomib and 
melphalan-prednisone. Grade 3 events occurred in a higher proportion of patients 
in the bortezomib group than in the control group (53% vs. 44%, P=0.02), but 
there were no significant differences in grade 4 events (28% and 27%, 
respectively) or treatment-related deaths (1% and 2%).
CONCLUSIONS: Bortezomib plus melphalan-prednisone was superior to 
melphalan-prednisone alone in patients with newly diagnosed myeloma who were 
ineligible for high-dose therapy. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00111319.)

2008 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0801479
PMID: 18753647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]