---
reference_id: "PMID:19536083"
title: "Treatment of Alport syndrome: beyond animal models."
authors:
- Gross O
- Kashtan CE
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/ki.2009.223
keywords:
- Angiotensin II Type 1 Receptor Blockers/therapeutic use
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Animals
- Autoantigens/genetics
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Cyclosporine/therapeutic use
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Kidney Transplantation
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Alport syndrome: beyond animal models.
**Authors:** Gross O, Kashtan CE
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ki.2009.223](https://doi.org/10.1038/ki.2009.223)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2009 Sep;76(6):599-603. doi: 10.1038/ki.2009.223. Epub 2009 Jun
17.

Treatment of Alport syndrome: beyond animal models.

Gross O(1), Kashtan CE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, University Medicine Goettingen,
Goettingen, Germany. gross.oliver@med.uni-goettingen.de

Alport syndrome (AS) is a hereditary glomerulopathy due to abnormal composition
of the glomerular basement membrane, leading to end-stage renal disease (ESRD).
Studies of animal models of AS have suggested a variety of potentially effective
therapies, but none of these has been definitely shown to prevent or delay ESRD
in human AS. Studies in Alport mice suggest that angiotensin inhibition not only
has antiproteinuric effects but suppresses cytokine and collagen production as
well as tubulointerstitial fibrogenesis and inflammation. For these reasons,
many Alport patients are treated empirically with angiotensin antagonists.
Cyclosporine may reduce proteinuria in AS, but the risk of nephrotoxic side
effects complicates long-term therapy in children. Current data on the role of
HMG-CoA reductase inhibition are sparse, so therapy should be limited to adults
with dyslipoproteinemia. Results of some, but not all, studies suggest that bone
marrow-derived cells may ameliorate disease in Alport mice. However, until
experimental doubts concerning the superiority of bone-marrow transplantation
over other treatments are resolved by additional investigation, human research
subjects should not be exposed to cell-based therapies that may carry
substantial risks. In summary, all potential therapies are off-label use in
children. As a consequence, initial therapeutic trials should focus on the
safety and efficiency of medical treatment, as well as the optimal timing of
therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/ki.2009.223
PMID: 19536083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
