---
reference_id: PMID:35235726
title: Nirsevimab for Prevention of RSV in Healthy Late-Preterm and Term Infants.
authors:
- Hammitt LL
- Dagan R
- Yuan Y
- Baca Cots M
- Bosheva M
- Madhi SA
- Muller WJ
- Zar HJ
- Brooks D
- Grenham A
- Wählby Hamrén U
- Mankad VS
- Ren P
- Takas T
- Abram ME
- Leach A
- Griffin MP
- Villafana T
- MELODY Study Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2110275
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Antiviral Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Infant, Premature"
- "Infant, Premature, Diseases/prevention & control"
- "Injections, Intramuscular"
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- "Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections/prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nirsevimab for Prevention of RSV in Healthy Late-Preterm and Term Infants.
**Authors:** Hammitt LL, Dagan R, Yuan Y, Baca Cots M, Bosheva M, Madhi SA, Muller WJ, Zar HJ, Brooks D, Grenham A, Wählby Hamrén U, Mankad VS, Ren P, Takas T, Abram ME, Leach A, Griffin MP, Villafana T, MELODY Study Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2110275](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2110275)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2022 Mar 3;386(9):837-846. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2110275.

Nirsevimab for Prevention of RSV in Healthy Late-Preterm and Term Infants.

Hammitt LL(1), Dagan R(1), Yuan Y(1), Baca Cots M(1), Bosheva M(1), Madhi SA(1), 
Muller WJ(1), Zar HJ(1), Brooks D(1), Grenham A(1), Wählby Hamrén U(1), Mankad 
VS(1), Ren P(1), Takas T(1), Abram ME(1), Leach A(1), Griffin MP(1), Villafana 
T(1); MELODY Study Group.

Collaborators: Binder C, Resch B, De Wachter E, Decaluwe W, Goetghebuer T, 
Atanosova V, Blazheva A, Bosheva M, Krasteva-Vilmosh M, Chilvers M, Mitchell I, 
Papenburg J, Lanno R, Nellis G, Toome L, Kokko S, Koski S, Laajalahti O, 
Peltonen L, Rämet M, Ukkonen B, Adamon L, Epaud R, Nguyen K, Panzer F, Thome U, 
Dagan R, Simmonds A, Shiomi M, Tamai K, Grantina I, Tameliene R, Czajka H, 
Boguslaw B, Tetiurka T, Park MS, Antonova T, Baltserovich N, Galustyan A, 
Perminova O, Ballot D, Barnabas SL, Diacon AH, Madhi S, Strehlau R, Venter E, 
Walele AH, Zar HJ, Arimany Montaña JL, Baca Cots M, Cabañas F, Garcia-Garcia ML, 
García JL, Martinez Orgado JA, Martinon-Torres F, Martinez SN, Pineda Caplliure 
A, Ramos-Diaz JC, Ruiz González MD, Sánchez Ferrer FJ, Solé Mir E, Collados CT, 
Berggren Broström E, Galiza E, Hawcutt DB, Adams G, Anderson E, Bailony M, 
Benton T, Bhatt A, Bula-Rudas F, Carlin S, Collins MA, Cruz M, Dailey Pierce R, 
Domachowske J, Englund J, Finn D, Garscadden A, Halpern J, Hammitt L, Honrubia 
D, Kagan R, Keller E, Koch W, Leonardi M, Mann D, Martin J, Muller W, Narendran 
V, Nelson D, Nguyen D, Okorie U, Pardalos J, Pelzer D, Polak M, Ramilo O, Ren C, 
Roessler K, Russell S, Senders S, Shepard J, Simões EAF, Simon M, Simonsen K, 
Sutcliffe CG, Tekippe M, Tipton M, Twiggs J, VanDeRiet D, Wisman P, Abram ME, 
Ahuja S, Auge C, Chen S, Fakoya L, Kubiak RJ, Khan AA, Larick M, Markanday S, 
Trivedi R, Heinrichs J.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore (L.L.H.), and AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg (Y.Y., D.B., A.G., P.R., T.T., 
M.E.A., A.L., M.P.G., T.V.) - both in Maryland; the Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel (R.D.); Quirónsalud 
Málaga Hospital, Malaga, Spain (M.B.C.); University Multiprofile Hospital for 
Active Treatment, St. George Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria (M.B.); the 
South African Medical Research Council Vaccines and Infectious Diseases 
Analytics Research Unit and African Leadership in Vaccinology Expertise, Faculty 
of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg (S.A.M.), and 
the Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Red Cross Children's Hospital, 
and the Medical Research Council Unit on Child and Adolescent Health, University 
of Cape Town, Cape Town (H.J.Z.) - all in South Africa; Ann and Robert H. Lurie 
Children's Hospital of Chicago and Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago (W.J.M.); AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden (U.W.H.); and 
AstraZeneca, Durham, NC (V.S.M.).

BACKGROUND: Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a major cause of lower 
respiratory tract infection and hospitalization in infants. Nirsevimab is a 
monoclonal antibody to the RSV fusion protein that has an extended half-life. 
The efficacy and safety of nirsevimab in healthy late-preterm and term infants 
are uncertain.
METHODS: We randomly assigned, in a 2:1 ratio, infants who had been born at a 
gestational age of at least 35 weeks to receive a single intramuscular injection 
of nirsevimab or placebo before the start of an RSV season. The primary efficacy 
end point was medically attended RSV-associated lower respiratory tract 
infection through 150 days after the injection. The secondary efficacy end point 
was hospitalization for RSV-associated lower respiratory tract infection through 
150 days after the injection.
RESULTS: A total of 1490 infants underwent randomization: 994 were assigned to 
the nirsevimab group and 496 to the placebo group. Medically attended 
RSV-associated lower respiratory tract infection occurred in 12 infants (1.2%) 
in the nirsevimab group and in 25 infants (5.0%) in the placebo group; these 
findings correspond to an efficacy of 74.5% (95% confidence interval [CI], 49.6 
to 87.1; P<0.001) for nirsevimab. Hospitalization for RSV-associated lower 
respiratory tract infection occurred in 6 infants (0.6%) in the nirsevimab group 
and in 8 infants (1.6%) in the placebo group (efficacy, 62.1%; 95% CI, -8.6 to 
86.8; P = 0.07). Among infants with data available to day 361, antidrug 
antibodies after baseline were detected in 58 of 951 (6.1%) in the nirsevimab 
group and in 5 of 473 (1.1%) in the placebo group. Serious adverse events were 
reported in 67 of 987 infants (6.8%) who received nirsevimab and in 36 of 491 
infants (7.3%) who received placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: A single injection of nirsevimab administered before the RSV season 
protected healthy late-preterm and term infants from medically attended 
RSV-associated lower respiratory tract infection. (Funded by 
MedImmune/AstraZeneca and Sanofi; MELODY ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT03979313.).

Copyright © 2022 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2110275
PMID: 35235726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]