---
reference_id: "PMID:20616173"
title: Histopathologic classification of ANCA-associated glomerulonephritis.
authors:
- Berden AE
- Ferrario F
- Hagen EC
- Jayne DR
- Jennette JC
- Joh K
- Neumann I
- Noël LH
- Pusey CD
- Waldherr R
- Bruijn JA
- Bajema IM
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010050477
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antibodies, Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic/blood"
- Biopsy
- Female
- "Glomerulonephritis/classification, immunology, pathology"
- Humans
- Kidney Glomerulus/pathology
- Kidney Tubules/pathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histopathologic classification of ANCA-associated glomerulonephritis.
**Authors:** Berden AE, Ferrario F, Hagen EC, Jayne DR, Jennette JC, Joh K, Neumann I, Noël LH, Pusey CD, Waldherr R, Bruijn JA, Bajema IM
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2010050477](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2010050477)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010 Oct;21(10):1628-36. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010050477. Epub 
2010 Jul 8.

Histopathologic classification of ANCA-associated glomerulonephritis.

Berden AE(1), Ferrario F, Hagen EC, Jayne DR, Jennette JC, Joh K, Neumann I, 
Noël LH, Pusey CD, Waldherr R, Bruijn JA, Bajema IM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
Netherlands. a.e.berden@lumc.nl

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2010 Dec;6(12):689. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2010.145.

Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis is the most 
common cause of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis worldwide, and the renal 
biopsy is the gold standard for establishing the diagnosis. Although the 
prognostic value of the renal biopsy in ANCA-associated glomerulonephritis is 
widely recognized, there is no consensus regarding its pathologic 
classification. We present here such a pathologic classification developed by an 
international working group of renal pathologists. Our classification proposes 
four general categories of lesions: Focal, crescentic, mixed, and sclerotic. To 
determine whether these lesions have predictive value for renal outcome, we 
performed a validation study on 100 biopsies from patients with clinically and 
histologically confirmed ANCA-associated glomerulonephritis. Two independent 
pathologists, blinded to patient data, scored all biopsies according to a 
standardized protocol. Results show that the proposed classification system is 
of prognostic value for 1- and 5-year renal outcomes. We believe this pathologic 
classification will aid in the prognostication of patients at the time of 
diagnosis and facilitate uniform reporting between centers. This classification 
at some point might also provide means to guide therapy.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2010050477
PMID: 20616173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]