---
reference_id: "PMID:39009114"
title: Comparison of Splenic Artery Aneurysms in Patients with and without Portal Hypertension.
authors:
- Leal J
- Batagini NC
- Stefan de Faria Oliveira I
- Frederico MG
- Rodrigues MS
- Casella IB
- Simão da Silva E
journal: Ann Vasc Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2024.06.010
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Portal/etiology, physiopathology, diagnosis, surgery"
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Splenic Artery/diagnostic imaging
- Male
- "Aneurysm/surgery, diagnostic imaging, mortality"
- Retrospective Studies
- Aged
- Risk Factors
- Adult
- Time Factors
- Risk Assessment
- Portal Pressure
- "Aneurysm, Ruptured/surgery, diagnostic imaging, mortality"
- Disease Progression
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of Splenic Artery Aneurysms in Patients with and without Portal Hypertension.
**Authors:** Leal J, Batagini NC, Stefan de Faria Oliveira I, Frederico MG, Rodrigues MS, Casella IB, Simão da Silva E
**Journal:** Ann Vasc Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.avsg.2024.06.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avsg.2024.06.010)

## Content

1. Ann Vasc Surg. 2024 Dec;109:232-237. doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2024.06.010. Epub
2024  Jul 14.

Comparison of Splenic Artery Aneurysms in Patients with and without Portal 
Hypertension.

Leal J(1), Batagini NC(2), Stefan de Faria Oliveira I(1), Frederico MG(1), 
Rodrigues MS(1), Casella IB(1), Simão da Silva E(1).

Author information:
(1)Vascular and Endovascular Surgery Department, Clinicas Hospitals of 
University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Vascular and Endovascular Surgery Department, Clinicas Hospitals of 
University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic 
address: nayaracioffi@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Splenic artery aneurysms (SAAs) are rare but seem to have higher 
incidence in patients with portal hypertension (PH). The present article aims to 
analyze the interference of PH in the natural history of these aneurysms.
METHODS: This was a retrospective study of data recorded prospectively. Between 
January 2000 and December 2019, all SAAs patients in follow-up at a tertiary 
institution were selected for analysis. Primary end point was to analyze the 
presentation and evolution of SAAs in patients with PH, and secondary was to 
identify cumulative rates of freedom from rupture, interventions, and survival 
in this group, during a 10-year follow-up.
RESULTS: In total, 96 patients were identified with SAAs, 79 (82.29%) did not 
have PH and 17 (17.7%) had this comorbidity. Among the demographic 
characteristics, the patients with SAAs and PH were significantly younger 
(52 years [standard deviation {SD} 13.3] versus 61.9 years [SD 12.2] [P = 0.05]) 
and had lower number of pregnancies (1.1 pregnancies [SD 1.2] versus 3.37 
pregnancies [SD 2.3] [P = 0.03]). Patients with PH had a higher cumulative rate 
of surgical intervention throughout follow-up (up to 75.6% in 10 years) when 
compared to patients without PH, with 36.9% intervention rate in 10 years of 
follow-up. Patients with PH had larger diameter at diagnosis (35 mm, SD 27.3) 
compared to patients without PH (22.6 mm, SD 16.1), P = 0.008. However, there 
were no statistical differences in the relative growth rate, in aneurysmal 
rupture rate throughout follow-up, as well as in survival over the years, 
between the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The patients with SAAs and PH are significantly younger, have 
larger SAA diameters at diagnosis and have a higher cumulative rate of surgical 
intervention throughout follow-up in 10 years, despite the relative growth rate 
being similar to that of patients without PH.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2024.06.010
PMID: 39009114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]