---
reference_id: "PMID:34049953"
title: Dengue virus infection induces inflammation and oxidative stress on the heart.
authors:
- Kangussu LM
- Costa VV
- Olivon VC
- Queiroz-Junior CM
- Gondim ANS
- Melo MB
- Reis D
- Nóbrega N
- Araújo N
- Rachid MA
- Souza RP
- Tirapelli CR
- Santos RASD
- Cruz JDS
- Teixeira MM
- Souza DDG
- Bonaventura D
journal: Heart
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2020-318912
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue virus infection induces inflammation and oxidative stress on the heart.
**Authors:** Kangussu LM, Costa VV, Olivon VC, Queiroz-Junior CM, Gondim ANS, Melo MB, Reis D, Nóbrega N, Araújo N, Rachid MA, Souza RP, Tirapelli CR, Santos RASD, Cruz JDS, Teixeira MM, Souza DDG, Bonaventura D
**Journal:** Heart (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/heartjnl-2020-318912](https://doi.org/10.1136/heartjnl-2020-318912)

## Content

1. Heart. 2022 Mar;108(5):388-396. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2020-318912. Epub 2021
May  28.

Dengue virus infection induces inflammation and oxidative stress on the heart.

Kangussu LM(#)(1), Costa VV(#)(2), Olivon VC(3), Queiroz-Junior CM(3), Gondim 
ANS(4)(5), Melo MB(3), Reis D(1), Nóbrega N(1), Araújo N(1), Rachid MA(6), Souza 
RP(7), Tirapelli CR(8), Santos RASD(3), Cruz JDS(5), Teixeira MM(5), Souza 
DDG(9), Bonaventura D(10).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Farmacologia, ICB, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte, Brasil.
(2)Departamento de Morfologia, ICB, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte, Brasil.
(3)Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofísica, ICB, Universidade Federal de Minas 
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brasil.
(4)Departamento de Educação - Campus XII, Universidade do Estado da Bahia, 
Salvador, Bahia, Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Bioquímica e Imunologia, ICB, Universidade Federal de Minas 
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brasil.
(6)Departamento de Patologia, ICB, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte, Brasil.
(7)Departamento de Genética, Ecologia e Evolução, ICB, Universidade Federal de 
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brasil.
(8)Laboratório de Farmacologia, DEPCH, Escola de Enfermagem de Ribeirão Preto, 
Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(9)Departamento de Microbiologia, ICB, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, 
Belo Horizonte, Brasil.
(10)Departamento de Farmacologia, ICB, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, 
Belo Horizonte, Brasil danibona@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Dengue fever is one of the most important arboviral diseases in the 
world, and its severe forms are characterised by a broad spectrum of systemic 
and cardiovascular hallmarks. However, much remains to be elucidated regarding 
the pathogenesis triggered by Dengue virus (DENV) in the heart. Herein, we 
evaluated the cardiac outcomes unleashed by DENV infection and the possible 
mechanisms associated with these effects.
METHODS: A model of an adapted DENV-3 strain was used to infect male BALB/c mice 
to assess haemodynamic measurements and the functional, electrophysiological, 
inflammatory and oxidative parameters in the heart.
RESULTS: DENV-3 infection resulted in increased systemic inflammation and 
vascular permeability with consequent reduction of systolic blood pressure and 
increase in heart rate. These changes were accompanied by a decrease in the 
cardiac output and stroke volume, with a reduction trend in the left ventricular 
end-systolic and end-diastolic diameters and volumes. Also, there was a 
reduction trend in the calcium current density in the ventricular cardiomyocytes 
of DENV-3 infected mice. Indeed, DENV-3 infection led to leucocyte infiltration 
and production of inflammatory mediators in the heart, causing pericarditis and 
myocarditis. Moreover, increased reactive oxygen species generation and 
lipoperoxidation were also verified in the cardiac tissue of DENV-3 infected 
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: DENV-3 infection induced a marked cardiac dysfunction, which may be 
associated with inflammation, oxidative stress and electrophysiological changes 
in the heart. These findings provide new cardiac insights into the mechanisms 
involved in the pathogenesis triggered by DENV, contributing to the research of 
new therapeutic targets for clinical practice.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/heartjnl-2020-318912
PMID: 34049953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.