---
reference_id: "PMID:38044746"
title: The incidence of movement disorder increases with age and contrasts with subtle and limited neuroimaging abnormalities in argininosuccinic aciduria.
authors:
- Gurung S
- Karamched S
- Perocheau D
- Seunarine KK
- Baldwin T
- Alrashidi H
- Touramanidou L
- Duff C
- Elkhateeb N
- Stepien KM
- Sharma R
- Morris A
- Hartley T
- Crowther L
- Grunewald S
- Cleary M
- Mundy H
- Chakrapani A
- Batzios S
- Davison J
- Footitt E
- Tuschl K
- Lachmann R
- Murphy E
- Santra S
- Uudelepp ML
- Yeo M
- Finn PF
- Cavedon A
- Siddiqui S
- Rice L
- Martini PGV
- Frassetto A
- Heales S
- Mills PB
- Gissen P
- Clayden JD
- Clark CA
- Eaton S
- Kalber TL
- Baruteau J
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12691
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The incidence of movement disorder increases with age and contrasts with subtle and limited neuroimaging abnormalities in argininosuccinic aciduria.
**Authors:** Gurung S, Karamched S, Perocheau D, Seunarine KK, Baldwin T, Alrashidi H, Touramanidou L, Duff C, Elkhateeb N, Stepien KM, Sharma R, Morris A, Hartley T, Crowther L, Grunewald S, Cleary M, Mundy H, Chakrapani A, Batzios S, Davison J, Footitt E, Tuschl K, Lachmann R, Murphy E, Santra S, Uudelepp ML, Yeo M, Finn PF, Cavedon A, Siddiqui S, Rice L, Martini PGV, Frassetto A, Heales S, Mills PB, Gissen P, Clayden JD, Clark CA, Eaton S, Kalber TL, Baruteau J
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12691](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12691)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2024 Nov;47(6):1213-1227. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12691. Epub 
2023 Dec 4.

The incidence of movement disorder increases with age and contrasts with subtle 
and limited neuroimaging abnormalities in argininosuccinic aciduria.

Gurung S(1), Karamched S(2), Perocheau D(1), Seunarine KK(1), Baldwin T(1), 
Alrashidi H(1), Touramanidou L(1), Duff C(1), Elkhateeb N(3)(4), Stepien KM(5), 
Sharma R(5), Morris A(6), Hartley T(6), Crowther L(6), Grunewald S(3), Cleary 
M(3), Mundy H(7), Chakrapani A(3), Batzios S(3), Davison J(3), Footitt E(3), 
Tuschl K(3), Lachmann R(8), Murphy E(8), Santra S(9), Uudelepp ML(3), Yeo M(3), 
Finn PF(10), Cavedon A(10), Siddiqui S(10), Rice L(10), Martini PGV(10), 
Frassetto A(10), Heales S(1), Mills PB(1), Gissen P(1)(3)(11), Clayden JD(1), 
Clark CA(1), Eaton S(1), Kalber TL(2), Baruteau J(1)(3)(11).

Author information:
(1)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, 
London, UK.
(2)Centre for Advanced Biomedical Imaging, University College London, London, 
UK.
(3)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge, 
UK.
(5)Mark Holland Metabolic Unit, Adult Inherited Metabolic Diseases Department, 
Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UK.
(6)Willink Unit, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, UK.
(7)Evelina London Children's Hospital, St Thomas's Hospital, London, UK.
(8)Charles Dent Metabolic Unit, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(9)Clinical IMD, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(10)Moderna, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(11)National Institute of Health Research Great Ormond Street Biomedical 
Research Centre, London, UK.

Argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) is integral to the urea cycle detoxifying 
neurotoxic ammonia and the nitric oxide (NO) biosynthesis cycle. Inherited ASL 
deficiency causes argininosuccinic aciduria (ASA), a rare disease with 
hyperammonemia and NO deficiency. Patients present with developmental delay, 
epilepsy and movement disorder, associated with NO-mediated downregulation of 
central catecholamine biosynthesis. A neurodegenerative phenotype has been 
proposed in ASA. To better characterise this neurodegenerative phenotype in ASA, 
we conducted a retrospective study in six paediatric and adult metabolic centres 
in the UK in 2022. We identified 60 patients and specifically looked for 
neurodegeneration-related symptoms: movement disorder such as ataxia, tremor and 
dystonia, hypotonia/fatigue and abnormal behaviour. We analysed neuroimaging 
with diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in an 
individual with ASA with movement disorders. We assessed conventional and DTI 
MRI alongside single photon emission computer tomography (SPECT) with dopamine 
analogue radionuclide 123I-ioflupane, in Asl-deficient mice treated by hASL mRNA 
with normalised ureagenesis. Movement disorders in ASA appear in the second and 
third decades of life, becoming more prevalent with ageing and independent from 
the age of onset of hyperammonemia. Neuroimaging can show abnormal DTI features 
affecting both grey and white matter, preferentially basal ganglia. ASA mouse 
model with normalised ureagenesis did not recapitulate these DTI findings and 
showed normal 123I-ioflupane SPECT and cerebral dopamine metabolomics. 
Altogether these findings support the pathophysiology of a late-onset movement 
disorder with cell-autonomous functional central catecholamine dysregulation but 
without or limited neurodegeneration of dopaminergic neurons, making these 
symptoms amenable to targeted therapy.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12691
PMCID: PMC11586606
PMID: 38044746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Julien Baruteau is in receipt of research 
funding from Moderna Therapeutics. Patrick F. Finn, Alex Cavedon, Summar 
Siddiqui, Lisa Rice, Paolo G. V. Martini and Andrea Frassetto are employees of 
Moderna Therapeutics. Andrea Frassetto and Lisa Rice are inventors of patent 
application no. PCT/US23/17573 ‘Lipid nanoparticles and polynucleotides encoding 
argininosuccinate lyase for the treatment of argininosuccinic aciduria’. Other 
authors have no competing financial conflict of interest to declare.