---
reference_id: "PMID:15115436"
title: "Deletion of Ser-171 causes inactivation, proteasome-mediated degradation and complete deficiency of human transaldolase."
authors:
- Grossman CE
- Niland B
- Stancato C
- Verhoeven NM
- Van Der Knaap MS
- Jakobs C
- Brown LM
- Vajda S
- Banki K
- Perl A
journal: Biochem J
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1042/BJ20040413
keywords:
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- "Enzyme Activation/genetics, physiology"
- Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/chemistry, enzymology, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Bacterial/genetics"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic/drug effects, genetics"
- Humans
- "Liver Cirrhosis/enzymology, genetics"
- "Lymphocytes/chemistry, enzymology, metabolism"
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed/genetics"
- "Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/genetics, physiology"
- Protein Conformation
- RNA/metabolism
- "Recombinant Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Sequence Deletion/genetics, physiology"
- "Serine/genetics, physiology"
- "Transaldolase/biosynthesis, deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deletion of Ser-171 causes inactivation, proteasome-mediated degradation and complete deficiency of human transaldolase.
**Authors:** Grossman CE, Niland B, Stancato C, Verhoeven NM, Van Der Knaap MS, Jakobs C, Brown LM, Vajda S, Banki K, Perl A
**Journal:** Biochem J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20040413](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20040413)

## Content

1. Biochem J. 2004 Sep 1;382(Pt 2):725-31. doi: 10.1042/BJ20040413.

Deletion of Ser-171 causes inactivation, proteasome-mediated degradation and
complete deficiency of human transaldolase.

Grossman CE(1), Niland B, Stancato C, Verhoeven NM, Van Der Knaap MS, Jakobs C,
Brown LM, Vajda S, Banki K, Perl A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, State University of New York UMU, College of
Medicine, 750 East Adams Street, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

Homozygous deletion of three nucleotides coding for Ser-171 (S171) of TAL-H
(human transaldolase) has been identified in a female patient with liver
cirrhosis. Accumulation of sedoheptulose 7-phosphate raised the possibility of
TAL (transaldolase) deficiency in this patient. In the present study, we show
that the mutant TAL-H gene was effectively transcribed into mRNA, whereas no
expression of the TALDeltaS171 protein or enzyme activity was detected in
TALDeltaS171 fibroblasts or lymphoblasts. Unlike wild-type TAL-H-GST fusion
protein (where GST stands for glutathione S-transferase), TALDeltaS171-GST was
solubilized only in the presence of detergents, suggesting that deletion of
Ser-171 caused conformational changes. Recombinant TALDeltaS171 had no enzymic
activity. TALDeltaS171 was effectively translated in vitro using rabbit
reticulocyte lysates, indicating that the absence of TAL-H protein in
TALDeltaS171 fibroblasts and lymphoblasts may be attributed primarily to rapid
degradation. Treatment with cell-permeable proteasome inhibitors led to the
accumulation of TALDeltaS171 in whole cell lysates and cytosolic extracts of
patient lymphoblasts, suggesting that deletion of Ser-171 led to rapid
degradation by the proteasome. Although the TALDeltaS171 protein became readily
detectable in proteasome inhibitor-treated cells, it displayed no appreciable
enzymic activity. The results suggest that deletion of Ser-171 leads to
inactivation and proteasome-mediated degradation of TAL-H. Since TAL-H is a
regulator of apoptosis signal processing, complete deficiency of TAL-H may be
relevant for the pathogenesis of liver cirrhosis.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20040413
PMCID: PMC1133831
PMID: 15115436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
