---
reference_id: "PMID:36315921"
title: "More Than 2% of Circulating Tumor Plasma Cells Defines Plasma Cell Leukemia-Like Multiple Myeloma."
authors:
- Jelinek T
- Bezdekova R
- Zihala D
- Sevcikova T
- Anilkumar Sithara A
- Pospisilova L
- Sevcikova S
- Polackova P
- Stork M
- Knechtova Z
- Venglar O
- Kapustova V
- Popkova T
- Muronova L
- Chyra Z
- Hrdinka M
- Simicek M
- Garcés JJ
- Puig N
- Cedena MT
- Jurczyszyn A
- Castillo JJ
- Penka M
- Radocha J
- Mateos MV
- San-Miguel JF
- Paiva B
- Pour L
- Rihova L
- Hajek R
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.01226
keywords:
- Humans
- Multiple Myeloma/drug therapy
- "Leukemia, Plasma Cell"
- Prognosis
- Plasma Cells/pathology
- "Neoplastic Cells, Circulating/pathology"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# More Than 2% of Circulating Tumor Plasma Cells Defines Plasma Cell Leukemia-Like Multiple Myeloma.
**Authors:** Jelinek T, Bezdekova R, Zihala D, Sevcikova T, Anilkumar Sithara A, Pospisilova L, Sevcikova S, Polackova P, Stork M, Knechtova Z, Venglar O, Kapustova V, Popkova T, Muronova L, Chyra Z, Hrdinka M, Simicek M, Garcés JJ, Puig N, Cedena MT, Jurczyszyn A, Castillo JJ, Penka M, Radocha J, Mateos MV, San-Miguel JF, Paiva B, Pour L, Rihova L, Hajek R
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.22.01226](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.22.01226)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2023 Mar 1;41(7):1383-1392. doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.01226. Epub 2022
 Oct 31.

More Than 2% of Circulating Tumor Plasma Cells Defines Plasma Cell Leukemia-Like 
Multiple Myeloma.

Jelinek T(1), Bezdekova R(2), Zihala D(1), Sevcikova T(1)(3), Anilkumar Sithara 
A(1)(3), Pospisilova L(4), Sevcikova S(5), Polackova P(2), Stork M(6), Knechtova 
Z(6), Venglar O(3), Kapustova V(1), Popkova T(1), Muronova L(1), Chyra Z(1), 
Hrdinka M(1), Simicek M(1), Garcés JJ(7), Puig N(8), Cedena MT(9), Jurczyszyn 
A(10), Castillo JJ(11), Penka M(2), Radocha J(12), Mateos MV(8), San-Miguel 
JF(7), Paiva B(7), Pour L(5), Rihova L(2), Hajek R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematooncology, University Hospital Ostrava and Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Clinical Hematology, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, 
Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(4)Institute of Biostatistics and Analyses, Ltd, Brno, Czech Republic.
(5)Babak Myeloma Group, Department of Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital 
Brno and Faculty of Medicine Masaryk University, Czech Republic.
(7)Clinica Universidad de Navarra, Centro de Investigacion Medica Aplicada 
(CIMA), Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria de Navarra (IDISNA), CIBER-ONC 
number CB16/12/00369, Pamplona, Spain.
(8)Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Instituto de Investigacion Biomedica de 
Salamanca (IBSAL), Centro de Investigación del Cancer (IBMCC-USAL, CSIC), 
CIBER-ONC number CB16/12/00233, Salamanca, Spain.
(9)Hospital 12 de Octubre, CIBER-ONC number CB16/12/00369, Madrid, Spain.
(10)Plasma Cell Dyscrasia Center, Department of Hematology, Jagiellonian 
University Medical College, Faculty of Medicine Cracow, Poland.
(11)Division of Hematologic Malignancies, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA.
(12)4th Department of Internal Medicine-Hematology, University Hospital Hradec 
Kralove, Charles University, Faculty of Medicine in Hradec Kralove, Hradec 
Kralove, Czech Republic.

PURPOSE: Primary plasma cell leukemia (PCL) is the most aggressive monoclonal 
gammopathy. It was formerly characterized by ≥ 20% circulating plasma cells 
(CTCs) until 2021, when this threshold was decreased to ≥ 5%. We hypothesized 
that primary PCL is not a separate clinical entity, but rather that it 
represents ultra-high-risk multiple myeloma (MM) characterized by elevated CTC 
levels.
METHODS: We assessed the levels of CTCs by multiparameter flow cytometry in 395 
patients with newly diagnosed transplant-ineligible MM to establish a cutoff for 
CTCs that identifies the patients with ultra-high-risk PCL-like MM. We tested 
the cutoff on 185 transplant-eligible patients with MM and further validated on 
an independent cohort of 280 transplant-ineligible patients treated in the 
GEM-CLARIDEX trial. The largest published real-world cohort of patients with 
primary PCL was used for comparison of survival. Finally, we challenged the 
current 5% threshold for primary PCL diagnosis.
RESULTS: Newly diagnosed transplant-ineligible patients with MM with 2%-20% CTCs 
had significantly shorter progression-free survival (3.1 v 15.6 months; P < 
.001) and overall survival (14.6 v 33.6 months; P = .023) than patients with < 
2%. The 2% cutoff proved to be applicable also in transplant-eligible patients 
with MM and was successfully validated on an independent cohort of patients from 
the GEM-CLARIDEX trial. Most importantly, patients with 2%-20% CTCs had 
comparable dismal outcomes with primary PCL. Moreover, after revealing a low 
mean difference between flow cytometric and morphologic evaluation of CTCs, we 
showed that patients with 2%-5% CTCs have similar outcomes as those with 5%-20% 
CTCs.
CONCLUSION: Our study uncovers that ≥ 2% CTCs is a biomarker of hidden primary 
PCL and supports the assessment of CTCs by flow cytometry during the diagnostic 
workup of MM.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.22.01226
PMCID: PMC9995102
PMID: 36315921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]