---
reference_id: "PMID:24568663"
title: Class switch recombination process in ataxia telangiectasia patients with elevated serum levels of IgM.
authors:
- Mohammadinejad P
- Abolhassani H
- Aghamohammadi A
- Pourhamdi S
- Ghosh S
- Sadeghi B
- Nasiri Kalmarzi R
- Durandy A
- Borkhardt A
journal: J Immunoassay Immunochem
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1080/15321819.2014.891525
keywords:
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin Class Switching/genetics, immunology"
- "Immunoglobulin M/blood, immunology"
- Mutation
- "Recombination, Genetic/genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Class switch recombination process in ataxia telangiectasia patients with elevated serum levels of IgM.
**Authors:** Mohammadinejad P, Abolhassani H, Aghamohammadi A, Pourhamdi S, Ghosh S, Sadeghi B, Nasiri Kalmarzi R, Durandy A, Borkhardt A
**Journal:** J Immunoassay Immunochem (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15321819.2014.891525](https://doi.org/10.1080/15321819.2014.891525)

## Content

1. J Immunoassay Immunochem. 2015;36(1):16-26. doi: 10.1080/15321819.2014.891525.

Class switch recombination process in ataxia telangiectasia patients with 
elevated serum levels of IgM.

Mohammadinejad P(1), Abolhassani H, Aghamohammadi A, Pourhamdi S, Ghosh S, 
Sadeghi B, Nasiri Kalmarzi R, Durandy A, Borkhardt A.

Author information:
(1)a Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, 
Children's Medical Center , Tehran University of Medical Science , Tehran , 
Iran.

Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare primary immunodeficiency disorder with 
various clinical manifestations. Increased serum levels of IgM and recurrent 
infections, mainly sinopulmonary infections, can be the presenting feature in a 
number of AT patients and may be initially misdiagnosed as hyper-IgM (HIgM) 
syndrome. This study was designed to investigate class switch recombination 
(CSR) as a critical mechanism in B lymphocytes' maturation to produce different 
isotypes of antibody in response to antigen stimulation in AT cases with HIgM 
presentation. Quantitative IgE production after stimulation by IL-4 and CD40L 
was considered as an indicator for CSR function. We also compared their results 
with sex and age matched AT patients without HIgM presentation. We report four 
AT patients with recurrent infections during infancy and high serum levels of 
IgM. Laboratory evaluations revealed defective CSR while none of the three AT 
patients without HIgM presentation had a defect in the CSR process. The 
characterized defect in AT is a mutation in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated 
(ATM) gene. This gene may result in CSR defects due to impaired DNA break 
repair. A special association between AT and HIgM may indicate a new subgroup of 
AT patients according to their clinical phenotype and CSR condition.

DOI: 10.1080/15321819.2014.891525
PMID: 24568663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]