---
reference_id: "PMID:27230413"
title: "KCC3 axonopathy: neuropathological features in the central and peripheral nervous system."
authors:
- Auer RN
- Laganière JL
- Robitaille YO
- Richardson J
- Dion PA
- Rouleau GA
- Shekarabi M
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.90
keywords:
- Adult
- "Agenesis of Corpus Callosum/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Autopsy
- "Axons/metabolism, pathology"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Nerve Degeneration
- "Peripheral Nervous System/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- "Symporters/genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
- K Cl- Cotransporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KCC3 axonopathy: neuropathological features in the central and peripheral nervous system.
**Authors:** Auer RN, Laganière JL, Robitaille YO, Richardson J, Dion PA, Rouleau GA, Shekarabi M
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/modpathol.2016.90](https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.2016.90)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2016 Sep;29(9):962-76. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.90. Epub 2016
May  27.

KCC3 axonopathy: neuropathological features in the central and peripheral
nervous system.

Auer RN(1), Laganière JL(2), Robitaille YO(3), Richardson J(2), Dion PA(2),
Rouleau GA(2), Shekarabi M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
Canada.
(2)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute and
Hospital, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology, Hôpital Ste-Justine, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy associated with agenesis of the corpus
callosum (HMSN/ACC) is an autosomal recessive disease of the central and
peripheral nervous system that presents as early-onset polyneuropathy. Patients
are hypotonic and areflexic from birth, with abnormal facial features and
atrophic muscles. Progressive peripheral neuropathy eventually confines them to
a wheelchair in the second decade of life, and death occurs by the fourth
decade. We here define the neuropathologic features of the disease in autopsy
tissues from eight cases. Both developmental and neurodegenerative features were
found. Hypoplasia or absence of the major telencephalic commissures and a
hypoplasia of corticospinal tracts to half the normal size, were the major
neurodevelopmental defects we observed. Despite being a neurodegenerative
disease, preservation of brain weight and a conspicuous absence of neuronal or
glial cell death were signal features of this disease. Small tumor-like
overgrowths of axons, termed axonomas, were found in the central and peripheral
nervous system, indicating attempted axonal regeneration. We conclude that the
neurodegenerative deficits in HMSN/ACC are primarily caused by an axonopathy
superimposed upon abnormal development, affecting peripheral but also central
nervous system axons, all ultimately because of a genetic defect in the axonal
cotransporter KCC3.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.90
PMID: 27230413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
