---
reference_id: "PMID:12837347"
title: "Noma: an \"infectious\" disease of unknown aetiology."
authors:
- Baratti-Mayer D
- Pittet B
- Montandon D
- Bolivar I
- Bornand JE
- Hugonnet S
- Jaquinet A
- Schrenzel J
- Pittet D
- Geneva Study Group on Noma
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s1473-3099(03)00670-4
keywords:
- Africa/epidemiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Developing Countries
- Humans
- Infant
- "Noma/epidemiology, mortality, physiopathology"
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Noma: an "infectious" disease of unknown aetiology.
**Authors:** Baratti-Mayer D, Pittet B, Montandon D, Bolivar I, Bornand JE, Hugonnet S, Jaquinet A, Schrenzel J, Pittet D, Geneva Study Group on Noma
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1473-3099(03)00670-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1473-3099(03)00670-4)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2003 Jul;3(7):419-31. doi: 10.1016/s1473-3099(03)00670-4.

Noma: an "infectious" disease of unknown aetiology.

Baratti-Mayer D(1), Pittet B, Montandon D, Bolivar I, Bornand JE, Hugonnet S,
Jaquinet A, Schrenzel J, Pittet D; Geneva Study Group on Noma.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Lancet Infect Dis. 2004 Feb;4(2):73. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(04)00924-7.

Noma (cancrum oris) is a devastating gangrenous disease that leads to severe
tissue destruction in the face and is associated with high morbidity and
mortality. It is seen almost exclusively in young children living in remote
areas of less developed countries, particularly in Africa. The exact prevalence
of the disease is unknown, but a conservative estimate is that 770000 people are
currently affected by noma sequelae. The cause remains unknown, but a
combination of several elements of a plausible aetiology has been identified:
malnutrition, a compromised immune system, poor oral hygiene and a lesion of the
gingival mucosal barrier, and an unidentified bacterial factor acting as a
trigger for the disease. This review discusses the epidemiology, clinical
features, current understanding of the pathophysiology, and treatment of the
acute phase and sequelae requiring reconstructive surgery. Noma may be
preventable if recognised at an early stage. Further research is needed to
identify more exactly the causative agents.

DOI: 10.1016/s1473-3099(03)00670-4
PMID: 12837347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
