---
reference_id: "PMID:30834273"
title: "Standardized Uptake Value Using Thyroid Quantitative SPECT/CT for the Diagnosis and Evaluation of Graves' Disease: A Prospective Multicenter Study."
authors:
- Dong F
- Li L
- Bian Y
- Li G
- Han X
- Li M
- Liu J
- Xue Y
- Li Y
- Hu Y
- Tan J
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1155/2019/7589853
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Standardized Uptake Value Using Thyroid Quantitative SPECT/CT for the Diagnosis and Evaluation of Graves' Disease: A Prospective Multicenter Study.
**Authors:** Dong F, Li L, Bian Y, Li G, Han X, Li M, Liu J, Xue Y, Li Y, Hu Y, Tan J
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2019/7589853](https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/7589853)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2019 Jan 30;2019:7589853. doi: 10.1155/2019/7589853.
eCollection  2019.

Standardized Uptake Value Using Thyroid Quantitative SPECT/CT for the Diagnosis 
and Evaluation of Graves' Disease: A Prospective Multicenter Study.

Dong F(1), Li L(2), Bian Y(3), Li G(4), Han X(5), Li M(6), Liu J(7), Xue Y(8), 
Li Y(2), Hu Y(3), Tan J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, 
Tianjin, China.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, 
China.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, Shanxi, China.
(5)Department of Nuclear Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(6)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(7)Department of Nuclear Medicine, The People's Hospital of Inner Mongolia 
Autonomous Region, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia, China.
(8)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Guangzhou Panyu Central Hospital, Guangzhou, 
China.

The clinical applications of the quantitative single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT)/computed tomography (CT) are being expanded to a variety of 
fields of nuclear medicine. However, clinical application of quantitative 
SPECT/CT for the evaluation of Graves' disease (GD) still needs further 
investigation. Our aim was to investigate the feasibility of standard uptake 
value (SUV) of the thyroid for the clinical diagnosis and evaluation of GD. In 
this prospective multicenter study, 116 patients diagnosed with GD (Graves 
group) and 74 healthy volunteers (control group) were enrolled from 8 different 
hospitals. All patients underwent technetium pertechnetate (99mTcO4 -) SPECT/CT 
imaging with Q.Metrix quantitative software and 24-hour thyroid radioactive 
iodine uptake (24h-RAIU) test. The SUVmax and SUVmean in Graves group were 
significantly higher than those of control group (P<0.01). Cut-off values of 
SUVmax and SUVmean to predict GD were 231.425 and 116.66 by ROC curves, 
respectively. The SUVmax and SUVmean in Graves patients were significantly 
related to serum thyroxine level with correlation coefficient of 0.493 and 0.512 
for FT3 and 0.449 and 0.464 for FT4, respectively (all P<0.01). Additionally, 
the SUVmax and SUVmean in GD positively correlated with 24h-RAIU with a 
coefficient of 0.832 and 0.830, respectively (P<0.01). The volumes determined by 
Q.Metrix (35.65 ± 20.56ml) of 72 subjects also positively correlated with that 
from ultrasound (36.67 ± 21.00ml) with a coefficient of 0.927 (P<0.01). SUV 
measurements derived from thyroid SPECT/CT may be useful for the clinical 
diagnosis and evaluation of GD.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/7589853
PMCID: PMC6374828
PMID: 30834273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]