---
reference_id: "PMID:28433096"
title: "Wilson disease: neurologic features."
authors:
- Członkowska A
- Litwin T
- Chabik G
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00010-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilson disease: neurologic features.
**Authors:** Członkowska A, Litwin T, Chabik G
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00010-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00010-0)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2017;142:101-119. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00010-0.

Wilson disease: neurologic features.

Członkowska A(1), Litwin T(2), Chabik G(2).

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Neurology, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, 
Warsaw, Poland; Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical 
University of Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: czlonkow@ipin.edu.pl.
(2)Second Department of Neurology, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, 
Warsaw, Poland.

Wilson disease (WD) is a neurodegenerative disorder, which presents as a 
spectrum of neurologic manifestations that includes tremor, bradykinesia, 
rigidity, dystonia, chorea, dysarthria, and dysphagia, together with a 
combination of neurologic symptoms that can easily lead to misdiagnosis. An 
early diagnosis of WD, and appropriate anticopper treatment, usually leads to a 
marked improvement in patient health. Conversely, delayed diagnosis can result 
in persistent pathology, which, left untreated, can ultimately prove lethal. The 
aim of this chapter is to present a detailed description of the neurologic 
features of WD, including their evaluation, together with relevant 
ophthalmologic examinations, brain neuroimaging, and other laboratory 
measurements that show the extent of the involvement of the nervous system.

© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00010-0
PMID: 28433096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]