---
reference_id: "PMID:38786040"
title: Protein Quality Control of NKCC2 in Bartter Syndrome and Blood Pressure Regulation.
authors:
- Laghmani K
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13100818
keywords:
- "Bartter Syndrome/metabolism, genetics"
- Humans
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 1/metabolism"
- Blood Pressure
- Animals
- Endoplasmic Reticulum-Associated Degradation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein Quality Control of NKCC2 in Bartter Syndrome and Blood Pressure Regulation.
**Authors:** Laghmani K
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13100818](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13100818)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 May 10;13(10):818. doi: 10.3390/cells13100818.

Protein Quality Control of NKCC2 in Bartter Syndrome and Blood Pressure
Regulation.

Laghmani K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, INSERM, Sorbonne Université, Université
de Paris, F-75006 Paris, France.
(2)CNRS, ERL8228, F-75006 Paris, France.

Mutations in NKCC2 generate antenatal Bartter syndrome type 1 (type 1 BS), a
life-threatening salt-losing nephropathy characterized by arterial hypotension,
as well as electrolyte abnormalities. In contrast to the genetic inactivation of
NKCC2, inappropriate increased NKCC2 activity has been associated with
salt-sensitive hypertension. Given the importance of NKCC2 in salt-sensitive
hypertension and the pathophysiology of prenatal BS, studying the molecular
regulation of this Na-K-2Cl cotransporter has attracted great interest.
Therefore, several studies have addressed various aspects of NKCC2 regulation,
such as phosphorylation and post-Golgi trafficking. However, the regulation of
this cotransporter at the pre-Golgi level remained unknown for years. Similar to
several transmembrane proteins, export from the ER appears to be the
rate-limiting step in the cotransporter's maturation and trafficking to the
plasma membrane. The most compelling evidence comes from patients with type 5
BS, the most severe form of prenatal BS, in whom NKCC2 is not detectable in the
apical membrane of thick ascending limb (TAL) cells due to ER retention and
ER-associated degradation (ERAD) mechanisms. In addition, type 1 BS is one of
the diseases linked to ERAD pathways. In recent years, several molecular
determinants of NKCC2 export from the ER and protein quality control have been
identified. The aim of this review is therefore to summarize recent data
regarding the protein quality control of NKCC2 and to discuss their potential
implications in BS and blood pressure regulation.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13100818
PMCID: PMC11120568
PMID: 38786040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflicts of interest.
