---
reference_id: "PMID:17185020"
title: A phase I/II clinical trial of enzyme replacement therapy in mucopolysaccharidosis II (Hunter syndrome).
authors:
- Muenzer J
- Gucsavas-Calikoglu M
- McCandless SE
- Schuetz TJ
- Kimura A
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.09.001
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Double-Blind Method
- Glycosaminoglycans/urine
- Humans
- "Iduronate Sulfatase/administration & dosage, adverse effects, immunology, therapeutic use"
- Immunoglobulin G/biosynthesis
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- "Joints/drug effects, physiopathology"
- "Liver/drug effects, pathology"
- Male
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis II/drug therapy, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Recombinant Proteins/administration & dosage, adverse effects, immunology, therapeutic use"
- Respiratory Function Tests
- Safety
- "Spleen/drug effects, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A phase I/II clinical trial of enzyme replacement therapy in mucopolysaccharidosis II (Hunter syndrome).
**Authors:** Muenzer J, Gucsavas-Calikoglu M, McCandless SE, Schuetz TJ, Kimura A
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.09.001)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2007 Mar;90(3):329-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.09.001. Epub
 2006 Dec 20.

A phase I/II clinical trial of enzyme replacement therapy in
mucopolysaccharidosis II (Hunter syndrome).

Muenzer J(1), Gucsavas-Calikoglu M, McCandless SE, Schuetz TJ, Kimura A.

Author information:
(1)University of North Carolina, Department of Pediatrics, CB # 7487, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599-7487, USA. muenzer@med.unc.edu <muenzer@med.unc.edu>

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety and explore the efficacy of idursulfase
(recombinant human iduronate-2-sulfatase) treatment for mucopolysaccharidosis II
(MPS II).
STUDY DESIGN: Twelve patients were enrolled into a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial for 24 weeks followed by an open-label extension study.
Three groups of 4 patients were enrolled sequentially, with 3 patients in each
group receiving idursulfase and 1 patient receiving placebo. The first group
received idursulfase at 0.15 mg/kg infused every other week with the 2nd and 3rd
groups receiving 0.5 and 1.5 mg/kg, respectively. After 24 weeks the
placebo-treated patients were changed to idursulfase at the dose of their group.
The primary endpoint was a change from baseline in urinary excretion of
glycosaminoglycans. Results were pooled for analysis by ANOVA and compared to
baseline.
RESULTS: Urinary glycosaminoglycans were reduced within 2 weeks of initiating
idursulfase and were decreased 49% after 48 weeks of treatment (P<0.0001). Both
liver and spleen volume were decreased at 24 weeks (P<0.01) and 48 weeks
(P<0.001). The 6-minute walk test distance increased an average of 48 meters
after 48 weeks (P=0.013). Six patients in the higher dose groups developed IgG
antibodies that did not influence the clinical effects of idursulfase.
CONCLUSIONS: This study describes the first experience with enzyme replacement
therapy for the treatment of patients with MPS II. Idursulfase was generally
well tolerated and was associated with reductions in urine glycosaminoglycans
levels and organ size, as well as an increased 6-minute walk test distance.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.09.001
PMID: 17185020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
