---
reference_id: "PMID:12680478"
title: Thalidomide for erythema nodosum leprosum and other applications.
authors:
- Okafor MC
journal: Pharmacotherapy
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1592/phco.23.4.481.32115
keywords:
- Animals
- Cachexia/drug therapy
- Erythema Nodosum/drug therapy
- Graft vs Host Disease/drug therapy
- Humans
- "Leprosy, Lepromatous/drug therapy"
- Multiple Myeloma/drug therapy
- Patient Education as Topic/methods
- "Sarcoma, Kaposi/drug therapy"
- "Thalidomide/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thalidomide for erythema nodosum leprosum and other applications.
**Authors:** Okafor MC
**Journal:** Pharmacotherapy (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1592/phco.23.4.481.32115](https://doi.org/10.1592/phco.23.4.481.32115)

## Content

1. Pharmacotherapy. 2003 Apr;23(4):481-93. doi: 10.1592/phco.23.4.481.32115.

Thalidomide for erythema nodosum leprosum and other applications.

Okafor MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, University of California, San Francisco, 
USA.

Thalidomide, administered as a sedative and antiemetic decades ago, was 
considered responsible for numerous devastating cases of birth defects and 
consequently was banned from markets worldwide. However, the drug remarkably has 
resurfaced with promise of immunomodulatory benefit in a wide array of 
immunologic disorders for which available treatments were limited. It is 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration for erythema nodosum leprosum 
(ENL). Although the relative paucity of leprosy and ENL worldwide may 
perceivably limit interest in and knowledge about thalidomide, increasing 
numbers of new and potential uses expand its applicability widely beyond ENL. 
Thalidomide, an inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor a, is the best known agent 
for short-term treatment of ENL skin manifestations, as well as postremission 
maintenance therapy to prevent recurrence. For this indication, it is effective 
as monotherapy and as part of combination therapy with corticosteroids. Studies 
of thalidomide in chronic graft-versus-host disease showed benefit in children 
and adults as treatment, but not as prophylaxis. The agent has been administered 
successfully for treatment of cachexia related to cancer, tuberculosis, and 
human immunodeficiency virus infection, although evidence of efficacy is 
inconclusive. Thalidomide monotherapy effectively induced objective response in 
trials in patients with both newly diagnosed and advanced or refractory multiple 
myeloma. Combination therapy with thalidomide and corticosteroids was also 
effective in these patients, as well as in treatment of aphthous and genital 
ulcers. Limited evidence supports the drug's benefit in treatment of Kaposi's 
sarcoma. Other thalidomide applications include Crohn's disease, rheumatoid 
arthritis, and multiple sclerosis. Somnolence, constipation, and rash were the 
most frequently cited adverse effects in studies, but thalidomide-induced 
neuropathy and idiopathic thromboembolism were critical causes for drug 
discontinuation. Thalidomide is still contraindicated in pregnant women, women 
of childbearing age, and sexually active men not using contraception. Clinicians 
should be conversant with thalidomide in ENL (its primary application) in the 
natural course of leprosy, as well as in the agent's other applications.

DOI: 10.1592/phco.23.4.481.32115
PMID: 12680478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]