---
reference_id: "PMID:36224286"
title: "Nephrons, podocytes and chronic kidney disease: Strategic antihypertensive therapy for renoprotection."
authors:
- Haruhara K
- Kanzaki G
- Tsuboi N
journal: Hypertens Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41440-022-01061-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nephrons, podocytes and chronic kidney disease: Strategic antihypertensive therapy for renoprotection.
**Authors:** Haruhara K, Kanzaki G, Tsuboi N
**Journal:** Hypertens Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41440-022-01061-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41440-022-01061-5)

## Content

1. Hypertens Res. 2023 Feb;46(2):299-310. doi: 10.1038/s41440-022-01061-5. Epub 
2022 Oct 12.

Nephrons, podocytes and chronic kidney disease: Strategic antihypertensive 
therapy for renoprotection.

Haruhara K(1), Kanzaki G(1), Tsuboi N(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, The 
Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, The 
Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. tsuboi-n@jikei.ac.jp.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is one of the strongest risk factors for 
hypertension, and hypertension can exacerbate the progression of CKD. Thus, the 
management of CKD and antihypertensive therapy are inextricably linked. Research 
over the past decades has shown that the human kidney is more diverse than 
initially thought. Subjects with low nephron endowment are at increased risk of 
developing CKD and hypertension, which is consistent with the theory of the 
developmental origins of health and disease. Combined with other lifetime risks 
of CKD, hypertension may lead to a vicious cycle consisting of podocyte injury, 
glomerulosclerosis and further loss of nephrons. Of note, recent studies have 
shown that the number of nephrons correlates well with the number of podocytes, 
suggesting that these two components are intrinsically linked and may influence 
each other. Both nephrons and podocytes have no or very limited regenerative 
capacity and are destined to decrease throughout life. Therefore, one of the 
best strategies to slow the progression of CKD is to maintain the "numbers" of 
these essential components necessary to preserve renal function. To this end, 
both the achievement of an optimal blood pressure and a maximum reduction in 
urinary protein excretion are essential. Lifestyle modifications and 
antihypertensive drug therapy must be carefully individualized to address the 
potential diversity of the kidneys.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41440-022-01061-5
PMCID: PMC9899692
PMID: 36224286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.