---
reference_id: "PMID:34383774"
title: Evaluation of a point-of-care diagnostic to identify glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in Brazil.
authors:
- Zobrist S
- Brito M
- Garbin E
- Monteiro WM
- Clementino Freitas S
- Macedo M
- Soares Moura A
- Advani N
- Kahn M
- Pal S
- Gerth-Guyette E
- Bansil P
- Domingo GJ
- Pereira D
- Lacerda MV
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009649
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of a point-of-care diagnostic to identify glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in Brazil.
**Authors:** Zobrist S, Brito M, Garbin E, Monteiro WM, Clementino Freitas S, Macedo M, Soares Moura A, Advani N, Kahn M, Pal S, Gerth-Guyette E, Bansil P, Domingo GJ, Pereira D, Lacerda MV
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0009649](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0009649)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Aug 12;15(8):e0009649. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009649. eCollection 2021 Aug.

Evaluation of a point-of-care diagnostic to identify glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficiency in Brazil.

Zobrist S(1), Brito M(2)(3), Garbin E(4), Monteiro WM(2)(3), Clementino Freitas 
S(2), Macedo M(4), Soares Moura A(2), Advani N(1), Kahn M(1), Pal S(1), 
Gerth-Guyette E(1), Bansil P(1), Domingo GJ(1), Pereira D(4)(5), Lacerda 
MV(2)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Diagnostics, PATH, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(2)Fundação de Medicina Tropical Dr Heitor Vieira Dourado (FMT/HVD), Manaus, 
Amazonas, Brazil.
(3)Universidade do Estado do Amazonas, Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.
(4)Centro de Pesquisa Em Medicina Tropical (CEPEM), Porto Velho, Rondônia, 
Brazil.
(5)Universidade Federal de Rondônia (UNIR), Porto Velho, Rondônia, Brazil.
(6)Instituto Leônidas & Maria Deane (ILMD), Fiocruz, Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is a common 
enzyme deficiency, prevalent in many malaria-endemic countries. G6PD-deficient 
individuals are susceptible to hemolysis during oxidative stress, which can 
occur from exposure to certain medications, including 8-aminoquinolines used to 
treat Plasmodium vivax malaria. Accordingly, access to point-of-care (POC) G6PD 
testing in Brazil is critical for safe treatment of P. vivax malaria.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: This study evaluated the performance of the 
semi-quantitative, POC STANDARD G6PD Test (SD Biosensor, Republic of Korea). 
Participants were recruited at clinics and through an enriched sample in Manaus 
and Porto Velho, Brazil. G6PD and hemoglobin measurements were obtained from 
capillary samples at the POC using the STANDARD and HemoCue 201+ (HemoCue AB, 
Sweden) tests. A thick blood slide was prepared for malaria microscopy. At the 
laboratories, the STANDARD and HemoCue tests were repeated on venous samples and 
a quantitative spectrophotometric G6PD reference assay was performed (Pointe 
Scientific, Canton, MI). G6PD was also assessed by fluorescent spot test. In 
Manaus, a complete blood count was performed. Samples were analyzed from 1,736 
participants. In comparison to spectrophotometry, the STANDARD G6PD Test 
performed equivalently in determining G6PD status in venous and capillary 
specimens under varied operating temperatures. Using the 
manufacturer-recommended reference value thresholds, the test's sensitivity at 
the <30% threshold on both specimen types was 100% (95% confidence interval [CI] 
venous 93.6%-100.0%; capillary 93.8%-100.0%). Specificity was 98.6% on venous 
specimens (95% CI 97.9%-99.1%) and 97.8% on capillary (95% CI 97.0%-98.5%). At 
the 70% threshold, the test's sensitivity was 96.9% on venous specimens (95% CI 
83.8%-99.9%) and 94.3% on capillary (95% CI 80.8%-99.3%). Specificity was 96.5% 
(95% CI 95.0%-97.6%) and 92.3% (95% CI 90.3%-94.0%) on venous and capillary 
specimens, respectively.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The STANDARD G6PD Test is a promising tool to aid in 
POC detection of G6PD deficiency in Brazil.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov 
(identifier: NCT04033640).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009649
PMCID: PMC8384181
PMID: 34383774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.