---
reference_id: "PMID:16670151"
title: Increases in serum estrogen levels during major illness are caused by increased peripheral aromatization.
authors:
- Spratt DI
- Morton JR
- Kramer RS
- Mayo SW
- Longcope C
- Vary CP
journal: Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00467.2005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increases in serum estrogen levels during major illness are caused by increased peripheral aromatization.
**Authors:** Spratt DI, Morton JR, Kramer RS, Mayo SW, Longcope C, Vary CP
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpendo.00467.2005](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00467.2005)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Sep;291(3):E631-8. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.00467.2005. Epub 2006 May 2.

Increases in serum estrogen levels during major illness are caused by increased 
peripheral aromatization.

Spratt DI(1), Morton JR, Kramer RS, Mayo SW, Longcope C, Vary CP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, Dept. of Ob/Gyn, Maine Medical 
Center, Portland, ME 04102, USA. spratd@mmc.org

Although serum testosterone levels decrease acutely in critically ill patients, 
estrogen levels rise. We hypothesized that increased rates of aromatization of 
androgens to estrogens underlie the increase in serum estrogen levels. Eleven 
men and three women (age 42-69 yr) were prospectively studied before and again 
after elective coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG). Each patient 
received priming doses of [(14)C]androgen and [(3)H]estrogen that were 
immediately followed by peripheral infusions for 210 min. Eight men and three 
women received androstenedione (A(4))/estrone (E(1)) and three men received 
testosterone (T)/estradiol (E(2)). Adipose tissue biopsies were obtained in 
another six men before and after CABG to evaluate levels of P450 aromatase mRNA. 
Serum T levels decreased postoperatively in all 17 men (P < 0.001), whereas E(1) 
levels rose (P = 0.004), with a trend toward a rise in E(2) (P = 0.23). 
Peripheral aromatization rates of androgens to estrogens rose markedly in all 14 
patients (P < 0.0001). Estrogen clearance rates rose (P < 0.002). Mean serum 
A(4) levels increased slightly postoperatively (P = 0.04), although no increase 
in A(4) production rates (PRs) was observed. T PRs decreased in two of three 
men, whereas clearance rates increased in all three. Adipose tissue P450 
aromatase mRNA content increased postoperatively (P < 0.001). We conclude that 
the primary cause of increased estrogen levels in acute illness is increased 
aromatase P450 gene expression, resulting in enhanced aromatization of androgens 
to estrogens, a previously undescribed endocrine response to acute illness. Both 
increased T clearance and decreased T production contribute to decreased serum T 
levels. Animal studies suggest that these opposing changes in circulating 
estrogen and androgen levels may be important to reduce morbidity and mortality 
in critical illness.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00467.2005
PMID: 16670151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]