---
reference_id: "PMID:36980387"
title: "Therapeutic Management and Prognostic Factors for Ovarian Malignant Tumours in Adolescents: A Comprehensive Review of Current Guidelines."
authors:
- Margioula-Siarkou C
- Petousis S
- Margioula-Siarkou G
- Mavromatidis G
- Chatzinikolaou F
- Hatzipantelis E
- Guyon F
- Dinas K
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13061080
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic Management and Prognostic Factors for Ovarian Malignant Tumours in Adolescents: A Comprehensive Review of Current Guidelines.
**Authors:** Margioula-Siarkou C, Petousis S, Margioula-Siarkou G, Mavromatidis G, Chatzinikolaou F, Hatzipantelis E, Guyon F, Dinas K
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics13061080](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13061080)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Mar 13;13(6):1080. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13061080.

Therapeutic Management and Prognostic Factors for Ovarian Malignant Tumours in 
Adolescents: A Comprehensive Review of Current Guidelines.

Margioula-Siarkou C(1), Petousis S(1), Margioula-Siarkou G(1), Mavromatidis 
G(1), Chatzinikolaou F(1), Hatzipantelis E(2), Guyon F(3), Dinas K(1).

Author information:
(1)2nd Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, 541 24 Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Children's & Adolescent's Haematology-Oncology Unit, 2nd Department of 
Paediatrics, School of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 541 24 
Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Gynaecologic Oncology Unit, Institut Bergonié, 33000 Bordeaux, France.

Background: Ovarian malignant tumours are rarely diagnosed in adolescents but 
may have a significant impact on their survival, future fertility and quality of 
life. The management of such cases is rather complex and requires expertise and 
careful planning according to scarce existing evidence and recommendations. 
Objective: The aim of this study was to review and compare recommendations from 
published guidelines regarding the diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of 
malignant ovarian tumours in adolescents. Evidence acquisition: A comparative 
descriptive/narrative review of guidelines issued by L'Observatoire des Tumeurs 
Malignes Rares Gynécologiques, the British Society for Paediatric & Adolescent 
Gynaecology, the European Society for Medical Oncology, the European Society of 
Gynecological Oncology-European Society for Paediatric Oncology and the European 
Cooperative Study Group for Pediatric Rare Tumors was conducted. Results: All 
guidelines recommend a thorough diagnostic work-up, consisting of both imaging 
tests and serum tumour marker measurement, as well as the use of 
immunohistochemical methods to confirm the diagnosis and complete surgical 
staging prior to constructing the treatment plan. There is a lack of 
recommendations regarding the assessment of prognostic factors, with only one 
guideline providing detailed information. Treatment strategies, as suggested by 
the majority of guidelines and with only a few discrepancies between them, 
should include both surgery and adjuvant therapies, mainly chemotherapy, with 
great emphasis on fertility preservation when it is considered oncologically 
safe and on the significance of regular and long-term follow-up. Conclusions: 
There is a significant degree of agreement among recommendations of existing 
guidelines. The reported differences, although limited, highlight the need for 
the adoption of an international consensus in order to further improve the 
management of adolescent ovarian cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13061080
PMCID: PMC10047001
PMID: 36980387

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.