---
reference_id: "PMID:31254513"
title: A longitudinal study of retinopathy in the PEX1-Gly844Asp mouse model for mild Zellweger Spectrum Disorder.
authors:
- Argyriou C
- Polosa A
- Cecyre B
- Hsieh M
- Di Pietro E
- Cui W
- Bouchard JF
- Lachapelle P
- Braverman N
journal: Exp Eye Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2019.107713
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A longitudinal study of retinopathy in the PEX1-Gly844Asp mouse model for mild Zellweger Spectrum Disorder.
**Authors:** Argyriou C, Polosa A, Cecyre B, Hsieh M, Di Pietro E, Cui W, Bouchard JF, Lachapelle P, Braverman N
**Journal:** Exp Eye Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exer.2019.107713](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2019.107713)

## Content

1. Exp Eye Res. 2019 Sep;186:107713. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2019.107713. Epub 2019
Jun  27.

A longitudinal study of retinopathy in the PEX1-Gly844Asp mouse model for mild 
Zellweger Spectrum Disorder.

Argyriou C(1), Polosa A(2), Cecyre B(3), Hsieh M(4), Di Pietro E(5), Cui W(6), 
Bouchard JF(7), Lachapelle P(8), Braverman N(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Research Institute of the 
McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Montreal, Quebec, H4A 
3J1, Canada. Electronic address: Catherine.argyriou@mail.mcgill.ca.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, McGill University, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, 
Montreal, Quebec, H4A 3J1, Canada. Electronic address: 
anna.polosa@mail.mcgill.ca.
(3)School of Optometry, Université de Montréal, Pavillon 3744 Jean-Brillant, 
Bureau 260-39, Montréal, Québec, H3T 1P1, Canada. Electronic address: 
bruno.cecyre@umontreal.ca.
(4)Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Montreal, Quebec, H4A 3J1, 
Canada. Electronic address: monica.hsieh@mail.mcgill.ca.
(5)Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Montreal, Quebec, H4A 3J1, 
Canada. Electronic address: erminia.di_pietro@mail.mcgill.ca.
(6)Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Montreal, Quebec, H4A 3J1, 
Canada. Electronic address: wei.cui@mail.mcgill.ca.
(7)School of Optometry, Université de Montréal, Pavillon 3744 Jean-Brillant, 
Bureau 260-39, Montréal, Québec, H3T 1P1, Canada. Electronic address: 
jean-francois.bouchard@umontreal.ca.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, McGill University, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, 
Montreal, Quebec, H4A 3J1, Canada; Child Health and Human Development Program, 
Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie 
Boulevard, Montreal, Quebec, H4A 3J1, Canada. Electronic address: 
pierre.lachapelle@mcgill.ca.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Research Institute of the 
McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Montreal, Quebec, H4A 
3J1, Canada; Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of 
the McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Montreal, Quebec, 
H4A 3J1, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Montreal, 
Quebec, H4A 3J1, Canada. Electronic address: Nancy.braverman@mcgill.ca.

Zellweger Spectrum Disorder (ZSD) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by 
mutations in any one of 13 PEX genes whose protein products are required for 
peroxisome assembly. Retinopathy leading to blindness is one of the major 
untreatable handicaps faced by patients with ZSD but is not well characterized, 
and the requirement for peroxisomes in retinal health is unknown. To address 
this, we examined the progression of retinopathy from 2 to 32 weeks of age in 
our murine model for the common human PEX1-p.Gly843Asp allele (PEX1-p.Gly844Asp) 
using electrophysiology, histology, immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, 
biochemistry, and visual function tests. We found that retinopathy in male and 
female PEX1-G844D mice was marked by an attenuated cone function and abnormal 
cone morphology early in life, with gradually decreasing rod function. 
Structural defects at the inner retina occurred later in the form of bipolar 
cell degradation (between 13 and 32 weeks). Inner segment disorganization and 
enlarged mitochondria were seen at 32 weeks, while other inner retinal cells 
appeared preserved. Visual acuity was diminished by 11 weeks of age, while 
signal transmission from the retina to the brain was relatively intact from 7 to 
32 weeks of age. Molecular analyses showed that PEX1-G844D is a subfunctional 
but stable protein, contrary to human PEX1-G843D. Finally, C26:0 
lysophosphatidylcholine was elevated in the PEX1-G844D retina, while 
phopshoethanolamine plasmalogen lipids were present at normal levels. These 
characterization studies identify therapeutic endpoints for future preclinical 
trials, including improving or preserving the electroretinogram response, 
improving visual acuity, and/or preventing loss of bipolar cells.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2019.107713
PMID: 31254513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]