---
reference_id: "PMID:28301990"
title: Risk factors for community-acquired bacterial meningitis.
authors:
- Lundbo LF
- Benfield T
journal: Infect Dis (Lond)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/23744235.2017.1285046
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk factors for community-acquired bacterial meningitis.
**Authors:** Lundbo LF, Benfield T
**Journal:** Infect Dis (Lond) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/23744235.2017.1285046](https://doi.org/10.1080/23744235.2017.1285046)

## Content

1. Infect Dis (Lond). 2017 Jun;49(6):433-444. doi: 10.1080/23744235.2017.1285046.

Risk factors for community-acquired bacterial meningitis.

Lundbo LF(1)(2)(3), Benfield T(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Infectious Diseases , Copenhagen University Hospital , 
Hvidovre , Denmark.
(2)b Clinical Research Centre , Copenhagen University Hospital , Hvidovre , 
Denmark.
(3)c Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences , University of Copenhagen , 
København , Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Bacterial meningitis is a significant burden of disease and 
mortality in all age groups worldwide despite the development of effective 
conjugated vaccines. The pathogenesis of bacterial meningitis is based on 
complex and incompletely understood host-pathogen interactions. Some of these 
are pathogen-specific, while some are shared between different bacteria.
METHODS: We searched the database PubMed to identify host risk factors for 
bacterial meningitis caused by the pathogens Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria 
meningitidis and Haemophilus influenzae type b, because they are three most 
common causative bacteria beyond the neonatal period.
RESULTS: We describe a number of risk factors; including socioeconomic factors, 
age, genetic variation of the host and underlying medical conditions associated 
with increased susceptibility to invasive bacterial infections in both children 
and adults.
CONCLUSIONS: As conjugated vaccines are available for these infections, it is of 
utmost importance to identify high risk patients to be able to prevent invasive 
disease.

DOI: 10.1080/23744235.2017.1285046
PMID: 28301990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]