---
reference_id: "PMID:40579891"
title: "Minimally Invasive Staged Endoscopic CO2 Laser Repair of Type III Laryngo-Tracheo-Esophageal Clefts: When and How."
authors:
- "O'Riordan I"
- Francisco S
- Rajeev D
- Peterson J
- Ferrari L
- Mercier E
- Watters K
- Rahbar R
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/lary.32375
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Minimally Invasive Staged Endoscopic CO2 Laser Repair of Type III Laryngo-Tracheo-Esophageal Clefts: When and How.
**Authors:** O'Riordan I, Francisco S, Rajeev D, Peterson J, Ferrari L, Mercier E, Watters K, Rahbar R
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.32375](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.32375)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2025 Dec;135(12):4944-4954. doi: 10.1002/lary.32375. Epub 2025
Jun  28.

Minimally Invasive Staged Endoscopic CO2 Laser Repair of Type III 
Laryngo-Tracheo-Esophageal Clefts: When and How.

O'Riordan I(1), Francisco S(1), Rajeev D(1), Peterson J(1), Ferrari L(1), 
Mercier E(1), Watters K(1), Rahbar R(1).

Author information:
(1)Boston Children's Hospital, Department of Otolaryngology and Communication 
Enhancement, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

OBJECTIVES: The management of Type III laryngeal clefts has evolved over the 
last number of years to include endoscopic approaches in select cases. The aim 
of our study was to evaluate the outcomes of endoscopically managed Type III 
laryngeal clefts in terms of repair success, swallowing outcomes, complications, 
and tracheostomy decannulation rates.
METHODS: A retrospective review of Type III endoscopic laryngeal cleft repairs 
was performed over a 15-year period (2007-2021). Data collected included 
demographic details, number and types of surgical interventions, surveillance 
airway endoscopy findings, and swallow and tracheostomy outcomes.
RESULTS: Nineteen patients with Type III laryngeal clefts who were treated with 
endoscopic carbon dioxide laser-assisted repair were included. Median patient 
age was 9.6 months (0.4-24.1 years) and 52% were male. Thirteen patients (68%) 
underwent staged repairs of between 1 and 3 procedures in total. Two patients 
required eventual open repair. Postoperative swallowing outcomes were available 
for 15 patients (78%) and demonstrated that 12 patients were tolerating thin 
liquids, 2 patients were thickening, and one remains unable to feed orally.
CONCLUSION: Endoscopic Type III laryngeal cleft repair is a reasonable 
alternative to traditional open repair in selected cases. Endoscopic closure 
allows for repair of Type III clefts in a staged fashion, with 68% of patients 
in our institution having a successful closure within three stages. In select 
patients, endoscopic laryngeal cleft repair is a procedure with a low morbidity 
profile when compared to open repair and should be considered as a surgical 
option whenever possible.

© 2025 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.32375
PMID: 40579891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]