---
reference_id: PMID:10942418
title: "Interaction among SOX10, PAX3 and MITF, three genes altered in Waardenburg syndrome."
authors:
- Bondurand N
- Pingault V
- Goerich DE
- Lemort N
- Sock E
- Le Caignec C
- Wegner M
- Goossens M
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.13.1907
keywords:
- Animals
- COS Cells
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Genes, Reporter"
- HeLa Cells
- "High Mobility Group Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- In Situ Hybridization
- "Luciferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred Strains"
- Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor
- Mutation
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Protein Binding
- SOXE Transcription Factors
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Transcriptional Activation
- Transfection
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interaction among SOX10, PAX3 and MITF, three genes altered in Waardenburg syndrome.
**Authors:** Bondurand N, Pingault V, Goerich DE, Lemort N, Sock E, Le Caignec C, Wegner M, Goossens M
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/9.13.1907](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/9.13.1907)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Aug 12;9(13):1907-17. doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.13.1907.

Interaction among SOX10, PAX3 and MITF, three genes altered in Waardenburg 
syndrome.

Bondurand N(1), Pingault V, Goerich DE, Lemort N, Sock E, Le Caignec C, Wegner 
M, Goossens M.

Author information:
(1)Génétique Moléculaire et Physiopathologie, INSERM U468, et Laboratoire de 
Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, AP-HP, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil Cedex, 
France.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is an autosomal dominant disorder with an incidence of 
1 in 40 000 that manifests with sensorineural deafness and pigmentation defects. 
It is classified into four types depending on the presence or absence of 
additional symptoms. WS1 and WS3 are due to mutations in the PAX3 gene whereas 
some WS2 cases are associated with mutations in the microphthalmia-associated 
transcription factor (MITF) gene. The WS4 phenotype can result from mutations in 
the endothelin-B receptor gene (EDNRB), in the gene for its ligand, endothelin-3 
(EDN3), or in the SOX10 gene. PAX3 has been shown to regulate MITF gene 
expression. The recent implication of SOX10 in WS4 prompted us to test whether 
this transcription factor, known to cooperate in vitro with PAX3, is also able 
to regulate expression from the MITF promoter. Here we show that SOX10, in 
synergy with PAX3, strongly activates MITF expression in transfection assays. 
Analyses revealed that PAX3 and SOX10 interact directly by binding to a proximal 
region of the MITF promoter containing binding sites for both factors. Moreover, 
SOX10 or PAX3 mutant proteins fail to transactivate this promoter, providing 
further evidence that the two genes act in concert to directly regulate 
expression of MITF. In situ hybridization experiments carried out in the 
dominant megacolon (DOM:) mouse, confirmed that SOX10 dysfunction impairs MITF: 
expression as well as melanocytic development and survival. These experiments, 
which demonstrate an interaction between three of the genes that are altered in 
WS, could explain the auditory-pigmentary symptoms of this disease.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/9.13.1907
PMID: 10942418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]