---
reference_id: "PMID:36937905"
title: "Case report: A rare homozygous variation in the ENPP1 gene, presenting with generalized arterial calcification of infancy in a Chinese infant."
authors:
- Lu P
- Chen J
- Chen M
- Wang L
- Xiang D
- Yin J
- Yang S
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1105381
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: A rare homozygous variation in the ENPP1 gene, presenting with generalized arterial calcification of infancy in a Chinese infant.
**Authors:** Lu P, Chen J, Chen M, Wang L, Xiang D, Yin J, Yang S
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2023.1105381](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2023.1105381)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2023 Mar 3;10:1105381. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1105381. 
eCollection 2023.

Case report: A rare homozygous variation in the ENPP1 gene, presenting with 
generalized arterial calcification of infancy in a Chinese infant.

Lu P(1), Chen J(1), Chen M(1), Wang L(1), Xiang D(1), Yin J(1), Yang S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China.

Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is a rare genetic disease 
characterized by arterial calcifications or stenoses and hypertension. GACI is 
caused by mutations in the ENPP1 or ABCC6 genes, and it often causes 
intrauterine or early infancy death. Here, we report a case of rare GACI caused 
by a homozygous variation in ENPP1, in a Chinese infant initially presenting 
with hypertension. The proband was an 8-month-old boy with in utero tricuspid 
valve calcification, presenting with hypertension at birth. Enhanced computed 
tomography revealed extensive arterial calcification. Genetic testing identified 
a homozygous variation in ENPP1 (c.783C > G p.Y261X), which led to the diagnosis 
of GACI. This mutation has been reported in only three Chinese patients, which 
all initially presented with hypophosphatemic rickets rather than GACI. This 
case enriches the clinical and genetic spectrum of ENPP1 mutations and reminds 
us that GACI should be considered in an infant presenting with hypertension and 
extensive arterial calcification, and that genetic testing should be performed.

© 2023 Lu, Chen, Chen, Wang, Xiang, Yin and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1105381
PMCID: PMC10020691
PMID: 36937905

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.