---
reference_id: "PMID:32729297"
title: Diplomyelia in a patient with a clinical suspicion of autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay type (ARSACS).
authors:
- Dziewulska D
journal: Folia Neuropathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.5114/fn.2020.96646
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Male
- Muscle Spasticity
- Spinal Cord/abnormalities
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/congenital
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diplomyelia in a patient with a clinical suspicion of autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay type (ARSACS).
**Authors:** Dziewulska D
**Journal:** Folia Neuropathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.5114/fn.2020.96646](https://doi.org/10.5114/fn.2020.96646)

## Content

1. Folia Neuropathol. 2020;58(2):94-99. doi: 10.5114/fn.2020.96646.

Diplomyelia in a patient with a clinical suspicion of autosomal recessive
spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay type (ARSACS).

Dziewulska D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland.

Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is a form of
cerebellar ataxia related to mutations in the SACS gene on chromosome 13q12.12
encoding sacsin protein. Characteristic clinical features are ataxia,
spasticity, distal muscle wasting, neuropathy, dysarthria, nystagmus, and finger
or feet deformities. The presented case concerns a 32-year-old man with clinical
diagnosis of ARSACS. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of the brain
revealed cerebellar atrophy typical of the disease while neuroimaging of the
C1-C3 and C6-Th12 segments showed only the thin thoracic spinal cord. The
patient died suddenly and a gross examination of the spinal cord revealed
extraspinal tumour at the C4-C5 levels, which turned out to be an additional
spinal cord. Microscopic examination showed an extensive ischemic necrosis
involving C6-Th5 segments of the proper spinal cord, and disturbed intrinsic
structure containing many pathological vessels of the extra spinal cord. Lack of
visualization of C4-C5 spinal cord segments on MRI scans made diagnosis of
diplomyelia in vivo impossible. However, diplomyelia does not exclude
coexistence of ARSACS because of the occurrence of such clinical symptoms as
dysarthria or nystagmus which cannot be explained by the presence of the spinal
cord defect. The possibility of congenital malformations of the spinal cord in
adults should be remembered as their early identification and surgical
correction can improve neurological symptoms.

DOI: 10.5114/fn.2020.96646
PMID: 32729297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
