---
reference_id: "PMID:31215467"
title: "Randomized investigation of the bioavailability of fluoride in saliva after administration of sodium fluoride, amine fluoride and fluoride containing bioactive glass dentifrices."
authors:
- Naumova EA
- Staiger M
- Kouji O
- Modric J
- Pierchalla T
- Rybka M
- Hill RG
- Arnold WH
journal: BMC Oral Health
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12903-019-0805-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized investigation of the bioavailability of fluoride in saliva after administration of sodium fluoride, amine fluoride and fluoride containing bioactive glass dentifrices.
**Authors:** Naumova EA, Staiger M, Kouji O, Modric J, Pierchalla T, Rybka M, Hill RG, Arnold WH
**Journal:** BMC Oral Health (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12903-019-0805-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12903-019-0805-6)

## Content

1. BMC Oral Health. 2019 Jun 18;19(1):119. doi: 10.1186/s12903-019-0805-6.

Randomized investigation of the bioavailability of fluoride in saliva after 
administration of sodium fluoride, amine fluoride and fluoride containing 
bioactive glass dentifrices.

Naumova EA(1), Staiger M(1), Kouji O(1), Modric J(1), Pierchalla T(1), Rybka 
M(1), Hill RG(2), Arnold WH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological and Material Sciences in Dentistry, Faculty of 
Health, Witten/Herdecke University, Alfred-Herrhausen-Strasse 44, 58455, Witten, 
Germany.
(2)Institute of Dentistry, Barts and The London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, E1 4NS, UK.
(3)Department of Biological and Material Sciences in Dentistry, Faculty of 
Health, Witten/Herdecke University, Alfred-Herrhausen-Strasse 44, 58455, Witten, 
Germany. wolfgang.arnold@uni-wh.de.

OBJECTIVES: Bioactive glasses which degrade in aqueous solutions may release 
bioactive ions such as fluoride (F-) and support fluoride bioavailability in 
saliva. We investigated how these effects would be apparent in an in vivo 
experimental trial after toothbrushing in comparison with sodium fluoride and 
amine fluoride.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In this single-center, randomized, parallel in vivo trial 
with a three strata block design, where healthy subjects were randomly assigned 
into three groups. Each group brushed their teeth either with fluoridated 
bioactive glass containing dentifrice, with a sodium fluoride (NaF) containing 
dentifrice or with amine fluoride (AmF) containing toothpaste. Saliva was 
collected time intervals before, immediately after, 30, 60 and 120 min after 
toothbrushing. Fluoride concentration was determined in supernatant saliva and 
salivary sediment using a fluoride ion selective electrode. The data were 
evaluated statistically using non-parametric tests.
RESULTS: The increase of bioactive fluoride in supernatant saliva was higher 
after application of NaF or AmF compared to fluoridated bioactive glass. In 
salivary sediment bioavailability of fluoride lasted longer after application of 
fluoridated bioactive glass.
CONCLUSIONS: Toothbrushing with the fluoride containing bioactive glass 
dentifrices had positive effects on the fluoride bioavailability within two 
hours. Fluoride containing bioactive glass represent a new area for 
investigation in caries prophylaxis. The bioactive potential impact on the tooth 
remineralization should be examined further.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: DRKS00016038 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-019-0805-6
PMCID: PMC6582593
PMID: 31215467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.