---
reference_id: "PMID:20301681"
title: GTP Cyclohydrolase 1-Deficient Dopa-Responsive Dystonia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Furukawa Y
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GTP Cyclohydrolase 1-Deficient Dopa-Responsive Dystonia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Furukawa Y

## Content

1. GTP Cyclohydrolase 1-Deficient Dopa-Responsive Dystonia.

Furukawa Y(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2002 Feb 21 [updated 2019 Jan 24].

Author information:
(1)Chairman, Department of Neurology, Vice President, Juntendo Tokyo Koto
Geriatric Medical Center, Professor, Department of Neurology, Faculty of
Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: GTP cyclohydrolase 1-deficient dopa-responsive
dystonia (GTPCH1-deficient DRD) is characterized by childhood-onset dystonia and
a dramatic and sustained response to low doses of oral administration of
levodopa. This disorder typically presents with gait disturbance caused by foot
dystonia, later development of parkinsonism, and diurnal fluctuation of symptoms
(aggravation of symptoms toward the evening and alleviation of symptoms in the
morning after sleep). Initial symptoms are often gait difficulties attributable
to flexion-inversion (equinovarus posture) of the foot. Occasionally, initial
symptoms are arm dystonia, postural tremor of the hand, or slowness of
movements. Brisk deep-tendon reflexes in the legs, ankle clonus, and/or the
striatal toe (dystonic extension of the big toe) are present in many affected
individuals. In general, gradual progression to generalized dystonia is
observed. Intellectual, cerebellar, sensory, and autonomic disturbances
generally do not occur.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of GTPCH1-deficient DRD is established in a
proband by identification of a heterozygous pathogenic variant in GCH1 by
molecular genetic testing. In individuals with a suspected diagnosis of
GTPCH1-deficient DRD and no identifiable GCH1 pathogenic variants, biochemical
testing may be necessary.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Initial suggested dose of
levodopa/decarboxylase inhibitor (DCI): Children age <6 years: 1-10 mg/kg
levodopa/DCI daily, administered in multiple doses. Children age ≥6 years: 25-50
mg levodopa/DCI 1-3x daily. Adults: 50 mg levodopa/DCI 1-3x daily. For all, dose
should be changed slowly and by small increments as needed. Motor benefit occurs
immediately or within a few days of starting levodopa; full benefit occurs
within several days to a few months. Maximum benefit (complete or near-complete
responsiveness of symptoms) is generally achieved by <300-400 mg/day of
levodopa/DCI. Although dyskinesias may appear at the beginning of levodopa
therapy, they subside following dose reduction and do not reappear when the dose
is gradually increased. Typically, adverse motor effects of chronic levodopa
therapy (motor response fluctuations and dopa-induced dyskinesias) do not occur.
Prevention of secondary complications: Early diagnosis and therapy (with low
doses of levodopa) may prevent transient dyskinesias at initiation of levodopa
treatment. Surveillance: Examination by a movement disorder specialist at least
several times yearly is recommended. Agents/circumstances to avoid:
Discontinuation of levodopa treatment. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is
appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and
younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as
early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment.
Molecular genetic testing cannot be used to predict the occurrence of symptoms,
age of onset, severity and type of symptoms, or rate of disease progression in
family members who are heterozygous for a GCH1 pathogenic variant. Pregnancy
management: Levodopa therapy is continued during pregnancy without adverse
effect in most.
GENETIC COUNSELING: GTPCH1-deficient DRD is inherited in an autosomal dominant
manner. Affected individuals often have an affected parent with typical
GTPCH1-deficient DRD or adult-onset parkinsonism caused by a GCH1 pathogenic
variant. A proband with GTPCH1-deficient DRD may have the disorder as the result
of a de novo pathogenic variant. Every child of an individual with autosomal
dominant GTPCH1-deficient DRD has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic
variant. However, because of sex-related reduced penetrance (i.e., higher
penetrance in women than in men), it is not possible to predict whether
offspring with a GCH1 pathogenic variant will develop symptoms.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301681
