---
reference_id: "PMID:2931448"
title: Craniofacial and mucopolysaccharide abnormalities in Kniest dysplasia.
authors:
- Friede H
- Matalon R
- Harris V
- Rosenthal IM
journal: J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol
year: '1985'
keywords:
- Cephalometry
- Child
- "Facial Bones/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Glycosaminoglycans/urine
- Humans
- Keratan Sulfate/urine
- Male
- "Mucopolysaccharidoses/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- Radiography
- "Skull/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Craniofacial and mucopolysaccharide abnormalities in Kniest dysplasia.
**Authors:** Friede H, Matalon R, Harris V, Rosenthal IM
**Journal:** J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol (1985)

## Content

1. J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol. 1985;5(3):267-76.

Craniofacial and mucopolysaccharide abnormalities in Kniest dysplasia.

Friede H, Matalon R, Harris V, Rosenthal IM.

Serial roentgencephalograms of a male patient with Kniest dysplasia were 
obtained between 1 7/12 and 11 3/12 years of age and were analyzed and compared 
to cephalometric normative data. The patient displayed macrocephaly with 
increased size of the neurocranium in all three dimensions. The cranial base 
angle was significantly flattened, partly as a result of anterior displacement 
of the sella turcica. The odontoid process was short and wide. At 11 years of 
age there was bony fusion between the anterior arch of the atlas and the 
odontoid process as well as between the posterior arch of the atlas and the 
cranial base. The facial skeleton, including the nasal bones, infra-orbital 
rims, maxilla and mandible, was retropositioned relative to the anterior cranial 
base. The mandibular retrognathia was pronounced at an early age but improved 
with growth. At age 11 years the patient had a straight facial skeletal profile. 
Examination of the patient's 24-hour urinary excretion of keratan sulfate 
revealed values markedly elevated for his age. Three additional patients with 
Kniest dysplasia demonstrated similarly increased excretion of this 
glycosaminoglycan. The diagnosis of Kniest dysplasia can usually be made from 
roentgenograms of the extremities, the spine, and the pelvis. However, the 
morphologic characteristics of the head, as shown by cephalometric analysis, and 
the increased urinary excretion of keratan sulfate add confirmatory evidence 
useful in differential diagnosis.

PMID: 2931448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]