---
reference_id: "PMID:34519438"
title: Novel variants in KAT6B spectrum of disorders expand our knowledge of clinical manifestations and molecular mechanisms.
authors:
- Yabumoto M
- Kianmahd J
- Singh M
- Palafox MF
- Wei A
- Elliott K
- Goodloe DH
- Dean SJ
- Gooch C
- Murray BK
- Swartz E
- Schrier Vergano SA
- Towne MC
- Nugent K
- Roeder ER
- Kresge C
- Pletcher BA
- Grand K
- Graham JM Jr
- Gates R
- Gomez-Ospina N
- Ramanathan S
- Clark RD
- Glaser K
- Benke PJ
- Cohen JS
- Fatemi A
- Mu W
- Baranano KW
- Madden JA
- Gubbels CS
- Yu TW
- Agrawal PB
- Chambers MK
- Phornphutkul C
- Pugh JA
- Tauber KA
- Azova S
- Smith JR
- "O'Donnell-Luria A"
- Medsker H
- Srivastava S
- Krakow D
- Schweitzer DN
- Arboleda VA
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1809
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Alleles
- "Blepharophimosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Cohort Studies
- "Congenital Hypothyroidism/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- Facies
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Counseling
- Genetic Loci
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- Histone Acetyltransferases/genetics
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Joint Instability/diagnosis, genetics"
- Kidney/abnormalities
- Male
- Mutation
- Patella/abnormalities
- Phenotype
- "Psychomotor Disorders/diagnosis, genetics"
- Scrotum/abnormalities
- "Urogenital Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel variants in KAT6B spectrum of disorders expand our knowledge of clinical manifestations and molecular mechanisms.
**Authors:** Yabumoto M, Kianmahd J, Singh M, Palafox MF, Wei A, Elliott K, Goodloe DH, Dean SJ, Gooch C, Murray BK, Swartz E, Schrier Vergano SA, Towne MC, Nugent K, Roeder ER, Kresge C, Pletcher BA, Grand K, Graham JM Jr, Gates R, Gomez-Ospina N, Ramanathan S, Clark RD, Glaser K, Benke PJ, Cohen JS, Fatemi A, Mu W, Baranano KW, Madden JA, Gubbels CS, Yu TW, Agrawal PB, Chambers MK, Phornphutkul C, Pugh JA, Tauber KA, Azova S, Smith JR, O'Donnell-Luria A, Medsker H, Srivastava S, Krakow D, Schweitzer DN, Arboleda VA
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.1809](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.1809)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2021 Oct;9(10):e1809. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1809. Epub 2021
 Sep 14.

Novel variants in KAT6B spectrum of disorders expand our knowledge of clinical 
manifestations and molecular mechanisms.

Yabumoto M(1)(2), Kianmahd J(3), Singh M(1)(2), Palafox MF(1)(2), Wei A(2), 
Elliott K(2), Goodloe DH(4), Dean SJ(4), Gooch C(5), Murray BK(6), Swartz E(6), 
Schrier Vergano SA(6), Towne MC(7), Nugent K(8)(9), Roeder ER(8)(9), Kresge 
C(10), Pletcher BA(10), Grand K(11), Graham JM Jr(11), Gates R(12), Gomez-Ospina 
N(12), Ramanathan S(13), Clark RD(13), Glaser K(14), Benke PJ(14), Cohen 
JS(15)(16), Fatemi A(15)(16), Mu W(17), Baranano KW(16), Madden JA(18)(19), 
Gubbels CS(18), Yu TW(18), Agrawal PB(18)(19)(20), Chambers MK(21), Phornphutkul 
C(21), Pugh JA(22), Tauber KA(23), Azova S(24), Smith JR(24), O'Donnell-Luria 
A(18), Medsker H(25), Srivastava S(25), Krakow D(1)(26), Schweitzer DN(3), 
Arboleda VA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School 
of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(6)Division of Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital of The 
King's Daughters, Norfolk, Virginia, USA.
(7)Ambry Genetics Corp, Aliso Viejo, California, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, San Antonio, Texas, 
USA.
(9)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Genetics, Rutgers New Jersey 
Medical School, Newark, New Jersey, USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California, USA.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, Loma Linda 
University Children's Hospital, Loma Linda, California, USA.
(14)Division of Genetics, Joe DiMaggio Children's Hospital, Hollywood, Florida, 
USA.
(15)Department of Neurology and Developmental Medicine, Kennedy Krieger 
Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(16)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.
(17)Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.
(18)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(19)The Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(20)Division of Newborn Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(21)Division of Human Genetics, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University, Hasbro Children's Hospital/Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, Rhode 
Island, USA.
(22)Division of Child Neurology, Department of Neurology, Albany Medical Center, 
Albany, New York, USA.
(23)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Albany Medical Center, 
Bernard and Millie Duker Children's Hospital, Albany, New York, USA.
(24)Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(25)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(26)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.

The phenotypic variability associated with pathogenic variants in Lysine 
Acetyltransferase 6B (KAT6B, a.k.a. MORF, MYST4) results in several interrelated 
syndromes including Say-Barber-Biesecker-Young-Simpson Syndrome and 
Genitopatellar Syndrome. Here we present 20 new cases representing 10 novel 
KAT6B variants. These patients exhibit a range of clinical phenotypes including 
intellectual disability, mobility and language difficulties, craniofacial 
dysmorphology, and skeletal anomalies. Given the range of features previously 
described for KAT6B-related syndromes, we have identified additional phenotypes 
including concern for keratoconus, sensitivity to light or noise, recurring 
infections, and fractures in greater numbers than previously reported. We 
surveyed clinicians to qualitatively assess the ways families engage with 
genetic counselors upon diagnosis. We found that 56% (10/18) of individuals 
receive diagnoses before the age of 2 years (median age = 1.96 years), making it 
challenging to address future complications with limited accessible information 
and vast phenotypic severity. We used CRISPR to introduce truncating variants 
into the KAT6B gene in model cell lines and performed chromatin accessibility 
and transcriptome sequencing to identify key dysregulated pathways. This study 
expands the clinical spectrum and addresses the challenges to management and 
genetic counseling for patients with KAT6B-related disorders.

© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.1809
PMCID: PMC8580094
PMID: 34519438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.