---
reference_id: "PMID:30864557"
title: "Studying the Association between STAT4 Gene Polymorphism and Susceptibility to Rheumatoid Arthritis Disease: An Updated Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Ebrahimiyan H
- Mostafaei S
- Aslani S
- Jamshidi A
- Mahmoudi M
journal: Iran J Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.22034/IJI.2019.39408
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Studying the Association between STAT4 Gene Polymorphism and Susceptibility to Rheumatoid Arthritis Disease: An Updated Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Ebrahimiyan H, Mostafaei S, Aslani S, Jamshidi A, Mahmoudi M
**Journal:** Iran J Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.22034/IJI.2019.39408](https://doi.org/10.22034/IJI.2019.39408)

## Content

1. Iran J Immunol. 2019 Mar;16(1):71-83. doi: 10.22034/IJI.2019.39408.

Studying the Association between STAT4 Gene Polymorphism and Susceptibility to 
Rheumatoid Arthritis Disease: An Updated Meta-Analysis.

Ebrahimiyan H(1), Mostafaei S, Aslani S, Jamshidi A, Mahmoudi M.

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.

BACKGROUND: STAT4 is a transcription factor that plays a role in various 
cytokine signaling pathways and in T cell subsets differentiation. Several 
studies have reported STAT4 gene polymorphism in association with various 
autoimmune diseases.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluated the association between STAT4 rs7574865 SNP and RA risk 
by meta-analysis.
METHODS: Two major databases, namely Scopus and PubMed, were searched to find 
studies investigating the STAT4 polymorphism and RA in different populations up 
to November 2017. Association between STAT4 polymorphism and RA were analyzed 
using pooled odds ratio (OR) and their corresponding 95% CI.
RESULTS: In this meta-analysis, 21 population studies (16 papers) comprising 
15,732 cases and 15641 healthy subjects evaluating the STAT4 gene rs7574865 SNP 
were included based on inclusion criteria. Herein, we found a significant 
positive association between minor T allele as well as different genotypes with 
the risk of RA.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, this study revealed an association between STAT4 gene 
rs7574865 SNP and risk of RA.

DOI: 10.22034/IJI.2019.39408
PMID: 30864557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]