---
reference_id: "PMID:33158944"
title: The SARS-CoV-2 Conserved Macrodomain Is a Mono-ADP-Ribosylhydrolase.
authors:
- Alhammad YMO
- Kashipathy MM
- Roy A
- Gagné JP
- McDonald P
- Gao P
- Nonfoux L
- Battaile KP
- Johnson DK
- Holmstrom ED
- Poirier GG
- Lovell S
- Fehr AR
journal: J Virol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1128/JVI.01969-20
keywords:
- "Adenosine Diphosphate Ribose/chemistry, metabolism"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Coronavirus/chemistry, enzymology, metabolism"
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Humans
- Hydrolysis
- Kinetics
- "N-Glycosyl Hydrolases/chemistry, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Domains
- "SARS-CoV-2/chemistry, enzymology, metabolism"
- "Viral Nonstructural Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The SARS-CoV-2 Conserved Macrodomain Is a Mono-ADP-Ribosylhydrolase.
**Authors:** Alhammad YMO, Kashipathy MM, Roy A, Gagné JP, McDonald P, Gao P, Nonfoux L, Battaile KP, Johnson DK, Holmstrom ED, Poirier GG, Lovell S, Fehr AR
**Journal:** J Virol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.01969-20](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01969-20)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2021 Jan 13;95(3):e01969-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01969-20. Print 2021
Jan  13.

The SARS-CoV-2 Conserved Macrodomain Is a Mono-ADP-Ribosylhydrolase.

Alhammad YMO(1), Kashipathy MM(2), Roy A(3), Gagné JP(4)(5), McDonald P(3), Gao
P(6), Nonfoux L(4)(5), Battaile KP(7), Johnson DK(8), Holmstrom ED(1), Poirier
GG(4)(5), Lovell S(2), Fehr AR(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas,
USA.
(2)Protein Structure Laboratory, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, USA.
(3)High Throughput Screening Laboratory, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas,
USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Laval
University Cancer Research Center, Québec City, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Oncology Division, CHU de Québec Research Center, Québec City, Quebec,
Canada.
(6)Protein Production Group, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, USA.
(7)NYX, New York Structural Biology Center, Upton, New York, USA.
(8)Molecular Graphics and Modeling Laboratory and the Computational Chemical
Biology Core, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, USA.
(9)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas,
USA arfehr@ku.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2020 Oct 28:2020.05.11.089375. doi: 10.1101/2020.05.11.089375.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and other
SARS-related CoVs encode 3 tandem macrodomains within nonstructural protein 3
(nsp3). The first macrodomain, Mac1, is conserved throughout CoVs and binds to
and hydrolyzes mono-ADP-ribose (MAR) from target proteins. Mac1 likely counters
host-mediated antiviral ADP-ribosylation, a posttranslational modification that
is part of the host response to viral infections. Mac1 is essential for
pathogenesis in multiple animal models of CoV infection, implicating it as a
virulence factor and potential therapeutic target. Here, we report the crystal
structure of SARS-CoV-2 Mac1 in complex with ADP-ribose. SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV,
and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) Mac1 domains exhibit
similar structural folds, and all 3 proteins bound to ADP-ribose with affinities
in the low micromolar range. Importantly, using ADP-ribose-detecting binding
reagents in both a gel-based assay and novel enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
(ELISAs), we demonstrated de-MARylating activity for all 3 CoV Mac1 proteins,
with the SARS-CoV-2 Mac1 protein leading to a more rapid loss of substrate than
the others. In addition, none of these enzymes could hydrolyze poly-ADP-ribose.
We conclude that the SARS-CoV-2 and other CoV Mac1 proteins are MAR-hydrolases
with similar functions, indicating that compounds targeting CoV Mac1 proteins
may have broad anti-CoV activity.IMPORTANCE SARS-CoV-2 has recently emerged into
the human population and has led to a worldwide pandemic of COVID-19 that has
caused more than 1.2 million deaths worldwide. With no currently approved
treatments, novel therapeutic strategies are desperately needed. All
coronaviruses encode a highly conserved macrodomain (Mac1) that binds to and
removes ADP-ribose adducts from proteins in a dynamic posttranslational process
that is increasingly being recognized as an important factor that regulates
viral infection. The macrodomain is essential for CoV pathogenesis and may be a
novel therapeutic target. Thus, understanding its biochemistry and enzyme
activity are critical first steps for these efforts. Here, we report the crystal
structure of SARS-CoV-2 Mac1 in complex with ADP-ribose and describe its
ADP-ribose binding and hydrolysis activities in direct comparison to those of
SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV Mac1 proteins. These results are an important first step
for the design and testing of potential therapies targeting this unique protein
domain.

Copyright © 2021 Alhammad et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01969-20
PMCID: PMC7925111
PMID: 33158944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
