---
reference_id: "PMID:23534700"
title: Acral peeling skin syndrome resulting from a homozygous nonsense mutation in the CSTA gene encoding cystatin A.
authors:
- Krunic AL
- Stone KL
- Simpson MA
- McGrath JA
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/pde.12092
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Consanguinity
- Cystatin A/genetics
- "Dermatitis, Exfoliative/genetics, pathology"
- Family Health
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Pedigree
- "Pigmentation Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- Skin Diseases/congenital
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acral peeling skin syndrome resulting from a homozygous nonsense mutation in the CSTA gene encoding cystatin A.
**Authors:** Krunic AL, Stone KL, Simpson MA, McGrath JA
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.12092](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.12092)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2013 Sep-Oct;30(5):e87-8. doi: 10.1111/pde.12092. Epub 2013 
Mar 28.

Acral peeling skin syndrome resulting from a homozygous nonsense mutation in the 
CSTA gene encoding cystatin A.

Krunic AL(1), Stone KL, Simpson MA, McGrath JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois, 
Chicago, Illinois.

Acral peeling skin syndrome (APSS) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous 
disorder. We used whole-exome sequencing to identify the molecular basis of APSS 
in a consanguineous Jordanian-American pedigree. We identified a homozygous 
nonsense mutation (p.Lys22X) in the CSTA gene, encoding cystatin A, that was 
confirmed using Sanger sequencing. Cystatin A is a protease inhibitor found in 
the cornified cell envelope, and loss-of-function mutations have previously been 
reported in two cases of exfoliative ichthyosis. Our study expands the molecular 
pathology of APSS and demonstrates the value of next-generation sequencing in 
the genetic characterization of inherited skin diseases.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.12092
PMID: 23534700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]