---
reference_id: "PMID:27889061"
title: "Biallelic Mutations in MITF Cause Coloboma, Osteopetrosis, Microphthalmia, Macrocephaly, Albinism, and Deafness."
authors:
- George A
- Zand DJ
- Hufnagel RB
- Sharma R
- Sergeev YV
- Legare JM
- Rice GM
- Scott Schwoerer JA
- Rius M
- Tetri L
- Gamm DM
- Bharti K
- Brooks BP
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.004
keywords:
- Albinism/genetics
- Alleles
- Animals
- "Child, Preschool"
- Coloboma/genetics
- Deafness/genetics
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Megalencephaly/genetics
- Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor/genetics
- Microphthalmos/genetics
- Osteopetrosis/genetics
- Pedigree
- Syndrome
- "Zebrafish/embryology, genetics"
- Zebrafish Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic Mutations in MITF Cause Coloboma, Osteopetrosis, Microphthalmia, Macrocephaly, Albinism, and Deafness.
**Authors:** George A, Zand DJ, Hufnagel RB, Sharma R, Sergeev YV, Legare JM, Rice GM, Scott Schwoerer JA, Rius M, Tetri L, Gamm DM, Bharti K, Brooks BP
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.004)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Dec 1;99(6):1388-1394. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.004.
Epub 2016 Nov 23.

Biallelic Mutations in MITF Cause Coloboma, Osteopetrosis, Microphthalmia,
Macrocephaly, Albinism, and Deafness.

George A(1), Zand DJ(2), Hufnagel RB(1), Sharma R(3), Sergeev YV(1), Legare
JM(4), Rice GM(4), Scott Schwoerer JA(5), Rius M(1), Tetri L(4), Gamm DM(6),
Bharti K(3), Brooks BP(7).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA.
(3)Unit on Ocular and Stem Cell Translational Research, National Eye Institute,
NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, WI 53726, USA.
(5)McPherson Eye Research Institute and Department of Ophthalmology and Visual
Sciences, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison,
WI 53726, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, WI 53726, USA; McPherson Eye Research Institute and
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Wisconsin School
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53726, USA.
(7)Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA; Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC
20010, USA. Electronic address: brian.brooks1@nih.gov.

Comment in
    Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2017 May;30(3):280-281. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12575.

Human MITF is, by convention, called the "microphthalmia-associated
transcription factor" because of previously published seminal mouse genetic
studies; however, mutations in MITF have never been associated with
microphthalmia in humans. Here, we describe a syndrome that we term COMMAD,
characterized by coloboma, osteopetrosis, microphthalmia, macrocephaly,
albinism, and deafness. COMMAD is associated with biallelic MITF mutant alleles
and hence suggests a role for MITF in regulating processes such as optic-fissure
closure and bone development or homeostasis, which go beyond what is usually
seen in individuals carrying monoallelic MITF mutations.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.004
PMCID: PMC5142105
PMID: 27889061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
