---
reference_id: "PMID:38224710"
title: "Chemoprevention for malaria with monthly intermittent preventive treatment with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine in pregnant women living with HIV on daily co-trimoxazole in Kenya and Malawi: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial."
authors:
- Barsosio HC
- Madanitsa M
- Ondieki ED
- Dodd J
- Onyango ED
- Otieno K
- Wang D
- Hill J
- Mwapasa V
- Phiri KS
- Maleta K
- Taegtmeyer M
- Kariuki S
- Schmiegelow C
- Gutman JR
- Ter Kuile FO
journal: Lancet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02631-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chemoprevention for malaria with monthly intermittent preventive treatment with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine in pregnant women living with HIV on daily co-trimoxazole in Kenya and Malawi: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
**Authors:** Barsosio HC, Madanitsa M, Ondieki ED, Dodd J, Onyango ED, Otieno K, Wang D, Hill J, Mwapasa V, Phiri KS, Maleta K, Taegtmeyer M, Kariuki S, Schmiegelow C, Gutman JR, Ter Kuile FO
**Journal:** Lancet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02631-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02631-4)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2024 Jan 27;403(10424):365-378. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02631-4.
Epub  2024 Jan 12.

Chemoprevention for malaria with monthly intermittent preventive treatment with 
dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine in pregnant women living with HIV on daily 
co-trimoxazole in Kenya and Malawi: a randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial.

Barsosio HC(1), Madanitsa M(2), Ondieki ED(3), Dodd J(4), Onyango ED(3), Otieno 
K(3), Wang D(4), Hill J(4), Mwapasa V(5), Phiri KS(5), Maleta K(5), Taegtmeyer 
M(4), Kariuki S(6), Schmiegelow C(7), Gutman JR(8), Ter Kuile FO(9).

Author information:
(1)Kenya Medical Research Institute, Centre for Global Health Research, Kisumu, 
Kenya; Department of Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, UK. Electronic address: hbarsosio@kemri.go.ke.
(2)School of Global and Public Health, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences, 
Blantyre, Malawi; Academy of Medical Sciences, Malawi University of Science and 
Technology, Thyolo, Malawi.
(3)Kenya Medical Research Institute, Centre for Global Health Research, Kisumu, 
Kenya.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, UK.
(5)School of Global and Public Health, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences, 
Blantyre, Malawi.
(6)Kenya Medical Research Institute, Centre for Global Health Research, Kisumu, 
Kenya; Department of Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, UK.
(7)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Immunology and Microbiology, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Gynaecology and 
Obstetrics, Copenhagen University Hospital - North Zealand, Hillerød, Denmark.
(8)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, National Center 
for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(9)Kenya Medical Research Institute, Centre for Global Health Research, Kisumu, 
Kenya; Department of Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, UK. Electronic address: feiko.terkuile@lstmed.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2024 Jan 27;403(10424):327-330. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00048-5.

BACKGROUND: The efficacy of daily co-trimoxazole, an antifolate used for malaria 
chemoprevention in pregnant women living with HIV, is threatened by 
cross-resistance of Plasmodium falciparum to the antifolate 
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine. We assessed whether addition of monthly 
dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine to daily co-trimoxazole is more effective at 
preventing malaria infection than monthly placebo plus daily co-trimoxazole in 
pregnant women living with HIV.
METHODS: We did an individually randomised, two-arm, placebo-controlled trial in 
areas with high-grade sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine resistance in Kenya and Malawi. 
Pregnant women living with HIV on dolutegravir-based combination antiretroviral 
therapy (cART) who had singleton pregnancies between 16 weeks' and 28 weeks' 
gestation were randomly assigned (1:1) by computer-generated block 
randomisation, stratified by site and HIV status (known positive vs newly 
diagnosed), to daily co-trimoxazole plus monthly dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine 
(three tablets of 40 mg dihydroartemisinin and 320 mg piperaquine given daily 
for 3 days) or daily co-trimoxazole plus monthly placebo. Daily co-trimoxazole 
consisted of one tablet of 160 mg sulfamethoxazole and 800 mg trimethoprim. The 
primary endpoint was the incidence of Plasmodium infection detected in the 
peripheral (maternal) or placental (maternal) blood or tissue by PCR, 
microscopy, rapid diagnostic test, or placental histology (active infection) 
from 2 weeks after the first dose of dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine or placebo 
to delivery. Log-binomial regression was used for binary outcomes, and Poisson 
regression for count outcomes. The primary analysis was by modified intention to 
treat, consisting of all randomised eligible participants with primary endpoint 
data. The safety analysis included all women who received at least one dose of 
study drug. All investigators, laboratory staff, data analysts, and participants 
were masked to treatment assignment. This trial is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT04158713.
FINDINGS: From Nov 11, 2019, to Aug 3, 2021, 904 women were enrolled and 
randomly assigned to co-trimoxazole plus dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (n=448) 
or co-trimoxazole plus placebo (n=456), of whom 895 (99%) contributed to the 
primary analysis (co-trimoxazole plus dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine, n=443; 
co-trimoxazole plus placebo, n=452). The cumulative risk of any malaria 
infection during pregnancy or delivery was lower in the co-trimoxazole plus 
dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine group than in the co-trimoxazole plus placebo 
group (31 [7%] of 443 women vs 70 [15%] of 452 women, risk ratio 0·45, 95% CI 
0·30-0·67; p=0·0001). The incidence of any malaria infection during pregnancy or 
delivery was 25·4 per 100 person-years in the co-trimoxazole plus 
dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine group versus 77·3 per 100 person-years in the 
co-trimoxazole plus placebo group (incidence rate ratio 0·32, 95% CI 0·22-0·47, 
p<0·0001). The number needed to treat to avert one malaria infection per 
pregnancy was 7 (95% CI 5-10). The incidence of serious adverse events was 
similar between groups in mothers (17·7 per 100 person-years in the 
co-trimoxazole plus dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine group [23 events] vs 17·8 per 
100 person-years in the co-trimoxazole group [25 events]) and infants (45·4 per 
100 person-years [23 events] vs 40·2 per 100 person-years [21 events]). Nausea 
within the first 4 days after the start of treatment was reported by 29 (7%) of 
446 women in the co-trimoxazole plus dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine group versus 
12 (3%) of 445 women in the co-trimoxazole plus placebo group. The risk of 
adverse pregnancy outcomes did not differ between groups.
INTERPRETATION: Addition of monthly intermittent preventive treatment with 
dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine to the standard of care with daily unsupervised 
co-trimoxazole in areas of high antifolate resistance substantially improves 
malaria chemoprevention in pregnant women living with HIV on dolutegravir-based 
cART and should be considered for policy.
FUNDING: European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership 2; UK 
Joint Global Health Trials Scheme (UK Foreign, Commonwealth and Development 
Office; Medical Research Council; National Institute for Health Research; 
Wellcome); and Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 
Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02631-4
PMCID: PMC10865779
PMID: 38224710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests We declare no competing 
interests.