---
reference_id: "PMID:24480143"
title: "Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis and pulmonary sarcoidosis: differentiation from usual interstitial pneumonia using high-resolution computed tomography."
authors:
- Jeong YJ
- Lee KS
- Chung MP
- Han J
- Johkoh T
- Ichikado K
journal: Semin Ultrasound CT MR
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1053/j.sult.2013.10.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis and pulmonary sarcoidosis: differentiation from usual interstitial pneumonia using high-resolution computed tomography.
**Authors:** Jeong YJ, Lee KS, Chung MP, Han J, Johkoh T, Ichikado K
**Journal:** Semin Ultrasound CT MR (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.sult.2013.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.sult.2013.10.006)

## Content

1. Semin Ultrasound CT MR. 2014 Feb;35(1):47-58. doi: 10.1053/j.sult.2013.10.006.
 Epub 2013 Oct 17.

Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis and pulmonary sarcoidosis: differentiation 
from usual interstitial pneumonia using high-resolution computed tomography.

Jeong YJ(1), Lee KS(2), Chung MP(3), Han J(4), Johkoh T(5), Ichikado K(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Pusan National University Hospital, Pusan National 
University School of Medicine and Medical Research Institute, Pusan, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Department of Radiology and Center for Imaging Science, Samsung Medical 
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
Electronic address: kyungs.lee@samsung.com.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Radiology, Kinki Central Hospital Mutual Add Association of 
Public School Teachers, Itami, Japan.
(6)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Saiseikai Kumamoto Hospital, Kumamoto, 
Japan.

The distinction of chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) or advanced-stage 
sarcoidosis from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis or usual interstitial pneumonia 
is important because each disease is managed differently and may have a 
different prognosis. The analyses of pattern and distribution of lung 
parenchymal abnormalities on high-resolution computed tomography scans help 
differentiate among the 3 diseases. In chronic HP, the presence of lobular areas 
of decreased attenuation and centrilobular small nodules and the absence of 
lower lung zone predominance are characteristically observed. In advanced-stage 
sarcoidosis, patchy areas of reticulation, traction bronchiectasis, 
architectural distortion, honeycomblike cysts, bullae, and paracicatricial 
emphysema are observed in the upper and middle lung zones. Lung bases are 
usually spared. In idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis or usual interstitial 
pneumonia, however, the presence of honeycombing with lower lung zone 
predominance and the absence of centrilobular small nodules are important 
findings that allow us to differentiate the disease from chronic HP or 
advanced-stage sarcoidosis. In the 3 diseases, most important 
prognosis-predicting factor is the extent of fibrotic score (the extent of 
honeycombing and reticulation) calculated on high-resolution computed tomography 
scans or fibrosis estimated on chest radiographs.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.sult.2013.10.006
PMID: 24480143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]