---
reference_id: "PMID:39339000"
title: "HPV and Penile Cancer: Epidemiology, Risk Factors, and Clinical Insights."
authors:
- Mannam G
- Miller JW
- Johnson JS
- Gullapalli K
- Fazili A
- Spiess PE
- Chahoud J
journal: Pathogens
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/pathogens13090809
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Papillomaviridae/pathogenicity
- "Papillomavirus Infections/epidemiology, virology, complications, immunology"
- "Penile Neoplasms/epidemiology, immunology, therapy, virology"
- Risk Factors
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HPV and Penile Cancer: Epidemiology, Risk Factors, and Clinical Insights.
**Authors:** Mannam G, Miller JW, Johnson JS, Gullapalli K, Fazili A, Spiess PE, Chahoud J
**Journal:** Pathogens (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/pathogens13090809](https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens13090809)

## Content

1. Pathogens. 2024 Sep 18;13(9):809. doi: 10.3390/pathogens13090809.

HPV and Penile Cancer: Epidemiology, Risk Factors, and Clinical Insights.

Mannam G(1), Miller JW(1), Johnson JS(2), Gullapalli K(2), Fazili A(2), Spiess 
PE(2), Chahoud J(2).

Author information:
(1)USF Health Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL 33602, USA.
(2)Department of Genitourinary Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and 
Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Penile cancer (PC) is a rare malignancy predominantly of squamous cell origin. 
Approximately 40% of penile tumors are associated with human papillomavirus 
(HPV) infection. Diagnosing PC remains challenging due to its rarity and variety 
of clinical presentations. Furthermore, the impact of HPV on the tumor immune 
microenvironment complicates clinical management, although recent advancements 
in immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have shown some efficacy in treating 
HPV-associated PC. Ongoing research efforts aim to develop oncologic treatments 
that target HPV-induced cellular modifications. Additionally, novel therapeutic 
vaccines and adoptive T-cell therapies targeting HPV oncoproteins represent 
emerging treatment modalities. Our review highlights the complex interplay 
between HPV and penile carcinogenesis, emphasizing its epidemiology, etiology, 
clinicopathological characteristics, and potential therapeutic implications.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens13090809
PMCID: PMC11434800
PMID: 39339000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.