---
reference_id: "PMID:40857262"
title: Differential tropisms of old and new world hantaviruses influence virulence and developing host-directed antiviral candidates.
authors:
- Jeyachandran AV
- Irudayam JI
- Dubey S
- Chakravarty N
- Daskou M
- Zaiss A
- Garcia G
- Konda B
- Shah A
- Venkatraman A
- Su B
- Wang C
- Cui Q
- Williams KJ
- Srikanth S
- Kumar A
- Shi Y
- Deb A
- Damoiseaux R
- Stripp BR
- Ramaiah A
- Arumugaswami V
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013401
keywords:
- Humans
- Antiviral Agents/pharmacology
- "Viral Tropism/physiology, drug effects"
- "Orthohantavirus/pathogenicity, physiology, drug effects"
- Animals
- Endothelial Cells/virology
- Virulence
- "Hantavirus Infections/virology, drug therapy"
- Organoids/virology
- Lung/virology
- "Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential tropisms of old and new world hantaviruses influence virulence and developing host-directed antiviral candidates.
**Authors:** Jeyachandran AV, Irudayam JI, Dubey S, Chakravarty N, Daskou M, Zaiss A, Garcia G, Konda B, Shah A, Venkatraman A, Su B, Wang C, Cui Q, Williams KJ, Srikanth S, Kumar A, Shi Y, Deb A, Damoiseaux R, Stripp BR, Ramaiah A, Arumugaswami V
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1013401](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1013401)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2025 Aug 26;21(8):e1013401. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013401. 
eCollection 2025 Aug.

Differential tropisms of old and new world hantaviruses influence virulence and 
developing host-directed antiviral candidates.

Jeyachandran AV(1), Irudayam JI(1), Dubey S(1), Chakravarty N(1)(2)(3), Daskou 
M(1), Zaiss A(1), Garcia G(1), Konda B(4), Shah A(1), Venkatraman A(1), Su 
B(5)(6), Wang C(7), Cui Q(7), Williams KJ(5)(6), Srikanth S(8), Kumar A(9), Shi 
Y(7), Deb A(10)(11), Damoiseaux R(1)(11)(12)(13), Stripp BR(4), Ramaiah A(14), 
Arumugaswami V(1)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of California, 
Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, University of California, Los Angeles, 
California, United States of America.
(3)School of Medicine, California University of Science and Medicine, Colton, 
California, United States of America.
(4)Department of Medicine, Lung and Board of Governors Regenerative Medicine 
Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, United States 
of America.
(5)Department of Biological Chemistry, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(6)UCLA Lipidomics Lab, University of California, Los Angeles, California, 
United States of America.
(7)Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Beckman Research Institute of City 
of Hope, Duarte, California, United States of America.
(8)Department of Physiology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Visual and Anatomical Sciences, Wayne State 
University, Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.
(10)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(11)Eli & Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, 
UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(12)California NanoSystems Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United 
States of America.
(13)Department of Bioengineering, Samueli School of Engineering, UCLA, Los 
Angeles, California, United States of America.
(14)City of Milwaukee Health Department, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of 
America.

Hantaviruses are zoonotically transmitted from rodents to humans through the 
respiratory route, with no currently approved antivirals or widely available 
vaccines. The recent discovery of interhuman-transmitted Andes virus (ANDV) 
necessitates the systematic identification of cell tropism, infective potential, 
and potent therapeutic agents. We utilized human primary lung endothelial cells, 
various pluripotent stem cell-derived heart and brain cell types, and 
established human lung organoid models to evaluate the tropisms of Old World 
Hantaan (HTNV) and New World ANDV and Sin Nombre (SNV) viruses. ANDV exhibited 
broad tropism for all cell types assessed. SNV readily infected pulmonary 
endothelial cells, while HTNV robustly amplified in endothelial cells, 
cardiomyocytes, and astrocytes. We also provide the first evidence of hantaviral 
infection in human 3D distal lung organoids, which effectively modeled these 
differential tropisms. ANDV infection transcriptionally promoted cell injury and 
inflammatory responses, and downregulated lipid metabolic pathways in lung 
epithelial cells. Evaluation of selected drug candidates and 
pharmacotranscriptomics revealed that the host-directed small molecule compound 
urolithin B inhibited ANDV infection and restored cellular metabolism with 
minimal changes in host transcription. Given the scarcity of academic BSL-4 
facilities that enable in vivo hantaviral studies, this investigation presents 
advanced human cell-based model systems that closely recapitulate host cell 
tropism and responses to infection, thereby providing critical platforms to 
evaluate potential antiviral drug candidates.

Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be 
freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise 
used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the 
Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013401
PMCID: PMC12380290
PMID: 40857262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.