---
reference_id: "PMID:12144896"
title: Rabies re-examined.
authors:
- Rupprecht CE
- Hanlon CA
- Hemachudha T
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00287-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rabies re-examined.
**Authors:** Rupprecht CE, Hanlon CA, Hemachudha T
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00287-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00287-6)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2002 Jun;2(6):327-43. doi: 10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00287-6.

Rabies re-examined.

Rupprecht CE(1), Hanlon CA, Hemachudha T.

Author information:
(1)Rabies Section, WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on 
Rabies, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA. 
CYR5@CDC.GOV

Rabies is an acute, progressive, incurable viral encephalitis. The causative 
agents are neurotropic RNA viruses in the family Rhabdoviridae, genus 
Lyssavirus. Mammalian reservoirs include the Carnivora and Chiroptera, but rabid 
dogs still pose the greatest hazard worldwide. Viral transmission occurs mainly 
via animal bite, and once the virus is deposited in peripheral wounds, 
centripetal passage occurs towards the central nervous system. After viral 
replication, there is centrifugal spread to major exit portals, the salivary 
glands. The epidemiological significance of any host "carrier" state remains 
highly speculative. Although incubation periods average 1-3 months, disease 
occurrence days or years after exposure has been documented. Rabies should be 
suspected in patients with a concomitant history of animal bite and traditional 
clinical presentation, but a lack of such clues makes antemortem diagnosis a 
challenge. Pathogenetic mechanisms remain poorly understood, and current care 
entails palliative measures only. Current medical emphasis relies heavily on 
prevention of exposure and intervention before clinical onset. Prophylaxis 
encompasses thorough wound treatment, vaccine administration, and inoculation of 
rabies immunoglobulin. Although it is a major zoonosis, canine rabies can be 
eliminated, and application of new vaccine technologies permits significant 
disease control among wildlife species. Nevertheless, despite much technical 
progress in the past century, rabies is a disease of neglect and presents a 
modern public-health conundrum.

DOI: 10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00287-6
PMID: 12144896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]