---
reference_id: "PMID:34572893"
title: "ALK-Negative Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma: Current Concepts and Molecular Pathogenesis of a Heterogeneous Group of Large T-Cell Lymphomas."
authors:
- Pina-Oviedo S
- Ortiz-Hidalgo C
- Carballo-Zarate AA
- Zarate-Osorno A
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cancers13184667
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALK-Negative Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma: Current Concepts and Molecular Pathogenesis of a Heterogeneous Group of Large T-Cell Lymphomas.
**Authors:** Pina-Oviedo S, Ortiz-Hidalgo C, Carballo-Zarate AA, Zarate-Osorno A
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers13184667](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13184667)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Sep 17;13(18):4667. doi: 10.3390/cancers13184667.

ALK-Negative Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma: Current Concepts and Molecular
Pathogenesis of a Heterogeneous Group of Large T-Cell Lymphomas.

Pina-Oviedo S(1), Ortiz-Hidalgo C(2), Carballo-Zarate AA(3), Zarate-Osorno A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little
Rock, AR 72205, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hospital Médica Sur, Mexico City 14050, Mexico.
(3)Department of Pathology, Hospital Español, Mexico City 11520, Mexico.

Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is a subtype of CD30+ large T-cell
lymphoma (TCL) that comprises ~2% of all adult non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Based on
the presence/absence of the rearrangement and expression of anaplastic lymphoma
kinase (ALK), ALCL is divided into ALK+ and ALK-, and both differ clinically and
prognostically. This review focuses on the historical points, clinical features,
histopathology, differential diagnosis, and relevant cytogenetic and molecular
alterations of ALK- ALCL and its subtypes: systemic, primary cutaneous
(pc-ALCL), and breast implant-associated (BIA-ALCL). Recent studies have
identified recurrent genetic alterations in this TCL. In systemic ALK- ALCL,
rearrangements in DUSP22 and TP63 are detected in 30% and 8% of cases,
respectively, while the remaining cases are negative for these rearrangements. A
similar distribution of these rearrangements is seen in pc-ALCL, whereas none
have been detected in BIA-ALCL. Additionally, systemic ALK- ALCL-apart from
DUSP22-rearranged cases-harbors JAK1 and/or STAT3 mutations that result in the
activation of the JAK/STAT signaling pathway. The JAK1/3 and STAT3 mutations
have also been identified in BIA-ALCL but not in pc-ALCL. Although the
pathogenesis of these alterations is not fully understood, most of them have
prognostic value and open the door to the use of potential targeted therapies
for this subtype of TCL.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13184667
PMCID: PMC8472588
PMID: 34572893

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
