---
reference_id: "PMID:20301326"
title: "Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy, Autosomal Dominant – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Toomes C
- Downey L
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy, Autosomal Dominant – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Toomes C, Downey L

## Content

1. Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy, Autosomal Dominant – RETIRED CHAPTER,
FOR  HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.

Toomes C(1), Downey L(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 Mar 21 [updated 2011 Sep 22].

Author information:
(1)Royal Society Principal Research Fellow, Honorary Associate Professor, 
Section of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, Leeds Institute of Molecular 
Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom
(2)Consultant in Ophthalmology, Hull Royal Infirmary, Kingston upon Hull, United 
Kingdom

NOTE: THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN RETIRED. THIS ARCHIVAL VERSION IS FOR HISTORICAL 
REFERENCE ONLY, AND THE INFORMATION MAY BE OUT OF DATE.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Autosomal dominant familial exudative 
vitreoretinopathy (adFEVR) is characterized by failure of peripheral retinal 
vascularization. The visual problems and variable phenotype associated with 
adFEVR result from secondary complications caused by retinal ischemia. The 
retinal avascularity is probably present from birth and generates sequelae that 
stabilize in early adult life or progress in later life. Expressivity may be 
asymmetric and is highly variable, ranging from mild or asymptomatic to severe 
(e.g., registered as blind) within the same family.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of adFEVR is based on a family history 
compatible with autosomal dominant inheritance and bilateral peripheral retinal 
avascularity, seen temporally, by indirect ophthalmoscope and scleral 
indentation, or by fundus fluorescein angiography. Pathogenic variants in one of 
three genes are known to be associated with adFEVR: FZD4, encoding the protein 
frizzled-4; LRP5, encoding low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5; 
and TSPAN12, encoding tetraspanin-12. Pathogenic variants in these genes are 
responsible for fewer than 50% of adFEVR cases. Another locus, EVR3, has been 
mapped; the gene is not known.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Prophylactic cryotherapy or argon laser 
photocoagulation to induce regression of new vessel growth caused by ischemia 
resulting from retinal avascularity; treatment is similar for retinal holes and 
areas of retinal exudate to prevent retinal detachment; rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachments produced by retinal traction are repaired surgically using 
conventional methods and exudative retinal detachments may be stabilized with 
cryotherapy, but prognosis is guarded for both. Prevention of secondary 
complications: Reduced bone density would be expected to benefit from drugs used 
to treat osteoporosis; however, long-term follow-up data are not yet available. 
Surveillance: Regular fundus examination in children to evaluate for 
neovascularization, traction, or exudate; review of individuals with retinal 
traction at intervals determined by the clinical findings. Evaluation of 
relatives at risk: Fundus examination and fundus fluorescein angiography to 
identify characteristic lesions to allow early treatment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Autosomal dominant FEVR is inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. Offspring of an affected individual are at a 50% risk of 
inheriting the pathogenic variant, but many individuals with adFEVR can be 
asymptomatic because of reduced penetrance. Prenatal testing is possible if the 
pathogenic variant has been identified in the family.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301326