---
reference_id: "PMID:16882280"
title: "Spinal tuberculosis: overlooked?"
authors:
- Abou-Raya S
- Abou-Raya A
journal: J Intern Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2006.01675.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal tuberculosis: overlooked?
**Authors:** Abou-Raya S, Abou-Raya A
**Journal:** J Intern Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2796.2006.01675.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2006.01675.x)

## Content

1. J Intern Med. 2006 Aug;260(2):160-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2006.01675.x.

Spinal tuberculosis: overlooked?

Abou-Raya S(1), Abou-Raya A.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Unit, Internal Medicine Department, University of Alexandria, 
Alexandria, Egypt. suzanraya@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to ascertain the degree of 
occurrence of tuberculous infection in patients presenting with low back pain 
(LBP).
METHODS: Forty consecutive patients seeking primary medical attention for the 
main symptom of LBP and presenting to the Rheumatology Outpatient Clinic of our 
institution from January 2004 to June 2005, were recruited in this cohort study. 
All patients were thoroughly interrogated (occupational, trauma, infection, 
diabetes mellitus and medication history), subjected to a rigorous clinical 
examination and a battery of investigations
RESULTS: Twelve of the 40 patients (33%) proved to have spinal TB as the cause 
of backache. Eight of these patients were above the age of 65. Five of the 12 
patients with spinal TB also had concomitant osteoarthritic changes of the spine 
and two patients had concomitant disc prolapse. Eleven of the 12 patients with 
spinal TB had a completely normal chest X-ray and in 10 of these patients the 
plain X-ray of the lumbosacral region failed to show any significant lesion. In 
all 12 patients, sputum analysis failed to reveal acid-fast bacilli.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study indicate that TB is a common cause of 
LBP that is liable to be overlooked in the differential diagnosis of LBP. 
Furthermore, evidence of concurrent active intrathoracic TB may be lacking and 
consequently a high level of suspicion is required. The need for prompt 
diagnosis and treatment of skeletal TB is of utmost importance to prevent 
serious bone and joint destruction and severe neurological sequelae. A reliable 
imaging modality for diagnosing spinal TB seems to be magnetic resonance 
imaging.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2006.01675.x
PMID: 16882280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]