---
reference_id: "PMID:19761357"
title: "Benzoyl peroxide: a review of its current use in the treatment of acne vulgaris."
authors:
- Sagransky M
- Yentzer BA
- Feldman SR
journal: Expert Opin Pharmacother
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1517/14656560903277228
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Benzoyl peroxide: a review of its current use in the treatment of acne vulgaris.
**Authors:** Sagransky M, Yentzer BA, Feldman SR
**Journal:** Expert Opin Pharmacother (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1517/14656560903277228](https://doi.org/10.1517/14656560903277228)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2009 Oct;10(15):2555-62. doi: 
10.1517/14656560903277228.

Benzoyl peroxide: a review of its current use in the treatment of acne vulgaris.

Sagransky M(1), Yentzer BA, Feldman SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Center 
for Dermatology Research, Winston-Salem, NC 27157-1071, USA.

BACKGROUND: Owing to the use of topical and systemic antibiotics for acne 
vulgaris, the incidence of antibiotic-resistant Propionibacterium acnes is 
increasing worldwide. Topical benzoyl peroxide (BPO) is an alternative to 
antibiotics in the treatment of acne vulgaris.
OBJECTIVE: This review describes and evaluates recent clinical literature 
regarding the efficacy and tolerability of BPO.
METHODS: A PubMed literature search was conducted using the keywords benzoyl 
peroxide, acne, and combination therapy.
RESULTS: BPO is equally effective at concentrations of 2.5, 5.0 and 10%. 
However, a concentration-dependent irritant dermatitis can occur with higher 
concentrations. The efficacy of BPO can be enhanced when used in combination 
with topical retinoids, antibiotics and tertiary amines. BPO-containing 
combinations do not induce bacterial resistance and are important first-line 
treatments for mild to moderate acne vulgaris.

DOI: 10.1517/14656560903277228
PMID: 19761357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]