---
reference_id: "PMID:24517326"
title: "Pathological mitochondrial copper overload in livers of Wilson's disease patients and related animal models."
authors:
- Zischka H
- Lichtmannegger J
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/nyas.12347
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathological mitochondrial copper overload in livers of Wilson's disease patients and related animal models.
**Authors:** Zischka H, Lichtmannegger J
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nyas.12347](https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.12347)

## Content

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2014 May;1315:6-15. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12347. Epub 2014 Feb
12.

Pathological mitochondrial copper overload in livers of Wilson's disease 
patients and related animal models.

Zischka H(1), Lichtmannegger J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Toxicology and Pharmacology, Helmholtz Center Munich, 
German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.

In Wilson's disease (WD) and related animal models, liver mitochondria are 
confronted with an increasing copper burden. Physiologically, the mitochondrial 
matrix may act as a dynamic copper buffer that efficiently distributes the metal 
to its copper-dependent enzymes. Mitochondria are the first responders in the 
event of an imbalanced copper homeostasis, as typical changes of their structure 
are among the earliest observable pathological features in WD. These changes are 
due to accumulating copper in the mitochondrial membranes and can be reversed by 
copper-chelating therapies. At the early stage, copper-dependent oxidative 
stress does not seem to occur. On the contrary, however, when copper is 
massively deposited in mitochondria, severe structural and respiratory 
impairments are observed upon disease progression. This provokes reactive oxygen 
species and consequently causes the mitochondrial membranes to disintegrate, 
which triggers hepatocyte death. Thus, in WD mitochondria are prime targets for 
copper, and the excessive copper burden causes their destruction, subsequently 
provoking tissue failure and death.

© 2014 New York Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.12347
PMID: 24517326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]