---
reference_id: "PMID:22234484"
title: "Triggers for attacks in familial Mediterranean fever: application of the case-crossover design."
authors:
- Yenokyan G
- Armenian HK
journal: Am J Epidemiol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/aje/kwr460
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Triggers for attacks in familial Mediterranean fever: application of the case-crossover design.
**Authors:** Yenokyan G, Armenian HK
**Journal:** Am J Epidemiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/aje/kwr460](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwr460)

## Content

1. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 May 15;175(10):1054-61. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwr460. Epub
2012  Jan 10.

Triggers for attacks in familial Mediterranean fever: application of the 
case-crossover design.

Yenokyan G(1), Armenian HK.

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins Biostatistics Center, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, 615 North Wolfe Street, E-3153, Baltimore, MD 21205-2179, USA. 
gyenokya@jhsph.edu

The etiology of recurrent attacks of serositis in familial Mediterranean fever 
(FMF) is not completely understood. Uncontrolled clinical case series have 
reported that factors associated with emotional, physiological, or physical 
stress precede and might trigger the attacks. This case-crossover study, 
conducted between July 2007 and May 2008, aimed to estimate the role of 
precipitating factors in attacks in a sample of Armenian FMF patients in 
Yerevan, Armenia, where 104 patients contributed 55 case and 189 control time 
periods. The authors used conditional logistic regression to compare frequency 
of exposure to stressful events, strenuous physical activity, menstrual periods, 
and high-fat food consumption prior to FMF attacks and on attack-free random 
days. Multiple stressful life events predicted FMF attacks 2 days following the 
event. After adjustment for treatment, an additional stressful event was 
associated with an estimated 70% increase in the odds of having an FMF attack on 
the second day (95% confidence interval: 1.04, 2.79). High levels of perceived 
stress were also associated with FMF attacks. Physical exertion and high-fat 
diet did not increase the likelihood of FMF attacks. The possibility of 
prevention of attacks in FMF needs to be tested through stress-reduction 
interventions.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwr460
PMID: 22234484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]