---
reference_id: "PMID:29669547"
title: "Cutaneous lupus erythematosus in dogs: a comprehensive review."
authors:
- Olivry T
- Linder KE
- Banovic F
journal: BMC Vet Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12917-018-1446-8
keywords:
- Animals
- "Dog Diseases/classification, diagnosis, pathology"
- Dogs
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Cutaneous/classification, diagnosis, pathology, veterinary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous lupus erythematosus in dogs: a comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Olivry T, Linder KE, Banovic F
**Journal:** BMC Vet Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12917-018-1446-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12917-018-1446-8)

## Content

1. BMC Vet Res. 2018 Apr 18;14(1):132. doi: 10.1186/s12917-018-1446-8.

Cutaneous lupus erythematosus in dogs: a comprehensive review.

Olivry T(1)(2), Linder KE(3)(4), Banovic F(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 27606, USA. tolivry@ncsu.edu.
(2)Comparative Medicine Institute, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC,
USA. tolivry@ncsu.edu.
(3)Comparative Medicine Institute, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC,
USA.
(4)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(5)Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.

Since the first description of discoid lupus erythematosus (LE) in two dogs in
1979, the spectrum of canine cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CLE) variants has
expanded markedly.In this review, we first propose an adaptation of the
Gilliam-Sontheimer classification of CLE for dogs. We then review the
signalment, clinical signs, laboratory and histopathology and treatment outcome
of the currently recognized variants of canine CLE, which are vesicular CLE,
exfoliative CLE, mucocutaneous LE and facial or generalized discoid LE. We end
with a short description of the rare cutaneous manifestations of systemic LE in
dogs.Canine CLE variants are heterogeneous, some of them mirror their human
counterparts while others appear-thus far-unique to the dog. As most CLE
subtypes seem to have a good prognosis after diagnosis, veterinarians are
encouraged to become familiar with the spectrum of often-characteristic and
unique clinical signs that would permit an early diagnosis and the rapid
implementation of an effective treatment.

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-018-1446-8
PMCID: PMC5907183
PMID: 29669547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: not
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE:
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
