---
reference_id: "PMID:36571866"
title: "Childhood Dementia: A Collective Clinical Approach to Advance Therapeutic Development and Care."
authors:
- Djafar JV
- Johnson AM
- Elvidge KL
- Farrar MA
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2022.11.015
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Dementia/therapy, complications, pathology"
- Cognitive Dysfunction/complications
- Anxiety Disorders/complications
- Sleep
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Childhood Dementia: A Collective Clinical Approach to Advance Therapeutic Development and Care.
**Authors:** Djafar JV, Johnson AM, Elvidge KL, Farrar MA
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2022.11.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2022.11.015)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2023 Feb;139:76-85. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2022.11.015. 
Epub 2022 Dec 1.

Childhood Dementia: A Collective Clinical Approach to Advance Therapeutic 
Development and Care.

Djafar JV(1), Johnson AM(1), Elvidge KL(2), Farrar MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Paediatrics and Child Health, School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW 
Medicine and Health, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia; Department of 
Neurology, Sydney Children's Hospital Network, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Childhood Dementia Initiative, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Discipline of Paediatrics and Child Health, School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW 
Medicine and Health, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia; Department of 
Neurology, Sydney Children's Hospital Network, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 
Electronic address: m.farrar@unsw.edu.au.

Childhood dementias are a group of over 100 rare and ultra-rare pediatric 
conditions that are clinically characterized by chronic global neurocognitive 
decline. This decline is associated with a progressive loss of skills and 
shortened life expectancy. With an estimated incidence of one in 2800 births and 
less than 5% of the conditions having disease-modifying therapies, the impact is 
profound for patients and their families. Traditional research, care, and 
advocacy efforts have focused on individual disorders, or groups classified by 
molecular pathogenesis, and this has established robust foundations for further 
progress and collaboration. This review describes the shared and 
disease-specific clinical changes contributing to childhood dementia and 
considers these as potential indicators of underlying pathophysiologic 
processes. Like adult neurodegenerative syndromes, the heterogeneous phenotypes 
extend beyond cognitive decline and may involve changes in eating, motor 
function, pain, sleep, and behavior, mediated by physiological changes in neural 
networks. Importantly, these physiological phenotypes are associated with 
significant carer stress, anxiety, and challenges in care. These phenotypes are 
also pertinent for the development of therapeutics and optimization of best 
practice management. A collective approach to childhood dementia is anticipated 
to identify relevant biomarkers of prognosis or therapeutic efficacy, streamline 
the path from preclinical studies to clinical trials, increase opportunities for 
the development of multiple therapeutics, and refine clinical care.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2022.11.015
PMID: 36571866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]