---
reference_id: "PMID:31422399"
title: "Autosomal Dominant Tubulointerstitial Kidney Disease Due to UMOD Mutation: A Two-Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Liang D
- Liang S
- Zhang M
- Gao E
- Zhang Z
- Jin Y
- Xu F
- Zeng C
journal: Nephron
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1159/000502146
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Gout/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Hyperuricemia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Kidney/metabolism, pathology"
- "Kidney Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Nephritis, Interstitial/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Uromodulin/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal Dominant Tubulointerstitial Kidney Disease Due to UMOD Mutation: A Two-Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Liang D, Liang S, Zhang M, Gao E, Zhang Z, Jin Y, Xu F, Zeng C
**Journal:** Nephron (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000502146](https://doi.org/10.1159/000502146)

## Content

1. Nephron. 2019;143(4):282-287. doi: 10.1159/000502146. Epub 2019 Aug 16.

Autosomal Dominant Tubulointerstitial Kidney Disease Due to UMOD Mutation: A
Two-Case Report and Literature Review.

Liang D(1), Liang S(1), Zhang M(1), Gao E(1), Zhang Z(1), Jin Y(1), Xu F(1),
Zeng C(2).

Author information:
(1)National Clinical Research Center of Kidney Diseases, Jinling Hospital,
Nanjing University, School of Medicine, Nanjing, China.
(2)National Clinical Research Center of Kidney Diseases, Jinling Hospital,
Nanjing University, School of Medicine, Nanjing, China, zengch_nj@hotmail.com.

Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease due to UMOD (encoding
uromodulin) mutation (ADTKD-UMOD) is a rare hereditary disease. In the present
study, we reported 2 ADTKD cases with confirmed UMOD mutations (Arg185His,
Trp258Gly) by gene testing. They were young men and presented with hyperuricemia
and renal dysfunction with no hematuria or proteinuria. Renal histology showed
chronic tubulointerstitial nephropathy with fibrillar inclusions in the cells of
distal tubules. Electron microscopy illustrated extensive bundled and cystic
endoplasmic reticulum. Immunohistological analysis confirmed intracytoplasmic
aggregates of uromodulin in the distal tubules. Since ADTKD-UMOD is an
underdiagnosed disease, electron microscopy and immunohistochemical staining for
uromodulin are helpful in the diagnosis of ADTKD-UMOD and genetic analysis is
the gold standard.

© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000502146
PMID: 31422399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
