---
reference_id: "PMID:21325462"
title: High prevalence of RAS mutations in RET-negative sporadic medullary thyroid carcinomas.
authors:
- Moura MM
- Cavaco BM
- Pinto AE
- Leite V
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1921
keywords:
- Calcitonin/blood
- "Carcinoma, Medullary/genetics, pathology"
- Codon/genetics
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- "Genes, ras/genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High prevalence of RAS mutations in RET-negative sporadic medullary thyroid carcinomas.
**Authors:** Moura MM, Cavaco BM, Pinto AE, Leite V
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2010-1921](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2010-1921)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 May;96(5):E863-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1921.
Epub  2011 Feb 16.

High prevalence of RAS mutations in RET-negative sporadic medullary thyroid 
carcinomas.

Moura MM(1), Cavaco BM, Pinto AE, Leite V.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigação de Patobiologia Molecular, Instituto Português de 
Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil E.P.E., Rua Prof. Lima Basto, 1099-023 
Lisboa, Portugal. mmoura@ipolisboa.min-saude.pt

CONTEXT: Sporadic medullary thyroid carcinomas (MTC) frequently harbor mutations 
in the RET protooncogene. We have earlier reported a series of 51 sporadic MTC 
with 64.7% of RET-positive and 35.3% of RET-negative cases.
OBJECTIVE: In the present study, we investigated the possible involvement of RAS 
and BRAF protooncogenes in the development of sporadic RET-negative MTC.
PATIENTS AND DESIGN: We performed PCR amplification and sequencing analysis of 
the three mutational hotspots (codons 12, 13, and 61) of the H-, K-, and N-RAS 
genes, and of the mutational hotspot (codon 600) and exon 11 of the BRAF gene in 
65 sporadic MTC, of which 40 were RET positive and 25 were RET negative.
RESULTS: Somatic H-RAS and K-RAS mutations were detected in 14 of 25 (56.0%) and 
three of 25 (12.0%) of RET-negative sporadic MTC, respectively. On the other 
hand, only one of 40 (2.5%) RET-positive sporadic MTC had a RAS mutation, namely 
in H-RAS. One of the H-RAS mutations was novel (c.32_37dupCCGGCG). No mutations 
of N-RAS or BRAF were detected in all assessed tumor samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our results showed that RAS mutations were present in 
68.0% (17 of 25) of the RET-negative MTC and in only 2.5% of the RET-positive 
MTC (P < 0.0001), suggesting that activation of the protooncogenes RAS and RET 
represents alternative genetic events in sporadic MTC tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2010-1921
PMID: 21325462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]