---
reference_id: "PMID:31272578"
title: Ulcerative Colitis.
authors:
- Feuerstein JD
- Moss AC
- Farraye FA
journal: Mayo Clin Proc
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2019.01.018
keywords:
- "Colitis, Ulcerative/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Colon/pathology
- Humans
- Inflammation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ulcerative Colitis.
**Authors:** Feuerstein JD, Moss AC, Farraye FA
**Journal:** Mayo Clin Proc (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mayocp.2019.01.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2019.01.018)

## Content

1. Mayo Clin Proc. 2019 Jul;94(7):1357-1373. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2019.01.018.

Ulcerative Colitis.

Feuerstein JD(1), Moss AC(2), Farraye FA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Electronic 
address: jfeuerst@bidmc.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine and Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(3)Department of Medicine and Section of Gastroenterology, Boston Medical 
Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA.

Erratum in
    Mayo Clin Proc. 2019 Oct;94(10):2149. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2019.08.008.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease that can involve 
any aspect of the colon starting with mucosal inflammation in the rectum and 
extending proximally in a continuous fashion. Typical symptoms on presentation 
are bloody diarrhea, abdominal pain, fecal urgency, and tenesmus. In some 
patients, extraintestinal manifestations may predate the onset of 
gastrointestinal symptoms. A diagnosis of UC is made on the basis of presenting 
symptoms consistent with UC as well as endoscopic evidence showing continuous 
and diffuse colonic inflammation that starts in the rectum. Biopsies of the 
colon documenting chronic inflammation confirm the diagnosis of UC. Most cases 
are treated with pharmacological therapy to first induce remission and then to 
maintain a corticosteroid-free remission. There are multiple classes of drugs 
used to treat the disease. For mild to moderate UC, oral and rectal 
5-aminosalycilates are typically used. In moderate to severe colitis, medication 
classes include thiopurines, biological agents targeting tumor necrosis factor 
and integrins, and the small-molecule Janus kinase inhibitors. However, in up to 
15% of cases, patients in whom medical therapy fails or who have development of 
dysplasia secondary to their long-standing colitis will require surgical 
treatment. Finally, to minimize the complications of UC and adverse events from 
medications, a working collaboration between primary care physicians and 
gastroenterologists is necessary to make sure that vaccinations are optimized 
and that patients are screened for colon cancer, skin cancer, bone loss, 
depression, and other treatable and preventable complications.

Copyright © 2019 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. Published 
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2019.01.018
PMID: 31272578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]