---
reference_id: "PMID:31585094"
title: Oligodendrocyte Death in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease Is Rescued by Iron Chelation.
authors:
- Nobuta H
- Yang N
- Ng YH
- Marro SG
- Sabeur K
- Chavali M
- Stockley JH
- Killilea DW
- Walter PB
- Zhao C
- Huie P Jr
- Goldman SA
- Kriegstein AR
- Franklin RJM
- Rowitch DH
- Wernig M
journal: Cell Stem Cell
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2019.09.003
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Deferiprone/therapeutic use
- Ferroptosis
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/drug effects, physiology, transplantation"
- Iron/metabolism
- Iron Chelating Agents/therapeutic use
- Lipid Peroxidation
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Myelin Proteolipid Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Oligodendroglia/drug effects, physiology, transplantation"
- "Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Stem Cell Transplantation
- Targeted Gene Repair
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oligodendrocyte Death in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease Is Rescued by Iron Chelation.
**Authors:** Nobuta H, Yang N, Ng YH, Marro SG, Sabeur K, Chavali M, Stockley JH, Killilea DW, Walter PB, Zhao C, Huie P Jr, Goldman SA, Kriegstein AR, Franklin RJM, Rowitch DH, Wernig M
**Journal:** Cell Stem Cell (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.stem.2019.09.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2019.09.003)

## Content

1. Cell Stem Cell. 2019 Oct 3;25(4):531-541.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2019.09.003.

Oligodendrocyte Death in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease Is Rescued by Iron 
Chelation.

Nobuta H(1), Yang N(2), Ng YH(2), Marro SG(2), Sabeur K(1), Chavali M(1), 
Stockley JH(3), Killilea DW(4), Walter PB(5), Zhao C(6), Huie P Jr(7), Goldman 
SA(8), Kriegstein AR(9), Franklin RJM(6), Rowitch DH(10), Wernig M(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration 
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(2)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, 
UK; Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Hills 
Road, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, CA 94609, USA.
(5)UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland, Oakland, CA 94609, USA; Department 
of Biology, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada.
(6)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, 
Cambridge, UK; Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of 
Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK.
(7)Department of Surgical Pathology, Stanford Health Care, Palo Alto, CA 94305, 
USA.
(8)Center for Translational Neuromedicine, University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA; Center for Translational Neuromedicine, 
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration 
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of Neurology, Eli and Edythe Broad Center 
of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration 
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, Eli and Edythe Broad 
Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK; Department of 
Paediatrics, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK; Wellcome-MRC 
Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, 
UK. Electronic address: dhr25@medschl.cam.ac.uk.
(11)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Department of Pathology, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic 
address: wernig@stanford.edu.

Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is an X-linked leukodystrophy caused by 
mutations in Proteolipid Protein 1 (PLP1), encoding a major myelin protein, 
resulting in profound developmental delay and early lethality. Previous work 
showed involvement of unfolded protein response (UPR) and endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress pathways, but poor PLP1 genotype-phenotype associations suggest 
additional pathogenetic mechanisms. Using induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) 
and gene-correction, we show that patient-derived oligodendrocytes can develop 
to the pre-myelinating stage, but subsequently undergo cell death. Mutant 
oligodendrocytes demonstrated key hallmarks of ferroptosis including lipid 
peroxidation, abnormal iron metabolism, and hypersensitivity to free iron. Iron 
chelation rescued mutant oligodendrocyte apoptosis, survival, and 
differentiationin vitro, and post-transplantation in vivo. Finally, systemic 
treatment of Plp1 mutant Jimpy mice with deferiprone, a small molecule iron 
chelator, reduced oligodendrocyte apoptosis and enabled myelin formation. Thus, 
oligodendrocyte iron-induced cell death and myelination is rescued by iron 
chelation in PMD pre-clinical models.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2019.09.003
PMCID: PMC8282124
PMID: 31585094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing interests.