---
reference_id: "PMID:17627511"
title: Brittle type 1 diabetes mellitus.
authors:
- Bertuzzi F
- Verzaro R
- Provenzano V
- Ricordi C
journal: Curr Med Chem
year: '2007'
doi: 10.2174/092986707781058922
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brittle type 1 diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Bertuzzi F, Verzaro R, Provenzano V, Ricordi C
**Journal:** Curr Med Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2174/092986707781058922](https://doi.org/10.2174/092986707781058922)

## Content

1. Curr Med Chem. 2007;14(16):1739-44. doi: 10.2174/092986707781058922.

Brittle type 1 diabetes mellitus.

Bertuzzi F(1), Verzaro R, Provenzano V, Ricordi C.

Author information:
(1)Mediterranean Institute for Transplantation and Advanced Specialized 
Therapies, Palermo, Italy. fbertuzzi@ismett.edu

A small group of patients affected by type 1 diabetes mellitus is characterized 
by a severe instability of glycemic values with frequent and unpredictable 
hypoglycemic and/or ketoacidosis episodes which cannot be explained by errors of 
patients or diabetologists. The quality of life of these patients is 
dramatically compromised in particular because of the frequency of acute events, 
hospital recoveries and precocious appearance of chronic complications. This 
clinical condition has been defined as "brittle diabetes". A precise 
quantification of these patients is difficult because diagnostic criteria are 
still not well defined and it is often difficult to verify errors of patients in 
terms of inappropriate conduct with the pathology. Even more than the other 
kinds of diabetes, therapy is based on education, glycemic control, intensive 
therapy and strict interaction between physicians and patients. The introduction 
of insulin analogous, with either ultra-fast and ultra-slow action and the use 
of subcutaneous insulin pumps have significantly increased the possibility of 
treating the most of these cases. However, there is a minority of patients 
resistant to the therapy. In similar cases, pancreas or islet transplantation 
represents an effective therapeutic option entailing good expected outcomes. The 
main limiting factor of beta cell function replacement by transplantation is so 
far represented by the potentially severe side effects of the immunosuppression 
therapy necessary to avoid graft rejection and recurrence of autoimmunity.

DOI: 10.2174/092986707781058922
PMID: 17627511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]