---
reference_id: "PMID:30541925"
title: "Roles of the endoplasmic reticulum-resident, collagen-specific molecular chaperone Hsp47 in vertebrate cells and human disease."
authors:
- Ito S
- Nagata K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.TM118.002812
keywords:
- Animals
- "Collagen/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Embryo Loss/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
- Fibrosis
- "HSP47 Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "HSP70 Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "HSP90 Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Repetitive Sequences, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Roles of the endoplasmic reticulum-resident, collagen-specific molecular chaperone Hsp47 in vertebrate cells and human disease.
**Authors:** Ito S, Nagata K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.TM118.002812](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.TM118.002812)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Feb 8;294(6):2133-2141. doi: 10.1074/jbc.TM118.002812. Epub 
2018 Dec 12.

Roles of the endoplasmic reticulum-resident, collagen-specific molecular 
chaperone Hsp47 in vertebrate cells and human disease.

Ito S(1), Nagata K(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute for Protein Dynamics.
(2)From the Institute for Protein Dynamics, nagata@cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, and.
(4)CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kyoto Sangyo University, Kyoto 
603-8555, Japan.

Heat shock protein 47 (Hsp47) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident 
molecular chaperone essential for correct folding of procollagen in mammalian 
cells. In this Review, we discuss the role and function of Hsp47 in vertebrate 
cells and its role in connective tissue disorders. Hsp47 binds to collagenous 
(Gly-Xaa-Arg) repeats within triple-helical procollagen in the ER and can 
prevent its local unfolding or aggregate formation, resulting in accelerating 
triple-helix formation of procollagen. Hsp47 pH-dependently dissociates from 
procollagen in the cis-Golgi or ER-Golgi intermediate compartment and is then 
transported back to the ER. Although Hsp47 belongs to the serine protease 
inhibitor (serpin) superfamily, it does not possess serine protease inhibitory 
activity. Whereas general molecular chaperones such as Hsp70 and Hsp90 exhibit 
broad substrate specificity, Hsp47 has narrower specificity mainly for 
procollagens. However, other Hsp47-interacting proteins have been recently 
reported, suggesting a much broader role for Hsp47 in the cell that warrants 
further investigation. Other ER-resident stress proteins, such as binding 
immunoglobulin protein (BiP), are induced by ER stress, whereas Hsp47 is induced 
only by heat shock. Constitutive expression of Hsp47 is always correlated with 
expression of various collagen types, and disruption of the Hsp47 gene in mice 
causes embryonic lethality due to impaired basement membrane and collagen fibril 
formation. Increased Hsp47 expression is associated with collagen-related 
disorders such as fibrosis, characterized by abnormal collagen accumulation, 
highlighting Hsp47's potential as a clinically relevant therapeutic target.

© 2019 Ito and Nagata.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.TM118.002812
PMCID: PMC6369284
PMID: 30541925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article