---
reference_id: "PMID:14976552"
title: "LKB1 is a master kinase that activates 13 kinases of the AMPK subfamily, including MARK/PAR-1."
authors:
- Lizcano JM
- Göransson O
- Toth R
- Deak M
- Morrice NA
- Boudeau J
- Hawley SA
- Udd L
- Mäkelä TP
- Hardie DG
- Alessi DR
journal: EMBO J
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600110
keywords:
- AMP-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases
- AMP-Activated Protein Kinases
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport/genetics, metabolism"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cell Line
- Enzyme Activation
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Multienzyme Complexes/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Peptides/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein Subunits/genetics, metabolism"
- Substrate Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LKB1 is a master kinase that activates 13 kinases of the AMPK subfamily, including MARK/PAR-1.
**Authors:** Lizcano JM, Göransson O, Toth R, Deak M, Morrice NA, Boudeau J, Hawley SA, Udd L, Mäkelä TP, Hardie DG, Alessi DR
**Journal:** EMBO J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7600110](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7600110)

## Content

1. EMBO J. 2004 Feb 25;23(4):833-43. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600110. Epub 2004 Feb
 19.

LKB1 is a master kinase that activates 13 kinases of the AMPK subfamily,
including MARK/PAR-1.

Lizcano JM(1), Göransson O, Toth R, Deak M, Morrice NA, Boudeau J, Hawley SA,
Udd L, Mäkelä TP, Hardie DG, Alessi DR.

Author information:
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of
Dundee, Dundee, UK.

We recently demonstrated that the LKB1 tumour suppressor kinase, in complex with
the pseudokinase STRAD and the scaffolding protein MO25, phosphorylates and
activates AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). A total of 12 human kinases
(NUAK1, NUAK2, BRSK1, BRSK2, QIK, QSK, SIK, MARK1, MARK2, MARK3, MARK4 and MELK)
are related to AMPK. Here we demonstrate that LKB1 can phosphorylate the T-loop
of all the members of this subfamily, apart from MELK, increasing their activity
>50-fold. LKB1 catalytic activity and the presence of MO25 and STRAD are
required for activation. Mutation of the T-loop Thr phosphorylated by LKB1 to
Ala prevented activation, while mutation to glutamate produced active forms of
many of the AMPK-related kinases. Activities of endogenous NUAK2, QIK, QSK, SIK,
MARK1, MARK2/3 and MARK4 were markedly reduced in LKB1-deficient cells. Neither
LKB1 activity nor that of AMPK-related kinases was stimulated by phenformin or
AICAR, which activate AMPK. Our results show that LKB1 functions as a master
upstream protein kinase, regulating AMPK-related kinases as well as AMPK.
Between them, these kinases may mediate the physiological effects of LKB1,
including its tumour suppressor function.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600110
PMCID: PMC381014
PMID: 14976552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
