---
reference_id: "PMID:30604443"
title: Hyaluronic acid fillers for correcting midface volume deficit in Barraquer-Simons syndrome.
authors:
- Afra TP
- Vinay K
- Razmi T M
- Narang T
- Dogra S
journal: J Cosmet Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/jocd.12847
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyaluronic acid fillers for correcting midface volume deficit in Barraquer-Simons syndrome.
**Authors:** Afra TP, Vinay K, Razmi T M, Narang T, Dogra S
**Journal:** J Cosmet Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jocd.12847](https://doi.org/10.1111/jocd.12847)

## Content

1. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2019 Oct;18(5):1264-1266. doi: 10.1111/jocd.12847. Epub
2019  Jan 3.

Hyaluronic acid fillers for correcting midface volume deficit in 
Barraquer-Simons syndrome.

Afra TP(1), Vinay K(1), Razmi T M(1), Narang T(1), Dogra S(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology, Venereology and Leprology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical 
Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.

BACKGROUND: Barraquer-Simons syndrome (BSS) or acquired partial lipodystrophy is 
a disorder of loss of subcutaneous fat from the upper part of the body. The 
resulting cosmetic disfigurement causes significant psychological distress in 
the affected individuals. Fillers, autologous fat transplant or cosmetic 
surgeries can be used to correct the volume deficit.
METHODS: The authors report a case of a young woman, who presented with gradual 
loss of subcutaneous fat from the face, upper limbs, and trunk. On evaluation, 
she had low complement C3 levels, but there were no features to suggest any 
metabolic complication. She was diagnosed with BSS. Her volume deficit in the 
midface area was managed with hyaluronic acid (HA) filler.
RESULTS: The treatment has resulted in the correction of her facial volume loss 
immediately following the procedure with a maintained effect at follow-up 
visits. She experienced no major adverse events.
CONCLUSION: Hyaluronic acid filler is safe and effective for the management of 
volume loss in BSS. It gives a long lasting result and an added self-confidence 
to the patient.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/jocd.12847
PMID: 30604443