---
reference_id: "PMID:39899372"
title: Genotype-Based Molecular Mechanisms in Alport Syndrome.
authors:
- Caparali EB
- De Gregorio V
- Barua M
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.0000000647
keywords:
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics"
- Humans
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Animals
- Genotype
- Autoantigens/genetics
- Mice
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-Based Molecular Mechanisms in Alport Syndrome.
**Authors:** Caparali EB, De Gregorio V, Barua M
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.0000000647](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.0000000647)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2025 Jun 1;36(6):1176-1183. doi: 10.1681/ASN.0000000647.
Epub  2025 Feb 3.

Genotype-Based Molecular Mechanisms in Alport Syndrome.

Caparali EB(1)(2)(3), De Gregorio V(2), Barua M(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas,
Texas.
(2)Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Division of Nephrology, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Alport syndrome is an inherited disorder characterized by kidney disease,
sensorineural hearing loss, and ocular abnormalities. Alport syndrome is caused
by pathogenic variants in COL4A3 , COL4A4 , or COL4A5 , which encode the α 3, α
4, and α 5 chains of type 4 collagen that forms a heterotrimer expressed in the
glomerular basement membrane. Knowledge of its genetic basis has informed the
development of different models in dogs, mice, and rats that reflect its
autosomal and X-linked inheritance patterns as well as different mutation types,
including protein-truncating and missense variants. A key difference between
these two types is the synthesis of α 3 α 4 α 5(IV), which is not made in
autosomal Alport syndrome (two pathogenic variants in trans or biallelic) or
male patients with X-linked Alport syndrome due to protein-truncating variants.
By contrast, α 3 α 4 α 5(IV) is synthesized in Alport syndrome because of
missense variants. For missense variants, in vitro studies suggest that these
cause impaired type 4 collagen trafficking and endoplasmic reticulum stress. For
protein-truncating variants, knockout models suggest that persistence of an
immature α 1 α 1 α 2(IV) network is associated with biomechanical strain, which
activates endothelin-A receptors leading to mesangial filopodia formation.
Moreover, studies suggest that activation of collagen receptors, integrins and
discoidin domain receptor 1, play a role in disease propagation. In this review,
we provide an overview of how these genotype-phenotype mechanisms are key for a
precision medicine-based approach in the future.

Copyright © 2025 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.0000000647
PMCID: PMC12147967
PMID: 39899372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure forms, as provided by each author,
are available with the online version of the article at
http://links.lww.com/JSN/F60.
