---
reference_id: "PMID:28685491"
title: The Prevalence of PMM2-CDG in Estonia Based on Population Carrier Frequencies and Diagnosed Patients.
authors:
- Vals MA
- Pajusalu S
- Kals M
- Mägi R
- Õunap K
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2017_41
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Prevalence of PMM2-CDG in Estonia Based on Population Carrier Frequencies and Diagnosed Patients.
**Authors:** Vals MA, Pajusalu S, Kals M, Mägi R, Õunap K
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2017_41](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2017_41)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2018;39:13-17. doi: 10.1007/8904_2017_41. Epub 2017 Jul 7.

The Prevalence of PMM2-CDG in Estonia Based on Population Carrier Frequencies
and Diagnosed Patients.

Vals MA(1)(2)(3), Pajusalu S(4)(5), Kals M(6), Mägi R(6), Õunap K(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. mari-anne.vals@kliinikum.ee.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. mari-anne.vals@kliinikum.ee.
(3)Children's Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
mari-anne.vals@kliinikum.ee.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(6)Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

PMM2-CDG (MIM#212065) is the most common type of congenital disorders of
glycosylation (CDG) caused by mutations in PMM2 (MIM#601785). In Estonia, five
patients from three families have been diagnosed with PMM2-CDG. Our aim was to
evaluate the presence of different PMM2-CDG-causing mutations in a
population-based cohort and to calculate the expected frequency of PMM2-CDG in
Estonia. Also, we analyzed the prevalence of PMM2-CDG based on our patient group
data. To calculate the expected frequency of PMM2-CDG, we used the whole genome
sequencing data of 2,244 participants from biobank of the Estonian Genome
Center, University of Tartu. Nineteen individuals carried mutated PMM2 alleles
and altogether, five different mutations were identified. The observed carrier
frequency for all PMM2 disease-causing mutations was thus 1/118, and for the
most frequent mutation p.R141H, 1/224. The expected frequency of the disease in
Estonian population is 1/77,000. It is comparable to the current prevalence of
PMM2-CDG for the less than 18 years age group, which is 1/79,000. In conclusion,
the frequency of PMM2-CDG in Estonia is lower than in other European populations
reported thus far. We demonstrate that biobank data can be useful for gaining
new information about the epidemiology of the PMM2-CDG.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2017_41
PMCID: PMC5953896
PMID: 28685491
