---
reference_id: "PMID:26794321"
title: Disease invasion risk in a growing population.
authors:
- Yuan S
- van den Driessche P
- Willeboordse FH
- Shuai Z
- Ma J
journal: J Math Biol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00285-015-0962-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease invasion risk in a growing population.
**Authors:** Yuan S, van den Driessche P, Willeboordse FH, Shuai Z, Ma J
**Journal:** J Math Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00285-015-0962-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00285-015-0962-4)

## Content

1. J Math Biol. 2016 Sep;73(3):665-81. doi: 10.1007/s00285-015-0962-4. Epub 2016 
Jan 21.

Disease invasion risk in a growing population.

Yuan S(1), van den Driessche P(2), Willeboordse FH(3), Shuai Z(4), Ma J(5).

Author information:
(1)College of Science, Shanghai University for Science and Technology, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Victoria, Victoria, 
BC, Canada.
(3)University Scholars Programme, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(4)Department of Mathematics, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, 32816, 
USA.
(5)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Victoria, Victoria, 
BC, Canada. junlingm@uvic.ca.

The spread of an infectious disease may depend on the population size. For 
simplicity, classic epidemic models assume homogeneous mixing, usually standard 
incidence or mass action. For standard incidence, the contact rate between any 
pair of individuals is inversely proportional to the population size, and so the 
basic reproduction number (and thus the initial exponential growth rate of the 
disease) is independent of the population size. For mass action, this contact 
rate remains constant, predicting that the basic reproduction number increases 
linearly with the population size, meaning that disease invasion is easiest when 
the population is largest. In this paper, we show that neither of these may be 
true on a slowly evolving contact network: the basic reproduction number of a 
short epidemic can reach its maximum while the population is still growing. The 
basic reproduction number is proportional to the spectral radius of a contact 
matrix, which is shown numerically to be well approximated by the average excess 
degree of the contact network. We base our analysis on modeling the dynamics of 
the average excess degree of a random contact network with constant population 
input, proportional deaths, and preferential attachment for contacts brought in 
by incoming individuals (i.e., individuals with more contacts attract more 
incoming contacts). In addition, we show that our result also holds for uniform 
attachment of incoming contacts (i.e., every individual has the same chance of 
attracting incoming contacts), and much more general population dynamics. Our 
results show that a disease spreading in a growing population may evade control 
if disease control planning is based on the basic reproduction number at maximum 
population size.

DOI: 10.1007/s00285-015-0962-4
PMID: 26794321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]