---
reference_id: "PMID:23022303"
title: A review of the role of electrocardiography in the diagnosis of left ventricular hypertrophy in hypertension.
authors:
- Schillaci G
- Battista F
- Pucci G
journal: J Electrocardiol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2012.08.051
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of the role of electrocardiography in the diagnosis of left ventricular hypertrophy in hypertension.
**Authors:** Schillaci G, Battista F, Pucci G
**Journal:** J Electrocardiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2012.08.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2012.08.051)

## Content

1. J Electrocardiol. 2012 Nov-Dec;45(6):617-23. doi: 
10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2012.08.051. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

A review of the role of electrocardiography in the diagnosis of left ventricular 
hypertrophy in hypertension.

Schillaci G(1), Battista F, Pucci G.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale, and Ospedale S Maria, Unità 
di Medicina Interna, Università degli Studi di Perugia, Terni, Italy. 
skill@unipg.it

ECG remains the first line method for detection of left ventricular hypertrophy 
(LVH) in patients with hypertension. ECG diagnosis of LVH predicts a 
several-fold increase in age- and risk factor-adjusted cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality in asymptomatic patients with essential hypertension. When 
compared with traditional ECG methods, Cornell voltage product and 
multifactorial criteria such as the Perugia criterion allow detection of LVH in 
a higher proportion of subjects while carrying a high attributable risk for 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Hence, traditional interpretation of 
standard ECG maintains an important role for cardiovascular risk stratification 
in hypertension.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2012.08.051
PMID: 23022303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]