---
reference_id: PMID:30633901
title: "Biological Functions of Autophagy Genes: A Disease Perspective."
authors:
- Levine B
- Kroemer G
journal: Cell
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.048
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autophagy/genetics, physiology"
- "Autophagy-Related Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Proteins/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Biological Functions of Autophagy Genes: A Disease Perspective.
**Authors:** Levine B, Kroemer G
**Journal:** Cell (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.048](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.048)

## Content

1. Cell. 2019 Jan 10;176(1-2):11-42. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.048.

Biological Functions of Autophagy Genes: A Disease Perspective.

Levine B(1), Kroemer G(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Autophagy Research, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA; Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address: 
beth.levine@utsouthwestern.edu.
(2)Equipe 11 labellisée par la Ligue contre le Cancer, Centre de Recherche des 
Cordeliers, 75006 Paris, France; Cell Biology and Metabolomics platforms, 
Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, 94805 Villejuif, France; INSERM, U1138, 75006 
Paris, France; Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75006 Paris, 
France; Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Sorbonne Université, 75006 Paris, 
France; Pôle de Biologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, 75015 Paris, 
France; Karolinska Institute, Department of Women's and Children's Health, 
Karolinska University Hospital, 17176 Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: 
kroemer@orange.fr.

The lysosomal degradation pathway of autophagy plays a fundamental role in 
cellular, tissue, and organismal homeostasis and is mediated by evolutionarily 
conserved autophagy-related (ATG) genes. Definitive etiological links exist 
between mutations in genes that control autophagy and human disease, especially 
neurodegenerative, inflammatory disorders and cancer. Autophagy selectively 
targets dysfunctional organelles, intracellular microbes, and pathogenic 
proteins, and deficiencies in these processes may lead to disease. Moreover, ATG 
genes have diverse physiologically important roles in other membrane-trafficking 
and signaling pathways. This Review discusses the biological functions of 
autophagy genes from the perspective of understanding-and potentially 
reversing-the pathophysiology of human disease and aging.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.048
PMCID: PMC6347410
PMID: 30633901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT B.L. is a 
scientific co-founder of Casma Therapeutics, Inc. G.K. is a scientific 
co-founder of Samsara Therapeutics, Ltd.