---
reference_id: "PMID:2682125"
title: "[Review: endemic treponematoses are not always eradicated]."
authors:
- De Schryver A
- Meheus A
journal: Med Trop (Mars)
year: '1989'
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pinta/drug therapy, epidemiology, prevention & control"
- "Treponemal Infections/drug therapy, epidemiology, prevention & control"
- "Yaws/drug therapy, epidemiology, prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Review: endemic treponematoses are not always eradicated].
**Authors:** De Schryver A, Meheus A
**Journal:** Med Trop (Mars) (1989)

## Content

1. Med Trop (Mars). 1989 Jul-Sep;49(3):237-44.

[Review: endemic treponematoses are not always eradicated].

[Article in French]

De Schryver A(1), Meheus A.

Author information:
(1)Programme des Maladies Sexuellement Transmissibles, Organisation Mondiale de
la Santé, Genève, Suisse.

Yaws and other endemic treponematoses (bejel or endemic syphilis, pinta) are
resurging in many countries of the tropical belt. Today there are more than 2.5
million cases of these diseases, 75% of them in children. More than 100 million
additional children are at risk for these disabling and disfiguring infections
which destroy tissue and bone. In the 1950's and 1960's, through concerted
efforts and leadership of UNICEF and WHO, more than 50 million individuals in 46
countries were cured and the diseases were brought under control or even
eliminated from large parts of the world. Despite the success, endemic foci
remained and in the last years there has been an alarming resurgence of the
endemic treponematoses, in particular in parts of West and Central Africa.
Endemic treponematosis control is based on treatment with single-dose penicillin
of the entire treponemal reservoir. No instances of penicillin-resistance have
been documented and these infections should be eliminated while the organisms
still remain sensitive to penicillin. An endemic treponematosis control
programme must be fully integrated into the primary health care system and the
persistence of endemic treponematoses in an area is an indicator of the failing
effectiveness of primary health care.

PMID: 2682125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
