---
reference_id: "PMID:19172410"
title: "Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency: clinical features, drug therapy and follow-up."
authors:
- Manegold C
- Hoffmann GF
- Degen I
- Ikonomidou H
- Knust A
- Laass MW
- Pritsch M
- Wilichowski E
- Hörster F
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-009-1076-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Antiparkinson Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Aromatic-L-Amino-Acid Decarboxylases/deficiency, genetics"
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- "Brain Diseases, Metabolic, Inborn/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cholinergic Antagonists/administration & dosage"
- "Dopamine Agonists/administration & dosage"
- Drug Combinations
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- "Levodopa/administration & dosage"
- Male
- "Models, Biological"
- "Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors/administration & dosage"
- Radiography
- Retrospective Studies
- "Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/administration & dosage"
- "Vitamin B 6/administration & dosage"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency: clinical features, drug therapy and follow-up.
**Authors:** Manegold C, Hoffmann GF, Degen I, Ikonomidou H, Knust A, Laass MW, Pritsch M, Wilichowski E, Hörster F
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-009-1076-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-009-1076-1)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2009 Jun;32(3):371-80. doi: 10.1007/s10545-009-1076-1.
Epub  2009 Jan 28.

Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency: clinical features, drug therapy
and follow-up.

Manegold C(1), Hoffmann GF, Degen I, Ikonomidou H, Knust A, Laass MW, Pritsch M,
Wilichowski E, Hörster F.

Author information:
(1)Division of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, University Children's Hospital, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 430, Heidelberg D-69120, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) deficiency is a disorder
of biogenic amine metabolism resulting in generalized combined deficiency of
serotonin, dopamine and catecholamines. Main clinical features are developmental
delay, muscular hypotonia, dystonia, oculogyric crises and additional
extraneurological symptoms. Response to therapy has been variable and
unsatisfactory; the overall prognosis is guarded.
METHODS: To gain more insight into this rare disorder we collected clinical and
laboratory data of nine German patients. All patients were clinically examined
by one investigator, and their responses to different drug regimes were
evaluated by the patients' charts.
RESULTS: Symptoms were obvious from early infancy. Later, main neurological
features were truncal muscular hypotonia, hypokinesia, oculogyric crises and
rigor. Three patients had single seizures. All patients presented distinct
extraneurological symptoms, such as hypersalivation, hyperhidrosis, nasal
congestion, sleep disturbances and hypoglycaemia. In CSF all patients revealed
the pattern typical of AADC with decreased concentrations of homovanillic and
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid and elevated concentration of 3-ortho-methyldopa.
Diagnosis was confirmed by measurement of AADC activity in plasma in all
patients. Drug regimes consisted of vitamin B6, dopamine agonists, MAO
inhibitors and anticholinergics in different combinations. No patient achieved a
complete recovery from neurological symptoms, but partial improvement of
mobility and mood could be achieved in some.
CONCLUSION: AADC deficiency is a severe neurometabolic disorder, characterized
by muscular hypotonia, dystonia, oculogyric crises and additional
extraneurological symptoms. Medical treatment is challenging, but a systematic
trial of the different drugs is worthwhile.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-009-1076-1
PMID: 19172410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
