---
reference_id: "PMID:24577120"
title: "Follistatin in chondrocytes: the link between TRPV4 channelopathies and skeletal malformations."
authors:
- Leddy HA
- McNulty AL
- Lee SH
- Rothfusz NE
- Gloss B
- Kirby ML
- Hutson MR
- Cohn DH
- Guilak F
- Liedtke W
journal: FASEB J
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1096/fj.13-245936
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/embryology, genetics"
- Channelopathies/physiopathology
- Chick Embryo
- Chondrocytes/metabolism
- Follistatin/physiology
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- Osteochondrodysplasias
- Osteogenesis/genetics
- Swine
- TRPV Cation Channels/genetics
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Follistatin in chondrocytes: the link between TRPV4 channelopathies and skeletal malformations.
**Authors:** Leddy HA, McNulty AL, Lee SH, Rothfusz NE, Gloss B, Kirby ML, Hutson MR, Cohn DH, Guilak F, Liedtke W
**Journal:** FASEB J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.13-245936](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.13-245936)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2014 Jun;28(6):2525-37. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-245936. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Follistatin in chondrocytes: the link between TRPV4 channelopathies and skeletal 
malformations.

Leddy HA(1), McNulty AL(1), Lee SH(2), Rothfusz NE(1), Gloss B(3), Kirby ML(4), 
Hutson MR(4), Cohn DH(5), Guilak F(6), Liedtke W(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery.
(2)Department of Neurology.
(3)Department of Neurobiology.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, and.
(5)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology and Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, Orthopaedic Hospital Research Center, University of 
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, guilak@duke.edu wolfgang@neuro.duke.edu.
(7)Department of Neurology, Duke University Clinics for Pain and Palliative 
Care, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA; and 
guilak@duke.edu wolfgang@neuro.duke.edu.

Point mutations in the calcium-permeable TRPV4 ion channel have been identified 
as the cause of autosomal-dominant human motor neuropathies, arthropathies, and 
skeletal malformations of varying severity. The objective of this study was to 
determine the mechanism by which TRPV4 channelopathy mutations cause skeletal 
dysplasia. The human TRPV4(V620I) channelopathy mutation was transfected into 
primary porcine chondrocytes and caused significant (2.6-fold) up-regulation of 
follistatin (FST) expression levels. Pore altering mutations that prevent 
calcium influx through the channel prevented significant FST up-regulation 
(1.1-fold). We generated a mouse model of the TRPV4(V620I) mutation, and found 
significant skeletal deformities (e.g., shortening of tibiae and digits, similar 
to the human disease brachyolmia) and increases in Fst/TRPV4 mRNA levels 
(2.8-fold). FST was significantly up-regulated in primary chondrocytes 
transfected with 3 different dysplasia-causing TRPV4 mutations (2- to 2.3-fold), 
but was not affected by an arthropathy mutation (1.1-fold). Furthermore, 
FST-loaded microbeads decreased bone ossification in developing chick femora 
(6%) and tibiae (11%). FST gene and protein levels were also increased 4-fold in 
human chondrocytes from an individual natively expressing the TRPV4(T89I) 
mutation. Taken together, these data strongly support that up-regulation of FST 
in chondrocytes by skeletal dysplasia-inducing TRPV4 mutations contributes to 
disease pathogenesis.

© FASEB.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.13-245936
PMCID: PMC4021446
PMID: 24577120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]