---
reference_id: "PMID:26264464"
title: "'Splitting versus lumping': Temple-Baraitser and Zimmermann-Laband Syndromes."
authors:
- Bramswig NC
- Ockeloen CW
- Czeschik JC
- van Essen AJ
- Pfundt R
- Smeitink J
- Poll-The BT
- Engels H
- Strom TM
- Wieczorek D
- Kleefstra T
- Lüdecke HJ
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-015-1590-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 'Splitting versus lumping': Temple-Baraitser and Zimmermann-Laband Syndromes.
**Authors:** Bramswig NC, Ockeloen CW, Czeschik JC, van Essen AJ, Pfundt R, Smeitink J, Poll-The BT, Engels H, Strom TM, Wieczorek D, Kleefstra T, Lüdecke HJ
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-015-1590-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-015-1590-1)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2015 Oct;134(10):1089-97. doi: 10.1007/s00439-015-1590-1. Epub 2015
 Aug 12.

'Splitting versus lumping': Temple-Baraitser and Zimmermann-Laband Syndromes.

Bramswig NC(1), Ockeloen CW(2), Czeschik JC(3), van Essen AJ(4), Pfundt R(2), 
Smeitink J(5), Poll-The BT(6), Engels H(7), Strom TM(8)(9), Wieczorek D(3), 
Kleefstra T(2), Lüdecke HJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität 
Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45122, Essen, Germany. 
nuria.braemswig@uni-due.de.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität 
Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45122, Essen, Germany.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(8)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany.
(9)Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

KCNH1 mutations have recently been described in six individuals with 
Temple-Baraitser syndrome (TMBTS) and six individuals with Zimmermann-Laband 
syndrome (ZLS). TMBTS is characterized by intellectual disability (ID), 
epilepsy, dysmorphic facial features, broad thumbs and great toes with 
absent/hypoplastic nails. ZLS is characterized by facial dysmorphism including 
coarsening of the face and a large nose, gingival enlargement, ID, hypoplasia of 
terminal phalanges and nails and hypertrichosis. In this study, we present four 
additional unrelated individuals with de novo KCNH1 mutations from ID cohorts. 
We report on a novel recurrent pathogenic KCNH1 variant in three individuals and 
add a fourth individual with a previously TMBTS-associated KCNH1 variant. 
Neither TMBTS nor ZLS was suspected clinically. KCNH1 encodes a voltage-gated 
potassium channel, which is not only highly expressed in the central nervous 
system, but also seems to play an important role during development. Clinical 
evaluation of our mutation-positive individuals revealed that one of the main 
characteristics of TMBTS/ZLS, namely the pronounced nail hypoplasia of the great 
toes and thumbs, can be mild and develop over time. Clinical comparison of all 
published KCNH1 mutation-positive individuals revealed a similar facial but 
variable limb phenotype. KCNH1 mutation-positive individuals present with severe 
ID, neonatal hypotonia, hypertelorism, broad nasal tip, wide mouth, nail 
a/hypoplasia, a proximal implanted and long thumb and long great toes. In 
summary, we show that the phenotypic variability of individuals with KCNH1 
mutations is more pronounced than previously expected, and we discuss whether 
KCNH1 mutations allow for "lumping" or for "splitting" of TMBTS and ZLS.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-015-1590-1
PMID: 26264464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]