---
reference_id: "PMID:37288221"
title: Rehabilitation Approach for Children With Joubert Syndrome and Related Disorders.
authors:
- Mano H
- Kitamura K
- Tachibana M
- Suzuki A
- Yamauchi T
- Murakami T
- Okumura Y
- Koyama M
- Shimizu K
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.38658
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rehabilitation Approach for Children With Joubert Syndrome and Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Mano H, Kitamura K, Tachibana M, Suzuki A, Yamauchi T, Murakami T, Okumura Y, Koyama M, Shimizu K
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.38658](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.38658)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 May 7;15(5):e38658. doi: 10.7759/cureus.38658. eCollection 2023 
May.

Rehabilitation Approach for Children With Joubert Syndrome and Related 
Disorders.

Mano H(1), Kitamura K(1), Tachibana M(1), Suzuki A(1), Yamauchi T(2), Murakami 
T(3), Okumura Y(3), Koyama M(4), Shimizu K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Shizuoka Children's Hospital, 
Shizuoka, JPN.
(2)Department of General Pediatrics, Shizuoka Children's Hospital, Shizuoka, 
JPN.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Shizuoka Children's Hospital, Shizuoka, 
JPN.
(4)Department of Radiology, Shizuoka Children's Hospital, Shizuoka, JPN.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics and Cytogenetics, Shizuoka Children's 
Hospital, Shizuoka, JPN.

Joubert syndrome and related disorders (JSRD) are rare and intractable diseases 
characterized by delayed psychomotor development, hypotonia and/or ataxia, and 
abnormal respiratory and eye movements. Cerebellar vermis agenesis and molar 
tooth signs are distinct on cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Children 
with JSRD present with delayed psychomotor development, including intellectual 
disability and emotional or behavioral problems. Rehabilitation treatments are 
provided to promote psychomotor development. However, limited reports and 
evidence exist on rehabilitation treatments for children with JSRD. Three 
children with JSRD received rehabilitation treatment. The children received 
rehabilitation treatment once a week to once every one to two months at our 
hospital and/or other facilities. All patients received physical, occupational, 
and speech-language-hearing therapy, depending on their symptoms and conditions. 
In children with tracheostomies due to abnormal respiration, respiratory 
physical therapy and speech-language-hearing therapy, including augmentative and 
alternative communication, were needed. For hypotonia and ataxia, an orthotic 
intervention was considered in all three cases, and foot or ankle-foot orthoses 
were used in two cases. Although there is no specific or established 
rehabilitation method for children with JSRD, appropriate rehabilitation 
approaches, including physical, occupational, speech-language-hearing therapies 
and orthotic intervention, should be considered and provided to improve their 
function and expand their activity and participation. Orthotic intervention for 
hypotonia seems reasonable for improving gross motor development and function in 
children with JSRD.

Copyright © 2023, Mano et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.38658
PMCID: PMC10242429
PMID: 37288221

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.