---
reference_id: "PMID:37080965"
title: "Signaling pathways in vascular function and hypertension: molecular mechanisms and therapeutic interventions."
authors:
- Ma J
- Li Y
- Yang X
- Liu K
- Zhang X
- Zuo X
- Ye R
- Wang Z
- Shi R
- Meng Q
- Chen X
journal: Signal Transduct Target Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41392-023-01430-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Signaling pathways in vascular function and hypertension: molecular mechanisms and therapeutic interventions.
**Authors:** Ma J, Li Y, Yang X, Liu K, Zhang X, Zuo X, Ye R, Wang Z, Shi R, Meng Q, Chen X
**Journal:** Signal Transduct Target Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41392-023-01430-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-023-01430-7)

## Content

1. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2023 Apr 20;8(1):168. doi: 
10.1038/s41392-023-01430-7.

Signaling pathways in vascular function and hypertension: molecular mechanisms 
and therapeutic interventions.

Ma J(#)(1), Li Y(#)(1), Yang X(#)(1), Liu K(1), Zhang X(1), Zuo X(1), Ye R(1), 
Wang Z(1), Shi R(1), Meng Q(2), Chen X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, No. 37, 
Guo Xue District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, No. 37, 
Guo Xue District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, People's Republic of China. 
mengqingtao9@163.com.
(3)Department of Cardiology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, No. 37, 
Guo Xue District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, People's Republic of China. 
xiaopingchen23@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Hypertension is a global public health issue and the leading cause of premature 
death in humans. Despite more than a century of research, hypertension remains 
difficult to cure due to its complex mechanisms involving multiple interactive 
factors and our limited understanding of it. Hypertension is a condition that is 
named after its clinical features. Vascular function is a factor that affects 
blood pressure directly, and it is a main strategy for clinically controlling BP 
to regulate constriction/relaxation function of blood vessels. Vascular 
elasticity, caliber, and reactivity are all characteristic indicators reflecting 
vascular function. Blood vessels are composed of three distinct layers, out of 
which the endothelial cells in intima and the smooth muscle cells in media are 
the main performers of vascular function. The alterations in signaling pathways 
in these cells are the key molecular mechanisms underlying vascular dysfunction 
and hypertension development. In this manuscript, we will comprehensively review 
the signaling pathways involved in vascular function regulation and hypertension 
progression, including calcium pathway, NO-NOsGC-cGMP pathway, various vascular 
remodeling pathways and some important upstream pathways such as 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, oxidative stress-related signaling 
pathway, immunity/inflammation pathway, etc. Meanwhile, we will also summarize 
the treatment methods of hypertension that targets vascular function regulation 
and discuss the possibility of these signaling pathways being applied to 
clinical work.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41392-023-01430-7
PMCID: PMC10119183
PMID: 37080965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.