---
reference_id: "PMID:37028940"
title: "Pirfenidone in fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis: a double-blind, randomised clinical trial of efficacy and safety."
authors:
- Fernández Pérez ER
- Crooks JL
- Lynch DA
- Humphries SM
- Koelsch TL
- Swigris JJ
- Solomon JJ
- Mohning MP
- Groshong SD
- Fier K
journal: Thorax
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/thorax-2022-219795
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pirfenidone in fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis: a double-blind, randomised clinical trial of efficacy and safety.
**Authors:** Fernández Pérez ER, Crooks JL, Lynch DA, Humphries SM, Koelsch TL, Swigris JJ, Solomon JJ, Mohning MP, Groshong SD, Fier K
**Journal:** Thorax (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/thorax-2022-219795](https://doi.org/10.1136/thorax-2022-219795)

## Content

1. Thorax. 2023 Nov;78(11):1097-1104. doi: 10.1136/thorax-2022-219795. Epub 2023 
Apr 7.

Pirfenidone in fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis: a double-blind, randomised 
clinical trial of efficacy and safety.

Fernández Pérez ER(1), Crooks JL(2), Lynch DA(3), Humphries SM(3), Koelsch 
TL(3), Swigris JJ(4), Solomon JJ(4), Mohning MP(4), Groshong SD(5), Fier K(6).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, 
Colorado, USA fernandezevans@njhealth.org.
(2)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado, 
USA.
(3)Radiology, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(4)Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, 
Colorado, USA.
(5)Pathology, National Jewsih Health, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(6)Clinical and Translational Research Unit, National Jewish Health, Denver, 
Colorado, USA.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2023 Nov;78(11):1059-1060. doi: 10.1136/thorax-2023-220250.

BACKGROUND: Fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (FHP) is an irreversible lung 
disease with high morbidity and mortality. We sought to evaluate the safety and 
effect of pirfenidone on disease progression in such patients.
METHODS: We conducted a single-centre, randomised, double-blinded, 
placebo-controlled trial in adults with FHP and disease progression. Patients 
were assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive either oral pirfenidone (2403 mg/day) or 
placebo for 52 weeks. The primary end point was the mean absolute change in the 
per cent predicted forced vital capacity (FVC%). Secondary end points included 
progression-free survival (PFS, time to a relative decline ≥10% in FVC and/or 
diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO), acute respiratory 
exacerbation, a decrease of ≥50 m in the 6 min walk distance, increase or 
introduction of immunosuppressive drugs or death), change in FVC slope and mean 
DLCO%, hospitalisations, radiological progression of lung fibrosis and safety.
RESULTS: After randomising 40 patients, enrolment was interrupted by the 
COVID-19 pandemic. There was no significant between-group difference in FVC% at 
week 52 (mean difference -0.76%, 95% CI -6.34 to 4.82). Pirfenidone resulted in 
a lower rate of decline in the adjusted FVC% at week 26 and improved PFS (HR 
0.26, 95% CI 0.12 to 0.60). Results for other secondary end points showed no 
significant difference between groups. No deaths occurred in the pirfenidone 
group and one death (respiratory) occurred in the placebo group. There were no 
treatment-emergent serious adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: The trial was underpowered to detect a difference in the primary 
end point. Pirfenidone was found to be safe and improved PFS in patients with 
FHP.
TRIAL REGISTRATION MUMBER: NCT02958917.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/thorax-2022-219795
PMID: 37028940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: ERFP reports a relationship 
with Genentech, Boehringer Ingelheim and with National Heart Lung and Blood 
Institute that includes funding grants. All other authors declare that they have 
no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have 
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.