---
reference_id: "PMID:33891478"
title: "Ten-Year Outcome of Neoadjuvant Chemoradiotherapy Plus Surgery for Esophageal Cancer: The Randomized Controlled CROSS Trial."
authors:
- Eyck BM
- van Lanschot JJB
- Hulshof MCCM
- van der Wilk BJ
- Shapiro J
- van Hagen P
- van Berge Henegouwen MI
- Wijnhoven BPL
- van Laarhoven HWM
- Nieuwenhuijzen GAP
- Hospers GAP
- Bonenkamp JJ
- Cuesta MA
- Blaisse RJB
- Busch OR
- Creemers GM
- Punt CJA
- Plukker JTM
- Verheul HMW
- Spillenaar Bilgen EJ
- van der Sangen MJC
- Rozema T
- Ten Kate FJW
- Beukema JC
- Piet AHM
- van Rij CM
- Reinders JG
- Tilanus HW
- Steyerberg EW
- van der Gaast A
- CROSS Study Group
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.20.03614
keywords:
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Carboplatin/administration & dosage"
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/mortality, therapy"
- Esophagectomy
- Female
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Lymph Node Excision
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoadjuvant Therapy
- Netherlands/epidemiology
- "Paclitaxel/administration & dosage"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ten-Year Outcome of Neoadjuvant Chemoradiotherapy Plus Surgery for Esophageal Cancer: The Randomized Controlled CROSS Trial.
**Authors:** Eyck BM, van Lanschot JJB, Hulshof MCCM, van der Wilk BJ, Shapiro J, van Hagen P, van Berge Henegouwen MI, Wijnhoven BPL, van Laarhoven HWM, Nieuwenhuijzen GAP, Hospers GAP, Bonenkamp JJ, Cuesta MA, Blaisse RJB, Busch OR, Creemers GM, Punt CJA, Plukker JTM, Verheul HMW, Spillenaar Bilgen EJ, van der Sangen MJC, Rozema T, Ten Kate FJW, Beukema JC, Piet AHM, van Rij CM, Reinders JG, Tilanus HW, Steyerberg EW, van der Gaast A, CROSS Study Group
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.20.03614](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.20.03614)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2021 Jun 20;39(18):1995-2004. doi: 10.1200/JCO.20.03614. Epub
2021  Apr 23.

Ten-Year Outcome of Neoadjuvant Chemoradiotherapy Plus Surgery for Esophageal
Cancer: The Randomized Controlled CROSS Trial.

Eyck BM(1), van Lanschot JJB(1)(2), Hulshof MCCM(3), van der Wilk BJ(1), Shapiro
J(1), van Hagen P(1), van Berge Henegouwen MI(4), Wijnhoven BPL(1), van
Laarhoven HWM(5), Nieuwenhuijzen GAP(6), Hospers GAP(7), Bonenkamp JJ(8), Cuesta
MA(9), Blaisse RJB(10), Busch OR(4), Creemers GM(11), Punt CJA(12)(13), Plukker
JTM(14), Verheul HMW(15)(16), Spillenaar Bilgen EJ(17), van der Sangen MJC(18),
Rozema T(19)(20), Ten Kate FJW(21), Beukema JC(22), Piet AHM(23), van Rij
CM(24), Reinders JG(25), Tilanus HW(26), Steyerberg EW(27)(28), van der Gaast
A(29); CROSS Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Erasmus Medical Center Cancer Institute, Erasmus
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Formerly at Department of Surgery, Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam
University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam
University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Surgery, Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam University
Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Surgery, Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, the Netherlands.
(7)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Groningen-University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Surgery, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Surgery, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Location VUmc,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology, Rijnstate Hospital, Arnhem, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, the
Netherlands.
(12)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(13)Formerly at Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam,
Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(14)Department of Surgery, University of Groningen-University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(15)Department of Medical Oncology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
the Netherlands.
(16)Formerly at Department of Medical Oncology, Amsterdam University Medical
Centers, Location VUmc, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(17)Department of Surgery, Rijnstate Hospital, Arnhem, the Netherlands.
(18)Department of Radiation Oncology, Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, the
Netherlands.
(19)Verbeeten Institute, Tilburg, the Netherlands.
(20)Formerly at Department of Radiation Oncology, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(21)Formerly at Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(22)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Groningen-University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(23)Department of Radiation Oncology, Amsterdam University Medical Center,
Location VUmc, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(24)Department of Radiation Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Erasmus
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(25)Arnhem Radiotherapeutic Institute ARTI, Arnhem, the Netherlands.
(26)Formerly at Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Erasmus
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(27)Department of Public Health, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(28)Department of Biomedical Data Sciences, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, the Netherlands.
(29)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Erasmus
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2021 Oct 1;39(28):3189-3190. doi: 10.1200/JCO.21.01340.
    J Clin Oncol. 2021 Oct 1;39(28):3190-3191. doi: 10.1200/JCO.21.01543.
    Strahlenther Onkol. 2022 Jan;198(1):86-88. doi: 10.1007/s00066-021-01881-3.
    Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2022 May 1;113(1):5-10. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2021.12.177.

PURPOSE: Preoperative chemoradiotherapy according to the chemoradiotherapy for
esophageal cancer followed by surgery study (CROSS) has become a standard of
care for patients with locally advanced resectable esophageal or junctional
cancer. We aimed to assess long-term outcome of this regimen.
METHODS: From 2004 through 2008, we randomly assigned 366 patients to either
five weekly cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel with concurrent radiotherapy
(41.4 Gy in 23 fractions, 5 days per week) followed by surgery, or surgery
alone. Follow-up data were collected through 2018. Cox regression analyses were
performed to compare overall survival, cause-specific survival, and risks of
locoregional and distant relapse. The effect of neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy
beyond 5 years of follow-up was tested with time-dependent Cox regression and
landmark analyses.
RESULTS: The median follow-up was 147 months (interquartile range, 134-157).
Patients receiving neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy had better overall survival
(hazard ratio [HR], 0.70; 95% CI, 0.55 to 0.89). The effect of neoadjuvant
chemoradiotherapy on overall survival was not time-dependent (P value for
interaction, P = .73), and landmark analyses suggested a stable effect on
overall survival up to 10 years of follow-up. The absolute 10-year overall
survival benefit was 13% (38% v 25%). Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy reduced risk
of death from esophageal cancer (HR, 0.60; 95% CI, 0.46 to 0.80). Death from
other causes was similar between study arms (HR, 1.17; 95% CI, 0.68 to 1.99).
Although a clear effect on isolated locoregional (HR, 0.40; 95% CI, 0.21 to
0.72) and synchronous locoregional plus distant relapse (HR, 0.43; 95% CI, 0.26
to 0.72) persisted, isolated distant relapse was comparable (HR, 0.76; 95% CI,
0.52 to 1.13).
CONCLUSION: The overall survival benefit of patients with locally advanced
resectable esophageal or junctional cancer who receive preoperative
chemoradiotherapy according to CROSS persists for at least 10 years.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.20.03614
PMID: 33891478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Mark I. Van Berge HenegouwenConsulting or
Advisory Role: Medtronic, Johnson & Johnson, Mylan, Alesi SurgicalResearch
Funding: Olympus, StrykerTravel, Accommodations, Expenses: Johnson & Johnson
Hanneke W. M. Van LaarhovenConsulting or Advisory Role: Lilly/ImClone, Nordic
Group, Bristol Myers Squibb, ServierResearch Funding: Bristol Myers Squibb,
Bayer Schering Pharma, Celgene, Janssen-Cilag, Lilly, Nordic Group, Philips
Healthcare, Roche, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Servier, Merck KGaATravel,
Accommodations, Expenses: AstraZeneca Grard A. P. NieuwenhuijzenHonoraria:
Medtronic, LillyConsulting or Advisory Role: MedtronicResearch Funding:
Medtronic Geke A. P. HospersConsulting or Advisory Role: Roche, MSD, Amgen,
Bristol Myers Squibb, NovartisResearch Funding: Bristol Myers Squibb, Seerave
Foundation Cornelis J. A. PuntConsulting or Advisory Role: Nordic Bioscience
Henk M. W. VerheulConsulting or Advisory Role: Glycostem Ewout W.
SteyerbergPatents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Royalties from
Springer for a book “Clinical Prediction Models”No other potential conflicts of
interest were reported.
