---
reference_id: "PMID:38421525"
title: "The first Iranian patient with You-Hoover-Fong syndrome and a review of the literature on 27 cases: expanding the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum."
authors:
- Shokrollahi N
- Tehrani Fateh S
- Nouri M
- Behnam A
- Moghimi P
- Sadeghi H
- Mirfakhraie R
- Roudgari H
- Jamshidi S
- Miryounesi M
- Ghasemi MR
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-024-07413-y
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
- Genotype
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Iran
- Microcephaly/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The first Iranian patient with You-Hoover-Fong syndrome and a review of the literature on 27 cases: expanding the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum.
**Authors:** Shokrollahi N, Tehrani Fateh S, Nouri M, Behnam A, Moghimi P, Sadeghi H, Mirfakhraie R, Roudgari H, Jamshidi S, Miryounesi M, Ghasemi MR
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-024-07413-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-024-07413-y)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2024 Aug;45(8):3979-3987. doi: 10.1007/s10072-024-07413-y. Epub
2024  Feb 29.

The first Iranian patient with You-Hoover-Fong syndrome and a review of the 
literature on 27 cases: expanding the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum.

Shokrollahi N(1), Tehrani Fateh S(2), Nouri M(1), Behnam A(1), Moghimi P(3)(4), 
Sadeghi H(5), Mirfakhraie R(5), Roudgari H(4), Jamshidi S(4), Miryounesi 
M(6)(7), Ghasemi MR(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(2)School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)School of Medicine, Islamic Azad University Tehran Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(4)Center for Comprehensive Genetic Services, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Center for Comprehensive Genetic Services, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. miryounesi@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. miryounesi@gmail.com.
(8)Center for Comprehensive Genetic Services, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Ghasemimr891@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Ghasemimr891@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The ultra-rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder, You-Hoover-Fong 
Syndrome (YHFS), is caused by defects in the TELO2 gene and is characterized by 
intellectual disability, developmental delay, and ocular impairments. This study 
aims to contribute to a better understanding of YHFS by reviewing previous cases 
and introducing a novel variant in a new case.
METHODS: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was conducted on the proband to identify 
genetic variants, and Sanger sequencing was used to confirm variants within the 
family. This article presents a comprehensive collection of reported cases of 
YHFS, incorporating both molecular and clinical data, through an extensive 
literature search and analysis of English-language studies published until June 
2023.
RESULTS: Using WES, a novel homozygous missense variant, c.1799A > G (p. 
Tyr600Cys), was identified in the TELO2 gene in a 4-year-old Iranian male 
patient. Novel clinical features, including choanal atresia and clubfoot, were 
also identified. A comprehensive literature review identified 27 patients with 
YHFS, with 20 variants in the TELO2 gene. Missense pathogenic variants were the 
most common type of pathogenic variant, and the most common features were 
microcephaly and intellectual impairment.
CONCLUSION: This study presents the first case of pathogenic variants in TELO2 
gene in Iran, expands the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of YHFS and 
contributes to the growing body of literature pertaining to YHFS. Furthermore, 
our findings highlight the importance of genetic testing for non-consanguineous 
carrier screening, as compound heterozygosity may be a significant factor in the 
development of YHFS. Further research is needed to clarify the molecular 
mechanisms underlying YHFS pathogenesis.

© 2024. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-024-07413-y
PMID: 38421525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]