---
reference_id: "PMID:25978641"
title: Fibroblast Growth Factor 9 Regulation by MicroRNAs Controls Lung Development and Links DICER1 Loss to the Pathogenesis of Pleuropulmonary Blastoma.
authors:
- Yin Y
- Castro AM
- Hoekstra M
- Yan TJ
- Kanakamedala AC
- Dehner LP
- Hill DA
- Ornitz DM
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005242
keywords:
- Animals
- "DEAD-box RNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Epithelium/pathology
- Female
- "Fibroblast Growth Factor 9/genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Humans
- Lung/pathology
- Male
- Mesoderm/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "MicroRNAs/genetics, metabolism"
- Pulmonary Blastoma/genetics
- "Ribonuclease III/genetics, metabolism"
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- "beta Catenin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibroblast Growth Factor 9 Regulation by MicroRNAs Controls Lung Development and Links DICER1 Loss to the Pathogenesis of Pleuropulmonary Blastoma.
**Authors:** Yin Y, Castro AM, Hoekstra M, Yan TJ, Kanakamedala AC, Dehner LP, Hill DA, Ornitz DM
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1005242](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1005242)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2015 May 15;11(5):e1005242. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005242.
eCollection 2015 May.

Fibroblast Growth Factor 9 Regulation by MicroRNAs Controls Lung Development and
Links DICER1 Loss to the Pathogenesis of Pleuropulmonary Blastoma.

Yin Y(1), Castro AM(1), Hoekstra M(2), Yan TJ(1), Kanakamedala AC(1), Dehner
LP(3), Hill DA(3), Ornitz DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pathology, Children's National Medical Center, Washington,
D.C., United States of America.
(3)Lauren V. Ackerman Division of Surgical Pathology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Pleuropulmonary Blastoma (PPB) is the primary neoplastic manifestation of a
pediatric cancer predisposition syndrome that is associated with several
diseases including cystic nephroma, Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma, medulloblastoma, and ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor. The
primary pathology of PPB, epithelial cysts with stromal hyperplasia and risk for
progression to a complex primitive sarcoma, is associated with familial
heterozygosity and lesion-associated epithelial loss-of-heterozygosity of
DICER1. It has been hypothesized that loss of heterozygosity of DICER1 in lung
epithelium is a non-cell autonomous etiology of PPB and a critical pathway that
regulates lung development; however, there are no known direct targets of
epithelial microRNAs (miRNAs) in the lung. Fibroblast Growth Factor 9 (FGF9) is
expressed in the mesothelium and epithelium during lung development and
primarily functions to regulate lung mesenchyme; however, there are no known
mechanisms that regulate FGF9 expression during lung development. Using mouse
genetics and molecular phenotyping of human PPB tissue, we show that FGF9 is
overexpressed in lung epithelium in the initial multicystic stage of Type I PPB
and that in mice lacking epithelial Dicer1, or induced to overexpress epithelial
Fgf9, increased Fgf9 expression results in pulmonary mesenchymal hyperplasia and
a multicystic architecture that is histologically and molecularly
indistinguishable from Type I PPB. We further show that miR-140 is expressed in
lung epithelium, regulates epithelial Fgf9 expression, and regulates
pseudoglandular stages of lung development. These studies identify an essential
miRNA-FGF9 pathway for lung development and a non-cell autonomous signaling
mechanism that contributes to the mesenchymal hyperplasia that is characteristic
of Type I PPB.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005242
PMCID: PMC4433140
PMID: 25978641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
