---
reference_id: "PMID:39687605"
title: "Pain determinants and quality of life in Guillain-Barre syndrome: a prospective cohort study."
authors:
- Papri N
- Mohammed A
- Rahman MM
- Hasan I
- Azam R
- Saha T
- Shaon FTU
- Jahan I
- Hayat S
- Ara G
- Islam B
- Islam Z
journal: BMJ Neurol Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/bmjno-2024-000925
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pain determinants and quality of life in Guillain-Barre syndrome: a prospective cohort study.
**Authors:** Papri N, Mohammed A, Rahman MM, Hasan I, Azam R, Saha T, Shaon FTU, Jahan I, Hayat S, Ara G, Islam B, Islam Z
**Journal:** BMJ Neurol Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjno-2024-000925](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjno-2024-000925)

## Content

1. BMJ Neurol Open. 2024 Dec 11;6(2):e000925. doi: 10.1136/bmjno-2024-000925. 
eCollection 2024.

Pain determinants and quality of life in Guillain-Barre syndrome: a prospective 
cohort study.

Papri N(1), Mohammed A(1), Rahman MM(1), Hasan I(1), Azam R(1), Saha T(1), Shaon 
FTU(1), Jahan I(1), Hayat S(1), Ara G(2), Islam B(3), Islam Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Gut-Brain Axis, ICDDRB, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Nutrition Research Division, ICDDRB, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(3)Sheikh Fazilatunnessa Mujib Memorial KPJ Specialized Hospital & Nursing 
College, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

BACKGROUND: Pain is a serious manifestation in both the acute and chronic stages 
of Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS). We evaluated the frequency, characteristics 
and associated factors of pain and its impact on quality of life (QoL) among 
patients with GBS.
METHODS: We enrolled 644 patients with GBS from prospective cohort studies in 
Bangladesh conducted between 2010 and 2024. Data were collected at enrolment and 
at standard follow-up time points up to 26 weeks. Pain intensity was measured by 
a pain numeric rating scale. Group differences were tested using the χ² or 
Fisher's exact test, longitudinal changes were analysed with repeated-measures 
analysis of variance and correlations were analysed with Spearman's rank test.
RESULTS: The median age of the patients was 31 years, with 70% men. During 
enrolment, 71% of patients reported pain, which persisted among 38% at week 13 
and 26% at week 26. Pain was significantly associated with disease severity, 
muscle weakness and treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin in both the acute 
and chronic stages. Patients with acute pain had a higher proportion of axonal 
GBS (p=0.000) than those without pain. Chronic pain was associated with higher 
age (p=0.006), male sex (p=0.000), preceding diarrhoea (p=0.033) and 
dysautonomia (p=0.000). Higher pain intensity was reported among women 
(p=0.027), patients with higher age (p=0.029) and severe form of GBS (p=0.038) 
compared with counter groups. Acute pain was significantly associated with the 
'self-care' (p=0.023), 'usual activities' (p=0.049) and 'anxiety/depression' 
(p=0.048) domains of QoL, whereas chronic pain was associated with the 
'anxiety/depression' (p=0.005) domain.
CONCLUSIONS: Pain presented as a serious symptom negatively affecting the QoL in 
GBS. Systematic evaluation of pain is recommended to ensure a personalised 
treatment approach for GBS.

Copyright © Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. Re-use permitted under CC 
BY-NC. No commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjno-2024-000925
PMCID: PMC11647308
PMID: 39687605

Conflict of interest statement: There are no competing interests.