---
reference_id: "PMID:31213497"
title: Treatment effects and comorbid diseases in 58 patients with visual snow.
authors:
- van Dongen RM
- Waaijer LC
- Onderwater GLJ
- Ferrari MD
- Terwindt GM
journal: Neurology
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007825
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment effects and comorbid diseases in 58 patients with visual snow.
**Authors:** van Dongen RM, Waaijer LC, Onderwater GLJ, Ferrari MD, Terwindt GM
**Journal:** Neurology (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000007825](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000007825)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2019 Jul 23;93(4):e398-e403. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007825.
Epub  2019 Jun 18.

Treatment effects and comorbid diseases in 58 patients with visual snow.

van Dongen RM(1), Waaijer LC(1), Onderwater GLJ(1), Ferrari MD(1), Terwindt 
GM(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Centre, the 
Netherlands.
(2)From the Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Centre, the 
Netherlands. g.m.terwindt@lumc.nl.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2019 Jul 23;93(4):153. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007824.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate pharmacologic treatment options for visual snow and to 
report prevalence of comorbid diseases.
METHODS: Medical charts of patients with a diagnosis of visual snow at the 
neurology outpatient clinic were reviewed on prescribed medication, and comorbid 
migraine, tinnitus, and psychiatric conditions including depression and anxiety.
RESULTS: From 2007 to 2018, 58 patients were diagnosed with visual snow. 
Comorbid migraine was present in 51.7% of patients, lifetime depression in 
41.4%, and lifetime anxiety in 44.8%. Lamotrigine was prescribed most frequently 
(26/58) and resulted in partial remission of symptoms in 5/26 (19.2%). No 
patients reported complete remission. Adverse events occurred in 13/26 (50.0%) 
patients. None of the other prescribed drugs (valproate [n = 7], topiramate [n = 
4], acetazolamide [n = 2], flunarizine [n = 1]) led to improvement except for 
topiramate in one patient, who discontinued, however, because of adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: Of medication prescribed (lamotrigine, valproate, acetazolamide, 
flunarizine), only lamotrigine afforded some improvement in a small minority of 
patients. Migraine, depression, anxiety, and tinnitus were common comorbid 
diseases.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class IV evidence that for some 
patients with visual snow, lamotrigine resulted in partial remission of 
symptoms.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007825
PMCID: PMC6669936
PMID: 31213497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]