---
reference_id: PMID:15710782
title: Hyperadrenergic postural tachycardia syndrome in mast cell activation disorders.
authors:
- Shibao C
- Arzubiaga C
- Roberts LJ 2nd
- Raj S
- Black B
- Harris P
- Biaggioni I
journal: Hypertension
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000158259.68614.40
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperadrenergic postural tachycardia syndrome in mast cell activation disorders.
**Authors:** Shibao C, Arzubiaga C, Roberts LJ 2nd, Raj S, Black B, Harris P, Biaggioni I
**Journal:** Hypertension (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.HYP.0000158259.68614.40](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.HYP.0000158259.68614.40)

## Content

1. Hypertension. 2005 Mar;45(3):385-90. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000158259.68614.40. 
Epub 2005 Feb 14.

Hyperadrenergic postural tachycardia syndrome in mast cell activation disorders.

Shibao C(1), Arzubiaga C, Roberts LJ 2nd, Raj S, Black B, Harris P, Biaggioni I.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine and Pharmacology, 
and the Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, Tenn 37212, USA.

Comment in
    Hypertension. 2005 Mar;45(3):354-5. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000158260.46156.b7.

Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a disabling condition that commonly 
affects otherwise normal young females. Because these patients can present with 
a flushing disorder, we hypothesized that mast cell activation (MCA) can 
contribute to its pathogenesis. Here we describe POTS patients with MCA 
(MCA+POTS), diagnosed by episodes of flushing and abnormal increases in urine 
methylhistamine, and compared them to POTS patients with episodic flushing but 
normal urine methylhistamine and to normal healthy age-matched female controls. 
MCA+POTS patients were characterized by episodes of flushing, shortness of 
breath, headache, lightheadedness, excessive diuresis, and gastrointestinal 
symptoms such as diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. Triggering events include 
long-term standing, exercise, premenstrual cycle, meals, and sexual intercourse. 
In addition, patients were disabled by orthostatic intolerance and a 
characteristic hyperadrenergic response to posture, with orthostatic tachycardia 
(from 79+/-4 to 114+/-6 bpm), increased systolic blood pressure on standing 
(from 117+/-5 to 126+/-7 mm Hg versus no change in POTS controls), increased 
systolic blood pressure at the end of phase II of the Valsalva maneuver 
(157+/-12 versus 117+/-9 in normal controls and 119+/-7 mm Hg in POTS; P=0.048), 
and an exaggerated phase IV blood pressure overshoot (50+/-10 versus 17+/-3 mm 
Hg in normal controls; P<0.05). In conclusion, MCA should be considered in 
patients with POTS presenting with flushing. These patients often present with a 
typical hyperadrenergic response, but beta-blockers should be used with great 
caution, if at all, and treatment directed against mast cell mediators may be 
required.

DOI: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000158259.68614.40
PMID: 15710782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]