---
reference_id: "PMID:24396138"
title: The endemic treponematoses.
authors:
- Giacani L
- Lukehart SA
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.00070-13
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The endemic treponematoses.
**Authors:** Giacani L, Lukehart SA
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.00070-13](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00070-13)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2014 Jan;27(1):89-115. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00070-13.

The endemic treponematoses.

Giacani L(1), Lukehart SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

The agents of human treponematoses include four closely related members of the 
genus Treponema: three subspecies of Treponema pallidum plus Treponema carateum. 
T. pallidum subsp. pallidum causes venereal syphilis, while T. pallidum subsp. 
pertenue, T. pallidum subsp. endemicum, and T. carateum are the agents of the 
endemic treponematoses yaws, bejel (or endemic syphilis), and pinta, 
respectively. All human treponematoses share remarkable similarities in 
pathogenesis and clinical manifestations, consistent with the high genetic and 
antigenic relatedness of their etiological agents. Distinctive features have 
been identified in terms of age of acquisition, most common mode of 
transmission, and capacity for invasion of the central nervous system and fetus, 
although the accuracy of these purported differences is debated among 
investigators and no biological basis for these differences has been identified 
to date. In 2012, the World Health Organization (WHO) officially set a goal for 
yaws eradication by 2020. This challenging but potentially feasible endeavor is 
favored by the adoption of oral azithromycin for mass treatment and the 
currently focused distribution of yaws and endemic treponematoses and has 
revived global interest in these fascinating diseases and their causative 
agents.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00070-13
PMCID: PMC3910905
PMID: 24396138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]