---
reference_id: "PMID:34272945"
title: "Pathogenesis of Microscopic Colitis: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Zabana Y
- Tontini G
- Hultgren-Hörnquist E
- Skonieczna-Żydecka K
- Latella G
- Østvik AE
- Marlicz W
- "D'Amato M"
- Arias A
- Mielhke S
- Münch A
- Fernández-Bañares F
- Lucendo AJ
journal: J Crohns Colitis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjab123
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of Microscopic Colitis: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Zabana Y, Tontini G, Hultgren-Hörnquist E, Skonieczna-Żydecka K, Latella G, Østvik AE, Marlicz W, D'Amato M, Arias A, Mielhke S, Münch A, Fernández-Bañares F, Lucendo AJ
**Journal:** J Crohns Colitis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjab123](https://doi.org/10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjab123)

## Content

1. J Crohns Colitis. 2022 Jan 28;16(1):143-161. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjab123.

Pathogenesis of Microscopic Colitis: A Systematic Review.

Zabana Y(1)(2), Tontini G(3), Hultgren-Hörnquist E(4), Skonieczna-Żydecka K(5), 
Latella G(6), Østvik AE(7)(8), Marlicz W(9)(10), D'Amato M(11)(12), Arias 
A(2)(13), Mielhke S(14), Münch A(15), Fernández-Bañares F(1)(2), Lucendo 
AJ(2)(16).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology Department, Hospital Universitari Mútua de Terrassa, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y 
Digestivas, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan and 
Gastroenterology and Endoscopy Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca'Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(4)School of Medical Sciences, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.
(5)Department of Biochemical Sciences, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, 
Poland.
(6)Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, 
University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(7)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine [IKOM], Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, 
Norway.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Clinic of Medicine, St. Olav's 
University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, 
Poland.
(10)Centre for Digestive Diseases Endoklinika, Szczecin, Poland.
(11)Gastrointestinal Genetics Lab, CIC bioGUNE - BRTA, Derio, Spain.
(12)Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.
(13)Research Unit, Hospital General Mancha Centro, Alcázar de San Juan, Ciudad 
Real, Spain.
(14)Centre for Digestive Diseases, Internal Medicine Centre Eppendorf & 
Endoscopy Centre, University Hospital Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(15)Department of Health, Medicine, and Caring Sciences, Linköping University, 
Linköping, Sweden.
(16)Gastroenterology Department, Hospital General de Tomelloso-Spain and 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Princesa [IIS-IP], Madrid, Spain.

Erratum in
    J Crohns Colitis. 2022 Nov 1;16(10):1647. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac085.

BACKGROUND: Whereas the exact aetiology of microscopic colitis [MC] remains 
unknown, a dysregulated immune response to luminal factors or medications is the 
most accepted pathogenesis hypothesis.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review of the pathogenesis of MC. We applied 
the Joanna Briggs Institute methodologies and the PRISMA statement for the 
reporting of systematic reviews [PROSPERO Trial Identifier: CRD42020145008]. 
Populations, Exposure of interest, and Outcome [PEO] questions were used to 
explore the following topics in MC: 1] intestinal luminal factors; 2] 
autoimmunity; 3] innate immunity; 4] adaptive immunity; 5] extracellular matrix; 
6] genetic risk factors; and 7] mechanism of diarrhoea. A search was done in 
PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science up to February 2020. A narrative description 
was performed explaining the findings for each aspect of MC aetiopathogenesis.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight documents provided evidence for PEO1, 100 for PEO2, 72 for 
PEO3 and 4, 38 for PEO5, 20 for PEO6, and 23 for PEO7. The majority of documents 
were cohorts, case reports, and case series, with a few case-control and some 
experimental studies. Consistency among data provided by different studies was 
considered to support pathogenetic hypotheses. MC is a multifactorial disease 
believed to involve innate and adaptive immune responses to luminal factors, 
genetic risk, autoimmunity, and extracellular matrix alterations, all 
contributing by varied mechanisms to watery diarrhoea.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first systematic review on the aetiology of MC 
supporting the notion that MC is a multifactorial disease. However, high-profile 
studies are lacking, and most evidence derives from small heterogeneous studies.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjab123
PMID: 34272945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]