---
reference_id: "PMID:29308088"
title: Distinct subtypes of genomic PTEN deletion size influence the landscape of aneuploidy and outcome in prostate cancer.
authors:
- Vidotto T
- Tiezzi DG
- Squire JA
journal: Mol Cytogenet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s13039-017-0348-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct subtypes of genomic PTEN deletion size influence the landscape of aneuploidy and outcome in prostate cancer.
**Authors:** Vidotto T, Tiezzi DG, Squire JA
**Journal:** Mol Cytogenet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13039-017-0348-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13039-017-0348-y)

## Content

1. Mol Cytogenet. 2018 Jan 3;11:1. doi: 10.1186/s13039-017-0348-y. eCollection 
2018.

Distinct subtypes of genomic PTEN deletion size influence the landscape of 
aneuploidy and outcome in prostate cancer.

Vidotto T(1), Tiezzi DG(2), Squire JA(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São 
Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(2)Deparment of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Clinical Hospital of Ribeirão Preto, 
Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(3)Department of Pathology and Legal Medicine, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, 
University of São Paulo, 3900 Bandeirantes Avenue, Monte Alegre, Ribeirão Preto, 
São Paulo 14040-900 Brazil.
(4)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Inactivation of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene by deletion occurs in 
20-30% of prostate cancer tumors and loss strongly correlates with a worse 
outcome. PTEN loss of function not only leads to activation of the PI3K/AKT 
pathway, but is also thought to affect genome stability and increase levels of 
tumor aneuploidy. We performed an in silico integrative genomic and 
transcriptomic analysis of 491 TCGA prostate cancer tumors. These data were used 
to map the genomic sizes of PTEN gene deletions and to characterize levels of 
instability and patterns of aneuploidy acquisition.
RESULTS: PTEN homozygous deletions had a significant increase in aneuploidy 
compared to PTEN tumors without an apparent deletion, and hemizygous deletions 
showed an intermediate aneuploidy profile. A supervised clustering of somatic 
copy number alterations (SCNA) demonstrated that the size of PTEN deletions was 
not random, but comprised five distinct subtypes: (1) "Small Interstitial" 
(70 bp-789Kb); (2) "Large Interstitial" (1-7 MB); (3) "Large Proximal" 
(3-65 MB); (4) "Large Terminal" (8-64 MB), and (5) "Extensive" (71-132 MB). Many 
of the deleted fragments in each subtype were flanked by low copy repetitive 
(LCR) sequences. SCNAs such as gain at 3q21.1-3q29 and deletions at 8p, RB1, 
TP53 and TMPRSS2-ERG were variably present in all subtypes. Other SCNAs appeared 
to be recurrent in some deletion subtypes, but absent from others. To determine 
how the aneuploidy influenced global levels of gene expression, we performed a 
comparative transcriptome analysis. One deletion subtype (Large Interstitial) 
was characterized by gene expression changes associated with angiogenesis and 
cell adhesion, structure, and metabolism. Logistic regression demonstrated that 
this deletion subtype was associated with a high Gleason score (HR = 2.386; 95% 
C.I. 1.245-4.572), extraprostatic extension (HR = 2.423, 95% C.I. 1.157-5.075), 
and metastasis (HR = 7.135; 95% C.I. 1.540-33.044). Univariate and multivariate 
Cox Regression showed that presence of this deletion subtype was also strongly 
predictive of disease recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that genomic deletions of PTEN fall into five 
different size distributions, with breakpoints that often occur close LCR 
regions, and that each subtype is associated with a characteristic aneuploidy 
signature. The Large Interstitial deletion had a distinct gene expression 
signature that was related to cancer progression and was also predictive of a 
worse prognosis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13039-017-0348-y
PMCID: PMC5753467
PMID: 29308088

Conflict of interest statement: Data obtained from the TCGA open-access database 
was collected from tumors of patients who provided informed consent based on the 
guidelines from the TCGA Ethics, Law and Policy Group.All patients included in 
the TCGA public domain database consented for publication as detailed in 
[https://cancergenome.nih.gov/abouttcga/policies/informedconsent].The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.Springer Nature remains neutral 
with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.