---
reference_id: "PMID:34292174"
title: Medullary thyroid carcinoma.
authors:
- Jaber T
- Dadu R
- Hu MI
journal: Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000662
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Neuroendocrine"
- Humans
- Pyrazoles
- Pyridines
- Pyrimidines
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medullary thyroid carcinoma.
**Authors:** Jaber T, Dadu R, Hu MI
**Journal:** Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MED.0000000000000662](https://doi.org/10.1097/MED.0000000000000662)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2021 Oct 1;28(5):540-546. doi:
10.1097/MED.0000000000000662.

Medullary thyroid carcinoma.

Jaber T(1), Dadu R(2), Hu MI(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Department of Endocrine Neoplasia and Hormonal Disorders, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize recent developments in the diagnosis and
management of patients with medullary thyroid cancer (MTC), with a focus on
pathogenesis, systemic therapy, and future directions.
RECENT FINDINGS: The addition of mutational analysis to cytological assessment
of thyroid nodules has improved the diagnostic accuracy of MTC. The discovery of
new genomic alterations and overexpression of certain factors allows for
improved prognostication in MTC and provides potentially new therapeutic agents.
New data suggest that tumor environment may be more immunogenic than previously
thought in a subset of MTCs with identification of a new MTC-specific antigen
leading to a revival of investigating immune-based therapy for this disease. The
newly approved selective rearranged during transfection (RET0-inhibitors,
selpercatinib and pralsetinib, offer promising results, and tolerability for
patients with RET-mutated MTC; however, the development of resistance mechanisms
may be problematic.
SUMMARY: MTC has witnessed remarkable advancements in recent years. Our new
understanding of some of the driver mutations in MTC allows for therapeutics
with more tolerable adverse event profiles. However, there is still a need for
more effective treatment strategies for subsets of patients without actionable
mutations and for those who develop resistance to currently available therapies.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000662
PMID: 34292174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
