---
reference_id: "PMID:35220468"
title: The genomic characteristics of RET fusion positive tumors in Chinese non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
authors:
- Wu G
- Guo L
- Gu Y
- Huang T
- Liu M
- Zou X
- Yang B
- Huang P
- Wen C
- Yi L
- Liao W
- Zhao D
- Zhu J
- Zhang X
- Liu Y
- Yin Y
- Chen S
journal: J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00432-022-03959-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genomic characteristics of RET fusion positive tumors in Chinese non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
**Authors:** Wu G, Guo L, Gu Y, Huang T, Liu M, Zou X, Yang B, Huang P, Wen C, Yi L, Liao W, Zhao D, Zhu J, Zhang X, Liu Y, Yin Y, Chen S
**Journal:** J Cancer Res Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00432-022-03959-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00432-022-03959-6)

## Content

1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2023 Mar;149(3):1019-1028. doi: 
10.1007/s00432-022-03959-6. Epub 2022 Feb 26.

The genomic characteristics of RET fusion positive tumors in Chinese non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.

Wu G(1), Guo L(2), Gu Y(3), Huang T(4), Liu M(4), Zou X(3), Yang B(4), Huang 
P(3), Wen C(3), Yi L(3), Liao W(4), Zhao D(3), Zhu J(3), Zhang X(4), Liu Y(4), 
Yin Y(4), Chen S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Center, Meizhou People's Hospital 
(Huangtang Hospital), 63 Huangtang Road, Meizhou, China. guowuwugd@163.com.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Center, Meizhou People's Hospital 
(Huangtang Hospital), 63 Huangtang Road, Meizhou, China. 1851258807@qq.com.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Center, Meizhou People's Hospital 
(Huangtang Hospital), 63 Huangtang Road, Meizhou, China.
(4)HaploX Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China.
(5)HaploX Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China. chen@haplox.com.

BACKGROUND: Approximately 1-2% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients 
harbor RET (rearranged during transfection) fusions. The oncogenic RET fusions 
could lead to constitutive kinase activation and oncogenesis.
METHODS: 1746 Chinese NSCLC patients were analyzed in this study. Tumor tissues 
were collected, and were formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) and archived. 
Peripheral blood (PB) samples were also collected from each patient as control. 
In addition, we selected 17 of them for cfDNA NGS testing and 14 tumor samples 
for immunohistochemistry testing using PD-L1 rabbit monoclonal antibody, clones 
28-8 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK).
RESULTS: Of the 1746 NSCLC cases, RET rearrangements were identified in 25 cases 
(1.43%) with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC, of which 20 (80%) were 
female. We found that 14 out of 25 patients had an KIF5B-RET fusion, with KIF5B 
exon15-RET exon12, KIF5B exon23-RET exon12, and KIF5B exon24-RET exon11 detected 
in 14, 3, and 1 patients, respectively. We also identified one novel RET fusion 
partner PLCE1 and 4 intergenic-breakpoint fusions.
CONCLUSION: In this study, using the hybrid capture based next generation 
sequencing (NGS) techniques, we revealed the genomic profiling for the patients 
with RET fusion-positive NSCLC. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first 
study that exhibited the detailed breakpoints of Chinese NSCLC patients with RET 
rearrangement, and we found a novel new partner PLCE1. The results provided 
genomic information for patients with RET fusion which is significant for 
personalized clinical management in the era of precision medicine.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-022-03959-6
PMCID: PMC9984339
PMID: 35220468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TH, ML, BY, WL, XZ, YL, YY and SC were employed 
by the company HaploX Biotechnology Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.