---
reference_id: "PMID:12598077"
title: Haploinsufficiency in combination with aging causes SCN5A-linked hereditary Lenègre disease.
authors:
- Probst V
- Kyndt F
- Potet F
- Trochu JN
- Mialet G
- Demolombe S
- Schott JJ
- Baró I
- Escande D
- Le Marec H
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(02)02864-4
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Aging/physiology
- Child
- Female
- Genotype
- Haploidy
- "Heart Block/etiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Heart Conduction System/physiopathology
- Humans
- In Vitro Techniques
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Sodium Channels/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haploinsufficiency in combination with aging causes SCN5A-linked hereditary Lenègre disease.
**Authors:** Probst V, Kyndt F, Potet F, Trochu JN, Mialet G, Demolombe S, Schott JJ, Baró I, Escande D, Le Marec H
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0735-1097(02)02864-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0735-1097(02)02864-4)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003 Feb 19;41(4):643-52. doi:
10.1016/s0735-1097(02)02864-4.

Haploinsufficiency in combination with aging causes SCN5A-linked hereditary 
Lenègre disease.

Probst V(1), Kyndt F, Potet F, Trochu JN, Mialet G, Demolombe S, Schott JJ, Baró 
I, Escande D, Le Marec H.

Author information:
(1)Cardiology Department, Hôpital G&R Laennec, Nantes, France.

OBJECTIVES: The goal of this study was to investigate the genotype-to-phenotype 
relationship between SCN5A gene mutation and progressive cardiac conduction 
defect in order to gain insights into the pathophysiologic mechanisms of the 
disease.
BACKGROUND: Progressive cardiac conduction defect is a frequent disease commonly 
attributed to degeneration and fibrosis of the His bundle and its branches. In a 
French family, we have identified a splicing mutation in the SCN5A gene leading 
to hereditary progressive cardiac conduction defect.
METHODS: We have extended the size of the pedigree and phenotyped and genotyped 
all family members, and also investigated in vitro the functional consequences 
of the mutation.
RESULTS: Among 65 potentially affected members, 25 individuals were carriers of 
the IVS.22+2 T-->C SCN5A mutation. In relation to aging, gene carriers exhibit 
various types of conduction defects. P-wave, PR, and QRS duration increased 
progressively with age in gene carriers and in noncarriers. Whatever the age, 
conduction parameters were longer in gene carriers. The widening in the QRS 
complex with aging was more pronounced in gene carriers older than 40 years. 
Functional studies show that the IVS.22+2 T-->C SCN5A mutation lead to exon 22 
skipping and to a complete loss of function of the affected allele, but to a 
normal trafficking of the mutated gene product.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that hereditary Lenègre disease is caused 
by a haploinsufficiency mechanism, which in combination with aging leads to 
progressive alteration in conduction velocity.

DOI: 10.1016/s0735-1097(02)02864-4
PMID: 12598077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]