---
reference_id: "PMID:37244373"
title: Association between dual-task function and neuropsychological testing in older adults with cognitive impairment.
authors:
- Petrillo K
- Javed B
- Toosizadeh N
journal: Exp Gerontol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2023.112223
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between dual-task function and neuropsychological testing in older adults with cognitive impairment.
**Authors:** Petrillo K, Javed B, Toosizadeh N
**Journal:** Exp Gerontol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exger.2023.112223](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exger.2023.112223)

## Content

1. Exp Gerontol. 2023 Jul;178:112223. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2023.112223. Epub 2023
 May 29.

Association between dual-task function and neuropsychological testing in older 
adults with cognitive impairment.

Petrillo K(1), Javed B(2), Toosizadeh N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 
United States of America; Division of Geriatrics, General Internal Medicine and 
Palliative Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
United States of America.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 
United States of America; Division of Geriatrics, General Internal Medicine and 
Palliative Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
United States of America; Arizona Center on Aging, Department of Medicine, 
College of Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United States of 
America. Electronic address: ntoosizadeh@arizona.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Despite the current high prevalence of dementia, more than half of 
older adult patients never receive an evaluation. Current evaluation methods are 
lengthy, cumbersome, and not viable for busy clinics. This indicates that, 
despite recent improvements, a quick and objective routine test for screening 
cognitive decline in older adults is still needed. Poor dual-task gait 
performance has been previously associated with decreased executive and 
neuropsychological function. However, gait tests are not always viable for 
clinics or older patients.
METHODS: The aim of this study was to assess the relationship between a novel 
upper-extremity function (UEF) dual-task performance and neuropsychological test 
results in older adults. For UEF dual-tasks, participants performed a consistent 
elbow flexion and extension, while counting backwards in increments of threes or 
ones. Wearable motion sensors were attached to the forearm and upper-arm to 
measure accuracy and speed of elbow flexion kinematics to calculate a UEF 
cognitive score.
RESULTS: We recruited older adults at three stages: cognitively normal (CN) 
(n = 35), mild cognitively impaired (MCI) of the Alzheimer's type (n = 34), and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) (n = 22). The results demonstrate significant 
correlations between UEF cognitive score and mini-mental state examination 
(MMSE), Mini-Cog, Category fluency, Benson complex figure copy, Trail making 
test, and Montreal cognitive assessment (MOCA) (r values between -0.2355 and 
-0.6037 and p < 0.0288).
DISCUSSION: UEF dual-task was associated with executive function, orientation, 
repetition, abstraction, verbal recall, attention and calculation, language and 
visual construction. Of the associated brain domains, UEF dual-task was most 
significantly associated with executive function, visual construction, and 
delayed recall. The results from this study convey potential for UEF dual-task 
as a safe and convenient cognitive impairment screening method.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2023.112223
PMID: 37244373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
have no conflict of interest to disclose.