---
reference_id: "PMID:37214406"
title: "Case report of iatrogenic cerebral amyloid angiopathy after exposure to Lyodura: an Australian perspective."
authors:
- Muller C
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1185267
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report of iatrogenic cerebral amyloid angiopathy after exposure to Lyodura: an Australian perspective.
**Authors:** Muller C
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2023.1185267](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2023.1185267)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2023 May 5;17:1185267. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1185267. 
eCollection 2023.

Case report of iatrogenic cerebral amyloid angiopathy after exposure to Lyodura: 
an Australian perspective.

Muller C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(2)Department of Neurology, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Herston, QLD, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Recently proposed diagnostic criteria for iatrogenic cerebral 
amyloid angiopathy (iCAA) have sparked increased recognition of cases across the 
globe. Whilst these patients tend to have a tumultuous course, much like 
sporadic CAA, there is a high degree of variability. What is unique in this case 
is the breadth of clinicoradiological data available, including handwritten 
surgical notes from 1985. In retrospect, early imaging changes of what would 
ultimately lead to profound morbidity, were apparent 30 years after inoculation 
with cadaveric dural tissue.
AIM: In this case study we examine the clinicoradiological features of a case of 
probable iCAA and draw awareness to the presence of this disease in Australia.
METHODS: This case was admitted under the care of the author at the Royal 
Brisbane and Women's Hospital (RBWH). Clinical details and data were gathered 
during the patient's care and consent for publication provided by the enduring 
power of attorney.
RESULTS: This 56-year-old female presented in 2018 with left hemiparesis, 
neglect, and dysarthria secondary to a large right frontal lobe intracerebral 
hemorrhage (ICH) without an underlying macrovascular cause. MRI brain 
demonstrated diffuse superficial siderosis assumed related to previous surgical 
interventions during the mid-1980s for a Chiari malformation and cervical 
syrinx. There was evidence of extensive white matter disease, discordant with 
her lack of cerebrovascular disease risk factors. Brain biopsy confirmed CAA. 
Archived surgical notes confirmed exposure to Lyodura in 1985 and 1986. Two 
decades of MRI data were available for review and illustrate the evolution of 
CAA, from normal post-operative findings to marked and unrecognized 
abnormalities 4 years prior to her first ICH.
DISCUSSION: This is the first Australian case of probable iatrogenic CAA (iCAA) 
to have such extensive documentation of clinicoradiological evolution. It 
demonstrates the aggressive course iCAA can take and provides insights into 
early disease manifestations, relevant to the more common sporadic cases. A 
brief review of the history of commercial cadaveric tissue use in Australia 
highlights enormous changes in medical practice over the last 50 years. 
Awareness within Australia should be raised for this clinical phenomenon, and 
cases collated to contribute to the growing international pool of evidence.

Copyright © 2023 Muller.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1185267
PMCID: PMC10196053
PMID: 37214406

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.