---
reference_id: "PMID:28007901"
title: "A rat model of ataxia-telangiectasia: evidence for a neurodegenerative phenotype."
authors:
- Quek H
- Luff J
- Cheung K
- Kozlov S
- Gatei M
- Lee CS
- Bellingham MC
- Noakes PG
- Lim YC
- Barnett NL
- Dingwall S
- Wolvetang E
- Mashimo T
- Roberts TL
- Lavin MF
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw371
keywords:
- Animals
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/pharmacology
- Ataxia Telangiectasia/complications
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/physiology
- Betamethasone/pharmacology
- "Brain/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Inflammation/etiology, pathology, prevention & control"
- "Microglia/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/etiology, pathology, prevention & control"
- "Neurons/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Rats
- "Rats, Mutant Strains"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rat model of ataxia-telangiectasia: evidence for a neurodegenerative phenotype.
**Authors:** Quek H, Luff J, Cheung K, Kozlov S, Gatei M, Lee CS, Bellingham MC, Noakes PG, Lim YC, Barnett NL, Dingwall S, Wolvetang E, Mashimo T, Roberts TL, Lavin MF
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddw371](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddw371)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2017 Jan 1;26(1):109-123. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw371.

A rat model of ataxia-telangiectasia: evidence for a neurodegenerative
phenotype.

Quek H(1)(2), Luff J(1), Cheung K(1)(2), Kozlov S(1), Gatei M(1), Lee CS(3),
Bellingham MC(4), Noakes PG(4), Lim YC(2), Barnett NL(1)(5)(6), Dingwall
S(1)(2)(7), Wolvetang E(7), Mashimo T(8), Roberts TL(1)(2)(3), Lavin MF(1).

Author information:
(1)The University of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research, Herston, Qld,
Australia.
(2)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Qld, Australia.
(3)The Ingham Institute for Applied Medical Research and School of Medicine,
Western Sydney University, Liverpool, NSW, Australia.
(4)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Qld,
Australia.
(5)Queensland Eye Institute, South Brisbane, Qld, Australia.
(6)School of Biomedical Sciences, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane,
Qld, Australia.
(7)Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of
Queensland, St Lucia, Qld, Australia.
(8)Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations
in the ATM gene is characterised by cerebellar atrophy and progressive
neurodegeneration which has been poorly recapitulated in Atm mutant mice.
Consequently, pathways leading to neurodegeneration in A-T are poorly
understood. We describe here the generation of an Atm knockout rat model that
does not display cerebellar atrophy but instead paralysis and spinal cord
atrophy, reminiscent of that seen in older patients and milder forms of the
disorder. Loss of Atm in neurons and glia leads to accumulation of cytosolic
DNA, increased cytokine production and constitutive activation of microglia
consistent with a neuroinflammatory phenotype. Rats lacking ATM had significant
loss of motor neurons and microgliosis in the spinal cord, consistent with onset
of paralysis. Since short term treatment with steroids has been shown to improve
the neurological signs in A-T patients we determined if that was also the case
for Atm-deficient rats. Betamethasone treatment extended the lifespan of Atm
knockout rats, prevented microglial activation and significantly decreased
neuroinflammatory changes and motor neuron loss. These results point to
unrepaired damage to DNA leading to significant levels of cytosolic DNA in
Atm-deficient neurons and microglia and as a consequence activation of the
cGAS-STING pathway and cytokine production. This in turn would increase the
inflammatory microenvironment leading to dysfunction and death of neurons. Thus
the rat model represents a suitable one for studying neurodegeneration in A-T
and adds support for the use of anti-inflammatory drugs for the treatment of
neurodegeneration in A-T patients.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddw371
PMID: 28007901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
