---
reference_id: "PMID:33539324"
title: "Biallelic variants in TSPOAP1, encoding the active-zone protein RIMBP1, cause autosomal recessive dystonia."
authors:
- Mencacci NE
- Brockmann MM
- Dai J
- Pajusalu S
- Atasu B
- Campos J
- Pino G
- Gonzalez-Latapi P
- Patzke C
- Schwake M
- Tucci A
- Pittman A
- Simon-Sanchez J
- Carvill GL
- Balint B
- Wiethoff S
- Warner TT
- Papandreou A
- Soo A
- Rein R
- Kadastik-Eerme L
- Puusepp S
- Reinson K
- Tomberg T
- Hanagasi H
- Gasser T
- Bhatia KP
- Kurian MA
- Lohmann E
- Õunap K
- Rosenmund C
- Südhof TC
- Wood NW
- Krainc D
- Acuna C
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1172/JCI140625
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics, metabolism"
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- Calcium Signaling
- "Dendrites/genetics, metabolism"
- "Dystonic Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Purkinje Cells/metabolism
- Synaptic Transmission
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic variants in TSPOAP1, encoding the active-zone protein RIMBP1, cause autosomal recessive dystonia.
**Authors:** Mencacci NE, Brockmann MM, Dai J, Pajusalu S, Atasu B, Campos J, Pino G, Gonzalez-Latapi P, Patzke C, Schwake M, Tucci A, Pittman A, Simon-Sanchez J, Carvill GL, Balint B, Wiethoff S, Warner TT, Papandreou A, Soo A, Rein R, Kadastik-Eerme L, Puusepp S, Reinson K, Tomberg T, Hanagasi H, Gasser T, Bhatia KP, Kurian MA, Lohmann E, Õunap K, Rosenmund C, Südhof TC, Wood NW, Krainc D, Acuna C
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI140625](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI140625)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2021 Apr 1;131(7):e140625. doi: 10.1172/JCI140625.

Biallelic variants in TSPOAP1, encoding the active-zone protein RIMBP1, cause
autosomal recessive dystonia.

Mencacci NE(1)(2), Brockmann MM(3), Dai J(4), Pajusalu S(5)(6)(7), Atasu
B(8)(9), Campos J(10), Pino G(10), Gonzalez-Latapi P(1), Patzke C(4), Schwake
M(1), Tucci A(2), Pittman A(2), Simon-Sanchez J(8)(9), Carvill GL(1), Balint
B(2)(11), Wiethoff S(2)(9)(12), Warner TT(2)(13), Papandreou A(14)(15), Soo
A(14)(15), Rein R(16), Kadastik-Eerme L(17)(18), Puusepp S(5)(6), Reinson
K(5)(6), Tomberg T(19), Hanagasi H(20), Gasser T(8)(9), Bhatia KP(2), Kurian
MA(13)(14), Lohmann E(8)(9), Õunap K(5)(6), Rosenmund C(3), Südhof TC(4), Wood
NW(2), Krainc D(1), Acuna C(4)(10).

Author information:
(1)Ken and Ruth Davee Department of Neurology and Simpson Querrey Center for
Neurogenetics, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical and Movement Neurosciences, UCL Queen Square Institute
of Neurology, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Neurophysiology, Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
(7)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(8)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE)-Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany.
(9)Center of Neurology, Department of Neurodegeneration, Hertie Institute for
Clinical Brain Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(10)Chica and Heinz Schaller Foundation, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
and.
(11)Department of Neurology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(12)Klinik für Neurologie mit Institut für Translationale Neurologie, Albert
Schweitzer Campus 1, Gebäude A1, Münster, Germany.
(13)Reta Lila Weston Institute of Neurological Studies, UCL Queen Square
Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom.
(14)Molecular Neurosciences, Developmental Neurosciences, UCL Institute of Child
Health, London, United Kingdom.
(15)Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United
Kingdom.
(16)Children's Clinic.
(17)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery.
(18)Neurology Clinic, and.
(19)Radiology Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
(20)Behavioural Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology,
Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.

Dystonia is a debilitating hyperkinetic movement disorder, which can be
transmitted as a monogenic trait. Here, we describe homozygous frameshift,
nonsense, and missense variants in TSPOAP1, which encodes the active-zone
RIM-binding protein 1 (RIMBP1), as a genetic cause of autosomal recessive
dystonia in 7 subjects from 3 unrelated families. Subjects carrying
loss-of-function variants presented with juvenile-onset progressive generalized
dystonia, associated with intellectual disability and cerebellar atrophy.
Conversely, subjects carrying a pathogenic missense variant (p.Gly1808Ser)
presented with isolated adult-onset focal dystonia. In mice, complete loss of
RIMBP1, known to reduce neurotransmission, led to motor abnormalities
reminiscent of dystonia, decreased Purkinje cell dendritic arborization, and
reduced numbers of cerebellar synapses. In vitro analysis of the p.Gly1808Ser
variant showed larger spike-evoked calcium transients and enhanced
neurotransmission, suggesting that RIMBP1-linked dystonia can be caused by
either reduced or enhanced rates of spike-evoked release in relevant neural
networks. Our findings establish a direct link between dysfunction of the
presynaptic active zone and dystonia and highlight the critical role played by
well-balanced neurotransmission in motor control and disease pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI140625
PMCID: PMC8011894
PMID: 33539324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared
that no conflict of interest exists.
