---
reference_id: "PMID:37902689"
title: "Psychotherapies for the treatment of borderline personality disorder: A systematic review."
authors:
- Crotty K
- Viswanathan M
- Kennedy S
- Edlund MJ
- Ali R
- Siddiqui M
- Wines R
- Ratajczak P
- Gartlehner G
journal: J Consult Clin Psychol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1037/ccp0000833
keywords:
- Borderline Personality Disorder/therapy
- Humans
- Psychotherapy/methods
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psychotherapies for the treatment of borderline personality disorder: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Crotty K, Viswanathan M, Kennedy S, Edlund MJ, Ali R, Siddiqui M, Wines R, Ratajczak P, Gartlehner G
**Journal:** J Consult Clin Psychol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1037/ccp0000833](https://doi.org/10.1037/ccp0000833)

## Content

1. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2024 May;92(5):275-295. doi: 10.1037/ccp0000833. Epub 
2023 Oct 30.

Psychotherapies for the treatment of borderline personality disorder: A 
systematic review.

Crotty K(1), Viswanathan M(1), Kennedy S(1), Edlund MJ(1), Ali R(1), Siddiqui 
M(1), Wines R(1), Ratajczak P(2), Gartlehner G(1).

Author information:
(1)RTI International.
(2)Department for Evidence-based Medicine and Evaluation, Danube University 
Krems.

OBJECTIVE: Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is the most common personality 
disorder, affecting 1.8% of the general population, 10% of psychiatric 
outpatients, and 15%-25% of psychiatric inpatients. Practice guidelines 
recommend psychotherapies as first-line treatments. However, psychotherapies 
commonly used for the treatment of BPD are numerous, and little is known about 
the comparative effectiveness of each individual psychotherapy versus treatment 
as usual (TAU) or other psychotherapies. To systematically assess the 
comparative effectiveness of commonly used psychotherapies versus TAU or versus 
other psychotherapies for BPD treatment.
METHOD: We conducted systematic literature searches in MEDLINE, EMBASE, the 
Cochrane Library, and APA PsycINFO up to July 14, 2022, and searched reference 
lists of pertinent articles and reviews. Inclusion criteria were (a) patients 13 
years or older with a diagnosis of BPD, (b) treatment with commonly used 
psychotherapies, (c) comparison with TAU or another psychotherapy, (d) 
assessment of relevant BPD-related health outcomes, and (e) randomized or 
nonrandomized trials or controlled observational studies. Two investigators 
independently screened abstracts and full-text articles and graded the certainty 
of evidence using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and 
Evaluation approach.
RESULTS: We found 25 psychotherapy studies meeting inclusion criteria with data 
on 2,545 participants. Seventeen studies compared nine psychotherapies with TAU 
and nine studies compared eight psychotherapies with another psychotherapy for 
the treatment of BPD. Overall, both TAU and included psychotherapies were 
effective in treating the severity and symptoms of BPD. Moderate certainty of 
evidence suggests that systems training for emotional predictability and problem 
solving is more effective than TAU for the treatment of BPD; low certainty of 
evidence suggests that dialectical behavior therapy, schema therapy, 
transference-focused psychotherapy, acceptance and commitment therapy, 
manual-assisted cognitive therapy, and cognitive behavioral therapy are more 
effective than TAU for treating BPD. We were unable to draw conclusions from 
head-to-head comparisons of psychotherapies, which were limited to single 
studies with very low to low certainty of evidence.
CONCLUSIONS: All commonly used psychotherapies improve BPD severity, symptoms, 
and functioning. Our assessment found no strong evidence suggesting that any one 
psychotherapy is more beneficial than another. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 
2024 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/ccp0000833
PMID: 37902689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]