---
reference_id: "PMID:40508048"
title: "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: Pathophysiological Mechanisms and Treatment Strategies (Part 2)."
authors:
- Tolochko C
- Shiryaeva O
- Alekseeva T
- Dyachuk V
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijms26115240
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: Pathophysiological Mechanisms and Treatment Strategies (Part 2).
**Authors:** Tolochko C, Shiryaeva O, Alekseeva T, Dyachuk V
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms26115240](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms26115240)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2025 May 29;26(11):5240. doi: 10.3390/ijms26115240.

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: Pathophysiological Mechanisms and Treatment 
Strategies (Part 2).

Tolochko C(1), Shiryaeva O(2), Alekseeva T(1), Dyachuk V(2).

Author information:
(1)V. A. Almazov Federal National Medical Research Centre, Saint Petersburg 
197341, Russia.
(2)Research Laboratory of Neurogenesis and Neurodegenerative Diseases, V. A. 
Almazov Federal National Medical Research Centre, Saint Petersburg 197341, 
Russia.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease 
associated with damage to motor neurons and leading to severe muscle weakness 
and, eventually, death. Over the past decade, understanding of the key 
pathogenetic links of ALS, including glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity and 
oxidative stress, has significantly advanced. This review considers the recent 
evidence on molecular mechanisms of these processes, as well as the therapeutic 
strategies aimed at their modulation. Special attention is paid to 
antiglutamatergic and antioxidant drugs as approaches to the ALS pathogenetic 
therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms26115240
PMCID: PMC12154316
PMID: 40508048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.