---
reference_id: "PMID:28783725"
title: A Braf kinase-inactive mutant induces lung adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Nieto P
- Ambrogio C
- Esteban-Burgos L
- Gómez-López G
- Blasco MT
- Yao Z
- Marais R
- Rosen N
- Chiarle R
- Pisano DG
- Barbacid M
- Santamaría D
journal: Nature
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nature23297
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/genetics, pathology"
- Alleles
- Animals
- Carcinogenesis/genetics
- Disease Progression
- Female
- "Genes, Neurofibromatosis 1"
- Humans
- Loss of Function Mutation
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, metabolism"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Braf kinase-inactive mutant induces lung adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Nieto P, Ambrogio C, Esteban-Burgos L, Gómez-López G, Blasco MT, Yao Z, Marais R, Rosen N, Chiarle R, Pisano DG, Barbacid M, Santamaría D
**Journal:** Nature (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature23297](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature23297)

## Content

1. Nature. 2017 Aug 10;548(7666):239-243. doi: 10.1038/nature23297. Epub 2017 Aug
 2.

A Braf kinase-inactive mutant induces lung adenocarcinoma.

Nieto P(1), Ambrogio C(1), Esteban-Burgos L(1), Gómez-López G(2), Blasco MT(1),
Yao Z(3), Marais R(4), Rosen N(3), Chiarle R(5), Pisano DG(2), Barbacid M(1),
Santamaría D(1).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Oncology, Molecular Oncology Programme, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Bioinformatics Unit, Structural Biology and Biocomputing Programme, Centro
Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(3)Program in Molecular Pharmacology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York 10065, USA.
(4)Molecular Oncology Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, M20 4BX
Manchester, UK.
(5)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2017 Nov;14(11):648-649. doi:
10.1038/nrclinonc.2017.140.

The initiating oncogenic event in almost half of human lung adenocarcinomas is
still unknown, a fact that complicates the development of selective targeted
therapies. Yet these tumours harbour a number of alterations without obvious
oncogenic function including BRAF-inactivating mutations. Inactivating BRAF
mutants in lung predominate over the activating V600E mutant that is frequently
observed in other tumour types. Here we demonstrate that the expression of an
endogenous Braf(D631A) kinase-inactive isoform in mice (corresponding to the
human BRAF(D594A) mutation) triggers lung adenocarcinoma in vivo, indicating
that BRAF-inactivating mutations are initiating events in lung oncogenesis.
Moreover, inactivating BRAF mutations have also been identified in a subset of
KRAS-driven human lung tumours. Co-expression of Kras(G12V) and Braf(D631A) in
mouse lung cells markedly enhances tumour initiation, a phenomenon mediated by
Craf kinase activity, and effectively accelerates tumour progression when
activated in advanced lung adenocarcinomas. We also report a key role for the
wild-type Braf kinase in sustaining Kras(G12V)/Braf(D631A)-driven tumours.
Ablation of the wild-type Braf allele prevents the development of lung
adenocarcinoma by inducing a further increase in MAPK signalling that results in
oncogenic toxicity; this effect can be abolished by pharmacological inhibition
of Mek to restore tumour growth. However, the loss of wild-type Braf also
induces transdifferentiation of club cells, which leads to the rapid development
of lethal intrabronchiolar lesions. These observations indicate that the signal
intensity of the MAPK pathway is a critical determinant not only in tumour
development, but also in dictating the nature of the cancer-initiating cell and
ultimately the resulting tumour phenotype.

DOI: 10.1038/nature23297
PMCID: PMC5648056
PMID: 28783725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare competing financial
interests: details are available in the online version of the paper.
