---
reference_id: "PMID:24139842"
title: Madras motor neuron disease (MMND) is distinct from the riboflavin transporter genetic defects that cause Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome.
authors:
- Nalini A
- Pandraud A
- Mok K
- Houlden H
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2013.08.003
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Bulbar Palsy, Progressive/genetics"
- Child
- Female
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Humans
- India
- Male
- Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Motor Neuron Disease/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Madras motor neuron disease (MMND) is distinct from the riboflavin transporter genetic defects that cause Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome.
**Authors:** Nalini A, Pandraud A, Mok K, Houlden H
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2013.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2013.08.003)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2013 Nov 15;334(1-2):119-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2013.08.003.
Epub  2013 Aug 13.

Madras motor neuron disease (MMND) is distinct from the riboflavin transporter 
genetic defects that cause Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome.

Nalini A(1), Pandraud A, Mok K, Houlden H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences, Bangalore, India. Electronic address: atchayaramnal@yahoo.co.in.

INTRODUCTION: Madras motor neuron disease (MMND), MMND variant (MMNDV) and 
Familial MMND (FMMND) have a unique geographic distribution predominantly 
reported from Southern India. The characteristic features are onset in young, 
weakness and wasting of limbs, multiple lower cranial nerve palsies and 
sensorineural hearing loss. There is a considerable overlap in the phenotype of 
MMND with Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome (BVVL) Boltshauser syndrome, 
Nathalie syndrome and Fazio-Londe syndrome. Recently a number of BVVL cases and 
families have been described with mutations in two riboflavin transporter genes 
SLC52A2 and SLC52A3 (solute carrier family 52, riboflavin transporter, member 2 
and 3 respectively).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We describe six families and four sporadic MMND cases that 
have been clinically characterized in detail with history, examination, imaging 
and electrophysiological investigations. We sequenced the SLC52A1, SLC52A2 and 
SLC52A3 in affected probands and sporadic individuals from the MMND series as 
well as the C9ORF72 expansion. No genetic defects were identified and the 
C9ORF72 repeats were all less than 10.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that MMND is a distinct clinical subgroup of 
childhood onset MND patients where the known genetic defects are so far 
negative. The clinico-genetic features of MMND in comparison with the BVVL group 
of childhood motor neuron diseases suggest that these diseases are likely to 
share a common defective biological pathway that may be a combination of genetic 
and environmental factors.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2013.08.003
PMCID: PMC4068726
PMID: 24139842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Madras motor neuron disease (MMND) a unique disorder which was
described in 1970, was a name given by Meenakshisundaram et al. to a group of
patients from Madras (now called Chennai) located in Southern India [1]. The disease manifests in young
individuals with clinical features of thin habitus, wasting and weakness
predominantly of distal muscles of the limbs, involvement of facial and bulbar
muscles, pyramidal dysfunction and associated sensorineural hearing impairment. The
disease was described as a sporadic disorder with benign course [1,2]. Later they described the
same disorder in additional 29 cases [2,3]. Subsequently a few more reports from Bangalore
and Vellore in the South, Mumbai in the West and Kolkata in the East were published
[4–10]. Apart from reports mainly from India
three independent cases, one each from Thailand, Italy and China have been reported
and curiously the patient in the Italian report had originated from South India
[11–13]. Although the earliest reports stated that it was a
sporadic benign disorder, we have reported on the familial form of MMND and also
observed that the disorders could have a more rapid and fatal course [14]. We have reported on the entity of
MMND variant wherein these patients in addition have features of optic atrophy
[15].

MMND overlaps clinically with Brown–Vialetto–Van Laere
Syndrome (BVVL) [16,17], which in itself is likely allelic to a number of other
complex childhood motor neuron diseases such as Boltshauser syndrome [18], Nathalie syndrome [19] and Fazio–Londe syndrome
[20]. Recently, mutations
in the gene SLC52A3 (solute carrier family 52, riboflavin
transporter, member 3) were identified as a cause of BVVL in a consanguineous family
with multiple affected individuals [21,22]. Mutations were subsequently found in 6 additional
families. In humans there are 3 members of the riboflavin transporter family,
SLC52A1, SLC52A2 and SLC52A3 [23,24]. SLC52A2 and SLC52A3 cause typical BVVL and SLC52A1
causes a complex childhood syndrome with similar neurological features. The great
importance of identifying mutations in this patient group is that riboflavin
supplementation improves the clinical phenotype.

Here we describe the detailed clinical phenotype and genetic
screening of six MMND families and four sporadic cases. The SLC52A1, SLC52A2 and
SLC52A3 genes were sequenced and the series was examined for C9ORF72 expansions which
have recently been shown to be a common cause of MND [25,26].

Ten patients with classical features of MMND were studied in this
report. All these patients had volunteered and gave written informed consent to
perform the genetic analysis for presence of BVVL gene in their blood samples. All
patients were evaluated at the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences,
a tertiary national referral center for neurological disorders. The medical records
were scrutinized and all data regarding the clinical features including
electromyography, nerve conduction studies, audiological investigations, visual
evoked potentials, CT scan and MRI brain findings were entered into a proforma. After
the consent 10 ml of blood for genomic DNA was collected and DNA
separated and stored at the Molecular genetics laboratory DNA Bank at the Institute.
Patients were informed about the non-availability of facilities in India to
genetically diagnose these rare orphan disorders and hence they opted to have the
genetic testing for MMND and BVVL syndrome in the UK and the DNA samples were
transferred by the patients.

SLC52A1, SLC52A2
and SLC52A3 PCR primers were designed using Exon Primer so
that PCR products would span whole exons and approximately 35 bp
of flanking introns (http://ihg.gsf.de/ihg/ExonPrimer.html) (Table 2). PCR primers were also
designed for SLC52A1 and SLC52A3 as
above and previously described [27,28]. PCR amplification was performed using 25 ng of genomic DNA, 12 μl 2× PCR Master
Mix (Roche, Indianapolis, IN), 1 μl each of 10 μM forward and reverse  primers, and 2 μl H2O. Touchdown PCR was performed as follows:
95 °C for 5 min, followed by 8 cycles of denaturing at 95 °C for 20 s, annealing at 60 °C for 20 s, and extending at 72 °C for 30 s.
Following these 8 cycles, 20 cycles of the
same conditions were run, however the annealing temperature was decreased by
0.5 °C per cycle until the final annealing temperature
reached 50 °C. Finally, 12 cycles were run
with denaturing at 95 °C for 20 s,
annealing at 50 °C for 20 s, and extending
at 72 °C for 30 s. Product underwent final
extension at 72 °C for 5 min. PCR
amplification products were cleaned with AMPure SPRI beads as per the
manufacturer's protocol (Agencourt, Danvers, MA, US).

Approximately 25 ng (roughly 1 μl) of each PCR product was used as template per each sequencing reaction.
Sequencing reactions contained 5 × reaction buffer
(2 μl), big dye (0.5 μl) (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and H2O (5.5 μl), and the forward or reverse primer that was used for amplification of the
original product (1 μl). Conditions were as follows:
25 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C,
annealing at 50 °C, and extension at 60 °C were performed. Sequencing reactions were cleaned using CleanSEQ SPRI
beads as per the manufacturer's protocol (Agencourt). Sequencing was performed
using the 3730 DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems).

We screened the GGGGCC expansion in the MMND cohort and the
controls using the reversed-prime PCR protocol as previously reported. Briefly,
100 ng of genomic DNA was amplified with a final volume of
20 μl containing 10 μl FastStart PCR
Master Mix (Roche), 0.18 mM 7-deaza dGTP, 1 × Qiagen Q solution, 10% DMSO, 0.7 μM reverse primer
consisting of four GGGGCC repeats and an anchor tail
(TACGCATCCCAGTTTGAGACGGGGGCCGGGGCCGGGGCCGGGG), 1.4 μM 6FAM
fluorescent-primer located 280 bp 3′ prime to the repeat
sequence (AGTCGCTAGAGGCGAAAGC) and 1.4 μM anchor primer
corresponding to the anchor tail of the reverse primer (TACGCATCCCAGTTTGAGACG). A
touchdown PCR cycling protocol was used where the initial annealing temperature
was lowered from 70 °C to 56 °C in
2 °C increments and a 3 min extension
time for each cycle. Fragment length analysis was performed on an ABI 3730XL
genetic analyzer (Applied Biosystems Inc., Foster City, CA, USA), and data
analyzed using ABI GeneScan software. Each case was analyzed in duplicate to
confirm allele sizes.

Hearing acuity was established at octave frequencies from 250 Hz to 8000 Hz for air conduction and 250 Hz to 4000 Hz for bone conduction. Degree of hearing
impairment was classified based on the average of air conduction pure tone thresholds
at all octave frequencies tested hereafter referred to as all frequency average
(AFA). This method of averaging was for a relatively better reflection of average
hearing level. Based on AFA, the patients were grouped as per the three frequency
average classification [29]
as normal hearing (− 10 to 25 dB), mild
(26–40 dB), moderate (41–55 dB),
moderately severe (56–70 dB), severe (71–90 dB) and profound (> 90 dB)
hearing loss. Pure tone audiometric findings were analyzed in terms of percentage of
ears affected.

Descriptive statistics mean ± standard deviation (range) for continuous variables and number
(percentage) for categorical variables were used to express data. All the data
analyses were carried out using SPSS Ver. 13.0.

Nine of the ten patients hailed from Southern India. There were
seven males. The diagnosis was Familial MMND in 6 patients [FMMD variant-5, FMMND-1],
Sporadic MMND in 4 cases [SMMND variant-2, SMMND-2]. Mean age at onset was
14.8 ± 4.34 years
(range, 9–20). Mean age at presentation was 21.8 ± 6.5 years (range, 11–31).
Mean duration of illness was 85.0 ± 54.7 months (3–168). Classically majority had a slender
habitus. The salient neurological symptoms and signs among these 10 patients are
shown in Table 1. The
predominant initial symptom at onset was impaired hearing in 6 patients (60.0%). The
neurological deficits were bilateral optic atrophy in 6 patients (60.0%) and
associated mild visual impairment in 4 patients (66.6%). Bifacial weakness was noted
in 5 patients (50.0%). Clinical hearing impairment in 10 patients (100.0%). Bulbar
weakness in 10 patients (100.0%) [dysarthria in all 9 patients (90.0%), hypophonia in
9 patients (90.0%)]. Moderate to severe atrophy of the tongue with fasciculations was
seen in 8 patients (80.0%). Wasting and weakness of distal muscles of the upper limbs
were observed in 7 patients (70.0%). Wasting and weakness of distal muscles of the
lower limbs were present in 3 patients (30.0%). Small muscles of the hand were
severely weak when the upper limbs were affected. Signs of pyramidal tract
dysfunction in the upper limbs were seen in 6 patients (60.0%), and in the lower
limbs in 10 patients (100.0%). Babinski's sign was positive in 5 patients (50.0%).
Mild cerebellar signs such as gait ataxia were found in 3 patients (30.0%). Higher
mental functions were normal in all.

Among the 20 ears (10 patients), various degrees of hearing acuity
(from mild to profound hearing loss) were demonstrated. Pure tone audiometric
findings in them were, sensorineural (SN) hearing loss of mild degree in 1 patient's
ears (10.0%), moderate in 2 patient's ears (20.0%), moderately severe in 2 patient's
ears (20.0%), severe in 2 patient's ears (20.0%) and profound degree in 3 patient's
ears (30.0%).

The results of the distortion product (DP) otoacoustic emissions
(OAE) and auditory brain stem response (ABR) were available for the 20 ears. The most
significant finding was the presence of robust OAEs in the presence of impaired AFA
(ranging from mild to profound degree of SN hearing loss) in all. Thus, DPOAE and ABR
demonstrated a neural dysfunction.

Screening of theSLC52A1, SLC52A2 and SLC52A3 genes in MMND cases and
family probands by Sanger sequencing of the coding and flanking intronic regions did
not reveal any pathogenic mutation. These genes were also analyzed using liquid based
exome enrichment and sequencing and were found to also be negative. The C9ORF72
expansion was analyzed and found that the GGGGCC repeats were in the normal range of
than 10.

In this present report we describe a series of MMND patients and
families. All 10 patients had the classical features of MMND/MMNDV with progressive
hearing impairment associated with progressive involvement of bulbar nuclei (7th and
9th to 10th) including severe muscle weakness and wasting due to anterior horn cell
involvement, with pyramidal dysfunction.

It is long been debated that MMND resembles
Brown–Vialetto–Van Laere (BVVL) syndrome and the other complex childhood
motor neuron disease syndromes which consist of Boltshauser syndrome, Nathalie
syndrome and Fazio–Londe syndrome [24,30]. Over the last 110 years
after its initial description, only 39 cases of BVVL syndrome have been documented
worldwide [31]. In contrast
we have seen more than 120 cases of MMND at a single neurological center over a
38 year period. BVVL syndrome is distinctly a rare familial
disorder with slow or rapid progression of bilateral nerve deafness, involvement of
the seventh to twelfth cranial nerves and rarely the third, fifth and sixth cranial
nerves. Lower motor neuron signs in the limbs are infrequently present and pyramidal
signs are rare [32], whereas
in MMND lower and upper motor neuron signs are seen in majority of patients and third
or sixth cranial nerve is never noted to be affected. In BVVL syndrome a female
preponderance (M:F; 1:5) has been reported while in MNND a male preponderance or
equal distribution is noted. In BVVL syndrome, more than 50% of reported cases are
familial, and also autosomal dominant inheritance with variable penetrance and
X-linked inheritance was postulated in some families [33].

This clinico-genetic study of MMND presents the clinical phenotype
of a number of cases that have been characterized in detail. The genetic exclusion of
the three genes that have been reported to cause the classical BVVL phenotype and the
C9ORF72 which is the commonest cause of MND is important as it indicates that MMND is
genetically distinct from these other forms of the disease. This suggests that MMND
represents a distinct form of childhood onset motor neuron disease and does not, as
previously suggested share any of the genes associated with BVVL like
disorders.

The similarity of MMND with BVVL and the other early onset childhood
motor neuron diseases suggests that the familial form MMND is likely to share a
common or associated pathological pathway. It is also possible that MMND could be
caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors and of course we cannot
exclude the possibility that these diseases could be associated with an unknown
expanded repeat, as in the case of C9ORF72 which would be very difficult to identify
using Sanger or next generation techniques. MMND is familial and sporadic and we
suggest further analysis of the genetic and environmental factors to identify the
causes of this disorder.

The authors have no conflict of interest.