---
reference_id: "PMID:25300213"
title: "N-alkylpyridinium quaternization combined with liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry: A highly sensitive method to quantify fatty alcohols in thyroid tissues."
authors:
- Cao Y
- Guan Q
- Sun T
- Wang H
- Leng J
- Guo Y
journal: Anal Chim Acta
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2014.08.027
keywords:
- "Chromatography, Liquid/methods"
- Fatty Alcohols/analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Limit of Detection
- Male
- Pyridinium Compounds/chemistry
- "Spectrometry, Mass, Electrospray Ionization/methods"
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry/methods
- Thyroid Gland/chemistry
- Thyroid Neoplasms/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# N-alkylpyridinium quaternization combined with liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry: A highly sensitive method to quantify fatty alcohols in thyroid tissues.
**Authors:** Cao Y, Guan Q, Sun T, Wang H, Leng J, Guo Y
**Journal:** Anal Chim Acta (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.aca.2014.08.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2014.08.027)

## Content

1. Anal Chim Acta. 2014 Nov 7;849:19-26. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2014.08.027. Epub
2014  Aug 20.

N-alkylpyridinium quaternization combined with liquid 
chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry: A highly 
sensitive method to quantify fatty alcohols in thyroid tissues.

Cao Y(1), Guan Q(2), Sun T(3), Wang H(1), Leng J(1), Guo Y(4).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Organic Mass Spectrometry in Shanghai, Shanghai Institute 
of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 200032 Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center 
(FUSCC), 200032 Shanghai, China; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical 
College, Fudan University, 200032 Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center 
(FUSCC), 200032 Shanghai, China; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical 
College, Fudan University, 200032 Shanghai, China. Electronic address: 
tuanqisun@163.com.
(4)National Center for Organic Mass Spectrometry in Shanghai, Shanghai Institute 
of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 200032 Shanghai, China. 
Electronic address: ylguo@sioc.ac.cn.

A highly sensitive method was developed for the identification and 
quantification of fatty alcohols in biological tissues. In the presence of 
pyridine-d0 and triflic anhydride (Tf2O), fatty alcohols were converted into 
permanently charged N-alkylpyridinium ions. Stable isotope-labeled derivatives 
were generated by pyridine-d5 and added as internal standard (IS). The mixture 
was analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to positive electrospray 
ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS). This method was optimized 
and validated in terms of reaction time, derivatization efficiency, stability, 
desalting, and ion suppression effect. Besides, fatty alcohols exhibited good 
linear relationship (r(2)>0.993) over the concentration range of 10 ngmL(-1)-1 
μgmL(-1). The limits of detection (LODs) were lowered from previously reported 
0.1 ngmL(-1) to 0.25 pgmL(-1). Precision (RSD%<15.6%), accuracy (93.0-107.2%), 
matrix effect, and recovery (in thyroid tissues) were validated as well. 
Finally, this method was applied for the analysis of ten even carbon-numbered 
fatty alcohols (C8-C24) in human thyroid carcinoma and para-carcinoma tissues, 
revealing a significant decrease of fatty alcohols (free and esterified) in 
thyroid carcinoma tissues (p<0.05).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aca.2014.08.027
PMID: 25300213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]