---
reference_id: "PMID:39521281"
title: Prevalence and outcomes of cancer and treatment-associated toxicities for patients with ataxia telangiectasia.
authors:
- Magnarelli A
- Liu Q
- Wang F
- Peng XP
- Wright J
- Oak N
- Natale V
- Rothblum-Oviatt C
- Lefton-Greif MA
- McGrath-Morrow S
- Crawford TO
- Ehrhardt MJ
- Lederman HM
- Sharma R
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2024.10.023
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/epidemiology, genetics, drug therapy, mortality"
- "Neoplasms/epidemiology, mortality, drug therapy, genetics"
- Prevalence
- Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Incidence
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and outcomes of cancer and treatment-associated toxicities for patients with ataxia telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Magnarelli A, Liu Q, Wang F, Peng XP, Wright J, Oak N, Natale V, Rothblum-Oviatt C, Lefton-Greif MA, McGrath-Morrow S, Crawford TO, Ehrhardt MJ, Lederman HM, Sharma R
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2024.10.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2024.10.023)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2025 Feb;155(2):640-649. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2024.10.023. Epub 2024 Nov 8.

Prevalence and outcomes of cancer and treatment-associated toxicities for 
patients with ataxia telangiectasia.

Magnarelli A(1), Liu Q(2), Wang F(3), Peng XP(4), Wright J(5), Oak N(6), Natale 
V(7), Rothblum-Oviatt C(8), Lefton-Greif MA(9), McGrath-Morrow S(10), Crawford 
TO(11), Ehrhardt MJ(12), Lederman HM(5), Sharma R(13).

Author information:
(1)Eudowood Division of Pediatric Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md.
(2)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Cancer Control, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, Tenn.
(4)A-T Clinical Center, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Md; Division of 
Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hosptial at Montefiore, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY.
(5)Eudowood Division of Pediatric Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md; A-T Clinical Center, Johns 
Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Md.
(6)Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tenn.
(7)A-T Clinical Center, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Md; Forgotten 
Diseases Research Foundation, Santa Clara, Calif.
(8)A-T Clinical Center, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Md.
(9)A-T Clinical Center, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Md; Department of 
Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md; Department of 
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Md; Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Johns Hopkins 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md.
(10)A-T Clinical Center, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Md; Division of 
Pulmonary Medicine and Sleep, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Pa; Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa.
(11)A-T Clinical Center, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Md; Department of 
Neurology, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, Md; Department of Pediatrics, 
Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, Md.
(12)Department of Epidemiology and Cancer Control, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, Tenn; Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, Tenn.
(13)A-T Clinical Center, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Md; Department of 
Hematology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tenn. Electronic 
address: richa.sharma@stjude.org.

BACKGROUND: Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a DNA repair disorder with cancer 
predisposition.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to characterize the prevalence and outcomes of hematologic 
and solid cancers and treatment-associated toxicities in individuals with A-T.
METHODS: Data were retrospectively analyzed from the Johns Hopkins Ataxia 
Telangiectasia Clinical Center cohort. Cumulative incidence and standardized 
incidence ratios of cancer, survival probability after cancer diagnosis, and 
standardized mortality ratios were calculated. Cox regression estimated risk of 
death on the basis of chemotherapy (standard vs reduced) dosing, and 
multivariable logistic regression evaluated cancer risk associations with ataxia 
telangiectasia mutated (ATM) exons and variants.
RESULTS: Eighty-four (16.5%) of 508 individuals were diagnosed with a primary 
cancer, of whom 62 (74%) were hematologic in origin and 22 (26%) were 
solid-organ cancers. The cumulative incidence of cancer was 29% by age 35 years. 
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma occurred most frequently (n = 39), whereas solid cancers 
disproportionately affected those 18 years and older (n = 22). The standardized 
mortality ratio was 24.6 (95% CI, 21.1-28.4) overall and 232.9 (95% 
CI,178.1-299.2) among individuals with cancer. Risk of death was higher when 
treated with standard/unknown versus modified chemotherapy (hazard ratio, 2.2; 
95% CI, 1.1-4.4; P = .024). Chemotherapy-associated toxicities developed in 58% 
of individuals, predominantly neurologic (n = 14) and gastrointestinal (n = 10) 
systems. Three exons were enriched for cancer-associated variants.
CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with A-T experience a wide array of blood and 
solid-organ malignancies, high mortality rates, and treatment-related 
toxicities, highlighting need for targeted therapies to mitigate toxicity and 
optimize survival.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2024.10.023
PMCID: PMC11915532
PMID: 39521281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement This work was funded by the 
National Institutes of Health (grant no. RR00052 to H.L., T.O.C., J.W., 
M.A.L.G., and S.M.M. and grant no. R21 TR003534 to H.L., T.O.C., J.W., M.A.L.G., 
S.M.M., and V.N.), the Food and Drug Administration (grant no. RO1 FD007605 to 
H.L., T.O.C., J.W., M.A.L.G., S.M.M., and V.N.), and the A-T Children’s Project 
(to H.L., T.O.C., J.W., M.A.L.G., S.M.M., and V.N.). Disclosure of potential 
conflict of interest: The authors declare that they have no relevant conflicts 
of interest.