---
reference_id: "PMID:20066421"
title: "[Cystic desmoplastic small round cell tumor: tumor development from cystic-\"mesothelioblastic\" areas?]."
authors:
- Kuhnen C
- Schäfer KL
- Franke K
- Poremba C
journal: Pathologe
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s00292-009-1258-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Cystic desmoplastic small round cell tumor: tumor development from cystic-"mesothelioblastic" areas?].
**Authors:** Kuhnen C, Schäfer KL, Franke K, Poremba C
**Journal:** Pathologe (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00292-009-1258-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00292-009-1258-5)

## Content

1. Pathologe. 2010 Mar;31(2):142-9. doi: 10.1007/s00292-009-1258-5.

[Cystic desmoplastic small round cell tumor: tumor development from 
cystic-"mesothelioblastic" areas?].

[Article in German]

Kuhnen C(1), Schäfer KL, Franke K, Poremba C.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pathologie am Clemenshospital, Medical Center, Düesbergweg 128, 
48153 Münster. kuhnen@patho-muenster.de

A 7-cm cystic lesion in the upper left abdomen and additional smaller solid 
tumor nodules were diagnosed incidentally in a 15-year-old boy without tumor 
symptoms. The main tumorous cystic lesion showed a flattened single-cell tumor 
cell component in gradual transition to stratified, papillary and truly 
"invasive" typical desmoplastic areas of a desmoplastic small round-cell tumor 
(DSRCT). The Ki-67-proliferation index gradually increased within three 
histologic tumor patterns up to about 70% in the typical desmoplastic 
(infiltrating) component. Using microdissection techniques, EWS-WT1-gene fusion 
transcripts were detected in the cystic (single-cell-layered), the papillary and 
the solid tumor proliferations (exon 7 of EWS on chromosome 22 with exon 8 of 
WT1 on chromosome 11). The presented case illustrates a predominant cystic 
growth pattern of DSRCT, in which a stepwise development in the pathogenesis of 
DSRCT from cystic (-"mesothelioblastic") towards a more papillary proliferation 
and finally typical "infiltrative" desmoplastic tumor pattern might be 
discussed. The cystic pattern could represent an initial stage in the 
development of the neoplasia. The presence of specific EWS-WT1-gene fusion 
transcripts in all tumor growth patterns in this respect would indicate an early 
event in t(11;22)(p13;q12) translocation in the pathogenesis of DSRCT.

DOI: 10.1007/s00292-009-1258-5
PMID: 20066421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]