---
reference_id: "PMID:37817707"
title: Potassium Voltage-Gated Channel Subfamily H Member 1 (KCNH1) Missense Mutation Causing Epileptic Encephalopathy And Autistic Behaviour.
authors:
- Chand P
- Sulaiman A
- Kirmani S
journal: J Pak Med Assoc
year: '2023'
doi: 10.47391/JPMA.6766
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potassium Voltage-Gated Channel Subfamily H Member 1 (KCNH1) Missense Mutation Causing Epileptic Encephalopathy And Autistic Behaviour.
**Authors:** Chand P, Sulaiman A, Kirmani S
**Journal:** J Pak Med Assoc (2023)
**DOI:** [10.47391/JPMA.6766](https://doi.org/10.47391/JPMA.6766)

## Content

1. J Pak Med Assoc. 2023 Sep;73(9):1894-1896. doi: 10.47391/JPMA.6766.

Potassium Voltage-Gated Channel Subfamily H Member 1 (KCNH1) Missense Mutation 
Causing Epileptic Encephalopathy And Autistic Behaviour.

Chand P(1), Sulaiman A(2), Kirmani S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric and Child Health, Aga Khan University Hospital, 
Karachi,Pakistan.
(2)Department of Medical Education, Aga Khan University Hospital, 
Karachi,Pakistan.

The phenotypically similar genetic diseases Zimmermann Laband syndrome (ZLS) and 
Temple-Baraitser syndrome (TMBTS) cause neurodevelopmental problems. Mutations 
in the gene coding for potassium voltage-gated channel, primarily KCNH1, cause 
these symptoms. An uncommon mutation in KCNH1 (p.Arg357Trp) present on Exon 7, 
reported to replace arginine with tryptophan at codon 357 of the KCNH1 protein 
c.1069C>T, caused pharma coresistantseizures and autistic behaviour in a 
2.7-year-old boy. This mutation causes problems with protein modelling and has 
yet to be documented in any genetic databases around the world. This mutation 
was overlapped with GPHN gene, c.828+1G>A, in our patient, causing GPHN related 
spectrum disorder (autosomal dominant) along with molybdenum cofactor deficiency 
(autosomal recessive) leading to a neuropsychiatric presentation including 
autistic behaviour, making diagnosis and management even more complicated.

DOI: 10.47391/JPMA.6766
PMID: 37817707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]