---
reference_id: "PMID:38684297"
title: "[Clinical analysis and genetic diagnosis of three children with Isoleucine metabolic disorders due to variants of HSD17B10 and ACAT1 genes]."
authors:
- Ji W
- Tian G
- Zhang X
- Wang Y
- Yang Y
- Zhou Z
- Guo J
journal: Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20230518-00300
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Acetyl-CoA C-Acetyltransferase/genetics
- Isoleucine/genetics
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, diagnosis"
- Child
- Mutation
- "Carnitine/analogs & derivatives, blood, urine"
- Acetyl-CoA C-Acyltransferase/deficiency
- 3-Hydroxyacyl CoA Dehydrogenases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Clinical analysis and genetic diagnosis of three children with Isoleucine metabolic disorders due to variants of HSD17B10 and ACAT1 genes].
**Authors:** Ji W, Tian G, Zhang X, Wang Y, Yang Y, Zhou Z, Guo J
**Journal:** Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20230518-00300](https://doi.org/10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20230518-00300)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2024 May 10;41(5):540-545. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20230518-00300.

[Clinical analysis and genetic diagnosis of three children with Isoleucine
metabolic disorders due to variants of HSD17B10 and ACAT1 genes].

[Article in Chinese]

Ji W(1), Tian G, Zhang X, Wang Y, Yang Y, Zhou Z, Guo J.

Author information:
(1)Neonatal Screening Center, Shanghai Children's Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200040, China. tiangl@shchildren.com.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the clinical, biochemical and genetic characteristics of
three children with Isoleucine metabolic disorders due to variants of HSD17B10
and ACAT1 genes.
METHODS: Two children with 17β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 10 (HSD17B10)
deficiency and a child with β-ketothiolase deficiency (BKD) diagnosed at
Shanghai Children's Hospital between 2014 and 2021 were selected as the study
subjects. Clinical data of the children were collected. The children were
subjected to blood acylcarnitine, urinary organic acid and genetic testing, and
candidate variants were analyzed with bioinformatic tools.
RESULTS: The main symptoms of the three children had included epilepsy,
developmental delay, hypotonia and acidosis. Their blood acylcarnitine
methylcrotonyl carnitine (C5:1), 3-hydroxyisovalerylcarnitine (C5-OH) and
3-hydroxybutylcarnitine (C4OH) were increased to various extents, and urine
organic acids including methyl crotonylglycine and 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyric
acid were significantly increased. Child 1 and child 2 were respectively found
to harbor a c.347G>A (p.R116Q) variant and a c.274G>A (p.A92T) variant of the
HSD17B10 gene, and child 3 was found to harbor compound heterozygous variants of
the ACAT1 gene, namely c.547G>A (p.G183R) and a c.331G>C (p.A111P). Among these,
the c.274G>A (p.A92T) and c.331G>C (p.A111P) variants were unreported
previously. Based on the guidelines from the American College of Medical
Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), they were respectively classified as variant of
unknown significance (PP3_Strong+PM2_supporting) and likely pathogenic
(PM3+PM2_Supporting+PP3_Moderate+PP4).
CONCLUSION: Both the HSD17B10 deficiency and BKD can lead to Isoleucine
metabolism disorders, which may be difficult to distinguish clinically. Genetic
testing can further confirm the diagnosis. Discoveries of the HSD17B10: c.274G>A
(p.A92T) variant and the ACAT1: c.331G>C (p.A111P) variant have enriched the
mutational spectrum of the two diseases.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20230518-00300
PMID: 38684297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
