---
reference_id: "PMID:39272213"
title: Genomic and phenotypic landscapes of X-linked hereditary hearing loss in the Chinese population.
authors:
- Feng H
- Huang S
- Ma Y
- Yang J
- Chen Y
- Wang G
- Han M
- Kang D
- Zhang X
- Dai P
- Yuan Y
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03338-z
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- China
- East Asian People/genetics
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Genomics
- Genotype
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- POU Domain Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic and phenotypic landscapes of X-linked hereditary hearing loss in the Chinese population.
**Authors:** Feng H, Huang S, Ma Y, Yang J, Chen Y, Wang G, Han M, Kang D, Zhang X, Dai P, Yuan Y
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03338-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03338-z)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Sep 13;19(1):342. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03338-z.

Genomic and phenotypic landscapes of X-linked hereditary hearing loss in the 
Chinese population.

Feng H(#)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Huang S(#)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Ma Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), 
Yang J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Chen Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Wang G(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Han 
M(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Kang D(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Zhang X(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Dai 
P(7)(8)(9)(10)(11), Yuan Y(12)(13)(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Senior Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, the 6th Medical 
Center of Chinese PLA General Hospital, Chinese PLA Medical School,, Beijing, 
100853, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Hearing and Balance Science, Beijing, 100853, China.
(3)National Clinical Research Center for Otolaryngologic Diseases, Beijing, 
100853, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Hearing Science, Ministry of Education, Beijing, 100853, 
China.
(5)Beijing Key Laboratory of Hearing Impairment Prevention and Treatment, 
Beijing, 100853, China.
(6)Chinese PLA Medical School, Beijing, 100853, China.
(7)Senior Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, the 6th Medical 
Center of Chinese PLA General Hospital, Chinese PLA Medical School,, Beijing, 
100853, China. daipu301@vip.sina.com.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Hearing and Balance Science, Beijing, 100853, China. 
daipu301@vip.sina.com.
(9)National Clinical Research Center for Otolaryngologic Diseases, Beijing, 
100853, China. daipu301@vip.sina.com.
(10)Key Laboratory of Hearing Science, Ministry of Education, Beijing, 100853, 
China. daipu301@vip.sina.com.
(11)Beijing Key Laboratory of Hearing Impairment Prevention and Treatment, 
Beijing, 100853, China. daipu301@vip.sina.com.
(12)Senior Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, the 6th Medical 
Center of Chinese PLA General Hospital, Chinese PLA Medical School,, Beijing, 
100853, China. yyymzh@163.com.
(13)State Key Laboratory of Hearing and Balance Science, Beijing, 100853, China. 
yyymzh@163.com.
(14)National Clinical Research Center for Otolaryngologic Diseases, Beijing, 
100853, China. yyymzh@163.com.
(15)Key Laboratory of Hearing Science, Ministry of Education, Beijing, 100853, 
China. yyymzh@163.com.
(16)Beijing Key Laboratory of Hearing Impairment Prevention and Treatment, 
Beijing, 100853, China. yyymzh@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Hearing loss (HL) is the most common sensory birth deficit 
worldwide, with causative variants in more than 150 genes. However, the 
etiological contribution and clinical manifestations of X-linked inheritance in 
HL remain unclear within the Chinese HL population. In this study, we focused on 
X-linked hereditary HL and aimed to assess its contribution to hereditary HL and 
identify the genotype-phenotype relationship.
METHODS: We performed a molecular epidemiological investigation of X-linked 
hereditary HL based on next-generation sequencing and third-generation 
sequencing in 3646 unrelated patients with HL. We also discussed the clinical 
features associated with X-linked non-syndromic HL-related genes based on a 
review of the literature.
RESULTS: We obtained a diagnostic rate of 52.72% (1922/3646) among our patients; 
the aggregate contribution of HL caused by genes on the X chromosome in this 
cohort was ~ 1.14% (22/1922), and POU3F4 variants caused ~ 59% (13/22) of these 
cases. We found that X-linked HL was congenital or began during childhood in all 
cases, with representative audiological profiles or typical cochlear 
malformations in certain genes. Genotypic and phenotypic analyses showed that 
causative variants in PRPS1 and AIFM1 were mainly of the missense type, 
suggesting that phenotypic variability was correlated with the different effects 
that the replaced residues exert on structure and function. Variations in SMPX 
causing truncation of the protein product were associated with DFNX4, which 
resulted in typical audiological profiles before and after the age of 10 years, 
whereas nontruncated proteins typically led to distal myopathy. No phenotypic 
differences were identified in patients carrying POU3F4 or COL4A6 variants.
CONCLUSIONS: Our work constitutes a preliminary evaluation of the molecular 
contribution of X-linked genes in heritable HL (~ 1.14%). The 15 novel variants 
reported here expand the mutational spectrum of these genes. Analysis of the 
genotype-phenotype relationship is valuable for X-linked HL precise diagnostics 
and genetic counseling. Elucidation of the pathogenic mechanisms and 
audiological profiles of HL can also guide choices regarding treatment 
modalities.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03338-z
PMCID: PMC11396341
PMID: 39272213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.