---
reference_id: "PMID:26197713"
title: "[Hemochromatosis]."
authors:
- Oppl B
- Zwerina J
journal: Z Rheumatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00393-015-1583-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Hemochromatosis].
**Authors:** Oppl B, Zwerina J
**Journal:** Z Rheumatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00393-015-1583-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00393-015-1583-4)

## Content

1. Z Rheumatol. 2015 Sep;74(7):609-16; quiz 617. doi: 10.1007/s00393-015-1583-4.

[Hemochromatosis].

[Article in German]

Oppl B(1), Zwerina J.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann-Institut für Osteologie im Hanusch-Krankenhaus der WGKK und 
Unfallkrankenhaus Meidling der AUVA, 1. Medizinische Abteilung, 
Hanusch-Krankenhaus, Heinrich-Collin-Str. 30, 1140, Wien, Österreich.

Hereditary hemochromatosis is a frequent autosomal recessive iron storage 
disease in northern and western Europe. The classical clinical triad of liver 
cirrhosis, hyperpigmentation and diabetes is nowadays rare, most probably 
because of early recognition. The homozygous C282Y mutation in the HFE gene is 
responsible for most cases of hereditary hemochromatosis, although other much 
rarer mutations in other genes have been recently identified. Progressive iron 
overload not only causes liver cirrhosis but also triggers development of a 
characteristic arthropathy. Bony swelling with intermittent arthritis of the 
second and third metacarpophalangeal joints is typical as well as occurrence of 
chondrocalcinosis in wrists and knee joints. The therapy of choice is excess 
iron removal by phlebotomy. Treatment usually prevents or even reverses liver 
damage but does not alter the course of hemochromatosis arthropathy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00393-015-1583-4
PMID: 26197713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]