---
reference_id: "PMID:32183665"
title: Treatment of Anderson-Fabry Disease.
authors:
- Simonetta I
- Tuttolomondo A
- Daidone M
- Miceli S
- Pinto A
journal: Curr Pharm Des
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2174/1381612826666200317142412
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Anderson-Fabry Disease.
**Authors:** Simonetta I, Tuttolomondo A, Daidone M, Miceli S, Pinto A
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Des (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1381612826666200317142412](https://doi.org/10.2174/1381612826666200317142412)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Des. 2020;26(40):5089-5099. doi: 10.2174/1381612826666200317142412.

Treatment of Anderson-Fabry Disease.

Simonetta I(1), Tuttolomondo A(1), Daidone M(1), Miceli S(1), Pinto A(1).

Author information:
(1)U.O.C di Medicina Interna con Stroke Care, Dipartimento di Promozione della 
Salute, Materno Infantile, Medicina Interna e Specialistica di Eccellenza "G. 
D'Alessandro" (PROMISE), University of Palermo, Piazza delle Cliniche n.2, 90127 
Palermo, Italy.

Fabry disease is an X-linked disorder of glycosphingolipid metabolism that 
results in progressive accumulation of neutral glycosphingolipids, predominantly 
globotriaosylsphingosine (Gb3) in lysosomes, as well as other cellular 
compartments of several tissues, causing multi-organ manifestations 
(acroparesthesias, hypohidrosis, angiokeratomas, signs and symptoms of cardiac, 
renal, cerebrovascular involvement). Pathogenic mutations lead to a deficiency 
of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A (GLA). In the presence of high 
clinical suspicion, a careful physical examination and specific laboratory tests 
are required. Finally, the diagnosis of Fabry's disease is confirmed by the 
demonstration of the absence of or reduced alpha-galactosidase A enzyme activity 
in hemizygous men and gene typing in heterozygous females. Measurement of the 
biomarkers Gb3 and Lyso Gb3 in biological specimens may facilitate diagnosis. 
The current treatment of Anderson-Fabry disease is represented by enzyme 
replacement therapy (ERT) and oral pharmacological chaperone. Future treatments 
are based on new strategic approaches such as stem cell-based therapy, 
pharmacological approaches chaperones, mRNA therapy, and viral gene therapy. 
This review outlines the current therapeutic approaches and emerging treatment 
strategies for Anderson-Fabry disease.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612826666200317142412
PMID: 32183665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]