---
reference_id: "PMID:40404199"
title: "Clinical features, behaviour and language in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome."
authors:
- Lamônica D
- Rosa KG
- Ribeiro E
- da Rocha E
- Martins MF
- Giacheti CM
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2024-264591
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features, behaviour and language in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.
**Authors:** Lamônica D, Rosa KG, Ribeiro E, da Rocha E, Martins MF, Giacheti CM
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2024-264591](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2024-264591)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2025 May 21;18(5):e264591. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2024-264591.

Clinical features, behaviour and language in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.

Lamônica D(1), Rosa KG(2), Ribeiro E(3), da Rocha E(4), Martins MF(4), Giacheti 
CM(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculdade de Odontologia de Bauru da Universidade de São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil 
dionelam@uol.com.br.
(2)Universidade Estadual Paulista "Julio de Mesquita Filho", Marília, Brazil.
(3)Associação Cearense de Doenças Genéticas, Fortaleza, Brazil.
(4)Faculdade de Odontologia de Bauru da Universidade de São Paulo, Bauru, 
Brazil.

Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is associated with intellectual disability and 
multiple congenital anomalies. A female patient with WHS was evaluated at two 
different times, in childhood and adolescence. Clinical examinations of various 
medical specialties and assessments of language and behaviour were carried out. 
In childhood, she showed signs of autism spectrum disorder, as well as other 
phenotypic characteristics. The impact of this chromosomal anomaly has had 
repercussions on neurodevelopment and needs to be better understood. This case 
highlights the serious impairment in both language and behaviour, despite 
investments in lifelong intervention processes. More research is required to 
understand WHS' deleterious effects on development, specifically on language and 
behaviour.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2025. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2024-264591
PMID: 40404199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.