---
reference_id: "PMID:38774108"
title: Midterm Outcomes of Surgical Reconstruction and Spontaneous Recovery of Upper-Extremity Paralysis Following Acute Flaccid Myelitis.
authors:
- Doi K
- Hattori Y
- Sakamoto S
- Yii Chia DS
- Gour V
- Sasaki J
journal: JB JS Open Access
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2106/JBJS.OA.23.00143
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Midterm Outcomes of Surgical Reconstruction and Spontaneous Recovery of Upper-Extremity Paralysis Following Acute Flaccid Myelitis.
**Authors:** Doi K, Hattori Y, Sakamoto S, Yii Chia DS, Gour V, Sasaki J
**Journal:** JB JS Open Access (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2106/JBJS.OA.23.00143](https://doi.org/10.2106/JBJS.OA.23.00143)

## Content

1. JB JS Open Access. 2024 May 21;9(2):e23.00143. doi: 10.2106/JBJS.OA.23.00143.
eCollection 2024 Apr-Jun.

Midterm Outcomes of Surgical Reconstruction and Spontaneous Recovery of
Upper-Extremity Paralysis Following Acute Flaccid Myelitis.

Doi K(1), Hattori Y(1), Sakamoto S(1), Yii Chia DS(2), Gour V(1), Sasaki J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Ogori Daiichi General Hospital, Yamaguchi,
Japan.
(2)Sengkang General Hospital Singapore, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a disabling, poliomyelitis-like
illness that mainly affects children. Although various surgical interventions
are performed for intractable paralysis due to AFM, the timing of surgery and
its long-term outcomes have yet to be established, especially for shoulder
reconstruction. This study aimed to analyze the midterm outcomes of
nonsurgically and surgically treated upper-extremity AFM and the factors
influencing shoulder functional outcomes after surgical reconstruction.
METHODS: We retrospectively examined 39 patients with AFM in 50 upper
extremities between 2011 and 2019. The degree of spontaneous recovery of
completely paralyzed muscles was evaluated at a median of 3, 6, and 37 months
after the onset of paralysis. Twenty-seven patients with 29 extremities
underwent surgery involving nerve transfer, muscle-tendon transfer, or free
muscle transfer for shoulder, elbow, and hand reconstruction.
RESULTS: Patients with complete paralysis of shoulder abduction at 6 months did
not show later recovery. Twenty-two patients with 24 extremities underwent
shoulder surgery, and all but 1 were followed for at least 24 months after
surgery. Although postoperative shoulder abduction recovery was similar between
transfer of the spinal accessory nerve and of the contralateral C7 nerve root to
the suprascapular nerve, the outcomes obtained with spinal accessory nerve
transfer had more variability, likely related to latent spinal accessory nerve
paralysis, shoulder instability related to pectoralis major paralysis, and the
type of paralysis. Shoulder abduction recovery was also greatly affected by
scapulothoracic joint movement. In contrast, the outcomes of the elbow flexion
and hand reconstructions were more consistent and acceptable.
CONCLUSIONS: All patients had loss of shoulder abduction, and restoration of
shoulder function was less predictable and depended on the quality of the donor
nerves and recovery of the synergistic muscles. Strict donor nerve selection and
additional nerve transfer for shoulder reconstruction are imperative for
satisfactory outcomes.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic Level IV. See Instructions for Authors for a
complete description of levels of evidence.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by The Journal of Bone and Joint
Surgery, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.OA.23.00143
PMCID: PMC11104719
PMID: 38774108

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: No external funding was received for
this work. The Article Processing Charge for open access publication was funded
by personal funds. The Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest forms are
provided with the online version of the article
(http://links.lww.com/JBJSOA/A631).
