---
reference_id: "PMID:41232971"
title: "[Merkel carcinoma]."
authors:
- Oulès B
journal: Ann Chir Plast Esthet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.anplas.2025.05.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Merkel carcinoma].
**Authors:** Oulès B
**Journal:** Ann Chir Plast Esthet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anplas.2025.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anplas.2025.05.002)

## Content

1. Ann Chir Plast Esthet. 2025 Nov;70(6):476-479. doi: 
10.1016/j.anplas.2025.05.002.

[Merkel carcinoma].

[Article in French]

Oulès B(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de dermatologie, hôpital Cochin - AP-HP. centre, université Paris 
Cité, 123, boulevard de Port-Royal, 75014 Paris, France. Electronic address: 
benedicte.oules@aphp.fr.

Merkel's carcinoma is a rare but highly aggressive cutaneous neuroendocrine 
tumor whose incidence has increased due to an aging population and increased UV 
exposure. It is characterized by rapid growth, high risk of recurrence and early 
metastatic spread. Two subtypes have been identified: Merkel 
polyomavirus-related (MCPyV), present in 80% of cases in Europe, and UV-related. 
The main risk factors are advanced age, male gender, light phototypes and 
immunosuppression. Clinically, it appears as a painless, red or purplish nodule, 
often on photo-exposed areas. Diagnosis is based on histopathology and 
immunohistochemistry (CK20+ and synaptophysin+). Extension assessment is 
essential, and relies on PET-CT, brain MRI and lymph node ultrasound. Staging 
follows the AJCC 8th edition, distinguishing between localized (I/II), lymph 
node involved (III) and metastatic (IV) stages. Treatment is based on surgery 
(excision with 1cm margins) and adjuvant radiotherapy. In the case of lymph node 
involvement, lymph node dissection and radiotherapy are recommended. Metastatic 
forms now benefit from immunotherapy (anti-PD-1/PD-L1), which has improved 
prognosis. Merkel carcinoma has a high recurrence rate (25-50%). Monitoring is 
based on regular clinical and radiological follow-up over several years. 
Biomarkers such as NSE and anti-MCPyV serology are currently being evaluated.

Copyright © 2025 The Author. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anplas.2025.05.002
PMID: 41232971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Déclaration de liens d’intérêts L’auteur déclare 
ne pas avoir de liens d’intérêts.