---
reference_id: "PMID:25209853"
title: "SGCE and myoclonus dystonia: motor characteristics, diagnostic criteria and clinical predictors of genotype."
authors:
- Peall KJ
- Kurian MA
- Wardle M
- Waite AJ
- Hedderly T
- Lin JP
- Smith M
- Whone A
- Pall H
- White C
- Lux A
- Jardine PE
- Lynch B
- Kirov G
- "O'Riordan S"
- Samuel M
- Lynch T
- King MD
- Chinnery PF
- Warner TT
- Blake DJ
- Owen MJ
- Morris HR
journal: J Neurol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7488-3
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Dystonia/genetics
- "Dystonic Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Genotype
- Humans
- Ireland/epidemiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Sarcoglycans/genetics
- United Kingdom/epidemiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SGCE and myoclonus dystonia: motor characteristics, diagnostic criteria and clinical predictors of genotype.
**Authors:** Peall KJ, Kurian MA, Wardle M, Waite AJ, Hedderly T, Lin JP, Smith M, Whone A, Pall H, White C, Lux A, Jardine PE, Lynch B, Kirov G, O'Riordan S, Samuel M, Lynch T, King MD, Chinnery PF, Warner TT, Blake DJ, Owen MJ, Morris HR
**Journal:** J Neurol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-014-7488-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-014-7488-3)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2014 Dec;261(12):2296-304. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7488-3. Epub 2014
 Sep 11.

SGCE and myoclonus dystonia: motor characteristics, diagnostic criteria and
clinical predictors of genotype.

Peall KJ(1), Kurian MA, Wardle M, Waite AJ, Hedderly T, Lin JP, Smith M, Whone
A, Pall H, White C, Lux A, Jardine PE, Lynch B, Kirov G, O'Riordan S, Samuel M,
Lynch T, King MD, Chinnery PF, Warner TT, Blake DJ, Owen MJ, Morris HR.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Institute of
Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Cardiff
University, Hadyn Ellis Building, Maindy Road, Cardiff, CF24 4HQ, UK,
PeallKJ@cardiff.ac.uk.

Myoclonus dystonia syndrome (MDS) is a young-onset movement disorder. A
proportion of cases are due to mutations in the maternally imprinted SGCE gene.
We assembled the largest cohort of MDS patients to date, and determined the
frequency and type of SGCE mutations. The aim was to establish the motor
phenotype in mutation carriers and utility of current diagnostic criteria.
Eighty-nine probands with clinical features compatible with MDS were recruited
from the UK and Ireland. Patients were phenotypically classified as "definite",
"probable" or "possible" MDS according to previous guidelines. SGCE was analyzed
using direct sequencing and copy number variant analysis. In those where no
mutation was found, DYT1 (GAG deletion), GCH1, THAP1 and NKX2.1 genes were also
sequenced. Nineteen (21.3%) probands had an SGCE mutation. Three patterns of
motor symptoms emerged: (1) early childhood onset upper body myoclonus and
dystonia, (2) early childhood onset lower limb dystonia, progressing later to
more pronounced myoclonus and upper body involvement, and (3) later childhood
onset upper body myoclonus and dystonia with evident cervical involvement. Five
probands had large contiguous gene deletions ranging from 0.7 to 2.3 Mb in size
with distinctive clinical features, including short stature, joint laxity and
microcephaly. Our data confirms that SGCE mutations are most commonly identified
in MDS patients with (1) age at onset ≤10 years and (2) predominant upper body
involvement of a pure myoclonus-dystonia. Cases with whole SGCE gene deletions
had additional clinical characteristics, which are not always predicted by
deletion size or gene involvement.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-014-7488-3
PMCID: PMC4495322
PMID: 25209853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
