---
reference_id: "PMID:23361196"
title: Long-term respiratory health effects in textile workers.
authors:
- Lai PS
- Christiani DC
journal: Curr Opin Pulm Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e32835cee9a
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term respiratory health effects in textile workers.
**Authors:** Lai PS, Christiani DC
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pulm Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCP.0b013e32835cee9a](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCP.0b013e32835cee9a)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2013 Mar;19(2):152-7. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e32835cee9a.

Long-term respiratory health effects in textile workers.

Lai PS(1), Christiani DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health (Environmental and Occupational Medicine 
and Epidemiology Program), Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA. pslai@hsph.harvard.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Over 60 million people worldwide work in the textile or 
clothing industry. Recent studies have recognized the contribution of workplace 
exposures to chronic lung diseases, in particular chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). Early studies in textile workers have focused on the 
relationship between hemp or cotton dust exposure and the development of a 
syndrome termed byssinosis. The purpose of this review is to evaluate the effect 
of long-term exposure to organic dust in textile workers on chronic respiratory 
disease in the broader context of disease classifications, such as reversible or 
irreversible obstructive lung disease (i.e. asthma or COPD), and restrictive 
lung disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: Cessation of exposure to cotton dust leads to improvement in 
lung function. Recent animal models have suggested a shift in the lung 
macrophage:dendritic cell population ratio as a potential mechanistic 
explanation for persistent inflammation in the lung due to repeated cotton 
dust-related endotoxin exposure. Other types of textile dust, such as silk, may 
contribute to COPD in textile workers.
SUMMARY: Textile dust-related obstructive lung disease has characteristics of 
both asthma and COPD. Significant progress has been made in the understanding of 
chronic lung disease due to organic dust exposure in textile workers.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e32835cee9a
PMCID: PMC3725301
PMID: 23361196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]