---
reference_id: "PMID:19796826"
title: "Management of otitis media with effusion in children with primary ciliary dyskinesia: a literature review."
authors:
- Campbell RG
- Birman CS
- Morgan L
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2009.08.024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of otitis media with effusion in children with primary ciliary dyskinesia: a literature review.
**Authors:** Campbell RG, Birman CS, Morgan L
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijporl.2009.08.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2009.08.024)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2009 Dec;73(12):1630-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijporl.2009.08.024. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

Management of otitis media with effusion in children with primary ciliary 
dyskinesia: a literature review.

Campbell RG(1), Birman CS, Morgan L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hornsby Ku-Ring-Gai Hospital, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia. raewyn.campbell@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Primary ciliary dyskinesia is an autosomal recessively inherited 
group of disorders of ciliary ultrastructure. Otolaryngologists are frequently 
involved in the management of some of the most common symptoms of primary 
ciliary dyskinesia including chronic rhinitis, sinusitis and otitis media with 
effusion. A dilemma for otorhinolaryngologists is whether ventilation tubes are 
of benefit in children with primary ciliary dyskinesia and otitis media with 
effusion and what effective alternatives exist. This paper aims to address this 
issue via a literature review and case presentation.
METHODS: An extensive review of the literature was undertaken and a discussion 
of the advantages and disadvantages of ventilation tubes in the management of 
otitis media with effusion in these children is presented and compared with that 
of the general population. We present a case of a 9 months old boy with 
Kartagener's Syndrome and chronic bilateral otitis media with effusion to 
illustrate our findings.
RESULTS: Eight papers were identified, all with small study numbers. The main 
outcome measures were hearing, otorrhoea and tympanic membrane structural 
changes. The natural history of otitis media with effusion and hearing loss in 
primary ciliary dyskinesia appears to be fluctuant into adulthood. Therefore, 
otitis media with effusion in primary ciliary dyskinesia does not resolve by the 
age of 9 years, regardless of treatment, as previously assumed. Ventilation tube 
insertion improves hearing in primary ciliary dyskinesia, but may lead to a 
higher rate of otorrhoea when compared to the general population. Tympanic 
membrane changes were clinically insignificant. Our patient eventually underwent 
successful insertion of bilateral ventilation tubes with a marked improvement in 
hearing and language with minimal otorrhoea.
CONCLUSION/DISCUSSION: The highest level of evidence found for the management of 
otitis media with effusion in children with primary ciliary dyskinesia was level 
IV. Currently, the evidence is inconclusive and conflicting. Whilst our results 
are promising, clearly higher quality research on a larger number of patients is 
required to definitively evaluate the management options for otitis media with 
effusion in these children.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2009.08.024
PMID: 19796826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]