---
reference_id: "PMID:34348284"
title: "A Novel SCN5A Variant Causes Temperature-Sensitive Loss Of Function in a Family with Symptomatic Brugada Syndrome, Cardiac Conduction Disease, and Sick Sinus Syndrome."
authors:
- Sanner K
- Mueller-Leisse J
- Zormpas C
- Duncker D
- Leffler A
- Veltmann C
journal: Cardiology
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1159/000518210
keywords:
- Brugada Syndrome/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel/genetics
- Sick Sinus Syndrome/genetics
- Temperature
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel SCN5A Variant Causes Temperature-Sensitive Loss Of Function in a Family with Symptomatic Brugada Syndrome, Cardiac Conduction Disease, and Sick Sinus Syndrome.
**Authors:** Sanner K, Mueller-Leisse J, Zormpas C, Duncker D, Leffler A, Veltmann C
**Journal:** Cardiology (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000518210](https://doi.org/10.1159/000518210)

## Content

1. Cardiology. 2021;146(6):754-762. doi: 10.1159/000518210. Epub 2021 Jul 8.

A Novel SCN5A Variant Causes Temperature-Sensitive Loss Of Function in a Family 
with Symptomatic Brugada Syndrome, Cardiac Conduction Disease, and Sick Sinus 
Syndrome.

Sanner K(1), Mueller-Leisse J(2), Zormpas C(2), Duncker D(2), Leffler A(3), 
Veltmann C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Rhythmology and Electrophysiology, Department of Cardiology and Angiology, 
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany, leffler.andreas@mh-hannover.de.

INTRODUCTION: Brugada syndrome (BrS) is an inherited arrhythmia syndrome 
associated with an increased risk of sudden cardiac death. SCN5A is the most 
important disease-modifying gene for BrS, but many SCN5A variants have not been 
functionally characterized. Furthermore, the temperature dependency of SCN5A is 
only rarely explored in in vitro analyses.
METHODS: The clinical phenotype of the affected family was assessed by medical 
history, ECGs and ajmaline challenge. Whole-cell patch clamp recordings were 
performed on HEK 293T cells expressing Nav1.5-G1712S, a novel SCN5A variant 
found in the symptomatic family.
RESULTS: Three male family members had experienced sudden cardiac death, sudden 
cardiac arrest, and rhythmogenic syncopes. Beside a positive ajmaline challenge 
with demarcation of a Brugada type 1 ECG, 1 patient also showed evidence of 
symptomatic cardiac conduction disease and sick sinus syndrome (SSS). In patch 
clamp analyses, Nav1.5-G1712S generated reduced peak currents as compared to the 
wild type. At body temperature, Nav1.5-G1712S additionally exhibited an enhanced 
slow inactivation and an impaired recovery from inactivation.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that G1712S is a pathogenic SCN5A loss-of function 
mutation at physiological temperature associated with an overlapping 
presentation of BrS, SSS, and cardiac conduction disease.

© 2021 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000518210
PMCID: PMC8743901
PMID: 34348284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.