---
reference_id: "PMID:22410431"
title: Potential value of nutrigenomics in Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Ferguson LR
journal: Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/nrgastro.2012.41
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potential value of nutrigenomics in Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Ferguson LR
**Journal:** Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrgastro.2012.41](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrgastro.2012.41)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012 Mar 13;9(5):260-70. doi: 
10.1038/nrgastro.2012.41.

Potential value of nutrigenomics in Crohn's disease.

Ferguson LR(1).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Nutrition, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, The 
University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand. 
l.ferguson@auckland.ac.nz

Crohn's disease is a chronic relapsing condition that has no certain cure. Both 
genetic susceptibility and nutrition have key roles, but their level of 
involvement varies between patients. Interacting gene pathways influence the 
probability of disease development, but these are affected by stress and various 
environmental factors, including diet. In addition, the role of the gut 
microbiome must not be underestimated, as it is substantially altered in 
patients with Crohn's disease. Although an elemental diet might lead to disease 
remission, reintroducing real foods and sustainable diets in patients with 
Crohn's disease is currently difficult, and would benefit from the sensitivity 
and rapid feedback provided by the field of nutrigenomics. Nutrigenomics 
utilizes high-throughput genomics technologies to reveal changes in gene and 
protein expression that are modulated by the patient's nutrition. The most 
widely used technique thus far is transcriptomics, which permits measurement of 
changes in the expression of thousands of genes simultaneously in one sample. 
Given the volume of numbers generated in such studies, data-basing and 
bioinformatics are essential to ensure the correct application of nutrigenomics 
at the population level. These methods have been successfully applied to animal 
models of Crohn's disease, and the time is right to move them to human studies.

DOI: 10.1038/nrgastro.2012.41
PMID: 22410431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]