---
reference_id: "PMID:35483324"
title: "Global Prevalence of Myotonic Dystrophy: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Liao Q
- Zhang Y
- He J
- Huang K
journal: Neuroepidemiology
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000524734
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Myotonic Dystrophy/epidemiology, genetics"
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global Prevalence of Myotonic Dystrophy: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Liao Q, Zhang Y, He J, Huang K
**Journal:** Neuroepidemiology (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000524734](https://doi.org/10.1159/000524734)

## Content

1. Neuroepidemiology. 2022;56(3):163-173. doi: 10.1159/000524734. Epub 2022 Apr
28.

Global Prevalence of Myotonic Dystrophy: An Updated Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis.

Liao Q(1)(2), Zhang Y(3), He J(4), Huang K(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, China.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University, Changsha, China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Institute of Molecular Precision Medicine and Hunan Key Laboratory of
Molecular Precision Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, China.

INTRODUCTION: Myotonic dystrophy (DM), the most common muscular dystrophy in
adults, is a group of autosomal inherited neuromuscular disorders characterized
by progressive muscle weakness, myotonia, and cardiac conduction abnormalities.
Due to the different gene mutations, DM has been subclassified into DM type 1
(DM1) and type 2 (DM2). However, the prevalence studies on DM and its subtypes
are insufficient.
METHODS: The PubMed (1966-2022), MEDLINE (1950-2022), Web of Science
(1864-2022), and Cochrane Library (2022) databases were searched for original
research articles published in English. The quality of the included studies was
assessed by a checklist adapted from Strengthening the Reporting of
Observational studies in Epidemiology. To derive the pooled epidemiological
prevalence estimates, a meta-analysis was performed using the random-effects
model. Heterogeneity was assessed using the Cochrane Q statistic and the I2
statistic.
RESULTS: A total of 17 studies were included in the systematic review and
meta-analysis. Of the 17 studies evaluated, 14 studies were considered medium
quality, 2 studies were considered high quality, and 1 study was considered low
quality. The global prevalence of DM varied widely from 0.37 to 36.29 cases per
100,000. The pooled estimate of the prevalence of DM was 9.99 cases (95% CI:
5.62-15.53) per 100,000. The pooled estimate of the prevalence of DM1 was 9.27
cases (95% CI: 4.73-15.21) per 100,000, ranging from 0.37 to 36.29 cases per
100,000. The pooled estimate of the prevalence of DM2 was 2.29 cases (95% CI:
0.17-6.53) per 100,000, ranging from 0.00 to 24.00 cases per 100,000.
CONCLUSION: Our study provided accurate estimates of the prevalence of DM. The
high heterogeneity and the lack of high-quality studies highlight the need to
conduct higher quality studies on orphan diseases.

© 2022 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000524734
PMID: 35483324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
