---
reference_id: "PMID:33388543"
title: Three-Year Longitudinal Motor Function and Disability Level of Acute Flaccid Myelitis.
authors:
- Chong PF
- Kira R
- Torisu H
- Yasumoto S
- Okumura A
- Mori H
- Tanaka-Taya K
- AFM Study Group
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.11.019
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/complications, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Progression
- "Enterovirus D, Human/pathogenicity"
- Enterovirus Infections/complications
- Female
- Hand Strength/physiology
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Mobility Limitation
- "Myelitis/complications, physiopathology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/complications, physiopathology"
- "Paralysis/etiology, physiopathology"
- Prognosis
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Three-Year Longitudinal Motor Function and Disability Level of Acute Flaccid Myelitis.
**Authors:** Chong PF, Kira R, Torisu H, Yasumoto S, Okumura A, Mori H, Tanaka-Taya K, AFM Study Group
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.11.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.11.019)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2021 Mar;116:14-19. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.11.019.
Epub 2020 Dec 3.

Three-Year Longitudinal Motor Function and Disability Level of Acute Flaccid
Myelitis.

Chong PF(1), Kira R(1), Torisu H(2), Yasumoto S(3), Okumura A(4), Mori H(5),
Tanaka-Taya K(6); AFM Study Group.

Collaborators: Sato T, Kanazawa A, Suzuki K, Toyofuku E, Fukuyama T, Asaoka M,
Fujita T, Yano T, Kumakura A, Kawabata T, Miyatake C, Hiyane M, Moriyama N,
Kawamura N, Tanaka K, Ohta G, Ono S, Ban K, Sugiyama N, Ohta K, Inoue M,
Sakajiri K, Yamamuro M, Endo Y, Nakano K, Yoshida N, Suzuki Y, Takami Y, Kasai
M, Takahashi Y, Miyamoto T, Ishida Y, Takeshita E, Abe Y, Kubota S, Ishii W,
Tsuyusaki Y, Hattori A, Nagura M, Koran N, Toki T, Goto S, Terashima H, Kikuchi
E, Mikami H, Konishi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Fukuoka Children's Hospital, Fukuoka,
Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Fukuoka Dental College Medical and Dental Hospital,
Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Medical Education Center, Fukuoka University School of Medicine, Fukuoka,
Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Aichi Medical University, Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.
(5)Department of Radiology, Graduate School and Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Infectious Disease Surveillance Center, National Institute of Infectious
Diseases, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: ktaya@nih.go.jp.

BACKGROUND: We summarize the long-term motor outcome and disability level in a
cluster of pediatric patients with acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) associated with
the enterovirus D68 outbreak in 2015.
METHODS: This is a nationwide follow-up questionnaire analysis study. Clinical
data including the motor function (manual muscle strength test) and other
neurological symptoms were collected at the acute (nadir), recovery
(six months), and chronic (three years) stages. We use the Barthel index, which
measures 10 variables describing activity of daily living and mobility to assess
the disability level.
RESULTS: Clinical data of 33 patients with AFM (13 females, 20 males; median
age = 4.1 years) were available. Among patients with tetraplegia or triplegia,
paraplegia, and monoplegia at the acute stage, two of seven, four of thirteen,
and two of thirteen exhibited complete recovery without paralysis; of those five
of seven, eight of thirteen, and two of thirteen showed improvement with lesser
limb involvement at the chronic stage, respectively. Nine patients (27%)
demonstrated improvement at the recovery-to-chronic period. All six patients
with positive isolation of enterovirus D68 from biological samples at the acute
stage showed persistent motor deficits. Other neurological findings had better
prognosis than motor weakness. Better Barthel index score at the chronic stage
was observed (P < 0.001; median difference [95% confidence interval], 53 [40 to
63]), implying an improved disability level even in patients with persistent
motor deficits.
CONCLUSIONS: AFM has a high rate of persistent motor deficits showing one- to
two-limb paralysis. Disability level of patients with AFM, however, generally
improved at the three-year time point.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.11.019
PMID: 33388543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
