---
reference_id: "PMID:1340758"
title: Calcium homeostasis and hypercalciuria in hyperprostaglandin E syndrome.
authors:
- Leonhardt A
- Timmermanns G
- Roth B
- Seyberth HW
journal: J Pediatr
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(05)82480-1
keywords:
- "Bone Diseases, Metabolic/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Calcitriol/blood
- "Calcium/blood, urine"
- "Calcium Metabolism Disorders/drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Calcium, Dietary/administration & dosage"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Dinoprostone/metabolism
- Ergocalciferols/blood
- Female
- Homeostasis/physiology
- Humans
- Indomethacin/therapeutic use
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Nephrocalcinosis/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Parathyroid Hormone/blood
- Phosphates/blood
- Renin/blood
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calcium homeostasis and hypercalciuria in hyperprostaglandin E syndrome.
**Authors:** Leonhardt A, Timmermanns G, Roth B, Seyberth HW
**Journal:** J Pediatr (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3476(05)82480-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3476(05)82480-1)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 1992 Apr;120(4 Pt 1):546-54. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(05)82480-1.

Calcium homeostasis and hypercalciuria in hyperprostaglandin E syndrome.

Leonhardt A(1), Timmermanns G, Roth B, Seyberth HW.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospitals, University of Marburg, Germany.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 1993 Aug;123(2):334. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(05)81719-6.

Children with hyperprostaglandin E syndrome, a neonatal variant of Bartter
syndrome with enhanced renal and systemic formation of prostaglandin E2, have
hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and osteopenia. Because prostaglandin E2
affects tubular calcium handling, stimulates the formation of calcitriol in
vitro, and has osteolytic activity, we studied calcium homeostasis and the
influence of prostaglandin E2 formation on hypercalciuria in nine patients with
hyperprostaglandin E syndrome during long-term indomethacin treatment and after
its withdrawal. Suppression of prostaglandin E2 formation by indomethacin
resulted in improvement of biochemical and clinical features of
hyperprostaglandin E syndrome. However, hypercalciuria, osteopenia, and
nephrocalcinosis did not completely resolve. Despite a low calcium diet, daily
urinary calcium excretion was enhanced during and after withdrawal of
indomethacin treatment (median 6.3, range 5.3 to 14, and median 9.4, range 4.4
to 38 mg/kg per day, respectively). Daily urinary calcium excretion was greater
after withdrawal than during indomethacin treatment. Urinary calcium excretion
was not correlated with urinary prostaglandin E2 excretion. Plasma levels of
intact parathyroid hormone (median 11, range 6.8 to 12 pmol/L) and calcitriol
(median 157, range 108 to 236 pg/ml) were elevated during indomethacin treatment
and decreased after withdrawal of indomethacin. These data suggest that
hypercalciuria in hyperprostaglandin E syndrome is mainly due to a renal leak of
calcium, which is caused by enhanced renal formation of prostaglandin E2 and a
tubular defect not related to prostaglandin E2 formation. There is no evidence
for prostaglandin-stimulated calcitriol formation. Decreasing plasma levels of
parathyroid hormone in the presence of renal calcium losses after withdrawal of
indomethacin treatment may be due to a bone resorption process caused by
systemic prostaglandin formation; the process may contribute to hypercalciuria
in the patient not receiving indomethacin.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3476(05)82480-1
PMID: 1340758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
