---
reference_id: "PMID:31237654"
title: Characterization of Retinal Structure in ATF6-Associated Achromatopsia.
authors:
- Mastey RR
- Georgiou M
- Langlo CS
- Kalitzeos A
- Patterson EJ
- Kane T
- Singh N
- Vincent A
- Moore AT
- Tsang SH
- Lin JH
- Young MP
- Hartnett ME
- Héon E
- Kohl S
- Michaelides M
- Carroll J
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.19-27047
keywords:
- Activating Transcription Factor 6/genetics
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Color Vision Defects/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated Cation Channels/genetics
- Electroretinography
- Female
- "Fovea Centralis/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Ophthalmoscopy
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/pathology
- "Retinal Pigment Epithelium/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Retinal Rod Photoreceptor Cells/pathology
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of Retinal Structure in ATF6-Associated Achromatopsia.
**Authors:** Mastey RR, Georgiou M, Langlo CS, Kalitzeos A, Patterson EJ, Kane T, Singh N, Vincent A, Moore AT, Tsang SH, Lin JH, Young MP, Hartnett ME, Héon E, Kohl S, Michaelides M, Carroll J
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.19-27047](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.19-27047)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2019 Jun 3;60(7):2631-2640. doi: 
10.1167/iovs.19-27047.

Characterization of Retinal Structure in ATF6-Associated Achromatopsia.

Mastey RR(1), Georgiou M(2)(3), Langlo CS(4), Kalitzeos A(2)(3), Patterson 
EJ(1), Kane T(2)(3), Singh N(2)(3), Vincent A(5), Moore AT(6), Tsang SH(7), Lin 
JH(8)(9), Young MP(10), Hartnett ME(10), Héon E(5), Kohl S(11), Michaelides 
M(2)(3), Carroll J(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences, Medical College of Wisconsin, 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States.
(2)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology & Anatomy, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, The University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California-San Francisco Medical 
School, San Francisco, California, United States.
(7)Jonas Children's Vision Care, Departments of Ophthalmology, Pathology and 
Cell Biology, Columbia Stem Cell Initiative, New York, New York, United States.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, United States.
(9)Department of Pathology, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, United States.
(10)Moran Eye Center, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States.
(11)Centre for Ophthalmology Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

PURPOSE: Mutations in six genes have been associated with achromatopsia (ACHM): 
CNGA3, CNGB3, PDE6H, PDE6C, GNAT2, and ATF6. ATF6 is the most recent gene to be 
identified, though thorough phenotyping of this genetic subtype is lacking. 
Here, we sought to test the hypothesis that ATF6-associated ACHM is a 
structurally distinct form of congenital ACHM.
METHODS: Seven genetically confirmed subjects from five nonconsanguineous 
families were recruited. Foveal hypoplasia and the integrity of the ellipsoid 
zone (EZ) band (a.k.a., IS/OS) were graded from optical coherence tomography 
(OCT) images. Images of the photoreceptor mosaic were acquired using confocal 
and nonconfocal split-detection adaptive optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy 
(AOSLO). Parafoveal cone and rod density values were calculated and compared to 
published normative data as well as data from two subjects harboring CNGA3 or 
CNGB3 mutations who were recruited for comparative purposes. Additionally, 
nonconfocal dark-field AOSLO images of the retinal pigment epithelium were 
obtained, with quantitative analysis performed in one subject with ATF6-ACHM.
RESULTS: Foveal hypoplasia was observed in all subjects with ATF6 mutations. 
Absence of the EZ band within the foveal region (grade 3) or appearance of a 
hyporeflective zone (grade 4) was seen in all subjects with ATF6 using OCT. 
There was no evidence of remnant foveal cone structure using confocal AOSLO, 
although sporadic cone-like structures were seen in nonconfocal split-detection 
AOSLO. There was a lack of cone structure in the parafovea, in direct contrast 
to previous reports.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate a near absence of cone structure in subjects 
harboring ATF6 mutations. This implicates ATF6 as having a major role in cone 
development and suggests that at least a subset of subjects with ATF6-ACHM have 
markedly fewer cellular targets for cone-directed gene therapies than do 
subjects with CNGA3- or CNGB3-ACHM.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.19-27047
PMCID: PMC6594318
PMID: 31237654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]