---
reference_id: "PMID:39866519"
title: "Effects of physiotherapy on degenerative cerebellar ataxia: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Matsugi A
- Bando K
- Kondo Y
- Kikuchi Y
- Miyata K
- Hiramatsu Y
- Yamanaka Y
- Tanaka H
- Okuda Y
- Haruyama K
- Yamasaki Y
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1491142
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of physiotherapy on degenerative cerebellar ataxia: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Matsugi A, Bando K, Kondo Y, Kikuchi Y, Miyata K, Hiramatsu Y, Yamanaka Y, Tanaka H, Okuda Y, Haruyama K, Yamasaki Y
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2024.1491142](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2024.1491142)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2025 Jan 10;15:1491142. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1491142.
eCollection 2024.

Effects of physiotherapy on degenerative cerebellar ataxia: a systematic review
and meta-analysis.

Matsugi A(1), Bando K(2), Kondo Y(2), Kikuchi Y(3), Miyata K(4), Hiramatsu Y(5),
Yamanaka Y(6), Tanaka H(7), Okuda Y(3), Haruyama K(8), Yamasaki Y(9).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Rehabilitation, Shijonawate Gakuen University, Osaka, Japan.
(2)National Center Hospital, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo,
Japan.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation for Intractable Neurological Disorders,
Institute of Brain and Blood Vessels Mihara Memorial Hospital, Gunma, Japan.
(4)Department of Physical Therapy, Ibaraki Prefectural University of Health
Science, Ibaraki, Japan.
(5)Neurorehabilitaion Research Institute, Morinomiya Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(6)Department of Rehabilitation, Osaka University Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Kansai Medical University
Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(8)Department of Physical Therapy, Faculty of Health Science, Juntendo
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Rehabilitation, Maruki Memorial Medical and Social Welfare
Center, Saitama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Evidence of the effectiveness of physiotherapy, including muscle
strength training, coordination training, aerobic exercise, cycling regimen,
balance training, gait training, and activity of daily living training, in
patients with degenerative cerebellar ataxia (DCA) was insufficient for clinical
decision making. We aimed to explore clinical outcomes and examine the
parameters associated with physical impairment and activity in people with DCA
based on preregistration (PROSPERO: CRD42024493883).
METHODS: The PubMed, Cochrane Library, CHINAL, and PEDro databases were searched
for relevant randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Data extraction, quality
assessment, and heterogeneity analyses were conducted. The Grading of
Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation framework (GRADE) was
used to assess the quality of evidence, and a meta-analysis was performed.
RESULTS: Eighteen RCTs, which included 398 participants, showed a serious risk
of bias (RoB) and low certainty of evidence for this primary outcome. For
meta-analysis, 315 patients assessed based on the Scale for Assessment and
Rating of Ataxia (SARA) were included. Overall, physiotherapy significantly
reduced SARA scores (MD = -1.41, [95% CI: -2.16, -0.66]); the subgroup analysis
showed that the following interventions exerted significant effects:
multi-aspect training program (5 studies, MD = -1.59, [95% CI: -5.15, -0.03]),
balance training (3 studies, MD = -1.58, [95% CI: -2.55, -0.62]), and aerobic
training (3 studies, MD = -1.65, [95% CI: -2.53, -0.77]). By contrast, vibration
(2 studies, MD = -0.56, [95% CI: -2.05, 0.93]) and dual-task training (1 study,
MD = 0.24, [95% CI: -6.4, 6.88]) exhibited no significant effects.
CONCLUSION: Physical therapy, especially multi-aspect physical therapy such as
muscle strengthening, coordination training, gait training, and ADL training,
may reduce DCA symptoms. Further, balance and aerobic training can be added to
the program. However, the estimated effect size may change in future studies
because of the serious RoB, very low certainty of evidence, and high
heterogeneity with SARA as the primary outcome. High-quality RCTs are required
to establish evidence for the effectiveness of physical therapy in patients with
DCA.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION:
https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?RecordID=493883,
identifier: CRD42024493883.

Copyright © 2025 Matsugi, Bando, Kondo, Kikuchi, Miyata, Hiramatsu, Yamanaka,
Tanaka, Okuda, Haruyama and Yamasaki.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1491142
PMCID: PMC11757114
PMID: 39866519

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
