---
reference_id: "PMID:23748068"
title: "Aromatase deficiency, a rare syndrome: case report."
authors:
- Baykan EK
- Erdoğan M
- Özen S
- Darcan Ş
- Saygılı LF
journal: J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.4274/Jcrpe.970
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aromatase deficiency, a rare syndrome: case report.
**Authors:** Baykan EK, Erdoğan M, Özen S, Darcan Ş, Saygılı LF
**Journal:** J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.4274/Jcrpe.970](https://doi.org/10.4274/Jcrpe.970)

## Content

1. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2013;5(2):129-32. doi: 10.4274/Jcrpe.970.

Aromatase deficiency, a rare syndrome: case report.

Baykan EK(1), Erdoğan M, Özen S, Darcan Ş, Saygılı LF.

Author information:
(1)Ege University Faculty of Medicine, İnternal Medicine Department of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism Unit, İzmir, Turkey. emnkrtl@hotmail.com

Erratum in
    J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2013 Sep 10;5(3):216.

Aromatase deficiency (AD) is a rare autosomal recessive inheritance syndrome. 
Its worldwide incidence is unknown, and there are few case reports in the 
literature. Aromatase dysfunction develops due to CYP19A1 gene mutation and a 
decrease in estrogen synthesis. Estrogen deficiency can induce delayed 
epiphyseal closure, eunuchoid body habitus, osteopenia, and osteoporosis in both 
genders. Our patient was a 27-year-old male who presented with bone pain, 
recurrent bone fractures associated with minimal trauma starting in puberty, and 
a progressive increase in height. Laboratory tests revealed that the blood 
levels of follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone were above 
normal, testosterone level was normal, and estrogen was undetectable. Plain bone 
radiography of the left wrist and hand demonstrated that the epiphyses were 
still unfused. Lumbar osteoporosis was detected in bone densitometry. In the 
genetic analysis, homozygous R375H guanine-adenine (G-A) mutation was detected 
in the CYP19A1 gene, and a diagnosis of AD was reached. Treatment with 25 μg 
transdermal estradiol was started. All family members were examined. Homozygous 
R375H G-A mutation was detected in the patient's younger brother. Heterozygous 
R375H G-A mutation was found in his mother, father, and older brother. In 
conclusion, this AD patient requires lifetime estrogen replacement in order to 
provide sufficient bone mineralization, to reduce the risk of bone fractures, 
and to lead a healthy life. The best method to prevent the possible 
complications is to diagnose the AD syndrome at early ages and to provide 
adequate estrogen replacement starting at puberty.

DOI: 10.4274/Jcrpe.970
PMCID: PMC3701920
PMID: 23748068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]