---
reference_id: "PMID:25218700"
title: Occult hepatitis B virus infection with positive hepatitis B e antigen.
authors:
- Han Z
- Liu Y
- Pan J
- Bi Y
- Liu J
- Zhou YH
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.09.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Occult hepatitis B virus infection with positive hepatitis B e antigen.
**Authors:** Han Z, Liu Y, Pan J, Bi Y, Liu J, Zhou YH
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2014.09.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2014.09.007)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2015 Jan 1;438:266-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.09.007. Epub
2014  Sep 16.

Occult hepatitis B virus infection with positive hepatitis B e antigen.

Han Z(1), Liu Y(2), Pan J(2), Bi Y(3), Liu J(2), Zhou YH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, East China Sanatorium, Wuxi 214065, 
Jiangsu Province, China; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower 
Hospital, Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing 210008, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing 
University Medical School, Nanjing 210008, China; Jiangsu Key Laboratory for 
Molecular Medicine, Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing 210008, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing 
University Medical School, Nanjing 210008, China.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing 
University Medical School, Nanjing 210008, China; Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing University Medical School, 
Nanjing 210008, China; Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Nanjing 
University Medical School, Nanjing 210008, China. Electronic address: 
yzh20061111@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) is a marker to indicate active 
replication of hepatitis B virus (HBV). Occult HBV infection (OBI), referred to 
persistence of HBV DNA in serum and/or liver without detectable serum hepatitis 
B surface (HBsAg), usually has low HBV DNA levels. The presence of HBeAg in OBI 
is unusual.
METHODS: We report 2 patients who presented negative for HBsAg but positive for 
HBeAg and HBV DNA. HBV markers were quantified in the longitudinal sera in a 
period of 1-2years. The HBV DNA sequences were analyzed in 2 patients' sera and 
1 patient's liver.
RESULTS: Both patients were also positive for total anti-HBs and anti-HBc but 
negative for anti-HBe and anti-HBc IgM. HBV DNA levels were 234-567IU/ml in case 
1 and 42-1130IU/ml in case 2. The alignment analysis of the S gene showed that 
HBV in both patients was genotype C, serotype adr. Cloning analysis of the a 
determinant of HBsAg showed that the immune escape mutants were predominant in 
both patients over the follow-up period. The HBV had double mutations (A1762T 
and G1764A) in the basal core promoter but had no mutation in the pre C/C gene 
in both patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The patients with negative HBsAg but positive HBeAg may represent a 
unique type of OBI. Test for HBeAg would be critical to identifying such type of 
OBI.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.09.007
PMID: 25218700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]