---
reference_id: "PMID:32728396"
title: "Bone and joint complications in patients with hereditary hemochromatosis: a cross-sectional study of 93 patients."
authors:
- Nguyen CD
- Morel V
- Pierache A
- Lion G
- Cortet B
- Flipo RM
- Canva-Delcambre V
- Paccou J
journal: Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1177/1759720X20939405
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone and joint complications in patients with hereditary hemochromatosis: a cross-sectional study of 93 patients.
**Authors:** Nguyen CD, Morel V, Pierache A, Lion G, Cortet B, Flipo RM, Canva-Delcambre V, Paccou J
**Journal:** Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1759720X20939405](https://doi.org/10.1177/1759720X20939405)

## Content

1. Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis. 2020 Jul 16;12:1759720X20939405. doi: 
10.1177/1759720X20939405. eCollection 2020.

Bone and joint complications in patients with hereditary hemochromatosis: a 
cross-sectional study of 93 patients.

Nguyen CD(1), Morel V(2), Pierache A(3), Lion G(4), Cortet B(1), Flipo RM(1), 
Canva-Delcambre V(5), Paccou J(6).

Author information:
(1)Service de rhumatologie, CHU Lille, Lille, France.
(2)Service de radiologie ostéoarticulaire, CHU Lille, Lille, France.
(3)EA 2694 - Santé Publique: épidémiologie et qualité des soins, Université de 
Lille, CHU Lille, F-Lille, France.
(4)Service de médecine nucléaire, CHU Lille, Lille, France.
(5)Service d'hépatologie, CHU Lille, Lille, France.
(6)Service de rhumatologie, Hôpital Roger Salengro, Rue Emile Laine, CHRU, 59037 
Lille cedex, France.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to determine the frequency and 
characteristics of bone and joint complications, specifically bone fragility, 
joint replacement surgery, and arthropathy, in hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) 
and related factors.
METHODS: This study was a cross-sectional observational study of 93 patients 
with HH. Radiographs of the hands, wrists, knees, and ankles were scored for 
joint space narrowing, erosions and cysts, osteophytes, and chondrocalcinosis. 
Prevalent (vertebral and non-vertebral) fragility fractures were recorded and 
bone mineral density (BMD) was systematically evaluated by dual energy X-ray 
absorptiometry. Bone fragility was defined as (i) a T-score ⩽ -2.5 at any site 
with or without a prevalent fragility fracture, or (ii) a T-score between -1.0 
and -2.5 at any site and a prevalent fragility fracture.
RESULTS: The mean age of the patients was 60.0 (11.2) years, and 58.0% of them 
were men. The frequency of radiographic MCP2-3 arthropathy was 37.6% (95% CI 
0.28-0.48). Radiographic MCP2-3 arthropathy was independently associated with 
older age [OR 1.17 (1.09-1.26) per year, p < 0.0001], male sex [OR 3.89 
(1.17-12.97), p = 0.027] and C282Y+/+ genotype [OR 4.78 (1.46-15.68), 
p = 0.010]. The frequency of joint replacement surgery was 12.9% (95% CI 
0.07-0.21). The frequency of bone fragility was 20.4% (95% CI 0.13-0.30). Bone 
fragility was independently associated with hepatic cirrhosis [OR 8.20 
(1.74-38.68), p = 0.008].
DISCUSSION: Radiographic MCP2-3 arthropathy was found to occur in 37.6% of 
patients with HH. The association observed between this form of arthropathy and 
C282Y homozygosity, male sex, and older age suggests that demographic 
characteristics and genetic background are likely to be major determinants of 
this joint disorder and play a more important role than severity of iron 
overload. Bone fragility was observed in a fifth of the patients with HH, 
independently of genetic background and severity of iron overload, and was 
strongly associated with hepatic cirrhosis.
CONCLUSION: Future investigations should focus on pathogenesis and early 
identification of patients at risk of developing bone and joint complications 
secondary to HH.

© The Author(s), 2020.

DOI: 10.1177/1759720X20939405
PMCID: PMC7366396
PMID: 32728396

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest.