---
reference_id: "PMID:31609781"
title: "G6PD deficiency: An update."
authors:
- Harcke SJ
- Rizzolo D
- Harcke HT
journal: JAAPA
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000586304.65429.a7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# G6PD deficiency: An update.
**Authors:** Harcke SJ, Rizzolo D, Harcke HT
**Journal:** JAAPA (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.JAA.0000586304.65429.a7](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.JAA.0000586304.65429.a7)

## Content

1. JAAPA. 2019 Nov;32(11):21-26. doi: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000586304.65429.a7.

G6PD deficiency: An update.

Harcke SJ(1), Rizzolo D, Harcke HT.

Author information:
(1)Susan J. Harcke is a PA and medical officer in the Delaware National Guard's 
31st Civil Support Team in Smyrna, Del. Denise Rizzolo is an assistant clinical 
professor at the Pace Completion Program in the Department of Physician Studies 
in New York City and an assessment specialist for the Physician Assistant 
Education Association. H. Theodore Harcke is a professor of radiology and 
pediatrics at Sidney Kimmel College of Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, in 
Philadelphia, Pa. The authors have disclosed no potential conflicts of interest, 
financial or otherwise.

Although glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is less known in 
Western countries than in the Middle East and Africa, global migration and 
immigration are bringing ethnic groups with the highest incidence of this 
inherited genetic disorder into the US healthcare system. The G6PD enzyme is 
critical to protecting erythrocytes against oxidative stress, and deficiency may 
lead to hemolysis in the presence of certain environmental factors such as 
infection and some medications and foods. Neonatal jaundice, favism, and 
hemolysis are associated with exposure to increased oxidative stressors in 
patients with G6PD deficiency. By recognizing the potential for G6PD deficiency, 
clinicians can screen for the disorder and teach affected patients how to avoid 
triggers that result in harmful clinical manifestations.

DOI: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000586304.65429.a7
PMID: 31609781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]