---
reference_id: "PMID:15797856"
title: Deficiency of the G-protein alpha-subunit G(s)alpha in osteoblasts leads to differential effects on trabecular and cortical bone.
authors:
- Sakamoto A
- Chen M
- Nakamura T
- Xie T
- Karsenty G
- Weinstein LS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M500346200
keywords:
- Acid Phosphatase/pharmacology
- Alkaline Phosphatase/metabolism
- Animals
- Bone Marrow Cells/metabolism
- Bone and Bones/metabolism
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- Cartilage/metabolism
- Cell Differentiation
- Chondrocytes/metabolism
- Collagen Type I/metabolism
- "Collagen Type I, alpha 1 Chain"
- Cyclic AMP/metabolism
- Cytokines/metabolism
- DNA Primers/chemistry
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/chemistry, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Isoenzymes/pharmacology
- Membrane Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Models, Biological"
- "Models, Genetic"
- "Osteoblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- Osteocalcin/metabolism
- Osteopontin
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- RANK Ligand
- Receptor Activator of Nuclear Factor-kappa B
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Sialoglycoproteins/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Skull/metabolism
- Tartrate-Resistant Acid Phosphatase
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deficiency of the G-protein alpha-subunit G(s)alpha in osteoblasts leads to differential effects on trabecular and cortical bone.
**Authors:** Sakamoto A, Chen M, Nakamura T, Xie T, Karsenty G, Weinstein LS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M500346200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M500346200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 3;280(22):21369-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M500346200. Epub
2005  Mar 28.

Deficiency of the G-protein alpha-subunit G(s)alpha in osteoblasts leads to
differential effects on trabecular and cortical bone.

Sakamoto A(1), Chen M, Nakamura T, Xie T, Karsenty G, Weinstein LS.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Branch, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

The G-protein alpha-subunit G(s)alpha is required for the intracellular cAMP
responses to hormones and other agonists. G(s)alpha is known to mediate the cAMP
response to parathyroid hormone and other hormones and cytokines in bone and
cartilage. To analyze the in vivo role of G(s)alpha signaling in osteoblasts, we
developed mice with osteoblast/osteocyte-specific G(s)alpha deficiency (BGsKO)
by mating G(s)alpha-floxed mice with collagen Ialpha1 promoter-Cre recombinase
transgenic mice. Early skeletal development was normal in BGsKO mice, because
formation of the initial cartilage template and bone collar was unaffected. The
chondrocytic zones of the growth plates also appeared normal in BGsKO mice.
BGsKO mice had a defect in the formation of the primary spongiosa with reduced
immature osteoid (new bone formation) and overall length, which led to reduced
trabecular bone volume. In contrast, cortical bone was thickened with narrowing
of the bone marrow cavity. This was probably due to decreased cortical bone
resorption, because osteoclasts were markedly reduced on the endosteal surface
of cortical bone. In addition, the expression of alkaline phosphatase, an early
osteoblastic differentiation marker, was normal, whereas the expression of the
late osteoblast differentiation markers osteopontin and osteocalcin was reduced,
suggesting that the number of mature osteoblasts in bone is reduced. Expression
of the osteoclast-stimulating factor receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand was
also reduced. Overall, our findings have similarities to parathyroid hormone
null mice and confirm that the differential effects of parathyroid hormone on
trabecular and cortical bone are primarily mediated via G(s)alpha in
osteoblasts. Osteoblast-specific G(s)alpha deficiency leads to reduced bone
turnover.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M500346200
PMID: 15797856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
