---
reference_id: PMID:33982886
title: Augmentation of Stimulator of Interferon Genes-Induced Type I Interferon Production in COPA Syndrome.
authors:
- Kato T
- Yamamoto M
- Honda Y
- Orimo T
- Sasaki I
- Murakami K
- Hemmi H
- Fukuda-Ohta Y
- Isono K
- Takayama S
- Nakamura H
- Otsuki Y
- Miyamoto T
- Takita J
- Yasumi T
- Nishikomori R
- Matsubayashi T
- Izawa K
- Kaisho T
journal: Arthritis Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/art.41790
keywords:
- Alleles
- Coatomer Protein/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Interferon Type I/genetics
- "Joint Diseases/genetics, immunology"
- "Kidney Diseases/genetics, immunology"
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/genetics, immunology"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Augmentation of Stimulator of Interferon Genes-Induced Type I Interferon Production in COPA Syndrome.
**Authors:** Kato T, Yamamoto M, Honda Y, Orimo T, Sasaki I, Murakami K, Hemmi H, Fukuda-Ohta Y, Isono K, Takayama S, Nakamura H, Otsuki Y, Miyamoto T, Takita J, Yasumi T, Nishikomori R, Matsubayashi T, Izawa K, Kaisho T
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.41790](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.41790)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2021 Nov;73(11):2105-2115. doi: 10.1002/art.41790.

Augmentation of Stimulator of Interferon Genes-Induced Type I Interferon 
Production in COPA Syndrome.

Kato T(1), Yamamoto M(2), Honda Y(3), Orimo T(4), Sasaki I(1), Murakami K(5), 
Hemmi H(6), Fukuda-Ohta Y(1), Isono K(1), Takayama S(2), Nakamura H(2), Otsuki 
Y(2), Miyamoto T(2), Takita J(7), Yasumi T(7), Nishikomori R(8), Matsubayashi 
T(2), Izawa K(7), Kaisho T(1).

Author information:
(1)Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan.
(2)Seirei Hamamatsu General Hospital, Hamamatsu, Japan.
(3)Institute for the Advanced Study of Human Biology and Kyoto University, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan, and Osaka University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Okayama University of Science, Imabari, Japan.
(6)Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan, and Okayama University of 
Science, Imabari, Japan.
(7)Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(8)Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Coatomer subunit alpha (COPA) syndrome, also known as 
autoinflammatory interstitial lung, joint, and kidney disease, is caused by 
heterozygous mutations in COPA. We identified a novel COPA variant in 4 patients 
in one family. We undertook this study to elucidate whether and how the variant 
causes manifestations of COPA syndrome by studying these 4 patients and by 
analyzing results from a gene-targeted mouse model.
METHODS: We performed whole-exome sequencing in 7 family members and measured 
the type I interferon (IFN) signature of the peripheral blood cells. We analyzed 
the effects of COPA variants in in vitro experiments and in Copa mutant mice 
that were generated.
RESULTS: We identified a heterozygous variant of COPA (c.725T>G, p.Val242Gly) in 
the 4 affected members of the family. The IFN score was high in the members 
carrying the variant. In vitro analysis revealed that COPA V242G, as well as the 
previously reported disease-causing variants, augmented stimulator of interferon 
genes (STING)-induced type I IFN promoter activities. CopaV242G/+ mice 
manifested interstitial lung disease and STING-dependent elevation of 
IFN-stimulated gene expression. In CopaV242G/+ dendritic cells, the STING 
pathway was not constitutively activated but was hyperactivated upon 
stimulation, leading to increased type I IFN production.
CONCLUSION: V242G, a novel COPA variant, was found in 4 patients from one 
family. In gene-targeted mice with the V242G variant, interstitial lung disease 
was recapitulated and augmented responses of the STING pathway, leading to an 
increase in type I IFN production, were demonstrated.

© 2021, American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.41790
PMID: 33982886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]