---
reference_id: "PMID:38459147"
title: "Neurosurgical intervention for the Meckel-Gruber Syndrome: A systematic review."
authors:
- Junior JHMF
- Junior SP
- Pustilnik HN
- de Almeida Leão L
- da Paz MGDS
- Araujo TB
- de Deus FOG
- Alcântara T
- Dourado JC
- de Avellar LM
journal: Childs Nerv Syst
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00381-024-06346-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurosurgical intervention for the Meckel-Gruber Syndrome: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Junior JHMF, Junior SP, Pustilnik HN, de Almeida Leão L, da Paz MGDS, Araujo TB, de Deus FOG, Alcântara T, Dourado JC, de Avellar LM
**Journal:** Childs Nerv Syst (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00381-024-06346-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00381-024-06346-3)

## Content

1. Childs Nerv Syst. 2024 Jul;40(7):2161-2168. doi: 10.1007/s00381-024-06346-3. 
Epub 2024 Mar 9.

Neurosurgical intervention for the Meckel-Gruber Syndrome: A systematic review.

Junior JHMF(1), Junior SP(2), Pustilnik HN(3), de Almeida Leão L(2), da Paz 
MGDS(4), Araujo TB(4), de Deus FOG(4), Alcântara T(4), Dourado JC(4), de Avellar 
LM(4).

Author information:
(1)Metropolitan Union of Education and Culture, Salvador, Brazil. 
jefferson_heber@hotmail.com.
(2)Bahiana School of Medicine and Public Health, Salvador, Brazil.
(3)Salvador University, Salvador, Brazil.
(4)General Hospital Roberto Santos, Salvador, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Meckel-Gruber Syndrome (MKS) is an autosomal recessive genetic 
disorder, notable for its triad of occipital encephalocele, polycystic renal 
dysplasia, and postaxial polydactyly. Identified by Johann Friederich Meckel in 
1822, MKS is categorized as a ciliopathy due to gene mutations. Diagnosis is 
confirmed by the presence of at least two key features. The condition is 
incompatible with life, leading to death in the womb or shortly after birth. 
Recent studies have largely focused on the genetic aspects of MKS, with limited 
information regarding the impact of neurosurgical approaches, particularly in 
treating encephaloceles.
METHODS: A systematic review was performed according to the PRISMA statement. 
The PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science databases were consulted for data 
screening and extraction, which was conducted by two independent reviewers. The 
search strategy aimed to encompass studies documenting cases of MKS with 
published reports of encephalocele excisions, and the search strings for all 
databases were: Meckel-Gruber syndrome OR Meckel Gruber syndrome OR 
Meckel-gruber OR Meckel Gruber.
RESULTS: The study included 10 newborns with MKS associated with occipital 
encephalocele or meningocele, all of whom underwent surgical repair of the 
occipital sac. The mean gestational age at birth was 36 (± 2) weeks. The mean of 
birth weight was 3.14 (± 0.85) kilograms. The average head circumference at 
birth was 33.82 cm (± 2.17). The mean diameter of the encephalocele/meningocele 
was 5.91 (± 1.02) cm. Other common central nervous system abnormalities included 
hydrocephalus, Dandy-Walker malformation, and agenesis of the corpus callosum. 
40% required shunting for hydrocephalus. Surgery to remove the occipital sac 
occurred at a median age of 2.5 days (1.5-6.5). The most common post-surgical 
complication was the need for mechanical ventilation. The most common cause of 
death was pneumonia and the median age at death was 6.66 (0.03-18) months.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that neurosurgical intervention, especially for 
managing encephaloceles, may offer some improvement in survival, albeit within a 
context of generally poor prognosis. However, these results should be 
interpreted with caution.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00381-024-06346-3
PMID: 38459147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]