---
reference_id: "PMID:12370273"
title: Antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies specific for myeloperoxidase cause glomerulonephritis and vasculitis in mice.
authors:
- Xiao H
- Heeringa P
- Hu P
- Liu Z
- Zhao M
- Aratani Y
- Maeda N
- Falk RJ
- Jennette JC
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1172/JCI15918
keywords:
- Adoptive Transfer
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic/immunology"
- Cell Line
- DNA-Binding Proteins/physiology
- Female
- "Glomerulonephritis/etiology, therapy"
- "Immunization, Passive"
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Neutrophil Activation
- Peroxidase/immunology
- "Serum Albumin, Bovine/immunology"
- "Vasculitis/etiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies specific for myeloperoxidase cause glomerulonephritis and vasculitis in mice.
**Authors:** Xiao H, Heeringa P, Hu P, Liu Z, Zhao M, Aratani Y, Maeda N, Falk RJ, Jennette JC
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI15918](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI15918)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2002 Oct;110(7):955-63. doi: 10.1172/JCI15918.

Antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies specific for myeloperoxidase cause 
glomerulonephritis and vasculitis in mice.

Xiao H(1), Heeringa P, Hu P, Liu Z, Zhao M, Aratani Y, Maeda N, Falk RJ, 
Jennette JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill,Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2002 Oct;110(7):919-21. doi: 10.1172/JCI16699.

Antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies (ANCAs) are identified in the 
circulation of approximately 80% of patients with pauci-immune necrotizing and 
crescentic glomerulonephritis and systemic small vessel vasculitis, such as 
microscopic polyangiitis and Wegener granulomatosis. The most common antigen 
target for ANCAs is myeloperoxidase (MPO), which is found in neutrophils and 
monocytes. We report definitive experimental animal evidence that ANCAs are 
pathogenic. MPO knockout (Mpo(-/-)) mice were immunized with mouse MPO. 
Splenocytes from these mice or from control mice were injected intravenously 
into recombinase-activating gene-2-deficient (Rag2(-/-)) mice, which lack 
functioning B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes. All mice that received splenocytes 
developed mild to moderate glomerular immune deposits, but only mice that 
received 1 x 10(8) or 5 x 10(7) anti-MPO splenocytes developed severe 
necrotizing and crescentic glomerulonephritis, granulomatous inflammation, and 
systemic necrotizing vasculitis, including necrotizing arteritis and hemorrhagic 
pulmonary capillaritis. To test the pathogenic potential of antibodies alone, 
purified anti-MPO IgG or control IgG was injected intravenously into Rag2(-/-) 
mice and wild-type mice. Mice that received anti-MPO IgG but not mice that 
received control IgG developed focal necrotizing and crescentic 
glomerulonephritis with a paucity of glomerular Ig deposition. Thus, anti-MPO 
IgG alone was able to cause pauci-immune glomerular necrosis and crescent 
formation in the absence of functional T or B lymphocytes in Rag2(-/-) mice and 
in the presence of an intact immune system in wild-type C57BL/6J mice. This 
animal model offers strong support for a direct pathogenic role for ANCA IgG in 
human glomerulonephritis and vasculitis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI15918
PMCID: PMC151154
PMID: 12370273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]