---
reference_id: "PMID:33447843"
title: "Arrhythmogenic potential of myocardial disarray in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: genetic basis, functional consequences and relation to sudden cardiac death."
authors:
- Finocchiaro G
- Sheikh N
- Leone O
- Westaby J
- Mazzarotto F
- Pantazis A
- Ferrantini C
- Sacconi L
- Papadakis M
- Sharma S
- Sheppard MN
- Olivotto I
journal: Europace
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/europace/euaa348
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arrhythmogenic potential of myocardial disarray in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: genetic basis, functional consequences and relation to sudden cardiac death.
**Authors:** Finocchiaro G, Sheikh N, Leone O, Westaby J, Mazzarotto F, Pantazis A, Ferrantini C, Sacconi L, Papadakis M, Sharma S, Sheppard MN, Olivotto I
**Journal:** Europace (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/europace/euaa348](https://doi.org/10.1093/europace/euaa348)

## Content

1. Europace. 2021 Jul 18;23(7):985-995. doi: 10.1093/europace/euaa348.

Arrhythmogenic potential of myocardial disarray in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: 
genetic basis, functional consequences and relation to sudden cardiac death.

Finocchiaro G(1)(2), Sheikh N(1)(2), Leone O(3), Westaby J(4), Mazzarotto 
F(5)(6)(7)(8), Pantazis A(8), Ferrantini C(9)(10), Sacconi L(10)(11), Papadakis 
M(4), Sharma S(4), Sheppard MN(4), Olivotto I(5).

Author information:
(1)Cardiothoracic Centre, Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital, London, UK.
(2)King's College London.
(3)Cardiovascular and Cardiac Transplant Pathology Unit, Department of 
Pathology, Sant'Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(4)Cardiovascular Pathology Unit and Cardiology Clinical and Academic Group. St 
George's, University of London, London and St George's University Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust, UK.
(5)Cardiomyopathy Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(6)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, 
Italy.
(7)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, UK.
(8)Cardiovascular Research Centre, Royal Brompton and Harefield National Health 
Service Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(9)University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(10)European Laboratory for Non-Linear Spectroscopy, Florence, Italy.
(11)Institute for Experimental Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Europace. 2021 Sep 8;23(9):1509. doi: 10.1093/europace/euab197.

Myocardial disarray is defined as disorganized cardiomyocyte spatial 
distribution, with loss of physiological fibre alignment and orientation. Since 
the first pathological descriptions of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 
disarray appeared as a typical feature of this condition and sparked vivid 
debate regarding its specificity to the disease and clinical significance as a 
diagnostic marker and a risk factor for sudden death. Although much of the 
controversy surrounding its diagnostic value in HCM persists, it is increasingly 
recognized that myocardial disarray may be found in physiological contexts and 
in cardiac conditions different from HCM, raising the possibility that central 
focus should be placed on its quantity and distribution, rather than a mere 
presence. While further studies are needed to establish what amount of disarray 
should be considered as a hallmark of the disease, novel experimental approaches 
and emerging imaging techniques for the first time allow ex vivo and in vivo 
characterization of the myocardium to a molecular level. Such advances hold the 
promise of filling major gaps in our understanding of the functional 
consequences of myocardial disarray in HCM and specifically on arrhythmogenic 
propensity and as a risk factor for sudden death. Ultimately, these studies will 
clarify whether disarray represents a major determinant of the HCM clinical 
profile, and a potential therapeutic target, as opposed to an intriguing but 
largely innocent bystander.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. 
© The Author(s) 2021. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/europace/euaa348
PMID: 33447843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]