---
reference_id: "PMID:35106973"
title: 2022 American College of Rheumatology/European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology Classification Criteria for Microscopic Polyangiitis.
authors:
- Suppiah R
- Robson JC
- Grayson PC
- Ponte C
- Craven A
- Khalid S
- Judge A
- Hutchings A
- Merkel PA
- Luqmani RA
- Watts RA
- DCVAS Study Group
journal: Arthritis Rheumatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/art.41983
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic/immunology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Microscopic Polyangiitis/classification, diagnosis, immunology"
- Middle Aged
- Rheumatology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2022 American College of Rheumatology/European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology Classification Criteria for Microscopic Polyangiitis.
**Authors:** Suppiah R, Robson JC, Grayson PC, Ponte C, Craven A, Khalid S, Judge A, Hutchings A, Merkel PA, Luqmani RA, Watts RA, DCVAS Study Group
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheumatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.41983](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.41983)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2022 Mar;74(3):400-406. doi: 10.1002/art.41983. Epub 2022
 Feb 2.

2022 American College of Rheumatology/European Alliance of Associations for 
Rheumatology Classification Criteria for Microscopic Polyangiitis.

Suppiah R(1), Robson JC(2), Grayson PC(3), Ponte C(4), Craven A(5), Khalid S(5), 
Judge A(6), Hutchings A(7), Merkel PA(8), Luqmani RA(5), Watts RA(9); DCVAS 
Study Group.

Collaborators: Gatenby P, Hill C, Ranganathan D, Kronbichler A, Blockmans D, 
Barra L, Carette S, Pagnoux C, Dhindsa N, Fifi-Mah A, Khalidi N, Liang P, Milman 
N, Pineau C, Tian X, Wang G, Wang T, Zhao MH, Tesar V, Baslund B, Hammam N, 
Shahin A, Pirila L, Putaala J, Hellmich B, Henes J, Lamprecht P, Neumann T, 
Schmidt W, Sunderkoetter C, Szekanecz Z, Danda D, Das S, Gupta R, Rajasekhar L, 
Sharma A, Wagh S, Clarkson M, Molloy E, Salvarani C, Schiavon F, Tombetti E, 
Vaglio A, Amano K, Arimura Y, Dobashi H, Fujimoto S, Harigai M, Hirano F, 
Hirahashi J, Honma S, Kawakami T, Kobayashi S, Kono H, Makino H, Matsui K, Muso 
E, Suzuki K, Ikeda K, Takeuchi T, Tsukamoto T, Uchida S, Wada T, Yamada H, 
Yamagata K, Yumura W, Lai KS, Flores-Suarez LF, Hinojosa A, Rutgers B, Tak PP, 
Grainger R, Quincey V, Stamp L, Suppiah R, Besada E, Diamantopoulos A, Sznajd J, 
Azevedo E, Geraldes R, Rodrigues M, Santos E, Song YW, Moiseev S, Hocˇevar A, 
Cid MC, Moreno XS, Atukorala I, Berglin E, Mohammed A, Segelmark M, Daikeler T, 
Direskeneli H, Hatemi G, Kamali S, Karadag Ö, Pehlevan S, Adler M, Basu N, Bruce 
I, Chakravarty K, Dasgupta B, Flossmann O, Gendi N, Hassan A, Hoyles R, Jayne D, 
Jones C, Klocke R, Lanyon P, Laversuch C, Luqmani R, Robson J, Magliano M, Mason 
J, Maw WW, McInnes I, Mclaren J, Morgan M, Morgan A, Mukhtyar C, O'Riordan E, 
Patel S, Peall A, Robson J, Venkatachalam S, Vermaak E, Menon A, Watts R, Yee 
CS, Albert D, Calabrese L, Chung S, Forbess L, Gaffo A, Gewurz-Singer O, Grayson 
P, Liang K, Matteson E, Merkel PA, Springer J, Sreih A.

Author information:
(1)Auckland District Health Board, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Centre for Health and Clinical Research, University of the West of England, 
and University Hospitals and Weston NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol, UK.
(3)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, NIH, 
Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, 
Universidade de Lisboa, and Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, 
Portugal.
(5)Oxford NIHR Biomedical Research Centre and University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(6)Oxford NIHR Biomedical Research Centre and University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, 
and Bristol NIHR Biomedical Research Centre and University of Bristol, Bristol, 
UK.
(7)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(8)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(9)University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2022 Mar;74(3):383-385. doi: 10.1002/art.41984.
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2022 Jun;18(6):309-310. doi: 10.1038/s41584-022-00777-5.

OBJECTIVE: To develop and validate classification criteria for microscopic 
polyangiitis (MPA).
METHODS: Patients with vasculitis or comparator diseases were recruited into an 
international cohort. The study proceeded in 5 phases: 1) identification of 
candidate items using consensus methodology, 2) prospective collection of 
candidate items present at the time of diagnosis, 3) data-driven reduction of 
the number of candidate items, 4) expert panel review of cases to define the 
reference diagnosis, and 5) derivation of a points-based risk score for disease 
classification in a development set using least absolute shrinkage and selection 
operator logistic regression, with subsequent validation of performance 
characteristics in an independent set of cases and comparators.
RESULTS: The development set for MPA consisted of 149 cases of MPA and 408 
comparators. The validation set consisted of an additional 142 cases of MPA and 
414 comparators. From 91 candidate items, regression analysis identified 10 
items for MPA, 6 of which were retained. The final criteria and their weights 
were as follows: perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) or 
anti-myeloperoxidase-ANCA positivity (+6), pauci-immune glomerulonephritis (+3), 
lung fibrosis or interstitial lung disease (+3), sino-nasal symptoms or signs 
(-3), cytoplasmic ANCA or anti-proteinase 3 ANCA positivity (-1), and eosinophil 
count ≥1 × 109 /liter (-4). After excluding mimics of vasculitis, a patient with 
a diagnosis of small- or medium-vessel vasculitis could be classified as having 
MPA with a cumulative score of ≥5 points. When these criteria were tested in the 
validation data set, the sensitivity was 91% (95% confidence interval [95% CI] 
85-95%) and the specificity was 94% (95% CI 92-96%).
CONCLUSION: The 2022 American College of Rheumatology/European Alliance of 
Associations for Rheumatology classification criteria for MPA are now validated 
for use in clinical research.

© 2022 American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.41983
PMID: 35106973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]