---
reference_id: "PMID:41323099"
title: "Timely intervention in HMG-CoA Lyase deficiency: The role of newborn screening, metabolic management, and genomic sequencing."
authors:
- Menkovic I
- Makhijani N
- Francescatto L
- Pendyal S
- Stanley C
- Young SP
- Koeberl DD
- Niyazov D
- Stiles AR
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101278
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Timely intervention in HMG-CoA Lyase deficiency: The role of newborn screening, metabolic management, and genomic sequencing.
**Authors:** Menkovic I, Makhijani N, Francescatto L, Pendyal S, Stanley C, Young SP, Koeberl DD, Niyazov D, Stiles AR
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101278](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101278)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2025 Nov 14;45:101278. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101278.
eCollection 2025 Dec.

Timely intervention in HMG-CoA Lyase deficiency: The role of newborn screening,
metabolic management, and genomic sequencing.

Menkovic I(1), Makhijani N(2), Francescatto L(3), Pendyal S(2), Stanley C(4),
Young SP(2)(5), Koeberl DD(2), Niyazov D(2), Stiles AR(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's National
Hospital; George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Duke University Health System, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Variantyx, Inc. 1671 Worcester Road, Suite 400, Framingham, MA, USA.
(5)Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Duke University Health System, Durham, NC,
USA.

3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) lyase deficiency is a rare autosomal
recessive metabolic disease caused by variants in the HMGCL gene leading to an
impairment in leucine catabolism and ketone synthesis. In the United States,
HMG-CoA lyase deficiency is listed on the recommended uniform screening panel as
a core condition for newborn screening. A positive newborn screen will typically
show an elevation of C5-hydroxylated species on the acylcarnitine profile using
a dried-blood spot collected between 24 and 48 h of life. Initial follow-up
testing generally includes a plasma acylcarnitine profile and a urine organic
acid profile. Clinically, this metabolic alteration can lead to severe metabolic
decompensation, presenting as hypoketotic hypoglycemia and, when left untreated,
potential long-term neurological impairments. This report highlights the case of
a 38-day-old male with an initial abnormal newborn screen. Follow-up testing
showed moderate elevations of C5-hydroxylated and C6-dicarboxylated species on
the plasma acylcarnitine profile and marked elevations of
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric acid, 3-methylglutaconic acid, 3-methylglutaric and
3-hydroxyisovaleric acid detected by urine organic acid analysis. These findings
were consistent with a biochemical diagnosis of HMG-CoA lyase deficiency.
Confirmatory molecular testing included targeted HMGCL sequencing including
deletion/duplication analysis; the results of which were negative. Genome
sequencing was then requested which identified a deep intronic complex variant
of unknown significance within intron 1 of HGMCL. RNA sequencing studies were
sent as follow-up which revealed that the level of expression of the HMGCL gene
was negligible in comparison with tissue-matched controls, thus confirming the
biochemical diagnosis of HMG-CoA lyase deficiency.

© 2025 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101278
PMCID: PMC12662037
PMID: 41323099

Conflict of interest statement: None.
