---
reference_id: "PMID:19953639"
title: "Molecular and clinical heterogeneity in CLCN7-dependent osteopetrosis: report of 20 novel mutations."
authors:
- Pangrazio A
- Pusch M
- Caldana E
- Frattini A
- Lanino E
- Tamhankar PM
- Phadke S
- Lopez AG
- Orchard P
- Mihci E
- Abinun M
- Wright M
- Vettenranta K
- Bariae I
- Melis D
- Tezcan I
- Baumann C
- Locatelli F
- Zecca M
- Horwitz E
- Mansour LS
- Van Roij M
- Vezzoni P
- Villa A
- Sobacchi C
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21167
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chloride Channels/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Crystallization
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- "Osteopetrosis/genetics, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular and clinical heterogeneity in CLCN7-dependent osteopetrosis: report of 20 novel mutations.
**Authors:** Pangrazio A, Pusch M, Caldana E, Frattini A, Lanino E, Tamhankar PM, Phadke S, Lopez AG, Orchard P, Mihci E, Abinun M, Wright M, Vettenranta K, Bariae I, Melis D, Tezcan I, Baumann C, Locatelli F, Zecca M, Horwitz E, Mansour LS, Van Roij M, Vezzoni P, Villa A, Sobacchi C
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21167](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21167)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Jan;31(1):E1071-80. doi: 10.1002/humu.21167.

Molecular and clinical heterogeneity in CLCN7-dependent osteopetrosis: report of 
20 novel mutations.

Pangrazio A(1), Pusch M, Caldana E, Frattini A, Lanino E, Tamhankar PM, Phadke 
S, Lopez AG, Orchard P, Mihci E, Abinun M, Wright M, Vettenranta K, Bariae I, 
Melis D, Tezcan I, Baumann C, Locatelli F, Zecca M, Horwitz E, Mansour LS, Van 
Roij M, Vezzoni P, Villa A, Sobacchi C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council, 20090 
Segrate, Italy.

The "Osteopetroses" are genetic diseases whose clinical picture is caused by a 
defect in bone resorption by osteoclasts. Three main forms can be distinguished 
on the basis of severity, age of onset and means of inheritance: the dominant 
benign, the intermediate and the recessive severe form. While several genes have 
been involved in the pathogenesis of the different types of osteopetroses, the 
CLCN7 gene has drawn the attention of many researchers, as mutations within this 
gene are associated with very different phenotypes. We report here the 
characterization of 25 unpublished patients which has resulted in the 
identification of 20 novel mutations, including 11 missense mutations, 6 causing 
premature termination, 1 small deletion and 2 putative splice site defects. 
Careful analysis of clinical and molecular data led us to several conclusions. 
First, intermediate osteopetrosis is not homogeneous, since it can comprise both 
severe dominant forms with an early onset and recessive ones without central 
nervous system involvement. Second, the appropriateness of haematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation in CLCN7-dependent ARO patients has to be carefully 
evaluated and exhaustive CNS examination is strongly suggested, as 
transplantation can almost completely cure the disease in situations where no 
primary neurological symptoms are present. Finally, the analysis of this largest 
cohort of CLCN7-dependent ARO patients together with some ADO II families 
allowed us to draw preliminary genotype-phenotype correlations suggesting that 
haploinsufficiency is not the mechanism causing ADO II. The availability of 
biochemical assays to characterize ClC-7 function will help to confirm this 
hypothesis.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21167
PMID: 19953639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]