---
reference_id: "PMID:23635801"
title: "Diagnosis, prognosis, and management of leiomyosarcoma: recognition of anatomic variants."
authors:
- Bathan AJ
- Constantinidou A
- Pollack SM
- Jones RL
journal: Curr Opin Oncol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/CCO.0b013e3283622c77
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leiomyosarcoma/classification, diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis, prognosis, and management of leiomyosarcoma: recognition of anatomic variants.
**Authors:** Bathan AJ, Constantinidou A, Pollack SM, Jones RL
**Journal:** Curr Opin Oncol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CCO.0b013e3283622c77](https://doi.org/10.1097/CCO.0b013e3283622c77)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Oncol. 2013 Jul;25(4):384-9. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0b013e3283622c77.

Diagnosis, prognosis, and management of leiomyosarcoma: recognition of anatomic
variants.

Bathan AJ(1), Constantinidou A, Pollack SM, Jones RL.

Author information:
(1)University of Washington/Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to present the most recent
advances in the diagnosis of the more common leiomyosarcoma (LMS) anatomic
variants, potentially useful prognostic markers that have recently been
identified and the systemic approaches currently used or under evaluation to
improve the outcome of patients with this disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: Over the last few years emphasis has been placed on
incorporating effective imaging tools and using pathological biomarkers in the
diagnostic workup of LMS. Moreover, efforts are being made to identify
meaningful prognostic and predictive parameters that will aid the development of
effective novel therapeutics. The number of systemic therapies available to
treat LMS has increased over the last decade, but the selection of systemic
therapy is not based on the anatomic origin of LMS.
SUMMARY: Currently, the only curative option in LMS is surgery and despite
progress in systemic therapy the outcome of patients with advanced/metastatic
disease remains poor. Better understanding of the underlying biology of the LMS
variants, improved diagnostics and more effective, less toxic therapeutic agents
are required.

DOI: 10.1097/CCO.0b013e3283622c77
PMID: 23635801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
