---
reference_id: "PMID:25729264"
title: C596G mutation in FBN1 causes Marfan syndrome with exotropia in a Chinese family.
authors:
- Wang F
- Li B
- Lan L
- Li L
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# C596G mutation in FBN1 causes Marfan syndrome with exotropia in a Chinese family.
**Authors:** Wang F, Li B, Lan L, Li L
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2015)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2015 Feb 23;21:194-200. eCollection 2015.

C596G mutation in FBN1 causes Marfan syndrome with exotropia in a Chinese 
family.

Wang F(1), Li B(1), Lan L(1), Li L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Henan University 
of Science and Technology, Luoyang, Henan, China.

PURPOSE: To screen mutations in the fibrillin-1 (FBN1) gene in a Chinese family 
with autosomal dominant Marfan syndrome (MFS).
METHODS: Patients and unaffected family members were given ophthalmic, 
cardiovascular, and physical examinations with a 5-year follow-up. Genomic DNA 
was extracted from the leukocytes of venous blood from all patients and their 
relatives. The entire coding region of the FBN1gene was screened with an ABI 
9700 GeneAmp PCR System. The mutation identified was screened in 100 healthy and 
ethnically unrelated Chinese individuals.
RESULTS: Mutation screening in FBN1 identified a T>G transition at position 
c.1786 in exon 14, leading to substitution of cysteine for glycine at codon 596 
(C596G) in this four-generation Chinese family. The C596G mutation was 
associated with the disease phenotypes in all six patients but not found in 14 
unaffected family members or the 100 ethnically unrelated and healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: A C596G mutation in FBN1 was identified in a Chinese family with 
MFS. Our results expand the spectrum of FBN1 mutations and contribute to the 
understanding of the role of FBN1 in the pathogenesis of Marfan syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4341440
PMID: 25729264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]