---
reference_id: "PMID:32356182"
title: Disease-Specific Biomarkers in Transthyretin Cardiac Amyloidosis.
authors:
- Hendren NS
- Roth LR
- Grodin JL
journal: Curr Heart Fail Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s11897-020-00457-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease-Specific Biomarkers in Transthyretin Cardiac Amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Hendren NS, Roth LR, Grodin JL
**Journal:** Curr Heart Fail Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11897-020-00457-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11897-020-00457-z)

## Content

1. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2020 Jun;17(3):77-83. doi: 10.1007/s11897-020-00457-z.

Disease-Specific Biomarkers in Transthyretin Cardiac Amyloidosis.

Hendren NS(1), Roth LR(1), Grodin JL(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. Justin.Grodin@utsouthwestern.edu.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Transthyretin amyloidosis is an increasingly recognized cause 
of restrictive cardiomyopathy related to amyloid fibril deposition in cardiac 
tissues. As treatment therapies have emerged for transthyretin amyloidosis 
(ATTR), so has interest in using biomarkers to identify disease prior to 
advanced presentation.
RECENT FINDINGS: Lower levels of transthyretin and retinol binding protein-4 
have been demonstrated in patients with pathogenic mutations of transthyretin 
either with or without clinical disease. Levels associate with the severity of 
mutations as well as response to treatment with transthyretin stabilizers or 
small interfering RNA molecules which silence transthyretin production. 
Transthyretin stability is the rate limiting step of amyloid fibril formation 
and directly measuring transthyretin kinetic stability has the potential to 
identify patients as risk as well as therapeutic response to treatment 
regardless of pathogenic or wild-type genetics. In addition, non-antibody 
protein-based peptide probes have been developed that directedly measure 
misfolded transthyretin oligomers due to transthyretin breakdown. Although 
promising, both TTR kinetic and protein peptide probes remain in early stages of 
clinical investigation. Transthyretin, retinol binding protein-4, transthyretin 
kinetic stability, and protein-based peptide probes have potential as biomarkers 
to facilitate an earlier ATTR diagnosis for patients with pathogenic 
transthyretin mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s11897-020-00457-z
PMID: 32356182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]