---
reference_id: "PMID:17935173"
title: "Parvovirus B19 infection in Chile: markers of infection and immunity in patients with clinical symptoms."
authors:
- Larrañaga C
- León O
- Díaz P
- Miranda M
- Norambuena X
- Pérez M
- Gaggero A
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.21018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parvovirus B19 infection in Chile: markers of infection and immunity in patients with clinical symptoms.
**Authors:** Larrañaga C, León O, Díaz P, Miranda M, Norambuena X, Pérez M, Gaggero A
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.21018](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.21018)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2007 Dec;79(12):1927-34. doi: 10.1002/jmv.21018.

Parvovirus B19 infection in Chile: markers of infection and immunity in patients 
with clinical symptoms.

Larrañaga C(1), León O, Díaz P, Miranda M, Norambuena X, Pérez M, Gaggero A.

Author information:
(1)Virology Program, ICBM, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, 
Chile.

Parvovirus B19 infection is associated with a wide variety of symptoms and 
signs, and given that some clinical features, such as anemia, arthropathy and 
rash may be attributable to other causes, laboratory diagnosis of B19 markers is 
necessary. The principal aims were to study the behavior of B19 
infection-associated diseases in the Chilean population and to compare B19 
markers for recent or active infection and for immunity status in patients with 
clinical symptoms suspicious of B19 infection and control individuals. Sera from 
a total of 267 patients with diverse clinical manifestations associated with B19 
and from 69 healthy controls were tested for B19 DNA using PCR and for specific 
IgM and immunoglobulin G (IgG) by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Out 
of 267 patients examined, 89 had B19-associated disease markers: 43 had B19 DNA 
without IgM, 25 had IgM without B19 DNA, and 21 had both B19 DNA and IgM. Also 
49 patients were positive only for IgG without B19 DNA or IgM. Out of the 69 
healthy controls, only 2 had B19 DNA without IgM and 30 had IgG without B19 DNA 
and/or IgM. The distribution of the clinical diagnoses associated with recent 
B19 infection, tested by B19 DNA and/or IgM, included 38.5% with hematological 
illnesses, 23.4% with rheumatic diseases, 45.7% with infectious diseases, 33.3% 
with indications of prenatal infection, 32.3% with conditions that induce 
immunodeficiency, and 15.8% with other miscellaneous conditions. The use of both 
markers, DNA and IgM, allows a more adequate diagnosis of infection by this 
virus.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.21018
PMID: 17935173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]