---
reference_id: "PMID:10706561"
title: Novel molecular defects of the delta-aminolevulinate dehydratase gene in a patient with inherited acute hepatic porphyria.
authors:
- Akagi R
- Shimizu R
- Furuyama K
- Doss MO
- Sassa S
journal: Hepatology
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1002/hep.510310321
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adolescent
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- CHO Cells
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Cricetinae
- "DNA, Complementary/biosynthesis"
- Erythrocytes/enzymology
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Porphobilinogen Synthase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Porphyrias, Hepatic/blood, enzymology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel molecular defects of the delta-aminolevulinate dehydratase gene in a patient with inherited acute hepatic porphyria.
**Authors:** Akagi R, Shimizu R, Furuyama K, Doss MO, Sassa S
**Journal:** Hepatology (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.510310321](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.510310321)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 2000 Mar;31(3):704-8. doi: 10.1002/hep.510310321.

Novel molecular defects of the delta-aminolevulinate dehydratase gene in a
patient with inherited acute hepatic porphyria.

Akagi R(1), Shimizu R, Furuyama K, Doss MO, Sassa S.

Author information:
(1)Okayama Prefectural University, Japan.

Cloning and expression of the defective gene for delta-aminolevulinate
dehydratase (ALAD) from the second of 2 German patients with ALAD deficiency
porphyria (ADP), who had been originally reported by Doss et al. in 1979, were
performed. Cloning of cDNAs for the defective ALAD were performed using
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed lymphoblastoid cells of the proband, and
nucleotide sequences of cloned cDNA were determined. Two separate mutations of
ALAD cDNA were identified in each ALAD allele. One was G457A, termed "H1,"
resulting in V153M substitution, while the other was a deletion of 2 sequential
bases at T(818) and C(819), termed "H2," resulting in a frame shift with a
premature stop codon at the amino acid position of 294. Using allele-specific
oligonucleotide hybridization, the mother of the proband was shown to have an H1
defect, while using genomic DNA analysis, the father was shown to have an H2
defect. Expression of H1 cDNA in Chinese hamster ovary cells produced an ALAD
protein with only a partial activity (10.65% +/- 1.80% of the normal), while H2
cDNA encoded no significant protein. These data thus demonstrate that the
proband was associated with 2 novel molecular defects of the ALAD gene, 1 in
each allele, and account for the extremely low ALAD activity in his erythrocytes
( approximately 1% of normal).

DOI: 10.1002/hep.510310321
PMID: 10706561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
