---
reference_id: "PMID:36795902"
title: RNU4atac-opathy.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Duker A
- Velasco D
- Robertson N
- Jackson A
- DeFelice M
- Bober MB
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RNU4atac-opathy.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Duker A, Velasco D, Robertson N, Jackson A, DeFelice M, Bober MB

## Content

1. RNU4atac-opathy.

Duker A(1), Velasco D(2), Robertson N(3), Jackson A(3), DeFelice M(1), Bober 
MB(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2025.
2023 Feb 16.

Author information:
(1)Nemours Children's Health, Wilmington, Delaware
(2)University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska
(3)University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: RNU4atac-opathy encompasses the phenotypic spectrum of 
biallelic RNU4ATAC pathogenic variants, including the three historically 
designated clinical phenotypes microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism 
type I/III (MOPDI), Roifman syndrome, and Lowry-Wood syndrome, as well as 
varying combinations of the disease features / system involvement that do not 
match specific defined phenotypes. Findings present in all affected individuals 
include growth restriction, microcephaly, skeletal dysplasia, and cognitive 
impairment. Less common but variable findings include brain anomalies, seizures, 
strokes, immunodeficiency, and cardiac anomalies, as well as ophthalmologic, 
skin, renal, gastrointestinal, hearing, and endocrine involvement.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of RNU4atac-opathy is established in a proband 
with suggestive findings and biallelic pathogenic (or likely pathogenic) 
variants in RNU4ATAC identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Supportive care to improve quality of 
life, maximize function, and reduce complications is recommended. This ideally 
involves multidisciplinary care by specialists in relevant fields, including 
orthopedists to monitor the associated skeletal dysplasia and immunologists to 
manage antibiotic treatment of infections and use of immunoglobulin replacement 
therapy as indicated to avoid life-threatening infections. Surveillance: To 
monitor existing manifestations and response to supportive care (such as growth, 
developmental progress, and educational needs), and to detect new manifestations 
(particularly brain MRI for detection of stroke in children with MOPDI with 
neurologic deterioration). Agents/circumstances to avoid: Perform immunologic 
evaluation prior to administration of live vaccines. For those with MOPDI, 
minimize medically stressful situations as much as possible, including stress 
during anesthesia, due to energy-related strokes.
GENETIC COUNSELING: RNU4atac-opathy is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an RNU4ATAC pathogenic 
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of 
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance 
of inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Intrafamilial 
clinical variability has been reported between sibs who inherit the same 
biallelic RNU4ATAC pathogenic variants. Once the RNU4ATAC pathogenic variants 
have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2025, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 36795902