---
reference_id: "PMID:6344634"
title: "The campomelic syndrome: review, report of 17 cases, and follow-up on the currently 17-year-old boy first reported by Maroteaux et al in 1971."
authors:
- Houston CS
- Opitz JM
- Spranger JW
- Macpherson RI
- Reed MH
- Gilbert EF
- Herrmann J
- Schinzel A
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1983'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320150103
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Adolescent
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- Cartilage/abnormalities
- Female
- Genitalia/abnormalities
- H-Y Antigen
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Respiratory Distress Syndrome, Newborn/genetics"
- Respiratory System/physiopathology
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The campomelic syndrome: review, report of 17 cases, and follow-up on the currently 17-year-old boy first reported by Maroteaux et al in 1971.
**Authors:** Houston CS, Opitz JM, Spranger JW, Macpherson RI, Reed MH, Gilbert EF, Herrmann J, Schinzel A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1983)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320150103](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320150103)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1983 May;15(1):3-28. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320150103.

The campomelic syndrome: review, report of 17 cases, and follow-up on the 
currently 17-year-old boy first reported by Maroteaux et al in 1971.

Houston CS, Opitz JM, Spranger JW, Macpherson RI, Reed MH, Gilbert EF, Herrmann 
J, Schinzel A.

We report 17 cases of the campomelic syndrome (CS) and a follow-up of one of the 
original patients of Maroteaux et al who is now 17 years old. Our review is 
based on 97 patients, including our own. An infant with the CS presents at birth 
with spectacularly short and bowed femora and tibiae. The initial chest 
radiograph confirms the diagnosis by demonstrating extremely small bladeless 
scapulae and hypoplastic pedicles of many thoracic vertebrae. Ossification of 
the sternal segments, pubis, talus, and knee epiphyses is also retarded. Usually 
the hips are dislocated and talipes equinovarus deformities are present. There 
is a small chondrocranium and a disproportionately large neurocranium. The 
bell-shaped chest, narrow superiorly, does not explain the degree of respiratory 
distress that soon ensues. Narrow airways from defective tracheo-bronchial 
cartilage can often be demonstrated on the radiograph, but micrognathia, 
retroglossia, cleft palate, hypoplastic lungs, and even CNS-based hypotonia 
contribute to the respiratory problem. Internal anomalies include frequent 
absence of olfactory bulbs and tracts and dilatation of cerebral ventricles, 
heart defects (PDA, VSD, stenosis of aortic isthmus), hydroureter and 
hydronephrosis, renal hypoplasia, renal hypoplasia, and rarely renal cysts.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320150103
PMID: 6344634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]