---
reference_id: "PMID:12220086"
title: The spatial epidemiology of cholera in an endemic area of Bangladesh.
authors:
- Ali M
- Emch M
- Donnay JP
- Yunus M
- Sack RB
journal: Soc Sci Med
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0277-9536(01)00230-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The spatial epidemiology of cholera in an endemic area of Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Ali M, Emch M, Donnay JP, Yunus M, Sack RB
**Journal:** Soc Sci Med (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0277-9536(01)00230-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0277-9536(01)00230-1)

## Content

1. Soc Sci Med. 2002 Sep;55(6):1015-24. doi: 10.1016/s0277-9536(01)00230-1.

The spatial epidemiology of cholera in an endemic area of Bangladesh.

Ali M(1), Emch M, Donnay JP, Yunus M, Sack RB.

Author information:
(1)International Vaccine Institute, Seoul, South Korea. mali@ivi.int

This paper defines high-risk areas of cholera based on environmental risk 
factors of the disease in an endemic area of Bangladesh. The risk factors 
include proximity to surface water, high population density, and low educational 
status, which were identified in an earlier study by the authors. Cholera data 
were analyzed by spatially referenced extended household units for two time 
periods, 1983-1987 and 1992-1996. These periods were chosen because they had 
different dominant cholera agents. From 1983-1987 classical cholera was dominant 
and from 1992-1996 El Tor was dominant. By defining high-risk areas based on 
risk factors, this study builds a spatial risk model for cholera. The model is 
then evaluated based on the locations of observed cholera cases. The study also 
identifies the determinants of death due to cholera for the two different time 
periods dominated by the different cholera agents. The modeled risk areas that 
were based on the risk factors were found to correspond with actual 
distributions of cholera morbidity and mortality. The high-risk areas of the 
dominant cholera agents are relatively stable over time. However, from 1983-1987 
El Tor cholera, which was not the dominant agent during that period, was not 
associated with high-risk areas, suggesting that the El Tor habitat may have 
changed over time. The case fatality rate for cholera was related to proximity 
to a diarrhea treatment hospital in the study area.

DOI: 10.1016/s0277-9536(01)00230-1
PMID: 12220086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]