---
reference_id: "PMID:36641620"
title: Embryo Selection for a Carrier of an Early-Onset Alzheimer's Disease-Associated Mutation in the PSEN1 Gene.
authors:
- Valdés-Martínez OH
- García-Luna SM
- Oceguera-Palao LC
- Villarreal-Pineda L
- Sordia-Hernández LH
- de la Fuente Cortez B
- Morales-Martínez A
journal: J Prev Alzheimers Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.14283/jpad.2023.4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Embryo Selection for a Carrier of an Early-Onset Alzheimer's Disease-Associated Mutation in the PSEN1 Gene.
**Authors:** Valdés-Martínez OH, García-Luna SM, Oceguera-Palao LC, Villarreal-Pineda L, Sordia-Hernández LH, de la Fuente Cortez B, Morales-Martínez A
**Journal:** J Prev Alzheimers Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.14283/jpad.2023.4](https://doi.org/10.14283/jpad.2023.4)

## Content

1. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2023;10(1):144-147. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2023.4.

Embryo Selection for a Carrier of an Early-Onset Alzheimer's Disease-Associated 
Mutation in the PSEN1 Gene.

Valdés-Martínez OH(1), García-Luna SM, Oceguera-Palao LC, Villarreal-Pineda L, 
Sordia-Hernández LH, de la Fuente Cortez B, Morales-Martínez A.

Author information:
(1)Felipe Arturo Morales-Martínez, Centro Universitario de Medicina 
Reproductiva, Hospital Universitario "Dr. José Eleuterio González", Edificio 
Barragán 3er Piso. Av. Gonzalitos y Av. Francisco I. Madero Pte s/n, Colonia 
Mitras Centro, Monterrey N.L., México. 64460, e-mail: drfamm@yahoo.com, Phone: 
+52 81 83483054, Fax: +52 81 83483054  .

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative dementia. It 
manifests as early-onset or late-onset AD. Early-onset AD represents about 5.5% 
of the total cases and occurs in patients under age 65. The EOAD progresses more 
aggressively and has a shorter life expectancy due to a greater pathogenic load. 
We present two asymptomatic siblings, a 30-year-old male and a 34- year-old 
female, who are heterozygous carriers of a pathogenic variant c.428T>C 
(Ile143Thr) in the presenilin 1 (PSEN1) gene. During genetic counseling, 
assisted reproduction techniques (ART) coupled with embryo biopsy and a 
preimplantation genetic test for monogenic disorders (PGT-M) were recommended to 
provide reproductive care for the patients and their partners. ART and 
preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) have made it possible to have 
chromosomally normal and genetically unaffected offspring, allowing patients 
with genetic diseases to become parents.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2023.4
PMID: 36641620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial interests to disclose.