---
reference_id: "PMID:38561452"
title: Clinical phenotype and genetic function analysis of a family with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy-7 caused by POLR3A mutation.
authors:
- Ruan DD
- Ruan XL
- Wang RL
- Lin XF
- Zhang YP
- Lin B
- Li SJ
- Wu M
- Chen Q
- Zhang JH
- Cheng Q
- Zhang YW
- Lin F
- Luo JW
- Zheng Z
- Li YF
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-58452-6
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- Humans
- Hereditary Central Nervous System Demyelinating Diseases/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Atrophy
- "RNA, Transfer"
- "RNA Polymerase III/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical phenotype and genetic function analysis of a family with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy-7 caused by POLR3A mutation.
**Authors:** Ruan DD, Ruan XL, Wang RL, Lin XF, Zhang YP, Lin B, Li SJ, Wu M, Chen Q, Zhang JH, Cheng Q, Zhang YW, Lin F, Luo JW, Zheng Z, Li YF
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-58452-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-58452-6)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Apr 1;14(1):7638. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-58452-6.

Clinical phenotype and genetic function analysis of a family with 
hypomyelinating leukodystrophy-7 caused by POLR3A mutation.

Ruan DD(#)(1), Ruan XL(#)(2), Wang RL(#)(1)(3), Lin XF(#)(1)(4), Zhang YP(1), 
Lin B(1), Li SJ(1), Wu M(1), Chen Q(1), Zhang JH(1), Cheng Q(1)(5), Zhang YW(6), 
Lin F(7)(8), Luo JW(9), Zheng Z(10)(11), Li YF(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shengli Clinical Medical College 
of Fujian Medical University, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou, 
350001, China.
(3)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Emergency Medicine, Fujian Provincial 
Institute of Emergency Medicine, Fujian Emergency Medical Center, Fuzhou, 
350001, China.
(4)Pediatrics Department, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, 350001, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, 350001, China.
(6)Department of Neurology, Youxi County General Hospital, Sanming, 365100, 
China.
(7)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shengli Clinical Medical College 
of Fujian Medical University, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, China. 
linfan@fjmu.edu.cn.
(8)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Fujian Provincial Center for Geriatrics, 
Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, 350001, China. linfan@fjmu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shengli Clinical Medical College 
of Fujian Medical University, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, China. 
docluo0421@aliyun.com.
(10)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shengli Clinical Medical College 
of Fujian Medical University, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, China. 
zz128cy@163.com.
(11)Department of Neurology, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, 350001, China. 
zz128cy@163.com.
(12)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shengli Clinical Medical College 
of Fujian Medical University, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, China. 
lyfd02068@163.com.
(13)Department of Neurology, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, 350001, China. 
lyfd02068@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2024 Sep 10;14(1):21122. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-72293-3.

Hypomyelinating leukodystrophy (HLD) is a rare genetic heterogeneous disease 
that can affect myelin development in the central nervous system. This study 
aims to analyze the clinical phenotype and genetic function of a family with 
HLD-7 caused by POLR3A mutation. The proband (IV6) in this family mainly showed 
progressive cognitive decline, dentin dysplasia, and hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism. Her three old brothers (IV1, IV2, and IV4) also had different 
degrees of ataxia, dystonia, or dysarthria besides the aforementioned 
manifestations. Their brain magnetic resonance imaging showed bilateral 
periventricular white matter atrophy, brain atrophy, and corpus callosum atrophy 
and thinning. The proband and her two living brothers (IV2 and IV4) were 
detected to carry a homozygous mutation of the POLR3A (NM_007055.4) gene c. 
2300G > T (p.Cys767Phe), and her consanguineous married parents (III1 and III2) 
were p.Cys767Phe heterozygous carriers. In the constructed POLR3A wild-type and 
p.Cys767Phe mutant cells, it was seen that overexpression of wild-type POLR3A 
protein significantly enhanced Pol III transcription of 5S rRNA and tRNA 
Leu-CAA. However, although the mutant POLR3A protein overexpression was 
increased compared to the wild-type protein overexpression, it did not show the 
expected further enhancement of Pol III function. On the contrary, Pol III 
transcription function was frustrated (POLR3A, BC200, and tRNA Leu-CAA 
expression decreased), and MBP and 18S rRNA expressions were decreased. This 
study indicates that the POLR3A p.Cys767Phe variant caused increased expression 
of mutated POLR3A protein and abnormal expression of Pol III transcripts, and 
the mutant POLR3A protein function was abnormal.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-58452-6
PMCID: PMC10985069
PMID: 38561452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.