---
reference_id: "PMID:38048918"
title: The relationship between CYP19A1 gene expression in luteinized granulosa cells and follicular estradiol output in women with endometriosis.
authors:
- Giacomini E
- Pagliardini L
- Minetto S
- Pinna M
- Kleeman F
- Bonesi F
- Makieva S
- Pavone V
- Reschini M
- Papaleo E
- Candiani M
- Somigliana E
- Viganò P
journal: J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2023.106439
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The relationship between CYP19A1 gene expression in luteinized granulosa cells and follicular estradiol output in women with endometriosis.
**Authors:** Giacomini E, Pagliardini L, Minetto S, Pinna M, Kleeman F, Bonesi F, Makieva S, Pavone V, Reschini M, Papaleo E, Candiani M, Somigliana E, Viganò P
**Journal:** J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jsbmb.2023.106439](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsbmb.2023.106439)

## Content

1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2024 Mar;237:106439. doi: 
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2023.106439. Epub 2023 Dec 2.

The relationship between CYP19A1 gene expression in luteinized granulosa cells 
and follicular estradiol output in women with endometriosis.

Giacomini E(1), Pagliardini L(2), Minetto S(1), Pinna M(3), Kleeman F(1), Bonesi 
F(1), Makieva S(1), Pavone V(1), Reschini M(3), Papaleo E(4), Candiani M(5), 
Somigliana E(3), Viganò P(1).

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Sciences Laboratory, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 
Milan, Italy.
(2)Reproductive Sciences Laboratory, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 
Milan, Italy. Electronic address: pagliardini.luca@hsr.it.
(3)Infertility Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
Milano, Italy.
(4)Centro Scienze della Natalità, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 
Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, Milan, Italy.

Endometriosis was claimed to negatively affect the intrafollicular environment, 
hindering oocyte competence. Previous studies evaluated expression levels of 
cytochrome P450 aromatase (CYP19A) in granulosa and cumulus oophorus cells 
collected from endometriosis women, but results are controversial. To further 
investigate the intrafollicular environment whose alteration may potentially 
disturb ovarian steroidogenesis in endometriosis, gene expression of CYP19A and 
of its upstream enzymes, StAR and 3βHSD was assessed in luteinized granulosa 
cells isolated from follicular fluids (FF) collected during Assisted 
Reproduction Technology (ART) procedures in women with stage III-IV disease and 
from subjects without the condition. In a subgroup of patients, cumulus oophorus 
cells (COCs) were also assessed for CYP19A, StAR and 3βHSD gene expression. No 
difference in mRNA expression of CYP19A1, StAR and 3βHSD in both granulosa cells 
and COCs was observed between the two groups of patients. No significant 
difference was also found between estradiol FF levels detected in endometriosis 
patients (median=873, IQR=522-1221 ng/ml)) and control patients (median=878, 
IQR=609-1137 ng/ml). To gain more insight into the intrafollicular regulation of 
CYP19A in patients with endometriosis, associations between expression of the 
analyzed genes, systemic and follicular 17β-estradiol levels and ART outcomes 
were assessed. While in the control group, levels of CYP19A1, StAR and 3βHSD 
transcripts significantly correlated with follicular estradiol levels (adjusted 
R² of 0.60), no significant association was detected in affected women (adjusted 
R² of 0.23). After stratification of the populations based on the presence of 
the disease, CYP19A1 expression was shown to correlate with the number of 
oocytes retrieved [β:- 1.214;95%CI: - 2.085 - (-0.343); p = 0.007] in the 
control group while this association was not present in patients with 
endometriosis [β:- 0.003; 95%CI:- 0.468-0.461; p = 0.988)]. These results do not 
support data from the literature indicating a reduced aromatase expression in 
granulosa cells of affected women, but they highlight a potential subtle 
mechanism affecting the ovulation process in these women.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2023.106439
PMID: 38048918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.