---
reference_id: "PMID:32062078"
title: "Does heart surgery change the capacity of α1-antitrypsin to inhibit the ATP-induced release of monocytic interleukin-1β? A preliminary study."
authors:
- Agné A
- Richter K
- Tumpara S
- Sauer AL
- Beckert F
- Wrenger S
- Zakrzewicz A
- Hecker A
- Markmann M
- Koch C
- Zajonz T
- Sander M
- Böning A
- Padberg W
- Janciauskiene S
- Grau V
journal: Int Immunopharmacol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2020.106297
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphate/metabolism
- Aged
- Cardiopulmonary Bypass
- Female
- Humans
- "Inflammation/etiology, immunology"
- Interleukin-1beta/metabolism
- Leukocyte Elastase/metabolism
- Lipopolysaccharides/metabolism
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Monocytes/physiology
- Pilot Projects
- Postoperative Complications/immunology
- Prospective Studies
- U937 Cells
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Does heart surgery change the capacity of α1-antitrypsin to inhibit the ATP-induced release of monocytic interleukin-1β? A preliminary study.
**Authors:** Agné A, Richter K, Tumpara S, Sauer AL, Beckert F, Wrenger S, Zakrzewicz A, Hecker A, Markmann M, Koch C, Zajonz T, Sander M, Böning A, Padberg W, Janciauskiene S, Grau V
**Journal:** Int Immunopharmacol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.intimp.2020.106297](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2020.106297)

## Content

1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2020 Apr;81:106297. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2020.106297.
Epub  2020 Feb 12.

Does heart surgery change the capacity of α1-antitrypsin to inhibit the
ATP-induced release of monocytic interleukin-1β? A preliminary study.

Agné A(1), Richter K(2), Tumpara S(3), Sauer AL(4), Beckert F(4), Wrenger S(3),
Zakrzewicz A(2), Hecker A(2), Markmann M(4), Koch C(4), Zajonz T(4), Sander
M(4), Böning A(5), Padberg W(2), Janciauskiene S(6), Grau V(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Surgery, Department of General and Thoracic
Surgery, Justus-Liebig-University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany. Electronic
address: Alisa.Agne@chiru.med.uni-giessen.de.
(2)Laboratory of Experimental Surgery, Department of General and Thoracic
Surgery, Justus-Liebig-University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Intensive Care Medicine and Pain Therapy,
Justus-Liebig University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(5)Department of Heart and Vascular Surgery, Justus-Liebig University of
Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany; Member of the German Centre for Lung Research (DZL), Germany.
(7)Laboratory of Experimental Surgery, Department of General and Thoracic
Surgery, Justus-Liebig-University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany; Member of the
German Centre for Lung Research (DZL), Germany.

Heart surgery involving cardiopulmonary bypass induces systemic inflammation
that is, at least in part, caused by extracellular ATP originating from damaged
cells and by proteases secreted by activated neutrophils. The anti-protease
α1-antitrypsin (AAT) forms complexes with several proteases including neutrophil
elastase, resulting in a mutual loss of activity. We demonstrated recently that
AAT inhibits the ATP-induced release of the pro-inflammatory cytokine
interleukin-1β by human monocytes by a mechanism involving activation of
metabotropic functions at nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Interleukin-1β
importantly contributes to the pathogenesis of sterile inflammatory response
syndrome. Thus, AAT might function as an endogenous safeguard against
life-threatening systemic inflammation. In this preliminary study, we test the
hypothesis that during cardiopulmonary bypass, AAT is inactivated as an anti-
protease and as an inhibitor of ATP-induced interleukin-1β release. AAT was
affinity-purified from the blood plasma of patients before, during and after
surgery. Lipopolysaccharide-primed human monocytic U937 cells were stimulated
with ATP in the presence or absence of patient AAT to test for its inhibitory
effect on interleukin-1β release. Anti-protease activity was investigated via
complex formation with neutrophil elastase. The capacity of patient AAT to
inhibit the ATP-induced release of interleukin-1β might be slightly reduced in
response to heart surgery and complex formation of patient AAT with neutrophil
elastase was unimpaired. We conclude that surgery involving cardiopulmonary
bypass does not markedly reduce the anti-inflammatory and the anti-protease
activity of AAT. The question if AAT augmentation therapy during heart surgery
is suited to attenuate postoperative inflammation warrants further studies in
vivo.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2020.106297
PMID: 32062078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declared that there is no conflict of interest.
