---
reference_id: "PMID:19823913"
title: Cough and sleep.
authors:
- Lee KK
- Birring SS
journal: Lung
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s00408-009-9176-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cough and sleep.
**Authors:** Lee KK, Birring SS
**Journal:** Lung (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00408-009-9176-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00408-009-9176-0)

## Content

1. Lung. 2010 Jan;188 Suppl 1:S91-4. doi: 10.1007/s00408-009-9176-0. Epub 2009
Oct  13.

Cough and sleep.

Lee KK(1), Birring SS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, King's College Hospital, London, SE5 9RS, 
UK.

Cough and sleep are vital functions. The effects of cough on sleep and vice 
versa are important for a number of reasons. Sleep disruption is common in 
patients with cough and is often the reason why they seek medical attention. 
Sleep suppresses cough and the biological mechanisms for this action are poorly 
understood. Cough has recently been reported as a presenting symptom of 
obstructive sleep apnea. It is uncommon for healthy people to cough at night; 
however, approximately 50% of patients with chronic cough report sleep 
disruption due to cough. Cough frequency is much lower at night than during the 
day. There is reduced exposure to tussive stimuli at night and decreased cough 
reflex sensitivity. Cough is more difficult to induce in REM sleep compared to 
slow-wave sleep. Studies of anesthetized humans have shown that the cough reflex 
is suppressed; however, the expiratory reflex is less affected. The sleep-cough 
interaction has implications for the physician. The measurement of cough 
frequency with 24-h ambulatory cough monitors in patients with chronic cough 
suggests that the presence or absence of nocturnal cough is not helpful in 
establishing the etiology. Nocturnal cough may be a useful outcome parameter for 
clinical trials of antitussive drugs since it is under less voluntary control 
than daytime cough. Most antitussive drugs are sedatives. This suggests that 
part or all of their action may be through an effect on cortical neural 
pathways. Unexplained chronic cough has recently been reported as a presenting 
feature of obstructive sleep apnea. Patients are likely to be female and report 
gastroesophageal reflux and rhinitis. Continuous positive airway pressure 
therapy is effective in alleviating cough. Greater awareness of this condition 
is needed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-009-9176-0
PMID: 19823913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]