---
reference_id: "PMID:23518715"
title: "A genetic study of Wilson's disease in the United Kingdom."
authors:
- Coffey AJ
- Durkie M
- Hague S
- McLay K
- Emmerson J
- Lo C
- Klaffke S
- Joyce CJ
- Dhawan A
- Hadzic N
- Mieli-Vergani G
- Kirk R
- Elizabeth Allen K
- Nicholl D
- Wong S
- Griffiths W
- Smithson S
- Giffin N
- Taha A
- Connolly S
- Gillett GT
- Tanner S
- Bonham J
- Sharrack B
- Palotie A
- Rattray M
- Dalton A
- Bandmann O
journal: Brain
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awt035
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics
- Cation Transport Proteins/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- Copper-Transporting ATPases
- Female
- Genetic Testing/methods
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Retrospective Studies
- United Kingdom/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A genetic study of Wilson's disease in the United Kingdom.
**Authors:** Coffey AJ, Durkie M, Hague S, McLay K, Emmerson J, Lo C, Klaffke S, Joyce CJ, Dhawan A, Hadzic N, Mieli-Vergani G, Kirk R, Elizabeth Allen K, Nicholl D, Wong S, Griffiths W, Smithson S, Giffin N, Taha A, Connolly S, Gillett GT, Tanner S, Bonham J, Sharrack B, Palotie A, Rattray M, Dalton A, Bandmann O
**Journal:** Brain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awt035](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt035)

## Content

1. Brain. 2013 May;136(Pt 5):1476-87. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt035. Epub 2013 Mar
21.

A genetic study of Wilson's disease in the United Kingdom.

Coffey AJ(1), Durkie M, Hague S, McLay K, Emmerson J, Lo C, Klaffke S, Joyce CJ, 
Dhawan A, Hadzic N, Mieli-Vergani G, Kirk R, Elizabeth Allen K, Nicholl D, Wong 
S, Griffiths W, Smithson S, Giffin N, Taha A, Connolly S, Gillett GT, Tanner S, 
Bonham J, Sharrack B, Palotie A, Rattray M, Dalton A, Bandmann O.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, CB10 1SA, UK.

Previous studies have failed to identify mutations in the Wilson's disease gene 
ATP7B in a significant number of clinically diagnosed cases. This has led to 
concerns about genetic heterogeneity for this condition but also suggested the 
presence of unusual mutational mechanisms. We now present our findings in 181 
patients from the United Kingdom with clinically and biochemically confirmed 
Wilson's disease. A total of 116 different ATP7B mutations were detected, 32 of 
which are novel. The overall mutation detection frequency was 98%. The 
likelihood of mutations in genes other than ATP7B causing a Wilson's disease 
phenotype is therefore very low. We report the first cases with Wilson's disease 
due to segmental uniparental isodisomy as well as three patients with three 
ATP7B mutations and three families with Wilson's disease in two consecutive 
generations. We determined the genetic prevalence of Wilson's disease in the 
United Kingdom by sequencing the entire coding region and adjacent splice sites 
of ATP7B in 1000 control subjects. The frequency of all single nucleotide 
variants with in silico evidence of pathogenicity (Class 1 variant) was 0.056 or 
0.040 if only those single nucleotide variants that had previously been reported 
as mutations in patients with Wilson's disease were included in the analysis 
(Class 2 variant). The frequency of heterozygote, putative or definite 
disease-associated ATP7B mutations was therefore considerably higher than the 
previously reported occurrence of 1:90 (or 0.011) for heterozygote ATP7B 
mutation carriers in the general population (P < 2.2 × 10(-16) for Class 1 
variants or P < 5 × 10(-11) for Class 2 variants only). Subsequent exclusion of 
four Class 2 variants without additional in silico evidence of pathogenicity led 
to a further reduction of the mutation frequency to 0.024. Using this most 
conservative approach, the calculated frequency of individuals predicted to 
carry two mutant pathogenic ATP7B alleles is 1:7026 and thus still considerably 
higher than the typically reported prevalence of Wilson's disease of 1:30 000 (P 
= 0.00093). Our study provides strong evidence for monogenic inheritance of 
Wilson's disease. It also has major implications for ATP7B analysis in clinical 
practice, namely the need to consider unusual genetic mechanisms such as 
uniparental disomy or the possible presence of three ATP7B mutations. The marked 
discrepancy between the genetic prevalence and the number of clinically 
diagnosed cases of Wilson's disease may be due to both reduced penetrance of 
ATP7B mutations and failure to diagnose patients with this eminently treatable 
disorder.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt035
PMCID: PMC3634195
PMID: 23518715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]