---
reference_id: "PMID:18418680"
title: Clinical and genetic analysis of spinocerebellar ataxia type 11.
authors:
- Johnson J
- Wood N
- Giunti P
- Houlden H
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-008-0022-3
keywords:
- Atrophy
- Brain/pathology
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15"
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genetic Markers
- Humans
- Male
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Phylogeny
- Spectrin/genetics
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/classification, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic analysis of spinocerebellar ataxia type 11.
**Authors:** Johnson J, Wood N, Giunti P, Houlden H
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-008-0022-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-008-0022-3)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2008;7(2):159-64. doi: 10.1007/s12311-008-0022-3.

Clinical and genetic analysis of spinocerebellar ataxia type 11.

Johnson J(1), Wood N, Giunti P, Houlden H.

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics, Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology,
Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK.

The autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias (ADCAs) are a genetically
heterogeneous group of disorders. Clinical classification of the ADCAs into
three types has facilitated defining phenotypes and in turn, linkage analysis,
which has led to the discovery of 30 loci and 16 genes. The type III ADCAs are
'pure' spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA), those that appear to elude neurological
features outside of the cerebellum. At present 3 ADCA type III SCA genes have
been published, SCA5, SCA6, and SCA14, these three genes appear to have various
roles suggesting involvement in both different and possibly overlapping
neurodegenerative pathways. The known ADCAIII genes are thought to have such
roles as involvement in signal transduction, cell proliferation, synaptic
transmission, and channel regulation. Here we update readers on the current
progress on SCA11 and the identification of the disease gene. We discuss the
clinical, genetic, and pathological details of SCA11--a locus at chromosome
15q14-q21.3 in a Caucasian family of British ancestry. We also discuss the
refining of this region, and methods used to prioritize the screening of the
over 130 candidate genes in this genomic region.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-008-0022-3
PMID: 18418680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
