---
reference_id: "PMID:31317427"
title: Molecular Mechanisms and Therapeutics for SCA17.
authors:
- Liu Q
- Pan Y
- Li XJ
- Li S
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s13311-019-00762-z
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Genetic Therapy/methods, trends"
- Humans
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- "TATA-Box Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription, Genetic/physiology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Mechanisms and Therapeutics for SCA17.
**Authors:** Liu Q, Pan Y, Li XJ, Li S
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13311-019-00762-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-019-00762-z)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2019 Oct;16(4):1097-1105. doi: 10.1007/s13311-019-00762-z.

Molecular Mechanisms and Therapeutics for SCA17.

Liu Q(1)(2), Pan Y(1)(2), Li XJ(3), Li S(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Hunan Province in Neurodegenerative Disorders, Xiangya 
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China.
(2)Guangdong-Hongkong-Macau Institute of CNS Regeneration, Ministry of Education 
CNS Regeneration Collaborative Joint Laboratory, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)Guangdong-Hongkong-Macau Institute of CNS Regeneration, Ministry of Education 
CNS Regeneration Collaborative Joint Laboratory, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 
China. xjli33@jnu.edu.cn.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) is caused by polyglutamine (polyQ) 
expansion in the TATA box-binding protein (TBP), which functions as a general 
transcription factor. Like other polyQ expansion-mediated diseases, SCA17 is 
characterized by late-onset and selective neurodegeneration, despite the disease 
protein being ubiquitously expressed in the body. To date, the pathogenesis of 
polyQ diseases is not fully understood, and there are no effective treatments 
for these devastating disorders. The well-characterized function of TBP and 
typical neurodegeneration in SCA17 give us opportunities to understand how polyQ 
expansion causes selective neurodegeneration and to develop effective 
therapeutics. In this review, we discuss the molecular mechanisms behind SCA17, 
focusing on transcriptional dysregulation as its major cause. Mounting evidence 
suggests that reversing transcriptional alterations induced by mutant TBP and 
reducing the expression of mutant TBP are promising strategies to treat SCA17.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-019-00762-z
PMCID: PMC6985407
PMID: 31317427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.