---
reference_id: "PMID:26866375"
title: "AarF Domain Containing Kinase 3 (ADCK3) Mutant Cells Display Signs of Oxidative Stress, Defects in Mitochondrial Homeostasis and Lysosomal Accumulation."
authors:
- Cullen JK
- Abdul Murad N
- Yeo A
- McKenzie M
- Ward M
- Chong KL
- Schieber NL
- Parton RG
- Lim YC
- Wolvetang E
- Maghzal GJ
- Stocker R
- Lavin MF
journal: PLoS One
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148213
keywords:
- Cell Survival
- Cytosol/metabolism
- DNA Damage
- Endopeptidase K/metabolism
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Glutathione Transferase/metabolism
- HeLa Cells
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- Lentivirus/genetics
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- "Membrane Potential, Mitochondrial"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Mutation
- Oxidative Phosphorylation
- Oxidative Stress
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- RNA Interference
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/chemistry
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae/metabolism
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/metabolism
- "Ubiquinone/analogs & derivatives, chemistry"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AarF Domain Containing Kinase 3 (ADCK3) Mutant Cells Display Signs of Oxidative Stress, Defects in Mitochondrial Homeostasis and Lysosomal Accumulation.
**Authors:** Cullen JK, Abdul Murad N, Yeo A, McKenzie M, Ward M, Chong KL, Schieber NL, Parton RG, Lim YC, Wolvetang E, Maghzal GJ, Stocker R, Lavin MF
**Journal:** PLoS One (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0148213](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0148213)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 11;11(2):e0148213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148213.
eCollection 2016.

AarF Domain Containing Kinase 3 (ADCK3) Mutant Cells Display Signs of Oxidative
Stress, Defects in Mitochondrial Homeostasis and Lysosomal Accumulation.

Cullen JK(1), Abdul Murad N(1)(2), Yeo A(1), McKenzie M(3), Ward M(4), Chong
KL(5), Schieber NL(6), Parton RG(6), Lim YC(1), Wolvetang E(7), Maghzal GJ(8),
Stocker R(8), Lavin MF(9).

Author information:
(1)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(2)UKM Medical Molecular Biology Institute, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(3)Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Centre for Genetic Diseases, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia.
(4)Mater Medical Research Institute, Glycation and Diabetic Complications Group,
Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(5)Queensland University of Technology, ARC Centre of Excellence for Free
Radical Chemistry and Biotechnology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(6)The University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience and Centre
for Microscopy and Microanalysis, St. Lucia, QLD, Australia.
(7)The University of Queensland, Australian Institute for Bioengineering and
Nanotechnology, Brisbane, Australia.
(8)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Vascular Biology Division,
Darlinghurst, Australia.
(9)The University of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research, Brisbane, QLD,
Australia.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016 Jul 21;11(7):e0160162. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0160162.

Autosomal recessive ataxias are a clinically diverse group of syndromes that in
some cases are caused by mutations in genes with roles in the DNA damage
response, transcriptional regulation or mitochondrial function. One of these
ataxias, known as Autosomal Recessive Cerebellar Ataxia Type-2 (ARCA-2, also
known as SCAR9/COQ10D4; OMIM: #612016), arises due to mutations in the ADCK3
gene. The product of this gene (ADCK3) is an atypical kinase that is thought to
play a regulatory role in coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) biosynthesis. Although much work
has been performed on the S. cerevisiae orthologue of ADCK3, the cellular and
biochemical role of its mammalian counterpart, and why mutations in this gene
lead to human disease is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that ADCK3
localises to mitochondrial cristae and is targeted to this organelle via the
presence of an N-terminal localisation signal. Consistent with a role in CoQ10
biosynthesis, ADCK3 deficiency decreased cellular CoQ10 content. In addition,
endogenous ADCK3 was found to associate in vitro with recombinant Coq3, Coq5,
Coq7 and Coq9, components of the CoQ10 biosynthetic machinery. Furthermore, cell
lines derived from ARCA-2 patients display signs of oxidative stress, defects in
mitochondrial homeostasis and increases in lysosomal content. Together, these
data shed light on the possible molecular role of ADCK3 and provide insight into
the cellular pathways affected in ARCA-2 patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148213
PMCID: PMC4751082
PMID: 26866375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
