---
reference_id: "PMID:37225827"
title: Deep phenotypic characterization of the retinal dystrophy in patients with RNU4ATAC-associated Roifman syndrome.
authors:
- Ballios BG
- Mandola A
- Tayyib A
- Tumber A
- Garkaby J
- Vong L
- Heon E
- Roifman CM
- Vincent A
journal: Eye (Lond)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41433-023-02581-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deep phenotypic characterization of the retinal dystrophy in patients with RNU4ATAC-associated Roifman syndrome.
**Authors:** Ballios BG, Mandola A, Tayyib A, Tumber A, Garkaby J, Vong L, Heon E, Roifman CM, Vincent A
**Journal:** Eye (Lond) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41433-023-02581-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433-023-02581-1)

## Content

1. Eye (Lond). 2023 Dec;37(18):3734-3742. doi: 10.1038/s41433-023-02581-1. Epub 
2023 May 24.

Deep phenotypic characterization of the retinal dystrophy in patients with 
RNU4ATAC-associated Roifman syndrome.

Ballios BG(1), Mandola A(2), Tayyib A(1)(3), Tumber A(3), Garkaby J(2), Vong 
L(4), Heon E(1)(3), Roifman CM(2)(4), Vincent A(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Division of Immunology and Allergy, The Hospital for Sick Children and the 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)The Canadian Centre for Primary Immunodeficiency and The Jeffrey Modell 
Research Laboratory for the Diagnosis of Primary Immunodeficiency, The Hospital 
for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada. ajoy.vincent@sickkids.ca.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. ajoy.vincent@sickkids.ca.

PURPOSE: To characterize the retinal phenotype in RNU4ATAC-associated Roifman 
syndrome.
METHODS: Ten patients (including 8 males) with molecularly confirmed Roifman 
syndrome underwent detailed ophthalmologic evaluation including fundus imaging, 
fundus autofluorescence (FAF) imaging, spectral-domain optical coherence 
tomography (SD-OCT), and electroretinography (ERG). Six patients had follow-up 
eye exams. All patients also underwent comprehensive examination for features of 
extra-retinal Roifman syndrome.
RESULTS: All patients had biallelic RNU4ATAC variants. Nyctalopia was common 
(7/10). Visual acuity at presentation ranged from 20/20 to 20/200 (Age Range: 
5-41 years). Retinal exam revealed features of generalized retinopathy with 
mid-peripheral pigment epithelial changes. A para or peri-foveal ring of 
hyper-autofluorescence was the commonest FAF abnormality noted (6/8). The SD-OCT 
demonstrated relative preservation of the foveal ellipsoid zone in six cases; 
associated features included cystoid changes (5/10) and posterior staphyloma 
(3/10). The ERG was abnormal in all patients; nine showed generalized rod-cone 
dystrophy, whilst one patient with sectoral retinal involvement only had 
isolated rod dystrophy (20 years old). On follow-up examination (Mean duration: 
8.16 years), progressive loss of visual acuity (2/6), mid-peripheral retinal 
atrophy (3/6) or shortening of ellipsoid zone width (1/6) were observed.
CONCLUSION: This study has characterized the retinal phenotype in 
RNU4ATAC-associated Roifman syndrome. Retinal involvement is universal, 
early-onset, and overall, the retinal and FAF features are consistent with 
rod-cone degeneration that is slowly progressive over time. The sub-foveal 
retinal ultrastructure is relatively preserved in majority of patients. 
Phenotypic variability independent of age exists, and more study of allelic- and 
sex-based determinants of disease severity are necessary.

© 2023. Crown.

DOI: 10.1038/s41433-023-02581-1
PMCID: PMC10697969
PMID: 37225827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.