---
reference_id: "PMID:38673994"
title: "Pathogenesis of Alopecia Areata and Vitiligo: Commonalities and Differences."
authors:
- Yamaguchi HL
- Yamaguchi Y
- Peeva E
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25084409
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of Alopecia Areata and Vitiligo: Commonalities and Differences.
**Authors:** Yamaguchi HL, Yamaguchi Y, Peeva E
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25084409](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25084409)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Apr 17;25(8):4409. doi: 10.3390/ijms25084409.

Pathogenesis of Alopecia Areata and Vitiligo: Commonalities and Differences.

Yamaguchi HL(1), Yamaguchi Y(2), Peeva E(1).

Author information:
(1)Inflammation & Immunology Research Unit, Pfizer, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(2)Inflammation & Immunology Research Unit, Pfizer, Collegeville, PA 19426, USA.

Both alopecia areata (AA) and vitiligo are distinct, heterogenous, and complex 
disease entities, characterized by nonscarring scalp terminal hair loss and skin 
pigment loss, respectively. In AA, inflammatory cell infiltrates are in the deep 
reticular dermis close to the hair bulb (swarm of bees), whereas in vitiligo the 
inflammatory infiltrates are in the epidermis and papillary dermis. Immune 
privilege collapse has been extensively investigated in AA pathogenesis, 
including the suppression of immunomodulatory factors (e.g., transforming growth 
factor-β (TGF-β), programmed death-ligand 1 (PDL1), interleukin-10 (IL-10), 
α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH), and macrophage migration inhibitory 
factor (MIF)) and enhanced expression of the major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) throughout hair follicles. However, immune privilege collapse in vitiligo 
remains less explored. Both AA and vitiligo are autoimmune diseases that share 
commonalities in pathogenesis, including the involvement of plasmacytoid 
dendritic cells (and interferon-α (IFN- α) signaling pathways) and cytotoxic 
CD8+ T lymphocytes (and activated IFN-γ signaling pathways). Blood chemokine 
C-X-C motif ligand 9 (CXCL9) and CXCL10 are elevated in both diseases. Common 
factors that contribute to AA and vitiligo include oxidative stress, autophagy, 
type 2 cytokines, and the Wnt/β-catenin pathway (e.g., dickkopf 1 (DKK1)). Here, 
we summarize the commonalities and differences between AA and vitiligo, focusing 
on their pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25084409
PMCID: PMC11049978
PMID: 38673994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.L.Y. was an employee of Pfizer at the time of 
the study (currently sophomore at Northeastern University). Y.Y. and E.P. are 
employees of Pfizer. Y.Y. and E.P. hold stock and/or stock options with Pfizer.