---
reference_id: "PMID:32755987"
title: Novel Therapies Potentially Available for Pediatric B-Cell Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma.
authors:
- Harker-Murray PD
- Pommert L
- Barth MJ
journal: J Natl Compr Canc Netw
year: '2020'
doi: 10.6004/jnccn.2020.7608
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Therapies Potentially Available for Pediatric B-Cell Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma.
**Authors:** Harker-Murray PD, Pommert L, Barth MJ
**Journal:** J Natl Compr Canc Netw (2020)
**DOI:** [10.6004/jnccn.2020.7608](https://doi.org/10.6004/jnccn.2020.7608)

## Content

1. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2020 Aug;18(8):1125-1134. doi:
10.6004/jnccn.2020.7608.

Novel Therapies Potentially Available for Pediatric B-Cell Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma.

Harker-Murray PD(1), Pommert L(1), Barth MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Oncology, Midwest Children's Cancer Center, Milwaukee, Wisconsin; 
and.
(2)Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York.

Burkitt lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), and primary mediastinal 
B-cell lymphoma are the most common aggressive pediatric mature B-cell 
non-Hodgkin lymphomas (B-NHLs). Despite excellent survival with current 
chemotherapy regimens, therapy for Burkitt lymphoma and DLBCL has a high 
incidence of short- and long-term toxicities. Patients who experience relapse 
generally have a very poor prognosis. Therefore, novel approaches using targeted 
therapies to reduce toxicities and improve outcomes in the relapse setting are 
needed. The addition of rituximab, a monoclonal antibody against CD20, to 
upfront therapy has improved survival outcomes for high-risk patients and may 
allow decreased total chemotherapy in those with low-risk disease. Antibody-drug 
conjugates have been combined with chemotherapy in relapsed/refractory (R/R) 
NHL, and multiple antibody-drug conjugates are in development. Additionally, 
bispecific T-cell-engaging antibody constructs and autologous CAR T-cells have 
been successful in the treatment of R/R acute leukemias and are now being 
applied to R/R B-NHL with some successes. PD-L1 and PD-L2 on tumor cells can be 
targeted with checkpoint inhibitors, which restore T-cell-mediated immunity and 
antitumor responses and can be added to conventional chemotherapy and 
immune-directed therapies to augment responses. Lastly, trials of small molecule 
inhibitors targeting cell signaling pathways in NHL subtypes are underway. This 
article reviews many of the targeted therapies under development that could be 
considered for future trials in R/R pediatric mature B-NHL.

DOI: 10.6004/jnccn.2020.7608
PMID: 32755987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]