---
reference_id: "PMID:32759308"
title: The BBSome assembly is spatially controlled by BBS1 and BBS4 in human cells.
authors:
- Prasai A
- Schmidt Cernohorska M
- Ruppova K
- Niederlova V
- Andelova M
- Draber P
- Stepanek O
- Huranova M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013905
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The BBSome assembly is spatially controlled by BBS1 and BBS4 in human cells.
**Authors:** Prasai A, Schmidt Cernohorska M, Ruppova K, Niederlova V, Andelova M, Draber P, Stepanek O, Huranova M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA120.013905](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA120.013905)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Oct 16;295(42):14279-14290. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013905. 
Epub 2020 Aug 5.

The BBSome assembly is spatially controlled by BBS1 and BBS4 in human cells.

Prasai A(1), Schmidt Cernohorska M(1), Ruppova K(1), Niederlova V(1), Andelova 
M(1), Draber P(1), Stepanek O(2), Huranova M(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Adaptive Immunity, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech 
Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Laboratory of Adaptive Immunity, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech 
Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic martina.huranova@img.cas.cz 
ondrej.stepanek@img.cas.cz.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a pleiotropic ciliopathy caused by dysfunction of 
primary cilia. More than half of BBS patients carry mutations in one of eight 
genes encoding for subunits of a protein complex, the BBSome, which mediates 
trafficking of ciliary cargoes. In this study, we elucidated the mechanisms of 
the BBSome assembly in living cells and how this process is spatially regulated. 
We generated a large library of human cell lines deficient in a particular 
BBSome subunit and expressing another subunit tagged with a fluorescent protein. 
We analyzed these cell lines utilizing biochemical assays, conventional and 
expansion microscopy, and quantitative fluorescence microscopy techniques: 
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching and fluorescence correlation 
spectroscopy. Our data revealed that the BBSome formation is a sequential 
process. We show that the pre-BBSome is nucleated by BBS4 and assembled at 
pericentriolar satellites, followed by the translocation of the BBSome into the 
ciliary base mediated by BBS1. Our results provide a framework for elucidating 
how BBS-causative mutations interfere with the biogenesis of the BBSome.

© 2020 Prasai et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013905
PMCID: PMC7573277
PMID: 32759308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest—The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.