---
reference_id: "PMID:39510315"
title: Identification of Risk Genes for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder During Early Human Brain Development.
authors:
- Deng MG
- Zhou X
- Li X
- Liu J
journal: J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaac.2024.10.013
keywords:
- Humans
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/genetics
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- "Brain/growth & development, embryology, metabolism"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Female
- Transcriptome/genetics
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Risk Genes for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder During Early Human Brain Development.
**Authors:** Deng MG, Zhou X, Li X, Liu J
**Journal:** J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaac.2024.10.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2024.10.013)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2025 Sep;64(9):1080-1091. doi:
10.1016/j.jaac.2024.10.013. Epub 2024 Nov 5.

Identification of Risk Genes for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder During
Early Human Brain Development.

Deng MG(1), Zhou X(1), Li X(2), Liu J(3).

Author information:
(1)Wuhan Mental Health Center, Wuhan, Hubei, China; Wuhan Hospital for
Psychotherapy, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(2)Anhui University, Hefei, Anhui, China.
(3)Wuhan Mental Health Center, Wuhan, Hubei, China; Wuhan Hospital for
Psychotherapy, Wuhan, Hubei, China. Electronic address: liujiewei@hust.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common
neurodevelopmental disorder with high heritability. A total of 27 genome-wide
significant loci for ADHD were previously identified through genome-wide
association studies (GWASs), but the identification of risk genes that confer
susceptibility to ADHD has remained largely unexplored.
METHOD: As ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder, we integrated human brain
prenatal gene and transcript expression weight data (n = 120) and ADHD GWAS
summary statistics (n = 225,534; 38,691 cases and 186,843 controls) to perform a
transcriptome-wide association study (TWAS) by FUSION (an analytic suite).
RESULTS: Our analysis identified 10 genes, including LSM6, HYAL3, METTL15,
RPS26, LRRC37A15P, RP11-142I20.1, ABCB9, AP006621.5, AC000068.5, and PDXDC1,
that are significantly associated with ADHD, along with 8 transcripts of 7
genes. We also conducted TWAS analysis using CommonMind Consortium (CMC) adult
brain gene and gene-splicing expression weights (n = 452), which highlighted
several risk genes that showed associations with ADHD in both prenatal and
postnatal stages, such as LSM6 and HYAL3.
CONCLUSION: Overall, our TWAS of ADHD, by integrating human prenatal brain
transcriptome and ADHD GWAS results, uncovered the cis-effects of
gene/transcript regulation that are predicted to be associated with ADHD. By
combining colocalization and FOCUS fine-mapping analysis, we further unraveled
potential causal candidate risk genes. The risk genes/transcripts that we
identified in this study can serve as a valuable resource for further
investigation of the disease mechanisms underlying ADHD.
PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY: By analyzing the combined genetic data from over 225,000
people and genes related to brain development in this transcriptome-wide
association study, the authors identified 10 significant genes linked to ADHD.
These genes are active during early brain growth, affecting how brain cells
communicate.

Copyright © 2024 American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaac.2024.10.013
PMID: 39510315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
