---
reference_id: "PMID:18504390"
title: Testicular function in Klinefelter syndrome.
authors:
- Wikström AM
- Dunkel L
journal: Horm Res
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1159/000117387
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Testicular function in Klinefelter syndrome.
**Authors:** Wikström AM, Dunkel L
**Journal:** Horm Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000117387](https://doi.org/10.1159/000117387)

## Content

1. Horm Res. 2008;69(6):317-26. doi: 10.1159/000117387. Epub 2008 Mar 17.

Testicular function in Klinefelter syndrome.

Wikström AM(1), Dunkel L.

Author information:
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Helsinki University Central Hospital, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. anne.wikstrom@fimnet.fi

Klinefelter syndrome (KS) is the most common genetic form of male hypogonadism, 
but the phenotype becomes evident only after puberty. During childhood, and even 
during early puberty, pituitary-gonadal function in 47,XXY subjects is 
relatively normal, but from midpuberty onwards, FSH and LH levels increase to 
hypergonadotropic levels, inhibin B decreases to undetectable levels, and 
testosterone after an initial increase levels off at a low or low-normal level. 
Hence, most adult KS males display a clear hypergonadotropism with a varying 
degree of androgen deficiency; subsequently, testosterone substitution therapy 
is widely used to prevent symptoms and sequels of androgen deficiency. 
Testicular biopsies of prepubertal KS boys have shown preservation of 
seminiferous tubules with reduced numbers of germ cells, but Sertoli and Leydig 
cells have appeared normal. The testes in the adult KS male are, however, 
characterized by extensive fibrosis and hyalinization of the seminiferous 
tubules, and hyperplasia of the interstitium, but the tubules may show residual 
foci of spermatogenesis. Introduction of testicular sperm extraction in 
combination with intracytoplasmic sperm injection techniques has allowed 
non-mosaic KS males to father children.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000117387
PMID: 18504390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]