---
reference_id: "PMID:32207452"
title: "Anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery: A surgical certainty."
authors:
- Butt A
- Amanullah MM
- Amanullah MA
- Hasan A
- Ahmad W
journal: J Pak Med Assoc
year: '2020'
doi: 10.5455/JPMA.34200
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Bland White Garland Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology, surgery"
- Cardiac Surgical Procedures/methods
- Child
- "Coronary Vessels/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Dyspnea/diagnosis, etiology"
- Echocardiography/methods
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Mitral Valve Insufficiency/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Pulmonary Artery/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Replantation/methods
- Retrospective Studies
- Stroke Volume
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery: A surgical certainty.
**Authors:** Butt A, Amanullah MM, Amanullah MA, Hasan A, Ahmad W
**Journal:** J Pak Med Assoc (2020)
**DOI:** [10.5455/JPMA.34200](https://doi.org/10.5455/JPMA.34200)

## Content

1. J Pak Med Assoc. 2020 Mar;70(3):561-564. doi: 10.5455/JPMA.34200.

Anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery: A 
surgical certainty.

Butt A(1), Amanullah MM(2), Amanullah MA(3), Hasan A(4), Ahmad W(5).

Author information:
(1)4th Year MBBS Student, Aga Khan University Medical College, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiac Services, National Institute of 
Cardiovascular Diseases, Karachi, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Liaquat National Hospital and Medical College, 
Karachi, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Congenital Cardiothoracic Surgery, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle 
Upon Tyne, UK.
(5)Department of Surgery, Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.

This study aims to assess the clinical presentation and the outcomes of a 
surgical correction of an anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the 
pulmonary artery (ALCAPA). A retrospective review was carried out on the charts 
of six patients admitted for ALCAPA surgery at Aga Khan University Hospital, 
Karachi from March 2017 to May 2018.Dyspnoea, palpitation, poor feeding, 
fatiguability, pallor and a murmur of mitral regurgitation were the main 
presenting features. The pre-operative median left ventricular ejection fraction 
(LVEF) was 64%. Coronary reimplantation was performed in all the patients with a 
mitral valve repair being done in only one patient. The mea n LV EF was 66 .3%,p 
ost- ope rativel y. Mitra l regurgitation (MR) improved in patients 
post-operatively with trace in 2 patients and mild MR in one. Surgical 
correction by coronary re-implantation yields favourable outcomes in ALCAPA and 
significantly reduces the morbidity and mortality rates associated with the 
disease.

DOI: 10.5455/JPMA.34200
PMID: 32207452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]