---
reference_id: "PMID:29391587"
title: "Congenital myopathies: disorders of excitation-contraction coupling and muscle contraction."
authors:
- Jungbluth H
- Treves S
- Zorzato F
- Sarkozy A
- Ochala J
- Sewry C
- Phadke R
- Gautel M
- Muntoni F
journal: Nat Rev Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2017.191
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital myopathies: disorders of excitation-contraction coupling and muscle contraction.
**Authors:** Jungbluth H, Treves S, Zorzato F, Sarkozy A, Ochala J, Sewry C, Phadke R, Gautel M, Muntoni F
**Journal:** Nat Rev Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrneurol.2017.191](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrneurol.2017.191)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Neurol. 2018 Mar;14(3):151-167. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2017.191. Epub 
2018 Feb 2.

Congenital myopathies: disorders of excitation-contraction coupling and muscle 
contraction.

Jungbluth H(1)(2)(3), Treves S(4)(5), Zorzato F(4)(5), Sarkozy A(6), Ochala 
J(7), Sewry C(6), Phadke R(6), Gautel M(2), Muntoni F(6)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Neuromuscular Service, Evelina's Children 
Hospital, Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(2)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, Muscle Signalling Section, 
King's College, London, UK.
(3)Department of Clinical and Basic Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience (IoPPN), King's College, London, UK.
(4)Departments of Anesthesia and Biomedicine, Basel University and Basel 
University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Life Sciences, Microbiology and Applied Pathology Section, 
University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(6)The Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, Developmental Neurosciences Programme, UCL 
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital 
for Children, London, UK.
(7)Centre of Human and Aerospace Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Life Science 
and Medicine, King's College, London, UK.
(8)NIHR Great Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, London, UK.

The congenital myopathies are a group of early-onset, non-dystrophic 
neuromuscular conditions with characteristic muscle biopsy findings, variable 
severity and a stable or slowly progressive course. Pronounced weakness in axial 
and proximal muscle groups is a common feature, and involvement of extraocular, 
cardiorespiratory and/or distal muscles can implicate specific genetic defects. 
Central core disease (CCD), multi-minicore disease (MmD), centronuclear myopathy 
(CNM) and nemaline myopathy were among the first congenital myopathies to be 
reported, and they still represent the main diagnostic categories. However, 
these entities seem to belong to a much wider phenotypic spectrum. To date, 
congenital myopathies have been attributed to mutations in over 20 genes, which 
encode proteins implicated in skeletal muscle Ca2+ homeostasis, 
excitation-contraction coupling, thin-thick filament assembly and interactions, 
and other mechanisms. RYR1 mutations are the most frequent genetic cause, and 
CCD and MmD are the most common subgroups. Next-generation sequencing has vastly 
improved mutation detection and has enabled the identification of novel genetic 
backgrounds. At present, management of congenital myopathies is largely 
supportive, although new therapeutic approaches are reaching the clinical trial 
stage.

DOI: 10.1038/nrneurol.2017.191
PMID: 29391587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]