---
reference_id: "PMID:36830640"
title: Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Pathogenesis Underlying Inherited Retinal Dystrophies.
authors:
- Manley A
- Meshkat BI
- Jablonski MM
- Hollingsworth TJ
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biom13020271
keywords:
- Humans
- "Retinal Dystrophies/genetics, metabolism"
- Retina/metabolism
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells
- Mutation
- "Vision, Ocular"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Pathogenesis Underlying Inherited Retinal Dystrophies.
**Authors:** Manley A, Meshkat BI, Jablonski MM, Hollingsworth TJ
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom13020271](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom13020271)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2023 Feb 1;13(2):271. doi: 10.3390/biom13020271.

Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Pathogenesis Underlying Inherited Retinal 
Dystrophies.

Manley A(1), Meshkat BI(1)(2), Jablonski MM(1)(3)(4)(5), Hollingsworth 
TJ(1)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Hamilton Eye Institute, College of Medicine, 
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Tennessee Health Science 
Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics, Genomics and Informatics, University of Tennessee 
Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Biochemistry, University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRDs) are congenital retinal degenerative 
diseases that have various inheritance patterns, including dominant, recessive, 
X-linked, and mitochondrial. These diseases are most often the result of defects 
in rod and/or cone photoreceptor and retinal pigment epithelium function, 
development, or both. The genes associated with these diseases, when mutated, 
produce altered protein products that have downstream effects in pathways 
critical to vision, including phototransduction, the visual cycle, photoreceptor 
development, cellular respiration, and retinal homeostasis. The aim of this 
manuscript is to provide a comprehensive review of the underlying molecular 
mechanisms of pathogenesis of IRDs by delving into many of the genes associated 
with IRD development, their protein products, and the pathways interrupted by 
genetic mutation.

DOI: 10.3390/biom13020271
PMCID: PMC9953031
PMID: 36830640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.