---
reference_id: "PMID:31071186"
title: "Predicting kidney failure from longitudinal kidney function trajectory: A comparison of models."
authors:
- van den Brand JAJG
- Dijkstra TMH
- Wetzels J
- Stengel B
- Metzger M
- Blankestijn PJ
- Lambers Heerspink HJ
- Gansevoort RT
journal: PLoS One
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0216559
keywords:
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/diagnosis, etiology"
- Kidney Function Tests
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Models, Statistical"
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications"
- Risk Assessment/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predicting kidney failure from longitudinal kidney function trajectory: A comparison of models.
**Authors:** van den Brand JAJG, Dijkstra TMH, Wetzels J, Stengel B, Metzger M, Blankestijn PJ, Lambers Heerspink HJ, Gansevoort RT
**Journal:** PLoS One (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0216559](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0216559)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2019 May 9;14(5):e0216559. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0216559. 
eCollection 2019.

Predicting kidney failure from longitudinal kidney function trajectory: A 
comparison of models.

van den Brand JAJG(1), Dijkstra TMH(2), Wetzels J(1), Stengel B(3), Metzger 
M(3), Blankestijn PJ(4), Lambers Heerspink HJ(5), Gansevoort RT(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of nephrology, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud 
university medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany, Center for 
Integrative Neuroscience, University Tübingen, Tuübingen, Germany.
(3)CESP, Inserm, Univ Paris-Sud, UVSQ, Univ Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(4)Department of Nephrology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Nephrology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.

RATIONALE & OBJECTIVE: Early prediction of chronic kidney disease (CKD) 
progression to end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) currently use Cox models 
including baseline estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) only. Alternative 
approaches include a Cox model that includes eGFR slope determined over a 
baseline period of time, a Cox model with time varying GFR, or a joint modeling 
approach. We studied if these more complex approaches may further improve ESKD 
prediction.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective cohort.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: We re-used data from two CKD cohorts including patients 
with baseline eGFR >30ml/min per 1.73m2. MASTERPLAN (N = 505; 55 ESKD events) 
was used as development dataset, and NephroTest (N = 1385; 72 events) for 
validation.
PREDICTORS: All models included age, sex, eGFR, and albuminuria, known 
prognostic markers for ESKD.
ANALYTICAL APPROACH: We trained the models on the MASTERPLAN data and determined 
discrimination and calibration for each model at 2 years follow-up for a 
prediction horizon of 2 years in the NephroTest cohort. We benchmarked the 
predictive performance against the Kidney Failure Risk Equation (KFRE).
RESULTS: The C-statistics for the KFRE was 0.94 (95%CI 0.86 to 1.01). 
Performance was similar for the Cox model with time-varying eGFR (0.92 [0.84 to 
0.97]), eGFR (0.95 [0.90 to 1.00]), and the joint model 0.91 [0.87 to 0.96]). 
The Cox model with eGFR slope showed the best calibration.
CONCLUSION: In the present studies, where the outcome was rare and follow-up 
data was highly complete, the joint models did not offer improvement in 
predictive performance over more traditional approaches such as a survival model 
with time-varying eGFR, or a model with eGFR slope.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0216559
PMCID: PMC6508737
PMID: 31071186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.