---
reference_id: "PMID:34665525"
title: "Koolen-de Vries syndrome in a 63-year-old woman: Report of the oldest patient and a review of the adult phenotype."
authors:
- Farnè M
- Bernardini L
- Capalbo A
- Cavarretta G
- Torres B
- Sanchini M
- Fini S
- Ferlini A
- Bigoni S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62536
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Adult
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- Female
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Koolen-de Vries syndrome in a 63-year-old woman: Report of the oldest patient and a review of the adult phenotype.
**Authors:** Farnè M, Bernardini L, Capalbo A, Cavarretta G, Torres B, Sanchini M, Fini S, Ferlini A, Bigoni S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62536](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62536)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2022 Feb;188(2):692-707. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62536. Epub
2021  Oct 19.

Koolen-de Vries syndrome in a 63-year-old woman: Report of the oldest patient 
and a review of the adult phenotype.

Farnè M(1), Bernardini L(2), Capalbo A(2), Cavarretta G(3), Torres B(2), 
Sanchini M(1), Fini S(3), Ferlini A(1)(3), Bigoni S(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy.
(2)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Foundation, San 
Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy.
(3)Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Mother and Child, Ferrara Sant'Anna 
University Hospital, Ferrara, Italy.

Koolen-de Vries syndrome (KdVS) is a rare genetic disorder caused by a de novo 
microdeletion in chromosomal region 17q21.31 encompassing KANSL1 or by a de novo 
intragenic pathogenic variant of KANSL1. KdVS is typically characterized by 
intellectual disability (ID), variable from mild to severe, developmental 
psychomotor delay, especially of expressive language development, friendly 
disposition, and multiple systemic abnormalities. So far, most of the 
individuals affected by KdVS are diagnosed in infancy or in adolescence; to the 
best of our knowledge, only 34 (including ours) adults have been reported in 
literature. Here we present the adult phenotype of a 63-year-old Italian woman 
affected by KdVS, caused by a 17q21.31 microdeletion. She is, to our knowledge, 
the oldest affected individual reported so far. We collected her clinical 
history and photographs, as well as those of other 26 adult patients described 
so far and compared her to them. We propose that the cardinal features of KdVS 
in adulthood are ID (ranging from mild to severe, usually moderate), friendly 
behavior, musculoskeletal abnormalities (especially scoliosis), and facial 
dysmorphism (a long face and a pronounced pear-shape nose with bulbous 
overhanging nasal tip). Therefore, we suggest considering KdVS in differential 
diagnosis in adult patients characterized by these features.

© 2021 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62536
PMCID: PMC9297928
PMID: 34665525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.