---
reference_id: "PMID:38643380"
title: Representation of skin carcinomas in public awareness - Awareness worldwide and in Germany.
authors:
- Meinzenbach A
- Kaatz M
- Springer S
- Zieger M
journal: J Dtsch Dermatol Ges
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/ddg.15406
keywords:
- Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Germany/epidemiology
- Humans
- Global Health
- "Health Knowledge, Attitudes, Practice"
- Internet
- Seasons
- Awareness
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Representation of skin carcinomas in public awareness - Awareness worldwide and in Germany.
**Authors:** Meinzenbach A, Kaatz M, Springer S, Zieger M
**Journal:** J Dtsch Dermatol Ges (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ddg.15406](https://doi.org/10.1111/ddg.15406)

## Content

1. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2024 Jun;22(6):794-800. doi: 10.1111/ddg.15406. Epub
2024  Apr 21.

Representation of skin carcinomas in public awareness - Awareness worldwide and
in Germany.

Meinzenbach A(1)(2), Kaatz M(2)(3), Springer S(2), Zieger M(2).

Author information:
(1)Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Jena, Germany.
(2)SRH Wald-Klinikum Gera GmbH, Gera, Germany.
(3)DRK Krankenhaus Chemnitz-Rabenstein, Chemnitz, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: In recent years, there has been an increase in skin
cancer. The aim of this study was therefore to investigate the representation of
skin cancer in public awareness worldwide and in Germany, and to determine
whether Skin Cancer Awareness Month is represented in the search interests of
the Internet-using population in the same way as Breast Cancer Awareness Month
worldwide.
DATA AND METHODS: In this study, Google Trends data were used to track levels of
public awareness for different tumor entities and skin cancer types worldwide
and for Germany.
RESULTS: The results of this analysis clearly showed a high level of relative
public search interest in breast cancer worldwide in the awareness month of
October. Worldwide and in Germany, there was a certain increase in search
interest and a certain seasonal effect around the May awareness month for skin
cancer. For example, the analysis showed a search interest in May and during the
summer months in Germany.
CONCLUSIONS: It is likely that the population, for example in Germany, may
benefit further from an even greater emphasis on the topic of skin cancer.

© 2024 The Authors. Journal der Deutschen Dermatologischen Gesellschaft
published by Wiley‐VCH GmbH on behalf of Deutsche Dermatologische Gesellschaft.

DOI: 10.1111/ddg.15406
PMID: 38643380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
