---
reference_id: "PMID:29366908"
title: A role for KCC3 in maintaining cell volume of peripheral nerve fibers.
authors:
- Flores B
- Schornak CC
- Delpire E
journal: Neurochem Int
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2018.01.009
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain/metabolism
- Cell Size
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Nerve Fibers/metabolism
- Symporters/metabolism
- K Cl- Cotransporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A role for KCC3 in maintaining cell volume of peripheral nerve fibers.
**Authors:** Flores B, Schornak CC, Delpire E
**Journal:** Neurochem Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuint.2018.01.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuint.2018.01.009)

## Content

1. Neurochem Int. 2019 Feb;123:114-124. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2018.01.009. Epub
2018 Jan 31.

A role for KCC3 in maintaining cell volume of peripheral nerve fibers.

Flores B(1), Schornak CC(1), Delpire E(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program and Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, United States.
(2)Neuroscience Graduate Program and Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, United States. Electronic
address: eric.delpire@vanderbilt.edu.

The potassium chloride cotransporter, KCC3, is an electroneutral cotransporter
expressed in the peripheral and central nervous system. KCC3 is responsible for
the efflux of K+ and Cl- in neurons to help maintain cell volume and
intracellular chloride levels. A loss-of-function (LOF) of KCC3 causes
Hereditary Motor Sensory Neuropathy with Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum
(HMSN/ACC) in a population of individuals in the Charlevoix/Lac-Saint-Jean
region of Quebec, Canada. A variety of mouse models have been created to
understand the physiological and deleterious effects of a KCC3 LOF. Though this
KCC3 LOF in mouse models has recapitulated the peripheral neuropathy phenotype
of HMSN/ACC, we still know little about the development of the disease
pathophysiology. Interestingly, the most recent KCC3 mouse model that we created
recapitulated a peripheral neuropathy-like phenotype originating from a KCC3
gain-of-function (GOF). Despite the past two decades of research in attempting
to understand the role of KCC3 in disease, we still do not understand how
dysfunction of this cotransporter can lead to the pathophysiology of peripheral
neuropathy. This review focuses on the function of KCC3 in neurons and its role
in human and health and disease.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2018.01.009
PMCID: PMC6398598
PMID: 29366908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
