---
reference_id: "PMID:37182735"
title: Impact of stress on cardiac phenotypes in mice harboring an ankyrin-B disease variant.
authors:
- Wallace MJ
- Malhotra N
- Mariángelo JIE
- Stevens TL
- Young LJ
- Antwi-Boasiako S
- Abdallah D
- Takenaka SS
- Cavus O
- Murphy NP
- Han M
- Xu X
- Mangoni ME
- Hund TJ
- Roberts JD
- Györke S
- Mohler PJ
- El Refaey M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104818
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- Adrenergic Agents/metabolism
- Ankyrins/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Ion Channels/metabolism
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
- Phenotype
- Aging/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of stress on cardiac phenotypes in mice harboring an ankyrin-B disease variant.
**Authors:** Wallace MJ, Malhotra N, Mariángelo JIE, Stevens TL, Young LJ, Antwi-Boasiako S, Abdallah D, Takenaka SS, Cavus O, Murphy NP, Han M, Xu X, Mangoni ME, Hund TJ, Roberts JD, Györke S, Mohler PJ, El Refaey M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104818](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104818)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Jun;299(6):104818. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104818. Epub 2023
 May 12.

Impact of stress on cardiac phenotypes in mice harboring an ankyrin-B disease
variant.

Wallace MJ(1), Malhotra N(2), Mariángelo JIE(1), Stevens TL(1), Young LJ(3),
Antwi-Boasiako S(3), Abdallah D(3), Takenaka SS(3), Cavus O(3), Murphy NP(3),
Han M(3), Xu X(3), Mangoni ME(4), Hund TJ(5), Roberts JD(6), Györke S(1), Mohler
PJ(7), El Refaey M(8).

Author information:
(1)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA;
Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio, USA.
(2)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA;
Department of Surgery/Division of Cardiac Surgery, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(3)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(4)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, INSERM,
Montpellier, France.
(5)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA;
Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio, USA; Department of Internal Medicine/Division of
Cardiovascular Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(6)Population Health Research Institute, McMaster University, and Hamilton
Health Sciences, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(7)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA;
Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio, USA; Department of Internal Medicine/Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(8)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA;
Department of Surgery/Division of Cardiac Surgery, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, USA. Electronic address: Mona.elrefaey@osumc.edu.

Encoded by ANK2, ankyrin-B (AnkB) is a multifunctional adapter protein critical
for the expression and targeting of key cardiac ion channels, transporters,
cytoskeletal-associated proteins, and signaling molecules. Mice deficient for
AnkB expression are neonatal lethal, and mice heterozygous for AnkB expression
display cardiac structural and electrical phenotypes. Human ANK2
loss-of-function variants are associated with diverse cardiac manifestations;
however, human clinical 'AnkB syndrome' displays incomplete penetrance. To date,
animal models for human arrhythmias have generally been knock-out or transgenic
overexpression models and thus the direct impact of ANK2 variants on cardiac
structure and function in vivo is not clearly defined. Here, we directly tested
the relationship of a single human ANK2 disease-associated variant with cardiac
phenotypes utilizing a novel in vivo animal model. At baseline, young
AnkBp.E1458G+/+ mice lacked significant structural or electrical abnormalities.
However, aged AnkBp.E1458G+/+ mice displayed both electrical and structural
phenotypes at baseline including bradycardia and aberrant heart rate
variability, structural remodeling, and fibrosis. Young and old AnkBp.E1458G+/+
mice displayed ventricular arrhythmias following acute (adrenergic) stress. In
addition, young AnkBp.E1458G+/+ mice displayed structural remodeling following
chronic (transverse aortic constriction) stress. Finally, AnkBp.E1458G+/+
myocytes harbored alterations in expression and/or localization of key
AnkB-associated partners, consistent with the underlying disease mechanism. In
summary, our findings illustrate the critical role of AnkB in in vivo cardiac
function as well as the impact of single AnkB loss-of-function variants in vivo.
However, our findings illustrate the contribution and in fact necessity of
secondary factors (aging, adrenergic challenge, pressure-overload) to phenotype
penetrance and severity.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104818
PMCID: PMC10318515
PMID: 37182735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.
