---
reference_id: "PMID:32951245"
title: "Fetoscopic Release of Amniotic Band Syndrome: An Update."
authors:
- Minella C
- Costantino B
- Ruano R
- Koch A
- Weingertner AS
- Favre R
- Sananes N
journal: J Ultrasound Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jum.15480
keywords:
- "Amniotic Band Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Female
- Fetofetal Transfusion/surgery
- Fetoscopy
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Laser Therapy
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fetoscopic Release of Amniotic Band Syndrome: An Update.
**Authors:** Minella C, Costantino B, Ruano R, Koch A, Weingertner AS, Favre R, Sananes N
**Journal:** J Ultrasound Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jum.15480](https://doi.org/10.1002/jum.15480)

## Content

1. J Ultrasound Med. 2021 May;40(5):1039-1048. doi: 10.1002/jum.15480. Epub 2020
Sep 20.

Fetoscopic Release of Amniotic Band Syndrome: An Update.

Minella C(1), Costantino B(1), Ruano R(2), Koch A(1), Weingertner AS(1), Favre
R(1), Sananes N(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Maternal Fetal Medicine, Strasbourg University Hospital,
France.
(2)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)INSERM, UMR-S 1121, "Biomatériaux et Bioingénierie", Strasbourg University,
France.

Amniotic band syndrome is a rare condition. There have been few cases reported
of fetoscopic band dissection. The aim of this case series is to report 3 cases
of fetoscopic treatment for amniotic band syndrome, including indication for
surgery, technical aspects, complications and outcomes. Fetoscopic treatment was
performed respectively at 23 5/7 , 26 5/7 and 18 3/7 weeks' gestation. Two
procedures were performed with a laser fiber through a single trocar whereas one
surgery was performed with scissors. In conclusion, fetoscopic release of the
amniotic bands in case of amniotic band syndrome is feasible with encouraging
results in order to prevent amputation and dysfunction of the extremities.

© 2020 American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/jum.15480
PMID: 32951245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
