---
reference_id: "PMID:31150730"
title: The role of APOE in transgenic mouse models of AD.
authors:
- Balu D
- Karstens AJ
- Loukenas E
- Maldonado Weng J
- York JM
- Valencia-Olvera AC
- LaDu MJ
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2019.134285
keywords:
- Age Factors
- "Alzheimer Disease/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Apolipoproteins E/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Male
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Sex Factors
- tau Proteins/genetics
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# The role of APOE in transgenic mouse models of AD.
**Authors:** Balu D, Karstens AJ, Loukenas E, Maldonado Weng J, York JM, Valencia-Olvera AC, LaDu MJ
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neulet.2019.134285](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2019.134285)

## Content

1. Neurosci Lett. 2019 Aug 10;707:134285. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2019.134285. Epub
 2019 May 28.

The role of APOE in transgenic mouse models of AD.

Balu D(1), Karstens AJ(2), Loukenas E(3), Maldonado Weng J(4), York JM(5), 
Valencia-Olvera AC(6), LaDu MJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Electronic address: dbalu2@uic.edu.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA; Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at 
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Electronic address: karsten2@uic.edu.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Electronic address: elouke@uic.edu.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Electronic address: jmaldo27@uic.edu.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Electronic address: valenana@uic.edu.
(7)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Electronic address: mladu@uic.edu.

Identified in 1993, APOE4 is the greatest genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), increasing risk up to 15-fold compared to the common variant 
APOE3. Since the mid 1990's, transgenic (Tg) mice have been developed to model 
AD pathology and progression, primarily via expression of the familial AD (FAD) 
mutations in the presence of mouse-APOE (m-APOE). APOE4, associated with 
enhanced amyloid-β (Aβ) accumulation, has rarely been the focus in designing 
FAD-Tg mouse models. Initially, FAD-Tg mice were crossed with human (h)-APOE 
driven by heterologous promoters to identify an APOE genotype-specific AD 
phenotype. These models were later supplemented with FAD-Tg mice crossed with 
APOE-knockouts (APOE-/- or APOE-KO) and h-APOE-targeted replacement (h-APOE-TR) 
mice, originally generated to study the role of APOE genotype in peripheral 
lipid metabolism and atherosclerotic lesion development. Herein, we compare the 
m- and h-APOE multi-gene clusters, and then critically review the relevant 
history and approaches to developing a Tg mouse model to characterize 
APOE-dependent AD pathology, in combination with genetic (sex, age) and 
modifiable (e.g., inflammation, obesity) risk factors. Finally, we present 
recent data from the EFAD mice, which express 5xFAD mutations with the 
expression of the human apoE isoforms (E2FAD, E3FAD and E4FAD). This includes a 
study of 6- and 18-month-old male and female E3FAD and E4FAD, a comparison that 
enables examination of the interaction among the main AD risk factors: age, APOE 
genotype and sex. While no single transgenic mouse can capture the effects of 
all modifiable and genetic risk factors, going forward, a conscious effort needs 
to be made to include the factors that most significantly modulate AD pathology.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2019.134285
PMCID: PMC6717006
PMID: 31150730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder
with no cure and few palliative treatments [1]. Since the mid 90’s, transgenic (Tg) mice have been developed to
model the phenotypic pathology and progression of AD, including amyloid plaques
(amyloid-β peptide/Aβ), intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (tau;
NFT), neuroinflammation, neuritic dystrophy, frank neuronal loss, and
learning/memory deficits (reviewed in [75,
76]. Although it accounts for only 2-3%
of AD cases, familial AD (FAD) is the result of autosomal dominant mutations in
amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin-1 (PS1) or presenilin-2 (PS2) that
result in an increase in Aβ42 or the ratio of Aβ42/Aβ40 [82]. As wild type (wt) mouse
APP/PS1/PS2 expression does not lead to plaque deposition, FAD
mutations in the human genes are commonly used to induce AD pathology in Tg mouse
models (FAD-Tg mice) (for review, [76]). As
summarized in Figure 1, the first generation of
FAD-Tg mouse models were developed to understand the progression of Aβ
pathology, including either single (Fig. 1:
#2,3) [21, 25] or multiple FAD mutations (Fig.
1: #7,9,10,11,12) [29, 52, 55,
56, 62]. Mutations in the MAPT gene expressing
microtubule-associated protein were later combined with the FAD mutations to induce
tau pathology (Fig. 1: #10) [56]. In 1993, APOE4 was identified as
the greatest genetic risk factor for AD and found to be associated with accelerated
Aβ accumulation [16], both as amyloid
and soluble oligomeric forms of Aβ (oAβ), the latter considered a
proximal neurotoxin [15, 20, 23, 31, 32,
36, 64, 65, 80]. Despite the 5- to 15-fold increased risk in
APOE4 carriers, many FAD-Tg mice fail to model the effects of
human apoE isoforms. Specifically, FAD-Tg models continue to use murine
(m)-APOE instead of human (h)-APOE or limit the spatial and
temporal expression of h-APOE via heterologous promoters (Fig. 1: #6,8) Consequently, FAD-Tg models fail to
capture the scope of the APOE genotype-specific effects,
particularly on Aβ deposition and neuroinflammation. In addition, female sex
profoundly increases the APOE4 related risk for AD, though the
nature of this synergistic risk remains unclear [6, 19]. Thus, an ideal Tg model
for AD would exhibit the relevant spatial and temporal progression of AD pathology,
mirroring the APOE4- and female sex-based risk in humans (reviewed
in [75]). Herein we critically review the
relevant history and approaches to APOE-dependent AD pathology in
Tg-mouse models.

APOE encodes the protein apolipoprotein E (apoE), the
primary apolipoprotein expressed in the brain. While apolipoprotein J and
apolipoprotein D are also expressed in the brain and are components of lipoproteins,
these apolipoproteins do not support the synthesis or survival of a lipoprotein
[17, 34]. In humans, apoE has 3 naturally occurring isoforms that differ by a
single amino acid change at residues 112 and 158 (apoE2Cys,Cys,
apoE3Cys,Arg, apoE4Arg,Arg). In contrast, m-apoE is
expressed as a single isoform and differs from h-apoE at the protein level by
~100/300 amino acids. Based on the pioneering work of John Taylor and
colleagues [4, 5, 18, 37, 57],
h-APOE is now understood to be part of a ~58Kb
multi-gene cluster on chromosome 19 that contains
TOMM40/APOE/APOCI/APOCI’/APOCCIV/APOCII, while
m-APOE is part of a ~37Kb gene cluster on chromosome 7
that contains TOMM40/APOE/APOCI/APOCCIV/APOCII [24, 83] (Fig. 2). Thus, APOE
transcription is regulated by transcription factors in the promotor located up to
−1000bp from the APOE transcription start site (TSS;
reviewed in [47, 48]), as well as the interaction between these elements
and far distal enhancers [3, 12, 58, 68-71].
These distal elements include the hepatic control regions (HCR) and multienhancer
regions (ME) that contain, for example, liver X receptor (LXR) response elements
(LXRE) that dictate cell-specific expression ([35, 67]; reviewed in [86]). Indeed, one of the unique aspects of
APOE transcriptional regulation is that in the absence of
distal enhancers, the promotor cannot direct gene transcription in
vitro [35, 46, 79] or
in vivo [3, 22, 35,
67, 71]. Recent concern has focused on the difference in the transcriptional
regulation of the m- and h-APOE genes [47, 48], driven,
in part, by the growing popularity of FAD-Tg mice with h-APOE,
where h-APOE expression is driven by the m-APOE
promotor. Of particular concern is the role of nuclear transcription factors in the
expression of APOE and thus the number of, for example, LXRE
consensus sequences in m- and h-APOE [13, 49, 86]. While these are important points to
consider, a comprehensive review of this cluster regulation is beyond the scope of
this review.

Initially, APOE-Tg mice, including
APOE-knockouts (APOE−/−
or APOE-KO) (Fig. 1: #1) and
APOE-targeted replacement (APOE-TR) (Fig. 1: #4) mice, were generated primarily to
understand the role of apoE in peripheral lipid metabolism and atherosclerotic
lesion development [73, 87]. Many FAD-Tg models continue to use murine
(m)-APOE instead of human (h)-APOE or limit
the spatial and temporal expression of h-APOE via heterologous
promoters. However, APOE−/− and
APOE-TR mice are being exploited in FAD-Tg models to study the
role of apoE in the CNS (for review, [76]).
Genetic deletion of m-APOE in FAD-Tg mice
delays Aβ accumulation and amyloid deposition, as
first demonstrated in the landmark paper with PDAPP+/+
APOE−/− mice (Fig. 1: #5) [8], and
replicated using other FAD-Tg mouse models. Introducing h-APOE into
FAD-Tg/m-APOE−/− mice
further delays Aβ accumulation/amyloid deposition,
with Aβ pathology eventually appearing in the sequence of h-apoE isoforms:
apoE4 > apoE3 > apoE2. This temporal delay in pathology can be
considerable, as with the PDAPP/APOE-TR mice where plaque
deposition is delayed from 6- to 18-months (M) (Fig.
1: #13) [7]. These results
underscore functional differences between m- and h-APOE on
Aβ accumulation. Similar to amyloid deposition, apoE functioning varies in
m-apoE vs. h-apoE in most phenotypic AD processes, including Aβ clearance,
neuroinflammation and synaptic integrity (reviewed in [75]). Thus, in this comparison, the
APOE−/− mouse is functionally similar
to mouse models with h-APOE compared to m-APOE;
thus, FAD-Tg mouse models expressing endogenous m-APOE are less
relevant and predictive of human AD pathology.

As reviewed by Rebeck and colleagues, the deposition of Aβ
is apoE isoform-specific, while the accumulation and
progression of tau pathology is not apoE isoform-specific [63]. While Aβ plaques found in FAD-Tg
mouse brains are structurally similar to those found in human AD brains, these mice
do not develop NFTs composed of tau aggregates comparable to those found in human AD
brains. Therefore, the role of microtubule associated protein tau (MAPT) has been
well studied in frontal temporal dementia (FTD) and other variants of frontotemporal
lobar degeneration (e.g., progressive supranuclear palsy) [27, 60, 72]. In FTD-Tg mouse models with mutations in
human tau (e.g., Tau P301L, Tau P301S), NFTs form by 3-6M and may be accompanied by
motor deficits [77, 84]. The MAPT mutations used to induce
NFTs and tauopathy in mice do not increase AD risk but are associated with the rare
FTD’s in humans [30]. Recently, in
TauP301S × APOE-TR mice (Fig. 1: #18), it was demonstrated that in the presence of
apoE4, tau levels increased with apoE4 > apoE3 = apoE2 [66]. In contrast, adeno-associated viral (AAV) injections
of human tauP301L in neonatal APOE-TR mice show
exacerbated tau pathology and behavioral deficits in the presence of apoE2 but not
apoE4 [88]. Although inconsistent, the
exacerbation of tau pathology by h-APOE4 in the TauP301S
mouse is likely a response to the neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation induced by
the mutant tau, not the product of a direct interaction between apoE4 with tau.
Indeed, apoE4 likely acts as a “second hit” in cases where the CNS is
already compromised by the “first hit” from causes that include TBI,
neurodegeneration and even recovery from anesthesia [44]. Further evidence to consider in regard to apoE/tau interactions
includes: 1. ApoE is not likely to influence tau pathology via a direct interaction
under normal conditions in vivo as tau and apoE are not present in
the same intracellular compartment. As a classic secretory protein, exocytosis of
nascent apoE does not predict an interaction with tau, primarily a
microtubule-associated protein found in the cytosol. 2. FAD-Tg mice do not mirror
the temporal and pathological progression of tau pathology. Indeed, the only
evidence for an apoE isoform-specific effect on tau hyperphosphorylation (apoE4
> apoE3) is in NSE-APOE mice (Fig. 1: #8), with relevance compromised by the use of a heterologous
promoter that targets APOE expression to neurons, while apoE is
primarily secreted by glial cells (for review, [76]). Regardless, these mice do not develop NFTs [61]. 3. Incorporating tauopathy in AD mouse models may
not mirror human AD as MAPT mutations used to induce tauopathy in
mice do not increase AD risk but are associated with the rare FTD’s in
humans, as discussed above [30]. In
conclusion, the utility of incorporating tau mutations in AD-Tg mouse models to
determine if apoE exerts an isoform-specific effect on the development of tau
pathology requires a careful interpretation and may have a limited relevance to AD
as mutant tau causes FTD.

Crossing APOE-TR mice that express h-apoE isoforms with
FAD-Tg mice results in apoE expression at physiological levels under the control of
the m-apoE regulatory sequences. However, age-dependent mechanisms and critical
periods for apoE isoform-specific modulation of AD pathology remain unclear. To
address the stage of amyloid deposition where apoE4 has its greatest effect, both
AAV-mediated gene delivery and Cre-mediated mouse models can be activated at
different stages of pathology. AAV4-mediates overexpression of h-apoE in ependymal
cells and astrocytes in the subventricular zone of FAD-Tg mouse brains via the
ependymal system, while AAV8 driven by GFAP promotor leads to overexpression of
h-apoE in all astrocytes of APOE-TR mice [26, 38].
Interestingly, in both studies Aβ-associated AD pathology was highest in
apoE4-expressing mice. However, AAV-mediated CNS gene transfer in mice is not fully
understood due to limited characterization of biodistribution profiles and immune
responses with certain AAV serotypes. This limits the interpretation of these and
future findings that use AAV-mediated gene delivery to study the effect of apoE
expression on amyloid pathology at various stages. Crossing mice with the Cre
transgene driven by the GFAP promotor with inducible apoE3 or apoE4 in a FAD-Tg mice
provides astrocyte-specific expression (Fig. 1:
#19). Thus, expression of apoE3 or apoE4 can be activated at different stages of AD
pathology based on the Cre expression [41].
Alternatively, anti-sense oligos (ASOs) that target APOE3 or
APOE4 mRNA expression in FAD-Tg mice lower apoE expression,
again either before or after significant amyloid deposition [28]. In both studies, expression of apoE4 increased
Aβ-associated AD pathology in the brain when expressed early in the
development of AD pathology but not in the later stages. Thus, differential
modulation of Aβ aggregation highlights the critical interaction between two
AD risk factors: age and APOE.

In addition to the EFAD mice, a number of novel FAD/APOE-Tg
models have been developed (Fig. 1). Other
publications have relied on a comparison between
FAD/m-APOE+/+ and
FAD/m-APOE−/− to identify the function
of “apoE,” actually m-apoE. The latter is concerning as this
comparison, initially made by Bales in 1997 as discussed above, does not address the
differential isoform-specific functions of h-APOE (for example
[81]). Similarly, using a
FAD/APOE-Tg mouse with mixed apoE4/m-apoE, differential effects
on cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) and parenchymal plaques were observed,
suggesting opposing functions for m-apoE versus h-apoE4 (Fig. 1: #16) [40].
The question remains: What can be learned by comparing m-apoE to h-apoE4 that will
inform the difference between the human apoE isoforms. With the
FAD/APOE-Tg models, APOE4 has been linked to
enhanced Aβ-induced deficits in insulin signaling [11] and support the use of an anti-h-apoE4 antibody to
reduce apoE aggregation and plaque formation [39] [Fig. 1: #17]. Data from
Koldamova and colleagues demonstrate the interactive effects of diet,
APOE and sex on the immune response (Fig. 1: #15) [54].
Compared to normal diet, a high fat diet (HFD) increased amyloid deposition in
♂ and ♀ APOE4 carrier mice vs. ♂ and ♀
APOE3 carrier mice [53].
In addition, the HFD ♀APOE4 carriers also had the greatest
microglial coverage surrounding plaques, thus establishing a link among diet,
APOE, sex and the neuroimmune response [54].

The EFAD-Tg mouse model (carriers:
5xFAD+/−/APOE+/+; non-carriers:
5xFAD−/−APOE++) was
designed as a tractable preclinical FAD-Tg-mouse model for identifying the
mechanisms underlying apoE isoform-specific modulation of AD pathology (Fig. 1: #14) [85]. From their first description in 2012, EFAD mice have enabled
critical basic and therapeutic research [2,
9, 10, 14, 33, 42, 43, 51,
75, 89]. Recent publications have expanded the characterization of this
model to include measures of cerebrovascular integrity and inflammation [50, 78].
In LPS-challenged ♂E4FAD carrier mice, peripheral inflammation increased
cognitive decline and decreased post-synaptic protein levels [50]. Furthermore, chronic peripheral inflammation
resulted in cerebrovascular deficits, suggesting that the interaction among
APOE4, Aβ, and peripheral inflammation induced
cerebrovascular damage and cognitive decline. Recent developments with the EFAD-Tg
mouse presented in this review including the moderation effect of modifiable (e.g.,
inflammation, obesity) and genetic (e.g., sex, age) risk factors on AD pathology.
Epidemiological evidence suggests that vascular risk and lifestyle factors (e.g.,
obesity, Western diet) increase AD risk in humans with increasing attention on the
interplay of APOE genotype and sex [59]. In ♂EFAD carrier mice on a control diet, metabolic profiles
for E3FAD = E4FAD, while the Western diet was associated with Aβ-associated
pathology with E4FAD > EFAD3 [51].
This relationship differs by sex as recent findings show that in ♀EFAD
carrier mice, Western diet yields E3FAD > E4FAD for select measures of both
metabolic dysfunction and Aβ accumulation [14]. These results demonstrate a significant interaction between diet,
APOE genotype and sex on AD pathology and an important
gene-environment interaction [51].

As an update on the EFAD mice, a recently completed study of an 18M cohort
of ♀ and ♂ E3FAD and E4FAD mice was compared to 6M mice (n=8-12). The
6M male EFAD mouse data was adapted from [75]. All protocols follow the UIC Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee protocols. Breeding and colony maintenance was conducted at UIC. All the
biochemical and immunohistochemical methods have been published previously [85]. Kaplan Meier survival curves for only the
18M cohort revealed a significance difference in survival: ♀E4FAD <
(♂E4FAD ~ ♀E3FAD < (♂E3FAD (Fig. 3). Results from MWM in the 18M cohort demonstrated a
significant memory loss in the ♀E4FAD compared to (♂E4FAD,
♀E3FAD, and (♂E3FAD (data not shown). The apoE and Aβ
extraction profiles, using a 3-step sequential extraction with TBS, TBSX (TBS + 0.1
% TritonX) and FA (formic acid) were compared between 6M and 18M (Fig. 4 & 5). For
apoE, total levels increased significantly from 6 to 18M in the 4 groups but with no
difference between genotype and sex (Fig. 4A).
However, in the TBSX fraction, the fraction where lipoprotein-associated apoE
elutes, there was no age-induced increase in the ♀E4FAD mice, and
♀E4FAD < (♂E4FAD mice, and while there was an age-induced
increase in the ♀E3FAD, ♀E3FAD < ♂E3FAD (Fig. 4B). Total Aβ increased from 6 to 18M in the 4
groups, with ♀E3FAD > ♂E3FAD and ♀E4FAD >
(♂E4FAD (Fig. 5A). Importantly, soluble
oAβ exhibited a similar increase from 6 to 18M, with the response at 18M:
♀E3FAD > ♂E3FAD and ♀E4FAD > (♂E4FAD
(Fig 5B). There was no difference in the
soluble Aβ42 levels at 18M among the 4 groups (Fig 5C). Immunohistochemistry for astrogliosis (GFAP) and Aβ
deposition (Aβ mAb MOAB2) (Fig. 6A)
revealed that at 18M, astrogliosis in the ♀E4FAD was > 6M, >
(♂E4FAD and > ♀E3FAD, thus demonstrating significant age, sex
and genotype effects (Fig. 6B). Aβ
deposition in the cortex at 18M was also greatest in ♀E4FAD mice (Fig. 6C). These results indicate that measures of
AD pathology in the EFAD mice develop with age, with 18M the calculated 75% survival
rate for mice on their genetic background (https://www.jax.org/research-and-faculty/research-labs/the-harrison-lab/gerontology/life-span-as-a-biomarker),
confirmed by the Kaplan Meier survival curve (Fig.
3). Both biochemical and immunohistochemical measures of AD pathology
demonstrate significant interactive effects among age, sex and
APOE. Aging studies with these mice are ongoing.

FAD-Tg mouse models are evolving in an effort to replicate the diverse
pathology present in sporadic AD. However, information gleaned from these models is
limited if basic risks that include age, APOE genotype, and sex are
not considered. This is particularly critical for preclinical testing as the Tg
model should mirror the human population, which includes, for example,
APOE4 females. Furthermore, characterization of these effects
should not ignore the potential contributions of peripheral phenotypes (e.g., Cre,
AAV). In addition, the physiological relevance of certain models is still
understudied and controversial. For example, while the use of inducible
APOE-Tg models is a promising approach, it is still
understudied. Comparisons between models with m-APOE and
APOE−/− are not mechanistically
informative or predictive of future therapeutic approaches as a case study of an
APOE−/− human demonstrated deficits in
learning, memory, language, visuospatial abilities, and executive functions as well
as extensive xanthomas and a lipidemic plasma lipoprotein profile [45]. Further, m-apoE is not equivalent to the human apoE
isoforms, thus requiring the introduction of h-APOE. In the end, no
single transgenic mouse can capture the effects of all modifiable and genetic risk
factors. Going forward, a conscious effort needs to be made to include the factors
that most significantly modulate AD pathology. This approach will help to: 1) allow
full interpretation of findings; and 2) validate a mouse model for testing
therapeutics that translate to clinical trials.