---
reference_id: "PMID:40600431"
title: "Desmoplakin cardiomyopathy: recent updates in natural history and management."
authors:
- Hoffman-Andrews L
- Anderson OG
- Owens AT
journal: Curr Opin Cardiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000001240
keywords:
- Humans
- Desmoplakins/genetics
- "Cardiomyopathies/genetics, therapy, diagnosis"
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology, prevention & control"
- Genetic Testing
- Disease Management
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Desmoplakin cardiomyopathy: recent updates in natural history and management.
**Authors:** Hoffman-Andrews L, Anderson OG, Owens AT
**Journal:** Curr Opin Cardiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/HCO.0000000000001240](https://doi.org/10.1097/HCO.0000000000001240)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2025 Sep 1;40(5):375-380. doi:
10.1097/HCO.0000000000001240.  Epub 2025 Jun 27.

Desmoplakin cardiomyopathy: recent updates in natural history and management.

Hoffman-Andrews L(1), Anderson OG, Owens AT.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cardiomyopathy caused by pathogenic variants in the 
desmoplakin gene has recently emerged as an entity distinct from other genetic 
cardiomyopathies. This review summarizes recent literature, including the first 
large cohort studies of this disease, that have begun to characterize its 
natural history and specific management challenges.
RECENT FINDINGS: Desmoplakin cardiomyopathy may be characterized by episodic 
"hot phases", cutaneous findings, and a high risk of sudden cardiac death. 
Gene-specific risk factors for sudden cardiac death have begun to be elucidated.
SUMMARY: Genetic testing in arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy and recurrent 
myocarditis can identify patients with desmoplakin variants who may have a 
unique phenotype that requires gene-specific management. More research is needed 
in this population to further guide treatment, counseling, and risk 
stratification.

Copyright © 2025 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000001240
PMID: 40600431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]