---
reference_id: "PMID:11965423"
title: "[Thanatophoric dysplasia: report of 2 cases with neuropathological study]."
authors:
- Noronha L
- Prevedello LM
- Maggio EM
- Serapiao MJ
- Torres LF
journal: Arq Neuropsiquiatr
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1590/s0004-282x2002000100024
keywords:
- "Brain/abnormalities, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Skull/abnormalities, pathology"
- Thanatophoric Dysplasia/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Thanatophoric dysplasia: report of 2 cases with neuropathological study].
**Authors:** Noronha L, Prevedello LM, Maggio EM, Serapiao MJ, Torres LF
**Journal:** Arq Neuropsiquiatr (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1590/s0004-282x2002000100024](https://doi.org/10.1590/s0004-282x2002000100024)

## Content

1. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2002 Mar;60(1):133-7. doi:
10.1590/s0004-282x2002000100024.

[Thanatophoric dysplasia: report of 2 cases with neuropathological study].

[Article in Portuguese]

Noronha L(1), Prevedello LM, Maggio EM, Serapiao MJ, Torres LF.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Patologia, Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, PR,
Brasil.

We report two cases of thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) with detailed
neuropathologic evaluation. One case was representative of TD type I and the
other TD type II. The case with TD type I showed macrocephaly, narrow thoracic
cage, pulmonary hypoplasia and bowed limbs. Radiological study showed flat
vertebral bodies, short curved appendicular skeleton and flaring of metaphyses.
The other case (TD type 2) showed macrocephaly, cleft palate, short limbs and
cloverleaf skull. Radiological findings were generalized platyspondy with
excessive intervertebral disc space heights and a large head. Microscopic
examination of both cases revealed temporal lobe polymicrogyria, abnormalities
of the hippocampus and heterotopic neuroglial tissue within the meninges. There
were no noticeable differences in CNS abnormalities between TD type I and II.

DOI: 10.1590/s0004-282x2002000100024
PMID: 11965423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
