---
reference_id: "PMID:32779496"
title: "Large Congenital Epulis: A Neonatal Tumour with Striking Appearance, but Simple Management."
authors:
- Tiwari C
- Nagdeve N
- Saoji R
- Nama N
- Joshi S
journal: Fetal Pediatr Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/15513815.2020.1805532
keywords:
- Female
- "Gingival Neoplasms/congenital, pathology, surgery"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large Congenital Epulis: A Neonatal Tumour with Striking Appearance, but Simple Management.
**Authors:** Tiwari C, Nagdeve N, Saoji R, Nama N, Joshi S
**Journal:** Fetal Pediatr Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15513815.2020.1805532](https://doi.org/10.1080/15513815.2020.1805532)

## Content

1. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2022 Apr;41(2):351-353. doi: 
10.1080/15513815.2020.1805532. Epub 2020 Aug 11.

Large Congenital Epulis: A Neonatal Tumour with Striking Appearance, but Simple 
Management.

Tiwari C(1)(2), Nagdeve N(2), Saoji R(2), Nama N(3), Joshi S(3).

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences - Raipur, Raipur, 
India.
(2)Paediatric Surgery, Government Medical College and Hospital Nagpur, Nagpur, 
India.
(3)General Surgery, Government Medical College and Hospital, Nagpur, India.

Background Congenital epulis is a benign tumor of upper gingiva. Larger lesions 
interfere with mouth closing and normal feeding and may obstruct airways. We 
present a neonate with a large epulis. Case Report: A full term 3 kg 5 days 
female baby had a 20 cm × 15 cm gingival mass protruding from the oral cavity, 
connected by a pedicle attached to right upper gingiva (Figure 1). Multiple 
trophic ulcers had developed in the mass after birth. Mouth closing and normal 
feeding were hampered. The mass was excised surgically and baby improved. 
Conclusion: A large congenital epulis, though worrisome to parents, can be 
satisfactorily managed by surgical excision and has a good prognosis.

DOI: 10.1080/15513815.2020.1805532
PMID: 32779496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]