---
reference_id: "PMID:22482805"
title: "Attenuated BMP1 function compromises osteogenesis, leading to bone fragility in humans and zebrafish."
authors:
- Asharani PV
- Keupp K
- Semler O
- Wang W
- Li Y
- Thiele H
- Yigit G
- Pohl E
- Becker J
- Frommolt P
- Sonntag C
- Altmüller J
- Zimmermann K
- Greenspan DS
- Akarsu NA
- Netzer C
- Schönau E
- Wirth R
- Hammerschmidt M
- Nürnberg P
- Wollnik B
- Carney TJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.02.026
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use
- "Bone Morphogenetic Protein 1/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Bone and Bones/metabolism
- Cell Differentiation
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen/biosynthesis
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- Exome
- Female
- "Fractures, Bone/drug therapy, prevention & control"
- Genetic Loci
- Heat-Shock Proteins
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Osteoblasts/drug effects, physiology"
- "Osteogenesis/drug effects, genetics, physiology"
- Peptide Fragments
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- "Zebrafish/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Attenuated BMP1 function compromises osteogenesis, leading to bone fragility in humans and zebrafish.
**Authors:** Asharani PV, Keupp K, Semler O, Wang W, Li Y, Thiele H, Yigit G, Pohl E, Becker J, Frommolt P, Sonntag C, Altmüller J, Zimmermann K, Greenspan DS, Akarsu NA, Netzer C, Schönau E, Wirth R, Hammerschmidt M, Nürnberg P, Wollnik B, Carney TJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.02.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.02.026)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Apr 6;90(4):661-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.02.026.

Attenuated BMP1 function compromises osteogenesis, leading to bone fragility in 
humans and zebrafish.

Asharani PV(1), Keupp K, Semler O, Wang W, Li Y, Thiele H, Yigit G, Pohl E, 
Becker J, Frommolt P, Sonntag C, Altmüller J, Zimmermann K, Greenspan DS, Akarsu 
NA, Netzer C, Schönau E, Wirth R, Hammerschmidt M, Nürnberg P, Wollnik B, Carney 
TJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Proteos, Singapore, Singapore.

Bone morphogenetic protein 1 (BMP1) is an astacin metalloprotease with important 
cellular functions and diverse substrates, including extracellular-matrix 
proteins and antagonists of some TGFβ superfamily members. Combining whole-exome 
sequencing and filtering for homozygous stretches of identified variants, we 
found a homozygous causative BMP1 mutation, c.34G>C, in a consanguineous family 
affected by increased bone mineral density and multiple recurrent fractures. The 
mutation is located within the BMP1 signal peptide and leads to impaired 
secretion and an alteration in posttranslational modification. We also 
characterize a zebrafish bone mutant harboring lesions in bmp1a, demonstrating 
conservation of BMP1 function in osteogenesis across species. Genetic, 
biochemical, and histological analyses of this mutant and a comparison to a 
second, similar locus reveal that Bmp1a is critically required for 
mature-collagen generation, downstream of osteoblast maturation, in bone. We 
thus define the molecular and cellular bases of BMP1-dependent osteogenesis and 
show the importance of this protein for bone formation and stability.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.02.026
PMCID: PMC3322236
PMID: 22482805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]