---
reference_id: "PMID:26306640"
title: Reinitiation of mRNA translation in a patient with X-linked infantile spasms with a protein-truncating variant in ARX.
authors:
- Moey C
- Topper S
- Karn M
- Johnson AK
- Das S
- Vidaurre J
- Shoubridge C
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.176
keywords:
- "Codon, Initiator"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/diagnosis, genetics"
- HEK293 Cells
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- "Peptide Chain Initiation, Translational"
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Siblings
- "Spasms, Infantile/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reinitiation of mRNA translation in a patient with X-linked infantile spasms with a protein-truncating variant in ARX.
**Authors:** Moey C, Topper S, Karn M, Johnson AK, Das S, Vidaurre J, Shoubridge C
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2015.176](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2015.176)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2016 May;24(5):681-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.176. Epub 2015
Aug  26.

Reinitiation of mRNA translation in a patient with X-linked infantile spasms
with a protein-truncating variant in ARX.

Moey C(1)(2), Topper S(3), Karn M(4), Johnson AK(3), Das S(3), Vidaurre J(5),
Shoubridge C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, School of Peadiatrics and Reproductive Health,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(2)Robinson Research Institute, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.
(5)Nationwide Children's Hospital, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Mutations in the Aristaless-related homeobox gene (ARX) lead to a range of
X-linked intellectual disability phenotypes, with truncating variants generally
resulting in severe X-linked lissencephaly with ambiguous genitalia (XLAG), and
polyalanine expansions and missense variants resulting in infantile spasms. We
report two male patients with early-onset infantile spasms in whom a novel
c.34G>T (p.(E12*)) variant was identified in the ARX gene. A similar variant
c.81C>G (p.(Y27*)), has previously been described in two affected cousins with
early-onset infantile spasms, leading to reinitiation of ARX mRNA translation
resulting in an N-terminal truncated protein. We show that the novel c.34G>T
(p.(E12*)) variant also reinitiated mRNA translation at the next AUG codon
(c.121-123 (p.M41)), producing the same N-terminally truncated protein. The
production of both of these truncated proteins was demonstrated to be at
markedly reduced levels using in vitro cell assays. Using luciferase reporter
assays, we demonstrate that transcriptional repression capacity of ARX was
diminished by both the loss of the N-terminal corepressor octapeptide domain, as
a consequence of truncation, and the marked reduction in mutant protein
expression. Our study indicates that premature termination mutations very early
in ARX lead to reinitiation of translation to produce N-terminally truncated
protein at markedly reduced levels of expression. We conclude that even low
levels of N-terminally truncated ARX is sufficient to improve the patient's
phenotype compared with the severe phenotype of XLAG that includes malformations
of the brain and genitalia normally seen in complete loss-of-function mutations
in ARX.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.176
PMCID: PMC4930085
PMID: 26306640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
