---
reference_id: "PMID:27815653"
title: "Relationship of HLA-B*51 and HLA-B*52 alleles and TNF-α-308A/G polymorphism with susceptibility to Takayasu arteritis: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Chen S
- Luan H
- Li L
- Zeng X
- Wang T
- Li Y
- Yuan H
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10067-016-3445-0
keywords:
- Alleles
- Case-Control Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- HLA-B51 Antigen/genetics
- HLA-B52 Antigen/genetics
- Humans
- Inflammation
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Takayasu Arteritis/genetics
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship of HLA-B*51 and HLA-B*52 alleles and TNF-α-308A/G polymorphism with susceptibility to Takayasu arteritis: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Chen S, Luan H, Li L, Zeng X, Wang T, Li Y, Yuan H
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10067-016-3445-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-016-3445-0)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 2017 Jan;36(1):173-181. doi: 10.1007/s10067-016-3445-0. Epub 
2016 Nov 4.

Relationship of HLA-B*51 and HLA-B*52 alleles and TNF-α-308A/G polymorphism with 
susceptibility to Takayasu arteritis: a meta-analysis.

Chen S(1), Luan H(1), Li L(2), Zeng X(1), Wang T(1), Li Y(3), Yuan H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical 
College, Key Laboratory of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Ministry of 
Education, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical 
College, Key Laboratory of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Ministry of 
Education, Beijing, China. yongzhelipumch@126.com.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China. 18911662931@189.cn.

We performed a meta-analysis to determine whether combined evidence shows an 
association between HLA-B*51 and HLA-B*52 alleles and TNF-α-308A/G polymorphism 
and the susceptibility to Takayasu arteritis (TA). Relevant articles dated 
November 2015 were acquired from the PubMed, Embase and Cochrane databases. The 
number of genotypes and/or alleles for HLA-B*51 and HLA-B*52 alleles and 
TNF-α-308 A/G polymorphism in cases and control subjects was extracted, and 
statistical analysis was conducted using STATA 11.2 software. We included 20 
studies with 1864 TA patients and 6973 controls. The HLA-B*52 allele was found 
to be associated with TA (pooled OR 3.91, 95 % CI 3.22-4.74, P < 0.0001). The 
meta-analysis of TNF-α-308 A/G polymorphism for the A allele vs. G allele 
(P = 0.006) and AA + AG vs. GG (P = 0.023) revealed a significant association 
with TA. However, we did not find that the HLA-B*51 allele was associated with 
TA. This meta-analysis demonstrated that the HLA-B*52 allele and TNF-α-308 A/G 
polymorphism may contribute to TA susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-016-3445-0
PMID: 27815653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]