---
reference_id: "PMID:29998839"
title: "Paediatric Behçet's disease in Iran: report of 204 cases."
authors:
- Shahram F
- Nadji A
- Akhlaghi M
- Faezi ST
- Chams-Davatchi C
- Shams H
- Ghodsi SZ
- Davatchi F
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2018'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age of Onset
- "Behcet Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Child
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Iran/epidemiology
- Male
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- Registries
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paediatric Behçet's disease in Iran: report of 204 cases.
**Authors:** Shahram F, Nadji A, Akhlaghi M, Faezi ST, Chams-Davatchi C, Shams H, Ghodsi SZ, Davatchi F
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2018)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2018 Nov-Dec;36(6 Suppl 115):135-140. Epub 2018 Jun 19.

Paediatric Behçet's disease in Iran: report of 204 cases.

Shahram F(1), Nadji A(2), Akhlaghi M(3), Faezi ST(3), Chams-Davatchi C(4), Shams 
H(5), Ghodsi SZ(4), Davatchi F(3).

Author information:
(1)Behçet's Disease Unit, Rheumatology Research Centre, Shariati Hospital, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. shahramf@tums.ac.ir.
(2)Behçet's Disease Unit, Rheumatology Research Centre Shariati Hospital, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Behçet's Disease Unit, Rheumatology Research Centre, Shariati Hospital, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Behçet's Disease Unit, Rheumatology Research Centre, Shariati Hospital, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences; and Department of Dermatology, Autoimmune 
Bullous Diseases Research Centre, Razi Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Behçet's Disease Unit, Rheumatology Research Centre, Shariati Hospital, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences; and Department of Ophthalmology, Farabi 
Eye Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVES: This study proposed to report the characteristics of paediatric 
Behçet's disease (PED-BD) in a cohort of patients from Iran's registry and 
compare them with different reports throughout the world.
METHODS: From a cohort of 7504 Iranian patients with Behçet's disease those 
diagnosed before the age of 16 years were included in this study. Data were 
collected on a standard protocol comprising 105 items, including demographic 
features, type of presentation, and different clinical and laboratory findings.
RESULTS: PED-BD was seen in 2.7% of patients. The male/female ratio was 1.02/1, 
and the mean age at onset was 10.5±3.4. Positive familial history was present in 
9.9%. As a first manifestation, oral aphthosis was the most frequent (75%) 
followed by ocular lesions in 19.1%. The prevalence rates of various 
manifestations were as follows: oral aphthosis: 91.7%; genital ulcer: 42.2%; 
skin: 51.5% (pseudofolliculitis: 43.1%, erythema nodosum: 10.3%); ocular 
lesions: 66.2% (anterior uveitis 52%, posterior uveitis 58.3%, retinal 
vasculitis 39.7%); articular manifestations: 30.9%; neurological involvement: 
4.9%; vascular involvement: 6.4% (venous 4.9%, arterial 2.5%); gastrointestinal 
manifestations: 5.9%; epididymo-orchitis: 8.7% (boys); high ESR (≥20): 50.8%; 
abnormal urine: 14.1%; positive pathergy test: 57%; HLA-B5/51: 48.7%. ICBD 
criteria have the highest sensitivity for the classification of PED-BD patients 
in Iran (91.7%).
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical spectrum of PED-BD in Iran in this study was similar 
to that of other reports; however, genital ulcers, skin lesions (notably 
erythema nodosum), and gastrointestinal involvement were noticed to occur less 
frequently, while ocular lesions were more frequent and more severe compared to 
other reports.

PMID: 29998839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]