---
reference_id: "PMID:37904148"
title: The favorable outcome of Bernese periacetabular osteotomy for the hip osteoarthritis in multiple epiphyseal dysplasia.
authors:
- Chang YY
- Lee CC
- Lin SC
- Kuo KN
- Chang JF
- Wu KW
- Wang TM
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02920-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Adolescent
- "Osteoarthritis, Hip/etiology, surgery"
- Osteochondrodysplasias
- Retrospective Studies
- "Acetabulum/surgery, abnormalities"
- "Osteotomy/adverse effects, methods"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Hip Dislocation/etiology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The favorable outcome of Bernese periacetabular osteotomy for the hip osteoarthritis in multiple epiphyseal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Chang YY, Lee CC, Lin SC, Kuo KN, Chang JF, Wu KW, Wang TM
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02920-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02920-1)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Oct 30;18(1):340. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02920-1.

The favorable outcome of Bernese periacetabular osteotomy for the hip 
osteoarthritis in multiple epiphyseal dysplasia.

Chang YY(1), Lee CC(1), Lin SC(2)(3), Kuo KN(1)(4), Chang JF(5)(6), Wu KW(#)(7), 
Wang TM(#)(8).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Orthopedic Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, No.7, 
Chung Shan S. Rd., Taipei City, 100, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung, 402, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, 402, Taiwan.
(4)Cochrane Taiwan, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, 110, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, En Chu Kong Hospital, New Taipei City, 237, 
Taiwan.
(6)TMU Research Center of Urology and Kidney (TMU-RCUK), Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, 110, Taiwan.
(7)Departments of Orthopedic Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, No.7, 
Chung Shan S. Rd., Taipei City, 100, Taiwan. dtorth76@gmail.com.
(8)Departments of Orthopedic Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, No.7, 
Chung Shan S. Rd., Taipei City, 100, Taiwan. wukuanwen@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED) is a rare congenital bone 
dysplasia. Patients with MED develop secondary hip osteoarthritis as early as 
the third to the fourth decade. Currently, there is no consensus on the 
prevention of the progressive hip osteoarthritis secondary to MED. The Bernese 
periacetabular osteotomy (PAO) is a joint-preserving surgery to reshape 
acetabulum and extend femoral head coverage. However, there is no documentary 
evidence for the effect of the procedure on MED hips.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed the preliminary outcomes following the Bernese 
PAO in 6 MED hips. The average age at the time of surgery was 14.3 years (range 
from 11.4 to 17.2 years). For our study interest of time efficiency, 
radiographic parameters were analyzed preoperatively and 1 year postoperatively. 
The hip function was evaluated by the Harris Hip Score (HHS) before and after 
surgery.
RESULTS: The mean follow-up time was 1.7 years. The mean lateral center-edge 
angle increased from 3.8° to 47.1° (p = 0.02), anterior center-edge angle 
increased from 7.3° to 35.1° (p = 0.02), and acetabulum index decreased from 
27.8° to 14.6° (p = 0.04). The femoral head coverage ratio increased from 66.8% 
to 100% (p = 0.02). The post-operative anteroposterior pelvic radiograph 
demonstrated all preoperative broken Shenton lines were reversed. The mean HHS 
improved from 67.3 to 86.7 (p = 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Bernese PAO is a feasible treatment for hip disorders in MED 
patients. It reshapes acetabular and femoral morphology efficiently. In our 
study, the preliminary results showed the procedure not only improved 
radiographic outcomes but also hip function.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02920-1
PMCID: PMC10614309
PMID: 37904148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.