---
reference_id: "PMID:19008299"
title: "Cerebrocostomandibular-like syndrome and a mutation in the conserved oligomeric Golgi complex, subunit 1."
authors:
- Zeevaert R
- Foulquier F
- Dimitrov B
- Reynders E
- Van Damme-Lombaerts R
- Simeonov E
- Annaert W
- Matthijs G
- Jaeken J
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn379
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport/genetics, metabolism"
- Adolescent
- Base Sequence
- Brefeldin A/pharmacology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Fibroblasts/drug effects, metabolism"
- Frameshift Mutation
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism"
- Introns
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Point Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrocostomandibular-like syndrome and a mutation in the conserved oligomeric Golgi complex, subunit 1.
**Authors:** Zeevaert R, Foulquier F, Dimitrov B, Reynders E, Van Damme-Lombaerts R, Simeonov E, Annaert W, Matthijs G, Jaeken J
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddn379](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddn379)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Feb 1;18(3):517-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn379. Epub 2008 Nov
 13.

Cerebrocostomandibular-like syndrome and a mutation in the conserved oligomeric
Golgi complex, subunit 1.

Zeevaert R(1), Foulquier F, Dimitrov B, Reynders E, Van Damme-Lombaerts R,
Simeonov E, Annaert W, Matthijs G, Jaeken J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Herestraat 49, BE-3000
Leuven, Belgium.

We describe two patients with a cerebrocostomandibular-like syndrome and a novel
mutation in conserved oligomeric Golgi (COG) subunit 1, one of the subunits of
the conserved oligomeric Golgi complex. This hetero-octameric protein complex is
involved in retrograde vesicular trafficking and glycosylation. We identified in
both patients an intronic mutation, c.1070+5G>A, that disrupts a splice donor
site and leads to skipping of exon 6, a frameshift and a premature stopcodon in
exon 7. Real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction showed in the
first patient only 3% of normal transcript when compared with control. A delay
in retrograde trafficking could be demonstrated by Brefeldin A treatment of this
patient's fibroblasts. The costovertebral dysplasia of the two patients has been
described in cerebrocostomandibular syndrome (CCMS), but also in
cerebrofaciothoracic dysplasia and spondylocostal dysostosis. CCMS itself is
heterogeneous because both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive
inheritance has been described. We anticipate further genetic heterogeneity
because no mutations in COG1 were found in two additional patients with a CCMS.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn379
PMID: 19008299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
