---
reference_id: "PMID:19847447"
title: "Oligodendrocytes: biology and pathology."
authors:
- Bradl M
- Lassmann H
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-009-0601-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oligodendrocytes: biology and pathology.
**Authors:** Bradl M, Lassmann H
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-009-0601-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-009-0601-5)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2010 Jan;119(1):37-53. doi: 10.1007/s00401-009-0601-5. Epub 
2009 Oct 22.

Oligodendrocytes: biology and pathology.

Bradl M(1), Lassmann H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroimmunology, Center for Brain Research, Medical University 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria. monika.bradl@meduniwien.ac.at

Oligodendrocytes are the myelinating cells of the central nervous system (CNS). 
They are the end product of a cell lineage which has to undergo a complex and 
precisely timed program of proliferation, migration, differentiation, and 
myelination to finally produce the insulating sheath of axons. Due to this 
complex differentiation program, and due to their unique metabolism/physiology, 
oligodendrocytes count among the most vulnerable cells of the CNS. In this 
review, we first describe the different steps eventually culminating in the 
formation of mature oligodendrocytes and myelin sheaths, as they were revealed 
by studies in rodents. We will then show differences and similarities of human 
oligodendrocyte development. Finally, we will lay out the different pathways 
leading to oligodendrocyte and myelin loss in human CNS diseases, and we will 
reveal the different principles leading to the restoration of myelin sheaths or 
to a failure to do so.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-009-0601-5
PMCID: PMC2799635
PMID: 19847447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]