---
reference_id: "PMID:34010595"
title: Western diet induces Paneth cell defects through microbiome alterations and farnesoid X receptor and type I interferon activation.
authors:
- Liu TC
- Kern JT
- Jain U
- Sonnek NM
- Xiong S
- Simpson KF
- VanDussen KL
- Winkler ES
- Haritunians T
- Malique A
- Lu Q
- Sasaki Y
- Storer C
- Diamond MS
- Head RD
- McGovern DPB
- Stappenbeck TS
journal: Cell Host Microbe
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2021.04.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Western diet induces Paneth cell defects through microbiome alterations and farnesoid X receptor and type I interferon activation.
**Authors:** Liu TC, Kern JT, Jain U, Sonnek NM, Xiong S, Simpson KF, VanDussen KL, Winkler ES, Haritunians T, Malique A, Lu Q, Sasaki Y, Storer C, Diamond MS, Head RD, McGovern DPB, Stappenbeck TS
**Journal:** Cell Host Microbe (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chom.2021.04.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2021.04.004)

## Content

1. Cell Host Microbe. 2021 Jun 9;29(6):988-1001.e6. doi: 
10.1016/j.chom.2021.04.004. Epub 2021 May 18.

Western diet induces Paneth cell defects through microbiome alterations and 
farnesoid X receptor and type I interferon activation.

Liu TC(1), Kern JT(2), Jain U(2), Sonnek NM(2), Xiong S(2), Simpson KF(2), 
VanDussen KL(2), Winkler ES(3), Haritunians T(4), Malique A(2), Lu Q(2), Sasaki 
Y(5), Storer C(5), Diamond MS(6), Head RD(5), McGovern DPB(4), Stappenbeck 
TS(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: 
ta-chiang.liu@wustl.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(4)The F. Widjaja Foundation Inflammatory Bowel and Immunobiology Research 
Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles 90048, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of Medicine, Washington 
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: stappet@ccf.org.

Intestinal Paneth cells modulate innate immunity and infection. In Crohn's 
disease, genetic mutations together with environmental triggers can disable 
Paneth cell function. Here, we find that a western diet (WD) similarly leads to 
Paneth cell dysfunction through mechanisms dependent on the microbiome and 
farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and type I interferon (IFN) signaling. Analysis of 
multiple human cohorts suggests that obesity is associated with Paneth cell 
dysfunction. In mouse models, consumption of a WD for as little as 4 weeks led 
to Paneth cell dysfunction. WD consumption in conjunction with Clostridium spp. 
increased the secondary bile acid deoxycholic acid levels in the ileum, which in 
turn inhibited Paneth cell function. The process required excess signaling of 
both FXR and IFN within intestinal epithelial cells. Our findings provide a 
mechanistic link between poor diet and inhibition of gut innate immunity and 
uncover an effect of FXR activation in gut inflammation.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2021.04.004
PMCID: PMC8192497
PMID: 34010595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests T.-C.L. received 
research funding from Pfizer on Paneth cell phenotype in IBD, and advises 
Interline. R.D.H. and C.S. may receive royalty income based on the CompBio 
technology developed by R.D.H. and licensed by Washington University to 
PercayAI. T. Stappenbeck advises Janssen, Boehringer Ingelheim (Ingelheim, 
Germany), Kallyope, Takada, and Roche. All other authors declare no relevant 
competing interests.