---
reference_id: "PMID:31784757"
title: "Hepatitis C Virus Infection of Human Thyrocytes: Metabolic, Hormonal, and Immunological Implications."
authors:
- Hammerstad SS
- Blackard JT
- Lombardi A
- Owen RP
- Concepcion E
- Yi Z
- Zhang W
- Tomer Y
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgz241
keywords:
- Biomarkers/analysis
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cytokines/metabolism
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Hepacivirus/physiology
- "Hepatitis C/immunology, metabolism, virology"
- "Hepatocytes/immunology, metabolism, virology"
- Humans
- "Inflammation/immunology, metabolism, virology"
- Male
- MicroRNAs/genetics
- "Thyroid Epithelial Cells/immunology, metabolism, virology"
- Virus Replication
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis C Virus Infection of Human Thyrocytes: Metabolic, Hormonal, and Immunological Implications.
**Authors:** Hammerstad SS, Blackard JT, Lombardi A, Owen RP, Concepcion E, Yi Z, Zhang W, Tomer Y
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgz241](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgz241)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2020 Apr 1;105(4):1157-68. doi:
10.1210/clinem/dgz241.

Hepatitis C Virus Infection of Human Thyrocytes: Metabolic, Hormonal, and
Immunological Implications.

Hammerstad SS(1), Blackard JT(2), Lombardi A(3), Owen RP(4), Concepcion E(3), Yi
Z(5), Zhang W(5), Tomer Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(3)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore
Medical Center, Bronx, NY.
(4)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology Mount Sinai Hospital,
Icahn School of Medicine New York, NY.
(5)Department of Medicine Bioinformatics Core, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY.

CONTEXT: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a prevalent disease worldwide.
Thyroid dysfunction is one of the most common extrahepatic manifestations of HCV
infection. We hypothesized that HCV can directly infect human thyrocytes thereby
causing thyroid dysfunction.
SETTING: Human thyrocytes in primary cell culture, ML-1 human thyroid cell line,
and Huh7.5 human hepatocyte cell line were infected with HCV using the
Huh7.5JFH1 cell line that releases infectious HCV virions. After infection, the
release of new virions, production of proinflammatory cytokines, and expression
of miR-122 were evaluated. Ribonucleic acid (RNA) extracted from HCV-infected
cells and mock-infected cells was subjected to RNA sequencing and transcriptomic
analysis. Ingenuity pathway analysis was used to detect up- and down-regulated
pathways.
RESULTS: Human thyrocytes express major HCV entry factors including CD81,
occludin, claudin-1, and scavenger receptor class B1. Viral infection of thyroid
cells was confirmed by detection of HCV core protein in supernatants and
negative-sense HCV RNA in cell lysates. HCV infection of thyrocytes induced the
production of the chemokine CXCL-8 and the proinflammatory cytokines tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and significantly increased the expression of
miR-122. Moreover, HCV infection of thyrocytes decreased expression of the
thyroid peroxidase and thyroglobulin genes and increased expression of the
deiodinase 2 gene. The top upregulated pathways in HCV-infected thyrocytes were
immune pathways and metabolic pathways, while infected hepatocytes upregulated
lipid and glucose metabolism pathways as previously reported.
CONCLUSIONS: HCV infection may induce thyroid dysfunction by different
mechanisms including direct infection of thyrocytes leading to activation of
inflammatory pathways and upregulation of miR-122. These findings support a
general mechanism for viral induction of autoimmunity through direct infection
of target tissues.

© Endocrine Society 2019. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgz241
PMCID: PMC7067536
PMID: 31784757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
