---
reference_id: "PMID:35378684"
title: "The Role of the Complement System in Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy: Implications for Complement-Targeted Therapies."
authors:
- Querol LA
- Hartung HP
- Lewis RA
- van Doorn PA
- Hammond TR
- Atassi N
- Alonso-Alonso M
- Dalakas MC
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s13311-022-01221-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of the Complement System in Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy: Implications for Complement-Targeted Therapies.
**Authors:** Querol LA, Hartung HP, Lewis RA, van Doorn PA, Hammond TR, Atassi N, Alonso-Alonso M, Dalakas MC
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13311-022-01221-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-022-01221-y)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2022 Apr;19(3):864-873. doi: 10.1007/s13311-022-01221-y.
Epub  2022 Apr 4.

The Role of the Complement System in Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating 
Polyneuropathy: Implications for Complement-Targeted Therapies.

Querol LA(1), Hartung HP(2)(3)(4)(5), Lewis RA(6), van Doorn PA(7), Hammond 
TR(8), Atassi N(8), Alonso-Alonso M(8), Dalakas MC(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Diseases Unit, Department of Neurology, Hospital de La Santa 
Creu I Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Neurology, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Brain and Mind Center, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Neurology, Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(6)Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Sanofi, Neurology Clinical Development, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA. Marinos.Dalakas@jefferson.edu.
(10)Neuroimmunology National and Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical 
School, Athens, Greece. Marinos.Dalakas@jefferson.edu.

Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) is the most common, 
heterogeneous, immune-mediated neuropathy, characterized by predominant 
demyelination of motor and sensory nerves. CIDP follows a relapsing-remitting or 
a progressive course and causes substantial disability. The pathogenesis of CIDP 
involves a complex interplay of multiple aberrant immune responses, creating a 
pro-inflammatory environment, subsequently inflicting damage on the myelin 
sheath. Though the exact triggers are unclear, diverse immune mechanisms 
encompassing cellular and humoral pathways are implicated. The complement system 
appears to play a role in promoting macrophage-mediated demyelination. 
Complement deposition in sural nerve biopsies, as well as signs of increased 
complement activation in serum and CSF of patients with CIDP, suggest complement 
involvement in CIDP pathogenesis. Here, we present a comprehensive overview of 
the preclinical and clinical evidence supporting the potential role of the 
complement system in CIDP. This understanding furnishes a strong rationale for 
targeting the complement system to develop new therapies that could serve the 
unmet needs of patients affected by CIDP, particularly in those refractory to 
standard therapies.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-022-01221-y
PMCID: PMC9294101
PMID: 35378684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]