---
reference_id: "PMID:33024728"
title: "Mitochondrial Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders: Laboratory Diagnosis, Pathogenesis, and the Complicated Route to Treatment."
authors:
- Wanders RJA
- Visser G
- Ferdinandusse S
- Vaz FM
- Houtkooper RH
journal: J Lipid Atheroscler
year: '2020'
doi: 10.12997/jla.2020.9.3.313
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders: Laboratory Diagnosis, Pathogenesis, and the Complicated Route to Treatment.
**Authors:** Wanders RJA, Visser G, Ferdinandusse S, Vaz FM, Houtkooper RH
**Journal:** J Lipid Atheroscler (2020)
**DOI:** [10.12997/jla.2020.9.3.313](https://doi.org/10.12997/jla.2020.9.3.313)

## Content

1. J Lipid Atheroscler. 2020 Sep;9(3):313-333. doi: 10.12997/jla.2020.9.3.313.
Epub  2020 Sep 22.

Mitochondrial Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders: Laboratory Diagnosis, 
Pathogenesis, and the Complicated Route to Treatment.

Wanders RJA(1)(2), Visser G(1)(3), Ferdinandusse S(1), Vaz FM(1), Houtkooper 
RH(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Amsterdam UMC, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam Gastroenterology and Metabolism, Amsterdam Cardiovascular 
Sciences, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Mitochondrial fatty acid (FA) oxidation deficiencies represent a genetically 
heterogeneous group of diseases in humans caused by defects in mitochondrial FA 
beta-oxidation (mFAO). A general characteristic of all mFAO disorders is 
hypoketotic hypoglycemia resulting from the enhanced reliance on glucose 
oxidation and the inability to synthesize ketone bodies from FAs. Patients with 
a defect in the oxidation of long-chain FAs are at risk to develop cardiac and 
skeletal muscle abnormalities including cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias, which 
may progress into early death, as well as rhabdomyolysis and exercise 
intolerance. The diagnosis of mFAO-deficient patients has greatly been helped by 
revolutionary developments in the field of tandem mass spectrometry (MS) for the 
analysis of acylcarnitines in blood and/or urine of candidate patients. Indeed, 
acylcarnitines have turned out to be excellent biomarkers; not only do they 
provide information whether a certain patient is affected by a mFAO deficiency, 
but the acylcarnitine profile itself usually immediately points to which enzyme 
is likely deficient. Another important aspect of acylcarnitine analysis by 
tandem MS is that this technique allows high-throughput analysis, which explains 
why screening for mFAO deficiencies has now been introduced in many newborn 
screening programs worldwide. In this review, we will describe the current state 
of knowledge about mFAO deficiencies, with particular emphasis on recent 
developments in the area of pathophysiology and treatment.

Copyright © 2020 The Korean Society of Lipid and Atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.12997/jla.2020.9.3.313
PMCID: PMC7521971
PMID: 33024728

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.