---
reference_id: "PMID:34768013"
title: "Hepatotoxicity of metronidazole in Cockayne syndrome: A clinical report."
authors:
- Hunaut T
- Boulagnon-Rombi C
- Thorn H
- Doco-Fenzy M
- Thiéfin G
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104388
keywords:
- Adult
- Anti-Infective Agents/adverse effects
- Chemical and Drug Induced Liver Injury/pathology
- Cockayne Syndrome/pathology
- Humans
- "Jaundice/chemically induced, pathology"
- "Liver/drug effects, pathology"
- Male
- Metronidazole/adverse effects
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatotoxicity of metronidazole in Cockayne syndrome: A clinical report.
**Authors:** Hunaut T, Boulagnon-Rombi C, Thorn H, Doco-Fenzy M, Thiéfin G
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104388](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104388)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2022 Jan;65(1):104388. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104388. Epub 
2021 Nov 9.

Hepatotoxicity of metronidazole in Cockayne syndrome: A clinical report.

Hunaut T(1), Boulagnon-Rombi C(2), Thorn H(3), Doco-Fenzy M(4), Thiéfin G(5).

Author information:
(1)Service d'Hépato-Gastroentérologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de 
Reims, 51100, Reims, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Biopathologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Reims, 
51100, Reims, France.
(3)Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Reims, 51100, 
Reims, France.
(4)Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Reims, 51100, 
Reims, France; EA3801, SFR CAP Santé Reims-Amiens, Université de Reims 
Champagne-Ardenne, 51100, Reims, France.
(5)Service d'Hépato-Gastroentérologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de 
Reims, 51100, Reims, France. Electronic address: gthiefin@chu-reims.fr.

Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder 
characterized by growth failure and progressive multisystem dysfunction caused 
by deficient nucleotide excision repair. Whereas metronidazole (MTZ) 
hepatotoxicity is quite rare in the general population, cases of severe hepatic 
reaction to MTZ have been reported in CS patients. We report here the case of a 
21-year-old CS patient who presented with jaundice following one week of 
treatment with MTZ combined with spiramycin for dental care. This case is the 
first one documented with a liver biopsy. Histopathological analysis revealed 
portal and lobular inflammation with predominance of neutrophils, ballooning 
degeneration and severe cholestasis without bile duct damage. The outcome was 
marked by regression of jaundice over 6 weeks. Analysis of this case highlights 
the probable responsibility of MTZ and adds support to the recommendation to 
strictly avoid the prescription of this drug in CS patients.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104388
PMID: 34768013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]