---
reference_id: PMID:20301529
title: Myotonia Congenita.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Dunø M
- Vissing J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myotonia Congenita.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Dunø M, Vissing J

## Content

1. Myotonia Congenita.

Dunø M(1), Vissing J(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 Aug 3 [updated 2021 Feb 25].

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetic Laboratory, Department of Clinical Genetics, 
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
(2)Neuromuscular Clinic and Research Unit, Department of Neurology, 
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Myotonia congenita is characterized by muscle 
stiffness present from childhood; all striated muscle groups including the 
extrinsic eye muscles, facial muscles, and tongue may be involved. Stiffness is 
relieved by repeated contractions of the muscle (the "warm-up" phenomenon). 
Muscles are usually hypertrophic. Whereas autosomal recessive (AR) myotonia 
congenita is often associated with more severe manifestations (such as 
progressive minor distal weakness and attacks of transient weakness brought on 
by movement after rest), autosomal dominant (AD) myotonia congenita is not. The 
age of onset varies: in AD myotonia congenita onset is usually in infancy or 
early childhood; in AR myotonia congenita the average age of onset is slightly 
older. In both AR and AD myotonia congenita onset may be as late as the third or 
fourth decade of life.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The molecular diagnosis of myotonia congenita is established 
in a proband with suggestive findings of myotonia and sometimes muscle 
hypertrophy, and either a heterozygous CLCN1 pathogenic variant or biallelic 
CLCN1 pathogenic variants identified on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Muscle stiffness may respond to sodium 
channel blockers such as mexiletine (currently the medication with best 
documented effect), lamotrigine carbamazepine, or phenytoin. Beneficial effects 
have also been reported with quinine, dantrolene, and acetazolamide. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Depolarizing muscle relaxants (e.g., 
suxamethonium), adrenaline, beta-adrenergic agonists, and propranolol may 
aggravate myotonia. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Because individuals with 
myotonia congenita may be at increased risk for adverse anesthesia-related 
events, molecular genetic testing of at-risk family members (for the CLCN1 
pathogenic variant[s] identified in the proband) during childhood is 
appropriate.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Myotonia congenita is inherited in either an autosomal 
recessive (Becker disease) or an autosomal dominant (Thomsen disease) manner; 
the same pathogenic variant may be associated with both autosomal dominant and 
autosomal recessive inheritance. Establishing the mode of inheritance in a 
simplex case (i.e., a single occurrence in a family) may not be possible unless 
molecular genetic testing reveals two CLCN1 pathogenic variants on different 
alleles in a proband with unaffected parents, in which case inheritance can be 
assumed to be autosomal recessive. Autosomal recessive inheritance: If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for a CLCN1 pathogenic variant, each sib of 
an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% 
chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the 
familial pathogenic variants. Autosomal dominant inheritance: The majority of 
individuals diagnosed with autosomal dominant myotonia congenita have an 
affected parent. The proportion of individuals with myotonia congenita caused by 
a de novo pathogenic variant is unknown but is presumably very low. If a parent 
of the proband is affected and/or is known to have the pathogenic variant 
identified in the proband, the risk to the sibs of inheriting the pathogenic 
variant is 50%. Once the CLCN1 pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an 
affected family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301529