---
reference_id: "PMID:39441717"
title: ADA2 is a lysosomal deoxyadenosine deaminase acting on DNA involved in regulating TLR9-mediated immune sensing of DNA.
authors:
- Greiner-Tollersrud OK
- Krausz M
- Boehler V
- Polyzou A
- Seidl M
- Spahiu A
- Abdullah Z
- Andryka-Cegielski K
- Dominick FI
- Huebscher K
- Goschin A
- Smulski CR
- Trompouki E
- Link R
- Ebersbach H
- Srinivas H
- Marchant M
- Sogkas G
- Staab D
- Vågbø C
- Guerini D
- Baasch S
- Latz E
- Hartmann G
- Henneke P
- Geiger R
- Peng XP
- Grimbacher B
- Bartok E
- Alseth I
- Warncke M
- Proietti M
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114899
keywords:
- Toll-Like Receptor 9/metabolism
- "Adenosine Deaminase/metabolism, genetics"
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Humans
- DNA/metabolism
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/metabolism
- Animals
- HEK293 Cells
- Deoxyadenosines/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ADA2 is a lysosomal deoxyadenosine deaminase acting on DNA involved in regulating TLR9-mediated immune sensing of DNA.
**Authors:** Greiner-Tollersrud OK, Krausz M, Boehler V, Polyzou A, Seidl M, Spahiu A, Abdullah Z, Andryka-Cegielski K, Dominick FI, Huebscher K, Goschin A, Smulski CR, Trompouki E, Link R, Ebersbach H, Srinivas H, Marchant M, Sogkas G, Staab D, Vågbø C, Guerini D, Baasch S, Latz E, Hartmann G, Henneke P, Geiger R, Peng XP, Grimbacher B, Bartok E, Alseth I, Warncke M, Proietti M
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114899](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114899)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2024 Nov 26;43(11):114899. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114899. Epub 
2024 Oct 22.

ADA2 is a lysosomal deoxyadenosine deaminase acting on DNA involved in 
regulating TLR9-mediated immune sensing of DNA.

Greiner-Tollersrud OK(1), Krausz M(2), Boehler V(3), Polyzou A(4), Seidl M(5), 
Spahiu A(2), Abdullah Z(6), Andryka-Cegielski K(7), Dominick FI(7), Huebscher 
K(8), Goschin A(2), Smulski CR(9), Trompouki E(4), Link R(3), Ebersbach H(3), 
Srinivas H(3), Marchant M(3), Sogkas G(10), Staab D(3), Vågbø C(11), Guerini 
D(3), Baasch S(12), Latz E(13), Hartmann G(7), Henneke P(14), Geiger R(15), Peng 
XP(16), Grimbacher B(17), Bartok E(7), Alseth I(18), Warncke M(3), Proietti 
M(19).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, University of Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway.
(2)Institute for Immunodeficiency, Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, Medical 
Center, Faculty of Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Freiburg im 
Breisgau, Germany.
(3)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany; 
IRCAN Institute for Research on Cancer and Aging, INSERM Unité 1081, CNRS UMR 
7284, Université Côte d'Azur, Nice, France.
(5)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, 
Germany.
(6)Institute of Experimental Immunology, Universitätsklinikum Bonn, Bonn, 
Germany.
(7)Institute of Experimental Hematology and Transfusion Medicine Bonn, Bonn, 
Germany.
(8)Institute for Immunodeficiency, Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, Medical 
Center, Faculty of Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Freiburg im 
Breisgau, Germany; Institut für Forstentomologie und Waldschutz, 
Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
(9)Medical Physics Department, Centro Atómico Bariloche, Comisión Nacional de 
Energía Atómica (CNEA), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y 
Técnicas (CONICET), San Carlos de Bariloche, Río Negro, Argentina.
(10)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Hannover Medical School, 
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany; RESIST - Cluster of Excellence 
2155, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(11)Proteomics and Modomics Experimental Core (PROMEC), Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology and the Central Norway Regional Health Authority, 
Trondheim, Norway.
(12)Institute for Immunodeficiency, Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, Medical 
Center, Faculty of Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Freiburg im 
Breisgau, Germany; Institute for Infection Prevention and Control, Medical 
Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany; Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies (FRIAS), University 
of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(13)Institute of Innate Immunity, Universitätsklinikum Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(14)Institute for Immunodeficiency, Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, Medical 
Center, Faculty of Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Freiburg im 
Breisgau, Germany; Institute for Infection Prevention and Control, Medical 
Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(15)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana, 
Bellinzona, Switzerland; Institute of Oncology Research, Università della 
Svizzera italiana, Bellinzona, Switzerland.
(16)Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(17)Institute for Immunodeficiency, Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, Medical 
Center, Faculty of Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Freiburg im 
Breisgau, Germany; RESIST - Cluster of Excellence 2155 to Hanover Medical 
School, Satellite Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(18)Department of Microbiology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(19)Institute for Immunodeficiency, Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, Medical 
Center, Faculty of Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Freiburg im 
Breisgau, Germany; Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Hannover 
Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany; RESIST - Cluster 
of Excellence 2155, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 
Hannover, Germany. Electronic address: michele.proietti@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Although adenosine deaminase 2 (ADA2) is considered an extracellular ADA, 
evidence questions the physiological relevance of this activity. Our study 
reveals that ADA2 localizes within the lysosomes, where it is targeted through 
modifications of its glycan structures. We show that ADA2 interacts with DNA 
molecules, altering their sequences by converting deoxyadenosine (dA) to 
deoxyinosine (dI). We characterize its DNA substrate preferences and provide 
data suggesting that DNA, rather than free adenosine, is its natural substrate. 
Finally, we demonstrate that dA-to-dI editing of DNA molecules and ADA2 regulate 
lysosomal immune sensing of nucleic acids (NAs) by modulating Toll-like receptor 
9 (TLR9) activation. Our results describe a mechanism involved in the complex 
interplay between NA metabolism and immune response, possibly impacting ADA2 
deficiency (DADA2) and other diseases involving this pathway, including 
autoimmune diseases, cancer, or infectious diseases.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114899
PMID: 39441717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.