---
reference_id: "PMID:30008631"
title: Radon Exposure-induced Genetic Variations in Lung Cancers among Never Smokers.
authors:
- Choi JR
- Koh SB
- Kim HR
- Lee H
- Kang DR
journal: J Korean Med Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3346/jkms.2018.33.e207
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Air Pollution, Indoor"
- Autoantigens
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung"
- Case-Control Studies
- Environmental Exposure
- Female
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms/genetics
- Male
- Mi-2 Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase Complex
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms, Radiation-Induced"
- Radon
- Risk Factors
- Seoul
- Smokers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radon Exposure-induced Genetic Variations in Lung Cancers among Never Smokers.
**Authors:** Choi JR, Koh SB, Kim HR, Lee H, Kang DR
**Journal:** J Korean Med Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3346/jkms.2018.33.e207](https://doi.org/10.3346/jkms.2018.33.e207)

## Content

1. J Korean Med Sci. 2018 Jun 20;33(29):e207. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2018.33.e207.
eCollection 2018 Jul 16.

Radon Exposure-induced Genetic Variations in Lung Cancers among Never Smokers.

Choi JR(1), Koh SB(2), Kim HR(3), Lee H(4), Kang DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genomic Cohort, Yonsei University Wonju College of Medicine,
Wonju, Korea.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Yonsei University Wonju College of
Medicine, Wonju, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Macrogen Inc., Seoul, Korea.

Comment in
    J Korean Med Sci. 2018 Jun 20;33(29):e210. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2018.33.e210.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer in never smokers (LCINS) differs etiologically and
clinically from lung cancer attributed to smoking. After smoking, radon exposure
is the second leading cause and the primary risk factor of lung cancer among
never smokers. Exposure to radon can lead to genetic and epigenetic alterations
in tumor genomes affecting genes and pathways involved in lung cancer
development. The present study sought to explore genetic alterations associated
with LCINS exposed to radon gas indoors.
METHODS: Genetic associations were assessed via a case-control study of LCINS
(39 cases and 30 controls) using next generation sequencing. Associations
between genetic mutations and high exposure to radon were investigated by
OncoPrint and heatmap graphs. Bioinformatic analysis was conducted using various
tools. According radon exposure levels, we divided subjects in two groups of
cases and controls.
RESULTS: We found that ABL2 rs117218074, SMARCA4 rs2288845, PIK3R2 rs142933317,
MAPK1 rs1803545, and androgen receptor (AR) rs66766400 were associated with
LCINS exposed to high radon levels. Among these, Chromodomain helicase
DNA-binding protein 4 (CHD4) rs74790047, TSC2 rs2121870, and AR rs66766408 were
identified as common exonic mutations in both lung cancer patients and normal
individuals exposed to high levels of radon indoor.
CONCLUSION: We identified that CHD4 rs74790047, TSC2 rs2121870, and AR
rs66766408 are found to be common exonic mutations in both lung cancer patients
and normal individuals exposed to radon indoors. Further analysis is needed to
determine whether these genes are completely responsible for LCINS exposed to
residential radon.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2018.33.e207
PMCID: PMC6041477
PMID: 30008631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors have no potential
conflicts of interest to disclose.
