---
reference_id: "PMID:21310812"
title: "Genome-wide association studies in multiple sclerosis: lessons and future prospects."
authors:
- Kemppinen A
- Sawcer S
- Compston A
journal: Brief Funct Genomics
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/bfgp/elr004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association studies in multiple sclerosis: lessons and future prospects.
**Authors:** Kemppinen A, Sawcer S, Compston A
**Journal:** Brief Funct Genomics (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bfgp/elr004](https://doi.org/10.1093/bfgp/elr004)

## Content

1. Brief Funct Genomics. 2011 Mar;10(2):61-70. doi: 10.1093/bfgp/elr004. Epub
2011  Feb 10.

Genome-wide association studies in multiple sclerosis: lessons and future 
prospects.

Kemppinen A(1), Sawcer S, Compston A.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Unit, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of 
Cambridge, UK. ak635@medschl.cam.ac.uk

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory neurodegenerative disease with 
complex aetiology. A haplotype within the major histocompatibility region is the 
major risk factor for MS, but despite clear evidence for a genetic component 
additional risk variants were not identified until the recent advent of 
genome-wide association studies (GWAS). At present, 10 GWAS have been conducted 
in MS, and together with follow-up studies these have confirmed 16 loci with 
genome-wide significance. Many of these common risk variants are located at or 
near genes with central immunological functions and the majority are associated 
with other autoimmune diseases. However, evidence from pathway analyses on more 
modestly associated variants also supports the involvement of neurological 
genes. Although the mechanisms by which the associated variants exert their 
effects are still poorly understood, some have been shown to correlate with 
expression of nearby genes. Further studies are required to define the 
functionally relevant variants in the identified regions and to investigate 
their effects at the molecular and cellular level. Finally, many genetic risk 
variants for MS remain to be identified. In order to expose some of the loci 
with more modest effects, a GWAS in nearly 10,000 MS patients has recently been 
completed.

DOI: 10.1093/bfgp/elr004
PMID: 21310812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]