---
reference_id: "PMID:38159450"
title: Radon activity concentration RnCA and workers lung cancer risks in SENA coal mines, Colombia.
authors:
- Montañez-Reyes AT
- Sajo-Bohus L
- Martinez-Ovalle SA
journal: Appl Radiat Isot
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.apradiso.2023.111158
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radon activity concentration RnCA and workers lung cancer risks in SENA coal mines, Colombia.
**Authors:** Montañez-Reyes AT, Sajo-Bohus L, Martinez-Ovalle SA
**Journal:** Appl Radiat Isot (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.apradiso.2023.111158](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apradiso.2023.111158)

## Content

1. Appl Radiat Isot. 2024 Mar;205:111158. doi: 10.1016/j.apradiso.2023.111158.
Epub  2023 Dec 23.

Radon activity concentration RnCA and workers lung cancer risks in SENA coal 
mines, Colombia.

Montañez-Reyes AT(1), Sajo-Bohus L(2), Martinez-Ovalle SA(3).

Author information:
(1)Universidad Pedagógica y Tecnológica de Colombia, Tunja, Boyacá, Colombia, CP 
150003.
(2)Universidad Simón Bolívar, Baruta Ap.do 89000, Caracas, Venezuela YV-1080A; 
Alba Regia Technical Faculty, Óbuda University, 8000 Szekesfehervar, Hungary.
(3)Universidad Pedagógica y Tecnológica de Colombia, Tunja, Boyacá, Colombia, CP 
150003; Centro de Cancerología de Boyacá, Tunja, Boyacá, Colombia, CP 150003. 
Electronic address: s.agustin.martinez@uptc.edu.co.

The risk of lung cancer or pneumoconiosis mortality, increases with radioactive 
radon gas exposures. This article report health risk for underground workers 
exposed to radioactive gas and radon daughters carried by airborne dust at the 
coal mining in the Central Mountainous Region of Colombia. A set of 33 
measurement points located in that mine galleries were selected to monitor radon 
gas concentration activity, by passive LR-115 detectors, during two months. 
Resulting values provided radon concentrations, absorbed dose, environmental 
equivalent dose and the effective dose; miners increased risk of contracting 
lung cancer is included. It is concluded that the mine ventilation system 
satisfies the conditions required by the current radiological protection of the 
miners. Our study point out that Colombia can effectively address the potential 
risks associated with radon exposure and ensure a safer living environment for 
its citizens.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apradiso.2023.111158
PMID: 38159450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.