---
reference_id: "PMID:28576637"
title: The diagnosis of cystic fibrosis.
authors:
- De Boeck K
- Vermeulen F
- Dupont L
journal: Presse Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2017.04.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The diagnosis of cystic fibrosis.
**Authors:** De Boeck K, Vermeulen F, Dupont L
**Journal:** Presse Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lpm.2017.04.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lpm.2017.04.010)

## Content

1. Presse Med. 2017 Jun;46(6 Pt 2):e97-e108. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2017.04.010. Epub
 2017 May 31.

The diagnosis of cystic fibrosis.

De Boeck K(1), Vermeulen F(2), Dupont L(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Leuven, Department of Pulmonology, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. 
Electronic address: christiane.deboeck@uzleuven.be.
(2)University of Leuven, Department of Pulmonology, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(3)University of Leuven, Department of Pulmonology, Leuven, Belgium.

Establishing the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (CF) is straight forward in the 
majority of patients: they present with a clear clinical picture (most 
frequently chronic respiratory symptoms plus malabsorption), the sweat chloride 
value is>60mmol/L and two known disease causing CFTR mutations are identified. 
In less than 5% of subjects, mainly those with a milder or limited phenotype, 
the diagnostic process is more complex, because initial diagnostic test results 
are inconclusive: sweat chloride concentration in the intermediate range, less 
than 2 CF causing mutations identified or both. These patients should be 
referred to expert centers where bioassays of CFTR function like nasal potential 
difference measurement or intestinal current measurement can be done. Still, in 
some patients, despite symptoms compatible with CF and some indication of CFTR 
dysfunction (e.g. only intermediate sweat chloride value), diagnostic criteria 
are not met (e.g. only 1 CFTR mutation identified). For these subjects, the term 
CFTR related disorder (CFTR-RD) is used. Patients with disseminated 
bronchiectasis, congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens and acute or 
recurrent pancreatitis may fall in this category. CF has a very wide disease 
spectrum and increasingly the diagnosis is being made during adult life, mainly 
in subjects with milder phenotypes. In many countries, nationwide CF newborn 
screening (NBS) has been introduced. In screen positive babies, the diagnosis of 
CF must be confirmed by a sweat test demonstrating a sweat chloride 
concentration above 60mmol/L. To achieve the benefit of NBS, every baby in whom 
the diagnosis of CF is confirmed must receive immediate follow-up and treatment 
in a CF reference center. CF NBS is not full proof: some diagnoses will be 
missed and in some babies the diagnosis cannot be confirmed nor ruled out with 
certainty. Screening algorithms that include gene sequencing will detect a high 
number of such babies that are screen positive with an inconclusive diagnosis 
(CFSPID). Even in 2016, the most reliable and widely available diagnostic test 
for CF is the measurement of chloride concentration in sweat. The method of 
choice is sweat induction by pilocarpine iontophoresis, followed by sweat 
collection on a gauze or filter paper or in a Macroduct coil. Since mutation 
specific therapies have become available, it is important to identify the 
mutations responsible for CF in each individual patient.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2017.04.010
PMID: 28576637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]