---
reference_id: "PMID:34253416"
title: "Implementation strategies for the first licensed dengue vaccine: A meeting report."
authors:
- Fongwen N
- Delrieu I
- Ham LH
- Gubler DJ
- Durbin A
- Ooi EE
- Peeling RW
- Flasche S
- Hartigan-Go K
- Clifford S
- Martinez CT
- de Lamballerie X
- Barnighausen T
- Wilder-Smith A
journal: Vaccine
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.06.083
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Implementation strategies for the first licensed dengue vaccine: A meeting report.
**Authors:** Fongwen N, Delrieu I, Ham LH, Gubler DJ, Durbin A, Ooi EE, Peeling RW, Flasche S, Hartigan-Go K, Clifford S, Martinez CT, de Lamballerie X, Barnighausen T, Wilder-Smith A
**Journal:** Vaccine (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.06.083](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.06.083)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2021 Aug 9;39(34):4759-4765. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.06.083. Epub
 2021 Jul 10.

Implementation strategies for the first licensed dengue vaccine: A meeting 
report.

Fongwen N(1), Delrieu I(2), Ham LH(3), Gubler DJ(4), Durbin A(5), Ooi EE(6), 
Peeling RW(1), Flasche S(7), Hartigan-Go K(8), Clifford S(7), Martinez CT(9), de 
Lamballerie X(10), Barnighausen T(11), Wilder-Smith A(12).

Author information:
(1)International Diagnostics Centre, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, United Kingdom.
(2)EpiLinks, France.
(3)Mount Elizabeth Hospital, Singapore.
(4)Partnership for Dengue Control, Fondation Merieux, France.
(5)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA.
(6)Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore.
(7)Centre for Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases, London School of 
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, United Kingdom.
(8)Ateneo School of Government, Philippines.
(9)Director of Cafettor Medical, Professor of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 
Universidad del Bosque, in Bogotá, Colombia.
(10)UMR IRD 190, Inserm 1207 "Unité des Virus Émergents", Aix-Marseille 
Université - Institut de Recherche pour le Développement - Institut National de 
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale - Institut de Recherche Biomédicale des 
Armées - Établissement Français du Sang, France.
(11)Heidelberg Institute of Global Health, University of Heidelberg, Germany.
(12)Heidelberg Institute of Global Health, University of Heidelberg, Germany; 
Institute for Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: annelies.wilder-smith@lshtm.ac.uk.

Dengue vaccination would enhance the control of dengue, one of the most frequent 
vector-borne viral diseases globally. CYD-TDV is the first dengue vaccine to be 
licensed, but global uptake has been hampered due to its use being limited to 
seropositive persons aged 9 years and above, and the need for a 3-dose schedule. 
The Partnership for Dengue Control (PDC) organized a meeting with key opinion 
leaders and stakeholders to deliberate on implementation strategies for the use 
of CYD-TDV. New data have emerged that support the shortening of the primary 
schedule from a 3 to 2 dose schedule, extending the age range below 9 to 6 years 
of age, and expanding the indication from endemic populations to also include 
travelers to endemic areas. Cost-effectiveness may improve with the modified 
2-dose regimen and with multiple testing. Strategies to implement a dengue 
vaccination program have been developed, in particular school-based strategies. 
A range of delivery scenarios can then be considered, using various settings for 
each step of the intervention. However, several challenges remain, including 
communication about limiting the use of this vaccine to seropositive individuals 
only. Affordability will vary from country to country, as will government 
commitment and community acceptance. Well-tailored communication strategies that 
target key stakeholders are expected to make up a significant part of any future 
dengue vaccination program.

Copyright © 2021.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.06.083
PMID: 34253416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: [RP is Director of the 
International Diagnostics Centre. AD is clinical trial principal investigator 
for the NIH dengue vaccine. EEO has served on various advisory boards for dengue 
vaccine developers including Sanofi Pasteur. AWS serves as consultant to WHO; 
statements presented here reflect her views and not necessarily those of WHO. 
KHG was a Department of Health Philippines official and one of many respondents 
to legal cases in the Philippines in relations to Dengvaxia vaccination causing 
deaths in children. ID works for the company EpiLinks, that receives funding 
from Fondation Mérieux and Sanofi Pasteur to develop a toolkit for dengue 
vaccine implementation. CTM has recerived honoraria for consultancies from 
Sanofi Pasteur.]