---
reference_id: "PMID:36241675"
title: Methods and reference data for middle ear transfer functions.
authors:
- Koch M
- Eßinger TM
- Maier H
- Sim JH
- Ren L
- Greene NT
- Zahnert T
- Neudert M
- Bornitz M
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-21245-w
keywords:
- "Ear, Middle/surgery"
- Humans
- Ossicular Prosthesis
- Sound
- Temporal Bone
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Methods and reference data for middle ear transfer functions.
**Authors:** Koch M, Eßinger TM, Maier H, Sim JH, Ren L, Greene NT, Zahnert T, Neudert M, Bornitz M
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-022-21245-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-21245-w)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2022 Oct 14;12(1):17241. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-21245-w.

Methods and reference data for middle ear transfer functions.

Koch M(#)(1), Eßinger TM(#)(2), Maier H(3)(4), Sim JH(5), Ren L(6), Greene 
NT(7), Zahnert T(8), Neudert M(8), Bornitz M(8).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus, ERCD-Ear Research Center Dresden at 
the Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, TU Dresden, 
Fetscherstraße 74, 01307, Dresden, Germany. martin.koch@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(2)Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus, ERCD-Ear Research Center Dresden at 
the Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, TU Dresden, 
Fetscherstraße 74, 01307, Dresden, Germany. 
tillmoritz.essinger@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1a, 
30625, Hannover, Germany.
(4)Cluster of Excellence "Hearing4all", Hannover, Germany.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Eye and ENT Hospital of Fudan University, Fenyang Road 83, Shanghai, 200031, 
China.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(8)Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus, ERCD-Ear Research Center Dresden at 
the Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, TU Dresden, 
Fetscherstraße 74, 01307, Dresden, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Human temporal bone specimens are used in experiments measuring the sound 
transfer of the middle ear, which is the standard method used in the development 
of active and passive middle ear implants. Statistical analyses of these 
experiments usually require that the TB samples are representative of the 
population of non-pathological middle ears. Specifically, this means that the 
specimens must be mechanically well-characterized. We present an in-depth 
statistical analysis of 478 data sets of middle ear transfer functions (METFs) 
from different laboratories. The data sets are preprocessed and various 
contributions to the variance of the data are evaluated. We then derive a 
statistical range as a reference against which individual METF measurements may 
be validated. The range is calculated as the two-sided 95% tolerance interval at 
audiological frequencies. In addition, the mean and 95% confidence interval of 
the mean are given as references for assessing the validity of a sample group. 
Finally, we provide a suggested procedure for measuring METFs using the methods 
described herein.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-21245-w
PMCID: PMC9568555
PMID: 36241675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.