---
reference_id: "PMID:39949752"
title: "Case report: Complete response of recurrent locally advanced basal cell carcinoma following addition of vismodegib to neoadjuvant cemiplimab therapy."
authors:
- Lambert-Swainston C
- Samlowski W
- Reynolds B
- Hedayat A
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2025.1500785
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Complete response of recurrent locally advanced basal cell carcinoma following addition of vismodegib to neoadjuvant cemiplimab therapy.
**Authors:** Lambert-Swainston C, Samlowski W, Reynolds B, Hedayat A
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2025.1500785](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2025.1500785)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2025 Jan 30;15:1500785. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2025.1500785.
eCollection  2025.

Case report: Complete response of recurrent locally advanced basal cell
carcinoma following addition of vismodegib to neoadjuvant cemiplimab therapy.

Lambert-Swainston C(1), Samlowski W(1)(2)(3), Reynolds B(4), Hedayat A(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Nevada Las Vegas (UNLV), Las Vegas, NV, United States.
(2)Comprehensive Cancer Centers of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV, United States.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nevada School of Medicine,
Reno, NV, United States.
(4)Reynolds Plastic Surgery, Las Vegas, NV, United States.
(5)Quest Diagnostics, Associated Pathologists Chartered, Las Vegas, NV, United
States.
(6)American Melanoma Institute, Las Vegas, NV, United States.

Locally advanced basal cell carcinoma (laBCC) remains a significant management
challenge. Historically, surgery or radiotherapy represented the major treatment
options. Recently, hedgehog inhibitors and checkpoint inhibitors have
demonstrated significant activity. The optimal sequencing of these approaches is
not yet known. We describe a case of laBCC that recurred after definitive
radiotherapy. This patient was treated with neoadjuvant cemiplimab with minimal
response. Cautious addition of vismodegib with ongoing cemiplimab treatment was
well tolerated and resulted in significant tumor regression. A wide excision
demonstrated a pathologic complete response. Further evaluation of cemiplimab
and hedgehog inhibitor combination therapy in la BCC appears warranted.

Copyright © 2025 Lambert-Swainston, Samlowski, Reynolds and Hedayat.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2025.1500785
PMCID: PMC11821627
PMID: 39949752

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
