---
reference_id: "PMID:29697845"
title: Novel NOD2 Mutation in Early-Onset Inflammatory Bowel Phenotype.
authors:
- Girardelli M
- Loganes C
- Pin A
- Stacul E
- Decleva E
- Vozzi D
- Baj G
- De Giacomo C
- Tommasini A
- Bianco AM
journal: Inflamm Bowel Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/ibd/izy061
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Arthritis/genetics
- Caco-2 Cells
- Cytokines/blood
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- HEK293 Cells
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Inflammatory Bowel Diseases/genetics
- Intestines/pathology
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nod2 Signaling Adaptor Protein/genetics
- Phenotype
- Sarcoidosis
- Synovitis/genetics
- Uveitis/genetics
- Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel NOD2 Mutation in Early-Onset Inflammatory Bowel Phenotype.
**Authors:** Girardelli M, Loganes C, Pin A, Stacul E, Decleva E, Vozzi D, Baj G, De Giacomo C, Tommasini A, Bianco AM
**Journal:** Inflamm Bowel Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ibd/izy061](https://doi.org/10.1093/ibd/izy061)

## Content

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2018 May 18;24(6):1204-1212. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izy061.

Novel NOD2 Mutation in Early-Onset Inflammatory Bowel Phenotype.

Girardelli M(1), Loganes C(1), Pin A(2), Stacul E(3), Decleva E(4), Vozzi D(1), 
Baj G(4), De Giacomo C(3), Tommasini A(1), Bianco AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Advanced Diagnostic and Clinical Trials, Institute for Maternal 
and Child Health, 'IRCCS 'Burlo Garofolo,' Trieste, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, Surgery, and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Trieste, Italy.
(3)Pediatrics Division, Niguarda Ca' Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2) is a key 
intracellular protein of the innate immune system. NOD2 variants are associated 
with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and other inflammatory phenotypes. We 
described the case of a baby with a very early-onset IBD who is characterized by 
a rare homozygous variant in NOD2, found through whole-exome sequencing, Its 
pathogenic effect was investigated through bioinformatics and functional 
studies.
METHODS: The microbicide activity of the patient's phagocytes was analyzed using 
Escherichia coli. HEK293 and Caco2 cell lines were transfected with wild-type 
and mutated NOD2 cDNA to evaluate the NF-kB activity and the protein 
distribution. The functionality of the NOD2 pathway was assessed through 
analysis of the expression of tumor nectrosis factor alpha (TNFα) on monocytes. 
The levels of various cytokines were quantified in the patient plasma by a 
multiplex suspension array.
RESULTS: A missense NOD2 mutation, c.G1277A; p.R426H in homozygosis, was found. 
The patient's microbicide activity was comparable to that observed in controls. 
HEK293 cells transfected with the mutated cDNA showed a 20-fold increase of 
NF-kB activation in basal condition. Moreover, Caco2 immunostaining revealed a 
different cytoplasmic distribution of the mutated protein compared with 
wild-type. A higher production of TNFα by monocytes and elevated levels of 
plasmatic cytokines and chemokines were evidenced in the patient.
CONCLUSIONS: This homozygous mutation is functionally relevant and shows a 
different NOD2 involvement in the IBD phenotype. In our patient, this mutation 
caused a gain of function typical of the Blau syndrome phenotype, manifesting, 
however, an IBD-like phenotype.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izy061
PMID: 29697845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]