---
reference_id: "PMID:33524167"
title: "Systemic mastocytosis in adults: 2021 Update on diagnosis, risk stratification and management."
authors:
- Pardanani A
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.26118
keywords:
- Adult
- Algorithms
- Animals
- Bone Marrow/pathology
- Disease Management
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Drugs, Investigational/therapeutic use"
- Gain of Function Mutation
- Hematologic Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Humans
- Hydroxyurea/therapeutic use
- Interleukin-2 Receptor alpha Subunit/analysis
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Leukemia, Mast-Cell/epidemiology, etiology"
- "Mast Cells/chemistry, pathology"
- "Mastocytosis, Systemic/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, genetics"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/genetics
- Risk Assessment
- Tryptases/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic mastocytosis in adults: 2021 Update on diagnosis, risk stratification and management.
**Authors:** Pardanani A
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.26118](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.26118)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 2021 Apr 1;96(4):508-525. doi: 10.1002/ajh.26118. Epub 2021 Feb 
21.

Systemic mastocytosis in adults: 2021 Update on diagnosis, risk stratification 
and management.

Pardanani A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.

OVERVIEW: Systemic mastocytosis (SM) results from a clonal proliferation of 
abnormal mast cells (MC) in extra-cutaneous organs.
DIAGNOSIS: The major criterion is presence of multifocal clusters of spindled MC 
in the bone marrow. Minor diagnostic criteria include elevated serum tryptase 
level, abnormal MC CD25 expression, and presence of KITD816V mutation.
RISK STRATIFICATION: Establishing SM subtype as per the World Health 
Organization classification system is an important first step. Broadly, patients 
either have indolent/smoldering SM (ISM/SSM) or advanced SM, the latter includes 
aggressive SM (ASM), SM with associated hematological neoplasm (SM-AHN), and 
mast cell leukemia (MCL). Identification of poor-risk mutations (ie, ASXL1, 
RUNX1, SRSF2, NRAS) further refines the risk stratification. Recently, clinical 
and hybrid clinical-molecular risk models have been developed to more accurately 
assign prognosis in SM patients.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment goals for ISM patients are primarily directed towards 
anaphylaxis prevention/symptom control/osteoporosis treatment. Patients with 
advanced SM frequently need MC cytoreductive therapy to ameliorate 
disease-related organ dysfunction. High response rates have been seen with 
small-molecule inhibitors that target mutant-KIT, including midostaurin (Food 
and Drug Administration approved) or avapritinib (investigational). Other 
options for MC cytoreduction include cladribine or interferon-α, although 
head-to-head comparisons are lacking. Treatment of SM-AHN primarily targets the 
AHN component, particularly if an aggressive disease such as acute myeloid 
leukemia is present. Allogeneic stem cell transplant can be considered in such 
patients, or in those with relapsed/refractory advanced SM. Imatinib has a 
limited therapeutic role in SM; effective cytoreduction is limited to those with 
imatinib-sensitive KIT mutations.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.26118
PMID: 33524167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]