---
reference_id: PMID:30837080
title: A comprehensive review and update on ulcerative colitis().
authors:
- Gajendran M
- Loganathan P
- Jimenez G
- Catinella AP
- Ng N
- Umapathy C
- Ziade N
- Hashash JG
journal: Dis Mon
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.disamonth.2019.02.004
keywords:
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- "Colitis, Ulcerative/complications, diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Colon/pathology
- Humans
- "Inflammation/diagnosis, therapy"
- Intestinal Mucosa/pathology
- Quality of Life
- Rectum/pathology
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A comprehensive review and update on ulcerative colitis().
**Authors:** Gajendran M, Loganathan P, Jimenez G, Catinella AP, Ng N, Umapathy C, Ziade N, Hashash JG
**Journal:** Dis Mon (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.disamonth.2019.02.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.disamonth.2019.02.004)

## Content

1. Dis Mon. 2019 Dec;65(12):100851. doi: 10.1016/j.disamonth.2019.02.004. Epub
2019  Mar 2.

A comprehensive review and update on ulcerative colitis().

Gajendran M(1), Loganathan P(2), Jimenez G(3), Catinella AP(4), Ng N(5),
Umapathy C(6), Ziade N(7), Hashash JG(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
El Paso, 2000B Transmountain Road, El Paso, TX 79911, USA; Paul L. Foster School
of Medicine (PLFSOM), Texas Tech University Health Science Center El Paso, 5001
El Paso Dr, El Paso, TX 79905, USA. Electronic address:
Mahesh.Gajendran@ttuhsc.edu.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences
Center, 4800 Alberta Avenue, El Paso, TX 79905, USA.
(3)Paul L. Foster School of Medicine (PLFSOM), Texas Tech University Health
Science Center El Paso, 5001 El Paso Dr, El Paso, TX 79905, USA.
(4)Department of Family Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Science Center El
Paso, 2000B Transmountain Road, El Paso, TX 79911, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, Texas Tech University Health Science Center El Paso,
2000B Transmountain Road, El Paso, TX 79911, USA.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, University of California San
Francisco (UCSF), Fresno, CA, USA.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
(8)Division of Gastroenterology, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon;
Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, University of
Pittsburgh, M2, C Wing, 200 Lothrop Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic idiopathic inflammatory bowel disorder of
the colon that causes continuous mucosal inflammation extending from the rectum
to the more proximal colon, with variable extents. UC is characterized by a
relapsing and remitting course. UC was first described by Samuel Wilks in 1859
and it is more common than Crohn's disease worldwide. The overall incidence and
prevalence of UC is reported to be 1.2-20.3 and 7.6-245 cases per 100,000
persons/year respectively. UC has a bimodal age distribution with an incidence
peak in the 2nd or 3rd decades and followed by second peak between 50 and 80
years of age. The key risk factors for UC include genetics, environmental
factors, autoimmunity and gut microbiota. The classic presentation of UC include
bloody diarrhea with or without mucus, rectal urgency, tenesmus, and variable
degrees of abdominal pain that is often relieved by defecation. UC is diagnosed
based on the combination of clinical presentation, endoscopic findings,
histology, and the absence of alternative diagnoses. In addition to confirming
the diagnosis of UC, it is also important to define the extent and severity of
inflammation, which aids in the selection of appropriate treatment and for
predicting the patient's prognosis. Ileocolonoscopy with biopsy is the only way
to make a definitive diagnosis of UC. A pathognomonic finding of UC is the
presence of continuous colonic inflammation characterized by erythema, loss of
normal vascular pattern, granularity, erosions, friability, bleeding, and
ulcerations, with distinct demarcation between inflamed and non-inflamed bowel.
Histopathology is the definitive tool in diagnosing UC, assessing the disease
severity and identifying intraepithelial neoplasia (dysplasia) or cancer. The
classical histological changes in UC include decreased crypt density, crypt
architectural distortion, irregular mucosal surface and heavy diffuse
transmucosal inflammation, in the absence of genuine granulomas. Abdominal
computed tomographic (CT) scanning is the preferred initial radiographic imaging
study in UC patients with acute abdominal symptoms. The hallmark CT finding of
UC is mural thickening with a mean wall thickness of 8 mm, as opposed to a
2-3 mm mean wall thickness of the normal colon. The Mayo scoring system is a
commonly used index to assess disease severity and monitor patients during
therapy. The goals of treatment in UC are three fold-improve quality of life,
achieve steroid free remission and minimize the risk of cancer. The choice of
treatment depends on disease extent, severity and the course of the disease. For
proctitis, topical 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) drugs are used as the first
line agents. UC patients with more extensive or severe disease should be treated
with a combination of oral and topical 5-ASA drugs +/- corticosteroids to induce
remission. Patients with severe UC need to be hospitalized for treatment. The
options in these patients include intravenous steroids and if refractory,
calcineurin inhibitors (cyclosporine, tacrolimus) or tumor necrosis factor-α
antibodies (infliximab) are utilized. Once remission is induced, patients are
then continued on appropriate medications to maintain remission. Indications for
emergency surgery include refractory toxic megacolon, colonic perforation, or
severe colorectal bleeding.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.disamonth.2019.02.004
PMID: 30837080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
