---
reference_id: "PMID:37576877"
title: "Larotrectinib treatment for infantile fibrosarcoma in newborns: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Wang D
- Zhang F
- Feng W
- Pan J
- Yuan T
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1206833
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Larotrectinib treatment for infantile fibrosarcoma in newborns: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Wang D, Zhang F, Feng W, Pan J, Yuan T
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2023.1206833](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2023.1206833)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2023 Jul 27;13:1206833. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1206833.
eCollection  2023.

Larotrectinib treatment for infantile fibrosarcoma in newborns: a case report
and literature review.

Wang D(1)(2), Zhang F(1)(2), Feng W(1)(2), Pan J(1)(2), Yuan T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Laboratory for Diagnosis and Therapy of Neonatal Diseases of Zhejiang
Province, Hangzhou, China.

Infantile fibrosarcoma (IFS) is a rare tumor in childhood characterized by a
single, localized, painless mass that grows rapidly but has a relatively
indolent biological behavior and a favorable prognosis. Eighty-five percent of
infantile fibrosarcomas are associated with t (12;15) (p13;25) chromosomal
translocation resulting in ETV6-NTRK3 gene fusion, which provides the target for
targeted therapy. Here, we report a case of IFS in a newborn with a mass in the
left lower extremity confirmed by imaging, histopathological examination, tissue
FISH testing, and high-throughput sequencing to detect gene rearrangement. Based
on gene fusion targeted drug testing results, the patient was treated with
standard doses of larotrectinib, resulting in significant mass shrinkage with no
adverse effects, demonstrating the treatment effect of targeted therapy. This
case provides a reference for using larotrectinib in newborns with IFS.

Copyright © 2023 Wang, Zhang, Feng, Pan and Yuan.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1206833
PMCID: PMC10412926
PMID: 37576877

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.