---
reference_id: "PMID:25997994"
title: "Multiple Sclerosis Relapses: Epidemiology, Outcomes and Management. A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Kalincik T
journal: Neuroepidemiology
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1159/000382130
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Sclerosis Relapses: Epidemiology, Outcomes and Management. A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Kalincik T
**Journal:** Neuroepidemiology (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000382130](https://doi.org/10.1159/000382130)

## Content

1. Neuroepidemiology. 2015;44(4):199-214. doi: 10.1159/000382130. Epub 2015 May
20.

Multiple Sclerosis Relapses: Epidemiology, Outcomes and Management. A Systematic 
Review.

Kalincik T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne; Department of Neurology, 
Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Vic., Australia.

Relapses (episodic exacerbations of neurological signs or symptoms) are a 
defining feature of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS), the most 
prevalent MS phenotype. While their diagnostic value relates predominantly to 
the definition of clinically definite MS, their prognostic value is determined 
by their relatively high associated risk of incomplete remission resulting in 
residual disability. The mechanisms governing a relapse incidence are unknown, 
but numerous modifiers of relapse risk have been described, including 
demographic and clinical characteristics, many of which represent opportunities 
for improved disease management. Also relapse phenotypes have been associated 
with patient and disease characteristics and an individual predisposition to 
certain phenotypic presentations may imply individual neuroanatomical disease 
patterns. While immunomodulatory therapies and corticosteroids represent the 
mainstay of relapse prevention and acute management, respectively, their effect 
has only been partial and further search for more efficient relapse therapies is 
warranted. Other areas of research include pathophysiology and determinants of 
relapse incidence, recurrence and phenotypes, including the characteristics of 
the relapsing and non-relapsing multiple sclerosis variants and their 
responsiveness to therapies.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000382130
PMID: 25997994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]