---
reference_id: "PMID:34019743"
title: "Lethal and life-limiting skeletal dysplasias: Selected prenatal issues."
authors:
- Stembalska A
- Dudarewicz L
- Śmigiel R
journal: Adv Clin Exp Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.17219/acem/134166
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Osteochondrodysplasias
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta
- Pregnancy
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- Thanatophoric Dysplasia
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lethal and life-limiting skeletal dysplasias: Selected prenatal issues.
**Authors:** Stembalska A, Dudarewicz L, Śmigiel R
**Journal:** Adv Clin Exp Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.17219/acem/134166](https://doi.org/10.17219/acem/134166)

## Content

1. Adv Clin Exp Med. 2021 Jun;30(6):641-647. doi: 10.17219/acem/134166.

Lethal and life-limiting skeletal dysplasias: Selected prenatal issues.

Stembalska A(1), Dudarewicz L(2), Śmigiel R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Poland.
(2)Department of Genetics, Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital Research Institute, 
Łódź, Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Rare Disorders, Wroclaw Medical University, 
Poland.

Skeletal dysplasias are a heterogeneous group of congenital bone and cartilage 
disorders with a genetic etiology. The current classification of skeletal 
dysplasias distinguishes 461 diseases in 42 groups. The incidence of all 
skeletal dysplasias is more than 1 in every 5000 newborns. The type of dysplasia 
and associated abnormalities affect the lethality, survival and long-term 
prognosis of skeletal dysplasias. It is crucial to distinguish skeletal 
dysplasias and correctly diagnose the disease to establish the prognosis and 
achieve better management. It is possible to use prenatal ultrasonography to 
observe predictors of lethality, such as a bell-shaped thorax, short ribs, 
severe femoral shortening, and decreased lung volume. Individual lethal or 
life-limiting dysplasias may have more or less specific features on prenatal 
ultrasound. The prenatal features of the most common skeletal dysplasias, such 
as thanatophoric dysplasia, osteogenesis imperfecta type II, achondrogenesis, 
and campomelic dysplasia, are discussed in this article. Less frequent 
dysplasias, such as asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy, fibrochondrogenesis, 
atelosteogenesis, and homozygous achondroplasia, are also discussed.

DOI: 10.17219/acem/134166
PMID: 34019743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]