---
reference_id: "PMID:38168036"
title: Mouse models for inherited monoamine neurotransmitter disorders.
authors:
- Thöny B
- Ng J
- Kurian MA
- Mills P
- Martinez A
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12710
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- Humans
- Neurotransmitter Agents/metabolism
- Biogenic Monoamines/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mouse models for inherited monoamine neurotransmitter disorders.
**Authors:** Thöny B, Ng J, Kurian MA, Mills P, Martinez A
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12710](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12710)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2024 May;47(3):533-550. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12710. Epub
2024  Jan 2.

Mouse models for inherited monoamine neurotransmitter disorders.

Thöny B(1), Ng J(2), Kurian MA(3)(4), Mills P(5), Martinez A(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Children's 
Hospital Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Genetic Therapy Accelerator Centre, University College London, Queen Square 
Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(3)Zayed Centre for Research into Rare Disease in Children, GOS Institute of 
Child Health, University College London, London, UK.
(4)Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK.
(5)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, 
London, UK.
(6)Department of Biomedicine and Center for Translational Research in 
Parkinson's Disease, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(7)Neuro-SysMed, Department of Neurology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway.

Several mouse models have been developed to study human defects of primary and 
secondary inherited monoamine neurotransmitter disorders (iMND). As the field 
continues to expand, current defects in corresponding mouse models include 
enzymes and a molecular co-chaperone involved in monoamine synthesis and 
metabolism (PAH, TH, PITX3, AADC, DBH, MAOA, DNAJC6), tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) 
cofactor synthesis and recycling (adGTPCH1/DRD, arGTPCH1, PTPS, SR, DHPR), and 
vitamin B6 cofactor deficiency (ALDH7A1), as well as defective monoamine 
neurotransmitter packaging (VMAT1, VMAT2) and reuptake (DAT). No mouse models 
are available for human DNAJC12 co-chaperone and PNPO-B6 deficiencies, disorders 
associated with recessive variants that result in decreased stability and 
function of the aromatic amino acid hydroxylases and decreased neurotransmitter 
synthesis, respectively. More than one mutant mouse is available for some of 
these defects, which is invaluable as different variant-specific (knock-in) 
models may provide more insights into underlying mechanisms of disorders, while 
complete gene inactivation (knock-out) models often have limitations in terms of 
recapitulating complex human diseases. While these mouse models have common 
phenotypic traits also observed in patients, reflecting the defective 
homeostasis of the monoamine neurotransmitter pathways, they also present with 
disease-specific manifestations with toxic accumulation or deficiency of 
specific metabolites related to the specific gene affected. This review provides 
an overview of the currently available models and may give directions toward 
selecting existing models or generating new ones to investigate novel pathogenic 
mechanisms and precision therapies.

© 2024 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12710
PMID: 38168036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]