---
reference_id: "PMID:25022358"
title: Update on infections and vaccinations in systemic lupus erythematosus and Sjögren's syndrome.
authors:
- Pasoto SG
- Ribeiro AC
- Bonfa E
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000084
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on infections and vaccinations in systemic lupus erythematosus and Sjögren's syndrome.
**Authors:** Pasoto SG, Ribeiro AC, Bonfa E
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000084](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000084)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2014 Sep;26(5):528-37. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000084.

Update on infections and vaccinations in systemic lupus erythematosus and 
Sjögren's syndrome.

Pasoto SG(1), Ribeiro AC, Bonfa E.

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Division, Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da 
Universidade de São Paulo (USP), São Paulo, Brazil.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To provide an update on infections in systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE) and Sjögren's syndrome, particularly addressing their role 
as triggers of autoimmunity, their impact on mortality, the main microorganisms, 
the approaches to differential diagnosis with disease flares and recommendations 
for vaccination.
RECENT FINDINGS: New mechanisms for autoimmunity triggered by Epstein-Barr virus 
and human commensal microbiota have been described. The increased risk for 
tuberculosis was recently demonstrated for the first time in Sjögren's syndrome. 
C-reactive protein was reported to be a more sensitive and specific marker for 
bacterial infections in SLE than procalcitonin and phagocyte-specific S100A8/A9 
protein. Inactivated vaccines are well tolerated and efficacy was demonstrated 
for influenza vaccine. Immunogenicity is generally reduced but adequate in SLE. 
Prednisone or immunosuppressants are associated with decreased vaccine 
serological response, whereas hydroxicloroquine seems to improve vaccine 
immunogenicity. Other infection-preventive measures for these diseases include 
antimalarials and prophylaxis for tuberculosis or Pneumocystis jirovecii.
SUMMARY: Advances in the role of infectious agents as triggers for SLE and 
Sjögren's syndrome have provided new insights into disease development. 
Knowledge on vaccine immunogenicity, safety and efficacy has improved with 
evidence of a generally reduced but adequate response for inactivated vaccines 
in SLE. Other preventive measures comprise infection prophylaxis and 
antimalarials.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000084
PMID: 25022358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]