---
reference_id: "PMID:29856017"
title: Motor Assessment in Huntington's Disease Mice.
authors:
- Dunnett SB
- Brooks SP
journal: Methods Mol Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7825-0_7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Motor Assessment in Huntington's Disease Mice.
**Authors:** Dunnett SB, Brooks SP
**Journal:** Methods Mol Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4939-7825-0_7](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-7825-0_7)

## Content

1. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1780:121-141. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7825-0_7.

Motor Assessment in Huntington's Disease Mice.

Dunnett SB(1), Brooks SP(2).

Author information:
(1)Brain Repair Group, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK. DunnettSB@cardiff.ac.uk.
(2)The Brain Repair Group, School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, 
UK.

Motor deficits are a characteristic consequence of striatal damage, whether 
induced by experimental lesions, or in genetic models of Huntington's disease 
involving polyglutamine expansion in the huntingtin protein. With the growing 
power of genetic models and genetic tools for analysis, mice are increasingly 
the animal model of choice, and objective quantitative measures of motor 
performance are in demand for experimental analysis of disease pathophysiology, 
progression, and treatment. We present methodological protocols for six of the 
most common tests of motor function-ranging from spontaneous activity, locomotor 
coordination, balance, and skilled limb use-that are simple, effective, 
efficient, and widely used for motor assessment in Huntington's disease research 
in experimental mice.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7825-0_7
PMID: 29856017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]