---
reference_id: "PMID:38570547"
title: Differentiation and functioning of the lateral line organ in zebrafish require Smpx activity.
authors:
- Diana A
- Ghilardi A
- Del Giacco L
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-58138-z
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- "Zebrafish/genetics, metabolism"
- Lateral Line System/metabolism
- "Mechanotransduction, Cellular"
- "Hair Cells, Auditory/metabolism"
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- Muscle Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differentiation and functioning of the lateral line organ in zebrafish require Smpx activity.
**Authors:** Diana A, Ghilardi A, Del Giacco L
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-58138-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-58138-z)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Apr 3;14(1):7862. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-58138-z.

Differentiation and functioning of the lateral line organ in zebrafish require 
Smpx activity.

Diana A(1), Ghilardi A(1), Del Giacco L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Celoria 26, 
20133, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Biosciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Celoria 26, 
20133, Milan, Italy. luca.delgiacco@unimi.it.

The small muscle protein, X-linked (SMPX) gene encodes a cytoskeleton-associated 
protein, highly expressed in the inner ear hair cells (HCs), possibly regulating 
auditory function. In the last decade, several mutations in SMPX have been 
associated with X-chromosomal progressive non syndromic hearing loss in humans 
and, in line with this, Smpx-deficient animal models, namely zebrafish and 
mouse, showed significant impairment of inner ear HCs development, maintenance, 
and functioning. In this work, we uncovered smpx expression in the neuromast 
mechanosensory HCs of both Anterior and Posterior Lateral Line (ALL and PLL, 
respectively) of zebrafish larvae and focused our attention on the PLL. Smpx was 
subcellularly localized throughout the cytoplasm of the HCs, as well as in their 
primary cilium. Loss-of-function experiments, via both morpholino-mediated gene 
knockdown and CRISPR/Cas9 F0 gene knockout, revealed that the lack of Smpx led 
to fewer properly differentiated and functional neuromasts, as well as to a 
smaller PLL primordium (PLLp), the latter also Smpx-positive. In addition, the 
kinocilia of Smpx-deficient neuromast HCs appeared structurally and numerically 
altered. Such phenotypes were associated with a significant reduction in the 
mechanotransduction activity of the neuromast HCs, in line with their positivity 
for Smpx. In summary, this work highlights the importance of Smpx in lateral 
line development and, specifically, in proper HCs differentiation and/or 
maintenance, and in the mechanotransduction process carried out by the neuromast 
HCs. Because lateral line HCs are both functionally and structurally analogous 
to the cochlear HCs, the neuromasts might represent an invaluable-and easily 
accessible-tool to dissect the role of Smpx in HCs development/functioning and 
shed light on the underlying mechanisms involved in hearing loss.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-58138-z
PMCID: PMC10991396
PMID: 38570547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.