---
reference_id: "PMID:38288598"
title: "Mechanisms of RBM20 Cardiomyopathy: Insights From Model Systems."
authors:
- Gregorich ZR
- Zhang Y
- Kamp TJ
- Granzier HL
- Guo W
journal: Circ Genom Precis Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCGEN.123.004355
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of RBM20 Cardiomyopathy: Insights From Model Systems.
**Authors:** Gregorich ZR, Zhang Y, Kamp TJ, Granzier HL, Guo W
**Journal:** Circ Genom Precis Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCGEN.123.004355](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCGEN.123.004355)

## Content

1. Circ Genom Precis Med. 2024 Feb;17(1):e004355. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGEN.123.004355.  Epub 2024 Jan 30.

Mechanisms of RBM20 Cardiomyopathy: Insights From Model Systems.

Gregorich ZR(1), Zhang Y(1), Kamp TJ(2)(3)(4), Granzier HL(5), Guo W(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal and Dairy Sciences (Z.R.G., Y.Z., W.G.), University of 
Wisconsin-Madison.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Arrhythmia Research Program (T.J.K.), University of 
Wisconsin-Madison.
(3)Department of Medicine (T.J.K.), University of Wisconsin-Madison.
(4)Cardiovascular Research Center (T.J.K., W.G.), University of 
Wisconsin-Madison.
(5)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, The University of Arizona, 
Tucson (H.L.G.).

RBM20 (RNA-binding motif protein 20) is a vertebrate- and muscle-specific 
RNA-binding protein that belongs to the serine-arginine-rich family of splicing 
factors. The RBM20 gene was first identified as a dilated cardiomyopathy-linked 
gene over a decade ago. Early studies in Rbm20 knockout rodents implicated 
disrupted splicing of RBM20 target genes as a causative mechanism. Clinical 
studies show that pathogenic variants in RBM20 are linked to aggressive dilated 
cardiomyopathy with early onset heart failure and high mortality. Subsequent 
studies employing pathogenic variant knock-in animal models revealed that 
variants in a specific portion of the arginine-serine-rich domain in RBM20 not 
only disrupt splicing but also hinder nucleocytoplasmic transport and lead to 
the formation of RBM20 biomolecular condensates in the sarcoplasm. Conversely, 
mice harboring a disease-associated variant in the RRM (RNA recognition motif) 
do not show evidence of adverse remodeling or exhibit sudden death despite 
disrupted splicing of RBM20 target genes. Thus, whether disrupted splicing, 
biomolecular condensates, or both contribute to dilated cardiomyopathy is under 
debate. Beyond this, additional questions remain, such as whether there is 
sexual dimorphism in the presentation of RBM20 cardiomyopathy. What are the 
clinical features of RBM20 cardiomyopathy and why do some individuals develop 
more severe disease than others? In this review, we summarize the reported 
observations and discuss potential mechanisms of RBM20 cardiomyopathy derived 
from studies employing in vivo animal models and in vitro human-induced 
pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes. Potential therapeutic strategies 
to treat RBM20 cardiomyopathy are also discussed.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCGEN.123.004355
PMCID: PMC10923161
PMID: 38288598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures None.