---
reference_id: "PMID:35123694"
title: "Trametinib versus standard of care in patients with recurrent low-grade serous ovarian cancer (GOG 281/LOGS): an international, randomised, open-label, multicentre, phase 2/3 trial."
authors:
- Gershenson DM
- Miller A
- Brady WE
- Paul J
- Carty K
- Rodgers W
- Millan D
- Coleman RL
- Moore KN
- Banerjee S
- Connolly K
- Secord AA
- "O'Malley DM"
- Dorigo O
- Gaillard S
- Gabra H
- Slomovitz B
- Hanjani P
- Farley J
- Churchman M
- Ewing A
- Hollis RL
- Herrington CS
- Huang HQ
- Wenzel L
- Gourley C
journal: Lancet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02175-9
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage"
- "Carcinoma, Ovarian Epithelial/drug therapy, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Kinase 1/metabolism
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Grading
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/pathology"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Paclitaxel/administration & dosage"
- Progression-Free Survival
- "Pyridones/administration & dosage"
- "Pyrimidinones/administration & dosage"
- Standard of Care
- Treatment Outcome
- United Kingdom
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trametinib versus standard of care in patients with recurrent low-grade serous ovarian cancer (GOG 281/LOGS): an international, randomised, open-label, multicentre, phase 2/3 trial.
**Authors:** Gershenson DM, Miller A, Brady WE, Paul J, Carty K, Rodgers W, Millan D, Coleman RL, Moore KN, Banerjee S, Connolly K, Secord AA, O'Malley DM, Dorigo O, Gaillard S, Gabra H, Slomovitz B, Hanjani P, Farley J, Churchman M, Ewing A, Hollis RL, Herrington CS, Huang HQ, Wenzel L, Gourley C
**Journal:** Lancet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02175-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02175-9)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2022 Feb 5;399(10324):541-553. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02175-9.

Trametinib versus standard of care in patients with recurrent low-grade serous 
ovarian cancer (GOG 281/LOGS): an international, randomised, open-label, 
multicentre, phase 2/3 trial.

Gershenson DM(1), Miller A(2), Brady WE(2), Paul J(3), Carty K(3), Rodgers W(4), 
Millan D(5), Coleman RL(6), Moore KN(7), Banerjee S(8), Connolly K(9), Secord 
AA(10), O'Malley DM(11), Dorigo O(12), Gaillard S(13), Gabra H(14), Slomovitz 
B(15), Hanjani P(16), Farley J(17), Churchman M(18), Ewing A(19), Hollis RL(18), 
Herrington CS(18), Huang HQ(2), Wenzel L(20), Gourley C(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, The University 
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: 
dgershen@mdanderson.org.
(2)NRG Oncology, Clinical Trial Development Division, Biostatistics & 
Bioinformatics, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(3)Cancer Research UK Clinical Trials Unit, Institute of Cancer Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(4)New York Presbyterian/Queens, Department of Pathology, Weill Medical College 
of Cornell University, Flushing, NY, USA.
(5)Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, UK.
(6)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, The University 
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(7)Stephenson Cancer Center at the University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, OK, 
USA.
(8)The Royal Marsden Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, The Institute of Cancer 
Research, London, UK.
(9)Edinburgh Cancer Centre, Edinburgh, UK.
(10)Duke Cancer Institute, Durham, NC, USA.
(11)The Ohio State University and the James Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, USA.
(12)Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(13)Johns Hopkins Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(14)Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(15)Division ofGynecologic Oncology, Mount Sinai Medical Center, Miami Beach, 
FL, USA.
(16)Abington Memorial Hospital, Abington, PA, USA.
(17)St Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(18)Nicola Murray Centre for Ovarian Cancer Research, Institute of Genetics and 
Cancer, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.
(19)MRC Human Genetics Unit and CRUK Edinburgh Centre, MRC Institute of Genetics 
and Cancer, University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.
(20)Medicine and Public Health, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, CA, 
USA.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2022 Feb 5;399(10324):499-501. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02338-2.

BACKGROUND: Low-grade serous carcinoma of the ovary or peritoneum is 
characterised by MAPK pathway aberrations and its reduced sensitivity to 
chemotherapy relative to high-grade serous carcinoma. We compared the MEK 
inhibitor trametinib to physician's choice standard of care in patients with 
recurrent low-grade serous carcinoma.
METHODS: This international, randomised, open-label, multicentre, phase 2/3 
trial was done at 84 hospitals in the USA and UK. Eligible patients were aged 18 
years or older with recurrent low-grade serous carcinoma and measurable disease, 
as defined by Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors version 1.1, had 
received at least one platinum-based regimen, but not all five standard-of-care 
drugs, and had received an unlimited number of previous regimens. Patients with 
serous borderline tumours or tumours containing low-grade serous and high-grade 
serous carcinoma were excluded. Eligible patients were randomly assigned (1:1) 
to receive either oral trametinib 2 mg once daily (trametinib group) or one of 
five standard-of-care treatment options (standard-of-care group): intravenous 
paclitaxel 80 mg/m2 by body surface area on days 1, 8, and 15 of every 28-day 
cycle; intravenous pegylated liposomal doxorubicin 40-50 mg/m2 by body surface 
area once every 4 weeks; intravenous topotecan 4 mg/m2 by body surface area on 
days 1, 8, and 15 of every 28-day cycle; oral letrozole 2·5 mg once daily; or 
oral tamoxifen 20 mg twice daily. Randomisation was stratified by geographical 
region (USA or UK), number of previous regimens (1, 2, or ≥3), performance 
status (0 or 1), and planned standard-of-care regimen. The primary endpoint was 
investigator-assessed progression-free survival while receiving randomised 
therapy, as assessed by imaging at baseline, once every 8 weeks for 15 months, 
and then once every 3 months thereafter, in the intention-to-treat population. 
Safety was assessed in patients who received at least one dose of study therapy. 
This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02101788, and is active but 
not recruiting.
FINDINGS: Between Feb 27, 2014, and April 10, 2018, 260 patients were enrolled 
and randomly assigned to the trametinib group (n=130) or the standard-of-care 
group (n=130). At the primary analysis, there were 217 progression-free survival 
events (101 [78%] in the trametinib group and 116 [89%] in the standard-of-care 
group). Median progression-free survival in the trametinib group was 13·0 months 
(95% CI 9·9-15·0) compared with 7·2 months (5·6-9·9) in the standard-of-care 
group (hazard ratio 0·48 [95% CI 0·36-0·64]; p<0·0001). The most frequent grade 
3 or 4 adverse events in the trametinib group were skin rash (17 [13%] of 128), 
anaemia (16 [13%]), hypertension (15 [12%]), diarrhoea (13 [10%]), nausea (12 
[9%]), and fatigue (ten [8%]). The most frequent grade 3 or 4 adverse events in 
the standard-of-care group were abdominal pain (22 [17%]), nausea (14 [11%]), 
anaemia (12 [10%]), and vomiting (ten [8%]). There were no treatment-related 
deaths.
INTERPRETATION: Trametinib represents a new standard-of-care option for patients 
with recurrent low-grade serous carcinoma.
FUNDING: NRG Oncology, Cancer Research UK, Target Ovarian Cancer, and Novartis.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 
Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02175-9
PMCID: PMC8819271
PMID: 35123694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests DMG reports payments 
made to his institution from the National Cancer Institute (NRG Oncology), 
Novartis, and the GOG Foundation for this study; royalties or licenses from 
Elsevier and UpToDate outside the submitted work; consulting fees from Genentech 
outside the submitted work; personal fees for service as a member of the 
Committee of the National Cancer Institute outside the submitted work; and stock 
or stock options from Johnson & Johnson, Bristol Myers Squibb, and Biogen 
outside the submitted work. AM reports service as a masked study statistician 
for VBL Therapeutics; provision of statistical institutional support for 
Advaxis; service as a data safety monitoring board reporting statistician for 
Regeneron; and service on a study steering committee for Genentech and 
AstraZeneca, all outside the submitted work. RLC reports consulting fees from 
AstraZeneca, Merck–GlaxoSmithKline, and Clovis; grants from Genmab, 
Genentech–Roche, Janssen, Agenus, Regeneron, and OncoQuest; payments or 
honoraria for lectures, presentations, speaker's bureaus, manuscript writing, or 
educational events from AstraZeneca, Merck–GlaxoSmithKline, and Clovis; and 
service on a data safety monitoring board or an advisory board for Janssen, VBL 
Therapeutics, and AstraZeneca, all outside the submitted work. KNM reports 
service on advisory boards for Alkemeres, AstraZeneca, Aravive, Blueprint 
Medicines, Eisai, Elevar, GlaxoSmithKline–Tesaro, Genentech–Roche, Hengrui, 
Immunogen, IMab, Merck, Mereo, Mersana, Myriad, OncXerna, Onconova, Novartis, 
Sorrento, Tarveda, and VBL Therapeutics, all outside the submitted work; grant 
funding from PTC Therapeutics, Lilly, Merck, and Genentech–Roche outside the 
submitted work; funding paid to her institution from Cyteir, Immunocore, Bolt 
Bio, Amgen, Artios, GlaxoSmithKline–Tesaro, Mereo, Regeneron, Aravive, Verastem, 
and AstraZeneca, for all of which she also serves as a local principal 
investigator; serving as national principal investigator for the IMaGYN050 trial 
of ovarian cancer (Genentech–Roche), the MIRASOL trial of ovarian cancer 
(Immunogen), the Relevare study of ovarian cancer (OncXerna), the FIRST study of 
ovarian cancer (GlaxoSmithKline–Tesaro), and the ETCTN 10422 study of ovarian 
cancer (National Cancer Institute); being the associate director for GOG 
Partners, on the GOG Foundation board of directors, and the NRG Oncology chair 
of the ovarian cancer committee; and receiving speaking reimbursement from PER, 
Research to Practice, Medscape, Great Debates and Updates, and Gyn Mal, all of 
which are outside the scope of this work but were active during the conduct of 
this study. SB reports grants paid to their institution from AstraZeneca, 
Tesaro, and GlaxoSmithKline; personal fees for participation in advisory boards 
from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Genmab, GlaxoSmithKline, Immunogen, Merck Sharp & 
Dohme, Merck Serono, Mersana, Oncxerna, Seagen, Shattuck Lab, and Epsilogen; and 
personal fees for lectures from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Clovis, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Immunogen, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Mersana, Pfizer, Roche, and Takeda, all outside 
the submitted work. AAS reports a National Cancer Trial Network grant; grants 
paid to her institution from AbbVie, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Clovis, Eisai, Immutep, Merck, OncoQuest, PharmaMar, Genentech–Roche, Seagen, 
Tesaro–GlaxoSmithKline, and VBL Therapeutics; consulting fees from Aravive, 
AstraZeneca, Clovis, Cordgenics, Eisai, Merck, Mersana, Myriad, Oncoquest, 
Genentech–Roche, and Tesaro–GlaxoSmithKline; presentations for educational 
events on cervical cancer sponsored by Research to Practice; service on advisory 
boards (uncompensated) for AbbVie and Regeneron; service on clinical trial 
steering committees (all uncompensated) for the AtTEnd trial (Hoffman-LaRoche), 
the Oval Trial (VBL Therapeutics), and the FLORA-5 trial (Oncoquest); and 
service on the GOG Foundation Board of Directors, the Society of Gynecologic 
Oncology Board of Directors, and the American Association of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists Foundation Board of Trustees, all outside the submitted work. DMO 
reports National Cancer Institute support for this clinical trial; research 
funding paid to their institution from AstraZeneca, Tesaro–GlaxoSmithKline, 
Immunogen, Janssen–Johnson & Johnson, AbbVie Regeneron, Amgen, Novocure, 
Genentech–Roche, VentiRx Array Biopharma EMD Serono, Ergomed, Ajinomoto, Ludwig 
Cancer Research Stemcentrx, Cerulean Pharma, the GOG Foundation, the National 
Cancer Institute, Bristol Myers Squibb, C Serono, TRACON Pharmaceuticals, Yale 
University, New Mexico Cancer Care Alliance, inVentiv Health Clinical, Iovance 
Biotherapeutics, PRA Intl, Eisai, Agenus, Merck, GenMab, SeaGen, Mersana, and 
Clovis; personal fees for consulting or advisory board membership, or both, from 
AstraZeneca, Tesaro–GlaxoSmithKline, Immunogen, Ambry, Janssen–Johnson & 
Johnson, BBI, Agenus, AbbVie, Regeneron, Amgen, Novocure, Genentech–Roche, GOG 
Foundation, Iovance Biotherapeutics, Myriad Genetics, Eisai, Agenus, Tarveda, 
Merck, SeaGen, Novartis, Mersana, Clovis, Rubius, and Elevar, all outside the 
submitted work. OD reports grants or contracts from AstraZeneca, Clovis, 
Genentech, AbbVie, IMV, Millenium, and Pharmamar; payment or honoraria for 
lectures, presentations, speakers’ bureaus, manuscript writing, or educational 
events from Tesaro–GlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca; payment for expert testimony 
in one legal case unrelated to the current study; and participation on a data 
safety monitoring board or advisory board for Merck, Clovis, PACT, and 
Genentech, all outside the submitted work. SG reports financial support paid to 
her institution for the present study from the National Clinical Trials Network; 
grants or contracts from AstraZeneca, AbbVie, Pfizer, Rigel, Iovance, Tesaro, 
Genentech–Roche, PharmaMar, and GlaxoSmithKline; patents licensed to Sermonix 
(US patent numbers 10,905,659 and 10,258,604); participation on a data safety 
monitoring board or advisory board for Sermonix, Elevar Therapeutics, and 
GlaxoSmithKline; and service as an NRG Oncology phase 1 subcommittee co-chair, 
all outside the submitted work. BS reports personal fees for service on advisory 
boards for Abbvie, AstraZeneca, Bostongene, Clovis, Eisai, Genentech, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Jazz Pharmaceticals, Lilly, Merck, Myriad, Novartis, Nuvation, 
Onconova, and Seagen; and consulting for the GOG Foundation, all outside the 
submitted work. AE reports grants or contracts from UKRI for a post-doctoral 
fellowship outside the submitted work. CG reports grants from GlaxoSmithKline 
and Novartis for this study (trametinib, the test drug, was sold by 
GlaxoSmithKline to Novartis during the course of the study). WEB, JP, KCa, WR, 
DM, KCo, HG, PH, JF, MC, RLH, CSH, HQH, and LW declare no competing interests.