---
reference_id: "PMID:27526297"
title: Histology of the Transition Zone in Hirschsprung Disease.
authors:
- Kapur RP
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000711
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histology of the Transition Zone in Hirschsprung Disease.
**Authors:** Kapur RP
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0000000000000711](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0000000000000711)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Dec;40(12):1637-1646. doi:
10.1097/PAS.0000000000000711.

Histology of the Transition Zone in Hirschsprung Disease.

Kapur RP(1).

Author information:
(1)Seattle Children's Hospital, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

Surgical management of Hirschsprung disease requires resection of the 
aganglionic bowel and transition zone, a length of ganglionic bowel, immediately 
proximal to the aganglionic segment, with neuropathologic features that seem to 
correlate with dysmotility. Pathologists must be able to recognize 
histopathologic features of the transition zone in hematoxylin and eosin-stained 
sections in order to interpret intraoperative frozen sections and ensure 
adequate resection. The proximal ganglionic portions of colonic resection 
specimens from 59 patients with distal aganglionosis were analyzed with closely 
spaced transverse sections to map the distribution of the 3 most commonly 
referenced features of transition zone (partial circumferential aganglionosis, 
myenteric hypoganglionosis, and submucosal nerve hypertrophy). Each of these 
"primary" findings was restricted to a region ≤5 cm proximal to the aganglionic 
segment in the overwhelming majority of patients. Exceptions were more common 
with longer aganglionic segments. Three other neuroanatomic phenotypes 
(gangliosclerosis, ectopic myenteric ganglia, and eosinophilic ganglionitis) of 
uncertain clinical significance were distributed more irregularly and often over 
much longer distances. Routine resection of at least 5 cm of ganglionic bowel 
proximal to the aganglionic segment may reduce the incidence of transition zone 
pull-through. However, routine intraoperative frozen section examination of the 
proximal resection margin to exclude the 3 primary forms of hematoxylin and 
eosin neuropathology described in this study is strongly advised.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000711
PMID: 27526297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]