---
reference_id: "PMID:35837079"
title: Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Manifested as Multiple Polyps in Jejunum With Intussusception.
authors:
- Jiang HH
- Lu F
- Tan SG
- He SQ
journal: J Med Cases
year: '2022'
doi: 10.14740/jmc3944
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Manifested as Multiple Polyps in Jejunum With Intussusception.
**Authors:** Jiang HH, Lu F, Tan SG, He SQ
**Journal:** J Med Cases (2022)
**DOI:** [10.14740/jmc3944](https://doi.org/10.14740/jmc3944)

## Content

1. J Med Cases. 2022 Jun;13(6):302-306. doi: 10.14740/jmc3944. Epub 2022 Jun 11.

Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Manifested as Multiple Polyps in Jejunum With 
Intussusception.

Jiang HH(1), Lu F(1), Tan SG(1), He SQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Hengyang Central Hospital, Hengyang, 
Hunan 421000, China.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a relatively rare autosomal dominant genetic 
disease, often manifested as mucous membranes, skin pigmented spots and multiple 
polyps in the gastrointestinal tract. It can be followed by a variety of serious 
complications such as bleeding, obstruction, intussusception, and malignant 
transformation. We introduce the case of a 26-year-old male patient who was 
diagnosed with multiple polyps in the jejunum with intussusception caused by 
PJS. He was discharged after emergency surgery reduction and partial resection 
of the small intestine. Gastrointestinal polyps, hemorrhage, intussusception, 
intestinal obstruction, and increased risk of cancer occur in patients with PJS. 
Currently, polypectomy under endoscopic techniques, reexamination and follow-up 
are the main treatment options; surgical treatment is used for bleeding, 
intussusception, and cancer. Therefore, it is very necessary for us to have a 
correct understanding of it, actively prevent it, treat it and follow these 
patients closely.

Copyright 2022, Jiang et al.

DOI: 10.14740/jmc3944
PMCID: PMC9239520
PMID: 35837079

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests.