---
reference_id: "PMID:7086195"
title: Molecular defects in the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Pinnell SR
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '1982'
doi: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12545860
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular defects in the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Pinnell SR
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (1982)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1523-1747.ep12545860](https://doi.org/10.1111/1523-1747.ep12545860)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 1982 Jul;79 Suppl 1:90s-92s. doi: 
10.1111/1523-1747.ep12545860.

Molecular defects in the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Pinnell SR.

Several abnormalities in collagen biosynthesis have been described in patients 
with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Examples of collagen structural mutations as well 
as post-translational enzymatic defects have been detected. Patients with 
hydroxylysine-deficient collagen disease (Ehlers-Danlos type VI) have diminished 
lysyl hydroxylase activity. One mutant enzyme has been characterized which is 
thermally labile and had an altered affinity for ascorbate. Another mutant 
enzyme had a normal requirement for cofactors but activity was diminished. Type 
VII Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is associated with altered processing of procollagen 
to collagen. Most often the disorder is associated with deficient procollagen 
aminoprotease activity. One patient appears to represent a structural mutation 
of pro alpha 2 (I) resulting in incomplete cleavage of the amino terminal 
propeptide. One family with x-linked Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (type V) has been 
described with altered lysyl oxidase activity. Other patients with this disorder 
have had normal lysyl oxidase activity. The ecchymotic form of Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome (type IV) has defective type III collagen-synthesis. Patients have been 
described with absent synthesis, diminished synthesis and diminished secretion.

DOI: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12545860
PMID: 7086195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]