---
reference_id: "PMID:32066963"
title: FANCD2-FANCI is a clamp stabilized on DNA by monoubiquitination of FANCD2 during DNA repair.
authors:
- Alcón P
- Shakeel S
- Chen ZA
- Rappsilber J
- Patel KJ
- Passmore LA
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41594-020-0380-1
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# FANCD2-FANCI is a clamp stabilized on DNA by monoubiquitination of FANCD2 during DNA repair.
**Authors:** Alcón P, Shakeel S, Chen ZA, Rappsilber J, Patel KJ, Passmore LA
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41594-020-0380-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-020-0380-1)

## Content

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2020 Mar;27(3):240-248. doi: 10.1038/s41594-020-0380-1. 
Epub 2020 Feb 17.

FANCD2-FANCI is a clamp stabilized on DNA by monoubiquitination of FANCD2 during 
DNA repair.

Alcón P(#)(1), Shakeel S(#)(1), Chen ZA(2), Rappsilber J(2)(3), Patel KJ(1), 
Passmore LA(4).

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(3)Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK. 
passmore@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Cell Res. 2020 Jul;30(7):554-555. doi: 10.1038/s41422-020-0345-2.

Vertebrate DNA crosslink repair excises toxic replication-blocking DNA 
crosslinks. Numerous factors involved in crosslink repair have been identified, 
and mutations in their corresponding genes cause Fanconi anemia (FA). A key step 
in crosslink repair is monoubiquitination of the FANCD2-FANCI heterodimer, which 
then recruits nucleases to remove the DNA lesion. Here, we use cryo-EM to 
determine the structures of recombinant chicken FANCD2 and FANCI complexes. 
FANCD2-FANCI adopts a closed conformation when the FANCD2 subunit is 
monoubiquitinated, creating a channel that encloses double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). 
Ubiquitin is positioned at the interface of FANCD2 and FANCI, where it acts as a 
covalent molecular pin to trap the complex on DNA. In contrast, isolated FANCD2 
is a homodimer that is unable to bind DNA, suggestive of an autoinhibitory 
mechanism that prevents premature activation. Together, our work suggests that 
FANCD2-FANCI is a clamp that is locked onto DNA by ubiquitin, with distinct 
interfaces that may recruit other DNA repair factors.

DOI: 10.1038/s41594-020-0380-1
PMCID: PMC7067600
PMID: 32066963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.

Vertebrates repair DNA interstrand crosslinks through a complex and essential
process1. Genetic
inactivation of crosslink repair in humans results in Fanconi anemia (FA), a
disorder characterized by abnormal development, loss of blood production, and marked
cancer susceptibility2. Remarkably,
autosomal recessive mutations in any one of 20 genes (FANCA to
FANCQ) result in this genetic illness, and collectively the
FANC gene products function in a FA DNA crosslink repair pathway3. An understanding of this pathway is
emerging from cell biological and biochemical reconstitution studies4–9. These indicate that a number of the FANC gene products form
a large nuclear E3 monoubiquitin ligase complex (the FA core complex). When DNA
replication is stalled, the FA core complex is activated to monoubiquitinate the
FANCD2–FANCI heterodimer (ubD2–I)6,7,10–12.
Activated ubD2–I localizes to sites of DNA damage and is thought to recruit a
nuclease incision complex, consisting of FANCP (SLX4) and FANCQ (XPF)–ERCC1,
to remove the crosslinked DNA13–20. Genetic
studies also indicate that reversal of the monoubiquitination step by the
deubiquitinating enzyme USP1, in complex with UAF1, is required to complete DNA
crosslink repair21–23.

Most cases of FA are due to mutations in components of the FA core complex,
impairing its activity and resulting in a failure to monoubiquitinate
FANCD224. Loss of FANCI
also abolishes FANCD2 modification11,12.
Monoubiquitination is a tightly controlled process, and is regulated by
phosphorylation11,12,25–27.
Altogether this suggests that heterodimerization of FANCD2 with FANCI is essential
for this key step in the pathway.

Monoubiquitination of FANCD2 can be recapitulated in cell free systems in the
presence of DNA8,9,28,29. Many different DNA substrates
stimulate the reaction to a similar extent despite a modest preference of
D2–I for forked or crosslinked DNA structures in DNA binding assays30,31. FANCI is not substantially monoubiquitinated by purified
chicken FA core complexes8,29 and is only inefficiently
monoubiquitinated by a human complex in vitro9. DNA crosslink repair in cells can
be largely rescued by a FANCI variant with a mutated monoubiquitination site,
suggesting that FANCI ubiquitination is not essential25. Together, both in vitro and
in vivo data suggest that monoubiquitination of FANCD2 (not
FANCI) is the critical and predominant function of the FA core complex.

An x-ray crystal structure of the FANCD2–FANCI dimer revealed that the
monoubiquitination sites, as well as regulatory FANCI phosphorylation sites, map to
the dimerization interface, and that FANCI harbors a binding-site for DNA31. Still, a longstanding mystery is
why D2–I monoubiquitination and its subsequent reversal are so fundamental
for crosslink repair. Moreover, the mechanistic details of FANCD2 and FANCI
interaction with DNA, and how ubD2–I might ultimately enable DNA crosslink
removal are not known.

Here, we expressed and purified Gallus gallus FANCD2 and
FANCI complexes, and, using a recombinant FA core complex, we obtained
monoubiquitinated D2–I. Using cryoEM and biochemical assays, we delineated
details of how these factors interact with DNA. We determined the structure of
ubD2–I, which we show adopts a tight clamp on DNA. We also find that FANCD2
itself forms a homodimer that is unable to interact with DNA, but this can
interchange with FANCI, to create a D2–I heterodimer that interacts with DNA.
Our finding that the D2–I dimer transforms into a locked DNA clamp upon
monoubiquitination of FANCD2 provides insight into how crosslink repair could be
initiated.

First, we purified a recombinant D2–I complex after co-expression
of both proteins in insect cells (Extended Data
Fig. 1a). The purified complex functions as a monoubiquitination
substrate in vitro (Fig.
1a,b) and interacts with DNA (see below). We used cryoEM to
investigate the architecture of unmodified D2–I in the presence of
four-fold excess double stalled-fork DNA, and obtained a 3D structure at an
overall resolution of ~4.1 Å (Fig.
1c, d; Extended Data Fig. 1b-e;
Table 1). We then built homology
models of FANCD2 and FANCI, and fitted these into the map (Extended Data Fig. 2a-c). The structure of chicken
D2–I is highly similar to the previously-reported crystal structure of
the Mus musculus proteins31, in agreement with the high degree of structural and
functional conservation of the FA pathway across vertebrates (Extended Data Fig. 2d, Supplementary Table 1;
Supplementary Notes 1 and 2). Although the cryoEM sample was prepared
in the presence of DNA, DNA was not visible in the maps, consistent with a fast
off-rate.

As previously reported31, the FANCD2 and FANCI proteins share a striking structural
similarity containing a series of ɑ-helices arranged into four
superhelical ɑ-solenoid structures (S1–S4) and two helical domains
(HD1, HD2). They fold into an overall shape akin to two antiparallel saxophones.
In this arrangement, the ubiquitination sites (D2K563 and
IK525 for the chicken proteins) are buried within the
dimerization interface, indicating that remodeling of the complex is very likely
required for access by the FA monoubiquitin ligase complex. In the cryoEM
structure, the C-terminal domain of FANCD2 was at a lower resolution due to
flexibility of this region (Fig. 1d).
Flexibility of the C-terminal domains was also observed in a previous
negative-stain EM study32.

Next, to purify a monoubiquitinated complex, we incubated D2–I
with His-tagged ubiquitin, E1, E2 (UBE2T), recombinant FA core complex29 and DNA (Fig. 1a). We used a double stalled-fork DNA, but other DNA
structures are also effective in stimulating monoubiquitination8,28. FANCD2 was specifically monoubiquitinated on K563, but
FANCI was not ubiquitinated, as previously observed29. We enriched for the ubiquitinated complex by
affinity chromatography using the His-tag on ubiquitin (Fig. 1b). Using cryoEM, we obtained a 3D structure of
ubD2–I at an overall resolution of ~3.8 Å (Fig. 1c, d; Extended Data Fig. 1b-e; Table
1), allowing us to build models for FANCD2, FANCI and ubiquitin
(Fig. 2a; Extended Data Fig. 2).

The structure of ubD2–I is markedly different from the unmodified
complex. Symmetry was not obvious in 2D class averages (Fig. 1c), but the 3D reconstruction showed that the overall
ubD2–I complex retains some pseudo-symmetric features (Fig. 1d). In the monoubiquitinated form,
FANCD2 and FANCI are folded towards each other so the C-terminal domains of each
monomer (akin to the bells of the saxophone), wrap around density that we
assigned to double-stranded DNA (see below). In agreement with subunit
flexibility and remodeling of the complex, multi-body refinement of
ubD2–I showed that there is variability in the relative positions of
FANCD2 and FANCI (Supplementary Video 1).

Superimposition of the D2–I and ubD2–I models showed that
the dimer interface acts as a hinge, allowing the C-termini of FANCD2 and FANCI
to swing towards each other, rotating by almost 70° in the
monoubiquitinated complex (Supplementary Videos 2-4). This is largely a rigid body movement of both subunits,
but the N- and C-terminal regions of FANCD2 are also remodeled (Fig. 1d; Extended Data Fig. 2d). This conformational change opens a cleft to
expose the K563 monoubiquitination site in FANCD2 on the backside of the hinge,
where we unambiguously identified density for ubiquitin in the cryoEM map (Fig. 1d; Extended Data Fig. 2b). Ubiquitin is covalently anchored onto FANCD2
(Fig. 1b) but it docks onto the surface
of FANCI via the hydrophobic Ile44 patch on ubiquitin, and likely stabilizes the
complex (Fig. 2a-b). Crosslinking mass
spectrometry also showed that ubiquitin is in close proximity to both FANCD2 and
FANCI (Fig. 2c-e; Extended Data Fig. 3a; Supplementary Table
2).

In contrast, the FANCI monoubiquitination site (K525) is only partially
exposed because the cleft where it is located remains closed (Fig. 2e), explaining why it is inefficiently
monoubiquitinated with recombinant or native FA core complex in
vitro8,9,29 (Fig. 1b). In
cells, FANCI monoubiquitination is stimulated by phosphorylation (which may
further open up the dimerization interface31) but it is not essential for DNA crosslink
repair12,25.

The C-terminal solenoids (S4) of FANCD2 and FANCI, as well as additional
unmodeled C-terminal regions, mediate contacts at the new interface (Fig. 3a,b). These interactions likely
stabilize the C-terminal region of FANCD2, which is flexible in D2–I but
becomes well-ordered in the ubD2–I map (Fig. 1d).

The repositioned C-terminal domains of FANCD2 and FANCI in the
mono-ubiquitinated complex form a new channel between the two protomers. In
agreement with an important role for the C-terminal domain of FANCD2, deletion
of residues 1147–1451 in the human protein results in loss of FANCD2
monoubiquitination in vitro and in cells, loss of in
vitro DNA binding, and disruption of crosslink repair33. The channel contained density
for ~15–20 bp double-stranded DNA (Fig. 1d). The DNA extends beyond the channel and we could model a
total of 33 bp (Fig. 3c). The DNA was at
lower resolution than the rest of the map, likely because of heterogeneity in
the DNA position, and inherent flexibility. DNA makes contacts with both
proteins, but it appears to be shifted towards FANCI, adopting a binding mode
similar to that in a previously reported low-resolution FANCI–DNA crystal
structure31. Contacts
are likely mediated largely through interactions between the negatively-charged
phosphate backbone and positively-charged surface residues31. Intriguingly, the bound DNA
is kinked next to the C-terminal domains within the ubD2–I complex (Fig. 3c).

D2–I interacts with DNA31,33 and DNA is
required for monoubiquitination of D2–I in
vitro8,28, but the role of DNA in this
reaction was unclear. Our data suggested that DNA binding is required to close
the D2–I clamp and expose the monoubiquitination site. To further
investigate this, we performed monoubiquitination assays of D2–I in the
presence of a series of double-stranded DNAs of varying lengths. We used linear
double-stranded DNA since this allowed us to specifically analyze the length
dependence. D2–I was monoubiquitinated in the presence of a 19 bp DNA,
but not with a 14 bp DNA (Extended Data Fig.
3b). We also analyzed protein–DNA interactions within these
reactions by loading the monoubiquitination assays performed in the presence of
different DNAs directly onto native gels for analysis by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSAs). D2–I did not bind to a 14 bp DNA, but
interacted efficiently with DNA substrates that were 19 bp or longer (Extended Data Fig. 3b). Therefore, these
biochemical data show that the minimum DNA length required for ubiquitination
(15–19 bp) correlates with the minimum length required for D2–I
binding. This length also agrees well with the length of DNA encircled by
ubD2–I in the cryoEM structure.

Together, our structures and biochemical studies explain why and how DNA
stimulates FANCD2 monoubiquitination: D2–I binds double-stranded DNA,
promoting closure of the heterodimer to expose the K563 monoubiquitination site
in FANCD2 and allow access to the activated E2 enzyme. We also hypothesized that
monoubiquitination of FANCD2 on the backside of the hinge acts as a covalent
molecular pin, locking the closed heterodimer on DNA and preventing it from
rotating back to the open D2–I conformation. In agreement with this,
monoubiquitination results in a small, but reproducible, increase in DNA binding
affinity, possibly due to a slower off-rate (Extended Data Fig. 3c).

To test whether ubiquitin slows the off-rate and locks the complex on
DNA, we performed two-color DNA displacement assays: we incubated D2–I
with FAM-labeled DNA and then tested the ability of a second (Alexa-labeled) DNA
to be incorporated into D2–I by displacing the FAM-DNA. We found that in
the absence of ubiquitination, the second DNA is readily incorporated into
D2–I (Fig. 4). In contrast, when
FAM-DNA is used to form the ubD2–I complex, a much smaller amount of the
competing DNA is incorporated (Fig. 4).
Together, these experiments provide evidence that ubiquitin locks the
D2–I complex on DNA, effectively slowing the off-rate.

A major remaining question was why FANCD2 was not monoubiquitinated
in vivo or in vitro in the absence of
FANCI8,16,28. To
address this, we purified FANCD2 and FANCI separately. Purified FANCI ran as a
monomer on gel filtration chromatography whereas, unexpectedly, FANCD2 ran as a
dimer (Fig. 5a; Extended Data Fig. 4a). Interestingly, a recent study showed
that purified human FANCD2 also runs as a species of larger size compared to
human FANCI, likely corresponding to a dimeric FANCD234.

Next, we assessed the DNA binding capacities of each protein and found
that FANCI bound DNA efficiently but FANCD2 did not interact with DNA at any of
the concentrations we tested (Fig. 5b;
Extended Data Fig. 4b-c). Moreover,
isolated FANCD2 was not substantially monoubiquitinated by the FA core complex,
and this could not be stimulated by DNA (Extended
Data Fig. 5a).

To understand the molecular basis of FANCD2 dimerization and gain
insight into why it did not bind DNA, we determined the structure of the FANCD2
homodimer using cryoEM to ~3.4 Å resolution (Fig. 5c-e; Extended Data Fig.
1; Extended Data Fig. 2a, c).
The FANCD2 dimer was symmetric, with each protomer containing the same overall
domain architecture as in the heterodimeric complex. Surprisingly, the FANCD2
homodimer was in a closed conformation, more similar to ubD2–I than to
D2–I. This provides a molecular explanation for the lack of DNA binding
by isolated FANCD2: The DNA binding sites were blocked because it was in a
closed conformation that presumably does not open to allow entry of a
double-stranded helix. In addition, FANCD2 homodimerization occludes K563 on
both protomers, likely preventing their ubiquitination (Fig. 5e).

The FANCD2 homodimer was stable over a gel filtration column, indicative
of a high affinity interaction. To investigate how the heterodimeric D2–I
complex forms, we mixed purified FANCD2 and FANCI and analyzed their
oligomerization state. We found that after incubation with FANCD2, the migration
position of FANCI on a gel filtration column shifted to the position of a dimer
(Fig. 5a; Extended Data Fig 4a). This suggested that the monomeric FANCI
displaced one of the FANCD2 protomers in the homodimer. To definitively address
this, we immobilized FANCD2 on Streptavidin resin and incubated it with untagged
FANCI. After washing, FANCI was bound to the beads in approximately 1:1
stoichiometric ratio with FANCD2 (Extended Data
Fig. 5b). This is consistent with FANCI displacing one of the FANCD2
protomers to form the D2–I complex.

Until now, the precise role of DNA in monoubiquitination of FANCD2 was
unknown. It had also remained unclear how the monoubiquitinated lysine on FANCD2 was
accessed by UBE2T and the FA core complex, since it was occluded at the interface of
FANCD2 and FANCI in a previous crystal structure31. Here, our structural and biochemical analyses of FANCD2
and FANCI allow us to propose a new model for how DNA crosslink repair is initiated
(Fig. 5f): D2–I binds DNA at stalled
replication forks, and this causes a hinge-like rotation of FANCD2 and FANCI so they
encircle double-stranded DNA (Fig. 5f).
Transition into this closed conformation exposes a region on the back of the FANCD2
hinge, allowing the FA core complex and UBE2T to access the monoubiquitination site.
Ubiquitin then acts as a covalent molecular pin to lock the ubD2–I DNA clamp
into the closed conformation. We are not aware of any other examples where
covalently-linked ubiquitin locks a new protein conformation. Thus, our analysis
uncovers a new function for ubiquitination.

Unexpectedly, we find that recombinant FANCD2 alone purifies as a homodimer.
A recent study showed that purified human FANCD2 migrates as a larger species than
human FANCI on a gel filtration column, consistent with human FANCD2 also forming a
homodimeric complex34. Here, we
show that the FANCD2 homodimer adopts a closed conformation that is unable to engage
DNA. It cannot be ubiquitinated because the monoubiquitinated lysines are occluded
at the dimer interface. Upon incubation with FANCI, the FANCD2 homodimer readily
exchanges into a stable D2–I heterodimer, and adopts an open conformation,
permissive for DNA binding. Thus, our results suggest a mechanism of autoinhibition
wherein isolated FANCD2 cannot be prematurely recruited to DNA and cannot be
monoubiquitinated prior to assembly with FANCI. Since the D2–I heterodimer is
favored over the FANCD2 homodimer, it is unlikely that there would be substantial
amounts of monomeric FANCI and homodimeric FANCD2 in the cell. However, it remains
possible that the dynamics of D2–I association may be modulated by
post-translational modifications.

In the physiological context, it is not known if FANCD2 homodimers act in a
regulatory capacity to control the amount of D2–I complex in the cell, or if
homodimerization is simply a mechanism to sequester any excess FANCD2 if there is an
imbalance in the ratio of FANCD2:FANCI proteins produced. Nevertheless, when
endogenous FANCD2 is purified from cells, it does not come down with equivalent
levels of FANCI12,35. It is therefore possible that the
FANCD2–FANCI interaction may be regulated and that a fraction of endogenous
FANCD2 is not heterodimerized with FANCI, in agreement with previous data35. FANCI may have additional
functions to those shared with FANCD2 in DNA repair, supporting the hypothesis that
the proteins might exist as distinct entities36,37. Future
experiments will be required to test whether FANCD2 homodimerization regulates the
FA pathway.

In monoubiquitination assays, both chicken, human and murine D2–I
heterodimers show little selective preference for different forms of double-stranded
DNA8,9,28,31,38, although DNA binding assays show a modest preference for
certain DNA structures31,33. Thus, it is unclear whether the
D2–I dimers are specifically recruited by replication fork structures,
crosslinked DNA, the stalled replisome, or other factors. Since the FA pathway plays
a more general role in response to stalled replication forks, D2–I is likely
to bind a protein or DNA structure common to all pathways. We now show that the
ubD2–I dimer locks into a clamp around double-stranded DNA with a footprint
of ~20 nt. Repair of a DNA crosslink in a Xenopus cell-free
system showed that there is a careful choreography of events that occur after two
replication forks converge on a crosslink10,39. The forks stall
at a distance of 20–40 nt from the crosslink, and subsequently, one fork
advances until it reaches the nucleotide preceding the crosslink. At this point the
FANCP–FANCQ nuclease complex cuts around the crosslink (unhooking) on one
strand, and this step is abolished when D2–I is depleted10,14,15,40.

We suggest a model whereby D2–I is primed to interact with DNA,
possibly when a stalled replication fork is ~20 nt from the crosslink. This
could signal to the FA core complex to monoubiquitinate D2–I, locking it
around DNA just adjacent to the crosslink site. ubD2–I kinks the
double-stranded DNA helix, possibly providing distortion that marks the crosslinked
DNA substrate for the nuclease incision complex. Importantly, the ubiquitination of
FANCD2 alone is sufficient to lock the D2–I dimer on DNA, consistent with
genetic evidence that FANCI monoubiquitination is not required for crosslink
repair12. ubD2–I is
thought to directly recruit the incision complex10,18, but curiously,
the Ile44 patch of ubiquitin that interacts with ubiquitin-binding domains is buried
at the interface of ubiquitin and FANCI (Fig.
2b). The covalently-linked ubiquitin could swing out to expose the Ile44
patch, allowing recognition of ubiquitin, or alternatively, the incision complex may
recognize an alternate solvent-exposed interface on ubD2–I. Future studies
will aim to test these models.

Finally, our work provides an explanation for why it is essential to
de-ubiquitinate FANCD2 for the completion of crosslink repair. Genetic evidence in
chicken DT40 cells and in mice indicated that knockouts of USP1 lead to the
persistence of ubiquitinated FANCD2 tethered to chromatin21,41. This
aborts crosslink repair. Since ubiquitin locks the ubD2–I clamp on DNA,
ubiquitin must be removed for the clamp to open, releasing the DNA. Failure to carry
out this step would lead to the persistence of the clamp on DNA which could promote
uncontrolled cutting by the incision complex, prevent repair after incision, or
possibly create a protein–DNA obstacle to transcription or replication of
DNA. The structures of activated D2–I reported here, as well as the recent
structure of the FA core complex29, set the stage for future work to ultimately obtain a complete
biochemical and structural understanding of DNA interstrand crosslink repair.

cDNAs encoding full length Gallus gallus FANCI and
FANCD2 were synthesized (GeneArt) and cloned into pACEBac1. The individual genes
were amplified by PCR and cloned into pBIG1a vector using a modified version of
the biGBac system, as previously described42,43. The combined
vector was transformed into EMBacY E. coli competent cells for
bacmid generation. The purified bacmid was then transfected into Sf9 cells. The
virus was passaged twice before a large-scale culture was infected (5 ml of P2
virus into 500 ml of Sf9 cells at 2 million cells/ml). Cell growth and viability
were monitored and cells harvested upon growth arrest (typically on day 3 after
infection). A similar strategy was used for individual expression of FANCD2 and
FANCI except that the FANCD2 gene contained a C-terminal
extension with a 3C protease site and double StrepII tag whereas the
FANCI gene contained a C-terminal extension with a 3C
protease site and 6x His tag.

For D2–I we took advantage of an excellent protein overexpression
to devise a tag-free protein purification protocol based on sequential
fractionation combining cation exchange and affinity chromatography. Cells were
lysed by sonication in lysis buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM
TCEP, 5% glycerol, EDTA-free protease inhibitor, 5 mM benzamidine hydrochloride
and 100 U/ml benzonase). Clarified cell lysate was passed through a HiTrap SP HP
cation exchange chromatography column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) to remove
impurities. Flow-through containing the unbound D2–I complex was diluted
to 150 mM NaCl concentration and loaded onto a HiTrap Heparin HP affinity column
(GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Using a shallow NaCl gradient, the D2–I
complex eluted around ~ 500 mM NaCl concentration. The complex was run on
a Superdex 200 26/60 column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5,
150 mM NaCl and 1 mM TCEP. The fractions containing the complex were pooled and
concentrated to ~10 mg/ml and flash frozen for storage at -80 °C.
Samples from each step were analyzed by SDS-PAGE using 4-12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris
gels (ThermoFisher Scientific) to monitor the purification.

His-tagged FANCI was purified by sequential affinity and size exclusion
chromatography. Clarified cell lysate produced as for D2–I was loaded
onto a HisTrap HP column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Using an imidazole
gradient, FANCI eluted around ~200 mM imidazole concentration. Collected
fractions containing FANCI were diluted to ~100 mM NaCl concentration and
loaded onto a HiTrap Heparin HP affinity column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences).
Using a shallow NaCl gradient, FANCI eluted around ~500 mM NaCl
concentration. FANCI was then run on a Superdex 200 26/60 column (GE Healthcare
Life Sciences) in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl and 1 mM TCEP. The fractions
containing FANCI were pooled and concentrated to ~10 mg/ml and flash
frozen for storage at -80 °C.

StrepII-tagged FANCD2 was also purified by sequential affinity and size
exclusion chromatography. Clarified cell lysate produced as for D2–I and
FANCI was incubated with StrepTactin Sepharose High Performance resin (GE
Healthcare Life Sciences) for 60 min. The loaded resin was poured into a glass
column and washed twice with lysis buffer before elution with 8 mM
D-Desthiobiotin. The elution was then diluted to ~100 mM NaCl
concentration and loaded onto a HiTrap Heparin HP affinity column (GE Healthcare
Life Sciences). Using a shallow NaCl gradient, FANCD2 eluted around ~500
mM NaCl concentration. FANCD2 was then run on a Superdex 200 26/60 column (GE
Healthcare Life Sciences) in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl and 1 mM TCEP. The
fractions containing FANCD2 were pooled, concentrated to ~10 mg/ml and
flash frozen for storage at -80 °C. Throughout purification, we routinely
monitored the absorbance at 260 nm and 280 nm. The A260 nm/ A280
nm ratio shows that there is no substantial nucleic acid contamination
in the D2–I, FANCD2, or FANCI purifications.

Based on previously described ubiquitination assays8,28, we set up a large-scale in vitro
reconstitution of the FA core complex-mediated ubiquitination of D2–I. In
a total volume of 400 μl, the reaction contained 75 nM E1 ubiquitin
activating enzyme (Boston Biochem), 0.8 μM E2 (UBE2T)8, 0.5 μM E3 (FA core
complex)29, 1
μM D2–I, 5 μM DNA (double stalled-fork generated by
annealing oligonucleotides X1, X2, X3, X4, X5, X6 (Supplementary Table 3)),
and 20 μM His-tagged ubiquitin (Enzo Life Sciences) in a reaction buffer
of 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 64 mM NaCl, 4% glycerol, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM ATP
and 0.5 mM DTT. The reaction was incubated at 30 °C for 90 min before
applying it to 50 μl of Ni-NTA agarose resin (Qiagen) pre-equilibrated in
W25 buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP and 25 mM imidazole) in a
1.5 ml centrifuge tube. The resin was incubated under constant rotation at 4
°C for 60 min. The resin was washed twice, first with 400 μl of
W25 buffer followed by a wash with 400 μl of W50 buffer (20 mM HEPES pH
7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP and 50 mM imidazole). Each wash was performed for 60
min at 4 °C under rotation. The Ni-NTA bound ubD2–I complex was
eluted with W100 buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP and 100 mM
imidazole). Samples from each step were analyzed by SDS-PAGE to monitor the
purification of ubD2–I complex. Presence of ubiquitin was confirmed by
Western blot using anti-Ubiquitin (Millipore; Cat # 07-375). W100 elution
fractions were then concentrated using a Vivaspin column (30 kDa MWCO) to a
final volume of ~20 μl and ~500 nM concentration.

Fluorescently-labeled DNA (6FAM- or Alexa647-labeled on 3′ end,
purchased from IDT) was prepared by incubating complementary oligonucleotides
(Supplementary Table
3) at 95 °C for 5 min and slowly cooling down to room
temperature over ~2 h. For EMSAs, a 20 μl reaction containing 20
nM DNA was incubated with the indicated concentration of protein in the presence
of 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and 1 mM TCEP. The reactions were incubated
for 30 min at 22 °C. After incubation, 5 μl were directly loaded
on a native polyacrylamide gel (6% DNA Retardation, Thermo Fisher) and run at 4
°C using 0.5 X TBE buffer for 60 min. The gel was then visualized using a
Typhoon Imaging System (GE Healthcare). Each binding experiment was repeated two
or three times (as indicated in figure legends) and
ImageJ44 was used for quantification of percent DNA shifted (Fig. 4) or the mean intensity of free DNA and
standard deviation between the measurements (Extended Data Fig. 4c).

A volume of 300 μl of purified D2–I, FANCD2 and FANCI at 1
μM were sequentially run on a Superdex 200 10/300 column (GE Healthcare
Life Sciences) equilibrated in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl and 1 mM TCEP. To
investigate the exchange of FANCD2 and FANCI, we mixed and incubated 0.5
μM FANCD2 with 1 μM FANCI for 30 min at room temperature in a
total volume of 300 μl. The mix was then run on a Superdex 200 10/300
column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) equilibrated in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM
NaCl and 1 mM TCEP. Fractions were analyzed by SDS-PAGE using 4–12%
NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels (ThermoFisher Scientific).

We used purified StrepII-tagged FANCD2 and His-tagged FANCI to probe
their interaction. In a total volume of 50 μl per reaction, FANCD2:FANCI
at molar ratios 1:0, 1:0.5, 1:1, 1:2, 1:5 and 0:5 were mixed in 50 mM HEPES pH
7.5, 150 mM NaCl and 1 mM TCEP and incubated for 15 min at room temperature.
Each reaction was applied to 20 μl of StrepTactin Sepharose High
Performance resin (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) equilibrated in the same buffer.
The loaded resin was then incubated for 30 min at 4 °C. The unbound
fraction was removed and the resin further washed twice using 250 μl of
the same buffer. The bound fraction was analyzed by SDS-PAGE using 4–12%
NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels (ThermoFisher Scientific).

Three microliters of ~1 μM ubD2–I, D2–I or
D2 complex were blotted on plasma cleaned UltraAufoil R1.2/1.3 grids45 (Quantifoil) for 3–4.5
s and plunged into liquid ethane using a Vitrobot Mark IV. D2–I samples
were prepared with four-fold excess double stalled-fork DNA (generated by
annealing oligonucleotides X1, X2, X3, X4, X5, X6 (Supplementary Table 3)).
The grids were imaged on a Titan Krios using a Gatan K3 detector. All the data
collected at eBIC was in super-resolution mode and all the data collected at LMB
was in counting mode. Additional data was collected for ubD2–I at a tilt
of 23° to overcome preferred orientation.

All image processing was performed using
Relion3.0/3.146 unless otherwise stated. The images were
drift-corrected using MotionCorr247 and defocus was estimated using
CTFFIND448. Particles were initially picked manually and 2D
classified. Selected classes from the 2D classification were used to autopick
particles from the full datasets. After 2–3 rounds of 2D classification,
classes with different orientations were selected for initial model generation
in Relion. The initial model was used as reference for 3D
classification into 4 classes. The selected classes from 3D classification were
subjected to auto-refinement with solvent flattening using a soft mask. The
defocus values were further refined using CTF Refinement in
Relion followed by Bayesian polishing. Another round of
auto-refinement was performed on these polished particles. All maps were
post-processed to correct for modulation transfer function of the detector and
sharpened by applying a negative B factor as determined automatically by
Relion. A soft mask was applied during post processing to
generate FSC curves to yield maps of average resolutions of 3.8 Å for
ubD2–I, 4.1 Å for D2–I and 3.4 Å for D2.

To further improve the maps, we used focused classification and
refinement of the ubD2–I map by dividing them into FANCI, FANCD2 and DNA
regions. The density for DNA in ubD2–I was improved by using focused
classification without image alignment.

To analyze the conformational heterogeneity in ubD2–I, we applied
multi-body refinement using masks around FANCI and FANCD2 protomers. Two major
motions were detected using principal component analysis on the optimal
orientations of all the bodies for all particle images in the dataset using
relion_flex_analyse49 (Supplementary Video 1).

The crystal structure of Mus musculus FANDC2-FANCI
(PDB: 3S4W)31 was used as a
template to generate a homology model of Gallus gallus
D2–I in I-TASSER50. The homology model was initially fitted manually by
visual inspection of the ubD2–I, D2–I and D2 maps followed by
rigid fitting in UCSF Chimera51. The side chains were stubbed except for K563
of FANCD2 in ubD2–I map and the model was iteratively refined in
Coot52,53 and
Phenix54. Side chains which can be confidently identified in D2 map
were added. The crystal structure of ubiquitin (PDB: 1UBQ)55 was rigidly fitted into the
unassigned density in the ubD2–I map and refined in
Coot. An idealized dsDNA of 33 bp length was placed and refined
in the density observed for DNA in ubD2–I using Coot.

Purified ubD2–I (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM
imidazole and 1 mM TCEP) at a concentration of ~1 μM was
crosslinked with 2-fold molar ratio of disulfosuccinimidyl suberate (BS3) for 2
h on ice and the reaction was quenched with 50 mM NH4HCO3
for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were then loaded on 4–12% NuPAGE
Bis-Tris (ThermoFisher Scientific). Gel bands of crosslinked ubD2–I
complex were excised and digested with trypsin, as previously
described56. In brief,
proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) for 30
min at 37°C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, Germany)
for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. Proteins were then digested
overnight at 37°C with 10 ng μl-1 trypsin (Pierce,
Germany) in 45 mM ABC and 10% v/v acetonitrile.

Following digestion, peptides were extracted from the gel and desalted
using C18 StageTips as described previously57. Peptides were then eluted from the StageTip using 40
μl 80% v/v acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) into
a LowBind Eppendorf sample tube. Solvent in the eluate was removed using vacuum
centrifugation (Concentrator 5305 plus, Eppendorf, Germany). For LC-MS/MS
analysis, peptides were re-suspended with the sample loading buffer (0.1% v/v
formic acid (FA), 1.6% v/v ACN) to a concentration of ~ 0.3 μg
μl-1, and 3.5 μl was injected for LC-MS/MS
acquisition.

LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion™
Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Germany) coupled on-line to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex, Thermo
Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50-centimetre EASY-Spray C18 LC
column (Thermo Scientific) that is operated at 50 ºC column temperature.
Mobile phase A consists of water, 0.1% v/v formic acid and mobile phase B
consists of 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Peptides were loaded
at a flowrate of 0.3 μl/min. With the same flowrate, peptides were eluted
using a linear gradient going from 2% mobile phase B to 40% mobile phase B over
110 minutes, followed by a linear increase from 40% to 95% mobile phase B in
eleven minutes. Eluted peptides were ionized by an EASY-Spray source (Thermo
Scientific).

The MS data is acquired in the data-dependent mode with the top-speed
option. For each three-second acquisition cycle, the full scan mass spectrum was
recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The ions with a charge
state from 3+ to 7+ were isolated and fragmented using Higher-energy collisional
dissociation (HCD). For each isolated precursor, one of three collision energy
settings (26%, 28% or 30%) was selected for fragmentation using data dependent
decision tree based on the m/z and charge of the precursor58. The fragmentation spectra
were then recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000. Dynamic
exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60-second exclusion
duration.

The MS2 peak lists were generated from the raw mass spectrometric data
files using the MSConvert module in ProteoWizard (version 3.0.11729). The
default parameters were applied, except that Top MS/MS Peaks per 100 Da was set
to 20 and the de-noising function was enabled. The peak lists were searched
against the sequences and the reversed sequences (as decoys) of FANCI, FANCD2,
ubiquitin plus 4,514 E.coli proteins using xiSEARCH software
(https://www.rappsilberlab.org/software/xisearch)59 for identification of
crosslinked peptides. The following parameters were applied for the search: MS
accuracy = 5 ppm; MS2 accuracy = 10 ppm; enzyme = trypsin (with full tryptic
specificity); allowed number of missed cleavages = two; missing monoisotopic
peak=260; crosslinker
= BS3 the reaction specificity for BS3 was assumed to be for lysine, serine,
threonine, tyrosine and protein N termini); fixed modifications =
carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications = oxidation on
methionine, modifications by BS3 that are hydrolyzed or amidated on the end.
False discovery rate (FDR) was estimated based on the number of decoy
identification in ubID2 sequences. Crosslinking mass spec data was deposited in
the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE61 partner repository.

The structures of FANCI and FANCD2 determined in this study were
compared to each other and to the previously determined Mus
musculus FANCI–FANCD2 structure31 using PDBeFOLD62.

a Coomassie gel showing purified His-tagged FANCI,
StrepII-tagged FANCD2 and D2–I after gel filtration.
b–e CryoEM of D2–I, ubD2–I and D2.
b Representative micrographs. Selected individual particles
are marked with green circles. Scale bars are 25 nm. c Fourier
shell correlation curves for gold-standard refinements. d
Angular distribution density plots of particles used in 3D reconstructions
calculated using cryoEF63. Every point is a particle orientation and the
color scale represents the normalized density of views around this point.
The color scale runs from 0 (low, blue) to 0.00026 (high, red). All
complexes had a preferred orientation. Note that C2 symmetry was applied for
FANCD2. e Local resolution estimates calculated using
ResMap64. Uncropped image for panel a is available in Supplementary Fig.
1.

a Overall fitting of model to map for ubD2–I,
D2–I and D2 (FANCD2 is colored blue; FANCI magenta, ubiquitin green,
and DNA yellow). b Representative fits of model to map for
FANCD2, FANCI, DNA and ubiquitin in the ubD2–I structure.
c FSC curves for model versus map. d FANCD2
and FANCI structures from Gallus gallus (gg) were aligned
with each other and the with Mus musculus (mm)31 crystal structures using
PDBeFOLD62
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/ssm/) and figures were prepared
with Pymol (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 2.0,
Schrödinger, LLC).

a Distribution histogram of Cα-Cα
distances between linked residue pairs in the 3D model of ubD2–I
(left). Crosslinks with Cα-Cα distances below the theoretical
crosslinking limit (30 Å) are shown in green. Overlength crosslinks
(>30 Å) are shown in red. The distribution of
Cα-Cα distances between random crosslinkable residue pairs in
the 3D model is shown in grey. Crosslinks mapped onto the front view of the
3D structure are shown on the right. b Monoubiquitination
assays were assembled in the presence of 5 μM linear double-stranded
DNA of differing lengths (10–44 bp). DNA binding was analyzed by EMSA
(top) after loading the reactions onto native gels and imaging of the
fluorescently-labeled DNA. Monoubiquitination efficiency was analyzed by
Coomassie blue (middle) and Western blotting the His-tagged ubiquitin
(bottom). Controls lacking ubiquitin or DNA are indicated. These data are
representative of experiments performed three times. c
Monoubiquitination assays were assembled without (left) and with (right)
ubiquitin, both in the presence of a 39 bp double-stranded DNA at 100 nM and
increasing amounts of D2–I (0–1000 nM). Assays were analyzed
by EMSA (top, imaging for the fluorescently-labeled DNA) or Western blotting
His-tagged ubiquitin (bottom). We cannot exclude that other proteins may
interact with DNA in these assays, but the migration positions of the
shifted bands are similar to the experiment in Fig. 4 where ubD2–I was purified away from all other
proteins. These data are representative of experiments performed three
times. Uncropped images for panels b and c are available in Supplementary Fig.
1.

a Size-exclusion chromatogram as shown in Fig. 5a (top). Peak fractions were
analyzed by SDS-PAGE (bottom). A single asterisk (*) indicates the migration
position for monomers. A double asterisk (**) indicates the migration
position for dimers. These results are representative of experiments
performed three times. b DNA binding of FANCI, FANCD2,
D2–I, and FANCI mixed with FANCD2 was analyzed by EMSAs performed
with 20 nM 39-bp double-stranded DNA and 0–140 nM protein.
Representative gels of experiments performed independently three times. The
FANCD2 and D2–I gels are same as in Fig
5b. c Quantification of mean intensities of free DNA
from panel b. Error bars represent the standard deviation. Individual data
points (n=3 independent experiments) are shown. The means are connected by
lines for clarity. Uncropped images for panels a and b are available in
Supplementary Fig.
1. Data for the plot in c are available as source data.

a Monoubiquitination assays of D2–I and FANCD2
homodimer. The FANCD2 homodimer had a StrepII-tag and was therefore larger
than D2 in the D2–I complex. Monoubiquitination efficiency was
analyzed by Coomassie blue SDS-PAGE (top) and Western blotting the
His-tagged ubiquitin (bottom). b Exchange assay. The FANCD2
homodimer was immobilized on Streptactin resin and incubated with free
FANCI. The resin was washed, then bound and unbound fractions were analyzed
by SDS-PAGE. These data are representative of experiments performed twice.
Uncropped images are available in Supplementary Fig. 1.