---
reference_id: "PMID:31600044"
title: Hereditary Distal Renal Tubular Acidosis.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Alexander RT
- Gil-Peña H
- Greenbaum LA
- Santos F
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Distal Renal Tubular Acidosis.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Alexander RT, Gil-Peña H, Greenbaum LA, Santos F

## Content

1. Hereditary Distal Renal Tubular Acidosis.

Alexander RT(1), Gil-Peña H(2), Greenbaum LA(3), Santos F(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2019 Oct 10 [updated 2025 Apr 3].

Author information:
(1)University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
(2)Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias;, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain
(3)Emory University;, Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia
(4)University of Oviedo;, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo,
Spain

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Individuals with hereditary distal renal tubular
acidosis (dRTA) typically present in infancy with poor weight gain and growth
deficiency, although later presentations can occur, especially in individuals
with autosomal dominant SLC4A1-related dRTA. Initial clinical manifestations can
also include emesis, polyuria, polydipsia, constipation, diarrhea, decreased
appetite, and episodes of dehydration. Electrolyte manifestations include
hyperchloremic non-anion gap metabolic acidosis and hypokalemia. Renal
complications of hereditary dRTA include nephrocalcinosis, nephrolithiasis,
medullary cysts, and impaired kidney function. Additional manifestations include
bone demineralization (rickets, osteomalacia), sensorineural hearing loss (in
ATP6V0A4-, ATP6V1B1-, and FOXI1-related dRTA), hereditary hemolytic anemia (in
some individuals with SLC4A1-related dRTA), and amelogenesis imperfecta (in
WDR72-related dRTA).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of hereditary dRTA is established in a proband
with dRTA and biallelic pathogenic variants in ATP6V0A4, ATP6V1B1, FOXI1, or
WDR72, a heterozygous or biallelic pathogenic variants in SLC4A1, or specific
heterozygous pathogenic variants in ATP6V1B1 (affecting codon p.Arg394)
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Oral alkaline therapy to correct metabolic
acidosis and hypokalemia with additional potassium chloride as needed. ADV7103
is a combination controlled-release potassium bicarbonate and potassium citrate
medication approved in Europe that allows less frequent dosing. Supportive care:
Standard treatments for other possible manifestations including sensorineural
hearing, hemolytic anemia, and amelogenesis imperfecta. Surveillance: Fasting
venous blood gas or total CO2 prior to alkali dose in rapidly growing infants
and children at least every three to four months, and at least every six months
in older individuals. Serum creatinine, urea, sodium, potassium, chloride,
calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, and albumin in rapidly growing infants
and young children at least every three to four months, and at least every six
to 12 months in stable older children and adults. Urinalysis and urine
creatinine, sodium, potassium, calcium, and citrate annually and more frequently
when adjusting treatment. Annual renal ultrasound to evaluate for
nephrocalcinosis, urolithiasis, and cysts in asymptomatic individuals. Growth
assessment with calculation of body mass index in infants at least every three
months, and in older children at least every six months until achievement of
final height. Bone densitometry as needed. Audiometry annually in at-risk
individuals. Assessment for hemolytic anemia and dental assessment as needed in
at-risk individuals. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Potassium-sparing diuretics
should be used with caution or avoided. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is
appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and
younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as
early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment
and preventive measures. Pregnancy management: Women with hereditary dRTA may
develop severe metabolic acidosis and hypokalemia during pregnancy, especially
when complicated by hyperemesis gravidarum. Close monitoring of women with
hereditary dRTA during pregnancy is necessary.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Hereditary distal renal tubular acidosis caused by
loss-of-function variants in ATP6V0A4, ATP6V1B1, SLC4A1, FOXI1, or WDR72 is
inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Hereditary dRTA caused by
dominant-negative variants in SLC4A1 or heterozygous pathogenic variants in
ATP6V1B1 affecting the specific amino acid p.Arg394 are inherited in an
autosomal dominant manner. Autosomal recessive inheritance: If both parents are
known to be heterozygous for an autosomal recessive dRTA-related pathogenic
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of
inheriting biallelic pathogenic variants and being affected, a 50% chance of
being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the familial
pathogenic variants. Autosomal dominant inheritance: Each child of an individual
with autosomal dominant dRTA has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic
variant. Once the hereditary dRTA-causing pathogenic variant(s) have been
identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic
testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 31600044
