---
reference_id: "PMID:10080180"
title: Mutations in the gene encoding lamin A/C cause autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Bonne G
- Di Barletta MR
- Varnous S
- Bécane HM
- Hammouda EH
- Merlini L
- Muntoni F
- Greenberg CR
- Gary F
- Urtizberea JA
- Duboc D
- Fardeau M
- Toniolo D
- Schwartz K
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1038/6799
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Deoxyribonuclease HpaII/genetics
- "Deoxyribonucleases, Type II Site-Specific/genetics"
- Exons
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Lamin Type A
- Lamins
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Muscular Dystrophies/genetics
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss"
- Mutation
- "Myocardium/metabolism, pathology"
- "Nuclear Proteins/analysis, genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the gene encoding lamin A/C cause autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Bonne G, Di Barletta MR, Varnous S, Bécane HM, Hammouda EH, Merlini L, Muntoni F, Greenberg CR, Gary F, Urtizberea JA, Duboc D, Fardeau M, Toniolo D, Schwartz K
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/6799](https://doi.org/10.1038/6799)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Mar;21(3):285-8. doi: 10.1038/6799.

Mutations in the gene encoding lamin A/C cause autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss 
muscular dystrophy.

Bonne G(1), Di Barletta MR, Varnous S, Bécane HM, Hammouda EH, Merlini L, 
Muntoni F, Greenberg CR, Gary F, Urtizberea JA, Duboc D, Fardeau M, Toniolo D, 
Schwartz K.

Author information:
(1)INSERM UR153, GH Pitié-Salpétriêre, Paris, 
France.gbonne@myologie.infobiogen.fr

Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is characterized by early contractures 
of elbows and Achilles tendons, slowly progressive muscle wasting and weakness, 
and a cardiomyopathy with conduction blocks which is life-threatening. Two modes 
of inheritance exist, X-linked (OMIM 310300) and autosomal dominant (EDMD-AD; 
OMIM 181350). EDMD-AD is clinically identical to the X-linked forms of the 
disease. Mutations in EMD, the gene encoding emerin, are responsible for the 
X-linked form. We have mapped the locus for EDMD-AD to an 8-cM interval on 
chromosome 1q11-q23 in a large French pedigree, and found that the EMD phenotype 
in four other small families was potentially linked to this locus. This region 
contains the lamin A/C gene (LMNA), a candidate gene encoding two proteins of 
the nuclear lamina, lamins A and C, produced by alternative splicing. We 
identified four mutations in LMNA that co-segregate with the disease phenotype 
in the five families: one nonsense mutation and three missense mutations. These 
results are the first identification of mutations in a component of the nuclear 
lamina as a cause of inherited muscle disorder. Together with mutations in EMD 
(refs 5,6), they underscore the potential importance of the nuclear envelope 
components in the pathogenesis of neuromuscular disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/6799
PMID: 10080180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]