---
reference_id: "PMID:33824927"
title: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency liver disease.
authors:
- Patel D
- McAllister SL
- Teckman JH
journal: Transl Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.21037/tgh.2020.02.23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency liver disease.
**Authors:** Patel D, McAllister SL, Teckman JH
**Journal:** Transl Gastroenterol Hepatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tgh.2020.02.23](https://doi.org/10.21037/tgh.2020.02.23)

## Content

1. Transl Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021 Apr 5;6:23. doi: 10.21037/tgh.2020.02.23. 
eCollection 2021.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency liver disease.

Patel D(1), McAllister SL(2), Teckman JH(3).

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology and Nutrition, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, Cardinal 
Glennon Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Professor, Department of Pediatrics and Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 
USA.

The clinical presentation of liver disease is highly variable in homozygous ZZ 
alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency, and not all patients with the homozygous 
ZZ genotype develop liver disease. Although not fully identified, there is 
likely a strong influence of genetic and environmental modifiers of the 
intracellular injury cascade and fibrotic response. Most ZZ children are well 
and remain undiagnosed. Of those who come to medical attention, the most common 
pediatric presentation is neonatal cholestatic hepatitis, sometimes referred to 
as "neonatal hepatitis syndrome". The gold standard for diagnosis of AAT 
deficiency is analysis of the AAT protein phenotype in the patient serum or the 
genotype of their DNA genome. Careful follow up of all diagnosed children is 
important. Heterozygotes for S and Z alleles of AAT (SZ) may develop progressive 
liver disease similar to ZZ patients and also require close monitoring. There is 
no specific treatment for AAT deficiency induced liver disease and current 
therapy remains supportive with management of complications. Rarely, patients 
require liver transplant and typically the patient outcomes are excellent. With 
improved understanding of liver injury mechanisms, new strategies for treatment 
are now being explored, including siRNA technology, molecules to modulate 
secretion, and enhancers of proteolysis.

2021 Translational Gastroenterology and Hepatology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tgh.2020.02.23
PMCID: PMC7829072
PMID: 33824927

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tgh.2020.02.23). The series “Recent Advances in Rare 
Liver Diseases” was commissioned by the editorial office without any funding or 
sponsorship. JHT reports grants and personal fees from Arrowhead Pharma, grants 
and personal fees from Dicerna, grants and personal fees from Vertex, grants 
from NIH, grants from Alpha-1 Foundation, personal fees from Proteostasis, 
personal fees from Retrophin, personal fees from RestoreBio, grants and personal 
fees from KorroBio, personal fees from Ironwood Pharmaceuticals, grants and 
personal fees from Casma, grants and personal fees from Camp4 Therapeutics, 
grants and personal fees from Intellia, grants and personal fees from Editas, 
grants and personal fees from Alnylam, personal fees from EcoR1, personal fees 
from BioMarin, outside the submitted work. The other authors have no conflicts 
of interest to declare.