---
reference_id: "PMID:38890641"
title: "Efficacy and safety of eliapixant in endometriosis-associated pelvic pain: the randomized, placebo-controlled phase 2b SCHUMANN study."
authors:
- Parke S
- Gude K
- Roth K
- Messina F
journal: BMC Womens Health
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12905-024-03188-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Endometriosis/complications, drug therapy"
- "Pelvic Pain/drug therapy, etiology"
- Adult
- Double-Blind Method
- Treatment Outcome
- Middle Aged
- "Hydrocarbons, Fluorinated/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Pain Measurement
- Pyrimidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of eliapixant in endometriosis-associated pelvic pain: the randomized, placebo-controlled phase 2b SCHUMANN study.
**Authors:** Parke S, Gude K, Roth K, Messina F
**Journal:** BMC Womens Health (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12905-024-03188-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12905-024-03188-8)

## Content

1. BMC Womens Health. 2024 Jun 19;24(1):353. doi: 10.1186/s12905-024-03188-8.

Efficacy and safety of eliapixant in endometriosis-associated pelvic pain: the
randomized, placebo-controlled phase 2b SCHUMANN study.

Parke S(1), Gude K(2), Roth K(3), Messina F(4).

Author information:
(1)Research and Development, Bayer AG, Berlin, Germany. susanne.parke@bayer.com.
(2)Pharmacovigilance, Bayer AG, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Research and Development, Bayer AG, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Data Science UK, Bayer PLC, UK.

BACKGROUND: The SCHUMANN study evaluated the efficacy and safety of the
selective P2 × 3 antagonist eliapixant in patients with endometriosis-associated
pelvic pain (EAPP).
METHODS: SCHUMANN was a randomized, placebo- and active comparator-controlled,
double-blind to placebo and open-label to comparator, parallel-group,
multicenter, dose-finding phase 2b study. The participants were women with
surgically diagnosed endometriosis who fulfilled defined EAPP criteria.
Participants were randomized 1:1:1:1 to twice daily (BID) 25 mg, 75 mg, or
150 mg oral eliapixant or a placebo for 12 weeks. An exploratory once-daily
elagolix 150 mg treatment group was also included. The primary endpoint was the
absolute change in mean worst EAPP from baseline to the end of intervention
(EOI).
RESULTS: Overall, 215 participants were randomized for treatment (44 to
eliapixant 25 mg, 44 to eliapixant 75 mg, 43 to eliapixant 150 mg, 43 to a
placebo, and 41 to elagolix 150 mg). For safety reasons, the study was
terminated early; both treatment and enrollment stopped immediately, producing
less than 50% of the planned number of completers. The study found no
significant differences in EAPP reduction from baseline between groups and no
significant dose-response model. The elagolix 150 mg group showed better pain
reduction than any of the other groups. No new safety signals were observed,
relative to the previously known safety profile of eliapixant, which was
generally well tolerated. However, one case of moderate and probably
drug-induced liver injury in a participant receiving eliapixant 150 mg BID
supported the association between eliapixant and a potential increase in liver
function values, defined before the start of the phase 2 program.
CONCLUSIONS: This study did not meet its primary objective as no statistically
significant or clinically relevant differences in changes of mean worst EAPP
from baseline were observed between treatment groups. The single observed case
of moderate, probably drug-induced liver injury was the second case in the
eliapixant phase 2 program conducted in the following indications: refractory or
unexplained chronic cough, diabetic neuropathic pain, overactive bladder, and
EAPP. Due to this, the benefit-risk ratio for the study was no longer considered
to be positive.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT04614246;
registered November 3, 2020.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12905-024-03188-8
PMCID: PMC11186168
PMID: 38890641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are employees of Bayer AG.
