---
reference_id: "PMID:36447830"
title: A Case of Spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome With Comorbid Hypophosphatasia.
authors:
- Dattagupta A
- Williamson S
- El Nihum LI
- Petak S
journal: AACE Clin Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.aace.2022.08.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case of Spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome With Comorbid Hypophosphatasia.
**Authors:** Dattagupta A, Williamson S, El Nihum LI, Petak S
**Journal:** AACE Clin Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.aace.2022.08.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aace.2022.08.005)

## Content

1. AACE Clin Case Rep. 2022 Sep 2;8(6):255-258. doi: 10.1016/j.aace.2022.08.005. 
eCollection 2022 Nov-Dec.

A Case of Spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome With Comorbid 
Hypophosphatasia.

Dattagupta A(1)(2), Williamson S(1), El Nihum LI(1)(2), Petak S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, 
Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(2)Texas A&M College of Medicine, Texas A&M University, Bryan, Texas.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: Spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (spEDS) is a 
rare subtype of the heritable connective tissue disorder characterized in the 
2017 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) nosology. Three biallelic mutations, B4GALT7, 
B3GALT6, and SLC39A13, confirm the diagnosis of spEDS. Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is 
a heritable disorder caused by a genetic sequence variation in the ALPL gene 
affecting bone mineralization. Common symptoms in the adult form of HPP are 
joint pain, muscle hypotonia, and metatarsal fractures. Here we present a case 
of spEDS and HPP in a patient.
CASE REPORT: A 38-year-old woman was evaluated for chronic diffuse joint pain 
and a low alkaline phosphatase level of 27 U/L (reference, 31-125 U/L). In 
addition, she presented with a history of hypermobility, limb bowing, and 
hyperextensible skin, prompting genetic testing for EDS and HPP. The results 
returned significant for a synonymous sequence variant at c.441G>A in the 
B4GALT7 gene indicative of spEDS. HPP was clinically diagnosed by a repeat low 
alkaline phosphatase level of 23 U/L and high vitamin B6 level of 24.4 ng/mL 
(reference, 2.1-21.7 ng/mL), despite the absence of the ALPL gene sequence 
variation on genetic testing.
DISCUSSION: Remarkable personal and family history of this patient suggest that 
co-occurrence of EDS and HPP is not merely coincidental. Given the overlapping 
features of muscle hypotonia and joint pain between the 2 heritable disorders, a 
possible relationship between the 2 may have been previously overlooked.
CONCLUSION: Further investigation in the relationship and management of the 2 
heritable diseases is warranted as enzyme replacement therapy, asfotase alfa, 
approved for infantile and juvenile onset of HPP may improve the symptoms shared 
with EDS.

© 2022 AACE. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aace.2022.08.005
PMCID: PMC9701907
PMID: 36447830