---
reference_id: "PMID:18428345"
title: Diagnosis of fanconi anemia by diepoxybutane analysis.
authors:
- Auerbach AD
journal: Curr Protoc Hum Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1002/0471142905.hg0807s37
keywords:
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Epoxy Compounds/analysis
- "Fanconi Anemia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of fanconi anemia by diepoxybutane analysis.
**Authors:** Auerbach AD
**Journal:** Curr Protoc Hum Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/0471142905.hg0807s37](https://doi.org/10.1002/0471142905.hg0807s37)

## Content

1. Curr Protoc Hum Genet. 2003 Jul;Chapter 8:Unit 8.7. doi: 
10.1002/0471142905.hg0807s37.

Diagnosis of fanconi anemia by diepoxybutane analysis.

Auerbach AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by 
progressive pancytopenia and a high risk of malignancies, particularly acute 
myelogenous leukemia (AML). Diepoxybutane (DEB) analysis is the preferred test 
for FA because other agents have higher rates of false-positive and 
false-negative results. Basic Protocol in this unit applies the DEB test to rule 
out a diagnosis of FA using a peripheral blood sample from the patient. Support 
Protocol 1 provides instructions for working with DEB. Support Protocol 2 
describes staining slides for chromosome-breakage analysis that is performed on 
unbanded metaphase preparations. Alternate Protocol 2 provides a detailed method 
for applying the DEB test to cultured fibroblasts that grow as a monolayer 
attached to the bottom of the flask. outlines methods for using the DEB test for 
prenatal diagnosis of FA, utilizing fetal cells obtained by chorionic villus 
sampling (CVS), amniocentesis, or fetal blood sampling. Fanconi anemia (FA) is 
an autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by progressive pancytopenia and a 
high risk of malignanci.

DOI: 10.1002/0471142905.hg0807s37
PMID: 18428345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]