---
reference_id: "PMID:27558267"
title: "Molecular analysis of the CTSK gene in a cohort of 33 Brazilian families with pycnodysostosis from a cluster in a Brazilian Northeast region"
authors:
- Araujo TF
- Ribeiro EM
- Arruda AP
- Moreno CA
- de Medeiros PFV
- Minillo RM
- Melo DG
- Kim CA
- Doriqui MJR
- Felix TM
- Fock RA
- Cavalcanti DP
journal: Eur J Med Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s40001-016-0228-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular analysis of the CTSK gene in a cohort of 33 Brazilian families with pycnodysostosis from a cluster in a Brazilian Northeast region
**Authors:** Araujo TF, Ribeiro EM, Arruda AP, Moreno CA, de Medeiros PFV, Minillo RM, Melo DG, Kim CA, Doriqui MJR, Felix TM, Fock RA, Cavalcanti DP
**Journal:** Eur J Med Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40001-016-0228-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40001-016-0228-7)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Res. 2016 Aug 24;21(1):33.

Molecular analysis of the CTSK gene in a cohort of 33 Brazilian families with
pycnodysostosis from a cluster in a Brazilian Northeast region.

Araujo TF, Ribeiro EM, Arruda AP, Moreno CA, de Medeiros PFV, Minillo RM, Melo
DG, Kim CA, Doriqui MJR, Felix TM, Fock RA, Cavalcanti DP.

Background: Pycnodysostosis is an autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia, the
prevalence of which is estimated to be low (1 per million). Nevertheless, in
recent years we have found 27 affected individuals from 22 families in Ceará
State, a region of the Brazilian Northeast, giving a local prevalence of 3 per
million. This local prevalence associated with a high parental consanguinity,
suggesting a possible founder effect, prompted us to perform a molecular
investigation of these families to test this hypothesis.

Methods: The CTSK gene was sequenced by the Sanger method in the patients and
their parents. In addition to 18 families from Ceará, this study also included
15 families from other Brazilian regions. We also investigated the origin of
each family from the birthplace of the parents and/or grandparents.

Results: We have studied 39 patients, including 33 probands and 6 sibs, from 33
families with pycnodysostosis and identified six mutations, five previously
described (c.436G>C, c.580G>A, c.721C>T, c.830C>T and c.953G>A) and one novel
frameshift (c.83dupT). This frameshift variant seems to have a single origin in
Ceará State, since the haplotype study using the polymorphic markers D1S2344,
D1S442, D1S498 and D1S2715 suggested a common origin.

Conclusions: The high frequency of pycnodysostosis in Ceará State is the
consequence of the high inbreeding in that region.

DOI: 10.1186/s40001-016-0228-7
PMID: 27558267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
