---
reference_id: PMID:36721094
title: Indole-3-propionic acid alleviates chondrocytes inflammation and osteoarthritis via the AhR/NF-κB axis.
authors:
- Zhuang H
- Ren X
- Jiang F
- Zhou P
journal: Mol Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s10020-023-00614-9
keywords:
- Animals
- Rats
- NF-kappa B
- Chondrocytes
- "Receptors, Aryl Hydrocarbon/genetics"
- Inflammation
- Osteoarthritis/drug therapy
- Propionates
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Indole-3-propionic acid alleviates chondrocytes inflammation and osteoarthritis via the AhR/NF-κB axis.
**Authors:** Zhuang H, Ren X, Jiang F, Zhou P
**Journal:** Mol Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s10020-023-00614-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s10020-023-00614-9)

## Content

1. Mol Med. 2023 Jan 31;29(1):17. doi: 10.1186/s10020-023-00614-9.

Indole-3-propionic acid alleviates chondrocytes inflammation and osteoarthritis 
via the AhR/NF-κB axis.

Zhuang H(#)(1), Ren X(#)(1), Jiang F(1), Zhou P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
430060, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
430060, China. zhoupanghu@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Osteoarthritis (OA) is a common chronic disease characterized by 
chronic inflammation and extracellular matrix degradation. Indole-3-propionic 
acid (IPA) is a tryptophan metabolite secreted by intestinal flora, which can 
exert anti-inflammatory effects in a variety of diseases. In this study, we 
further investigated the potential therapeutic role of IPA in OA and the 
underlying mechanism.
METHODS: IL-1β was utilized to induce chondrocyte inflammation. Then, the 
cytotoxicity of IPA on rat chondrocytes was assessed. Meanwhile, RT-qPCR, Griess 
reaction, ELISA, Western blot and immunofluorescence were performed to evaluate 
the expression of inflammatory factors and stromal proteins, and the NF-κB 
pathway in chondrocytes treated with IL-1β alone, with IPA or with aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) knockdown. An OA rat model was established by 
anterior cruciate ligament transection, and hematoxylin-eosin staining, 
Safranin-O/Fast Green staining and immunochemistry were applied to estimate OA 
severity.
RESULTS: IPA did not affect cellular viability at concentrations up to 80 µM. 
IPA significantly inhibited the IL-1β-induced expression of inflammatory factors 
(Nitric oxide, PGE2, TNF-α, IL-6, iNOS and COX-2) and matrix-degrading enzymes 
(MMP-3, MMP-13 and ADAMTS-5), upregulated the expression of anabolic markers 
(aggrecan and collagen-II) and inactivated the NF-κB pathway. However, AhR 
knockdown could abolish the above protection capabilities and the suppression of 
the NF-κB pathway induced by IPA. Furthermore, IPA significantly reduced serum 
inflammatory cytokines expression, cartilage destruction and synovitis in vivo, 
demonstrating its protective role in OA progression.
CONCLUSION: IPA improved IL-1β-induced chondrocyte inflammation and 
extracellular matrix degradation through the AhR/NF-κB axis, which provides an 
innovative therapeutic strategy for OA.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s10020-023-00614-9
PMCID: PMC9890697
PMID: 36721094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.