---
reference_id: "PMID:39710556"
title: Coccidioidomycosis.
authors:
- Donovan FM
- Ampel NM
- Thompson GR 3rd
journal: Infect Dis Clin North Am
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.idc.2024.11.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coccidioidomycosis.
**Authors:** Donovan FM, Ampel NM, Thompson GR 3rd
**Journal:** Infect Dis Clin North Am (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.idc.2024.11.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idc.2024.11.012)

## Content

1. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2025 Mar;39(1):183-197. doi: 
10.1016/j.idc.2024.11.012. Epub 2024 Dec 21.

Coccidioidomycosis.

Donovan FM(1), Ampel NM(2), Thompson GR 3rd(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Valley Fever Center for Excellence, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious 
Diseases, University of Arizona Medical Center, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(2)College of Medicine, University of Arizona, 1656 E Mabel Street, Tucson, AZ 
85724, USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of California Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, CA, USA; Department of Medical 
Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, Davis, CA, USA; Center 
for Valley Fever, Davis, California, USA. Electronic address: 
grthompson@ucdavis.edu.

Coccidioidomycosis is the clinical disease caused by the dimorphic pathogenic 
fungi Coccidioides immitis and C posadasii. The number of clinically recognized 
coccidioidomycosis cases continues to increase yearly including in regions 
outside the traditional regions of endemicity. Following inhalation of 
Coccidioides spores, the course may range from asymptomatic exposure with 
resultant immunity, to a subacute pulmonary illness, to life-threatening 
disseminated infection. This review will summarize recent advances in our 
understanding of the infection and will include the ecology of Coccidioides, 
epidemiology and risk factors for infection, vaccine and novel antifungals in 
development, and management of immunosuppressed patients.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idc.2024.11.012
PMID: 39710556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure N.M. Ampel has no conflicts of 
interest. F. M. Donovan has received research support from F2G, United Kingdom. 
G.R. Thompson has served as a consultant and received research support from 
Astellas, United States, Basilea, Cidara, United States, F2G, GSK, Melinta, 
Mundipharma, Germany, and Scynexis.