---
reference_id: "PMID:25430560"
title: "Progress in understanding the pathogenesis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis: back to Histiocytosis X?"
authors:
- Berres ML
- Merad M
- Allen CE
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/bjh.13247
keywords:
- "Antigens, CD/metabolism"
- "Antigens, CD1/metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/classification, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- "Langerhans Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Lectins, C-Type/metabolism"
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Mannose-Binding Lectins/metabolism
- "Models, Biological"
- "Myeloid Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Neoplasms/classification, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progress in understanding the pathogenesis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis: back to Histiocytosis X?
**Authors:** Berres ML, Merad M, Allen CE
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjh.13247](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjh.13247)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 2015 Apr;169(1):3-13. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13247. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Progress in understanding the pathogenesis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis: 
back to Histiocytosis X?

Berres ML(1), Merad M, Allen CE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA; Tisch Cancer Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, 
USA; Immunology Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA; 
Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, 
Germany.

Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH), the most common histiocytic disorder, is 
characterized by the accumulation of CD1A(+) /CD207(+) mononuclear phagocytes 
within granulomatous lesions that can affect nearly all organ systems. 
Historically, LCH has been presumed to arise from transformed or pathologically 
activated epidermal dendritic cells called Langerhans cells. However, new 
evidence supports a model in which LCH occurs as a consequence of a misguided 
differentiation programme of myeloid dendritic cell precursors. Genetic, 
molecular and functional data implicate activation of the ERK signalling pathway 
at critical stages in myeloid differentiation as an essential and universal 
driver of LCH pathology. Based on these findings, we propose that LCH should be 
re-defined as an inflammatory myeloid neoplasia. Increased understanding of LCH 
pathogenesis will provide opportunities to optimize and personalize therapy 
through improved risk-stratification, targeted therapy and assessment of therapy 
response based on specific molecular features and origin of the pathological 
myeloid cells.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bjh.13247
PMCID: PMC5193221
PMID: 25430560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]