---
reference_id: "PMID:24418302"
title: "Raynaud's phenomenon: from molecular pathogenesis to therapy."
authors:
- Prete M
- Fatone MC
- Favoino E
- Perosa F
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2013.12.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Raynaud's phenomenon: from molecular pathogenesis to therapy.
**Authors:** Prete M, Fatone MC, Favoino E, Perosa F
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2013.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2013.12.001)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2014 Jun;13(6):655-67. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2013.12.001. Epub 
2014 Jan 10.

Raynaud's phenomenon: from molecular pathogenesis to therapy.

Prete M(1), Fatone MC(1), Favoino E(2), Perosa F(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, University of Bari Medical School, I-70124 Bari, Italy.
(2)Rheumatological and Autoimmune Systemic Diseases Units, University of Bari 
Medical School, I-70124 Bari, Italy.
(3)Rheumatological and Autoimmune Systemic Diseases Units, University of Bari 
Medical School, I-70124 Bari, Italy. Electronic address: 
federico.perosa@uniba.it.

Raynaud's phenomenon (RP) is a well defined clinical syndrome characterized by 
recurrent episodes of digital vasospasm triggered by exposure to 
physical/chemical or emotional stress. RP has been classified as primary or 
secondary, depending on whether it occurs as an isolated condition (pRP) or is 
associated to an underlying disease, mainly a connective tissue disease 
(CTD-RP). In both cases, it manifests with unique "triple" (pallor, cyanosis and 
erythema), or "double" color changes. pRP is usually a benign condition, while 
sRP can evolve and be complicated by acral digital ulcers and gangrene, which 
may require surgical treatment. The pathogenesis of RP has not yet been entirely 
clarified, nor is it known whether autoantibodies have a role in RP. Even so, 
recent advances in our understanding of the pathophysiology have highlighted 
novel potential therapeutic targets. The aim of this review is to discuss the 
etiology, epidemiology, risk factors, clinical manifestations, recently 
disclosed pathogenic mechanisms underlying RP and their correlation with the 
available therapeutic options, focusing primarily on pRP and CTD-RP.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2013.12.001
PMID: 24418302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]