---
reference_id: "PMID:34573371"
title: "Gene Mutations of the Three Ectodysplasin Pathway Key Players (EDA, EDAR, and EDARADD) Account for More than 60% of Egyptian Ectodermal Dysplasia: A Report of Seven Novel Mutations."
authors:
- Ahmed HA
- El-Kamah GY
- Rabie E
- Mostafa MI
- Abouzaid MR
- Hassib NF
- Mehrez MI
- Abdel-Kader MA
- Mohsen YH
- Zada SK
- Amr KS
- Sayed ISM
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12091389
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/etiology, genetics"
- Ectodysplasins/genetics
- Edar Receptor/genetics
- Edar-Associated Death Domain Protein/genetics
- Egypt
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Wnt Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene Mutations of the Three Ectodysplasin Pathway Key Players (EDA, EDAR, and EDARADD) Account for More than 60% of Egyptian Ectodermal Dysplasia: A Report of Seven Novel Mutations.
**Authors:** Ahmed HA, El-Kamah GY, Rabie E, Mostafa MI, Abouzaid MR, Hassib NF, Mehrez MI, Abdel-Kader MA, Mohsen YH, Zada SK, Amr KS, Sayed ISM
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12091389](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12091389)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Sep 8;12(9):1389. doi: 10.3390/genes12091389.

Gene Mutations of the Three Ectodysplasin Pathway Key Players (EDA, EDAR, and 
EDARADD) Account for More than 60% of Egyptian Ectodermal Dysplasia: A Report of 
Seven Novel Mutations.

Ahmed HA(1), El-Kamah GY(2), Rabie E(1)(3), Mostafa MI(4), Abouzaid MR(4), 
Hassib NF(4), Mehrez MI(4), Abdel-Kader MA(4), Mohsen YH(4), Zada SK(3), Amr 
KS(1), Sayed ISM(4).

Author information:
(1)Medical Molecular Genetics Department, Human Genetics & Genome Research 
Division (HGGR), National Research Centre (NRC), Cairo 12622, Egypt.
(2)Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics & Genome Research Division 
(HGGR), National Research Centre (NRC), Cairo 12622, Egypt.
(3)Biology Department, School of Sciences and Engineering, The American 
University in Cairo (AUC), Cairo 11835, Egypt.
(4)Orodental Genetics Department, Human Genetics & Genome Research Division 
(HGGR), National Research Centre (NRC), Cairo 12622, Egypt.

Ectodermal dysplasia (ED) is a diverse group of genetic disorders caused by 
congenital defects of two or more ectodermal-derived body structures, namely, 
hair, teeth, nails, and some glands, e.g., sweat glands. Molecular pathogenesis 
of ED involves mutations of genes encoding key proteins of major developmental 
pathways, including ectodysplasin (EDA) and wingless-type (WNT) pathways. The 
most common ED phenotype is hypohidrotic/anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) 
featuring hypotrichosis, hypohidrosis/anhidrosis, and hypodontia. Molecular 
diagnosis is fundamental for disease management and emerging treatments. We used 
targeted next generation sequencing to study EDA, EDAR, EDARADD, and WNT10A 
genes in 45 Egyptian ED patients with or without hypohidrosis. We present 
genotype and phenotype data of 28 molecularly-characterized patients 
demonstrating genetic heterogeneity, variable expressivity, and intrafamilial 
phenotypic variability. Thirteen mutations were reported, including four novel 
EDA mutations, two novel EDARADD, and one novel EDAR mutations. Identified 
mutations congregated in exons encoding key functional domains. EDA is the most 
common gene contributing to 85% of the identified Egyptian ED genetic spectrum, 
followed by EDARADD (10%) and EDAR (5%). Our cohort represents the first and 
largest cohort from North Africa where more than 60% of ED patients were 
identified emphasizing the need for exome sequencing to explore unidentified 
cases.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12091389
PMCID: PMC8468066
PMID: 34573371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.