---
reference_id: "PMID:39779499"
title: Germ cell tumors in children.
authors:
- Bode PK
- Blasco-Santana L
- Colmenero I
- Reyes-Múgica M
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-025-04023-7
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/classification, diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germ cell tumors in children.
**Authors:** Bode PK, Blasco-Santana L, Colmenero I, Reyes-Múgica M
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-025-04023-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-025-04023-7)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2025 Jan;486(1):65-79. doi: 10.1007/s00428-025-04023-7. Epub
2025  Jan 9.

Germ cell tumors in children.

Bode PK(1), Blasco-Santana L(2), Colmenero I(2), Reyes-Múgica M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Kantonsspital Winterthur, Winterthur, Switzerland. 
peter.bode@ksw.ch.
(2)Department of Histopathology, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, 
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

Pediatric germ cell tumors represent a rare but biologically diverse group of 
neoplasms arising from pluripotent primordial germ cells. The 2022 edition of 
the WHO Classification of Pediatric Tumors introduced the first organ 
independent classification of germ cell tumors, reflecting advances in molecular 
biology, histopathology, and clinical practice. This review highlights the key 
changes, including the refined distinctions between the different subtypes. 
These updates enhance diagnostic accuracy and provide a framework for 
understanding age-dependent differences in tumor biology and behavior. Emphasis 
is placed on integrating the new classification into multidisciplinary care, 
particularly in addressing diagnostic challenges in pre- and post-pubertal-type 
germ cell tumors. By bridging the gap between histopathology and oncology, the 
updated classification represents a pivotal step forward in improving outcomes 
for children with germ cell tumors.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-025-04023-7
PMCID: PMC11782398
PMID: 39779499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
declare no competing interests.