---
reference_id: PMID:35470378
title: Hippocampals neurogenesis is impaired in mice with a deletion in the coiled coil domain of Talpid3-implications for Joubert syndrome.
authors:
- Bashford AL
- Subramanian V
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac095
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Animals
- Cerebellum/abnormalities
- Dentate Gyrus
- Eye Abnormalities/genetics
- Hippocampus
- "Kidney Diseases, Cystic/genetics"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Neurogenesis/genetics
- Retina/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hippocampals neurogenesis is impaired in mice with a deletion in the coiled coil domain of Talpid3-implications for Joubert syndrome.
**Authors:** Bashford AL, Subramanian V
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddac095](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddac095)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2022 Sep 29;31(19):3245-3265. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac095.

Hippocampals neurogenesis is impaired in mice with a deletion in the coiled coil 
domain of Talpid3-implications for Joubert syndrome.

Bashford AL(1), Subramanian V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK.

Mutations in Talpid3, a basal body protein essential for the assembly of primary 
cilia, have been reported to be causative for Joubert Syndrome (JS). Herein, we 
report prominent developmental defects in the hippocampus of a conditional 
knockout mouse lacking the conserved exons 11 and 12 of Talpid3. At early 
postnatal stages, the Talpid3 mutants exhibit a reduction in proliferation in 
the dentate gyrus and a disrupted glial scaffold. The occurrence of 
mis-localized progenitors in the granule cell layer suggests a role for the 
disrupted glial scaffold in cell migration resulting in defective subpial 
neurogenic zone-to-hilar transition. Neurospheres derived from the hippocampus 
of Talpid3fl/flUbcCre mouse, in which Talpid3 was conditionally deleted, lacked 
primary cilia and were smaller in size. In addition, neurosphere cells showed a 
disrupted actin cytoskeleton and defective migration. Our findings suggest a 
link between the hippocampal defects and the learning/memory deficits seen in JS 
patients.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddac095
PMCID: PMC9523558
PMID: 35470378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]