---
reference_id: "PMID:17503254"
title: Environmental Arsenic Exposure and Urinary 8-OHdG in Arizona and Sonora.
authors:
- Burgess JL
- Meza MM
- Josyula AB
- Poplin GS
- Kopplin MJ
- McClellen HE
- Stürup S
- Lantz RC
journal: Clin Toxicol (Phila)
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1080/15563650701354119
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental Arsenic Exposure and Urinary 8-OHdG in Arizona and Sonora.
**Authors:** Burgess JL, Meza MM, Josyula AB, Poplin GS, Kopplin MJ, McClellen HE, Stürup S, Lantz RC
**Journal:** Clin Toxicol (Phila) (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15563650701354119](https://doi.org/10.1080/15563650701354119)

## Content

1. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2007 Jun-Aug;45(5):490-8. doi:
10.1080/15563650701354119.

Environmental Arsenic Exposure and Urinary 8-OHdG in Arizona and Sonora.

Burgess JL(1), Meza MM, Josyula AB, Poplin GS, Kopplin MJ, McClellen HE, Stürup 
S, Lantz RC.

Author information:
(1)University of Arizona. Tucson, Arizona, USA. jburgess@u.arizona.edu

Although at high levels arsenic exposure is associated with increased cancer 
incidence, information on the health effects of lower exposure levels is 
limited. The objective of this study was to determine whether arsenic at 
concentrations below 40 microg/L in drinking water is associated with increased 
urinary 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG), a biomarker of DNA oxidative damage 
and repair. Urine samples were collected from 73 nonsmoking adults residing in 
two communities in Arizona (mean tap water arsenic (microg/L) 4.0 +/- 2.3 and 
20.3 +/- 3.7), and 51 subjects in four communities in Sonora, Mexico (mean tap 
water arsenic (microg/L) ranging from 4.8 +/- 0.1 to 33.3 +/- 0.6). Although 
urinary arsenic concentration increased with higher exposure in tap water, 
urinary 8-OHdG concentration did not differ by community within Arizona or 
Sonora, and was not associated with urinary arsenic concentration. At the 
exposure levels evaluated in this study, drinking water arsenic was not 
associated with increased DNA oxidation as measured by urinary 8-OHdG.

DOI: 10.1080/15563650701354119
PMID: 17503254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]