---
reference_id: "PMID:2063197"
title: Subunit communication in the anthranilate synthase complex from Salmonella typhimurium.
authors:
- Caligiuri MG
- Bauerle R
journal: Science
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1126/science.2063197
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subunit communication in the anthranilate synthase complex from Salmonella typhimurium.
**Authors:** Caligiuri MG, Bauerle R
**Journal:** Science (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.2063197](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.2063197)

## Content

1. Science. 1991 Jun 28;252(5014):1845-8. doi: 10.1126/science.2063197.

Subunit communication in the anthranilate synthase complex from Salmonella 
typhimurium.

Caligiuri MG(1), Bauerle R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville 22901.

The anthranilate synthase-phosphoribosyl transferase complex of the tryptophan 
biosynthetic pathway in Salmonella typhimurium is an allosteric, 
heterotetrameric (TrpE2-TrpD2) enzyme whose multiple activities are negatively 
feedback-regulated by L-tryptophan. A hybrid complex containing one 
catalytically active, feedback-insensitive and one catalytically inactive, 
feedback-sensitive mutant TrpE subunit was assembled in vitro and used to 
investigate communication between regulatory and catalytic sites located on 
different subunits. The properties of the hybrid complex demonstrate that the 
binding of a single inhibitor molecule to one TrpE subunit is sufficient for the 
propagation of a conformational change that affects the active site of the 
companion subunit.

DOI: 10.1126/science.2063197
PMID: 2063197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]