---
reference_id: "PMID:35236583"
title: Fluid and Hemodynamics.
authors:
- French WB
- Scott M
journal: Anesthesiol Clin
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.anclin.2021.11.002
keywords:
- Enhanced Recovery After Surgery
- Fluid Therapy/methods
- Hemodynamics
- Humans
- "Postoperative Complications/etiology, prevention & control"
- Vasoconstrictor Agents
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fluid and Hemodynamics.
**Authors:** French WB, Scott M
**Journal:** Anesthesiol Clin (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anclin.2021.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anclin.2021.11.002)

## Content

1. Anesthesiol Clin. 2022 Mar;40(1):59-71. doi: 10.1016/j.anclin.2021.11.002.
Epub  2022 Feb 11.

Fluid and Hemodynamics.

French WB(1), Scott M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Virginia Commonwealth University Health System, 1250 E
Marshall Street, Richmond, VA 23219, USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic
address: Michael.Scott@Pennmedicine.Upenn.edu.

Several components of an Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) pathway act to
improve and simplify perioperative fluid and hemodynamic therapy. Modern
perioperative fluid management has shifted away from the liberal fluid therapy
and toward more individualized approaches. Clinical evidence has also emphasized
the importance of maintaining adequate mean arterial pressure and avoiding
intraoperative hypotension. Goal-directed hemodynamic therapy (GDHT), or the use
of cardiac output monitoring to guide fluid and vasopressor use, has been shown
to reduce complications, but its role within ERAS pathways is likely best-suited
to high-risk patients or those undergoing high-risk procedures. This article
reviews the mechanisms by which ERAS pathways aid the provider in hemodynamic
management, reviews trends, and evidence regarding fluid and hemodynamic therapy
approaches, and provides guidance on the practical implementation of these
concepts within ERAS pathways.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anclin.2021.11.002
PMID: 35236583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
