---
reference_id: "PMID:32954743"
title: "Osimertinib for EGFR-mutant lung cancer with central nervous system metastases: a meta-analysis and systematic review."
authors:
- Wang N
- Zhang Y
- Mi Y
- Deng H
- Chen G
- Tang Z
- Mao J
- Cui S
- Zhang Y
- Wang L
journal: Ann Palliat Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.21037/apm-20-605
keywords:
- Acrylamides
- Aniline Compounds
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- Central Nervous System
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Mutation
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Indoles
- Pyrimidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osimertinib for EGFR-mutant lung cancer with central nervous system metastases: a meta-analysis and systematic review.
**Authors:** Wang N, Zhang Y, Mi Y, Deng H, Chen G, Tang Z, Mao J, Cui S, Zhang Y, Wang L
**Journal:** Ann Palliat Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.21037/apm-20-605](https://doi.org/10.21037/apm-20-605)

## Content

1. Ann Palliat Med. 2020 Sep;9(5):3038-3047. doi: 10.21037/apm-20-605. Epub 2020
Sep 14.

Osimertinib for EGFR-mutant lung cancer with central nervous system metastases:
a meta-analysis and systematic review.

Wang N(1), Zhang Y(2), Mi Y(2), Deng H(2), Chen G(2), Tang Z(2), Mao J(2), Cui
S(1), Zhang Y(1), Wang L(3).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Institute, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Shijiazhuang, China.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Shijiazhuang, China. yuankundu@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Osimertinib, a third-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), is
the only Food and Drug Administration-approved third-generation epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR)TKI. Osimertinib is a cancer medicine that interferes with
the growth and spread of cancer cells in the body. Osimertinib is used to treat
a certain type of non-small cell lung cancer. We review some of the main
challenges in targeting EGFR, including lack of central nervous system
penetration with most tyrosine kinase inhibitors, activity of osimertinib
penetrating blood-brain barrier and the efficacy of osimertinib.
METHODS: Guided by the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and
meta-analyses (PRISMA) statement, we conducted a systematic literature search in
the databases PubMed, EMBASE, ISI Web of Science database on January 30, 2020,
searching for studies investigating the osimertinib efficacy on patients with
CNS metastases in EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). And
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) was used to assess the certainty in the evidence.
RESULTS: The pooled results showed that the overall response rate (ORR) and
disease control rate (DCR) were 70% and 92%, respectively, in patients with
T790M mutations. The efficacy of osimertinib was confirmed by the median
progression free survival (PFS). In untreated advanced EGFR-mutated NSCLC with
CNS metastases patients, the pooled ORR and DCR of osimertinib were 71% and 93%,
respectively. And the combined median PFS, achieved by osimertinib, was 12.21
months. Above data proved that osimertinib has well activity in disease control,
especially in first line.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis confirmed that in treatment-naive advanced NSCLC
CNS metastases harboring EGFR-TKI-sensitizing mutations, Osimertinib showed
impressive antitumor activity.

DOI: 10.21037/apm-20-605
PMID: 32954743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
