---
reference_id: "PMID:16606917"
title: Novel truncating and missense mutations of the KCC3 gene associated with Andermann syndrome.
authors:
- Uyanik G
- Elcioglu N
- Penzien J
- Gross C
- Yilmaz Y
- Olmez A
- Demir E
- Wahl D
- Scheglmann K
- Winner B
- Bogdahn U
- Topaloglu H
- Hehr U
- Winkler J
journal: Neurology
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000204181.31175.8b
keywords:
- Agenesis of Corpus Callosum
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Median Nerve/physiopathology
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Peroneal Nerve/physiopathology
- Sequence Deletion
- Symporters/genetics
- Syndrome
- K Cl- Cotransporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel truncating and missense mutations of the KCC3 gene associated with Andermann syndrome.
**Authors:** Uyanik G, Elcioglu N, Penzien J, Gross C, Yilmaz Y, Olmez A, Demir E, Wahl D, Scheglmann K, Winner B, Bogdahn U, Topaloglu H, Hehr U, Winkler J
**Journal:** Neurology (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1212/01.wnl.0000204181.31175.8b](https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000204181.31175.8b)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2006 Apr 11;66(7):1044-8. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000204181.31175.8b.

Novel truncating and missense mutations of the KCC3 gene associated with
Andermann syndrome.

Uyanik G(1), Elcioglu N, Penzien J, Gross C, Yilmaz Y, Olmez A, Demir E, Wahl D,
Scheglmann K, Winner B, Bogdahn U, Topaloglu H, Hehr U, Winkler J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Regensburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Neurology. 2006 Oct 24;67(8):1528.

BACKGROUND: Andermann syndrome (OMIM 218000) is an autosomal recessive
motor-sensory neuropathy associated with developmental and neurodegenerative
defects. The cerebral MRI reveals a variable degree of agenesis of the corpus
callosum. Recently, truncating mutations of the KCC3 gene (also known as
SLC12A6) have been associated with Andermann syndrome.
METHODS: The authors assessed clinically and genetically three isolated cases
from Germany and Turkey with symptoms consistent with Andermann syndrome.
RESULTS: The authors detected four novel mutations within the KCC3 gene in their
patients: two different truncating mutations in the first patient, a homozygous
truncating mutation in the second, and a homozygous missense mutation in the
third patient. In contrast to the classic phenotype of the Andermann syndrome
linked to truncating KCC3 mutations the phenotype and the course of the disease
linked to the missense mutation appeared to be different (i.e., showing
additional features like diffuse and widespread white matter abnormalities).
CONCLUSIONS: Not only truncating but also missense mutations of the KCC3 gene
are associated with Andermann syndrome. Different types of KCC3 mutations may
determine different clinical phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000204181.31175.8b
PMID: 16606917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
