---
reference_id: "PMID:28467028"
title: "Clinical diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy: The movement disorder society criteria."
authors:
- Höglinger GU
- Respondek G
- Stamelou M
- Kurz C
- Josephs KA
- Lang AE
- Mollenhauer B
- Müller U
- Nilsson C
- Whitwell JL
- Arzberger T
- Englund E
- Gelpi E
- Giese A
- Irwin DJ
- Meissner WG
- Pantelyat A
- Rajput A
- van Swieten JC
- Troakes C
- Antonini A
- Bhatia KP
- Bordelon Y
- Compta Y
- Corvol JC
- Colosimo C
- Dickson DW
- Dodel R
- Ferguson L
- Grossman M
- Kassubek J
- Krismer F
- Levin J
- Lorenzl S
- Morris HR
- Nestor P
- Oertel WH
- Poewe W
- Rabinovici G
- Rowe JB
- Schellenberg GD
- Seppi K
- van Eimeren T
- Wenning GK
- Boxer AL
- Golbe LI
- Litvan I
- Movement Disorder Society-endorsed PSP Study Group
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/mds.26987
keywords:
- Humans
- Practice Guidelines as Topic/standards
- "Societies, Medical/standards"
- "Supranuclear Palsy, Progressive/diagnosis, physiopathology"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Clinical diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy: The movement disorder society criteria.
**Authors:** Höglinger GU, Respondek G, Stamelou M, Kurz C, Josephs KA, Lang AE, Mollenhauer B, Müller U, Nilsson C, Whitwell JL, Arzberger T, Englund E, Gelpi E, Giese A, Irwin DJ, Meissner WG, Pantelyat A, Rajput A, van Swieten JC, Troakes C, Antonini A, Bhatia KP, Bordelon Y, Compta Y, Corvol JC, Colosimo C, Dickson DW, Dodel R, Ferguson L, Grossman M, Kassubek J, Krismer F, Levin J, Lorenzl S, Morris HR, Nestor P, Oertel WH, Poewe W, Rabinovici G, Rowe JB, Schellenberg GD, Seppi K, van Eimeren T, Wenning GK, Boxer AL, Golbe LI, Litvan I, Movement Disorder Society-endorsed PSP Study Group
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.26987](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.26987)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2017 Jun;32(6):853-864. doi: 10.1002/mds.26987. Epub 2017 May 3.

Clinical diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy: The movement disorder 
society criteria.

Höglinger GU(1)(2), Respondek G(1)(2), Stamelou M(3), Kurz C(4), Josephs KA(5), 
Lang AE(6), Mollenhauer B(7), Müller U(8), Nilsson C(9), Whitwell JL(10), 
Arzberger T(2)(4)(11), Englund E(12), Gelpi E(13), Giese A(11), Irwin DJ(14), 
Meissner WG(15)(16)(17), Pantelyat A(18), Rajput A(19), van Swieten JC(20), 
Troakes C(21), Antonini A(22), Bhatia KP(23), Bordelon Y(24), Compta Y(25), 
Corvol JC(26), Colosimo C(27), Dickson DW(28), Dodel R(29), Ferguson L(19), 
Grossman M(14), Kassubek J(30), Krismer F(31), Levin J(2)(32), Lorenzl 
S(33)(34)(35), Morris HR(36), Nestor P(37), Oertel WH(38), Poewe W(31), 
Rabinovici G(39), Rowe JB(40), Schellenberg GD(41), Seppi K(31), van Eimeren 
T(42), Wenning GK(31), Boxer AL(39), Golbe LI(43), Litvan I(44); Movement 
Disorder Society-endorsed PSP Study Group(1).

Collaborators: Boxer AL, Rajput A, Pantelyat A, Antonini A, Lang AE, Giese A, 
Mollenhauer B, Colosimo C, Kurz C, Nilsson C, Troakes C, Irwin DJ, Dickson DW, 
Gelpi E, Krismer F, Schellenberg GD, Respondek G, Rabinovici G, Wenning GK, 
Höglinger GU, Morris HR, Litvan I, Rowe JB, Kassubek J, Corvol JC, Whitwell JL, 
Levin J, van Swieten J, Bhatia KP, Josephs KA, Seppi K, Golbe LI, Stamelou M, 
Grossman M, Nestor P, Dodel R, Lorenzl S, van Eimeren T, Arzberger T, Müller U, 
Meissner WG, Poewe W, Oertel WH, Compta Y, Bordelon Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany.
(3)Second Department of Neurology, Attikon University Hospital, University of 
Athens, Athens, Greece.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(6)Morton and Gloria Shulman Movement Disorders Clinic and the Edmond J. Safra 
Program in Parkinson's Disease, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
(7)Paracelsus-Elena Klinik, Kassel, Germany, and University Medical Center 
Göttingen, Institute of Neuropathology, Göttingen, Germany.
(8)Institute of Human Genetics, Giessen, Germany.
(9)Department of Clinical Sciences, Division of Neurology, Lund University, 
Lund, Sweden.
(10)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesoya, USA.
(11)Center for Neuropathology and Prion Research, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
(12)Department of Clinical Sciences, Division of Oncology and Pathology, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(13)Neurological Tissue Bank of the Biobank - Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, 
Universitat de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.
(14)Frontotemporal Degeneration Center, Department of Neurology, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(15)Université de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, 
Bordeaux, France.
(16)CNRS, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, Bordeaux, France.
(17)Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Pellegrin, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(18)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(19)Division of Neurology, Royal University Hospital, University of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(20)Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(21)London Neurodegenerative Diseases Brain Bank, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience, Kings College London, London, United Kingdom.
(22)Parkinson and Movement Disorders Unit, IRCCS Hospital San Camillo, Venice, 
and Department of Neurosciences, Padova University, Padova, Italy.
(23)Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, United Kingdom.
(24)Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles, California, 
USA.
(25)Parkinson's Disease & Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, Hospital 
Clinic/IDIBAPS/University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(26)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06; and INSERM UMRS_1127, CIC_1422; 
and CNRS UMR_7225; and AP-HP; and ICM, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département 
des maladies du système nerveux, Paris, France.
(27)Department of Neurology, Santa Maria University Hospital of Terni, Terni, 
Italy.
(28)Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, USA.
(29)Department of Geriatric Medicine, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
(30)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(31)Department of Neurology, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(32)Department of Neurology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
(33)Institute of Nursing Science and Practice, Paracelsus Medical University, 
Salzburg, Austria.
(34)Department of Neurology, Hospital Agatharied, Agatharied, Germany.
(35)Department of Palliative Medicine, Munich University Hospital, LMU Munich, 
Munich, Germany.
(36)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
United Kingdom.
(37)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Magdeburg, Germany.
(38)Department of Neurology, Philipps Universität, Marburg, Germany.
(39)Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, University of California, 
San Francisco, California, USA.
(40)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.
(41)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(42)Departments of Nuclear Medicine and Neurology, University of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany.
(43)Department of Neurology, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New 
Brunswick, New Jersey, USA.
(44)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Diego, California, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: PSP is a neuropathologically defined disease entity. Clinical 
diagnostic criteria, published in 1996 by the National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke/Society for PSP, have excellent specificity, but their 
sensitivity is limited for variant PSP syndromes with presentations other than 
Richardson's syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to provide an evidence- and consensus-based revision of the 
clinical diagnostic criteria for PSP.
METHODS: We searched the PubMed, Cochrane, Medline, and PSYCInfo databases for 
articles published in English since 1996, using postmortem diagnosis or highly 
specific clinical criteria as the diagnostic standard. Second, we generated 
retrospective standardized clinical data from patients with autopsy-confirmed 
PSP and control diseases. On this basis, diagnostic criteria were drafted, 
optimized in two modified Delphi evaluations, submitted to structured 
discussions with consensus procedures during a 2-day meeting, and refined in 
three further Delphi rounds.
RESULTS: Defined clinical, imaging, laboratory, and genetic findings serve as 
mandatory basic features, mandatory exclusion criteria, or context-dependent 
exclusion criteria. We identified four functional domains (ocular motor 
dysfunction, postural instability, akinesia, and cognitive dysfunction) as 
clinical predictors of PSP. Within each of these domains, we propose three 
clinical features that contribute different levels of diagnostic certainty. 
Specific combinations of these features define the diagnostic criteria, 
stratified by three degrees of diagnostic certainty (probable PSP, possible PSP, 
and suggestive of PSP). Clinical clues and imaging findings represent supportive 
features.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we present new criteria aimed to optimize early, sensitive, 
and specific clinical diagnosis of PSP on the basis of currently available 
evidence. © 2017 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

© 2017 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.26987
PMCID: PMC5516529
PMID: 28467028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Relevant conflicts of interest/financial 
disclosures: Nothing to report. Full financial disclosures and author roles may 
be found in the online version of this article.

PSP was first described in 1964 on the basis of a small case series as an adult-onset, rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disease with the leading feature of vertical supranuclear gaze palsy and nerve cell degeneration mainly in the brain stem.1

Since then, major advances have led PSP to be defined by intracerebral aggregation of the microtubule-associated protein tau, predominantly involving isoforms with four microtubule-binding repeats (4R-tau), in neurofibrillary tangles, oligodendrocytic coils, and, specifically, astrocytic tufts.2–4 Thus, a definite diagnosis of PSP currently requires neuropathological examination.2,5

The clinical criteria proposed by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and Society for PSP (NINDS-SPSP) are currently the most widely used criteria for the ante mortem diagnosis of PSP.5 They rely on the demonstration of a vertical supranuclear gaze palsy plus postural instability and falls within the first year of symptom onset to diagnose “probable” PSP. “Possible” PSP is diagnosed in the presence of either supranuclear gaze palsy or a combination of slow vertical saccades and postural instability with falls within the first year.

The NINDS-SPSP criteria, as validated by autopsy, have excellent specificity, around 95% to 100% for probable PSP and around 80% to 93% for possible PSP.6–8 The combination of early onset postural instability and falls with vertical ocular motor dysfunction is now usually referred to as Richardson’s syndrome (PSP-RS)9 and is well captured by the NINDS-SPSP criteria.10 However, the criteria’s sensitivity for PSP overall is limited (median, 24%; range, 14%–83%) at the first clinical visit.5,7,8,11–13 Diagnosis is typically made 3 to 4 years after onset of first symptoms, when the cardinal features, that is falls and supranuclear gaze palsy, have become unequivocally apparent.13 Whereas inadequate ocular motor examinations may partly explain the low sensitivity early in the disease course, the NINDS-SPSP criteria also have low sensitivity for PSP patients presenting with variant PSP syndromes syndromes other than PSP-RS.10

Patients with autopsy-confirmed PSP have been reported with variant PSP clinical presentations, including initial predominance of ocular motor dysfunction (PSP-OM),10,14 postural instability (PSP-PI),10,15 Parkinsonism resembling idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (PSP-P),9,11,16 frontal lobe cognitive or behavioral presentations (PSP-F), including behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD),14,17–19 progressive gait freezing (PSP-PGF),20–22 corticobasal syndrome (PSP-CBS),23–26 primary lateral sclerosis (PSP-PLS),27,28 cerebellar ataxia (PSP-C),29–32 and speech/language disorders (PSP-SL), including nonfluent/agrammatic primary progressive aphasia (nfaPPA) and progressive apraxia of speech (AOS).33–36 Patients with presentations other than PSP-RS occurred in 76% of autopsy-confirmed PSP cases in a recent series and met the NINDS-SPSP criteria at significantly lower frequencies and longer latencies from symptom onset.10

Thus, early and reliable diagnosis of PSP remains a major clinical challenge, but is justifiably demanded by patients and their carers and is highly important for estimation of prognosis, appropriate allocation to therapeutic trials, and development of new diagnostic tools. Therefore, the International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society (MDS)-endorsed PSP Study Group set out to provide an evidence- and consensus-based revision of the NINDS-SPSP criteria. We aimed at improving the clinical detection of underlying PSP pathology by maintaining high diagnostic sensitivity for PSP-RS, improving sensitivity for early and variant PSP presentations, and achieving high specificity versus alternative diagnoses such as Parkinson’s disease (PD), MSA with predominant parkinsonism (MSA-P), corticobasal syndrome (CBS) attributed to corticobasal degeneration (CBD) or alternative proteinopathies, and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (from any underlying non-PSP/CBD proteinopathy) presenting as bvFTD (FTLD-bvFTD).

Here, we propose official MDS clinical diagnostic criteria for PSP (MDS-PSP criteria) for use in research and clinical practice.

The MDS-PSP criteria were generated by the MDS-PSP study group in a three-step approach.

First, we performed a systematic literature review covering the time since publication of the NINDS-SPSP criteria. In brief, the steering committee (G.U.H., M.S., A.L.B., L.I.G., and I.L.) assembled expert working groups for specific questions relevant to the diagnosis of PSP. We searched the PubMed, Cochrane, Medline, and PSYCInfo databases for articles, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses published in English from 1996 to 2015, applying either postmortem diagnosis or the NINDS-SPSP criteria. Study group members were encouraged to add relevant articles to be considered throughout the project period (end of 2016), particularly those published after 2015. The literature was analyzed following the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network recommendations.37 From N = 5,903 identified articles, N = 462 met the inclusion standards. The literature-based evidence was then summarized by the working groups for imaging and clinical aspects and is published in detail in accompanying papers in this issue of Movement Disorders.38,39

Second, we collected the largest autopsy-confirmed case series reported so far for PSP and disease controls (CBD, MSA-P, PD, and FTLD-bvFTD) from nine brain banks with a proven track record of a close collaboration with tertiary clinical referral centers, both with excellent experience in neurodegenerative diseases (Amsterdam, Netherlands; Baltimore, MD; Barcelona, Spain; Bordeaux, France; London, UK; Lund, Sweden; Munich, Germany; Philadelphia, PA; and Saskatchewan, Canada). High-quality original natural history data were available from patients with autopsy-confirmed PSP (N = 206), CBD (N = 54), MSA-P (N = 51), PD (N = 53), and FTLD-bvFTD (N = 73). We extracted demographic data and predefined clinical features (absence/presence/onset) in a standardized manner locally from the clinical records and collected them centrally. These data were used to estimate and stratify the diagnostic value of the clinical items selected from a comprehensive literature review and are reported in detail in an accompanying paper.38

Third, on the basis of the evidence obtained in the first two steps, the steering committee drafted an initial proposal of the criteria, which was distributed to the MDS-PSP study group members. They provided written feedback to the process coordinator (G.U.H.), who incorporated the comments into optimized criteria in two modified Delphi rounds. In March 2016, the group convened for a 2-day consensus meeting in Munich to present and discuss all aspects of the criteria (structure, basic features, exclusion criteria, core functional domains, operationalized clinical features, supportive findings, imaging, biomarkers, and genetics). For each of these items, the data obtained in the first two steps were presented by the subgroup coordinators. Thereafter, the written draft of the criteria was discussed stepwise. Modifications were integrated until the entire group unanimously agreed to the items under discussion. After the meeting, the written document was circulated again and optimized in three further Delphi rounds, in particular, dealing with precise wording, operationalized definition of clinical examination guidelines, and newly evolving aspects, such as tau PET imaging. After final approval, the current manuscript was written (G.U.H.) and circulated to incorporate final modifications.

Here, we present the MDS clinical diagnostic criteria for PSP.

Basic features need to be present in a patient in order to be considered for the diagnosis of PSP of any phenotype and at any stage (Table 1). Mandatory inclusion criteria (Table 1, B1) indicate the presence of a sporadic, adult-onset, gradually progressive neurodegenerative disease. Mandatory exclusion criteria (Table 1, B2) rule out PSP and need to be applied in any patient. Context-dependent exclusion criteria (Table 1, B3) also rule out PSP, but should be applied only in patients presenting with suggestive, unusual clinical features justifying further investigation.

We propose four core functional domains as characteristic clinical manifestations of PSP (ocular motor dysfunction [O], postural instability [P], akinesia [A], and cognitive dysfunction [C]; Table 2). In each domain, we propose three characteristic core clinical features, stratified by presumed levels of certainty (1 [highest], 2 [mid], and 3 [lowest]) that they contribute to the diagnosis of PSP (Table 2).

Supportive features (Table 3) are those having positive predictive values insufficient to qualify them as diagnostic features, but sufficient to provide helpful ancillary evidence to increase informal diagnostic confidence. These are classified as clinical clues (CC1–CC4) and imaging findings (IF1, IF2).

The core clinical features, supportive clinical clues, and supportive imaging findings were operationalized in an attempt to standardize the application of the MDS-PSP criteria (Table 4).

Four levels of diagnostic certainty are proposed (Table 5). Definite PSP is the neuropathological gold standard defining the disease entity, regardless of its clinical presentation. Probable PSP is diagnosed in the presence of a combination of clinical features with high specificity. Possible PSP is diagnosed in the presence of clinical features considered to substantially increase the sensitivity for PSP. Clinical syndromes suggestive of PSP have features that alone or in combination may constitute early, subtle evidence for PSP with modest, but still useful, positive predictive value. Additional presence of imaging findings (IF1 or IF2) qualifies for the label imaging supported diagnosis.

Clinical predominance types are determined based on the combination of clinical features (Table 5). These include PSP-RS, PSP-OM, PSP-PI, PSP-P, PSP-F, PSP-PGF, PSP-CBS, and PSP-SL, per our literature analysis reported in an accompanying article.38 Patients with possible PSP-SL or PSP-CBS also qualify for the diagnosis of a probable 4R-tauopathy.

Here, we propose new MDS-PSP criteria, which are aimed to optimize early, sensitive, and specific clinical diagnosis of PSP on the basis of currently available evidence. They are intended for use in both clinical practice and research, including the diagnosis of early and variant PSP for clinical trials.

The new diagnostic criteria accept the neuropathological examination as the gold standard to define PSP as a disease entity.2–4,40 The appropriateness of this definition is demonstrated by the unique morphological (e.g., tufted astrocytes, globose tangles),3,4 biochemical (e.g., straight filaments, 4R-tauopathy),3,4 and genetic features (e.g., the statistically robust findings obtained in a genome-wide association study)41 obtained in patients on the basis of this disease definition.

The development of the MDS-PSP clinical criteria was based on the NINDS-SPSP criteria, which are known to be very specific for the clinical prediction of pathologically defined PSP.7,8,13 For this reason, NINDS-SPSP “possible” and “probable” cases are now jointly classified as probable PSP-RS, as proposed previously,42 thus allowing comparability with the past published literature.

The mandatory inclusion criteria of the NINDS-SPSP criteria were largely maintained. We still consider PSP as a sporadic, not as a monogenic disease, because clinical or pathological phenocopies resulting from rare genetic variants (mutations) in MAPT do not share an identical etiology to sporadic PSP. Because sporadic occurrence does not ultimately rule out underlying monogenic inheritance, particularly in small families, MAPT sequencing may be considered, where higher certainty is warranted. We continue to set the minimum age at onset as 40, given that no autopsy-confirmed case has been demonstrated to manifest earlier, whereas some PSP look-alikes (e.g., Niemann-Pick disease, type C) may do so. We also specified the onset of PSP-related symptoms as including neurological, cognitive, or behavioral deficits to reflect current knowledge of the broad clinical spectrum over which PSP may range. Inclusion and exclusion criteria have been carefully adapted to the current state of knowledge, as presented in accompanying papers.38,39

Whereas the NINDS-SPSP criteria focused on two core functional domains (ocular motor dysfunction, postural instability), the MDS-PSP criteria added two further domains (akinesia, cognitive dysfunction). This accounts for the results obtained by hypothesis-free cluster analyses in two independent large clinicopathological series of definite PSP patients, identifying these four domains as most representative of characteristic disease manifestations.9,10 Within each domain, we specified three characteristic clinical features, stratified by levels of certainty for the diagnosis of PSP. These were identified through the systematic literature review, validated quantitatively in the clinicopathological cohort, and specified where required by expert consensus. Of note, these levels may coincide with a typical temporal evolution of symptoms in some (e.g., ocular motor dysfunction, postural instability), but not in other domains (e.g., akinesia, cognitive dysfunction). Using this 12-unit grid, we were able to allocate most symptoms considered as characteristic for the spectrum displayed by autopsy-confirmed PSP patients.

These 12 clinical features help to diagnose PSP with differing sensitivity and specificity38:

high sensitivity and high specificity, for example, vertical supranuclear palsy, frequently observed in PSP with high diagnostic relevance;

high sensitivity, but reduced specificity, for example, parkinsonism, with tremor and/or asymmetry and/or levodopa responsiveness, representing conditions that help to identify PSP patients, but depend on presence of other PSP-specific features to qualify for the diagnosis;

low sensitivity, but high specificity, for example, progressive gait freezing within 3 years of symptom onset, representing a very rare condition, however with a very high positive predictive value for the diagnosis of PSP; and

low sensitivity and low specificity, for example, CBS, which is observed regularly in specialized centers and needs to be considered as a possible manifestation of PSP as one of several possible underlying pathologies.

We also propose a list of supportive clinical clues to increase diagnostic confidence. We are aware of several other clinical signs that have been proposed to indicate the diagnosis of PSP, for example, retropulsion with spontaneous backward falls, falling back into a chair when precipitously attempting to rise from it without attributed caution (“rocket sign”), clumsily and unsteadily walk (“drunken sailor gait”), nuchal dystonia with retrocollis, raised eyebrows attributed to frontalis muscle overactivity (“astonished facies”), vertical wrinkles in the glabella region attributed to procerus muscle overactivity (“procerus sign”), low frequency of blinking (“Mona Lisa gaze”), and “messy-tie sign” attribute to an inability to look down when eating. Whereas these signs may indeed be helpful to raise suspicion about PSP, we found no clear evidence suggesting that they would indeed contribute reliable information to substantiate the diagnosis of PSP.

Until now, there have been no uniformly accepted clinical diagnostic criteria available for the variant PSP manifestations of neuropathologically defined PSP other than PSP-RS. Therefore, most of these cases were not identified early (or at all) for the purposes of routine clinical care, standardized acquisition of natural history data, or inclusion in therapeutic trials. Our proposed criteria overcome these limitations by providing evidence- and consensus-based guidelines to diagnose PSP-OM,10,14 PSP-PI,10,15 PSP-P,9,11,16 PSP-F,14,17–19 PSP-CBS,23–26 PSP-PGF,20–22 and PSP-SL.33–36

We did not attempt to provide criteria for PSP-PLS27,28 and PSP-C,29–32 although we do acknowledge the existence of these manifestations. This decision reflects the very rare occurrence of PSP-PLS and PSP-C and the sparse published clinicopathological evidence, which was not perceived to delineate features specific enough to allow ante mortem diagnosis. The study group declined to risk including patients with predominant PLS or cerebellar ataxia, because this would have weakened the distinction of PSP from motor neuron disease and MSA-C and other adult-onset sporadic cerebellar ataxias, respectively.

The MDS-PSP clinical diagnostic criteria are stratified by diagnostic certainty and may therefore be used for different purposes. The concept underlying this stratification has been described in detail elsewhere.43 The following diagnostic categories are proposed:

“Definite PSP” can only be diagnosed by neuropathological examination at present. Currently, no other biomarker, imaging, or genetic finding with close to 100% sensitivity and specificity is available.

“Probable PSP” is diagnosed in the presence of a combination of clinical features that may not be very sensitive for PSP, but are considered to be highly specific, thus being ideally suited for therapeutic and biological studies, where it is important to exclude non-PSP from the subject group.

“Possible PSP” is diagnosed in the presence of clinical features that substantially increase sensitivity, but at the possible cost of decreased specificity. This category is therefore suitable for descriptive epidemiologic studies and clinical care, where it is important not to exclude any cases of true PSP. With the addition of biomarkers to increase diagnostic specificity, these individuals might also be reasonably included in a therapeutic study.

Conditions “suggestive of PSP” represent subtle early signs of PSP, but do not meet the threshold for possible or probable PSP, and are suitable for early identification of individuals in whom the diagnosis may be confirmed as the disease evolves, thereby justifying close clinical follow-up examinations, especially in longitudinal observational studies to further characterize the natural history of PSP with the overall goal of improving diagnosis of patients in early-stage disease. This diagnostic category has been newly introduced in the MDS-PSP criteria in analogy to other progressive neurological diseases, in which defined conditions have been identified with predictable risk of converting to the established disease of interest (e.g., rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder for PD, mild cognitive impairment for Alzheimer’s disease [AD], or clinically isolated syndrome for multiple sclerosis). From a scientific perspective, this new category appears highly relevant for the prospective development of new clinical diagnostic tools and biomarkers permitting a diagnosis of PSP at an earlier stage. This diagnostic category would also be highly relevant for the development of disease-modifying therapies that would ideally be initiated in the very early course, before extensive neurodegeneration has occurred.

For the first time, we also introduce a new category for “probable 4R-tauopathies,” comprising patients with possible PSP-SL or PSP-CBS. By introducing this category, we acknowledge that these clinically defined conditions have a high likelihood of underlying PSP or CBD pathology, provided that the corresponding context-dependent exclusion criteria to rule out AD and genetic forms of FTLD-TDP are applied. PSP and CBD are two primary tauopathies with predominant aggregation of four-repeat tau isoforms, which are very difficult to differentially diagnose without neuropathological examination. Their joint ante mortem recognition as probable 4R-tauopathies, however, may offer opportunities for neurobiological investigations of shared pathological mechanisms (e.g., previous works41,44 or rational disease-modifying interventions. Obviously, all “probable” PSP categories are also probable 4R-tauopathies, however, with high probability of underlying PSP, but not CBD pathology.

We carefully evaluated the added diagnostic value obtained by supportive investigations, the results of which are presented in accompanying papers.38,39 In short, we adapted the following conclusions for the MDS-PSP criteria:

Genetic analyses do not help to support the clinical diagnosis of PSP, but known rare genetic variants (mutations) in some genes are exclusion criteria, because they may mimic aspects of PSP clinically, but differ neuropathologically. Furthermore, MAPT H2 haplotype homozygosity renders the diagnosis unlikely, but is not an exclusion criterion.

Established fluid biomarkers do not help to support the clinical diagnosis of PSP, but can rule out alternative non-neurodegenerative diagnoses in patients with similar clinical presentations (Table 1, B3). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers for AD may be useful in research investigations and help exclude patients with underlying AD neuropathology in CBS, which has a high frequency of patients with primary AD neuropathology (~20%) that can mimic PSP-CBS25,45; however, caution should be used in interpretation of these results in other forms of clinical PSP syndromes, given that secondary age-associated AD neuropathology can influence levels of CSF tau and β-amyloid in patients with PSP pathology.46

Brain imaging is relevant to rule out alternative diagnoses. Demonstration of predominant midbrain atrophy or hypometabolism and/or postsynaptic striatal dopaminergic degeneration increases the diagnostic confidence in patients diagnosed on the basis of clinical features and qualifies for the label of “imaging supported diagnosis.” However, only limited data are currently available, which would suggest that current imaging techniques may eventually help to anticipate or strongly consolidate the diagnosis as compared to diagnoses based on clinical features alone, given that most imaging studies have not been performed at a time point preceding the clinical diagnosis and have not been evaluated against the neuropathological gold standard. Tau-PET may evolve as an in vivo modality supportive of the pathological PSP diagnosis at the individual patient level.47,48 However, the currently available evidence with regard to its sensitivity and specificity, as assessed against the neuropathological gold standard, is too limited to draw firm diagnostic conclusions.

In summary, we propose the MDS clinical diagnostic criteria for PSP, incorporating the advances in knowledge about PSP and its differential diagnoses from the past 20 years. The MDS-PSP study group aims to develop a web-based tool to facilitate the broad implementation of the new criteria in clinical practice and a video-based tutorial to facilitate standardized application. The study group is engaged in international activities to validate these criteria prospectively in clinicopathological studies. We acknowledge that the MDS-PSP criteria will require continuous, adaptive modification as our understanding of PSP advances.