---
reference_id: "PMID:9774859"
title: "Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: case report and review of the chromosomal aberrations associated with diaphragmatic defects."
authors:
- Sergi C
- Schulze BR
- Hager HD
- Beedgen B
- Zilow E
- Linderkamp O
- Otto HF
- Tariverdian G
journal: Pathologica
year: '1998'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: case report and review of the chromosomal aberrations associated with diaphragmatic defects.
**Authors:** Sergi C, Schulze BR, Hager HD, Beedgen B, Zilow E, Linderkamp O, Otto HF, Tariverdian G
**Journal:** Pathologica (1998)

## Content

1. Pathologica. 1998 Jun;90(3):285-93.

Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: case report and review of the chromosomal aberrations 
associated with diaphragmatic defects.

Sergi C(1), Schulze BR, Hager HD, Beedgen B, Zilow E, Linderkamp O, Otto HF, 
Tariverdian G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

A female fetus showing severe growth retardation was delivered at 31 weeks of 
gestation because of fetal distress. At birth, the infant showed bradycardia and 
no spontaneous breathing. Although high frequency oscillatory ventilation was 
started, severe asphyxia persisted and the infant died of respiratory 
insufficiency. At the autopsy, the propositus showed microcephaly, prominent 
glabella, broad bridge of the nose, ocular hypertelorism, poorly differentiated 
and low-set ears, bilateral palatoschisis, and micrognathia. Midline closure 
defects of the cervical spine bodies, lower jaw, and skull base were seen at 
postmortem radiography. An extreme hypoplasia of both lungs, a large defect of 
the left diaphragm with upward displacement of viscera, and multiple cortical 
cysts in both kidneys were seen at postmortem examination. Karyotyping revealed 
a chromosomal imbalance with 46, XX, del(4) (pter-->13), characterizing the 
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome. Because diaphragmatic defects can occur in association 
with specific recognizable patterns of human malformation careful pathologic and 
genetic workup of all affected infants in crucial for accurate genetic 
counseling.

PMID: 9774859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]