---
reference_id: "PMID:10684852"
title: The intestinal T cell response to alpha-gliadin in adult celiac disease is focused on a single deamidated glutamine targeted by tissue transglutaminase.
authors:
- Arentz-Hansen H
- Körner R
- Molberg O
- Quarsten H
- Vader W
- Kooy YM
- Lundin KE
- Koning F
- Roepstorff P
- Sollid LM
- McAdam SN
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1084/jem.191.4.603
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The intestinal T cell response to alpha-gliadin in adult celiac disease is focused on a single deamidated glutamine targeted by tissue transglutaminase.
**Authors:** Arentz-Hansen H, Körner R, Molberg O, Quarsten H, Vader W, Kooy YM, Lundin KE, Koning F, Roepstorff P, Sollid LM, McAdam SN
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.191.4.603](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.191.4.603)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2000 Feb 21;191(4):603-12. doi: 10.1084/jem.191.4.603.

The intestinal T cell response to alpha-gliadin in adult celiac disease is 
focused on a single deamidated glutamine targeted by tissue transglutaminase.

Arentz-Hansen H(1), Körner R, Molberg O, Quarsten H, Vader W, Kooy YM, Lundin 
KE, Koning F, Roepstorff P, Sollid LM, McAdam SN.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology, Rikshospitalet, University of Oslo, N-0027 Oslo, 
Norway.

The great majority of patients that are intolerant of wheat gluten protein due 
to celiac disease (CD) are human histocompatibility leukocyte antigen 
(HLA)-DQ2(+), and the remaining few normally express HLA-DQ8. These two class II 
molecules are chiefly responsible for the presentation of gluten peptides to the 
gluten-specific T cells that are found only in the gut of CD patients but not of 
controls. Interestingly, tissue transglutaminase (tTG)-mediated deamidation of 
gliadin plays an important role in recognition of this food antigen by 
intestinal T cells. Here we have used recombinant antigens to demonstrate that 
the intestinal T cell response to alpha-gliadin in adult CD is focused on two 
immunodominant, DQ2-restricted peptides that overlap by a seven-residue fragment 
of gliadin. We show that tTG converts a glutamine residue within this fragment 
into glutamic acid and that this process is critical for T cell recognition. 
Gluten-specific T cell lines from 16 different adult patients all responded to 
one or both of these deamidated peptides, indicating that these epitopes are 
highly relevant to disease pathology. Binding studies showed that the deamidated 
peptides displayed an increased affinity for DQ2, a molecule known to 
preferentially bind peptides containing negatively charged residues. 
Interestingly, the modified glutamine is accommodated in different pockets of 
DQ2 for the different epitopes. These results suggest modifications of anchor 
residues that lead to an improved affinity for major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC), and altered conformation of the peptide-MHC complex may be a critical 
factor leading to T cell responses to gliadin and the oral intolerance of gluten 
found in CD.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.191.4.603
PMCID: PMC2195837
PMID: 10684852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]