---
reference_id: "PMID:2683783"
title: Inherited disorders of collagen gene structure and expression.
authors:
- Byers PH
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320340114
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited disorders of collagen gene structure and expression.
**Authors:** Byers PH
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320340114](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320340114)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1989 Sep;34(1):72-80. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320340114.

Inherited disorders of collagen gene structure and expression.

Byers PH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195.

As a result of investigations completed during the last 15 years, the molecular 
bases of most form of osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) and of some forms of the 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) are now known. Most forms of OI result from point 
mutations in the genes (COL1A1 and COL1A2) that encode the chains of type I 
procollagen or mutations that affect the expression of these genes. Less 
frequently, mutations that affect the size of the chain can also result in these 
phenotypes. The phenotypic presentation appears to be determined by the nature 
of the mutation, the chain in which it occurs, and, for point mutations, the 
position of the substitution and the nature of the substituting amino acid in 
the protein product. Similar mutations in the gene (COL3A1) that encodes the 
chains of type III procollagen result in the EDS type IV phenotype. Mutations 
which result in deletion of the cleavage site for the aminoterminal procollagen 
protease result in the EDS type VII phenotype and other mutations which affect 
the structure of the triple-helical domain by deletions and alter the 
conformation of the substrate at the site of proteolytic conversion can produce 
mixed phenotypes. Alterations in post-translational processing of collagenous 
proteins can result in the EDS type VI and EDS type IX phenotypes. Linkage 
analysis and study of type II collagen proteins from individuals with a variety 
of skeletal dysplasias suggest that similar mutations in these genes also result 
in clinically apparent phenotypes. Mutations in the majority of the 20 known 
collagen genes have not yet been identified.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320340114
PMID: 2683783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]