---
reference_id: "PMID:36970534"
title: "Corticosteroids in childhood epilepsies: A systematic review."
authors:
- Becker LL
- Kaindl AM
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1142253
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Corticosteroids in childhood epilepsies: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Becker LL, Kaindl AM
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1142253](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1142253)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Mar 10;14:1142253. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1142253. 
eCollection 2023.

Corticosteroids in childhood epilepsies: A systematic review.

Becker LL(1)(2)(3)(4), Kaindl AM(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Center for Chronically Sick Children, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(3)German Epilepsy Center for Children and Adolescents, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Institute of Cell- and Neurobiology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.

Corticosteroids have been used for the treatment of patients with epilepsy for 
more than 6 decades, based on the hypothesis of inflammation in the genesis 
and/or promotion of epilepsy. We, therefore, aimed to provide a systematic 
overview of the use of corticosteroid regimes in childhood epilepsies in line 
with the PRISMA guidelines. We performed a structured literature search via 
PubMed and identified 160 papers with only three randomized controlled trials 
excluding the substantial trials on epileptic spasms. Corticosteroid regimes, 
duration of treatment (days to several months), and dosage protocols were highly 
variable in these studies. Evidence supports the use of steroids in epileptic 
spasms; however, there is only limited evidence for a positive effect for other 
epilepsy syndromes, e.g., epileptic encephalopathy with spike-and-wave activity 
in sleep [(D)EE-SWAS] or drug-resistant epilepsies (DREs). In (D)EE-SWAS (nine 
studies, 126 patients), 64% of patients showed an improvement either in the EEG 
or in their language/cognition following various steroid treatment regimes. In 
DRE (15 studies, 436 patients), a positive effect with a seizure reduction in 
50% of pediatric and adult patients and seizure freedom in 15% was identified; 
however, no recommendation can be drawn due to the heterozygous cohort. This 
review highlights the immense need for controlled studies using steroids, 
especially in DRE, to offer patients new treatment options.

Copyright © 2023 Becker and Kaindl.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1142253
PMCID: PMC10036579
PMID: 36970534

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.