---
reference_id: "PMID:30496903"
title: Endovascular and Surgical Management of Intact Splenic Artery Aneurysm.
authors:
- Zhu C
- Zhao J
- Yuan D
- Huang B
- Yang Y
- Ma Y
- Xiong F
journal: Ann Vasc Surg
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2018.08.088
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aneurysm/diagnostic imaging, surgery, therapy"
- "Embolization, Therapeutic/adverse effects"
- "Endovascular Procedures/adverse effects, methods"
- Female
- Humans
- Laparoscopy/adverse effects
- Length of Stay
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Postoperative Complications/etiology, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Splenectomy
- "Splenic Artery/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vascular Surgical Procedures/adverse effects, methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endovascular and Surgical Management of Intact Splenic Artery Aneurysm.
**Authors:** Zhu C, Zhao J, Yuan D, Huang B, Yang Y, Ma Y, Xiong F
**Journal:** Ann Vasc Surg (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.avsg.2018.08.088](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avsg.2018.08.088)

## Content

1. Ann Vasc Surg. 2019 May;57:75-82. doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2018.08.088. Epub 2018
Nov  26.

Endovascular and Surgical Management of Intact Splenic Artery Aneurysm.

Zhu C(1), Zhao J(2), Yuan D(3), Huang B(3), Yang Y(3), Ma Y(3), Xiong F(3).

Author information:
(1)West China Medical School of Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Department of Vascular Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China. Electronic address: zhaojc3@163.com.
(3)Department of Vascular Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims to reveal the experience with endovascular and 
surgical management of intact splenic artery aneurysms in our single center.
METHOD: Between January 2011 and June 2017, 42 patients with intact splenic 
artery aneurysm were enrolled in this study. Twenty patients undergoing surgical 
intervention were classified as the surgical group, and 22 patients who received 
endovascular repair were categorized as the endovascular group. Demographic 
data, preoperative comorbidities, and anatomical characteristics of aneurysms 
were collected and analyzed. Details of interventions, perioperative outcomes, 
and follow-up results were evaluated and compared between the 2 groups.
RESULTS: Forty-two patients with a mean age of 53.4 ± 11.6 years were enrolled 
in this study, and 44 aneurysms were repaired. Thirty-nine (92.9%) patients were 
asymptomatic, and 3 (7.1%) patients were symptomatic. The diameter of splenic 
artery aneurysms was 3.3 ± 1.6 cm, and the shape was mostly saccular. In the 
surgical group, the common methods used were splenic artery aneurysm resection 
(9 patients), followed by splenic artery aneurysms resection and splenectomy (6 
patients), splenic artery aneurysm resection and arterial reconstruction with 
end-to-end anastomosis (3 patients), and laparoscopic splenic artery aneurysm 
resection coexisting with splenectomy (2 patients). In the endovascular group, 
the exclusive means was embolization with coils. The technical success rates in 
both open repair and endovascular repair were 100%. The 30-day mortality was 
nil, and no severe complication was found in the early time except that 1 
patient suffered multiple splenic abscess in the endovascular group after 
embolization. Endovascular repair had significantly shorter surgery time 
(82.5 ± 27.6 vs 191.9 ± 62.7 min, P < 0.001) and hospital stay (5.6 ± 3.1 vs 
10.8 ± 5.2 days, P < 0.001) compared with open repair. The median follow-up 
period in this study was 34.5 (interquartile range 16.8-60.8) months. Two sac 
reperfusions were detected during the follow-up in the endovascular group, and 
patients needed new embolization. No late deaths were found in the follow-up 
period, and the freedom from reintervention in the endovascular group at 1 and 
3 years postoperatively was 95.5% and 82.4%, respectively. In addition, the 
freedom from reintervention in the surgical group at both 1 year and 3 years 
postoperatively were 100%. No significant differences were observed in late 
survival and reintervention between open repair and endovascular repair.
CONCLUSIONS: Open repair and endovascular repair were equally feasible, safe, 
and effective for intact splenic artery aneurysm. Endovascular repair is less 
invasive accompanied with an obvious decrease in surgery time and rapid recovery 
with a short hospital time.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2018.08.088
PMID: 30496903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]