---
reference_id: "PMID:38054409"
title: Severity-adjusted evaluation of liver transplantation on health outcomes in urea cycle disorders.
authors:
- Posset R
- Garbade SF
- Gleich F
- Scharre S
- Okun JG
- Gropman AL
- Nagamani SCS
- Druck AC
- Epp F
- Hoffmann GF
- Kölker S
- Zielonka M
- Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium (UCDC)
- European registry and network for Intoxication type Metabolic Diseases (E-IMD) Consortia Study Group
journal: Genet Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2023.101039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severity-adjusted evaluation of liver transplantation on health outcomes in urea cycle disorders.
**Authors:** Posset R, Garbade SF, Gleich F, Scharre S, Okun JG, Gropman AL, Nagamani SCS, Druck AC, Epp F, Hoffmann GF, Kölker S, Zielonka M, Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium (UCDC), European registry and network for Intoxication type Metabolic Diseases (E-IMD) Consortia Study Group
**Journal:** Genet Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gim.2023.101039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gim.2023.101039)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2024 Apr;26(4):101039. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2023.101039. Epub 2023
Dec  3.

Severity-adjusted evaluation of liver transplantation on health outcomes in urea 
cycle disorders.

Posset R(1), Garbade SF(2), Gleich F(2), Scharre S(2), Okun JG(2), Gropman 
AL(3), Nagamani SCS(4), Druck AC(2), Epp F(2), Hoffmann GF(2), Kölker S(2), 
Zielonka M(5); Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium (UCDC); European registry and 
network for Intoxication type Metabolic Diseases (E-IMD) Consortia Study Group.

Collaborators: Mew NA(6), Seminara J(7), Burrage LC(8), Berry GT(9), Breilyn 
M(10), Schulze A(11), Harding CO(12), Berry SA(13), Wong D(14), McCandless 
SE(15), Baumgartner MR(16), Konczal L(17), Ficicioglu C(18), Diaz GA(19), 
Coughlin CR 2nd(20), Enns GM(21), Gallagher RC(22), Lam C(23), Stricker T(16), 
Wilkening G(24), Dionisi-Vici C(25), Dobbelaere D(26), Blasco-Alonso J(27), 
Burlina AB(28), Freisinger P(29), van Hasselt PM(30), Skouma A(31), Lund AM(32), 
Vara R(33), Sarajlija A(34), Morris AA(35), Chakrapani A(36), Barić I(37), 
Augoustides-Savvopoulou P(38), Chien YH(39), Cortès-Saladelafont E(40), Eyskens 
F(41), Gramer G(42), Zeman J(43), Karall D(44), Couce ML(45), Mühlhausen C(46), 
Pedrón-Giner C(47), Spiekerkoetter U(48), Sykut-Cegielska J(49), Wagenmakers 
M(50), Wijburg FA(51).

Author information:
(1)Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty Heidelberg, and Center for Pediatric 
and Adolescent Medicine, Department I, Division of Pediatric Neurology and 
Metabolic Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. 
Electronic address: roland.posset@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty Heidelberg, and Center for Pediatric 
and Adolescent Medicine, Department I, Division of Pediatric Neurology and 
Metabolic Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Children's National Health System and The George Washington School of 
Medicine, Washington, DC.
(4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine and 
Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX.
(5)Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty Heidelberg, and Center for Pediatric 
and Adolescent Medicine, Department I, Division of Pediatric Neurology and 
Metabolic Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. 
Electronic address: matthias.zielonka@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(6)Children's National Health System, The George Washington School of Medicine, 
Washington, DC, USA.
(7)Children's National Health System, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.
(8)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine and 
Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(9)Harvard Medical School and Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(10)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(11)The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(12)Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(13)University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(14)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(15)Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(16)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Children's 
Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Switzerland.
(17)University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(18)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, USA.
(19)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(20)Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 19Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(21)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Lucile Packard 
Children's Hospital, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.
(22)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(23)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Seattle Children's Hospital, Washington, 
USA.
(24)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, 
USA.
(25)Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù IRCCS, U.O.C. Malattie Metaboliche, Rome, 
Italy.
(26)Centre de Référence Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme de l'Enfant et de 
l'Adulte, Jeanne de Flandre Hospital, CHRU Lille, and RADEME EA 7364, Faculty of 
Medicine, University Lille 2, Lille, France.
(27)Hospital Materno-Infantil, AVda Arroyo de los Ángeles s/n; 29011, Málaga, 
Spain.
(28)Division of Inherited Metabolic Diseases Reference Centre Expanded Newborn 
Screening Department of Woman's and Child's Health University Hospital Padova, 
Italy.
(29)Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Klinikum am Steinenberg, Reutlingen, 
Germany.
(30)Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(31)Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece.
(32)Centre Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Departments of Paediatrics and Clinical 
Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(33)Department of Inherited Metabolic Disease, Evelina Children's Hospital, St 
Thomas' Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(34)Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia, Department of Metabolism 
and Clinical Genetics and University of Belgrade, School of Medicine, Belgrade, 
Serbia.
(35)The Willink Unit, Genomic Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS 
Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(36)Great Ormond Street Hospital, Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, London United Kingdom.
(37)University Hospital Center Zagreb and University of Zagreb, School of 
Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.
(38)University 1st Pediatric Department, Metabolic Laboratory, General Hospital 
of Thessaloniki 'Hippocration', Thessaloniki, Greece.
(39)National Taiwan University Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics and 
Pediatrics, Taipei, Taiwan.
(40)Department of Paediatrics Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Badalona, 
Spain.
(41)University Hospital of Antwerp UZA, Department of Pediatricy Inherited 
Metabolic Diseases, Antwerp, Belgium.
(42)Department for Inborn Metabolic Diseases, University Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(43)Department of Pediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, General Faculty 
Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(44)Medical University Innsbruck, Clinic for Pediatrics, Innsbruck, Austria.
(45)Department of Neonatology, University Clinical Hospital of Santiago de 
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, 15704, Spain.
(46)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Centre 
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(47)Sección de Gastroenterología y Nutrición, Hospital Infantil Universitario 
Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain.
(48)Department of General Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(49)Screening Department, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.
(50)Porphyria Expertcenter Rotterdam, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic 
Disease, Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(51)University Hospital of Amsterdam, Department of Pediatrics, Division of 
Metabolic Disorders, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Liver transplantation (LTx) is performed in individuals with urea cycle 
disorders when medical management (MM) insufficiently prevents the occurrence of 
hyperammonemic events. However, there is a paucity of systematic analyses on the 
effects of LTx on health-related outcome parameters compared to individuals with 
comparable severity who are medically managed.
METHODS: We investigated the effects of LTx and MM on validated health-related 
outcome parameters, including the metabolic disease course, linear growth, and 
neurocognitive outcomes. Individuals were stratified into "severe" and 
"attenuated" categories based on the genotype-specific and validated in vitro 
enzyme activity.
RESULTS: LTx enabled metabolic stability by prevention of further hyperammonemic 
events after transplantation and was associated with a more favorable growth 
outcome compared with individuals remaining under MM. However, neurocognitive 
outcome in individuals with LTx did not differ from the medically managed 
counterparts as reflected by the frequency of motor abnormality and cognitive 
standard deviation score at last observation.
CONCLUSION: Whereas LTx enabled metabolic stability without further need of 
protein restriction or nitrogen-scavenging therapy and was associated with a 
more favorable growth outcome, LTx-as currently performed-was not associated 
with improved neurocognitive outcomes compared with long-term MM in the 
investigated urea cycle disorders.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2023.101039
PMCID: PMC12812259
PMID: 38054409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RP receives consultancy fees from Immedica 
Pharma AB. SK receives funding from Immedica Pharma AB for the European 
Post-Authorization Registry for Ravicti® (glycerol phenylbutyrate) oral liquid 
in partnership with the E-IMD (RRPE) (EU PAS Register no. EUPAS17267; 
http://www.encepp.eu/). GFH received lecture fees from Swedish Orphan Biovitrum 
GmbH. The sponsors have in no way influenced the design, conductance, analysis 
and report of the present study. All other authors declare that they have no 
conflict of interest. All authors declare that they have no financial 
relationships relevant to this article to disclose.