---
reference_id: "PMID:26471271"
title: 47 patients with FLNA associated periventricular nodular heterotopia.
authors:
- Lange M
- Kasper B
- Bohring A
- Rutsch F
- Kluger G
- Hoffjan S
- Spranger S
- Behnecke A
- Ferbert A
- Hahn A
- Oehl-Jaschkowitz B
- Graul-Neumann L
- Diepold K
- Schreyer I
- Bernhard MK
- Mueller F
- Siebers-Renelt U
- Beleza-Meireles A
- Uyanik G
- Janssens S
- Boltshauser E
- Winkler J
- Schuierer G
- Hehr U
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0331-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Filamins/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- "Periventricular Nodular Heterotopia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 47 patients with FLNA associated periventricular nodular heterotopia.
**Authors:** Lange M, Kasper B, Bohring A, Rutsch F, Kluger G, Hoffjan S, Spranger S, Behnecke A, Ferbert A, Hahn A, Oehl-Jaschkowitz B, Graul-Neumann L, Diepold K, Schreyer I, Bernhard MK, Mueller F, Siebers-Renelt U, Beleza-Meireles A, Uyanik G, Janssens S, Boltshauser E, Winkler J, Schuierer G, Hehr U
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-015-0331-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-015-0331-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015 Oct 15;10:134. doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0331-9.

47 patients with FLNA associated periventricular nodular heterotopia.

Lange M(1), Kasper B(2), Bohring A(3), Rutsch F(4), Kluger G(5), Hoffjan S(6), 
Spranger S(7), Behnecke A(8), Ferbert A(9), Hahn A(10), Oehl-Jaschkowitz B(11), 
Graul-Neumann L(12), Diepold K(13), Schreyer I(14), Bernhard MK(15), Mueller 
F(16), Siebers-Renelt U(17), Beleza-Meireles A(18), Uyanik G(19), Janssens 
S(20), Boltshauser E(21), Winkler J(22), Schuierer G(23), Hehr U(24).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Regensburg, Medical Center, 
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93053, Regensburg, Germany. max.lange@ukr.de.
(2)Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Center, University of Erlangen, Medical 
Center, Erlangen, Germany. Burkhard.Kasper@uk-erlangen.de.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany. 
abohring@uni-muenster.de.
(4)Department of General Pediatrics, Muenster University Children's Hospital, 
Muenster, Germany. frank.rutsch@ukmuenster.de.
(5)Neuropädiatrie, Schön Klinik Vogtareuth, Vogtareuth, Germany und Paracelsus 
Medical University, Salzburg/Austria, Salzburg, Austria. 
GKluger@Schoen-Kliniken.de.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany. 
Sabine.Hoffjan@rub.de.
(7)Praxis fuer Humangenetik, Klinikum Bremen-Mitte, Bremen, Germany. 
sspranger@aol.com.
(8)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. 
anne.behnecke@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(9)Klinik für Neurologie, Klinikum Kassel and Medical School, Kassel, Germany. 
ferbert@klinikum-kassel.de.
(10)Department of Neuropediatrics, University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany. 
Andreas.Hahn@paediat.med.uni-giessen.de.
(11)Praxis fuer Humangenetik, Homburg, Saar, Germany. 
oehl-jaschkowitz@genetik-saar.de.
(12)Ambulantes Gesundheitszentrum der Charité (Humangenetik), 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. luitgard.graul-neumann@charite.de.
(13)Department of Neuropediatrics, Klinikum Kassel, Kassel, Germany. 
katharina.diepold@klinikum-kassel.de.
(14)Institut für Humangenetik, Uni Jena, Jena, Germany. 
Isolde.schreyer@mti.uni-jena.de.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, University of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, 
Germany. matthias.bernhard@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.
(16)Center for Human Genetics, Regensburg, Germany. 
info@humangenetik-regensburg.de.
(17)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany. 
Ulrike.Siebers-Renelt@ukmuenster.de.
(18)Genetics Clinic, Guy's Hospital, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, United Kingdom. ana.beleza@gstt.nhs.uk.
(19)Zentrum für Medizinische Genetik, Hanusch-Krankenhaus der Wiener 
Gebietskrankenkasse, Wien, Austria. goekhan.uyanik@wgkk.at.
(20)Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. 
sandra.janssens@ugent.be.
(21)Division of Neuropediatrics, University Children's Hospital Zürich, Zürich, 
Switzerland. eugen.boltshauser@bluewin.ch.
(22)Division of Molecular Neurology, University Hospital, 
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuernberg, Erlangen, Germany. 
Juergen.winkler@uk-erlangen.de.
(23)Department of Neuroradiology, University of Regensburg, Medical Center, 
Regensburg, Germany. Gerhard.Schuierer@medbo.de.
(24)Department of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, Medical Center, 
Regensburg, Germany. ute.hehr@ukr.de.

BACKGROUND: Heterozygous loss of function mutations within the Filamin A gene in 
Xq28 are the most frequent cause of bilateral neuronal periventricular nodular 
heterotopia (PVNH). Most affected females are reported to initially present with 
difficult to treat seizures at variable age of onset. Psychomotor development 
and cognition may be normal or mildly to moderately impaired. Distinct 
associated extracerebral findings have been observed and may help to establish 
the diagnosis including patent ductus arteriosus Botalli, progressive dystrophic 
cardiac valve disease and aortic dissection, chronic obstructive lung disease or 
chronic constipation. Genotype-phenotype correlations could not yet be 
established.
METHODS: Sanger sequencing and MLPA was performed for a large cohort of 47 
patients with Filamin A associated PVNH (age range 1 to 65 years). For 34 
patients more detailed clinical information was available from a structured 
questionnaire and medical charts on family history, development, epileptologic 
findings, neurological examination, cognition and associated clinical findings. 
Available detailed cerebral MR imaging was assessed for 20 patients.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine different FLNA mutations were observed, they are mainly 
truncating (37/39) and distributed throughout the entire coding region. No 
obvious correlation between the number and extend of PVNH and the severity of 
the individual clinical manifestation was observed. 10 of the mutation carriers 
so far are without seizures at a median age of 19.7 years. 22 of 24 patients 
with available educational data were able to attend regular school and obtain 
professional education according to age.
CONCLUSIONS: We report the clinical and mutation spectrum as well as MR imaging 
for a large cohort of 47 patients with Filamin A associated PVNH including two 
adult males. Our data are reassuring in regard to psychomotor and cognitive 
development, which is within normal range for the majority of patients. However, 
a concerning median diagnostic latency of 17 to 20 years was noted between 
seizure onset and the genetic diagnosis, intensely delaying appropriate medical 
surveillance for potentially life threatening cardiovascular complications as 
well as genetic risk assessment and counseling prior to family planning for this 
X-linked dominant inherited disorder with high perinatal lethality in hemizygous 
males.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-015-0331-9
PMCID: PMC4608144
PMID: 26471271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]