---
reference_id: "PMID:21207367"
title: Overview of animal models of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
authors:
- Russell VA
journal: Curr Protoc Neurosci
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/0471142301.ns0935s54
keywords:
- Animals
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/complications, etiology, genetics, pathology"
- "Brain/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dopamine/metabolism
- Environment
- Humans
- Impulsive Behavior/etiology
- Mice
- Rats
- "Rats, Inbred SHR"
- Synaptosomal-Associated Protein 25/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overview of animal models of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
**Authors:** Russell VA
**Journal:** Curr Protoc Neurosci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/0471142301.ns0935s54](https://doi.org/10.1002/0471142301.ns0935s54)

## Content

1. Curr Protoc Neurosci. 2011 Jan;Chapter 9:Unit9.35. doi:
10.1002/0471142301.ns0935s54.

Overview of animal models of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).

Russell VA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, South Africa.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a heterogeneous, highly
heritable, behavioral disorder that affects ∼5% to 10% of children worldwide.
Although animal models cannot truly reflect human psychiatric disorders, they
can provide insight into the disorder that cannot be obtained from human studies
because of the limitations of available techniques. Genetic models include the
spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR), the Naples High Excitability (NHE) rat,
poor performers in the 5-choice serial reaction time (5-CSRT) task, the dopamine
transporter (DAT) knock-out mouse, the SNAP-25 deficient mutant coloboma mouse,
mice expressing a human mutant thyroid hormone receptor, a nicotinic receptor
knock-out mouse, and a tachykinin-1 (NK1) receptor knock-out mouse. Chemically
induced models of ADHD include prenatal or early postnatal exposure to ethanol,
nicotine, polychlorinated biphenyls, or 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA).
Environmentally induced models have also been suggested; these include neonatal
anoxia and rat pups reared in social isolation. The major insight provided by
animal models was the consistency of findings regarding the involvement of
dopaminergic, noradrenergic, and sometimes also serotonergic systems, as well as
more fundamental defects in neurotransmission.

© 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/0471142301.ns0935s54
PMID: 21207367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
