---
reference_id: "PMID:10581026"
title: Mutations in COL11A2 cause non-syndromic hearing loss (DFNA13).
authors:
- McGuirt WT
- Prasad SD
- Griffith AJ
- Kunst HP
- Green GE
- Shpargel KB
- Runge C
- Huybrechts C
- Mueller RF
- Lynch E
- King MC
- Brunner HG
- Cremers CW
- Takanosu M
- Li SW
- Arita M
- Mayne R
- Prockop DJ
- Van Camp G
- Smith RJ
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1038/70516
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6/genetics"
- Collagen/genetics
- DNA/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- In Situ Hybridization
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in COL11A2 cause non-syndromic hearing loss (DFNA13).
**Authors:** McGuirt WT, Prasad SD, Griffith AJ, Kunst HP, Green GE, Shpargel KB, Runge C, Huybrechts C, Mueller RF, Lynch E, King MC, Brunner HG, Cremers CW, Takanosu M, Li SW, Arita M, Mayne R, Prockop DJ, Van Camp G, Smith RJ
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/70516](https://doi.org/10.1038/70516)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Dec;23(4):413-9. doi: 10.1038/70516.

Mutations in COL11A2 cause non-syndromic hearing loss (DFNA13).

McGuirt WT(1), Prasad SD, Griffith AJ, Kunst HP, Green GE, Shpargel KB, Runge C,
Huybrechts C, Mueller RF, Lynch E, King MC, Brunner HG, Cremers CW, Takanosu M,
Li SW, Arita M, Mayne R, Prockop DJ, Van Camp G, Smith RJ.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

We report that mutation of COL11A2 causes deafness previously mapped to the
DFNA13 locus on chromosome 6p. We found two families (one American and one
Dutch) with autosomal dominant, non-syndromic hearing loss to have mutations in
COL11A2 that are predicted to affect the triple-helix domain of the collagen
protein. In both families, deafness is non-progressive and predominantly affects
middle frequencies. Mice with a targeted disruption of Col11a2 also were shown
to have hearing loss. Electron microscopy of the tectorial membrane of these
mice revealed loss of organization of the collagen fibrils. Our findings
revealed a unique ultrastructural malformation of inner-ear architecture
associated with non-syndromic hearing loss, and suggest that tectorial membrane
abnormalities may be one aetiology of sensorineural hearing loss primarily
affecting the mid-frequencies.

DOI: 10.1038/70516
PMID: 10581026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
