---
reference_id: "PMID:3065771"
title: "Diastrophic dysplasia: a specific prenatal diagnosis by ultrasound."
authors:
- Gembruch U
- Niesen M
- Kehrberg H
- Hansmann M
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1002/pd.1970080709
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diastrophic dysplasia: a specific prenatal diagnosis by ultrasound.
**Authors:** Gembruch U, Niesen M, Kehrberg H, Hansmann M
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pd.1970080709](https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.1970080709)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 1988 Sep;8(7):539-45. doi: 10.1002/pd.1970080709.

Diastrophic dysplasia: a specific prenatal diagnosis by ultrasound.

Gembruch U(1), Niesen M, Kehrberg H, Hansmann M.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Präntale Diagnostik und Therapie, Universitäts-Frauenklinik, 
Bonn-Venusberg, F.R.G.

In a pregnant woman without increased genetic risk, the presence of distrophic 
dysplasia of the fetus was diagnosed sonographically at 31 weeks' gestation and 
definitively distinguished from other skeletal dysplasias. In all prenatal 
diagnosis of diastrophic dysplasia reported so far, this autosomal recessive 
congenital condition had occurred in the family's previous children and this 
made the diagnoses of fetal diastrophic dysplasia easier. The reported case was 
diagnosed due to evidence of an extreme shortening of all long bones of the 
extremities associated with other skeletal deformities which, taken as a whole, 
are typical of this syndrome: micrognathia, cervical kyphosis, persistent 
extension limitation in elbow and knee joints, club feet, ulnar diviation of 
hands, shortened phalanges, and, in particular, abduction of thumbs ('hitchhiker 
thumbs') and big toes.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.1970080709
PMID: 3065771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]