---
reference_id: "PMID:39792948"
title: "Breaking a barrier: In trans vlsE recombination and genetic manipulation of the native vlsE gene of the Lyme disease pathogen."
authors:
- Singh P
- Bankhead T
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012871
keywords:
- "Borrelia burgdorferi/genetics, immunology"
- "Lyme Disease/microbiology, genetics, immunology"
- "Recombination, Genetic"
- "Antigens, Bacterial/genetics"
- Bacterial Proteins/genetics
- Plasmids/genetics
- Lipoproteins/genetics
- Humans
- Host-Pathogen Interactions/genetics
- Antigenic Variation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Breaking a barrier: In trans vlsE recombination and genetic manipulation of the native vlsE gene of the Lyme disease pathogen.
**Authors:** Singh P, Bankhead T
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1012871](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1012871)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2025 Jan 10;21(1):e1012871. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012871. 
eCollection 2025 Jan.

Breaking a barrier: In trans vlsE recombination and genetic manipulation of the 
native vlsE gene of the Lyme disease pathogen.

Singh P(1), Bankhead T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State 
University, Pullman, Washington, United States of America.

Host-pathogen interactions represent a dynamic evolutionary process, wherein 
both hosts and pathogens continuously develop complex mechanisms to outmaneuver 
each other. Borrelia burgdorferi, the Lyme disease pathogen, has evolved an 
intricate antigenic variation mechanism to evade the host immune response, 
enabling its dissemination, persistence, and pathogenicity. Despite the 
discovery of this mechanism over two decades ago, the precise processes, genetic 
elements, and proteins involved in this system remain largely unknown. The vls 
locus, which is the site of antigenic variation, has been notoriously 
challenging to manipulate genetically due to its highly conserved structural 
features, even with significant advancements in molecular biology and genetic 
engineering for this highly segmented pathogen. Our study highlights the pivotal 
role of plasmid topology in facilitating in trans gene recombination. We 
demonstrate that gene conversion can occur in trans when a copy of vlsE gene is 
present on a linear plasmid, contrary to previous observations suggesting a cis 
arrangement is required for vlsE recombination. Significantly, employing this in 
trans gene conversion strategy with a linear plasmid, we have, for the first 
time, achieved targeted genetic mutation of putative cis-acting elements in the 
native vlsE gene. This has unveiled a potentially crucial role for the 17 bp 
direct repeats that flank the central variable cassette region of vlsE. 
Furthermore, we validated the reliability and reproducibility of our mutational 
approach by successfully inserting stop codons at two distinct sites within the 
central variable cassette of vlsE. Thus, this study presents a significant 
methodological innovation enabling the direct manipulation of the vls locus and 
lays the groundwork for systematic exploration of specific mutations affecting 
the mechanism of antigenic variation. As a result, it creates new avenues for 
research and raises intriguing questions that could guide the development of 
novel methods to explore host-pathogen interactions of the agent of Lyme 
disease.

Copyright: © 2025 Singh, Bankhead. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012871
PMCID: PMC11756760
PMID: 39792948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.