---
reference_id: "PMID:30897950"
title: "Surgery and Conservative Management of Camptodactyly in Pediatric Patients: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Wang AMQ
- Kim M
- Ho ES
- Davidge KM
journal: Hand (N Y)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1177/1558944719834654
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgery and Conservative Management of Camptodactyly in Pediatric Patients: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Wang AMQ, Kim M, Ho ES, Davidge KM
**Journal:** Hand (N Y) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1558944719834654](https://doi.org/10.1177/1558944719834654)

## Content

1. Hand (N Y). 2020 Nov;15(6):761-770. doi: 10.1177/1558944719834654. Epub 2019
Mar  22.

Surgery and Conservative Management of Camptodactyly in Pediatric Patients: A 
Systematic Review.

Wang AMQ(1), Kim M(2), Ho ES(3), Davidge KM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(2)University of Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Camptodactyly is a pediatric hand condition, the treatment of which remains 
controversial. The authors' aim was to improve patient care through clarifying 
the definition of camptodactyly and indications for surgical and/or conservative 
management, summarizing outcomes, and defining risks. A systematic review was 
conducted of articles in all languages on outcomes following surgical and/or 
conservative management of idiopathic camptodactyly in children using MEDLINE 
(Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System Online), PubMed, EMBASE 
(Excerpta Medica database), AMED (Allied and Complementary Medicine), and CINAHL 
(Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health Literature) (until January 2017). 
The primary outcome was posttreatment flexion contracture, and the secondary 
outcomes were indications for surgery, complications, and patient satisfaction. 
Database searching generated 16 final articles, with 7 case series and 9 
retrospective cohort studies. There was a lack of consistency on the definition 
of camptodactyly and in outcome reporting. All 16 studies received a "Weak" 
global rating and demonstrated low-quality evidence, suggesting that treatment 
of camptodactyly with operative or nonoperative measures reduces the degree of 
flexion contracture in most patients (from pretreatment averages of 20°-85° to 
posttreatment averages of 5°-37°). There was general agreement that surgery 
should be reserved for contracture >30° or failure to respond to conservative 
management. Surgery generally led to more complications compared with 
conservative management. Only one study reported on functional limitations, and 
another reported on patient-reported outcomes. Current evidence of the 
effectiveness of camptodactyly treatment in addressing both joint-specific 
deformity and patient-perceived function and appearance is insufficient to guide 
patient care. Future research may consider the development of decision aids to 
guide patients and families through selecting management strategies and to 
promote shared decision making.

DOI: 10.1177/1558944719834654
PMCID: PMC7850255
PMID: 30897950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.