---
reference_id: "PMID:31008308"
title: Next generation sequencing analysis of patients with familial cervical artery dissection.
authors:
- Grond-Ginsbach C
- Brandt T
- Kloss M
- Aksay SS
- Lyrer P
- Traenka C
- Erhart P
- Martin JJ
- Altintas A
- Siva A
- de Freitas GR
- Thie A
- Machetanz J
- Baumgartner RW
- Dichgans M
- Engelter ST
journal: Eur Stroke J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1177/2396987317693402
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Next generation sequencing analysis of patients with familial cervical artery dissection.
**Authors:** Grond-Ginsbach C, Brandt T, Kloss M, Aksay SS, Lyrer P, Traenka C, Erhart P, Martin JJ, Altintas A, Siva A, de Freitas GR, Thie A, Machetanz J, Baumgartner RW, Dichgans M, Engelter ST
**Journal:** Eur Stroke J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1177/2396987317693402](https://doi.org/10.1177/2396987317693402)

## Content

1. Eur Stroke J. 2017 Jun;2(2):137-143. doi: 10.1177/2396987317693402. Epub 2017
Feb 9.

Next generation sequencing analysis of patients with familial cervical artery
dissection.

Grond-Ginsbach C(1), Brandt T(2), Kloss M(1), Aksay SS(1), Lyrer P(3), Traenka
C(3), Erhart P(4), Martin JJ(5), Altintas A(6), Siva A(6), de Freitas GR(7),
Thie A(8), Machetanz J(9), Baumgartner RW(10), Dichgans M(11)(12), Engelter
ST(3)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Clinics for Neurologic Rehabilitation, Kliniken Schmieder, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, Basel University Hospital, Basel,
Switzerland.
(4)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, University Hospital
Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology, Sanatorio Allende, Cordoba, Argentina.
(6)Neurology Department, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul University, Turkey.
(7)Service of Neurology, Hospital Quinta D'Or/D'Or Institute for Research and
Education (IDOR), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(8)Klinikum und Seniorenzentrum Itzehoe, Itzehoe, Germany.
(9)Städtisches Krankenhaus Dresden-Neustadt, Dresden, Germany.
(10)NeuroZentrum, Klinik Hirslanden, Zürich, Switzerland.
(11)Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, Klinikum der Universität
München, Ludwig Maximilians Universität, Munich, Germany.
(12)Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany.
(13)Neurorehabilitation Unit, University of Basel and University Center for
Medicine of Aging and Rehabilitation, Felix Platter Hospital, Basel,
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The cause of cervical artery dissection is not well understood. We
test the hypothesis that mutations in genes associated with known arterial
connective tissue disorders are enriched in patients with familial cervical
artery dissection.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patient duos from nine pedigrees with familial cervical
artery dissection were analyzed by whole exome sequencing. Single nucleotide
variants in a panel of 11 candidate genes (ACTA2, MYH11, FBN1, TGFBR1, TGFBR2,
TGFB2, COL3A1, COL4A1, SMAD3, MYLK and SLC2A10) were prioritized according to
functionality (stop-loss, nonsense, and missense variants with polyphen-2 score
≥0.95). Variants classified as "benign" or "likely benign" in the ClinVar
database were excluded from further analysis. For comparison, non-benign
stop-loss, nonsense and missense variants with polyphen-2 score ≥0.95 in the
same panel of candidate genes were identified in the European non-Finnish
population of the ExAC database (n = 33,370).
RESULTS: Non-benign Single nucleotide variants in both affected patients were
identified in four of the nine cervical artery dissection families (COL3A1;
Gly324Ser, FBN1: Arg2554Trp, COL4A1: Pro116Leu, and TGFBR2: Ala292Thr) yielding
an allele frequency of 22.2% (4/18). In the comparison group, 1782 variants were
present in 33,370 subjects from the ExAC database (allele frequency:
1782/66,740 = 2.7%; p = 0.0008; odds ratio = 14.2; 95% confidence
interval = 3.8-52.9).
CONCLUSION: Cervical artery dissection families showed enrichment for non-benign
variants in genes associated with arterial connective tissue disorders. The
observation that findings differed across families indicates genetic
heterogeneity of familial cervical artery dissection.

DOI: 10.1177/2396987317693402
PMCID: PMC6453217
PMID: 31008308

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
