---
reference_id: "PMID:24457083"
title: "Diagnostic utility of MYC amplification and anti-MYC immunohistochemistry in atypical vascular lesions, primary or radiation-induced mammary angiosarcomas, and primary angiosarcomas of other sites."
authors:
- Ginter PS
- Mosquera JM
- MacDonald TY
- "D'Alfonso TM"
- Rubin MA
- Shin SJ
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.11.002
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Breast/pathology, radiation effects"
- "Breast Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Gene Amplification
- "Genes, myc/genetics"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms, Radiation-Induced/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Radiotherapy/adverse effects
- Tissue Array Analysis
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic utility of MYC amplification and anti-MYC immunohistochemistry in atypical vascular lesions, primary or radiation-induced mammary angiosarcomas, and primary angiosarcomas of other sites.
**Authors:** Ginter PS, Mosquera JM, MacDonald TY, D'Alfonso TM, Rubin MA, Shin SJ
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humpath.2013.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2013.11.002)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2014 Apr;45(4):709-16. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.11.002. Epub
2013  Nov 12.

Diagnostic utility of MYC amplification and anti-MYC immunohistochemistry in
atypical vascular lesions, primary or radiation-induced mammary angiosarcomas,
and primary angiosarcomas of other sites.

Ginter PS(1), Mosquera JM(2), MacDonald TY(3), D'Alfonso TM(3), Rubin MA(2),
Shin SJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: psg9003@nyp.org.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA; Institute for Precision Medicine of Weill
Cornell and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Breast cancer patients who receive radiation therapy or develop chronic
lymphedema following axillary dissection can develop secondary mammary
angiosarcomas (ASs) and, additionally, atypical vascular lesions (AVLs) in the
former group. Recently, MYC amplification by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) has been identified in secondary mammary AS but not in AVL and most
primary mammary AS as well as AS of other sites. We studied MYC amplification
and MYC protein expression in 7 radiation-induced AVLs, 9 secondary mammary ASs,
17 primary mammary ASs, and 20 primary ASs of other sites by FISH analysis and
immunohistochemistry. All 9 secondary mammary ASs showed gene amplification and
protein expression, whereas neither was found in any of 7 AVLs. No MYC
amplification or protein expression was identified in any of the 17 primary
mammary ASs. Among primary ASs of other sites, 1 cardiac AS and 1 skin AS showed
gene amplification and protein expression. The remaining 18 did not show
amplification (90%), but some demonstrated protein expression (39%). We conclude
that MYC amplification by FISH is present in secondary mammary AS but not in
AVL. We also found MYC amplification in 1 primary skin AS and 1 primary cardiac
AS. There was 100% concordance between MYC amplification and protein expression
in all AVL, primary mammary AS, and secondary mammary AS, whereas only 65%
concordance was found in AS of other sites. MYC protein expression in AS can be
helpful in certain diagnostic scenarios in the breast but not in other sites.

© 2014.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.11.002
PMID: 24457083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
