---
reference_id: "PMID:36403832"
title: "Integrated physiological, biochemical, and transcriptomic analysis of thallium toxicity in zebrafish (Danio rerio) larvae."
authors:
- Wei X
- Li X
- Liu P
- Li L
- Chen H
- Li D
- Liu J
- Xie L
journal: Sci Total Environ
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.160265
keywords:
- Animals
- Zebrafish/physiology
- Larva
- "Embryo, Nonmammalian"
- "Water Pollutants, Chemical/metabolism"
- Malondialdehyde/metabolism
- Thallium/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrated physiological, biochemical, and transcriptomic analysis of thallium toxicity in zebrafish (Danio rerio) larvae.
**Authors:** Wei X, Li X, Liu P, Li L, Chen H, Li D, Liu J, Xie L
**Journal:** Sci Total Environ (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.160265](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.160265)

## Content

1. Sci Total Environ. 2023 Feb 10;859(Pt 1):160265. doi: 
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.160265. Epub 2022 Nov 17.

Integrated physiological, biochemical, and transcriptomic analysis of thallium 
toxicity in zebrafish (Danio rerio) larvae.

Wei X(1), Li X(2), Liu P(1), Li L(3), Chen H(1), Li D(1), Liu J(4), Xie L(5).

Author information:
(1)SCNU Environmental Research Institute, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Chemical Pollution and Environmental Safety & MOE Key Laboratory of Theoretical 
Chemistry of Environment, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, 
China; School of Environment, South China Normal University, University Town, 
Guangzhou 510006, China.
(2)Xiamen Key Laboratory for Feed Quality Testing and Safety Evaluation, 
Fisheries College, Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, China.
(3)810 Institute of Hydrogeology and Engineering Geology, Shandong Provincial 
Bureau of Geology & Mineral Resources, Jinan 250014, China; Shandong Engineering 
Research Center for Environmental Protection and Remediation on Groundwater, 
Jinan 250014, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Water Quality and Conservation in the Pearl River Delta, 
Ministry of Education, Institute of Environmental Research at Greater Bay, 
School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 
510006, China.
(5)SCNU Environmental Research Institute, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Chemical Pollution and Environmental Safety & MOE Key Laboratory of Theoretical 
Chemistry of Environment, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, 
China; School of Environment, South China Normal University, University Town, 
Guangzhou 510006, China. Electronic address: lingtian.xie@m.scnu.edu.cn.

Although several studies have evaluated the effects of Thallium (Tl) in adult 
species of fish, the developmental toxicity of Tl has not been previously 
explored. In this study, zebrafish embryos (<4 h post fertilization (hpf)) were 
exposed to Tl at concentrations from 0.8 to 400 μg L-1 for 7 d. The results 
showed that the decreased hatching rate and increased malformation rate were 
observed in the larvae. The swimming velocity of larvae from 200 and 400 μg L-1 
treatments was respectively reduced by ~26 % and 15 %. Histopathological 
analysis of liver indicated the number of cells of karyolysis (143 % and 202 %) 
and pyknosis (170 % and 131 %) were respectively increased in 200 and 400 μg L-1 
Tl treatments. Meanwhile, the Tl body burden and metallothionein (MT) levels in 
the larvae were increased with elevated Tl concentrations. The level of 
malondialdehyde (MDA) was increased by ~20 to 51 % in all Tl treatments and 
total antioxidant capacity (TAC) was decreased by ~12 % at 200 μg L-1. The 
activities of Na+/K+-ATPase and protease were inhibited in 200 and 400 μg L-1 Tl 
treatments. Moreover, the transcripts of genes (Nrf2, HO-1, TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-8, 
IL-10, TGF) were significantly altered. In addition, a total of 930 
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 1549 DEGs were found in the 200 and 
400 μg L-1 treatments with 458 overlapped DEGs by transcriptomic analysis. The 
protein digestion and absorption, ECM-receptor interaction, and complement and 
coagulation cascades pathways were shown to be the most significantly enriched 
pathways. This study helps better understand the molecular mechanisms of Tl 
toxicity in fish.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.160265
PMID: 36403832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.