---
reference_id: "PMID:28744758"
title: "Gitelman syndrome: an analysis of the underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms of acid-base and electrolyte abnormalities."
authors:
- Filippatos TD
- Rizos CV
- Tzavella E
- Elisaf MS
journal: Int Urol Nephrol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s11255-017-1653-4
keywords:
- Acidosis/etiology
- Calcium/urine
- Chlorides/urine
- "Gitelman Syndrome/complications, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Hypokalemia/etiology, urine"
- Hyponatremia/etiology
- Potassium/urine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gitelman syndrome: an analysis of the underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms of acid-base and electrolyte abnormalities.
**Authors:** Filippatos TD, Rizos CV, Tzavella E, Elisaf MS
**Journal:** Int Urol Nephrol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11255-017-1653-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11255-017-1653-4)

## Content

1. Int Urol Nephrol. 2018 Jan;50(1):91-96. doi: 10.1007/s11255-017-1653-4. Epub
2017 Jul 25.

Gitelman syndrome: an analysis of the underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms of
acid-base and electrolyte abnormalities.

Filippatos TD(1), Rizos CV(2), Tzavella E(2), Elisaf MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School, University of Ioannina,
45110, Ioannina, Greece. filtheo@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School, University of Ioannina,
45110, Ioannina, Greece.

Gitelman syndrome is the most common inherited tubular disease resulting from
mutations of the SLC12A3 gene that encodes the thiazide-sensitive
sodium-chloride cotransporter in the early distal convoluted tubules. The review
presents the underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms of acid-base and electrolyte
abnormalities observed in patients with Gitelman syndrome. The syndrome is
usually characterized by hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis in combination with
hypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria. Additionally, increased chloride excretion and
renin/aldosterone levels, hypophosphatemia (occasionally), hyponatremia (rarely)
and glucose intolerance/insulin resistance have been reported. The knowledge of
the pathophysiologic mechanisms is useful for the treatment of patients with
Gitelman syndrome as well as for the understanding of other tubular diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-017-1653-4
PMID: 28744758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
