---
reference_id: "PMID:39398416"
title: "The Spectrum of clinical manifestations in newborns with the COQ4 mutation: case series and literature review."
authors:
- Pan P
- Zhou N
- Sun Y
- Chen Z
- Han J
- Zhou W
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1410133
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Spectrum of clinical manifestations in newborns with the COQ4 mutation: case series and literature review.
**Authors:** Pan P, Zhou N, Sun Y, Chen Z, Han J, Zhou W
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2024.1410133](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2024.1410133)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2024 Sep 27;12:1410133. doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1410133. 
eCollection 2024.

The Spectrum of clinical manifestations in newborns with the COQ4 mutation: case 
series and literature review.

Pan P(1), Zhou N(2), Sun Y(1), Chen Z(3), Han J(4), Zhou W(1).

Author information:
(1)Nenoatal Intensive Care Unit, Guangzhou Wowen and Children's Medical Center, 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Heart Center, Guangzhou Wowen and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Pathology Department, Guangzhou Wowen and Children's Medical Center, 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Prenatal Diagnostic Center, Guangzhou Wowen and Children's Medical Center, 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) plays an important role in the electron 
transport chain within the human mitochondrial respiratory chain. The 
manifestations of this deficiency exhibit a diverse range. This study 
investigates the clinical manifestations of primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency in 
neonates with the COQ4 mutation to improve the diagnosis of the disease and the 
prognosis through targeted treatment.
METHODS: We report 4 patients with primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency by COQ4 
variants in neonates. A comprehensive literature search and review for original 
articles and case reports with COQ4 mutation published from January 1989 to 
November 2023 was performed through Pubmed. We review clinical manifestations, 
diagnostic approaches, and treatment monitoring in these and 20 previously 
reported patients.
RESULTS: Within the cohort of four cases examined, three females and one male 
were identified from two distinct families. Specifically, case 1 and 2 consisted 
of monoamniotic twins. Cases 3 and 4 were siblings. A comprehensive review of 20 
cases involving neonatal-onset COQ4 mutation was conducted. Half of the cases 
are Chinese. There was no statistically significant difference in the mortality 
between Chinese (9/12, 75%) and other regions (11/12, 91.7%) (P = 0.27). The 
survival time for the 24 cases was 60.0 ± 98.0 days (95% confidence interval CI: 
0-252.0 days). The incidence of prenatal abnormalities in preterm infants was 
significantly higher than that in full-term infants (66.7% vs. 16.7%, P = 0.02). 
Hyperlactatemia was one of the most common manifestations, accounting for 75% of 
cases (18/24). Twenty of the 24 cases were diagnosed by whole exome sequencing. 
Only 9 patients received exogenous coenzyme Q10 treatment, and all the 4 
surviving patients received coenzyme Q10 supplementation.
CONCLUSION: The prognosis of COQ4 mutation in the neonatal period indicates a 
low survival rate and an poor prognosis. This may be due to the incomplete 
understanding of the mechanism of how COQ4 gene defects lead to coenzyme Q10 
deficiency and why CoQ10 supplementation does not respond well to treatment. To 
improve the diagnostic rate, in addition to genetic testing, mitochondrial 
functional verification should be prioritized in southern China, where the 
incidence is relatively high. It will facilitate more in-depth mechanistic 
studies.

© 2024 Pan, Zhou, Sun, Chen, Han and Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2024.1410133
PMCID: PMC11466766
PMID: 39398416

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.