---
reference_id: "PMID:24247024"
title: "Revisiting amniotic band sequence: a wide spectrum of manifestations."
authors:
- Barros M
- Gorgal G
- Machado AP
- Ramalho C
- Matias A
- Montenegro N
journal: Fetal Diagn Ther
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1159/000354616
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnostic imaging"
- "Amniotic Band Syndrome/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- Female
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Outcome
- Retrospective Studies
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revisiting amniotic band sequence: a wide spectrum of manifestations.
**Authors:** Barros M, Gorgal G, Machado AP, Ramalho C, Matias A, Montenegro N
**Journal:** Fetal Diagn Ther (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000354616](https://doi.org/10.1159/000354616)

## Content

1. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2014;35(1):51-6. doi: 10.1159/000354616. Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Revisiting amniotic band sequence: a wide spectrum of manifestations.

Barros M(1), Gorgal G, Machado AP, Ramalho C, Matias A, Montenegro N.

Author information:
(1)Prenatal Diagnosis Center, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Centro
Hospitalar S. João, Porto, Portugal.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the spectrum of clinical deformities related to amniotic
band sequence (ABS), ranging from mild to severe.
METHODS: Retrospective evaluation of 9 cases of ABS managed during a 4-year
period (February 2006 to April 2010) in a tertiary hospital.
RESULTS: The median gestational age at prenatal diagnosis was 15 weeks (range
11-26). Only 2 patients had clinical prenatal evidence of amnion rupture. In the
other 5 cases the diagnosis of ABS was established prenatally based on fetal
structural abnormalities. These abnormalities included: (1) upper limb defects:
syndactyly, amputation at the level of phalanges or first metacarpal or forearm;
(2) inferior extremities defects: tallus equinovarus and flexed knee, and
constriction ring; (3) umbilical cord strangulation, and (4) acrania.
CONCLUSION: ABS is a polymorphous syndrome and recognizing its various
manifestations can be of help in prenatal identification.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000354616
PMID: 24247024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
