---
reference_id: "PMID:18181200"
title: Prevalence of polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia.
authors:
- Ma X
- Vanasse G
- Cartmel B
- Wang Y
- Selinger HA
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.21129
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Algorithms
- Area Under Curve
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Connecticut/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Insurance Carriers/statistics & numerical data"
- International Classification of Diseases
- Male
- "Medicaid/statistics & numerical data"
- "Medicare/statistics & numerical data"
- Middle Aged
- Polycythemia Vera/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- "Thrombocythemia, Essential/epidemiology"
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia.
**Authors:** Ma X, Vanasse G, Cartmel B, Wang Y, Selinger HA
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.21129](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.21129)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 2008 May;83(5):359-62. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21129.

Prevalence of polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia.

Ma X(1), Vanasse G, Cartmel B, Wang Y, Selinger HA.

Author information:
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
xiaomei.ma@yale.edu

Polycythemia vera (PV) and essential thrombocythemia (ET) are common types of
myeloproliferative disorders (MPD), the prevalence of which has not been well
documented in the United States. Recent breakthroughs in the molecular etiology
of these disorders and the accelerated development of targeted
pharmacotherapeutics to treat them underscore the need to define the affected
population. In this study, we obtained health claims data from major commercial
insurance payers in Connecticut and the Center for Medicare and Medicaid
Services to estimate the prevalence of PV and ET. Specifically, logistic
regression was utilized to develop algorithms to predict the probability that an
individual with claims suggestive of MPD truly has PV or ET, and the algorithms
were then applied to health claims to estimate the number of PV and ET patients
in Connecticut. As of 2003, the age-standardized prevalence was 22 per 100,000
and 24 per 100,000 for PV and ET, respectively, in Connecticut. Applying the
age-specific prevalence of PV and ET to the entire US population resulted in an
estimated total of 65,243 patients with PV and 71,078 patients with ET in the
United States in 2003. This study is the first to assess the prevalence of PV
and ET in a large US population. Given the large number of individuals afflicted
with these diseases and the fact that demographic changes alone will further
increase the burden of

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.21129
PMID: 18181200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
