---
reference_id: "PMID:23568984"
title: "[Hashimoto's encephalopathy and autoantibodies]."
authors:
- Yoneda M
journal: Brain Nerve
year: '2013'
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- "Autoantibodies/biosynthesis, immunology"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- "Brain/immunology, pathology"
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, immunology, therapy"
- Encephalitis
- Female
- "Hashimoto Disease/diagnosis, immunology, therapy"
- Humans
- Prognosis
- Thyroid Gland/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Hashimoto's encephalopathy and autoantibodies].
**Authors:** Yoneda M
**Journal:** Brain Nerve (2013)

## Content

1. Brain Nerve. 2013 Apr;65(4):365-76.

[Hashimoto's encephalopathy and autoantibodies].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoneda M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Fukui Hospital, Japan.

Encephalopathy occasionally occurs in association with thyroid disorders, but 
most of these are treatable. These encephalopathies include a neuropsychiatric 
disorder associated with hypothyroidism, called myxedema encephalopathy. 
Moreover, Hashimoto's encephalopathy (HE) has been recognized as a new clinical 
disease based on an autoimmune mechanism associated with Hashimoto's 
thyroiditis. Steroid treatment was successfully administered to these patients. 
Recently, we discovered that the serum autoantibodies against the NH2-terminal 
of α-enolase (NAE) are highly specific diagnostic biomarkers for HE. Further, we 
analyzed serum anti-NAE autoantibodies and the clinical features in many cases 
of HE from institutions throughout Japan and other countries. Approximately half 
of assessed HE patients carry anti-NAE antibodies. The age was widely 
distributed with 2 peaks (20-30 years and 50-70 years). Most HE patients were in 
euthyroid states, and all patients had anti-thyroid (TG) antibodies and 
anti-thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibodies. Anti-TSH receptor (TSH-R) antibodies 
were observed in some cases. The common neuropsychiatry features are 
consciousness disturbance and psychosis, followed by cognitive dysfunction, 
involuntary movements, seizures, and ataxia. Abnormalities on 
electroencephalography (EEG) and decreased cerebral blood flow on brain SPECT 
were common findings, whereas abnormal findings on brain magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) were rare. HE patients have various clinical phenotypes such as 
the acute encephalopathy form, the chronic psychiatric form, and other 
particular clinical forms, including limbic encephalitis, progressive cerebellar 
ataxia, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)-like form. The cerebellar ataxic 
form of HE clinically mimics spinocerebellar degeneration (SCD) and is 
characterized by the absence of nystagmus, absent or mild cerebellar atrophy, 
and lazy background activities on EEG. Taken together, these data suggest that 
the possibility of encephalopathy associated with thyroid disorders must be 
considered.

PMID: 23568984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]