---
reference_id: PMID:29523679
title: Parathyroidectomy in the Management of Secondary Hyperparathyroidism.
authors:
- Lau WL
- Obi Y
- Kalantar-Zadeh K
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.10390917
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcimimetic Agents/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Hyperparathyroidism, Secondary/drug therapy, etiology, surgery"
- "Parathyroidectomy/adverse effects, methods, statistics & numerical data"
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications"
- Vascular Calcification/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parathyroidectomy in the Management of Secondary Hyperparathyroidism.
**Authors:** Lau WL, Obi Y, Kalantar-Zadeh K
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.10390917](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.10390917)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2018 Jun 7;13(6):952-961. doi: 10.2215/CJN.10390917.
Epub  2018 Mar 9.

Parathyroidectomy in the Management of Secondary Hyperparathyroidism.

Lau WL(1), Obi Y, Kalantar-Zadeh K.

Author information:
(1)Harold Simmons Center for Kidney Disease Research and Epidemiology, 
University of California, Irvine, California.

Secondary hyperparathyroidism develops in CKD due to a combination of vitamin D 
deficiency, hypocalcemia, and hyperphosphatemia, and it exists in nearly all 
patients at the time of dialysis initiation. There is insufficient data on 
whether to prefer vitamin D analogs compared with calcimimetics, but the 
available evidence suggests advantages with combination therapy. Calcium 
derangements, patient adherence, side effects, and cost limit the use of these 
agents. When parathyroid hormone level persists >800 pg/ml for >6 months, 
despite exhaustive medical interventions, monoclonal proliferation with nodular 
hyperplasia is likely present along with decreased expression of vitamin D and 
calcium-sensing receptors. Hence, surgical parathyroidectomy should be 
considered, especially if concomitant disorders exist, such as persistent 
hypercalcemia or hyperphosphatemia, tissue or vascular calcification including 
calciphylaxis, and/or worsening osteodystrophy. Parathyroidectomy is associated 
with 15%-57% greater survival in patients on dialysis, and it also improves 
hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, tissue calcification, bone mineral density, 
and health-related quality of life. The parathyroidectomy rate in the United 
States declined to approximately seven per 1000 dialysis patient-years between 
2002 and 2011 despite an increase in average parathyroid hormone levels, 
reflecting calcimimetics introduction and uncertainty regarding optimal 
parathyroid hormone targets. Hospitalization rates are 39% higher in the first 
postoperative year. Hungry bone syndrome occurs in approximately 25% of patients 
on dialysis, and profound hypocalcemia requires high doses of oral and 
intravenous calcium along with calcitriol supplementation. Total 
parathyroidectomy with autotransplantation carries a higher risk of permanent 
hypocalcemia, whereas risk of hyperparathyroidism recurrence is higher with 
subtotal parathyroidectomy. Given favorable long-term outcomes from 
observational parathyroidectomy cohorts, despite surgical risk and postoperative 
challenges, it is reasonable to consider parathyroidectomy in more patients with 
medically refractory secondary hyperparathyroidism.

Copyright © 2018 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.10390917
PMCID: PMC5989682
PMID: 29523679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]