---
reference_id: "PMID:37771451"
title: "Treatment of non-epileptic episodes of anxious, fearful behavior in adolescent juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (CLN3 disease)."
authors:
- Ostergaard JR
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1216861
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of non-epileptic episodes of anxious, fearful behavior in adolescent juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (CLN3 disease).
**Authors:** Ostergaard JR
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1216861](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1216861)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Sep 12;14:1216861. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1216861.
eCollection 2023.

Treatment of non-epileptic episodes of anxious, fearful behavior in adolescent
juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (CLN3 disease).

Ostergaard JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescence, Centre for Rare Diseases, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Recurrent non-epileptic episodes of frightened facial and body
expression occur in more than half of post-adolescent patients with juvenile
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (JNCL, CLN3 disease). Clinically, the episodes
look similar to the attacks of paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity (PSH)
commonly seen following traumatic brain injury (TBI). The episodes occur when
the patients are exposed to separation, hear loud sounds or are otherwise
bothered by discomfort and as in PSH following TBI, the attacks are difficult to
prevent and/or treat.
AIM AND METHODS: Based on present knowledge of triggering factors, the neural
anxiety/fear circuit, its afferent and efferent pathways and documented CLN3
disease-impact on these tracks, the current study discusses a rational approach
how to prevent and/or treat the attacks.
RESULTS: Patients with JNCL have a disturbed somatosensory modulation leading to
a reduced threshold of pain; a degeneration within the neural anxiety/fear
circuit leading to an imbalance of central network inhibition and excitation
pathways; and finally, an, with advancing age, increasing autonomic imbalance
leading to a significant dominance of the sympathetic neural system.
DISCUSSION: Theoretically, there are three points of attack how to prevent or
treat the episodes: (1) increase in threshold of discomfort impact; (2)
modulation of imbalance of central network inhibition and excitation, and (3)
restoring the balance between the sympathetic and parasympathetic neural systems
prompted by a parasympathetic withdrawal. As to (1) and (2), prevention should
have the greatest priority. As regards (3), research of transcutaneous vagal
stimulation treatment in JNCL is warranted.

Copyright © 2023 Ostergaard.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1216861
PMCID: PMC10523314
PMID: 37771451

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
