---
reference_id: "PMID:38180757"
title: Maternal Diabetes and Overweight and Congenital Heart Defects in Offspring.
authors:
- Turunen R
- Pulakka A
- Metsälä J
- Vahlberg T
- Ojala T
- Gissler M
- Kajantie E
- Helle E
journal: JAMA Netw Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2023.50579
keywords:
- Child
- Male
- Female
- Pregnancy
- Humans
- Overweight/epidemiology
- "Diabetes, Gestational/epidemiology"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1"
- Obesity/epidemiology
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/epidemiology, etiology"
- "Heart Septal Defects, Ventricular"
- Mothers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maternal Diabetes and Overweight and Congenital Heart Defects in Offspring.
**Authors:** Turunen R, Pulakka A, Metsälä J, Vahlberg T, Ojala T, Gissler M, Kajantie E, Helle E
**Journal:** JAMA Netw Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2023.50579](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2023.50579)

## Content

1. JAMA Netw Open. 2024 Jan 2;7(1):e2350579. doi: 
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2023.50579.

Maternal Diabetes and Overweight and Congenital Heart Defects in Offspring.

Turunen R(1)(2), Pulakka A(2)(3), Metsälä J(2), Vahlberg T(4), Ojala T(1), 
Gissler M(5)(6)(7), Kajantie E(2)(8)(9), Helle E(1)(2)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Research Center, New Children's Hospital, Helsinki University 
Hospital and University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Population Health Unit, Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(3)Research Unit of Population Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oulu, 
Oulu, Finland.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Turku, Turku, 
Finland.
(5)Department of Knowledge Brokers, Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Region Stockholm, Academic Primary Health Care Centre, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Clinical Medicine Research Unit, Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu 
University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu Finland.
(9)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(10)Stem Cells and Metabolism Research Program, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(11)Department of Paediatrics, Labatt Family Heart Centre, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

IMPORTANCE: Maternal diabetes and overweight or obesity are known to be 
associated with increased risk of congenital heart defects (CHDs) in offspring, 
but there are no large studies analyzing outcomes associated with these factors 
in 1 model.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of maternal diabetes and overweight or 
obesity with CHDs among offspring in 1 model.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This nationwide, population-based register 
study was conducted in a birth cohort from Finland consisting of all children 
born between 2006 and 2016 (620 751 individuals) and their mothers. Data were 
analyzed from January 2022 until November 2023.
EXPOSURES: Maternal prepregnancy body mass index (BMI; calculated as weight in 
kilograms divided by height in meters squared), categorized as underweight 
(<18.5), normal (18.5-24.9), overweight (25.0-29.9), and obesity (≥30), was 
assessed. Maternal diabetes status, classified as no diabetes, type 1 diabetes 
(T1D), type 2 or other diabetes, and gestational diabetes, was assessed.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Odds ratios (ORs) of isolated CHDs in children were 
found. In addition, 9 anatomical CHD subgroups were studied.
RESULTS: Of 620 751 children (316 802 males [51.0%]; 573 259 mothers aged 20-40 
years [92.3%]) born in Finland during the study period, 10 254 children (1.7%) 
had an isolated CHD. Maternal T1D was associated with increased odds of having a 
child with any CHD (OR, 3.77 [95% CI, 3.26-4.36]) and 6 of 9 CHD subgroups (OR 
range, 3.28 [95% CI, 1.55-6.95] for other septal defects to 7.39 [95% CI, 
3.00-18.21] for transposition of great arteries) compared with no maternal 
diabetes. Maternal overweight was associated with left ventricular outflow tract 
obstruction (OR, 1.28 [95% CI, 1.10-1.49]) and ventricular septal defects (OR, 
0.92 [95% CI, 0.86-0.98]), and obesity was associated with complex defects (OR, 
2.70 [95% CI, 1.14-6.43]) and right outflow tract obstruction (OR, 1.31 [95% CI, 
1.09-1.58]) compared with normal maternal BMI.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study found that maternal T1D was associated 
with increased risk for most types of CHD in offspring, while obesity and 
overweight were associated with increased risk for complex defects and outflow 
tract obstruction and decreased risk for ventricular septal defects. These 
different risk profiles of T1D and overweight and obesity may suggest distinct 
underlying teratogenic mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2023.50579
PMCID: PMC10770771
PMID: 38180757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Pulakka 
reported receiving grants from the European Commission outside the submitted 
work. Dr Metsälä reported receiving grants from the Finnish Cultural Foundation 
outside the submitted work. No other disclosures were reported.