---
reference_id: "PMID:20667823"
title: Loop-sheet mechanism of serpin polymerization tested by reactive center loop mutations.
authors:
- Yamasaki M
- Sendall TJ
- Harris LE
- Lewis GM
- Huntington JA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.156042
keywords:
- Animals
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Humans
- Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Interactions
- "Models, Chemical"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Protein Folding
- Protein Multimerization
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loop-sheet mechanism of serpin polymerization tested by reactive center loop mutations.
**Authors:** Yamasaki M, Sendall TJ, Harris LE, Lewis GM, Huntington JA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.156042](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.156042)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 1;285(40):30752-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.156042. Epub
2010  Jul 28.

Loop-sheet mechanism of serpin polymerization tested by reactive center loop
mutations.

Yamasaki M(1), Sendall TJ, Harris LE, Lewis GM, Huntington JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, United Kingdom.

The serpin mechanism of protease inhibition involves the rapid and stable
incorporation of the reactive center loop (RCL) into central β-sheet A. Serpins
therefore require a folding mechanism that bypasses the most stable
"loop-inserted" conformation to trap the RCL in an exposed and metastable state.
This unusual feature of serpins renders them highly susceptible to point
mutations that lead to the accumulation of hyperstable misfolded polymers in the
endoplasmic reticulum of secretory cells. The ordered and stable
protomer-protomer association in serpin polymers has led to the acceptance of
the "loop-sheet" hypothesis of polymerization, where a portion of the RCL of one
protomer incorporates in register into sheet A of another. Although this
mechanism was proposed 20 years ago, no study has ever been conducted to test
its validity. Here, we describe the properties of a variant of α(1)-antitrypsin
with a critical hydrophobic section of the RCL substituted with aspartic acid
(P8-P6). In contrast to the control, the variant was unable to polymerize when
incubated with small peptides or when cleaved in the middle of the RCL (accepted
models of loop-sheet polymerization). However, when induced by guanidine HCl or
heat, the variant polymerized in a manner indistinguishable from the control.
Importantly, the Asp mutations did not affect the ability of the Z or Siiyama
α(1)-antitrypsin variants to polymerize in COS-7 cells. These results argue
strongly against the loop-sheet hypothesis and suggest that, in serpin polymers,
the P8-P6 region is only a small part of an extensive domain swap.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.156042
PMCID: PMC2945569
PMID: 20667823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
