---
reference_id: "PMID:35662564"
title: "Clinical features and complications of Loeys-Dietz syndrome: A systematic review."
authors:
- Gouda P
- Kay R
- Habib M
- Aziz A
- Aziza E
- Welsh R
journal: Int J Cardiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2022.05.065
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and complications of Loeys-Dietz syndrome: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Gouda P, Kay R, Habib M, Aziz A, Aziza E, Welsh R
**Journal:** Int J Cardiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijcard.2022.05.065](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2022.05.065)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiol. 2022 Sep 1;362:158-167. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2022.05.065. Epub
 2022 Jun 1.

Clinical features and complications of Loeys-Dietz syndrome: A systematic 
review.

Gouda P(1), Kay R(1), Habib M(2), Aziz A(1), Aziza E(1), Welsh R(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Alberta, Division of Cariology, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Flinders University, School of Medicine, Adelaide, Australia.
(3)University of Alberta, Division of Cariology, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; 
Canadian VIGOUR Centre, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. 
Electronic address: Robert.Welsh@ahs.ca.

INTRODUCTION: Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is a connective tissue disorder that 
arises from mutations altering the transforming growth factor β signalling 
pathway. Due to the recent discovery of the underlying genetic mutations leading 
to LDS, the spectrum of characteristics and complications is not fully 
understood.
METHODS: Our search included five databases (Pubmed, SCOPUS, Web of Science, 
EMBASE and google scholar) and included variations of "Loeys-Dietz Syndrome" as 
search terms, using all available data until February 2021. All study types were 
included. Three reviewers screened 1394 abstracts, of which 418 underwent 
full-text review and 392 were included in the final analysis.
RESULTS: We identified 3896 reported cases of LDS with the most commonly 
reported features and complications being: aortic aneurysms and dissections, 
arterial tortuosity, high arched palate, abnormal uvula and hypertelorism. LDS 
Types 1 and 2 share many clinical features, LDS Type 2 appears to have a more 
aggressive aortic disease. LDS Type 3 demonstrated an increased prevalence of 
mitral valve prolapse and arthritis. LDS Type 4 and 5 demonstrated a lower 
prevalence of musculoskeletal and cardiovascular involvement. Amongst 222 women 
who underwent 522 pregnancies, 4% experienced an aortic dissection and the 
peripartum mortality rate was 1%.
CONCLUSION: We observed that LDS is a multisystem connective tissue disorder 
that is associated with a high burden of complications, requiring a 
multidisciplinary approach. Ongoing attempts to better characterise these 
features will allow clinicians to appropriately screen and manage these 
complications.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2022.05.065
PMID: 35662564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]