---
reference_id: "PMID:23700068"
title: Surveillance for urinary tract cancer in Lynch syndrome.
authors:
- Bernstein IT
- Myrhøj T
journal: Fam Cancer
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s10689-013-9634-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surveillance for urinary tract cancer in Lynch syndrome.
**Authors:** Bernstein IT, Myrhøj T
**Journal:** Fam Cancer (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10689-013-9634-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10689-013-9634-y)

## Content

1. Fam Cancer. 2013 Jun;12(2):279-84. doi: 10.1007/s10689-013-9634-y.

Surveillance for urinary tract cancer in Lynch syndrome.

Bernstein IT(1), Myrhøj T.

Author information:
(1)The Danish HNPCC-register, Department of Gastroenterology and Clinical 
Research Center, Copenhagen University Hospital, Hvidovre, Denmark. 
i.bernstein@rn.dk

Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is an inherited multiorgan 
cancer syndrome, which when caused by a germline mutation in the mismatch repair 
(MMR) genes is known as Lynch syndrome (LS). Mutation carriers are at risk for 
developing cancers primarily in the colon, rectum and endometrium, but also 
other extra-colonic cancers. Urinary tract cancers (UTC) have in many studies 
been reported increased in LS and it has been discussed among researchers and 
clinicians whether or not screening for urological tumours should be included in 
the surveillance programme and if so what screening procedures are justifiable. 
The aim of this review was to elucidate the present knowledge from the 
literature on the risk of UTC in LS and highlight the pros and cons of screening 
for asymptomatic neoplasia in the urinary tract. The review is based on a 
systematic literature search in PubMed database followed by a reference list of 
retrieved articles and manual searches of further relevant articles. In 
conclusion there is a moderate increased risk of UTC in LS, but a tremendous 
lack of knowledge on which screening programme, if any at all to establish, and 
if so what procedures and time intervals are appropriate. It is recommended that 
all eventually screening for UTC in LS, only should be performed in clinical 
trials or with a systematic reporting to a HNPCC-register for future evaluation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-013-9634-y
PMID: 23700068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]