---
reference_id: "PMID:25604431"
title: "Transthyretin (ATTR) amyloidosis: clinical spectrum, molecular pathogenesis and disease-modifying treatments."
authors:
- Sekijima Y
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2014-308724
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transthyretin (ATTR) amyloidosis: clinical spectrum, molecular pathogenesis and disease-modifying treatments.
**Authors:** Sekijima Y
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp-2014-308724](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2014-308724)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Sep;86(9):1036-43. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2014-308724. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Transthyretin (ATTR) amyloidosis: clinical spectrum, molecular pathogenesis and 
disease-modifying treatments.

Sekijima Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Neurology and Rheumatology), Shinshu University 
School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Shinshu 
University, Matsumoto, Japan.

Transthyretin (ATTR) amyloidosis is a life-threatening, gain-of-toxic-function 
disease characterised by extracellular deposition of amyloid fibrils composed of 
transthyretin (TTR). TTR protein destabilised by TTR gene mutation is prone to 
dissociate from its native tetramer to monomer, and to then misfold and 
aggregate into amyloid fibrils, resulting in autosomal dominant hereditary 
amyloidosis, including familial amyloid polyneuropathy, familial amyloid 
cardiomyopathy and familial leptomeningeal amyloidosis. Analogous misfolding of 
wild-type TTR results in senile systemic amyloidosis, now termed wild-type ATTR 
amyloidosis, characterised by acquired amyloid disease in the elderly. With the 
availability of genetic, biochemical and immunohistochemical diagnostic tests, 
patients with ATTR amyloidosis have been found in many nations; however, 
misdiagnosis is still common and considerable time is required before correct 
diagnosis in many cases. The current standard first-line treatment for 
hereditary ATTR amyloidosis is liver transplantation, which allows suppression 
of the main source of variant TTR. However, large numbers of patients are not 
suitable transplant candidates. Recently, the clinical effects of TTR tetramer 
stabilisers, diflunisal and tafamidis, were demonstrated in randomised clinical 
trials, and tafamidis has been approved for treatment of hereditary ATTR 
amyloidosis in European countries and in Japan. Moreover, antisense 
oligonucleotides and small interfering RNAs for suppression of variant and 
wild-type TTR synthesis are promising therapeutic approaches to ameliorate ATTR 
amyloidosis and are currently in phase III clinical trials. These newly 
developed therapies are expected to be effective for not only hereditary ATTR 
amyloidosis but also wild-type ATTR amyloidosis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2014-308724
PMID: 25604431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]