---
reference_id: "PMID:23361065"
title: Overlapping cortical malformations and mutations in TUBB2B and TUBA1A.
authors:
- Cushion TD
- Dobyns WB
- Mullins JG
- Stoodley N
- Chung SK
- Fry AE
- Hehr U
- Gunny R
- Aylsworth AS
- Prabhakar P
- Uyanik G
- Rankin J
- Rees MI
- Pilz DT
journal: Brain
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/brain/aws338
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Cerebral Cortex/abnormalities, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Genes, Overlapping/genetics"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lissencephaly/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/diagnosis, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Tubulin/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overlapping cortical malformations and mutations in TUBB2B and TUBA1A.
**Authors:** Cushion TD, Dobyns WB, Mullins JG, Stoodley N, Chung SK, Fry AE, Hehr U, Gunny R, Aylsworth AS, Prabhakar P, Uyanik G, Rankin J, Rees MI, Pilz DT
**Journal:** Brain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/aws338](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws338)

## Content

1. Brain. 2013 Feb;136(Pt 2):536-48. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws338. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

Overlapping cortical malformations and mutations in TUBB2B and TUBA1A.

Cushion TD(1), Dobyns WB, Mullins JG, Stoodley N, Chung SK, Fry AE, Hehr U,
Gunny R, Aylsworth AS, Prabhakar P, Uyanik G, Rankin J, Rees MI, Pilz DT.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Life Science, College of Medicine, Swansea University, Swansea
SA2 8PP, UK.

Comment in
    Brain. 2013 Feb;136(Pt 2):368-73. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt001.

Polymicrogyria and lissencephaly are causally heterogeneous disorders of
cortical brain development, with distinct neuropathological and neuroimaging
patterns. They can be associated with additional structural cerebral anomalies,
and recurrent phenotypic patterns have led to identification of recognizable
syndromes. The lissencephalies are usually single-gene disorders affecting
neuronal migration during cerebral cortical development. Polymicrogyria has been
associated with genetic and environmental causes and is considered a
malformation secondary to abnormal post-migrational development. However, the
aetiology in many individuals with these cortical malformations is still
unknown. During the past few years, mutations in a number of neuron-specific α-
and β-tubulin genes have been identified in both lissencephaly and
polymicrogyria, usually associated with additional cerebral anomalies including
callosal hypoplasia or agenesis, abnormal basal ganglia and cerebellar
hypoplasia. The tubulin proteins form heterodimers that incorporate into
microtubules, cytoskeletal structures essential for cell motility and function.
In this study, we sequenced the TUBB2B and TUBA1A coding regions in 47 patients
with a diagnosis of polymicrogyria and five with an atypical lissencephaly on
neuroimaging. We identified four β-tubulin and two α-tubulin mutations in
patients with a spectrum of cortical and extra-cortical anomalies. Dysmorphic
basal ganglia with an abnormal internal capsule were the most consistent
feature. One of the patients with a TUBB2B mutation had a lissencephalic
phenotype, similar to that previously associated with a TUBA1A mutation. The
remainder had a polymicrogyria-like cortical dysplasia, but the grey matter
malformation was not typical of that seen in 'classical' polymicrogyria. We
propose that the cortical malformations associated with these genes represent a
recognizable tubulinopathy-associated spectrum that ranges from lissencephalic
to polymicrogyric cortical dysplasias, suggesting shared pathogenic mechanisms
in terms of microtubular function and interaction with microtubule-associated
proteins.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws338
PMID: 23361065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
