---
reference_id: "PMID:34562437"
title: Broad locations of antigenic regions for anti-TRPM1 autoantibodies in paraneoplastic retinopathy with retinal ON bipolar cell dysfunction.
authors:
- Gyoten D
- Ueno S
- Okado S
- Chaya T
- Yasuda S
- Morimoto T
- Kondo M
- Kimura K
- Hayashi T
- Leroy BP
- Woo SJ
- Mukai R
- Joo K
- Furukawa T
journal: Exp Eye Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2021.108770
keywords:
- Aged
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Blotting, Western"
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Ocular/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Retinal Bipolar Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- TRPM Cation Channels/immunology
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Broad locations of antigenic regions for anti-TRPM1 autoantibodies in paraneoplastic retinopathy with retinal ON bipolar cell dysfunction.
**Authors:** Gyoten D, Ueno S, Okado S, Chaya T, Yasuda S, Morimoto T, Kondo M, Kimura K, Hayashi T, Leroy BP, Woo SJ, Mukai R, Joo K, Furukawa T
**Journal:** Exp Eye Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exer.2021.108770](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2021.108770)

## Content

1. Exp Eye Res. 2021 Nov;212:108770. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2021.108770. Epub 2021
Sep  22.

Broad locations of antigenic regions for anti-TRPM1 autoantibodies in 
paraneoplastic retinopathy with retinal ON bipolar cell dysfunction.

Gyoten D(1), Ueno S(2), Okado S(3), Chaya T(1), Yasuda S(3), Morimoto T(4), 
Kondo M(5), Kimura K(6), Hayashi T(7), Leroy BP(8), Woo SJ(9), Mukai R(10), Joo 
K(9), Furukawa T(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute for Protein 
Research, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Aichi, Japan. Electronic address: ueno@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Aichi, Japan.
(4)Department of Advanced Visual Neuroscience, Osaka University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine, Mie, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yamaguchi, Japan.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium; Department of Ophthalmology, Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent 
University Hospital, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; Division of Ophthalmology 
and CCMT, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, USA.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Gunma, Japan.

PURPOSE: Cancer-associated retinal ON bipolar cell dysfunction (CARBD), which 
includes melanoma-associated retinopathy (MAR), has been reported to be caused 
by autoantibodies against the molecules expressed in ON bipolar cells, including 
TRPM1. The purpose of this study was to determine the antigenic regions of the 
autoantibodies against TRPM1 in the sera of CARBD patients, in whom we 
previously detected anti-TRPM1 autoantibodies.
METHODS: The antigenic regions against TRPM1 in the sera of eight CARBD patients 
were examined by Western blots using HEK293T cells transfected with the plasmids 
expressing FLAG-tagged TRPM1 fragments. The clinical course of these patients 
was also documented.
RESULTS: The clinical course differed among the patients. The electroretinograms 
(ERGs) and symptoms were improved in three patients, deteriorated in one 
patient, remained unchanged for a long time in one patient, and were not 
followable in three patients. Seven of the eight sera possessed multiple 
antigenic regions: two sera contained at least four antigen recognition regions, 
and three sera had at least three regions. The antigen regions were spread over 
the entire TRPM1 protein: five sera in the N-terminal intracellular domain, six 
sera in the transmembrane-containing region, and six sera in the C-terminal 
intracellular domain. No significant relationship was observed between the 
location of the antigen epitope and the patients' clinical course.
CONCLUSIONS: The antigenic regions of anti-TRPM1 autoantibodies in CARBD 
patients were present not only in the N-terminal intracellular domain, which was 
reported in an earlier report, but also in the transmembrane-containing region 
and in the C-terminal intracellular domain. In addition, the antigenic regions 
for TRPM1 were found to vary among the CARBD patients examined, and most of the 
sera had multiple antigenic regions.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2021.108770
PMID: 34562437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]