---
reference_id: "PMID:3067577"
title: "Kabuki make-up (Niikawa-Kuroki) syndrome: a study of 62 patients."
authors:
- Niikawa N
- Kuroki Y
- Kajii T
- Matsuura N
- Ishikiriyama S
- Tonoki H
- Ishikawa N
- Yamada Y
- Fujita M
- Umemoto H
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320310312
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Dermatoglyphics
- Facial Bones/abnormalities
- Female
- Growth Disorders/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Japan
- Karyotyping
- Male
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kabuki make-up (Niikawa-Kuroki) syndrome: a study of 62 patients.
**Authors:** Niikawa N, Kuroki Y, Kajii T, Matsuura N, Ishikiriyama S, Tonoki H, Ishikawa N, Yamada Y, Fujita M, Umemoto H
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320310312](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320310312)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1988 Nov;31(3):565-89. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320310312.

Kabuki make-up (Niikawa-Kuroki) syndrome: a study of 62 patients.

Niikawa N(1), Kuroki Y, Kajii T, Matsuura N, Ishikiriyama S, Tonoki H, Ishikawa 
N, Yamada Y, Fujita M, Umemoto H, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

These 62 patients with the Kabuki make-up syndrome (KMS) were collected in a 
collaborative study among 33 institutions and analyzed clinically, 
cytogenetically, and epidemiologically to delineate the phenotypic spectrum of 
KMS and to learn about its cause. Among various manifestations observed, most 
patients had the following five cardinal manifestations: 1) a peculiar face 
(100%) characterized by eversion of the lower lateral eyelid; arched eyebrows, 
with sparse or dispersed lateral one-third; a depressed nasal tip; and prominent 
ears; 2) skeletal anomalies (92%), including brachydactyly V and a deformed 
spinal column, with or without sagittal cleft vertebrae; 3) dermatoglyphic 
abnormalities (93%), including increased digital ulnar loop and hypothenar loop 
patterns, absence of the digital triradius c and/or d, and presence of fingertip 
pads; 4) mild to moderate mental retardation (92%); and 5) postnatal growth 
deficiency (83%). Thus the core of the phenotypic spectrum of KMS is rather 
narrow and clearly defined. Many other inconsistent anomalies were observed. 
Important among them were early breast development in infant girls (23%), and 
congenital heart defects (31%), such as a single ventricle with a common atrium, 
ventricular septal defect, atrial septal defect, tetralogy of Fallot, 
coarctation of aorta, patent ductus arteriosus, aneurysm of aorta, transposition 
of great vessels, and right bundle branch block. Of the 62 KMS patients, 58 were 
Japanese, an indication that the syndrome is fairly common in Japan. It was 
estimated that its prevalence in Japanese newborn infants is 1/32,000. All the 
KMS cases in this study were sporadic, the sex ratio was even, there was no 
correlation with birth order, the consanguinity rate among the parents was not 
high, and no incriminated agent was found that was taken by the mothers during 
early pregnancy. Three of the 62 patients had a Y chromosome abnormality 
involving a possible common breakpoint (Yp11.2). This could indicate another 
possibility, i.e., that the KMS gene is on Yp11.2 and that the disease is 
pseudoautosomal dominant. These findings are compatible with an autosomal 
dominant disorder in which every patient represents a fresh mutation. The 
mutation rate was calculated at 15.6 X 10(6).

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320310312
PMID: 3067577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]