---
reference_id: "PMID:31288208"
title: "Diagnosis and treatment of basal cell carcinoma: European consensus-based interdisciplinary guidelines."
authors:
- Peris K
- Fargnoli MC
- Garbe C
- Kaufmann R
- Bastholt L
- Seguin NB
- Bataille V
- Marmol VD
- Dummer R
- Harwood CA
- Hauschild A
- Höller C
- Haedersdal M
- Malvehy J
- Middleton MR
- Morton CA
- Nagore E
- Stratigos AJ
- Szeimies RM
- Tagliaferri L
- Trakatelli M
- Zalaudek I
- Eggermont A
- Grob JJ
- "European Dermatology Forum (EDF), the European Association of Dermato-Oncology (EADO) and the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC)"
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2019.06.003
keywords:
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/mortality, pathology, therapy"
- Clinical Decision-Making
- Europe
- Humans
- Medical Oncology/standards
- Patient Selection
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- "Skin Neoplasms/mortality, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and treatment of basal cell carcinoma: European consensus-based interdisciplinary guidelines.
**Authors:** Peris K, Fargnoli MC, Garbe C, Kaufmann R, Bastholt L, Seguin NB, Bataille V, Marmol VD, Dummer R, Harwood CA, Hauschild A, Höller C, Haedersdal M, Malvehy J, Middleton MR, Morton CA, Nagore E, Stratigos AJ, Szeimies RM, Tagliaferri L, Trakatelli M, Zalaudek I, Eggermont A, Grob JJ, European Dermatology Forum (EDF), the European Association of Dermato-Oncology (EADO) and the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC)
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2019.06.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2019.06.003)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2019 Sep;118:10-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2019.06.003. Epub 2019
Jul  6.

Diagnosis and treatment of basal cell carcinoma: European consensus-based
interdisciplinary guidelines.

Peris K(1), Fargnoli MC(2), Garbe C(3), Kaufmann R(4), Bastholt L(5), Seguin
NB(6), Bataille V(7), Marmol VD(8), Dummer R(9), Harwood CA(10), Hauschild
A(11), Höller C(12), Haedersdal M(13), Malvehy J(14), Middleton MR(15), Morton
CA(16), Nagore E(17), Stratigos AJ(18), Szeimies RM(19), Tagliaferri L(20),
Trakatelli M(21), Zalaudek I(22), Eggermont A(23), Grob JJ(24); European
Dermatology Forum (EDF), the European Association of Dermato-Oncology (EADO) and
the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Dermatology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Italy;
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, IRCCS, Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: ketty.peris@unicatt.it.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(3)Centre for Dermatooncology, Department of Dermatology, Eberhard-Karls
University, Tuebingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University Hospital
Frankfurt, Germany.
(5)Department of Oncology, Odense University Hospital, Denmark.
(6)Dermatology Department, Saint-Louis Hospital, Paris, France.
(7)Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology Unit, School of Basic & Medical
Biosciences, King's College London, London, SE1 7EH, UK.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Brussels, Belgium.
(9)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich and University Zurich,
Switzerland.
(10)Centre for Cell Biology and Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute, Barts and
the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London,
London, United Kingdom.
(11)Department of Dermatology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(12)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.
(13)Department of Dermatology, University of Copenhagen, Bispebjerg Hospital,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(14)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona (Melanoma Unit),
University of Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Barcelona & CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain.
(15)Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus, Oxford, OX3
9DU, UK.
(16)Stirling Community Hospital, Stirling, UK.
(17)Department of Dermatology, Instituto Valenciano de Oncologia, Valencia,
Spain.
(18)1(st) Department of Dermatology- Venereology, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, School of Medicine, Andreas Sygros Hospital, Athens,
Greece.
(19)Clinic for Dermatology and Allergology, Klinikum Vest GmbH Teaching
Hospital, Recklinghausen, Germany.
(20)Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, UOC di Radioterapia,
Dipartimento di Scienze Radiologiche, Radioterapiche Ed Ematologiche, Rome,
Italy.
(21)Second Department of Dermatology, Aristotle University Medical School,
Papageorgiou General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(22)Dermatology Clinic, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
(23)Cancer Institute, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Grand Paris, 94805,
Villejuif, France.
(24)University Department of Dermatology, Marseille, France.

Comment in
    Eur J Cancer. 2020 May;131:98-99. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2019.12.002.
    Eur J Cancer. 2020 May;131:100-103. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.02.040.
    Eur J Cancer. 2020 Nov;140:151-153. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.07.039.
    Eur J Cancer. 2020 Nov;140:154-157. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.08.006.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common malignant tumour in white
populations. Multidisciplinary experts from the European Dermatology Forum, the
European Association of Dermato-Oncology and the European Organization of
Research and Treatment of Cancer collaborated to develop recommendations on
diagnosis and treatment of BCC. A new classification into 'easy-to-treat
(common) BCC and 'difficult-to-treat' BCC is proposed. Diagnosis is based on
clinicodermatoscopic features for 'easy-to-treat' BCCs. Histopathological
confirmation is mandatory in ambiguous lesions and in BCCs located in high-risk
areas. The first-line treatment of 'easy-to-treat' BCC is complete surgery.
Microscopically controlled surgery shall be offered for high-risk BCC, recurrent
BCC and BCC in critical anatomical sites. Topical therapies (5% imiquimod, 5%
fluorouracil) and destructive approaches (curettage, electrocautery,
cryotherapy, laser ablation) should be considered in patients with low-risk
superficial BCC. Photodynamic therapy is an effective treatment for superficial
BCC and thin nodular BCC. The therapy for a 'difficult-to-treat' BCC should
preferentially be discussed by a multidisciplinary tumour board. Hedgehog
inhibitors, vismodegib or sonidegib, should be offered to patients with locally
advanced and metastatic BCCs. Immunotherapy with anti-programmed cell death 1
(PD-1) antibodies is a promising therapeutic option, currently being
investigated in clinical trials. Radiotherapy represents a valid alternative to
surgery for BCC on the face, especially in elderly patients. In patients with
naevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS), close surveillance and regular
skin examinations are required to diagnose and treat BCCs at early stage.
Long-term follow-up is recommended in patients with high-risk BCC subtypes,
high-risk sites, multiple BCCs and NBCCS.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2019.06.003
PMID: 31288208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
