---
reference_id: "PMID:7634977"
title: Cytokine production in pouchitis is similar to that in ulcerative colitis.
authors:
- Patel RT
- Bain I
- Youngs D
- Keighley MR
journal: Dis Colon Rectum
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1007/BF02049839
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytokine production in pouchitis is similar to that in ulcerative colitis.
**Authors:** Patel RT, Bain I, Youngs D, Keighley MR
**Journal:** Dis Colon Rectum (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02049839](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02049839)

## Content

1. Dis Colon Rectum. 1995 Aug;38(8):831-7. doi: 10.1007/BF02049839.

Cytokine production in pouchitis is similar to that in ulcerative colitis.

Patel RT(1), Bain I, Youngs D, Keighley MR.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Surgery, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: Controversy exists as to whether pouchitis represents a reactivation of 
the immunologic mechanisms that lead to ulcerative colitis (UC). The aims of 
this study were to determine local levels of the cytokines: interleukin-1 beta 
(IL-1 beta), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-8 (IL-8), and tumor necrosis 
factor alpha (TNF alpha) in the mucosa of patients with "asymptomatic" ileoanal 
pouch (n = 25), pouchitis (n = 9), active UC (n = 20), normal ileum (n = 15), 
proctitis (n = 10), and normal colon (n = 15).
METHODS: Lamina propria mononuclear cells were isolated from mucosal biopsies by 
enzymatic dispersion and cultured for 48 hours. Proinflammatory cytokine levels 
were measured in the supernatants by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: IL-1 beta, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF alpha secretions were significantly 
greater in pouchitis and active UC than in the noninflamed ileoanal pouch and 
normal controls (P < 0.001). There was significant correlation (r = 0.63, P < 
0.05) between levels of cytokines expressed in pouchitis and active UC.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased cytokine expression occurs in both active UC and 
pouchitis and to a lesser extent in the long-standing ileoanal pouch.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02049839
PMID: 7634977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]