---
reference_id: "PMID:30674002"
title: "Topical Retinoids in Acne Vulgaris: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Kolli SS
- Pecone D
- Pona A
- Cline A
- Feldman SR
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s40257-019-00423-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topical Retinoids in Acne Vulgaris: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Kolli SS, Pecone D, Pona A, Cline A, Feldman SR
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40257-019-00423-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40257-019-00423-z)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2019 Jun;20(3):345-365. doi: 10.1007/s40257-019-00423-z.

Topical Retinoids in Acne Vulgaris: A Systematic Review.

Kolli SS(1), Pecone D(2), Pona A(2), Cline A(2), Feldman SR(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Center for Dermatology Research, Wake Forest 
School of Medicine, 1 Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157-1071, 
USA. skolli@wakehealth.edu.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Center for Dermatology Research, Wake Forest 
School of Medicine, 1 Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157-1071, 
USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, 
USA.
(4)Department of Public Health Sciences, Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Topical retinoids are a first-line treatment for acne vulgaris.
OBJECTIVE: This systematic review aims to evaluate the efficacy, safety, and 
tolerability of topical retinoids approved in the United States for the 
treatment of acne vulgaris.
METHODS: A PubMed and Embase search was conducted using the search terms 
'adapalene,' 'tretinoin,' 'tazarotene,' and 'acne vulgaris.' Selection of 
articles fit the following inclusion criteria: clinical trials evaluating both 
efficacy and safety/tolerability of topical retinoids approved in the United 
States for the treatment of acne vulgaris and published between January 1, 2008 
and September 1, 2018. Exclusion criteria included clinical trials involving 20 
subjects or fewer, subjects under 12 years of age, and topical retinoid 
combination therapies with moisturizers or aloe vera. Of 424 search results 
found, a total of 54 clinical trials were chosen based on selection criteria.
RESULTS: Topical retinoids are superior to vehicle in improving Investigator 
Global Assessment and Investigator's Static Global Assessment (24.1-28.8% and 
13.3-17.3%, respectively; p < 0.001). A topical retinoid combined with benzoyl 
peroxide led to IGA improvement compared with vehicle (26.1-34.9% vs 7-11.8%; 
p < 0.001) at Week 12. Topical retinoid plus an oral antibiotic was superior to 
vehicle in reducing lesion counts (64-78.9% vs 41-56.8%, p < 0.001). There was 
no significant difference in efficacy between tretinoin and tazarotene. 
Tretinoin 0.05% resulted in 62% of patients experiencing AEs compared with 
adapalene 0.1% (19%) and adapalene 0.3% (40%). More patients receiving adapalene 
were tolerant of the AEs compared with tazarotene (55.4% vs 24.4%; p < 0.0012).
CONCLUSIONS: Topical retinoids are safe and efficacious for the treatment of 
acne vulgaris. They should be used in combination with benzoyl peroxide to 
optimize results in patients. The differences in efficacy of topical retinoids 
appears minor; therefore, the type of topical retinoid is not as important as 
choosing a particular strength of topical retinoid and combining it with an 
antimicrobial agent. Adapalene has a superior tolerability profile amongst 
topical retinoids.

DOI: 10.1007/s40257-019-00423-z
PMID: 30674002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]