---
reference_id: "PMID:15743916"
title: "Microdeletion of target sites for insulator protein CTCF in a chromosome 11p15 imprinting center in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and Wilms' tumor."
authors:
- Prawitt D
- Enklaar T
- Gärtner-Rupprecht B
- Spangenberg C
- Oswald M
- Lausch E
- Schmidtke P
- Reutzel D
- Fees S
- Lucito R
- Korzon M
- Brozek I
- Limon J
- Housman DE
- Pelletier J
- Zabel B
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0500037102
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome/genetics
- CCCTC-Binding Factor
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 11"
- DNA Methylation
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Genomic Imprinting
- Humans
- "Insulin-Like Growth Factor II/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Pedigree
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Sequence Deletion
- Wilms Tumor/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microdeletion of target sites for insulator protein CTCF in a chromosome 11p15 imprinting center in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and Wilms' tumor.
**Authors:** Prawitt D, Enklaar T, Gärtner-Rupprecht B, Spangenberg C, Oswald M, Lausch E, Schmidtke P, Reutzel D, Fees S, Lucito R, Korzon M, Brozek I, Limon J, Housman DE, Pelletier J, Zabel B
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0500037102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0500037102)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 15;102(11):4085-90. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0500037102. Epub 2005 Mar 2.

Microdeletion of target sites for insulator protein CTCF in a chromosome 11p15 
imprinting center in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and Wilms' tumor.

Prawitt D(1), Enklaar T, Gärtner-Rupprecht B, Spangenberg C, Oswald M, Lausch E, 
Schmidtke P, Reutzel D, Fees S, Lucito R, Korzon M, Brozek I, Limon J, Housman 
DE, Pelletier J, Zabel B.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Mainz, Langenbeckstrasse 1, D-55101 Mainz, 
Germany. prawitt@molgen.medizin.uni-mainz.de

We have analyzed several cases of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) with Wilms' 
tumor in a familial setting, which give insight into the complex controls of 
imprinting and gene expression in the chromosome 11p15 region. We describe a 
2.2-kbp microdeletion in the H19/insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2)-imprinting 
center eliminating three target sites of the chromatin insulator protein CTCF 
that we believe here is necessary, but not sufficient, to cause BWS and Wilms' 
tumor. Maternal inheritance of the deletion is associated with IGF2 loss of 
imprinting and up-regulation of IGF2 mRNA. However, in at least one affected 
family member a second genetic lesion (a duplication of maternal 11p15) was 
identified and accompanied by a further increase in IGF2 mRNA levels 35-fold 
higher than control values. Our results suggest that the combined effects of the 
H19/IGF2-imprinting center microdeletion and 11p15 chromosome duplication were 
necessary for manifestation of BWS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0500037102
PMCID: PMC554791
PMID: 15743916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]