---
reference_id: "PMID:40560352"
title: "Distinctive hobnail subtype of papillary thyroid carcinoma: a case series and short review of literature."
authors:
- Yadav V
- Lahiri A
- Pasricha S
- Arora V
- Sharma P
- Chowdhury S
- Dewan AK
journal: Hormones (Athens)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s42000-025-00692-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/pathology, genetics, therapy"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/pathology, genetics, therapy"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- Mutation
- Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinctive hobnail subtype of papillary thyroid carcinoma: a case series and short review of literature.
**Authors:** Yadav V, Lahiri A, Pasricha S, Arora V, Sharma P, Chowdhury S, Dewan AK
**Journal:** Hormones (Athens) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s42000-025-00692-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s42000-025-00692-w)

## Content

1. Hormones (Athens). 2025 Sep;24(3):861-869. doi: 10.1007/s42000-025-00692-w.
Epub  2025 Jun 25.

Distinctive hobnail subtype of papillary thyroid carcinoma: a case series and
short review of literature.

Yadav V(1), Lahiri A(2), Pasricha S(3), Arora V(1), Sharma P(1), Chowdhury S(1),
Dewan AK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute and Research
Centre , New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Surgical Oncology Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute and Research
Centre , New Delhi, India. anupamlahiri9@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pathology Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute and Research Centre,
New Delhi, India.

INTRODUCTION: The hobnail subtype of papillary thyroid carcinoma (HSPTC) is a
rare and aggressive subtype, comprising 1-2% of all PTC cases. It is
characterized by poor prognosis, frequent BRAF and p53 mutations, and a high
recurrence rate. Given the limited data on HSPTC, especially in the Indian
population, this case series aims to provide valuable insights into its clinical
behavior, mutational profile, and treatment outcomes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted from January 2021
to December 2023. Histological reports were reviewed for cases with ≥ 5% hobnail
features. Cases fulfilling these criteria were reviewed for features of
high-grade differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Immunohistochemistry was performed
to identify BRAF.V600E and p53. Patient demographics, tumor characteristics, and
follow-up data were collected. Follow-up included clinical exams, thyroid
function tests, thyroglobulin, anti-thyroglobulin antibody levels, and imaging
when necessary.
RESULTS: Among 600 PTC cases, 4 were identified as HSPTC (0.67% incidence). The
median follow-up was 40 months. Mean tumor size of 3.3 cm. 75% showed BRAF and
p53 positivity. Lymphovascular invasion (LVI) was present in 50% of patients.
Recurrence occurred in two patients, both with LVI, despite receiving
radioactive iodine and radiotherapy. The largest tumor (6 cm) did not show lymph
node metastasis, while smaller tumors (2.2 cm, 2.3 cm) were metastatic. Higher
mitotic rate showed necrosis and lymph nodal metastasis. Neither BRAF nor p53
positivity correlated with thyroglobulin levels.
CONCLUSION: HSPTC exhibits aggressive behavior, particularly in cases with LVI,
high mitotic activity and necrosis. BRAF and p53 mutations are common and cause
aggressiveness. Early and aggressive management are essential to improve
outcomes.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Hellenic Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1007/s42000-025-00692-w
PMID: 40560352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical committee approval: This
is an observational study. The Institutional Research Ethics Committee has
confirmed that no ethical approval is required. Informed consent: Informed
consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
Conflict of interest: The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial
interests to disclose.
