---
reference_id: "PMID:29588315"
title: "Cholesterol Efflux Pathways Suppress Inflammasome Activation, NETosis, and Atherogenesis."
authors:
- Westerterp M
- Fotakis P
- Ouimet M
- Bochem AE
- Zhang H
- Molusky MM
- Wang W
- Abramowicz S
- la Bastide-van Gemert S
- Wang N
- Welch CL
- Reilly MP
- Stroes ES
- Moore KJ
- Tall AR
journal: Circulation
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032636
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily G, Member 1/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Atherosclerosis/genetics, metabolism, pathology, prevention & control"
- Case-Control Studies
- "Caspase 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Caspases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Caspases, Initiator"
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- Cytokines/blood
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Extracellular Traps/metabolism
- Humans
- "Inflammasomes/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Inflammation/genetics, metabolism, pathology, prevention & control"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Myeloid Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "NLR Family, Pyrin Domain-Containing 3 Protein/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Plaque, Atherosclerotic"
- "Receptors, LDL/genetics, metabolism"
- Spleen/metabolism
- "Tangier Disease/blood, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholesterol Efflux Pathways Suppress Inflammasome Activation, NETosis, and Atherogenesis.
**Authors:** Westerterp M, Fotakis P, Ouimet M, Bochem AE, Zhang H, Molusky MM, Wang W, Abramowicz S, la Bastide-van Gemert S, Wang N, Welch CL, Reilly MP, Stroes ES, Moore KJ, Tall AR
**Journal:** Circulation (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032636](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032636)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2018 Aug 28;138(9):898-912. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032636.

Cholesterol Efflux Pathways Suppress Inflammasome Activation, NETosis, and
Atherogenesis.

Westerterp M(1)(2), Fotakis P(1), Ouimet M(3)(4), Bochem AE(1)(5), Zhang H(6),
Molusky MM(1), Wang W(1), Abramowicz S(1), la Bastide-van Gemert S(7), Wang
N(1), Welch CL(1), Reilly MP(6), Stroes ES(5), Moore KJ(3), Tall AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine (M.W., P.F., A.E.B., M.M.M., W.W., S.A., N.W.,
C.L.W., A.R.T.).
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Molecular Genetics (M.W.).
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, New York University Medical
Center, NY (M.O., K.J.M.).
(4)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, and Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Canada
(M.O.).
(5)Department of Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, The Netherlands (A.E.B., E.S.S.).
(6)Division of Cardiology (H.Z., M.P.R.), Department of Medicine, Columbia
University, New York, NY.
(7)Department of Epidemiology (S.l.B-v.G.), University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2018 Jun;15(6):318-319. doi: 10.1038/s41569-018-0012-1.
    Ann Transl Med. 2018 Nov;6(Suppl 1):S24. doi: 10.21037/atm.2018.09.28.

BACKGROUND: The CANTOS trial (Canakinumab Antiinflammatory Thrombosis Outcome
Study) showed that antagonism of interleukin (IL)-1β reduces coronary heart
disease in patients with a previous myocardial infarction and evidence of
systemic inflammation, indicating that pathways required for IL-1β secretion
increase cardiovascular risk. IL-1β and IL-18 are produced via the NLRP3
inflammasome in myeloid cells in response to cholesterol accumulation, but
mechanisms linking NLRP3 inflammasome activation to atherogenesis are unclear.
The cholesterol transporters ATP binding cassette A1 and G1 (ABCA1/G1) mediate
cholesterol efflux to high-density lipoprotein, and Abca1/g1 deficiency in
myeloid cells leads to cholesterol accumulation.
METHODS: To interrogate mechanisms connecting inflammasome activation with
atherogenesis, we used mice with myeloid Abca1/g1 deficiency and concomitant
deficiency of the inflammasome components Nlrp3 or Caspase-1/11. Bone marrow
from these mice was transplanted into Ldlr-/- recipients, which were fed a
Western-type diet.
RESULTS: Myeloid Abca1/g1 deficiency increased plasma IL-18 levels in Ldlr-/-
mice and induced IL-1β and IL-18 secretion in splenocytes, which was reversed by
Nlrp3 or Caspase-1/11 deficiency, indicating activation of the NLRP3
inflammasome. Nlrp3 or Caspase-1/11 deficiency decreased atherosclerotic lesion
size in myeloid Abca1/g1-deficient Ldlr-/- mice. Myeloid Abca1/g1 deficiency
enhanced caspase-1 cleavage not only in splenic monocytes and macrophages, but
also in neutrophils, and dramatically enhanced neutrophil accumulation and
neutrophil extracellular trap formation in atherosclerotic plaques, with
reversal by Nlrp3 or Caspase-1/11 deficiency, suggesting that inflammasome
activation promotes neutrophil recruitment and neutrophil extracellular trap
formation in atherosclerotic plaques. These effects appeared to be indirectly
mediated by systemic inflammation leading to activation and accumulation of
neutrophils in plaques. Myeloid Abca1/g1 deficiency also activated the
noncanonical inflammasome, causing increased susceptibility to
lipopolysaccharide-induced mortality. Patients with Tangier disease, who carry
loss-of-function mutations in ABCA1 and have increased myeloid cholesterol
content, showed a marked increase in plasma IL-1β and IL-18 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Cholesterol accumulation in myeloid cells activates the NLRP3
inflammasome, which enhances neutrophil accumulation and neutrophil
extracellular trap formation in atherosclerotic plaques. Patients with Tangier
disease, who have increased myeloid cholesterol content, showed markers of
inflammasome activation, suggesting human relevance.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032636
PMCID: PMC6160368
PMID: 29588315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures A.R.T. reports
being a consultant to Amgen, CSL, Staten Biotech, and Dalcor. The other authors
report no conflicts of interest.
