---
reference_id: "PMID:20301534"
title: PAX6 Aniridia Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Kit V
- Oluonye N
- Moosajee M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PAX6 Aniridia Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Kit V, Oluonye N, Moosajee M

## Content

1. PAX6 Aniridia Syndrome.

Kit V(1), Oluonye N(2), Moosajee M(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 May 20 [updated 2026 Jun 2].

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Registrar, North Thames Deanery, NHS England, London, United 
Kingdom
(2)Consultant Neurodevelopmental Paediatrician, Great Ormond Street Hospital;, 
Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom
(3)Consultant Ophthalmologist, Professor of Molecular Ophthalmology, Moorfields 
Eye Hospital;, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: PAX6 aniridia syndrome is a pan ocular and systemic 
disorder. Classic aniridia affects the iris (partial or full iris hypoplasia), 
cornea (corneal keratopathy), anterior segment (resulting in raised intraocular 
pressure and glaucoma), lens (cataract and lens subluxation), fovea (foveal 
hypoplasia), and optic nerve (optic nerve coloboma and hypoplasia). Individuals 
with classic aniridia characteristically show nystagmus and impaired visual 
acuity (usually 20/100 to 20/200). Other PAX6-related ophthalmologic findings 
(often called "atypical aniridia" in the literature) range from isolated 
non-aniridic findings of classic aniridia to findings such as microphthalmia; 
affected individuals can also show asymmetry, or a complex phenotype with 
features of aniridia. Although the severity of aniridia shows interfamilial and 
intrafamilial variability, little variability is usually observed in the two 
eyes of an affected individual. Central nervous system findings can include 
central auditory processing difficulties in some individuals that may cause 
difficulties in understanding speech in the presence of normal hearing; reduced 
olfaction / anosmia; disordered sleep; developmental delay / intellectual 
disability; neurobehavioral/psychiatric manifestations such as autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and behavioral 
dysregulation; and mood disorders such as depression and anxiety.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PAX6 aniridia syndrome is established in a 
proband with suggestive findings and either (1) a heterozygous PAX6 
loss-of-function pathogenic variant (~80%-90% of affected individuals) or (2) a 
heterozygous deletion of chromosome 11p13 including the 5' and 3' regulatory 
regions of PAX6 (~10%-20% of affected individuals) identified by molecular 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Supportive treatment: Multidisciplinary care by specialists in 
ophthalmology who are familiar with management of PAX6 aniridia syndrome (i.e., 
correction of refractive errors; use of tinted or photochromic lenses; occlusion 
therapy in childhood for anisometropic amblyopia or strabismic amblyopia; 
caution regarding surgical procedures to decrease the likelihood or exacerbation 
of aniridic-related keratopathy (ARK) and/or severe aniridic fibrosis syndrome 
(AFS); cautious use of lensectomy to attempt to improve visual acuity in those 
with cataracts because of associated foveal hypoplasia; use of topical 
anti-glaucoma medication to manage glaucoma when possible; methods to treat 
corneal opacification). Other specialists include clinicians who provide low 
vision services and those who manage developmental delay / intellectual 
disability, speech-language pathologists for communication difficulties, and 
developmental pediatricians for issues such as neurobehavioral/psychiatric 
concerns. Surveillance: To monitor existing manifestations, the individual's 
response to supportive care, and the emergence of new manifestations, monitor 
children younger than age eight years every four to six months for refractive 
errors and detection and treatment of incipient or actual amblyopia (strabismic, 
refractive, or sensory); perform ophthalmology examination annually or sooner if 
there is acute deterioration in vision to detect issues such as corneal changes, 
raised intraocular pressure, and cataracts. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It 
is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of infants who are offspring or 
sibs of an individual with PAX6 aniridia syndrome (by either an eye examination 
or molecular genetic testing for the PAX6 genetic alteration in the family) to 
identify those who would benefit from prompt treatment and surveillance of 
complications of PAX6 aniridia syndrome.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PAX6 aniridia syndrome is caused by a heterozygous PAX6 
genetic alteration (either a loss-of-function PAX6 pathogenic variant or a 
deletion of chromosome 11p13 including the 5' and 3' regulatory regions of PAX6) 
and inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Approximately two thirds of 
individuals diagnosed with PAX6 aniridia syndrome have an affected parent. 
Approximately one third of affected individuals have the disorder as the result 
of a de novo PAX6 genetic alteration. Each child of an individual with PAX6 
aniridia syndrome has a 50% chance of inheriting the PAX6 genetic alteration. 
Once the PAX6 genetic alteration has been identified in an affected family 
member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301534