---
reference_id: "PMID:34215014"
title: "Alagille Syndrome: A Focused Review on Clinical Features, Genetics, and Treatment."
authors:
- Kohut TJ
- Gilbert MA
- Loomes KM
journal: Semin Liver Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1730951
keywords:
- "Alagille Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- "Jagged-1 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Receptor, Notch2"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alagille Syndrome: A Focused Review on Clinical Features, Genetics, and Treatment.
**Authors:** Kohut TJ, Gilbert MA, Loomes KM
**Journal:** Semin Liver Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0041-1730951](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0041-1730951)

## Content

1. Semin Liver Dis. 2021 Nov;41(4):525-537. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1730951. Epub
2021  Jul 2.

Alagille Syndrome: A Focused Review on Clinical Features, Genetics, and 
Treatment.

Kohut TJ(1), Gilbert MA(2), Loomes KM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Division of Genomic Diagnostics, Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Alagille syndrome (ALGS) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by pathogenic 
variants in JAG1 or NOTCH2, which encode fundamental components of the Notch 
signaling pathway. Clinical features span multiple organ systems including 
hepatic, cardiac, vascular, renal, skeletal, craniofacial, and ocular, and occur 
with variable phenotypic penetrance. Genotype-phenotype correlation studies have 
not yet shown associations between mutation type and clinical manifestations or 
severity, and it has been hypothesized that modifier genes may modulate the 
effects of JAG1 and NOTCH2 pathogenic variants. Medical management is 
supportive, focusing on clinical manifestations of disease, with liver 
transplant indicated for severe pruritus, liver synthetic dysfunction, portal 
hypertension, bone fractures, and/or growth failure. New therapeutic approaches 
are under investigation, including ileal bile acid transporter (IBAT) inhibitors 
and other approaches that may involve targeted interventions to augment the 
Notch signaling pathway in involved tissues.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1730951
PMID: 34215014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: K.M.L. declares the following conflicts—research 
grants for clinical trials: Mirum Pharmaceuticals (maralixibat) and Albireo 
Pharma (odevixibat); consulting for Mirum Pharmaceuticals, Albireo Pharma, and 
Travere Therapeutics (formerly known as Retrophin). M.A.G. declares the 
following conflicts—consulting for Travere Therapeutics (formerly known as 
Retrophin).