---
reference_id: "PMID:31696011"
title: "Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl Syndrome: A Case Report."
authors:
- Khan BA
- Shahid A
- Bin Nazir M
- Khan KS
- Punshi A
journal: Cureus
year: '2019'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.5618
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl Syndrome: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Khan BA, Shahid A, Bin Nazir M, Khan KS, Punshi A
**Journal:** Cureus (2019)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.5618](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.5618)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2019 Sep 10;11(9):e5618. doi: 10.7759/cureus.5618.

Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl Syndrome: A Case Report.

Khan BA(1), Shahid A(2), Bin Nazir M(1), Khan KS(1), Punshi A(3).

Author information:
(1)Dow Medical College, Dow University of Health Sciences (DUHS), Karachi, PAK.
(2)Internal Medicine, Dow University of Health Sciences (DUHS), Karachi, PAK.
(3)Internal Medicine, Civil Hospital Karachi, Karachi, PAK.

Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl syndrome (LMBBS), a rare autosomal recessive defect, 
mostly occurs in children born from consanguineous marriages. The major features 
of this syndrome are cone-rod dystrophy, polydactyly, obesity, learning 
disabilities, hypogonadism in males, renal anomalies, nystagmus, speech 
disorders, developmental delay, polyuria/polydipsia, ataxia, and poor 
coordination/clumsiness. In this report, we present a case of a 19-year-old man 
with pain and swelling of the left ankle and knee joints because of which he 
could not walk, with an onset of loose stools since a week. He presented with 
multiple non-itchy hyperpigmented macules on his face and back, polydactyly in 
his left foot, central obesity, proteinuria, macrocytic anemia, low intelligence 
quotient, reduced power in the left lower limb, reduced plantar reflexes, 
nystagmus, pigmented black lesions in the temporal retina on fundoscopy, a 
micropenis, absent pubic and axillary hair, and a small scrotum containing 
testes. The patient was diagnosed with LMBBS.

Copyright © 2019, Khan et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.5618
PMCID: PMC6820889
PMID: 31696011

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.