---
reference_id: "PMID:37367594"
title: "Clonal Diversity of Candida auris, Candida blankii, and Kodamaea ohmeri Isolated from Septicemia and Otomycosis in Bangladesh as Determined by Multilocus Sequence Typing."
authors:
- Sathi FA
- Aung MS
- Paul SK
- Nasreen SA
- Haque N
- Roy S
- Ahmed S
- Alam MM
- Khan S
- Rabbany MA
- Biswas JP
- Kobayashi N
journal: J Fungi (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jof9060658
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clonal Diversity of Candida auris, Candida blankii, and Kodamaea ohmeri Isolated from Septicemia and Otomycosis in Bangladesh as Determined by Multilocus Sequence Typing.
**Authors:** Sathi FA, Aung MS, Paul SK, Nasreen SA, Haque N, Roy S, Ahmed S, Alam MM, Khan S, Rabbany MA, Biswas JP, Kobayashi N
**Journal:** J Fungi (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jof9060658](https://doi.org/10.3390/jof9060658)

## Content

1. J Fungi (Basel). 2023 Jun 12;9(6):658. doi: 10.3390/jof9060658.

Clonal Diversity of Candida auris, Candida blankii, and Kodamaea ohmeri Isolated 
from Septicemia and Otomycosis in Bangladesh as Determined by Multilocus 
Sequence Typing.

Sathi FA(1), Aung MS(2), Paul SK(3), Nasreen SA(1), Haque N(1), Roy S(1), Ahmed 
S(4), Alam MM(5), Khan S(6), Rabbany MA(7), Biswas JP(8), Kobayashi N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mymensingh Medical College, Mymensingh 2200, 
Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Hygiene, School of Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, 
Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.
(3)Netrokona Medical College, Netrokona 2400, Bangladesh.
(4)Mugda Medical College, Dhaka 1214, Bangladesh.
(5)Department of ENT, Mymensingh Medical College Hospital, Mymensingh 2200, 
Bangladesh.
(6)Department of Oral Microbiology, Mymensingh Medical College Hospital, 
Mymensingh 2200, Bangladesh.
(7)Department of Neonatology, Mymensingh Medical College Hospital, Mymensingh 
2200, Bangladesh.
(8)Department of Pathology, Netrokona Medical College, Netrokona 2400, 
Bangladesh.

Candida auris, Candida blankii, and Kodamaea ohmeri have been regarded as 
emerging fungal pathogens that can cause infections with high mortality. For 
genotyping of C. auris, a multilocus sequence typing (MLST) scheme based on four 
locus sequences has been reported, while there is no typing scheme for C. 
blankii and K. ohmeri. In the present study, the existing MLST scheme of C. 
auris was modified by adding more locus types deduced from sequence data 
available in the GenBank database. Furthermore, MLST schemes of C. blankii and 
K. ohmeri were developed using the four cognate loci (ITS, RPB1, RPB2, D1/D2) 
and similar sequence regions to those of C. auris. These MLST schemes were 
applied to identify the ST (sequence type) of clinical isolates of C. auris (n = 
7), C. blankii (n = 9), and K. ohmeri (n = 6), derived from septicemia or 
otomycosis in Bangladesh in 2021. All the C. auris isolates were classified into 
a single ST (ST5) and clade I, having a Y132F substitution in ERG11p, which is 
associated with azole resistance. Similarly, all the C. blankii isolates 
belonged to a single type (ST1). In contrast, six K. ohmeri isolates were 
assigned to five types (ST1-ST5), suggesting its higher genetic diversity. These 
findings revealed the availability of MLST schemes for these three fungal 
species for understanding their clonal diversity among clinical isolates.

DOI: 10.3390/jof9060658
PMCID: PMC10301082
PMID: 37367594

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.