---
reference_id: "PMID:35598649"
title: Effectiveness of environmental interventions to reduce entomological indices of dengue, Zika, and chikungunya vector.
authors:
- Tortosa-La Osa S
- Martín-Ruiz E
- Galán-Relaño Á
- de Labry-Lima AO
journal: Acta Trop
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2022.106523
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effectiveness of environmental interventions to reduce entomological indices of dengue, Zika, and chikungunya vector.
**Authors:** Tortosa-La Osa S, Martín-Ruiz E, Galán-Relaño Á, de Labry-Lima AO
**Journal:** Acta Trop (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.actatropica.2022.106523](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actatropica.2022.106523)

## Content

1. Acta Trop. 2022 Sep;233:106523. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2022.106523. Epub 
2022 May 19.

Effectiveness of environmental interventions to reduce entomological indices of 
dengue, Zika, and chikungunya vector.

Tortosa-La Osa S(1), Martín-Ruiz E(2), Galán-Relaño Á(3), de Labry-Lima AO(4).

Author information:
(1)International Executive Service Corps. Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic.
(2)Andalusian Public Health School (EASP). Grenade, Spain. Electronic address: 
eva.martin.easp@juntadeandalucia.es.
(3)Animal Health Department, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Cordoba, Spain.
(4)Biosanitary Research Institute ibs. University Hospital of Grenade, 
University of Grenade, Spain; Epidemiology and Public Health CIBER (CIBERESP), 
Spain; Andalusian Medicine Information Centre. Andalusian Public Health School 
(EASP). Grenade, Spain.

Vector-borne diseases are a major public health problem. Amongst them, dengue, 
Zika and chikungunya illnesses are increasing their incidence and geographical 
expansion. Since vector control is the main measure to prevent these diseases, 
this systematic review aims to determine the effectiveness of environmental 
interventions for the prevention of the transmission of these three diseases, as 
well as for the reduction of their burden. Experimental studies of environmental 
management interventions aimed at vector control were included. The outcome 
variables of interest were disease burden indicators and entomological 
indicators. Of the 923 references initially retrieved, after discarding those 
that were duplicated or didn't comply with the inclusion criteria, a total of 7 
articles were included. All included studies carried out environmental 
manipulation interventions and only 1 carried out an environmental modification 
intervention. Regarding the outcome variables, all used entomological indicators 
(larval or pupae indices). Of those, pupae indices are better indicators of 
vector abundance. In 4 out of the 6 studies, there was a statistically 
significant reduction of the pupae indices related to the elimination of small 
containers, manipulation of large tanks and cleaning outdoor spaces. These 
interventions are easy to implement and involve little resources, which acquires 
special importance regarding areas with limited resources. Although it is 
assumed that a reduction of mosquitoes would lead to a reduction or the risk of 
transmission, a little evidence proving this has been published. It would be 
advisable that, in addition to entomological indicators, epidemiological, 
environmental and sociodemographic factors would be taken into consideration, 
bearing in mind that mosquito density is one of the many factors that influence 
the transmission of these viruses. None of the papers included used disease 
indicators, not allowing to demonstrate if environmental interventions 
contribute to reduce disease burden.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2022.106523
PMID: 35598649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]