---
reference_id: "PMID:34972922"
title: Exhaled Breath Condensate and Dyspnea in COPD.
authors:
- Patsiris S
- Papanikolaou I
- Stelios G
- Exarchos TP
- Vlamos P
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-78771-4_38
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exhaled Breath Condensate and Dyspnea in COPD.
**Authors:** Patsiris S, Papanikolaou I, Stelios G, Exarchos TP, Vlamos P
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-030-78771-4_38](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-78771-4_38)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2021;1337:339-344. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-78771-4_38.

Exhaled Breath Condensate and Dyspnea in COPD.

Patsiris S(1)(2), Papanikolaou I(3), Stelios G(3), Exarchos TP(4), Vlamos P(5).

Author information:
(1)General Hospital of Corfu, Corfu, Greece. patsiris@hotmail.com.
(2)Bioinformatics & Human Electrophysiology Laboratory, Department of 
Informatics, Ionian University, Corfu, Greece. patsiris@hotmail.com.
(3)General Hospital of Corfu, Corfu, Greece.
(4)Bioinformatics & Human Electrophysiology Laboratory, Department of 
Informatics, Ionian University, Corfu, Greece. exarchos@ionio.gr.
(5)Bioinformatics & Human Electrophysiology Laboratory, Department of 
Informatics, Ionian University, Corfu, Greece. vlamos@ionio.gr.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) possesses a crucial position in the 
field of respiratory medicine as there are still unsolved issues in its whole 
spectrum. One promising tool that is believed to provide answers to various 
problems in COPD is the exhaled breath condensate (EBC). Its wealth due to its 
content mirrors the ongoing actions taking place in the lungs and especially the 
two processes blamed for the pathophysiology of COPD, the inflammation and the 
oxidative stress. Attempts to connect the products of the analysis of the EBC 
with the clinical manifestations of COPD such as dyspnea are scarce. Up to date 
research has shown a positive correlation between the elevated levels of some 
markers of EBC such as H2O2 and 8-isoprostane and dyspnea, while others present 
ambiguous results. The severity of COPD also seems to be connected with their 
increase. The purpose of this chapter is to highlight these findings and present 
potential correlations. Further research in EBC and its association with the 
clinical phenotypes of COPD and especially dyspnea is necessary.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-78771-4_38
PMID: 34972922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]