---
reference_id: "PMID:9703425"
title: A common point mutation in the tyrosine hydroxylase gene in autosomal recessive L-DOPA-responsive dystonia in the Dutch population.
authors:
- van den Heuvel LP
- Luiten B
- Smeitink JA
- de Rijk-van Andel JF
- Hyland K
- Steenbergen-Spanjers GC
- Janssen RJ
- Wevers RA
journal: Hum Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1007/s004390050756
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 11"
- Denmark
- "Dystonia/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Levodopa/therapeutic use
- Point Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- Tyrosine 3-Monooxygenase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A common point mutation in the tyrosine hydroxylase gene in autosomal recessive L-DOPA-responsive dystonia in the Dutch population.
**Authors:** van den Heuvel LP, Luiten B, Smeitink JA, de Rijk-van Andel JF, Hyland K, Steenbergen-Spanjers GC, Janssen RJ, Wevers RA
**Journal:** Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004390050756](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004390050756)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 1998 Jun;102(6):644-6. doi: 10.1007/s004390050756.

A common point mutation in the tyrosine hydroxylase gene in autosomal recessive
L-DOPA-responsive dystonia in the Dutch population.

van den Heuvel LP(1), Luiten B, Smeitink JA, de Rijk-van Andel JF, Hyland K,
Steenbergen-Spanjers GC, Janssen RJ, Wevers RA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pediatrics and Neurology, University Hospital Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. B.vandeHeuvel@ckslkn.azn.nl

This report concerns one new mutation in the tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene in
three patients originating from three unrelated Dutch families with autosomal
recessive L-DOPA-responsive dystonia (DRD). In this study, all exons of the TH
gene were amplified by the polymerase chain reaction and subjected to analyses
by single-strand conformation polymorphism. An aberrant migration pattern was
observed for exon 6 of the TH gene in all patients. Direct sequencing of the
coding region of exon 6 revealed the presence of one novel missense mutation. An
a698g transition resulted in the substitution of the evolutionary conserved
arginine 233 by a histidine (R233H). All patients were homozygous for the
mutation. This new mutation in the TH gene was confirmed by restriction enzyme
analysis with the restriction enzyme HhaI. Thus, a high proportion of defective
TH alleles may be R233H in The Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1007/s004390050756
PMID: 9703425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
