---
reference_id: "PMID:36268591"
title: Disease-associated mutations in WDR34 lead to diverse impacts on the assembly and function of dynein-2.
authors:
- Shak C
- Vuolo L
- Uddin B
- Katoh Y
- Brown T
- Mukhopadhyay AG
- Heesom K
- Roberts AJ
- Stevenson N
- Nakayama K
- Stephens DJ
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1242/jcs.260073
keywords:
- Humans
- "Dyneins/genetics, metabolism"
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- "Ellis-Van Creveld Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cilia/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease-associated mutations in WDR34 lead to diverse impacts on the assembly and function of dynein-2.
**Authors:** Shak C, Vuolo L, Uddin B, Katoh Y, Brown T, Mukhopadhyay AG, Heesom K, Roberts AJ, Stevenson N, Nakayama K, Stephens DJ
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.260073](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.260073)

## Content

1. J Cell Sci. 2023 Mar 1;136(5):jcs260073. doi: 10.1242/jcs.260073. Epub 2022
Nov  7.

Disease-associated mutations in WDR34 lead to diverse impacts on the assembly 
and function of dynein-2.

Shak C(1), Vuolo L(1), Uddin B(1), Katoh Y(2), Brown T(1), Mukhopadhyay AG(3), 
Heesom K(4), Roberts AJ(3), Stevenson N(1), Nakayama K(2), Stephens DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology Laboratories, School of Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.
(2)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
(3)Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Department of Biological 
Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, London, WC1E 7HX, UK.
(4)Proteomics Facility, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol 
BS8 1TD, UK.

The primary cilium is a sensory organelle, receiving signals from the external 
environment and relaying them into the cell. Mutations in proteins required for 
transport in the primary cilium result in ciliopathies, a group of genetic 
disorders that commonly lead to the malformation of organs such as the kidney, 
liver and eyes and skeletal dysplasias. The motor proteins dynein-2 and 
kinesin-2 mediate retrograde and anterograde transport, respectively, in the 
cilium. WDR34 (also known as DYNC2I2), a dynein-2 intermediate chain, is 
required for the maintenance of cilia function. Here, we investigated WDR34 
mutations identified in Jeune syndrome, short-rib polydactyly syndrome and 
asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia patients. There is a poor correlation between 
genotype and phenotype in these cases, making diagnosis and treatment highly 
complex. We set out to define the biological impacts on cilia formation and 
function of WDR34 mutations by stably expressing the mutant proteins in 
WDR34-knockout cells. WDR34 mutations led to different spectrums of phenotypes. 
Quantitative proteomics demonstrated changes in dynein-2 assembly, whereas 
initiation and extension of the axoneme, localization of intraflagellar 
transport complex-B proteins, transition zone integrity and Hedgehog signalling 
were also affected.

© 2022. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.260073
PMCID: PMC9687537
PMID: 36268591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests D.J.S. is an Editor for 
Journal of Cell Science and played no role in the editorial handling of this 
paper. The authors declare no other competing or financial interests.