---
reference_id: "PMID:17661673"
title: "Human monkeypox: an emerging zoonotic disease."
authors:
- Parker S
- Nuara A
- Buller RM
- Schultz DA
journal: Future Microbiol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.2217/17460913.2.1.17
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human monkeypox: an emerging zoonotic disease.
**Authors:** Parker S, Nuara A, Buller RM, Schultz DA
**Journal:** Future Microbiol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2217/17460913.2.1.17](https://doi.org/10.2217/17460913.2.1.17)

## Content

1. Future Microbiol. 2007 Feb;2(1):17-34. doi: 10.2217/17460913.2.1.17.

Human monkeypox: an emerging zoonotic disease.

Parker S(1), Nuara A, Buller RM, Schultz DA.

Author information:
(1)Saint Louis University School of Medicine, Department of Molecular 
Microbiology & Immunology, St Louis, MO 63104, USA. scott9379@gmail.com

Zoonotic monkeypox virus is maintained in a large number of rodent and, to a 
lesser extent, nonhuman primate species in West and central Africa. Although 
monkeypox virus was discovered in 1958, the prototypic human cases were not 
witnessed until the early 1970s. Before this time, it is assumed that infections 
were masked by smallpox, which was then widely endemic. Nevertheless, since the 
1970s, reported monkeypox virus infections of humans have escalated, as have 
outbreaks with reported human-to-human transmission. This increase is likely due 
to numerous factors, such as enhanced surveillance efforts, environmental 
degradation and human urbanization of areas where monkeypox virus is maintained 
in its animal reservoir(s) and, consequently, serve as a nidus for human 
infection. Furthermore, viral genetic predispositions enable monkeypox virus to 
infect many animal species, represented in expansive geographic ranges. 
Monkeypox virus was once restricted to specific regions of Africa, but its 
environ has expanded, in one case intercontinentally--suggesting that human 
monkeypox infections could continue to intensify. As a zoonotic agent, monkeypox 
virus is far less sensitive to typical eradication measures since it is 
maintained in wild-animal populations. Moreover, human vaccination is becoming a 
less viable option to control poxvirus infections in today's increasingly 
immunocompromised population, particularly with the emergence of HIV in 
Sub-Saharan Africa. An increased frequency of human monkeypox virus infections, 
especially in immunocompromised individuals, may permit monkeypox virus to 
evolve and maintain itself independently in human populations.

DOI: 10.2217/17460913.2.1.17
PMID: 17661673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]