---
reference_id: "PMID:6496525"
title: Oral candidiasis.
authors:
- Dreizen S
journal: Am J Med
year: '1984'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral candidiasis.
**Authors:** Dreizen S
**Journal:** Am J Med (1984)

## Content

1. Am J Med. 1984 Oct 30;77(4D):28-33.

Oral candidiasis.

Dreizen S.

Candidiasis is, by far, the most common mycotic infection of the human oral 
cavity. The usually manifested clinical expression of oral candidiasis at all 
ages from the newborn to the elderly is thrush. Other forms that affect the 
mouth include acute atrophic candidiasis associated with oral antibiotic 
therapy, chronic atrophic candidiasis attributable to the wearing of full upper 
dentures, candidal cheilosis ascribable to perlèche or decreased vertical 
dimension in the lower third of the face, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis 
emanating from a T-lymphocyte deficiency, and candidal leukoplakia. Extensive 
use of antibiotics and immunosuppressive drugs have greatly increased the number 
of Candida-induced oral infections. Patients debilitated by irradiation, cancer 
chemotherapy, organ transplants, diabetes mellitus, and defects in cell-mediated 
immunity are particularly vulnerable. Fortunately, the vast majority of cases of 
oral candidiasis are not life-threatening and readily respond to appropriately 
administered anticandida agents. It must always be remembered, however, that the 
organism has the capacity to produce fulminating fatal infection by hematogenous 
dissemination from seemingly innocuous oral infections that serve as a portal of 
entry to the systemic circulation. Consequently, all oral candidal infections in 
compromised patients must be treated vigorously and effectively.

PMID: 6496525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]