---
reference_id: "PMID:33148913"
title: "Resminostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, circumvents tolerance to EGFR inhibitors in EGFR-mutated lung cancer cells with BIM deletion polymorphism."
authors:
- Arai S
- Takeuchi S
- Fukuda K
- Tanimoto A
- Nishiyama A
- Konishi H
- Takagi A
- Takahashi H
- Ong ST
- Yano S
journal: J Med Invest
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2152/jmi.67.343
keywords:
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- Bcl-2-Like Protein 11/genetics
- "ErbB Receptors/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Gefitinib/pharmacology
- Gene Deletion
- Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Humans
- Hydroxamic Acids/pharmacology
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- PC-3 Cells
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Sulfonamides/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Resminostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, circumvents tolerance to EGFR inhibitors in EGFR-mutated lung cancer cells with BIM deletion polymorphism.
**Authors:** Arai S, Takeuchi S, Fukuda K, Tanimoto A, Nishiyama A, Konishi H, Takagi A, Takahashi H, Ong ST, Yano S
**Journal:** J Med Invest (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2152/jmi.67.343](https://doi.org/10.2152/jmi.67.343)

## Content

1. J Med Invest. 2020;67(3.4):343-350. doi: 10.2152/jmi.67.343.

Resminostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, circumvents tolerance to EGFR
inhibitors in EGFR-mutated lung cancer cells with BIM deletion polymorphism.

Arai S(1), Takeuchi S(1)(2), Fukuda K(1)(2), Tanimoto A(1), Nishiyama A(1),
Konishi H(3), Takagi A(3), Takahashi H(4), Ong ST(5)(6)(7)(8), Yano S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University,
Kanazawa, Japan.
(2)Nano Life Science Institute, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.
(3)Yakult Central Institute, Yakult Honsha Co., Ltd., Kunitachi, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Pharmaceutical business division, Yakult Honsha Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology Signature Research Program, Duke-NUS Medical
School, Singapore.
(6)Department of Haematology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United
States of America.

Drug-tolerant cells are mediators of acquired resistance. BIM-intron2 deletion
polymorphism (BIM-del) is one of the mechanisms underlying the resistance to
epidermal growth factor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI)-mediated apoptosis
that induces drug tolerance. Here, we investigated whether resminostat, a
histone deacetylase inhibitor, circumvents BIM-del-associated apoptosis
resistance. The human EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell line
PC-9 and its homozygous BIM-del-positive variant (PC-9 BIMi2- / -), established
by editing with zinc finger nuclease, were used. In comparison with PC-9 cells,
PC-9 BIMi2- / - cells were less sensitive to apoptosis mediated by EGFR-TKIs
such as gefitinib and osimertinib. The combined use of resminostat and an
EGFR-TKI preferentially induced the expression of the pro-apoptotic BIM
transcript containing exon 4 rather than that containing exon 3, increased the
level of pro-apoptotic BIM protein (BIMEL), and stimulated apoptosis in vitro.
In a subcutaneous tumor model derived from PC-9 BIMi2- / - cells, gefitinib
monotherapy decreased tumor size but retained residual lesions, indicative of
the presence of tolerant cells in tumors. The combined use of resminostat and
gefitinib increased BIMEL protein level and induced apoptosis, subsequently
leading to the remarkable shrinkage of tumor. These findings suggest the
potential of resminostat to circumvent tolerance to EGFR-TKIs associated with
BIM deletion polymorphism. J. Med. Invest. 67 : 343-350, August, 2020.

DOI: 10.2152/jmi.67.343
PMID: 33148913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
