---
reference_id: "PMID:35616485"
title: "The Outcomes of an Individualized Physical Therapy Program in CALFAN Syndrome: A Case Report."
authors:
- Yigit S
- Albayrak HM
- Perk Yücel P
- Usgu S
- Yakut Y
journal: Pediatr Phys Ther
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/PEP.0000000000000903
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Ataxia
- Child
- Exercise Therapy
- Female
- Humans
- Physical Therapy Modalities
- Quality of Life
- Upper Extremity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Outcomes of an Individualized Physical Therapy Program in CALFAN Syndrome: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Yigit S, Albayrak HM, Perk Yücel P, Usgu S, Yakut Y
**Journal:** Pediatr Phys Ther (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PEP.0000000000000903](https://doi.org/10.1097/PEP.0000000000000903)

## Content

1. Pediatr Phys Ther. 2022 Jul 1;34(3):432-437. doi:
10.1097/PEP.0000000000000903.  Epub 2022 May 25.

The Outcomes of an Individualized Physical Therapy Program in CALFAN Syndrome: A 
Case Report.

Yigit S(1), Albayrak HM, Perk Yücel P, Usgu S, Yakut Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation (Drs Yigit, Usgu, and 
Yakut), Faculty of Health Sciences, Hasan Kalyoncu University, Gaziantep, 
Turkey; Department of Pediatric Genetics (Dr Mutlu Albayrak), Ankara Bilkent 
City Hospital-Children's Hospital, Ankara, Turkey; Department of Pediatric 
Neurology (Dr Perk Yücel), Faculty of Medicine, Trakya University, Edirne, 
Turkey.

PURPOSE: This case report investigated the effectiveness of an individualized 
physical therapy program in CALFAN syndrome.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 13-year-old girl participated in physical therapy, which 
included trunk stabilization, balance training, and functional exercises for 12 
weeks.
ASSESSMENTS: The International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale; Trunk Impairment 
Scale; Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory; Functional Independence Measure for 
Children; Quick Disability of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand Questionnaire; 9-Hole 
Peg Test; and Cobb measurement were used as outcome measures.
RESULTS: Positive changes were observed in the International Cooperative Ataxia 
Rating Scale; Quick Disability of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand Questionnaire; 
Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory; Trunk Impairment Scale; Functional 
Independence Measure; and the 9-Hole Peg Test. The Cobb angle was increased by 
2° in the thoracic region and reduced by 11° in the lumbar region.
CONCLUSIONS: Physical therapy improved quality of life, functional independence, 
trunk control, and upper extremity performance.
WHAT THIS ADDS TO EVIDENCE: This case report is the first to support the 
effectiveness of physical therapy for a child with CALFAN syndrome.

Copyright © 2022 Academy of Pediatric Physical Therapy of the American Physical 
Therapy Association.

DOI: 10.1097/PEP.0000000000000903
PMID: 35616485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.