---
reference_id: PMID:31892274
title: Disrupted Calcium Signaling in Animal Models of Human Spinocerebellar Ataxia (SCA).
authors:
- Prestori F
- Moccia F
- "D'Angelo E"
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3390/ijms21010216
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- Calcium Signaling/physiology
- Cerebellum/metabolism
- Homeostasis/physiology
- Humans
- "Models, Animal"
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disrupted Calcium Signaling in Animal Models of Human Spinocerebellar Ataxia (SCA).
**Authors:** Prestori F, Moccia F, D'Angelo E
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms21010216](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21010216)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Dec 27;21(1):216. doi: 10.3390/ijms21010216.

Disrupted Calcium Signaling in Animal Models of Human Spinocerebellar Ataxia 
(SCA).

Prestori F(1), Moccia F(2), D'Angelo E(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, 27100 
Pavia, Italy.
(2)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "Lazzaro Spallanzani", University of 
Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Mondino Foundation, 27100 Pavia, Italy.

Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) constitute a heterogeneous group of more than 40 
autosomal-dominant genetic and neurodegenerative diseases characterized by loss 
of balance and motor coordination due to dysfunction of the cerebellum and its 
efferent connections. Despite a well-described clinical and pathological 
phenotype, the molecular and cellular events that underlie neurodegeneration are 
still poorly undaerstood. Emerging research suggests that mutations in SCA genes 
cause disruptions in multiple cellular pathways but the characteristic SCA 
pathogenesis does not begin until calcium signaling pathways are disrupted in 
cerebellar Purkinje cells. Ca2+ signaling in Purkinje cells is important for 
normal cellular function as these neurons express a variety of Ca2+ channels, 
Ca2+-dependent kinases and phosphatases, and Ca2+-binding proteins to tightly 
maintain Ca2+ homeostasis and regulate physiological Ca2+-dependent processes. 
Abnormal Ca2+ levels can activate toxic cascades leading to characteristic death 
of Purkinje cells, cerebellar atrophy, and ataxia that occur in many SCAs. The 
output of the cerebellar cortex is conveyed to the deep cerebellar nuclei (DCN) 
by Purkinje cells via inhibitory signals; thus, Purkinje cell dysfunction or 
degeneration would partially or completely impair the cerebellar output in SCAs. 
In the absence of the inhibitory signal emanating from Purkinje cells, DCN will 
become more excitable, thereby affecting the motor areas receiving DCN input and 
resulting in uncoordinated movements. An outstanding advantage in studying the 
pathogenesis of SCAs is represented by the availability of a large number of 
animal models which mimic the phenotype observed in humans. By mainly focusing 
on mouse models displaying mutations or deletions in genes which encode for Ca2+ 
signaling-related proteins, in this review we will discuss the several 
pathogenic mechanisms related to deranged Ca2+ homeostasis that leads to 
significant Purkinje cell degeneration and dysfunction.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21010216
PMCID: PMC6981692
PMID: 31892274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the 
decision to publish the results.