---
reference_id: "PMID:40065254"
title: "Expression and significance of cytokines in peripheral blood and bone microenvironment in Kummell's disease, osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures and nonosteoporotic patients."
authors:
- Li Z
- Yao Q
- Ning Y
- Xu S
- Yan J
- Wang Q
- Wang S
journal: BMC Musculoskelet Disord
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12891-025-08472-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression and significance of cytokines in peripheral blood and bone microenvironment in Kummell's disease, osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures and nonosteoporotic patients.
**Authors:** Li Z, Yao Q, Ning Y, Xu S, Yan J, Wang Q, Wang S
**Journal:** BMC Musculoskelet Disord (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12891-025-08472-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-025-08472-8)

## Content

1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2025 Mar 10;26(1):232. doi: 
10.1186/s12891-025-08472-8.

Expression and significance of cytokines in peripheral blood and bone 
microenvironment in Kummell's disease, osteoporotic vertebral compression 
fractures and nonosteoporotic patients.

Li Z(#)(1)(2), Yao Q(#)(1)(3), Ning Y(1), Xu S(1), Yan J(1), Wang Q(1), Wang 
S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical 
University, Southwest Medical University, No. 25 Taiping Street, Luzhou, 646000, 
Sichuan Province, China.
(2)Hospital of Chengdu Office of People'S Government of Tibetan Autonomous 
Region, Chengdu, China.
(3)West China Tianfu Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical 
University, Southwest Medical University, No. 25 Taiping Street, Luzhou, 646000, 
Sichuan Province, China. jasewangspine@swmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the expression and determine the significance of cytokines 
in peripheral blood and vertebral blood in the bone microenvironment of patients 
with osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures (OVCFs) and Kummell's disease 
(KD).
METHODS: From October 2022 to April 2023, 16 patients with osteoporotic 
vertebral compression fracture (OVCF), 14 patients with Kummell (KD) disease, 
and 19 patients with lumbar degenerative disease were included in the study. The 
patients were divided into the OVCF group, KD group and control group. The 
levels of interleukin-1 (IL-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-α 
(TNF-α) and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) in peripheral blood and 
vertebral blood in the bone microenvironment were detected by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was 
used to determine the correlation between cytokines and the occurrence of OVCF 
and KD.
RESULTS: The levels of IL-1, IL-6, TGF-β and TNF-α in vertebral blood in the 
bone microenvironment of the KD group were significantly higher than those in 
peripheral blood (p = 0.001, p < 0.001, p = 0.017, p < 0.001). Compared with the 
control group, the OVCF displayed a marked increase in the expression of IL-1, 
IL-6, and TNF-α and a significant reduction in the expression of TGF-β 
(p < 0.001). In addition, compared with the vertebral blood in the bone 
microenvironment of the control group, the levels of IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-α in the 
vertebral blood in the bone microenvironment of the KD group were significantly 
increased (p < 0.001). and compared with the vertebral blood in the bone 
microenvironment of OVCF group, the levels of IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-α in the 
vertebral blood in the bone microenvironment of the KD group were significantly 
increased (p = 0.014, p = 0.020, p = 0.006). Moreover, Compared to peripheral 
blood, the vertebral blood within the bone microenvironment demonstrated 
increased area under the curve (AUC) values for the associations of IL-1, IL-6, 
and TNF-α with OVCF and Kummell's disease KD.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression levels of IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-α in OVCFs and KD were 
increased, but that of TGF-β was decreased. The levels of IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-α 
in the vertebral blood of KD patients were significantly increased, which can 
promote vertebral osteonecrosis and bone nonunion in KD patients. Alterations in 
the expression levels of these proinflammatory cytokines maybe demonstrate a 
significant correlation with the pathogenesis of OVCF and KD.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-025-08472-8
PMCID: PMC11892217
PMID: 40065254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The study also received ethical approval from the Ethics Committee 
of the Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University and strictly followed 
the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki(KY2023265).This study was 
retrospectively registered.Registration number:ChiCTR2300075907.Registration 
date:2023–09-19. Consent for publication: All authors gave their consent for 
publication。 Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.