---
reference_id: "PMID:32655339"
title: Novel Clinical and Radiological Findings in a Family with Autosomal Recessive Omodysplasia.
authors:
- Bayat A
- Dunø M
- Kirchhoff M
- Jørgensen FS
- Nishimura G
- Hove HB
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1159/000506384
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Clinical and Radiological Findings in a Family with Autosomal Recessive Omodysplasia.
**Authors:** Bayat A, Dunø M, Kirchhoff M, Jørgensen FS, Nishimura G, Hove HB
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000506384](https://doi.org/10.1159/000506384)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2020 Jun;11(2):83-89. doi: 10.1159/000506384. Epub 2020 Mar 7.

Novel Clinical and Radiological Findings in a Family with Autosomal Recessive 
Omodysplasia.

Bayat A(1), Dunø M(2), Kirchhoff M(2), Jørgensen FS(3)(4), Nishimura G(5), Hove 
HB(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Personalized Medicine, Danish Epilepsy Centre, 
Dianalund, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Fetal Medicine Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Copenhagen 
University Hospital Hvidovre, Hvidovre, Denmark.
(4)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(5)Center for Intractable Diseases, Saitama Medical University Hospital, 
Saitama, Japan.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, The RAREDIS Database Section of Rare 
Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Autosomal recessive omodysplasia (GPC6-related) is a rare short-limb skeletal 
dysplasia caused by biallelic mutations in the GPC6 gene. Affected individuals 
manifest with rhizomelic short stature, decreased mobility of elbow and knee 
joints as well as craniofacial anomalies. Both upper and lower limbs are 
severely affected. These manifestations contrast with normal height and limb 
shortening restricted to the arms in autosomal dominant omodysplasia 
(FZD2-related). Here, we report 2 affected brothers of Pakistani descent from 
Denmark with GPC6-related omodysplasia, aiming to highlight the clinical and 
radiological findings. A homozygous deletion of exon 6 in the GPC6 gene was 
detected. The pathognomonic radiological findings were distally tapered humeri 
and femora as well as severe proximal radioulnar diastasis. On close 
observations, we identified a recurrent and not previously described type of 
abnormal patterning in all long bones.

Copyright © 2020 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000506384
PMCID: PMC7325126
PMID: 32655339