---
reference_id: "PMID:35446128"
title: Plasma Proteomic Analysis Distinguishes Severity Outcomes of Human Ebola Virus Disease.
authors:
- Viodé A
- Smolen KK
- Fatou B
- Wurie Z
- Van Zalm P
- Konde MK
- Keita BM
- Ablam RA
- Fish EN
- Steen H
journal: mBio
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1128/mbio.00567-22
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plasma Proteomic Analysis Distinguishes Severity Outcomes of Human Ebola Virus Disease.
**Authors:** Viodé A, Smolen KK, Fatou B, Wurie Z, Van Zalm P, Konde MK, Keita BM, Ablam RA, Fish EN, Steen H
**Journal:** mBio (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mbio.00567-22](https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.00567-22)

## Content

1. mBio. 2022 Jun 28;13(3):e0056722. doi: 10.1128/mbio.00567-22. Epub 2022 Apr
21.

Plasma Proteomic Analysis Distinguishes Severity Outcomes of Human Ebola Virus 
Disease.

Viodé A(#)(1)(2), Smolen KK(#)(2)(3)(4), Fatou B(1)(2)(3), Wurie Z(1), Van Zalm 
P(1)(2), Konde MK(5)(6), Keita BM(5)(6), Ablam RA(5), Fish EN(#)(7)(8), Steen 
H(#)(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(2)Harvard Medical Schoolgrid.471403.5, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Precision Vaccines Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Sustainable Health Foundation (FOSAD), Conakry, Guinea.
(6)Center of Excellence for Training on Research and Priority Diseases 
(CEFORPAG), Conakry, Guinea.
(7)Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, University Health Network, 
Toronto, Canada.
(8)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

Ebola virus (EBV) disease (EVD) is a highly virulent systemic disease 
characterized by an aggressive systemic inflammatory response and impaired 
vascular and coagulation systems, often leading to uncontrolled hemorrhaging and 
death. In this study, the proteomes of 38 sequential plasma samples from 12 
confirmed EVD patients were analyzed. Of these 12 cases, 9 patients received 
treatment with interferon beta 1a (IFN-β-1a), 8 survived EVD, and 4 died; 2 of 
these 4 fatalities had received IFN-β-1a. Our analytical strategy combined three 
platforms targeting different plasma subproteomes: a liquid chromatography-mass 
spectrometry (LC-MS)-based analysis of the classical plasma proteome, a protocol 
that combines the depletion of abundant plasma proteins and LC-MS to detect less 
abundant plasma proteins, and an antibody-based cytokine/chemokine multiplex 
assay. These complementary platforms provided comprehensive data on 1,000 host 
and viral proteins. Examination of the early plasma proteomes revealed protein 
signatures that differentiated between fatalities and survivors. Moreover, 
IFN-β-1a treatment was associated with a distinct protein signature. Next, we 
examined those proteins whose abundances reflected viral load measurements and 
the disease course: resolution or progression. Our data identified a prognostic 
4-protein biomarker panel (histone H1-5, moesin, kininogen 1, and ribosomal 
protein L35 [RPL35]) that predicted EVD outcomes more accurately than the onset 
viral load. IMPORTANCE As evidenced by the 2013-2016 outbreak in West Africa, 
Ebola virus (EBV) disease (EVD) poses a major global health threat. In this 
study, we characterized the plasma proteomes of 12 individuals infected with 
EBV, using two different LC-MS-based proteomics platforms and an antibody-based 
multiplexed cytokine/chemokine assay. Clear differences were observed in the 
host proteome between individuals who survived and those who died, at both early 
and late stages of the disease. From our analysis, we derived a 4-protein 
prognostic biomarker panel that may help direct care. Given the ease of 
implementation, a panel of these 4 proteins or subsets thereof has the potential 
to be widely applied in an emergency setting in resource-limited regions.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.00567-22
PMCID: PMC9239184
PMID: 35446128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.