---
reference_id: "PMID:35353115"
title: Global Burden of Cutaneous Melanoma in 2020 and Projections to 2040.
authors:
- Arnold M
- Singh D
- Laversanne M
- Vignat J
- Vaccarella S
- Meheus F
- Cust AE
- de Vries E
- Whiteman DC
- Bray F
journal: JAMA Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2022.0160
keywords:
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- Global Health
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Melanoma/epidemiology
- Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Cutaneous Malignant Melanoma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global Burden of Cutaneous Melanoma in 2020 and Projections to 2040.
**Authors:** Arnold M, Singh D, Laversanne M, Vignat J, Vaccarella S, Meheus F, Cust AE, de Vries E, Whiteman DC, Bray F
**Journal:** JAMA Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamadermatol.2022.0160](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamadermatol.2022.0160)

## Content

1. JAMA Dermatol. 2022 May 1;158(5):495-503. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2022.0160.

Global Burden of Cutaneous Melanoma in 2020 and Projections to 2040.

Arnold M(1), Singh D(1), Laversanne M(1), Vignat J(1), Vaccarella S(1), Meheus
F(1), Cust AE(2)(3), de Vries E(4), Whiteman DC(5), Bray F(1).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Surveillance Branch, International Agency for Research on Cancer,
Lyon, France.
(2)The Daffodil Centre, The University of Sydney with Cancer Council New South
Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(3)Melanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Pontificia Universidad
Javeriana, Bogota, Colombia.
(5)Cancer Control Group, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston,
Queensland, Australia.

Comment in
    JAMA Dermatol. 2022 May 1;158(5):489-491. doi:
10.1001/jamadermatol.2022.0162.

IMPORTANCE: Despite many cases being preventable, cutaneous melanoma remains the
most serious skin cancer worldwide. Understanding the scale and profile of the
disease is vital to concentrate and reinforce global prevention efforts.
OBJECTIVE: To examine global patterns of cutaneous melanoma in 2020 and to
provide projected estimates of cases and deaths by 2040.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This population-based study used the GLOBOCAN
2020 database for global epidemiological assessment of new cases and deaths due
to invasive melanoma.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Age-standardized incidence and mortality rates were
calculated per 100 000 person-years by country, world region, and 4-tier level
of human development. Estimated numbers of cases and deaths were calculated for
the year 2040.
RESULTS: A worldwide total of 325 000 new melanoma cases (174 000 males, 151 000
females) and 57 000 deaths (32 000 males, 25 000 females) was estimated for
2020. Large geographic variations existed across countries and world regions,
with the highest incidence rates among males (42 per 100 000 person-years) and
females (31 per 100 000 person-years) observed in Australia/New Zealand,
followed by Western Europe (19 per 100 000 person-years for males and females),
North America (18 per 100 000 person-years for males, 14 per 100 000
person-years for females), and Northern Europe (17 per 100 000 person-years for
males, 18 per 100 000 person-years for females). Melanoma continued to be rare
in most African and Asian countries, with incidence rates commonly less than 1
per 100 000 person-years. Mortality rates peaked at 5 per 100 000 person-years
in New Zealand, and geographic variations were less pronounced than for
incidence. Melanoma was more frequent among males than females in most world
regions. If 2020 rates continue, the burden from melanoma is estimated to
increase to 510 000 new cases (a roughly 50% increase) and to 96 000 deaths (a
68% increase) by 2040.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This epidemiological assessment suggests that
melanoma remains an important challenge to cancer control and public health
globally, especially in fair-skinned populations of European descent.

DOI: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2022.0160
PMCID: PMC8968696
PMID: 35353115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Cust
reported receiving a fellowship from the Australian National Health and Medical
Research Council (NHMRC) outside the submitted work. Dr de Vries reported
receiving personal fees from Amgen outside the submitted work. Dr Whiteman
reported receiving salary support and competitive grants from the Australian
NHMRC during the conduct of the study. No other disclosures were reported.
