---
reference_id: "PMID:28674983"
title: "Multiple Sclerosis: Basic and Clinical."
authors:
- Buzzard K
- Chan WH
- Kilpatrick T
- Murray S
journal: Adv Neurobiol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-57193-5_8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Sclerosis: Basic and Clinical.
**Authors:** Buzzard K, Chan WH, Kilpatrick T, Murray S
**Journal:** Adv Neurobiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-319-57193-5_8](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-57193-5_8)

## Content

1. Adv Neurobiol. 2017;15:211-252. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-57193-5_8.

Multiple Sclerosis: Basic and Clinical.

Buzzard K(1), Chan WH(2), Kilpatrick T(2)(3)(4), Murray S(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC, 3050, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, The University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia.
(3)Melbourne Neuroscience Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
VIC, 3010, Australia.
(4)Multiple Sclerosis Research Division, The Florey Institute of Neuroscience 
and Mental Health, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, The University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia. ssmurray@unimelb.edu.au.
(6)Multiple Sclerosis Research Division, The Florey Institute of Neuroscience 
and Mental Health, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia. ssmurray@unimelb.edu.au.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common neurodegenerative disease affecting 
young adults in our community. It is a complex disease influenced by gender, 
genetic and environmental factors. MS is a chronic inflammatory disease of the 
central nervous system caused by aberrant immune activation resulting in damage 
to myelin sheaths within the brain and spinal cord and axonal loss. The 
demyelinating insult initially impairs the speed and efficiency of nerve cell 
function. In the majority of cases, this is followed by an innate endogenous 
repair response that can restore the myelin sheath and nerve cell function to 
relatively normal levels. However over time and with subsequent demyelinating 
events, this capacity is lost ultimately leading to neural degeneration. The 
influences that oligodendrocytes and myelin exert upon nerve cells to sustain 
their health and viability have begun to be identified. While immune-directed 
therapies can reduce the frequency of relapses and development of new lesions, 
they have little effect upon remyelination and nerve cell repair. This presents 
the next big challenge in MS therapeutics; complementing immune targeted 
therapies with strategies that directly target the primary cause of disability, 
that of remyelination.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-57193-5_8
PMID: 28674983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]