---
reference_id: "PMID:20377733"
title: Modelling the effect of temperature on transmission of dengue.
authors:
- Barbazan P
- Guiserix M
- Boonyuan W
- Tuntaprasart W
- Pontier D
- Gonzalez JP
journal: Med Vet Entomol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2915.2009.00848.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modelling the effect of temperature on transmission of dengue.
**Authors:** Barbazan P, Guiserix M, Boonyuan W, Tuntaprasart W, Pontier D, Gonzalez JP
**Journal:** Med Vet Entomol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2915.2009.00848.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2915.2009.00848.x)

## Content

1. Med Vet Entomol. 2010 Mar;24(1):66-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2915.2009.00848.x.

Modelling the effect of temperature on transmission of dengue.

Barbazan P(1), Guiserix M, Boonyuan W, Tuntaprasart W, Pontier D, Gonzalez JP.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Research Development, UMR 190 Emerging Viral Pathogens, Centre 
of Excellence for Vectors and Vector-borne Diseases, Faculty of Science, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

The main entomological parameters involved in the rate of dengue virus 
transmission include the longevity of female mosquitoes, the time interval 
between bites and the extrinsic incubation period of the virus. Field and 
laboratory data provide estimates for these parameters, but their interactions 
with other factors (e.g. host population density and environmental parameters) 
make their integration into a transmission model quite complex. To estimate the 
impact of these parameters on transmission, we developed a model of virus 
transmission by a vector population which predicts the number of potentially 
infective bites under a range of temperatures and entomological parameters, 
including the daily survival rate of females, the interval between bites and the 
extrinsic incubation period. Results show that in a stable population, an 
increase in mosquito longevity disproportionately enhances the number of 
potential transmissions (e.g. by as much as five times when the survival rate 
rises from 0.80 to 0.95). Halving the length of the biting interval with a 10- 
degrees C rise in temperature increases the transmission rate by at least 2.4 
times. Accordingly, the model can predict changes in dengue transmission 
associated with short-term variation in seasonal temperature and also with 
potentially long-lasting increases in global temperatures.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2915.2009.00848.x
PMID: 20377733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]