---
reference_id: "PMID:10357843"
title: "Evidence for a third genetic locus causing familial hypercholesterolemia. A non-LDLR, non-APOB kindred."
authors:
- Haddad L
- Day IN
- Hunt S
- Williams RR
- Humphries SE
- Hopkins PN
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '1999'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Apolipoproteins B/genetics
- Child
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Genotype
- Humans
- Hypercholesterolemia/genetics
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- "Receptors, LDL/genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence for a third genetic locus causing familial hypercholesterolemia. A non-LDLR, non-APOB kindred.
**Authors:** Haddad L, Day IN, Hunt S, Williams RR, Humphries SE, Hopkins PN
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (1999)

## Content

1. J Lipid Res. 1999 Jun;40(6):1113-22.

Evidence for a third genetic locus causing familial hypercholesterolemia. A
non-LDLR, non-APOB kindred.

Haddad L(1), Day IN, Hunt S, Williams RR, Humphries SE, Hopkins PN.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Medicine, University
College London Medical School, The Rayne Institute, 5 University Street, London
WC1E 6JJ, United Kingdom.

Monogenically inherited hypercholesterolemia is most commonly caused by
mutations at the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) locus causing familial
hypercholesterolemia (FH) or at the apolipoprotein B (APOB) locus causing the
disorder familial defective apoB (FDB). Probands from 47 kindreds with a strict
clinical diagnosis of FH were selected from the Cardiovascular Genetics Research
Lipid Clinic, Utah, for molecular genetic analysis. Using a combination of
single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and direct sequencing, 12
different LDLR gene mutations were found in 16 of the probands. Three of the
probands were carriers of the APOB R3500Q mutation. In five of the remaining 28
pedigrees where no mutation had been detected, samples from enough relatives
were available to examine co-segregation with the LDLR region using the
microsatellite marker D19S221, which is within 1 Mb centromeric of the LDLR
locus, and D19S394, sited within 150 kb telomeric of the LDLR locus. In four of
the families there was strong evidence for co-segregation between the LDLR locus
and the phenotype of hypercholesterolemia, but in one large family with 18
living affected members and clear-cut bimodal hypercholesterolemia, there were
numerous exclusions of co-segregation. Using length polymorphic markers within
and outside the APOB gene, linkage of phenotype in this family to the APOB
region was similarly excluded. In this large family, the degree of
hypercholesterolemia, prevalence of tendon xanthomata, and occurrence of early
coronary disease were indistinguishable from the other families studied. In
summary, the data provide unequivocal evidence that a third locus can be
etiological for monogenic familial hypercholesterolemia and should be
reinvigorating to research in this field.

PMID: 10357843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
