---
reference_id: "PMID:26671573"
title: Peridomestic Infection as a Determining Factor of Dengue Transmission.
authors:
- Martínez-Vega RA
- Danis-Lozano R
- Díaz-Quijano FA
- Velasco-Hernández J
- Santos-Luna R
- Román-Pérez S
- Kuri-Morales P
- Ramos-Castañeda J
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004296
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peridomestic Infection as a Determining Factor of Dengue Transmission.
**Authors:** Martínez-Vega RA, Danis-Lozano R, Díaz-Quijano FA, Velasco-Hernández J, Santos-Luna R, Román-Pérez S, Kuri-Morales P, Ramos-Castañeda J
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0004296](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0004296)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Dec 15;9(12):e0004296. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004296. eCollection 2015 Dec.

Peridomestic Infection as a Determining Factor of Dengue Transmission.

Martínez-Vega RA(1)(2)(3), Danis-Lozano R(4), Díaz-Quijano FA(5), 
Velasco-Hernández J(6), Santos-Luna R(7), Román-Pérez S(7), Kuri-Morales P(8), 
Ramos-Castañeda J(2)(9).

Author information:
(1)Escuela de Medicina, Universidad de Santander, Bucaramanga, Santander, 
Colombia.
(2)Centro de Investigaciones sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional 
de Salud Pública, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(3)Organización Latinoamericana para el Fomento de la Investigación en Salud, 
Bucaramanga, Santander, Colombia.
(4)Departamento de Control de Vectores, Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública, 
Tapachula, Chiapas, México.
(5)Departamento de Epidemiologia, Universidade de São Paulo. São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico-Juriquilla, Santiago de Querétaro, 
Querétaro, México.
(7)Subdirección de Geografía Médica y Sistemas, Instituto Nacional de Salud 
Pública, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(8)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., 
México.
(9)Center for Tropical Diseases, University of Texas-Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The study of endemic dengue transmission is essential for proposing 
alternatives to impact its burden. The traditional paradigm establishes that 
transmission starts around cases, but there are few studies that determine the 
risk.
METHODS: To assess the association between the peridomestic dengue infection and 
the exposure to a dengue index case (IC), a cohort was carried out in two 
Mexican endemic communities. People cohabitating with IC or living within a 
50-meter radius (exposed cohort) and subjects of areas with no ICs in a 
200-meter radius (unexposed cohort) were included.
RESULTS: Exposure was associated with DENV infection in cohabitants (PRa 3.55; 
95%CI 2.37-5.31) or neighbors (PRa 1.82; 95%CI 1.29-2.58). Age, location, 
toilets with no direct water discharge, families with children younger than 5 
and the House Index, were associated with infection. Families with older than 13 
were associated with a decreased frequency. After a month since the IC fever 
onset, the infection incidence was not influenced by exposure to an IC or vector 
density; it was influenced by the local seasonal behavior of dengue and the age. 
Additionally, we found asymptomatic infections accounted for 60% and a greater 
age was a protective factor for the presence of symptoms (RR 0.98; 95%CI 
0.97-0.99).
CONCLUSION: The evidence suggests that dengue endemic transmission in these 
locations is initially peridomestic, around an infected subject who may be 
asymptomatic due to demographic structure and endemicity, and it is influenced 
by other characteristics of the individual, the neighborhood and the location. 
Once the transmission chain has been established, dengue spreads in the 
community probably by the adults who, despite being the group with lower 
infection frequency, mostly suffer asymptomatic infections and have higher 
mobility. This scenario complicates the opportunity and the effectiveness of 
control programs and highlights the need to apply multiple measures for dengue 
control.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004296
PMCID: PMC4684393
PMID: 26671573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.