---
reference_id: "PMID:29199013"
title: "Two Phase 3 Clinical Trials Comparing the Safety and Efficacy of Netarsudil to Timolol in Patients With Elevated Intraocular Pressure: Rho Kinase Elevated IOP Treatment Trial 1 and 2 (ROCKET-1 and ROCKET-2)"
authors:
- Serle JB
- Katz LJ
- McLaurin E
- Heah T
- Ramirez-Davis N
- Usner DW
- Novack GD
- Kopczynski CC
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2017.11.019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two Phase 3 Clinical Trials Comparing the Safety and Efficacy of Netarsudil to Timolol in Patients With Elevated Intraocular Pressure: Rho Kinase Elevated IOP Treatment Trial 1 and 2 (ROCKET-1 and ROCKET-2)
**Authors:** Serle JB, Katz LJ, McLaurin E, Heah T, Ramirez-Davis N, Usner DW, Novack GD, Kopczynski CC
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajo.2017.11.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajo.2017.11.019)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2018 Feb;186:116-127. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2017.11.019.
Epub 2017 Dec 1.

Two Phase 3 Clinical Trials Comparing the Safety and Efficacy of Netarsudil to
Timolol in Patients With Elevated Intraocular Pressure: Rho Kinase Elevated IOP
Treatment Trial 1 and 2 (ROCKET-1 and ROCKET-2).

Serle JB, Katz LJ, McLaurin E, Heah T, Ramirez-Davis N, Usner DW, Novack GD,
Kopczynski CC.

Purpose: To evaluate the efficacy and ocular and systemic safety of netarsudil
0.02% ophthalmic solution, a rho-kinase inhibitor and norepinephrine
transporter inhibitor, in patients with open-angle glaucoma and ocular
hypertension. Design: Double-masked, randomized noninferiority clinical trials:
Rho Kinase Elevated IOP Treatment Trial 1 and 2 (ROCKET-1 and ROCKET-2).
Methods: After a washout of all pre-study ocular hypotensive medications,
eligible patients were randomized to receive netarsudil 0.02% once daily
(q.d.), timolol 0.5% twice a day (b.i.d.), and (ROCKET-2 only) netarsudil
0.02% b.i.d. Data through 3 months from both studies are provided in this
report. Results: Enrolled into the 2 studies were 1167 patients. Treatment
with netarsudil q.d. produced clinically and statistically significant
reductions from baseline intraocular pressure (P < .001), and was noninferior
to timolol in the per-protocol population with maximum baseline IOP < 25 mm Hg
in both studies (ROCKET-2, primary outcome measure and population, ROCKET-1,
post hoc outcome measure). Netarsudil b.i.d. was also noninferior to timolol
(ROCKET-2). The most frequent adverse event was conjunctival hyperemia, the
incidence of which ranged from 50% (126/251, ROCKET-2) to 53% (108/203,
ROCKET-1) for netarsudil q.d., 59% (149/253, ROCKET-2) for netarsudil b.i.d.,
and 8% (17/208, ROCKET-1) to 11% (27/251, ROCKET-2) for timolol (P < .0001 for
netarsudil vs timolol). Conclusions: In 2 large, randomized, double-masked
trials reported here, once-daily dosing of netarsudil 0.02% was found to be
effective and well tolerated for the treatment of patients with ocular
hypertension and open-angle glaucoma. The novel pharmacology and aqueous humor
dynamic effects of this molecule suggest it may be a useful addition to the
armamentarium of ocular hypotensive medications.

PMID: 29199013
