---
reference_id: "PMID:39639283"
title: "Bone biochemical markers, bone mineral density, and the risk of osteonecrosis of the femoral head: a Mendelian randomization study."
authors:
- Jia HF
- Tian ZM
- Liang XZ
- Li HZ
- Lu BW
- Zhang J
- Li G
journal: BMC Musculoskelet Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12891-024-08130-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Mendelian Randomization Analysis
- Bone Density/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Femur Head Necrosis/genetics, epidemiology, blood"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Alkaline Phosphatase/blood, genetics"
- Risk Factors
- "Calcium/blood, metabolism"
- "Vitamin D/blood, analogs & derivatives"
- Femur Neck/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone biochemical markers, bone mineral density, and the risk of osteonecrosis of the femoral head: a Mendelian randomization study.
**Authors:** Jia HF, Tian ZM, Liang XZ, Li HZ, Lu BW, Zhang J, Li G
**Journal:** BMC Musculoskelet Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12891-024-08130-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-024-08130-5)

## Content

1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2024 Dec 5;25(1):996. doi:
10.1186/s12891-024-08130-5.

Bone biochemical markers, bone mineral density, and the risk of osteonecrosis of 
the femoral head: a Mendelian randomization study.

Jia HF(1), Tian ZM(1), Liang XZ(1)(2), Li HZ(1), Lu BW(1), Zhang J(1), Li 
G(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)First Clinical Medical College, Shandong University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Jinan, 250355, Shandong, China.
(2)Orthopaedic Microsurgery, First College Of Clinical Medicine, Affiliated 
Hospital of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 16369 Jingshi 
Road, Jinan, 250014, Shandong, China.
(3)First Clinical Medical College, Shandong University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Jinan, 250355, Shandong, China. sdszylg@163.com.
(4)Orthopaedic Microsurgery, First College Of Clinical Medicine, Affiliated 
Hospital of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 16369 Jingshi 
Road, Jinan, 250014, Shandong, China. sdszylg@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Alterations in bone metabolism may play a significant role in the 
early stages of femoral head necrosis, yet the causal relationship remains 
unclear. This study utilizes a two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) approach 
to explore the genetic causal links between biochemical markers of bone 
metabolism, bone mineral density, and the risk of femoral head necrosis.
METHODS: This study utilizes publicly available genome-wide association study 
(GWAS) datasets, with exposure factors including biochemical bone markers 
(25OHD, calcium, and alkaline phosphatase) and bone mineral density (measured at 
the lumbar spine, heel, femoral neck, and total body). The outcome of interest 
is osteonecrosis of the femoral head. We selected validated single nucleotide 
polymorphisms that are strongly associated with the exposure factors as 
instrumental variables. Mendelian randomization analysis was conducted using 
inverse variance weighting(IVW), MR-Egger regression, and weighted median 
estimation. Additionally, we performed analyses for horizontal pleiotropy, 
heterogeneity, and sensitivity.
RESULTS: A total of 934 SNPs were included in this study. The MR analysis 
results indicate that the IVW analysis of 25OHD, Ca, and ALP did not reach 
statistical significance (25OHD OR = 1.006, 95%CI: 0.69-1.47, P = 0.975; Ca 
OR = 0.856, 95%CI: 0.43-1.70, P = 0.657; ALP OR = 1.022, 95%CI: 0.86-1.21, 
P = 0.801). However, bone density, including heel, lumbar spine, and total body 
bone density, showed a protective causal relationship with the onset of ONFH, 
while the results for femoral neck bone density did not reach statistical 
significance (lumbar spine BMD OR = 0.662, 95%CI: 0.48-0.91, P = 0.010; heel BMD 
OR = 0.726, 95%CI: 0.62-0.85, P < 0.001; total body BMD OR = 0.726, 95%CI: 
0.62-0.85, P < 0.001; femoral neck BMD OR = 0.748, 95%CI: 0.53-1.05, P = 0.096). 
Cochran's Q statistic for IVW and MR-Egger methods indicated no intergenic 
heterogeneity for all exposure outcomes' SNPs, and the tests for pleiotropy 
suggested a low likelihood of pleiotropy in all causal analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study indicate that there is no genetically 
mediated causal relationship between serum levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D, 
calcium, and alkaline phosphatase and osteonecrosis of the femoral head. 
However, heel, lumbar spine, and total body bone mineral density can be 
considered protective factors for the occurrence of ONFH. There is no genetic 
causality between femoral neck bone mineral density and ONFH development.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-024-08130-5
PMCID: PMC11619604
PMID: 39639283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The data used in this paper are publicly available, ethically 
approved, and the subjects have given their informed consent. Consent for 
publication: Not Applicable. Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests. Clinical trial number: Not applicable.