---
reference_id: "PMID:25726758"
title: "Eumycetoma and actinomycetoma--an update on causative agents, epidemiology, pathogenesis, diagnostics and therapy."
authors:
- Nenoff P
- van de Sande WW
- Fahal AH
- Reinel D
- Schöfer H
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.13008
keywords:
- Actinomycetales
- Actinomycetales Infections/complications
- "Amputation, Surgical"
- Animals
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Antifungal Agents/therapeutic use
- Cytokines/metabolism
- Debridement
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Inflammation/metabolism, microbiology"
- Itraconazole/therapeutic use
- Madurella
- "Mycetoma/diagnosis, epidemiology, metabolism, microbiology, therapy"
- Naphthalenes/therapeutic use
- Terbinafine
- Triazoles/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eumycetoma and actinomycetoma--an update on causative agents, epidemiology, pathogenesis, diagnostics and therapy.
**Authors:** Nenoff P, van de Sande WW, Fahal AH, Reinel D, Schöfer H
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.13008](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.13008)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015 Oct;29(10):1873-83. doi: 10.1111/jdv.13008.
 Epub 2015 Feb 27.

Eumycetoma and actinomycetoma--an update on causative agents, epidemiology,
pathogenesis, diagnostics and therapy.

Nenoff P(1), van de Sande WW(2), Fahal AH(3), Reinel D(4), Schöfer H(5).

Author information:
(1)Labor für medizinische Mikrobiologie, Partnerschaft Prof. Pietro Nenoff & Dr.
Constanze Krüger, Mölbis, Germany.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology & Infectious Diseases, Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)The Mycetoma Research Centre, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan.
(4)Hautarztpraxis, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Klinik für Dermatologie, Venerologie und Allergologie, Klinikum der Johann
Wolfgang Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Mycetoma is a chronic putrid infection of the cutaneous and subcutaneous tissue
concerning predominantly the feet, and more rarely other body parts. Mycetoma
can be caused by both fungi (eumycetoma) and bacteria (actinomycetoma). Mode of
infection is an inoculation of the causative microorganism via small injuries of
the skin. The clinical correlate of both forms of mycetoma is tumescence with
abscesses, painless nodules, sinuses and discharge. The latter is commonly
serous-purulent and contains grains (filamentous granules) which can be
expressed for diagnostic purposes. Distinctive for both eumycetoma and
actinomycetoma, are the formation of grains. Grains represent microcolonies of
the microorganism in vivo in the vital tissue. The most successful treatment
option for eumycetomas offers itraconazole in a dosage of 200 mg twice daily.
This triazole antifungal is considered as 'gold standard' for eumycetomas.
Alternatively, the cheaper ketoconazole was widely used, however, it was
currently stopped by the FDA. Actinomycetomas should be treated by the
combination of trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole (co-trimoxazole 80/400 to
160/800 mg per day) and amikacin 15 mg/kg body weight per day. Mycetomas are
neglected infections of the poor. They are more than a medical challenge. In
rural areas of Africa, Asia and South America mycetomas lead to socio-economic
consequences involving the affected patients, their families and the society in
general.

© 2015 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.13008
PMID: 25726758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
