---
reference_id: "PMID:11980846"
title: "Foxe3 haploinsufficiency in mice: a model for Peters' anomaly."
authors:
- Ormestad M
- Blixt A
- Churchill A
- Martinsson T
- Enerbäck S
- Carlsson P
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2002'
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Anterior Eye Segment/abnormalities, metabolism, pathology"
- Base Sequence
- "Cataract/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Corneal Opacity/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- DNA Primers/chemistry
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Eye Abnormalities/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Forkhead Transcription Factors
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- Radiation Hybrid Mapping
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Foxe3 haploinsufficiency in mice: a model for Peters' anomaly.
**Authors:** Ormestad M, Blixt A, Churchill A, Martinsson T, Enerbäck S, Carlsson P
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2002)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2002 May;43(5):1350-7.

Foxe3 haploinsufficiency in mice: a model for Peters' anomaly.

Ormestad M(1), Blixt A, Churchill A, Martinsson T, Enerbäck S, Carlsson P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Lundberg Laboratory, Gothenburg 
University, Medicinaregatan 9C, SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the importance in anterior segment dysgenesis of genetic 
variation in Foxe3, a gene encoding a forkhead transcription factor specifically 
expressed in the lens.
METHODS: The phenotype of mice heterozygous for a mutation in the DNA-binding 
domain of Foxe3 was examined from histologic sections, and DNA binding by the 
encoded protein was investigated by gel-shift assay. FOXE3 from human patients 
with Peters' anomaly was PCR amplified and sequenced.
RESULTS: The dysgenetic lens (dyl) allele of Foxe3 was found to encode a protein 
unable to bind DNA. Approximately 40% of mice heterozygous for Foxe3(dyl) have 
corneal and lenticular defects. The phenotype is variable but typically consists 
of the equivalent of Peters' anomaly in humans, with central corneal opacity, 
keratolenticular adhesion, and, in some cases, anterior polar cataract. In a 
small cohort (n = 13) of patients with Peters' anomaly, shown to be normal in 
the PAX6 locus, one individual was found to be heterozygous for a 
nonconservative missense mutation in FOXE3. The mutation, which does not occur 
in 116 chromosomes from a control population, substitutes leucine for arginine 
90 at a highly conserved position in the forkhead domain.
CONCLUSIONS: Haploinsufficiency of Foxe3 in a mouse model causes anterior 
segment dysgenesis similar to Peters' anomaly. Although causality could not be 
shown in the human case, the presence of a rare, nonconservative substitution in 
FOXE3 of a patient with Peters' anomaly is interesting, in light of the 
phenotypic similarities with the mutant mice.

PMID: 11980846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]