---
reference_id: "PMID:36307217"
title: "Clinical Features, Neuropathology, and Surgical Outcome in Patients With Refractory Epilepsy and Brain Somatic Variants in the SLC35A2 Gene."
authors:
- Barba C
- Blumcke I
- Winawer MR
- Hartlieb T
- Kang HC
- Grisotto L
- Chipaux M
- Bien CG
- Heřmanovská B
- Porter BE
- Lidov HGW
- Cetica V
- Woermann FG
- Lopez-Rivera JA
- Canoll PD
- Mader I
- "D'Incerti L"
- Baldassari S
- Yang E
- Gaballa A
- Vogel H
- Straka B
- Macconi L
- Polster T
- Grant GA
- Krsková L
- Shin HJ
- Ko A
- Crino PB
- Krsek P
- Lee JH
- Lal D
- Baulac S
- Poduri A
- Guerrini R
- SLC35A2 Study Group
journal: Neurology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000201471
keywords:
- Humans
- "Drug Resistant Epilepsy/genetics, surgery, pathology"
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, surgery, pathology"
- "Epilepsy/genetics, surgery, diagnosis"
- Seizures/pathology
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- Electroencephalography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Features, Neuropathology, and Surgical Outcome in Patients With Refractory Epilepsy and Brain Somatic Variants in the SLC35A2 Gene.
**Authors:** Barba C, Blumcke I, Winawer MR, Hartlieb T, Kang HC, Grisotto L, Chipaux M, Bien CG, Heřmanovská B, Porter BE, Lidov HGW, Cetica V, Woermann FG, Lopez-Rivera JA, Canoll PD, Mader I, D'Incerti L, Baldassari S, Yang E, Gaballa A, Vogel H, Straka B, Macconi L, Polster T, Grant GA, Krsková L, Shin HJ, Ko A, Crino PB, Krsek P, Lee JH, Lal D, Baulac S, Poduri A, Guerrini R, SLC35A2 Study Group
**Journal:** Neurology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000201471](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000201471)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2023 Jan 31;100(5):e528-e542. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000201471.
Epub  2022 Oct 28.

Clinical Features, Neuropathology, and Surgical Outcome in Patients With 
Refractory Epilepsy and Brain Somatic Variants in the SLC35A2 Gene.

Barba C(1), Blumcke I(1), Winawer MR(1), Hartlieb T(1), Kang HC(1), Grisotto 
L(1), Chipaux M(1), Bien CG(1), Heřmanovská B(1), Porter BE(1), Lidov HGW(1), 
Cetica V(1), Woermann FG(1), Lopez-Rivera JA(1), Canoll PD(1), Mader I(1), 
D'Incerti L(1), Baldassari S(1), Yang E(1), Gaballa A(1), Vogel H(1), Straka 
B(1), Macconi L(1), Polster T(1), Grant GA(1), Krsková L(1), Shin HJ(1), Ko 
A(1), Crino PB(1), Krsek P(1), Lee JH(1), Lal D(1), Baulac S(1), Poduri A(1), 
Guerrini R(1); SLC35A2 Study Group.

Collaborators: Buccoliero A, Conti V, Giordano F, Goldman J, Heinzen E, Koblížek 
M, Li A, Mandorlini C, Mari F, Mei D, Minghetti S, Parmeggiani L, Záměcník J.

Author information:
(1)From the IRCCS Meyer Children's Hospital (C.B., V.C., L.D.I., L.M., R.G.), 
Florence, Italy; University of Florence (C.B., L.G., R.G.), Florence, Italy; 
University Hospital Erlangen (I.B.), Germany; Columbia University (M.R.W., 
P.D.C.), New York, NY; Neurorehabilitation and Epileptology (T.H., I.M.), 
Vogtareuth, Germany; PMU Salzburg (T.H.), Austria; Yonsei University College of 
Medicine (H.-C.K., H.J.S.), Seoul, Republic of Korea; Rothschild Foundation 
Hospital (M.C.), Paris, France; Krankenhaus Mara (C.G.B., F.G.W., A.G., T.P.), 
Bielefeld University, Medical School, Germany; Charles University (B.H., B.S., 
L.K., P.K.), 2nd Faculty of Medicine and Motol University Hospital, Prague, 
Czech Republic; Stanford University (B.E.P., H.V.), School of Medicine Stanford, 
CA; Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School (H.G.W.L., E.Y., 
A.P.), MA; Society of Epilepsy Research (F.G.W.), Bielefeld, Germany; Case 
Western Reserve University (J.A.L.-R.), OH; Cleveland Clinic (J.A.L.-R., D.L.), 
Cleveland, OH; Sorbonne University (Sara Baldassari, Stéphanie Baulac), Paris 
Brain Institute (ICM), INSERM, CNRS, AP-HP, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, France; 
Lucile Packard Children's Hospital at Stanford University (G.A.G.), School of 
Medicine Stanford, CA; Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (A.K., 
J.H.L.), Daejeon, South Korea; University of Maryland School of Medicine 
(P.B.C.), Baltimore, MD; and Broad Institute of Harvard and M.I.T (D.L.), 
Cambridge, MA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 100(5):225.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The SLC35A2 gene, located at chromosome Xp11.23, 
encodes for a uridine diphosphate-galactose transporter. We describe clinical, 
genetic, neuroimaging, EEG, and histopathologic findings and assess possible 
predictors of postoperative seizure and cognitive outcome in 47 patients with 
refractory epilepsy and brain somatic SLC35A2 gene variants.
METHODS: This is a retrospective multicenter study where we performed a 
descriptive analysis and classical hypothesis testing. We included the variables 
of interest significantly associated with the outcomes in the generalized linear 
models.
RESULTS: Two main phenotypes were associated with brain somatic SLC35A2 
variants: (1) early epileptic encephalopathy (EE, 39 patients) with epileptic 
spasms as the predominant seizure type and moderate to severe intellectual 
disability and (2) drug-resistant focal epilepsy (DR-FE, 8 patients) associated 
with normal/borderline cognitive function and specific neuropsychological 
deficits. Brain MRI was abnormal in all patients with EE and in 50% of those 
with DR-FE. Histopathology review identified mild malformation of cortical 
development with oligodendroglial hyperplasia in epilepsy in 44/47 patients and 
was inconclusive in 3. The 47 patients harbored 42 distinct mosaic SLC35A2 
variants, including 14 (33.3%) missense, 13 (30.9%) frameshift, 10 (23.8%) 
nonsense, 4 (9.5%) in-frame deletions/duplications, and 1 (2.4%) splicing 
variant. Variant allele frequencies (VAFs) ranged from 1.4% to 52.6% (mean VAF: 
17.3 ± 13.5). At last follow-up (35.5 ± 21.5 months), 30 patients (63.8%) were 
in Engel Class I, of which 26 (55.3%) were in Class IA. Cognitive performances 
remained unchanged in most patients after surgery. Regression analyses showed 
that the probability of achieving both Engel Class IA and Class I outcomes, 
adjusted by age at seizure onset, was lower when the duration of epilepsy 
increased and higher when postoperative EEG was normal or improved. Lower brain 
VAF was associated with improved postoperative cognitive outcome in the analysis 
of associations, but this finding was not confirmed in regression analyses.
DISCUSSION: Brain somatic SLC35A2 gene variants are associated with 2 main 
clinical phenotypes, EE and DR-FE, and a histopathologic diagnosis of MOGHE. 
Additional studies will be needed to delineate any possible correlation between 
specific genetic variants, mutational load in the epileptogenic tissue, and 
surgical outcomes.

© 2022 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000201471
PMCID: PMC9931085
PMID: 36307217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]