---
reference_id: "PMID:32830221"
title: "Brain-first versus body-first Parkinson's disease: a multimodal imaging case-control study."
authors:
- Horsager J
- Andersen KB
- Knudsen K
- Skjærbæk C
- Fedorova TD
- Okkels N
- Schaeffer E
- Bonkat SK
- Geday J
- Otto M
- Sommerauer M
- Danielsen EH
- Bech E
- Kraft J
- Munk OL
- Hansen SD
- Pavese N
- Göder R
- Brooks DJ
- Berg D
- Borghammer P
journal: Brain
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awaa238
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- Case-Control Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multimodal Imaging/methods
- "Parkinson Disease/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- Positron Emission Tomography Computed Tomography/methods
- alpha-Synuclein/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain-first versus body-first Parkinson's disease: a multimodal imaging case-control study.
**Authors:** Horsager J, Andersen KB, Knudsen K, Skjærbæk C, Fedorova TD, Okkels N, Schaeffer E, Bonkat SK, Geday J, Otto M, Sommerauer M, Danielsen EH, Bech E, Kraft J, Munk OL, Hansen SD, Pavese N, Göder R, Brooks DJ, Berg D, Borghammer P
**Journal:** Brain (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awaa238](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awaa238)

## Content

1. Brain. 2020 Oct 1;143(10):3077-3088. doi: 10.1093/brain/awaa238.

Brain-first versus body-first Parkinson's disease: a multimodal imaging
case-control study.

Horsager J(1), Andersen KB(1), Knudsen K(1), Skjærbæk C(1), Fedorova TD(1),
Okkels N(1), Schaeffer E(2), Bonkat SK(2), Geday J(3), Otto M(4)(5), Sommerauer
M(6), Danielsen EH(5), Bech E(7), Kraft J(8), Munk OL(1), Hansen SD(9), Pavese
N(1)(10), Göder R(11), Brooks DJ(1)(10), Berg D(2), Borghammer P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine and PET, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(2)Department of Neurology, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Neurologen, Horsens, Denmark.
(4)Aarhus University Hospital, Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(5)Aarhus University Hospital, Department of Neurology, Aarhus, Denmark.
(6)University of Cologne, Department of Neurology, Cologne, Germany.
(7)Neuroklinik-Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.
(8)Neurolog Jonas Kraft, Aarhus, Denmark.
(9)Neurolog i Odense, Odense, Denmark.
(10)Institute of Translational and Clinical Neuroscience, Newcastle University,
Newcastle, UK.
(11)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Christian-Albrechts-University
Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

Comment in
    Brain. 2020 Oct 1;143(10):2871-2873. doi: 10.1093/brain/awaa293.

Parkinson's disease is characterized by the presence of abnormal, intraneuronal
α-synuclein aggregates, which may propagate from cell-to-cell in a prion-like
manner. However, it remains uncertain where the initial α-synuclein aggregates
originate. We have hypothesized that Parkinson's disease comprises two subtypes.
A brain-first (top-down) type, where α-synuclein pathology initially arises in
the brain with secondary spreading to the peripheral autonomic nervous system;
and a body-first (bottom-up) type, where the pathology originates in the enteric
or peripheral autonomic nervous system and then spreads to the brain. We also
hypothesized that isolated REM sleep behaviour disorder (iRBD) is a prodromal
phenotype for the body-first type. Using multimodal imaging, we tested the
hypothesis by quantifying neuronal dysfunction in structures corresponding to
Braak stages I, II and III involvement in three distinct patient groups. We
included 37 consecutive de novo patients with Parkinson's disease into this
case-control PET study. Patients with Parkinson's disease were divided into 24
RBD-negative (PDRBD-) and 13 RBD-positive cases (PDRBD+) and a comparator group
of 22 iRBD patients. We used 11C-donepezil PET/CT to assess cholinergic
(parasympathetic) innervation, 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy
to measure cardiac sympathetic innervation, neuromelanin-sensitive MRI to
measure the integrity of locus coeruleus pigmented neurons, and
18F-dihydroxyphenylalanine (FDOPA) PET to assess putaminal dopamine storage
capacity. Colon volume and transit times were assessed with CT scans and
radiopaque markers. Imaging data from the three groups were interrogated with
ANOVA and Kruskal-Wallis tests corrected for multiple comparisons. The PDRBD-
and PDRBD+ groups showed similar marked reductions in putaminal FDOPA-specific
uptake, whereas two-thirds of iRBD patients had normal scans (P < 10-13, ANOVA).
When compared to the PDRBD- patients, the PDRBD+ and iRBD patients showed
reduced mean MIBG heart:mediastinum ratios (P < 10-5, ANOVA) and colon
11C-donepezil standard uptake values (P = 0.008, ANOVA). The PDRBD+ group
trended towards a reduced mean MRI locus coeruleus: pons ratio compared to
PDRBD- (P = 0.07, t-test). In comparison to the other groups, the PDRBD+ group
also had enlarged colon volumes (P < 0.001, ANOVA) and delayed colonic transit
times (P = 0.01, Kruskal-Wallis). The combined iRBD and PDRBD+ patient data were
compatible with a body-first trajectory, characterized by initial loss of
cardiac MIBG signal and 11C-colonic donepezil signal followed by loss of
putaminal FDOPA uptake. In contrast, the PDRBD- data were compatible with a
brain-first trajectory, characterized by primary loss of putaminal FDOPA uptake
followed by a secondary loss of cardiac MIBG signal and 11C-donepezil signal.
These findings support the existence of brain-first and body-first subtypes of
Parkinson's disease.

© The Author(s) (2020). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awaa238
PMID: 32830221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
