---
reference_id: "PMID:37189393"
title: "Myocardial Inflammation as a Manifestation of Genetic Cardiomyopathies: From Bedside to the Bench."
authors:
- Peretto G
- Sommariva E
- Di Resta C
- Rabino M
- Villatore A
- Lazzeroni D
- Sala S
- Pompilio G
- Cooper LT
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biom13040646
keywords:
- Humans
- Myocarditis/genetics
- "Cardiomyopathies/genetics, pathology"
- Heart Failure/complications
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/genetics"
- "Inflammation/genetics, complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myocardial Inflammation as a Manifestation of Genetic Cardiomyopathies: From Bedside to the Bench.
**Authors:** Peretto G, Sommariva E, Di Resta C, Rabino M, Villatore A, Lazzeroni D, Sala S, Pompilio G, Cooper LT
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom13040646](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom13040646)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2023 Apr 4;13(4):646. doi: 10.3390/biom13040646.

Myocardial Inflammation as a Manifestation of Genetic Cardiomyopathies: From
Bedside to the Bench.

Peretto G(1)(2), Sommariva E(3), Di Resta C(2)(4), Rabino M(3), Villatore A(1),
Lazzeroni D(5), Sala S(1), Pompilio G(3)(6), Cooper LT(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Electrophysiology and Arrhythmology, IRCCS San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(2)School of Medicine, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(3)Unit of Vascular Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Centro Cardiologico
Monzino IRCCS, 20139 Milan, Italy.
(4)Genomic Unit for the Diagnosis of Human Pathologies, IRCCS San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(5)IRCCS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi, 43100 Parma, Italy.
(6)Department of Biomedical, Surgical and Dental Sciences, Università degli
Studi di Milano, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(7)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224,
USA.

Over recent years, preclinical and clinical evidence has implicated myocardial
inflammation (M-Infl) in the pathophysiology and phenotypes of traditionally
genetic cardiomyopathies. M-Infl resembling myocarditis on imaging and histology
occurs frequently as a clinical manifestation of classically genetic cardiac
diseases, including dilated and arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy. The emerging role
of M-Infl in disease pathophysiology is leading to the identification of
druggable targets for molecular treatment of the inflammatory process and a new
paradigm in the field of cardiomyopathies. Cardiomyopathies constitute a leading
cause of heart failure and arrhythmic sudden death in the young population. The
aim of this review is to present, from bedside to bench, the current state of
the art about the genetic basis of M-Infl in nonischemic cardiomyopathies of the
dilated and arrhythmogenic spectrum in order to prompt future research towards
the identification of novel mechanisms and treatment targets, with the ultimate
goal of lowering disease morbidity and mortality.

DOI: 10.3390/biom13040646
PMCID: PMC10136351
PMID: 37189393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
