---
reference_id: "PMID:19682192"
title: "Severe acute exacerbation of chronic hepatitis B: a unique presentation of a common disease."
authors:
- Wong VW
- Chan HL
journal: J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.05924.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe acute exacerbation of chronic hepatitis B: a unique presentation of a common disease.
**Authors:** Wong VW, Chan HL
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.05924.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.05924.x)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Jul;24(7):1179-86. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.05924.x.

Severe acute exacerbation of chronic hepatitis B: a unique presentation of a 
common disease.

Wong VW(1), Chan HL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China.

Severe acute exacerbation is a unique presentation of chronic hepatitis B 
characterized by very high alanine aminotransferase level accompanied by 
jaundice and hepatic decompensation. The underlying pathogenesis is likely 
related to excessive immune clearance, which may be related to the genotype of 
hepatitis B virus. The mortality is very high once hepatic encephalopathy 
develops, but some patients can recover to almost normal liver function in 
contrast to patients with end-stage liver cirrhosis. This condition should be 
differentiated from acute hepatitis B and other causes of acute hepatitis must 
be excluded. Conventional prognostic systems may not be applicable to severe 
acute exacerbation of chronic hepatitis B. In general, patients who have 
thrombocytopenia, hyperbilirubinemia and coagulopathy have a higher risk of 
mortality regardless of the serum alanine aminotransferase levels. There is no 
evidence that lamivudine treatment can reduce the short-term mortality of severe 
acute exacerbation. However, patients with severe acute exacerbation tend to 
have a higher rate of maintained virological response, higher rate of hepatitis 
B e antigen seroconversion and low rate of drug resistance on extended 
lamivudine treatment as compared to other chronic hepatitis B patients. 
Virological relapse and severe hepatitis reactivation is common after treatment 
cessation and therefore long-term antiviral treatment is recommended. Liver 
transplantation, particularly living donor liver transplantation, should be 
considered for patients who develop hepatic failure secondary to severe acute 
exacerbation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.05924.x
PMID: 19682192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]