---
reference_id: "PMID:33672234"
title: "Accidental Consumption of Aspartame in Phenylketonuria: Patient Experiences."
authors:
- Newbould E
- Pinto A
- Evans S
- Ford S
- "O'Driscoll M"
- Ashmore C
- Daly A
- MacDonald A
journal: Nutrients
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/nu13020707
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Accidental Consumption of Aspartame in Phenylketonuria: Patient Experiences.
**Authors:** Newbould E, Pinto A, Evans S, Ford S, O'Driscoll M, Ashmore C, Daly A, MacDonald A
**Journal:** Nutrients (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/nu13020707](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13020707)

## Content

1. Nutrients. 2021 Feb 23;13(2):707. doi: 10.3390/nu13020707.

Accidental Consumption of Aspartame in Phenylketonuria: Patient Experiences.

Newbould E(1), Pinto A(2), Evans S(2), Ford S(3), O'Driscoll M(4), Ashmore C(2), 
Daly A(2), MacDonald A(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health, Education & Life Sciences, Birmingham City University: 
City South Campus, Westbourne Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 3TN, UK.
(2)Birmingham Women's and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Steelhouse Lane, 
Birmingham B4 6NH, UK.
(3)National Society for Phenylketonuria, Purley CR8 9DD, UK.
(4)School of Health and Education, Middlesex University, Room WG41A (Williams 
Building), The Burroughs Hendon, London NW4 4BT, UK.

Aspartame is a phenylalanine containing sweetener, added to foods and drinks, 
which is avoided in phenylketonuria (PKU). However, the amount of phenylalanine 
provided by aspartame is unidentifiable from food and drinks labels. We 
performed a cross-sectional online survey aiming to examine the accidental 
aspartame consumption in PKU. 206 questionnaires (58% female) were completed. 
55% of respondents (n = 114) were adults with PKU or their parent/carers and 45% 
(n = 92) were parents/carers of children with PKU. 74% (n = 152/206) had 
consumed food/drinks containing aspartame. Repeated accidental aspartame 
consumption was common and more frequent in children (p < 0.0001). The aspartame 
containing food/drinks accidentally consumed were fizzy drinks (68%, n = 
103/152), fruit squash (40%, n = 61/152), chewing gum (30%, n = 46/152), 
flavoured water (25%, n = 38/152), ready to drink fruit squash cartons (23%, n = 
35/152) and sports drinks (21%, n = 32/152). The main reasons described for 
accidental consumption, were manufacturers' changing recipes (81%, n = 123/152), 
inability to check the ingredients in pubs/restaurants/vending machines (59%, n 
= 89/152) or forgetting to check the label (32%, n = 49/152). 23% (n= 48/206) 
had been prescribed medicines containing aspartame and 75% (n = 36/48) said that 
medicines were not checked by medics when prescribed. 85% (n = 164/192) 
considered the sugar tax made accidental aspartame consumption more likely. Some 
of the difficulties for patients were aspartame identification in drinks 
consumed in restaurants, pubs, vending machines (77%, n = 158/206); similarities 
in appearance of aspartame and non-aspartame products (62%, n = 127/206); time 
consuming shopping/checking labels (56%, n = 115/206); and unclear labelling 
(55%, n = 114/206). These issues caused anxiety for the person with PKU (52%, n 
= 106/206), anxiety for parent/caregivers (46%, n = 95/206), guilt for 
parent/carers (42%, n = 87/206) and social isolation (42%, n = 87/206). It is 
important to understand the impact of aspartame and legislation such as the 
sugar tax on people with PKU. Policy makers and industry should ensure that the 
quality of life of people with rare conditions such as PKU is not compromised 
through their action.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13020707
PMCID: PMC7926728
PMID: 33672234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.