---
reference_id: "PMID:9196757"
title: Coma scales for children with severe falciparum malaria.
authors:
- Newton CR
- Chokwe T
- Schellenberg JA
- Winstanley PA
- Forster D
- Peshu N
- Kirkham FJ
- Marsh K
journal: Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0035-9203(97)90207-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coma scales for children with severe falciparum malaria.
**Authors:** Newton CR, Chokwe T, Schellenberg JA, Winstanley PA, Forster D, Peshu N, Kirkham FJ, Marsh K
**Journal:** Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0035-9203(97)90207-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0035-9203(97)90207-8)

## Content

1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1997 Mar-Apr;91(2):161-5. doi: 
10.1016/s0035-9203(97)90207-8.

Coma scales for children with severe falciparum malaria.

Newton CR(1), Chokwe T, Schellenberg JA, Winstanley PA, Forster D, Peshu N, 
Kirkham FJ, Marsh K.

Author information:
(1)Kenya Medical Research Institute, Clinical Research Centre, Kilifi Unit, 
Kenya. cnewton@ich.ucl.ac.uk

The Blantyre coma scale (BCS) is used to assess children with severe falciparum 
malaria, particularly as a criterion for cerebral malaria, but it has not been 
formally validated. We compared the BCS to the Adelaide coma scale (ACS), for 
Kenyan children with severe malaria. We examined the inter-observer agreement 
between 3 observers in the assessment of coma scales on 17 children by measuring 
the proportion of agreement (PA), disagreement rate (DR) and fixed sample size 
kappa (kappa n). We assessed the sensitivity and specificity of the scales in 
detecting events (seizures and hypoglycaemia) in 240 children during admission 
and the usefulness of the scales in predicting outcome. There was considerable 
disagreement between observers in the assessment of both scales (BCS: PA = 0.55, 
DR = 0.09 and kappa n = 0.27; ACS: PA = 0.36, DR = 0.31, and kappa n = 0.31), 
particularly with the verbal component of the BCS (kappa n = 0.02). Compared to 
the ACS, the BCS was more specific (0.85 for BCS and 0.80 for ACS), but less 
sensitive (0.25-0.69 vs. 0.38-0.88 respectively) in detecting events and was a 
worse predictor of neurological sequelae. The BCS provided a better overall 
assessment of a child's incapacity from falciparum malaria, but the ACS was more 
useful in assessing neurological disturbances.

DOI: 10.1016/s0035-9203(97)90207-8
PMID: 9196757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]