---
reference_id: "PMID:23234454"
title: "Cardiac asthma: new insights into an old disease."
authors:
- Tanabe T
- Rozycki HJ
- Kanoh S
- Rubin BK
journal: Expert Rev Respir Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1586/ers.12.67
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac asthma: new insights into an old disease.
**Authors:** Tanabe T, Rozycki HJ, Kanoh S, Rubin BK
**Journal:** Expert Rev Respir Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1586/ers.12.67](https://doi.org/10.1586/ers.12.67)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2012 Dec;6(6):705-14. doi: 10.1586/ers.12.67.

Cardiac asthma: new insights into an old disease.

Tanabe T(1), Rozycki HJ, Kanoh S, Rubin BK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine 
and the Children's Hospital of Richmond at VCU, Richmond, VA, USA.

Cardiac asthma has been defined as wheezing, coughing and orthopnea due to 
congestive heart failure. The clinical distinction between bronchial asthma and 
cardiac asthma can be straight forward, except in patients with chronic lung 
disease coexisting with left heart disease. Pulmonary edema and pulmonary 
vascular congestion have been thought to be the primary causes of cardiac asthma 
but most patients have a poor response to diuretics. There appears to be limited 
effectiveness of classical asthma medications like bronchodilators or 
corticosteroids in treating cardiac asthma. Evidence suggests that circulating 
inflammatory factors and tissue growth factors also lead to airway obstruction 
suggesting the possibility of developing novel therapies.

DOI: 10.1586/ers.12.67
PMID: 23234454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]