---
reference_id: "PMID:34932395"
title: "Not the final diagnosis: from Addison's disease to POEMS syndrome: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Xie X
- Li R
- Lu Y
- Li X
- Kuang P
- Wang C
- Tong N
- Lü Q
journal: J Int Med Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/03000605211066239
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Not the final diagnosis: from Addison's disease to POEMS syndrome: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Xie X, Li R, Lu Y, Li X, Kuang P, Wang C, Tong N, Lü Q
**Journal:** J Int Med Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/03000605211066239](https://doi.org/10.1177/03000605211066239)

## Content

1. J Int Med Res. 2021 Dec;49(12):3000605211066239. doi:
10.1177/03000605211066239.

Not the final diagnosis: from Addison's disease to POEMS syndrome: a case report 
and literature review.

Xie X(1), Li R(2), Lu Y(3), Li X(4), Kuang P(5), Wang C(1), Tong N(6), Lü Q(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, West China Hospital of Sichuan 
University/West China School of Nursing, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Chengdu Seventh People's 
Hospital, Chengdu, China.
(4)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Mississippi Medical 
Center, Jackson, MS, USA.
(5)Department of Haematology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China.
(6)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, West China Hospital of Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, China.

We report the case of a 47-year-old male patient with pigmentation of the head, 
face and hands, who was initially diagnosed as having primary adrenal 
insufficiency (Addison's disease). Laboratory testing, imaging and physical 
examination revealed subclinical hypothyroidism, high circulating prolactin and 
oestradiol concentrations, gynaecomastia, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly and 
weakness of both lower limbs. These findings led us to consider whether a single 
or multiple diseases were present in this patient. Indeed, Addison's disease can 
represent one aspect of a wider systemic disease. Therefore, we performed 
further examinations, and found high serum M protein (5.1%) and vascular 
endothelial growth factor [1005.30 pg/mL (normal range 0 to 142 pg/mL)] 
concentrations. As a consequence, we diagnosed polyneuropathy, organomegaly, 
endocrinopathy, monoclonal gammopathy and skin changes (POEMS) syndrome. 
Consequently, when a single disease cannot fully explain the multiple symptoms 
and signs of one patient, clinicians should consider the possibility of the 
presence of a wider syndrome and undertake more detailed diagnostic testing.

DOI: 10.1177/03000605211066239
PMCID: PMC8826110
PMID: 34932395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interest: The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest.