---
reference_id: "PMID:36002026"
title: "Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 study of bardoxolone methyl in patients with diabetic kidney disease: design and baseline characteristics of the AYAME study."
authors:
- Nangaku M
- Takama H
- Ichikawa T
- Mukai K
- Kojima M
- Suzuki Y
- Watada H
- Wada T
- Ueki K
- Narita I
- Kashihara N
- Kadowaki T
- Hase H
- Akizawa T
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfac242
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Aged
- Male
- Diabetic Nephropathies/etiology
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/complications"
- Renal Dialysis/adverse effects
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/complications, drug therapy"
- Double-Blind Method
- Heart Failure/complications
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- "Albuminuria/etiology, complications"
- "Clinical Trials, Phase III as Topic"
- Multicenter Studies as Topic
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Oleanolic Acid/analogs & derivatives"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 study of bardoxolone methyl in patients with diabetic kidney disease: design and baseline characteristics of the AYAME study.
**Authors:** Nangaku M, Takama H, Ichikawa T, Mukai K, Kojima M, Suzuki Y, Watada H, Wada T, Ueki K, Narita I, Kashihara N, Kadowaki T, Hase H, Akizawa T
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfac242](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfac242)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2023 May 4;38(5):1204-1216. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfac242.

Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 study of bardoxolone methyl 
in patients with diabetic kidney disease: design and baseline characteristics of 
the AYAME study.

Nangaku M(1), Takama H(2), Ichikawa T(2), Mukai K(2), Kojima M(2), Suzuki Y(3), 
Watada H(4), Wada T(5), Ueki K(6)(7), Narita I(8), Kashihara N(9), Kadowaki 
T(10), Hase H(11), Akizawa T(12).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Endocrinology, the University of Tokyo Graduate 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Research & Development Division, Kyowa Kirin, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Metabolism and Endocrinology, Juntendo University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Nephrology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Medical, 
Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.
(6)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Center Hospital, 
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Molecular Diabetic Medicine, Diabetes Research Center, Research 
Institute, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Division of Clinical Nephrology and Rheumatology, Niigata University Graduate 
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.
(9)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Kawasaki Medical School, Okayama, 
Japan.
(10)Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Aoba Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Showa University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is the leading cause of end-stage 
kidney disease (ESKD), but currently available treatments do not improve kidney 
function or prevent the initiation of dialysis/kidney replacement therapy. A 
previous study demonstrated that bardoxolone methyl improves the estimated 
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), but the study was prematurely terminated 
because of an imbalance in heart failure between treatment groups. The 
subsequent phase 2 TSUBAKI study demonstrated no incidence of heart failure and 
an improved eGFR and GFR as determined by inulin clearance in DKD patients.
METHODS: This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicentre phase 3 
study was designed to assess the efficacy and safety of bardoxolone methyl in 
DKD patients with an eGFR ≥15.0-<60.0 ml/min/1.73 m2 and a urinary 
albumin:creatinine ratio (UACR) ≤3500 mg/g but without risk factors for heart 
failure. The primary endpoint is the time to onset of a ≥30% decrease in the 
eGFR or ESKD. Randomized patients (1:1) have been under treatment with 
once-daily oral bardoxolone methyl (5, 10 or 15 mg by intrapatient dose 
adjustment) or placebo for at least 3 years.
RESULTS: The mean age of the 1013 patients is 65.9 years, 21.5% are female, the 
mean eGFR is 37.84 ml/min/1.73 m2 and the median UACR is 351.80 mg/g.
CONCLUSIONS: Appropriate patients are enrolled in this study. This study will 
investigate the long-term efficacy and safety of bardoxolone methyl in DKD 
patients covering a wider range of eGFR (≥15.0-<60.0 ml/min/1.73 m2) and 
albuminuria (≤3500 mg/g) compared with previous studies.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfac242
PMCID: PMC10157761
PMID: 36002026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.N. has received research grants, consulting 
fees and lecture fees from Kyowa Kirin and is vice president of the Japanese 
Society of Internal Medicine, president of the Asian Pacific Society of 
Nephrology and president-elect of the International Society of Nephrology. H.T., 
T.I., K.M. and M.K. are employees of Kyowa Kirin. Y.S. received grants from 
Kyowa Kirin during the study and has received honoraria from Kyowa Kirin. H.W. 
has received institutional grants from Takeda, Boehringer Ingelheim, Kissei, 
Novo Nordisk, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Lifescan Japan, Sumitomo Dainippon, Kyowa Kirin 
and Merck Sharp & Dohme; has received honoraria from Mitsubishi Tanabe, Sumitomo 
Dainippon, Sanwa Kagaku, Takeda, Sanofi, Kowa, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Eli Lilly and Novo Nordisk; and is a board member of the Japanese 
Diabetes Society. T.W. has received grants from Shiseido, Kyowa Kirin, Astellas, 
Chugai, Daiichi Sankyo, Kissei, Kowa, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Asahi Kasei Pharma, 
Mochida, Takeda, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Otsuka, Sanofi, Terumo, Torii and 
Hayashidera Medinol as well as honoraria from Astellas, AstraZeneca, Baxter, 
Bayer Yakuhin, Chugai, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly Japan, Kissei, Kowa, Kyowa 
Kirin, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Miyarisan, Takeda, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Nippon 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Ono, Otsuka, Sanofi, Sanwa Kagaku, Taisho Pharma, Teijin 
Pharma, Terumo, Torii, Vifor (International) AG and Fujirebio. K.U. has received 
honoraria from Takeda, Sumitomo Dainippon, Novo Nordisk and Mitsubishi Tanabe. 
N.K. has received consulting fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim and 
Kyowa Kirin; has received honoraria from Kyowa Kirin, AstraZeneca, Otsuka, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Astellas, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis and Daiichi Sankyo; 
and has a leadership or fiduciary role in other boards for AstraZeneca, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis and Gilead Sciences. T.K. has 
received grants from Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly Japan, Kyowa Kirin, 
Merck Sharp & Dohme, Daiichi Sankyo, Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, Takeda, Astellas, 
Ono, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Sumitomo Dainippon and Asahi Mutual Life Insurance 
Company and has received honoraria from Merck Sharp & Dohme, Takeda, Mitsubishi 
Tanabe, Astellas, Abbott Japan, Terumo, Teijin Pharma, Ono, AstraZeneca, 
Sumitomo Dainippon, Sanofi, Eli Lilly Japan, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, Novo 
Nordisk, Bayer Holding, Novartis, Daiichi Sankyo, Fujifilm Toyama Chemical, 
Kowa, Kyowa Kirin and Medtronic Japan. T.A. received grants from Kyowa Kirin 
during the study; has received consulting fees from Astellas, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Bayer, Japan Tobacco, Torii, Sanwa Kagaku, Nipro and Kyowa Kirin; and has 
received honoraria from Astellas, Bayer, Torii, Kissei, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Ono, 
Chugai, Fuso and Kyowa Kirin. The remaining authors have nothing to disclose.