---
reference_id: "PMID:28968809"
title: "The worldwide incidence and prevalence of systemic lupus erythematosus: a systematic review of epidemiological studies."
authors:
- Rees F
- Doherty M
- Grainge MJ
- Lanyon P
- Zhang W
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kex260
keywords:
- Africa/epidemiology
- Age Distribution
- Asia/epidemiology
- Australasia/epidemiology
- Central America/epidemiology
- Europe/epidemiology
- Humans
- Incidence
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/epidemiology"
- North America/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Sex Distribution
- South America/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The worldwide incidence and prevalence of systemic lupus erythematosus: a systematic review of epidemiological studies.
**Authors:** Rees F, Doherty M, Grainge MJ, Lanyon P, Zhang W
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kex260](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kex260)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2017 Nov 1;56(11):1945-1961. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/kex260.

The worldwide incidence and prevalence of systemic lupus erythematosus: a 
systematic review of epidemiological studies.

Rees F(1)(2), Doherty M(1), Grainge MJ(3), Lanyon P(1)(2), Zhang W(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Orthopaedics and Dermatology, University of 
Nottingham.
(2)Rheumatology Department, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust.
(3)Division of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, UK.

OBJECTIVES: The aim was to review the worldwide incidence and prevalence of SLE 
and variation with age, sex, ethnicity and time.
METHODS: A systematic search of MEDLINE and EMBASE search engines was carried 
out using Medical Subject Headings and keyword search terms for Systemic Lupus 
Erythematosus combined with incidence, prevalence and epidemiology in August 
2013 and updated in September 2016. Author, journal, year of publication, 
country, region, case-finding method, study period, number of incident or 
prevalent cases, incidence (per 100 000 person-years) or prevalence (per 100 000 
persons) and age, sex or ethnic group-specific incidence or prevalence were 
collected.
RESULTS: The highest estimates of incidence and prevalence of SLE were in North 
America [23.2/100 000 person-years (95% CI: 23.4, 24.0) and 241/100 000 people 
(95% CI: 130, 352), respectively]. The lowest incidences of SLE were reported in 
Africa and Ukraine (0.3/100 000 person-years), and the lowest prevalence was in 
Northern Australia (0 cases in a sample of 847 people). Women were more 
frequently affected than men for every age and ethnic group. Incidence peaked in 
middle adulthood and occurred later for men. People of Black ethnicity had the 
highest incidence and prevalence of SLE, whereas those with White ethnicity had 
the lowest incidence and prevalence. There appeared to be an increasing trend of 
SLE prevalence with time.
CONCLUSION: There are worldwide differences in the incidence and prevalence of 
SLE that vary with sex, age, ethnicity and time. Further study of genetic and 
environmental risk factors may explain the reasons for these differences. More 
epidemiological studies in Africa are warranted.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kex260
PMID: 28968809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]