---
reference_id: "PMID:1279661"
title: "Atelosteogenesis type II: sonographic and radiological correlation."
authors:
- Nores JA
- Rotmensch S
- Romero R
- Avila C
- Inati M
- Hobbins JC
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1002/pd.1970120907
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnostic imaging"
- "Abortion, Eugenic"
- Adult
- "Connective Tissue Diseases/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Female
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging
- Pregnancy
- Radiography
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
- alpha-Fetoproteins/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atelosteogenesis type II: sonographic and radiological correlation.
**Authors:** Nores JA, Rotmensch S, Romero R, Avila C, Inati M, Hobbins JC
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pd.1970120907](https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.1970120907)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 1992 Sep;12(9):741-53. doi: 10.1002/pd.1970120907.

Atelosteogenesis type II: sonographic and radiological correlation.

Nores JA(1), Rotmensch S, Romero R, Avila C, Inati M, Hobbins JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, CT 06510.

Atelosteogenesis type II is a lethal chondrodysplasia characterized by severe 
micromelia, spinal abnormalities, talipes equinovarus, and abducted thumbs and 
toes. We present a case diagnosed at 21 weeks of gestation in which antenatal 
sonographic and post-mortem radiological findings were correlated. The patient 
had a recurrence of this disorder in a subsequent pregnancy which was terminated 
at 15 weeks, supporting previous reports of an autosomal recessive inheritance 
pattern. The feasibility of diagnosing the following morphological features by 
prenatal ultrasonography is demonstrated: coronal clefts of the vertebral 
bodies, metaphyseal and epiphyseal abnormalities, spinal deviations such as 
cervical kyphosis and a horizontal sacrum, additional ossification centres in 
the pelvis, and preaxial deviation of the thumbs and toes. The differential 
diagnosis of this disorder from other skeletal dysplasias with similar features 
is discussed.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.1970120907
PMID: 1279661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]