---
reference_id: "PMID:24615633"
title: Rett syndrome and MeCP2.
authors:
- Liyanage VR
- Rastegar M
journal: Neuromolecular Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s12017-014-8295-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rett syndrome and MeCP2.
**Authors:** Liyanage VR, Rastegar M
**Journal:** Neuromolecular Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12017-014-8295-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12017-014-8295-9)

## Content

1. Neuromolecular Med. 2014 Jun;16(2):231-64. doi: 10.1007/s12017-014-8295-9.
Epub  2014 Mar 11.

Rett syndrome and MeCP2.

Liyanage VR(1), Rastegar M.

Author information:
(1)Regenerative Medicine Program, Department of Biochemistry and Medical 
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, 745 Bannatyne Avenue, Rm. 
627, Basic Medical Sciences Bldg., Winnipeg, MB, R3E 0J9, Canada.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe and progressive neurological disorder, which 
mainly affects young females. Mutations of the methyl-CpG binding protein 2 
(MECP2) gene are the most prevalent cause of classical RTT cases. MECP2 
mutations or altered expression are also associated with a spectrum of 
neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism spectrum disorders with recent links 
to fetal alcohol spectrum disorders. Collectively, MeCP2 relation to these 
neurodevelopmental disorders highlights the importance of understanding the 
molecular mechanisms by which MeCP2 impacts brain development, mental 
conditions, and compromised brain function. Since MECP2 mutations were 
discovered to be the primary cause of RTT, a significant progress has been made 
in the MeCP2 research, with respect to the expression, function and regulation 
of MeCP2 in the brain and its contribution in RTT pathogenesis. To date, there 
have been intensive efforts in designing effective therapeutic strategies for 
RTT benefiting from mouse models and cells collected from RTT patients. Despite 
significant progress in MeCP2 research over the last few decades, there is still 
a knowledge gap between the in vitro and in vivo research findings and 
translating these findings into effective therapeutic interventions in human RTT 
patients. In this review, we will provide a synopsis of Rett syndrome as a 
severe neurological disorder and will discuss the role of MeCP2 in RTT 
pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1007/s12017-014-8295-9
PMCID: PMC5798978
PMID: 24615633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None.