---
reference_id: "PMID:26318292"
title: Metabolic alterations caused by HNF1β expression in ovarian clear cell carcinoma contribute to cell survival.
authors:
- Amano Y
- Mandai M
- Yamaguchi K
- Matsumura N
- Kharma B
- Baba T
- Abiko K
- Hamanishi J
- Yoshioka Y
- Konishi I
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2015'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4692
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma, Clear Cell/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Basic/genetics, metabolism"
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Neutral/genetics, metabolism"
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- "Blotting, Western"
- Cell Hypoxia
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cell Proliferation/drug effects, genetics"
- Cell Survival/genetics
- Cisplatin/pharmacology
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling/methods
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Glutathione/metabolism
- Glutathione Disulfide/metabolism
- Glycolysis/genetics
- "Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Metabolome
- Metabolomics/methods
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- RNA Interference
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metabolic alterations caused by HNF1β expression in ovarian clear cell carcinoma contribute to cell survival.
**Authors:** Amano Y, Mandai M, Yamaguchi K, Matsumura N, Kharma B, Baba T, Abiko K, Hamanishi J, Yoshioka Y, Konishi I
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2015)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.4692](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.4692)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):26002-17. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4692.

Metabolic alterations caused by HNF1β expression in ovarian clear cell carcinoma
contribute to cell survival.

Amano Y(1), Mandai M(1)(2), Yamaguchi K(1), Matsumura N(1), Kharma B(1), Baba
T(1), Abiko K(1), Hamanishi J(1), Yoshioka Y(1), Konishi I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kinki University Faculty of
Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Japan.

HNF1β is expressed exclusively in ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) and not in
other ovarian cancers, regarded as a hallmark of this tumor. This implies its
central role in the unique character of OCCC, including resistance to
chemotherapy, but its exact role and influence in cancer biology or the
molecular bases of its function are largely unknown. Using comprehensive
metabolome analysis of HNF1β_shRNA-stable cell lines, we show here that HNF1β
drastically alters intracellular metabolism, especially in direction to enhance
aerobic glycolysis, so called the "Warburg effect". The consequence of the
metabolic change contributed cell survival under stresses such as hypoxia and
chemo-reagent, only when sufficient glucose supply was available. Augmented cell
survival was based on the reduced ROS activity derived from metabolic alteration
such as shift from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis and increased
intracellular anti-oxidant, glutathione (GSH). One of the cystine transporters,
rBAT is likely to play a major role in this GSH increase. These data suggest
that HNF1β, possibly induced by stressful microenvironment in the endometriotic
cyst, confers survival advantage to the epithelial cells, which leads to the
occurrence of OCCC, a chemo-resistant phenotype of ovarian cancer.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.4692
PMCID: PMC4694881
PMID: 26318292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST None.
