---
reference_id: "PMID:34454779"
title: Analysis of the clinical features of Japanese patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia.
authors:
- Chiyonobu K
- Xu Y
- Feng G
- Saso S
- Ogawa S
- Ikejiri M
- Abo M
- Kondo M
- Gotoh S
- Kubo H
- Hosoki K
- Nagao M
- Fujisawa T
- Nakatani K
- Takeuchi K
journal: Auris Nasus Larynx
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2021.08.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of the clinical features of Japanese patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Chiyonobu K, Xu Y, Feng G, Saso S, Ogawa S, Ikejiri M, Abo M, Kondo M, Gotoh S, Kubo H, Hosoki K, Nagao M, Fujisawa T, Nakatani K, Takeuchi K
**Journal:** Auris Nasus Larynx (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anl.2021.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anl.2021.08.003)

## Content

1. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2022 Apr;49(2):248-257. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2021.08.003.
Epub  2021 Aug 26.

Analysis of the clinical features of Japanese patients with primary ciliary 
dyskinesia.

Chiyonobu K(1), Xu Y(1), Feng G(1), Saso S(2), Ogawa S(3), Ikejiri M(4), Abo 
M(5), Kondo M(6), Gotoh S(7), Kubo H(1), Hosoki K(8), Nagao M(9), Fujisawa T(9), 
Nakatani K(10), Takeuchi K(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, Mie University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Tsu, Mie, Japan.
(2)School of Medicine, Mie University, Tsu, Mie, Japan.
(3)Electron Microscopy Research Center, Mie University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Tsu, Mie, Japan.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Mie University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Tsu, Mie, Japan.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Women's Medical University, 
Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Drug Discovery for Lung Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.
(8)Department of Medicine, Immunology Allergy and Rheumatology, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(9)Institute for Clinical Research, National Hospital Organization Mie National 
Hospital, Tsu, Mie, Japan.
(10)Department of Genomic Medicine, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Tsu, Mie, Japan.
(11)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, Mie University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Tsu, Mie, Japan. Electronic address: 
kazuhiko@clin.medic.mie-u.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare hereditary disease. Most 
reports of PCD in Japan are case reports, and clinical analysis has not been 
performed. Differences in the causative genes might affect the clinical features 
in different ethnic groups. The purpose of this study was to clarify the 
clinical features of Japanese patients with PCD.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective chart review of PCD patients seen at Mie 
University Hospital and patients whose blood samples were sent to us for genetic 
analysis from 2011 to 2020. Data on the following items were collected and 
analyzed: age at first visit to the hospital, age at diagnosis of PCD, process 
of referral to our facility, chief complaint, situs status, PrImary CiliARy 
DyskinesiA Rule (PICADAR) score, nasal nitric oxide concentration, otoscopic 
findings, rhinoscopic findings, and paranasal computed tomography scan findings.
RESULTS: Sixty-seven patients (24 male, 43 female) were diagnosed with PCD 
during the study period. Age at diagnosis ranged from 2 months to 69 years 
(median, 17 years). Respiratory symptoms (77%) were the most common complaint, 
followed by nasal (15%) and aural (8%) symptoms. Situs inversus was present in 
17 (25%) cases. Only 2 cases had congenital cardiac anomalies. The mean PICADAR 
score was 7.3 (range, 3-14) points. Approximately 50% of tympanic membranes 
showed retraction, suggesting otitis media with effusion. The mean Lund-Mackay 
score was 12.8 (range, 7-17) points, suggesting that the radiographic findings 
were not always severe. There was no significant difference in the total 
Lund-Mackay score between patients with and without situs inversus (12.7 vs. 
12.6, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Situs inversus was present in 25% of Japanese PCD patients, which is 
much lower than observed in other countries. This is a result of differences in 
the major disease-causing genes. The general rule that "situs inversus is 
observed in approximately 50% of PCD patients" cannot be applied, at least, in 
Japanese PCD patients.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2021.08.003
PMID: 34454779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]