---
reference_id: "PMID:23184146"
title: GLRB is the third major gene of effect in hyperekplexia.
authors:
- Chung SK
- Bode A
- Cushion TD
- Thomas RH
- Hunt C
- Wood SE
- Pickrell WO
- Drew CJ
- Yamashita S
- Shiang R
- Leiz S
- Longardt AC
- Raile V
- Weschke B
- Puri RD
- Verma IC
- Harvey RJ
- Ratnasinghe DD
- Parker M
- Rittey C
- Masri A
- Lingappa L
- Howell OW
- Vanbellinghen JF
- Mullins JG
- Lynch JW
- Rees MI
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds498
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Epilepsy/genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics, physiopathology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Glycine Plasma Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscle Hypertonia/genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Protein Conformation
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
- "Receptors, Glycine/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Reflex, Abnormal/genetics"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GLRB is the third major gene of effect in hyperekplexia.
**Authors:** Chung SK, Bode A, Cushion TD, Thomas RH, Hunt C, Wood SE, Pickrell WO, Drew CJ, Yamashita S, Shiang R, Leiz S, Longardt AC, Raile V, Weschke B, Puri RD, Verma IC, Harvey RJ, Ratnasinghe DD, Parker M, Rittey C, Masri A, Lingappa L, Howell OW, Vanbellinghen JF, Mullins JG, Lynch JW, Rees MI
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/dds498](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds498)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Mar 1;22(5):927-40. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds498. Epub 2012 Nov
 25.

GLRB is the third major gene of effect in hyperekplexia.

Chung SK(1), Bode A, Cushion TD, Thomas RH, Hunt C, Wood SE, Pickrell WO, Drew
CJ, Yamashita S, Shiang R, Leiz S, Longardt AC, Raile V, Weschke B, Puri RD,
Verma IC, Harvey RJ, Ratnasinghe DD, Parker M, Rittey C, Masri A, Lingappa L,
Howell OW, Vanbellinghen JF, Mullins JG, Lynch JW, Rees MI.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Research and Molecular Neuroscience, Institute of Life Science,
Swansea University, Swansea SA2 8PP, UK. s.chung@swansea.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jun 15;22(12):2552. Longhardt, Ann-Carolyn [corrected to
Longardt, Ann-Carolyn].

Glycinergic neurotransmission is a major inhibitory influence in the CNS and its
disruption triggers a paediatric and adult startle disorder, hyperekplexia. The
postsynaptic α(1)-subunit (GLRA1) of the inhibitory glycine receptor (GlyR) and
the cognate presynaptic glycine transporter (SLC6A5/GlyT2) are well-established
genes of effect in hyperekplexia. Nevertheless, 52% of cases (117 from 232)
remain gene negative and unexplained. Ligand-gated heteropentameric GlyRs form
chloride ion channels that contain the α(1) and β-subunits (GLRB) in a 2α(1):3β
configuration and they form the predominant population of GlyRs in the postnatal
and adult human brain, brainstem and spinal cord. We screened GLRB through 117
GLRA1- and SLC6A5-negative hyperekplexia patients using a multiplex-polymerase
chain reaction and Sanger sequencing approach. The screening identified
recessive and dominant GLRB variants in 12 unrelated hyperekplexia probands.
This primarily yielded homozygous null mutations, with nonsense (n = 3), small
indel (n = 1), a large 95 kb deletion (n = 1), frameshifts (n = 1) and one
recurrent splicing variant found in four cases. A further three cases were found
with two homozygous and one dominant GLRB missense mutations. We provide strong
evidence for the pathogenicity of GLRB mutations using splicing assays, deletion
mapping, cell-surface biotinylation, expression studies and molecular modelling.
This study describes the definitive assignment of GLRB as the third major gene
for hyperekplexia and impacts on the genetic stratification and biological
causation of this neonatal/paediatric disorder. Driven principally by
consanguineous homozygosity of GLRB mutations, the study reveals long-term
additive phenotypic outcomes for affected cases such as severe apnoea attacks,
learning difficulties and developmental delay.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds498
PMID: 23184146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
