---
reference_id: "PMID:33143726"
title: "SHOX deficiency in children with growth impairment: evaluation of known and new auxological and radiological indicators."
authors:
- Vannelli S
- Baffico M
- Buganza R
- Verna F
- Vinci G
- Tessaris D
- Di Rosa G
- Borraccino A
- de Sanctis L
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-020-00927-z
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Arm Bones/diagnostic imaging
- Body Height
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Growth Disorders/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Short Stature Homeobox Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SHOX deficiency in children with growth impairment: evaluation of known and new auxological and radiological indicators.
**Authors:** Vannelli S, Baffico M, Buganza R, Verna F, Vinci G, Tessaris D, Di Rosa G, Borraccino A, de Sanctis L
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-020-00927-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-020-00927-z)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2020 Nov 3;46(1):163. doi: 10.1186/s13052-020-00927-z.

SHOX deficiency in children with growth impairment: evaluation of known and new
auxological and radiological indicators.

Vannelli S(1)(2), Baffico M(3), Buganza R(4)(5)(6), Verna F(4)(5), Vinci
G(4)(5), Tessaris D(4)(5), Di Rosa G(7), Borraccino A(5), de Sanctis L(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology, Regina Margherita Children's Hospital, Turin, Italy.
silvia.vannelli@unito.it.
(2)Department of Public Health and Pediatric Sciences, University of Turin,
Turin, Italy. silvia.vannelli@unito.it.
(3)Laboratory of Human Genetics, Galliera Hospitals, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Pediatric Endocrinology, Regina Margherita Children's Hospital, Turin, Italy.
(5)Department of Public Health and Pediatric Sciences, University of Turin,
Turin, Italy.
(6)Postgraduate School of Pediatrics, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(7)Pediatric Radiology, Regina Margherita Children's Hospital, Turin, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The phenotypic features of SHOX deficiency (SHOX-D) are highly
variable and can be very mild, especially in young children. The aim of this
retrospective study was to evaluate auxological and radiological indicators that
could be predictive of SHOX-D in children.
METHODS: Molecular analysis of the SHOX gene was performed in 296 subjects with
growth impairment or skeletal disproportion, without alternative diagnosis.
Auxological variables and radiographs of the hand, wrist and forearm were
evaluated.
RESULTS: SHOX mutations (88% inherited, 12% de novo) were identified in 52
subjects. The most predictive auxological indicators of SHOX-D were an increased
sitting height/height ratio and a decreased arm span/height ratio. The convexity
of distal radial metaphysis at X-ray, not yet reported in literature, was also
found to be predictive of SHOX-D. In young children, stratification of data by
bone age also highlighted ulnar tilt, lucency of the ulnar border of the distal
radius and enlarged radius as the radiological signs most related to SHOX-D .
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, the analysis of auxological and radiological
indicators in SHOX-D children allowed to identify an additional early
radiological sign and underlines the importance of family auxological
evaluation.

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-020-00927-z
PMCID: PMC7640664
PMID: 33143726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
