---
reference_id: "PMID:18834967"
title: "Mutations in CHD7, encoding a chromatin-remodeling protein, cause idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and Kallmann syndrome."
authors:
- Kim HG
- Kurth I
- Lan F
- Meliciani I
- Wenzel W
- Eom SH
- Kang GB
- Rosenberger G
- Tekin M
- Ozata M
- Bick DP
- Sherins RJ
- Walker SL
- Shi Y
- Gusella JF
- Layman LC
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.09.005
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Chromatin/chemistry
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Exons
- Female
- Humans
- Hypogonadism/genetics
- Kallmann Syndrome/genetics
- Male
- Molecular Conformation
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in CHD7, encoding a chromatin-remodeling protein, cause idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and Kallmann syndrome.
**Authors:** Kim HG, Kurth I, Lan F, Meliciani I, Wenzel W, Eom SH, Kang GB, Rosenberger G, Tekin M, Ozata M, Bick DP, Sherins RJ, Walker SL, Shi Y, Gusella JF, Layman LC
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.09.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.09.005)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Oct;83(4):511-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.09.005. Epub
2008  Oct 2.

Mutations in CHD7, encoding a chromatin-remodeling protein, cause idiopathic 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and Kallmann syndrome.

Kim HG(1), Kurth I, Lan F, Meliciani I, Wenzel W, Eom SH, Kang GB, Rosenberger 
G, Tekin M, Ozata M, Bick DP, Sherins RJ, Walker SL, Shi Y, Gusella JF, Layman 
LC.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Center for Human Genetic Research, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, and Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

CHARGE syndrome and Kallmann syndrome (KS) are two distinct developmental 
disorders sharing overlapping features of impaired olfaction and hypogonadism. 
KS is a genetically heterogeneous disorder consisting of idiopathic 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) and anosmia, and is most commonly due to 
KAL1 or FGFR1 mutations. CHARGE syndrome, a multisystem autosomal-dominant 
disorder, is caused by CHD7 mutations. We hypothesized that CHD7 would be 
involved in the pathogenesis of IHH and KS (IHH/KS) without the CHARGE phenotype 
and that IHH/KS represents a milder allelic variant of CHARGE syndrome. Mutation 
screening of the 37 protein-coding exons of CHD7 was performed in 101 IHH/KS 
patients without a CHARGE phenotype. In an additional 96 IHH/KS patients, exons 
6-10, encoding the conserved chromodomains, were sequenced. RT-PCR, SIFT, 
protein-structure analysis, and in situ hybridization were performed for 
additional supportive evidence. Seven heterozygous mutations, two splice and 
five missense, which were absent in > or = 180 controls, were identified in 
three sporadic KS and four sporadic normosmic IHH patients. Three mutations 
affect chromodomains critical for proper CHD7 function in chromatin remodeling 
and transcriptional regulation, whereas the other four affect conserved 
residues, suggesting that they are deleterious. CHD7's role is further 
corroborated by specific expression in IHH/KS-relevant tissues and appropriate 
developmental expression. Sporadic CHD7 mutations occur in 6% of IHH/KS 
patients. CHD7 represents the first identified chromatin-remodeling protein with 
a role in human puberty and the second gene to cause both normosmic IHH and KS 
in humans. Our findings indicate that both normosmic IHH and KS are mild allelic 
variants of CHARGE syndrome and are caused by CHD7 mutations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.09.005
PMCID: PMC2561938
PMID: 18834967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]