---
reference_id: "PMID:20818854"
title: Bone marrow transplantation for recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.
authors:
- Wagner JE
- Ishida-Yamamoto A
- McGrath JA
- Hordinsky M
- Keene DR
- Woodley DT
- Chen M
- Riddle MJ
- Osborn MJ
- Lund T
- Dolan M
- Blazar BR
- Tolar J
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0910501
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Bone Marrow Transplantation/adverse effects
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Collagen Type VII/genetics, immunology, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Female
- Fetal Blood/transplantation
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Graft Rejection
- Humans
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission"
- Reticulin/ultrastructure
- "Skin/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- Transplantation Chimera
- Transplantation Conditioning/adverse effects
- "Transplantation, Homologous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone marrow transplantation for recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.
**Authors:** Wagner JE, Ishida-Yamamoto A, McGrath JA, Hordinsky M, Keene DR, Woodley DT, Chen M, Riddle MJ, Osborn MJ, Lund T, Dolan M, Blazar BR, Tolar J
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa0910501](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0910501)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2010 Aug 12;363(7):629-39. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0910501.

Bone marrow transplantation for recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.

Wagner JE(1), Ishida-Yamamoto A, McGrath JA, Hordinsky M, Keene DR, Woodley DT, 
Chen M, Riddle MJ, Osborn MJ, Lund T, Dolan M, Blazar BR, Tolar J.

Author information:
(1)Blood and Marrow Transplant Program, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. wagne002@umn.edu

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Sep 30;363(14):1383. Woodley, David T [added]; Chen, Mei 
[added].

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Aug 12;363(7):680-2. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1004319.

BACKGROUND: Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa is an incurable, often 
fatal mucocutaneous blistering disease caused by mutations in COL7A1, the gene 
encoding type VII collagen (C7). On the basis of preclinical data showing 
biochemical correction and prolonged survival in col7 −/− mice, we hypothesized 
that allogeneic marrow contains stem cells capable of ameliorating the 
manifestations of recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in humans.
METHODS: Between October 2007 and August 2009, we treated seven children who had 
recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa with immunomyeloablative chemotherapy 
and allogeneic stem-cell transplantation. We assessed C7 expression by means of 
immunofluorescence staining and used transmission electron microscopy to 
visualize anchoring fibrils. We measured chimerism by means of competitive 
polymerase-chain-reaction assay, and documented blister formation and wound 
healing with the use of digital photography.
RESULTS: One patient died of cardiomyopathy before transplantation. Of the 
remaining six patients, one had severe regimen-related cutaneous toxicity, with 
all having improved wound healing and a reduction in blister formation between 
30 and 130 days after transplantation. We observed increased C7 deposition at 
the dermal-epidermal junction in five of the six recipients, albeit without 
normalization of anchoring fibrils. Five recipients were alive 130 to 799 days 
after transplantation; one died at 183 days as a consequence of graft rejection 
and infection. The six recipients had substantial proportions of donor cells in 
the skin, and none had detectable anti-C7 antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased C7 deposition and a sustained presence of donor cells 
were found in the skin of children with recessive dystrophic epidermolysis 
bullosa after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Further studies are needed 
to assess the long-term risks and benefits of such therapy in patients with this 
disorder. (Funded by the National Institutes of Health; ClinicalTrials.gov 
number, NCT00478244.)

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0910501
PMCID: PMC2967187
PMID: 20818854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]