---
reference_id: "PMID:39092058"
title: "Clinical pattern, neuroimaging findings and outcome of Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis in children: A retrospective study."
authors:
- Mukhtiar K
- Raza M
- Ishaque S
- Maha Q
- Noor A
journal: Pak J Med Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.12669/pjms.40.7.8015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical pattern, neuroimaging findings and outcome of Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis in children: A retrospective study.
**Authors:** Mukhtiar K, Raza M, Ishaque S, Maha Q, Noor A
**Journal:** Pak J Med Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.12669/pjms.40.7.8015](https://doi.org/10.12669/pjms.40.7.8015)

## Content

1. Pak J Med Sci. 2024 Aug;40(7):1479-1484. doi: 10.12669/pjms.40.7.8015.

Clinical pattern, neuroimaging findings and outcome of Acute Disseminated 
Encephalomyelitis in children: A retrospective study.

Mukhtiar K(1), Raza M(2), Ishaque S(3), Maha Q(4), Noor A(5).

Author information:
(1)Khairunnisa Mukhtiar, Assistant Professor, Department of Pediatrics & Child 
Health, Section of Pediatric Neurology, Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(2)Mohammad Raza, Instructor, Department of Pediatrics & Child Health, Section 
of Pediatric Neurology, Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.
(3)Sidra Ishaque, Assistant Professor, Department of Pediatrics & Child Health, 
Section of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Aga Khan University Hospital, 
Karachi, Pakistan.
(4)Quratulain Maha, Intern, Department of Pediatrics & Child Health, Aga Khan 
University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.
(5)Ayesha Noor Intern, Department of Pediatrics & Child Health, Aga Khan 
University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the clinical spectrum, neuroimaging findings, and 
outcome of Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM) in children.
METHOD: We conducted a descriptive cross sectional study of all children aged 6 
months to 18 years, diagnosed with ADEM at Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi 
from January 2018 till December 2022.
RESULTS: This retrospective study enrolled 30 cases of ADEM, with a mean age of 
6.43 ± 4.079, including 13 males and 17 females. The average hospital stay was 
7.29 ± 4.379 days. The most common clinical features were fever, headache, and 
altered consciousness, while motor deficit was observed in 15 (53.5%) patients. 
Abnormal cerebrospinal fluid was found in 14 (46.6%) patients. Brain MRI 
identified bilateral and multifocal lesions in 22 (78.6%) patients, with 
brainstem lesions detected in 7 (25%) patients. Treatment included IV 
methylprednisolone (22; 73%), IVIG (9; 30%), or both (6; 20%). Clinical 
improvement was observed in 25 (89.3%) patients, with residual weakness present 
in eight (26%) patients at discharge. There was one reported death. Long-term 
complications included motor deficits, seizures, poor scholastic performance, 
and behavioral issues.
CONCLUSION: The clinical presentation of ADEM is variable, but the most common 
symptoms are fever, headache, and altered consciousness. Despite generally 
favorable outcome, long-term monitoring revealed that patients may experience 
motor deficits, seizures, cognitive impairment, and academic difficulties.

Copyright: © Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.12669/pjms.40.7.8015
PMCID: PMC11255823
PMID: 39092058

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests: None.