---
reference_id: "PMID:17390259"
title: Huntington's Disease.
authors:
- Walker FO
journal: Semin Neurol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1055/s-2007-971176
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington's Disease.
**Authors:** Walker FO
**Journal:** Semin Neurol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2007-971176](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2007-971176)

## Content

1. Semin Neurol. 2007 Apr;27(2):143-50. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-971176.

Huntington's Disease.

Walker FO(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157-1078, USA.

Huntington's disease may present at any age, but most typically manifests 
between the ages of 35 and 45 years as a slowly progressive neurodegenerative 
movement disorder with cognitive and behavioral impairment. It is an 
autosomal-dominant disorder that has a substantial impact on family structure 
and dynamics in terms of providing care for affected family members and, for the 
offspring of an affected parent, dealing with at-risk status. Therapy that slows 
the progressive neuronal dysfunction or degeneration is unavailable, so 
pharmacotherapy is currently aimed primarily at managing behavioral and 
psychiatric symptoms, and, in selected cases, controlling severe chorea. 
Effective intervention by clinicians is possible, however, in terms of providing 
patients and families with accurate information about the disease, counseling 
them about availability of genetic testing at specialized centers, and in giving 
them sound advice regarding work, driving, relationships, finances, research 
participation, and support groups.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-971176
PMID: 17390259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]