---
reference_id: "PMID:6129186"
title: Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins.
authors:
- Pinchera A
- Fenzi GF
- Macchia E
- Bartalena L
- Mariotti S
- Monzani F
journal: Horm Res
year: '1982'
doi: 10.1159/000179520
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins.
**Authors:** Pinchera A, Fenzi GF, Macchia E, Bartalena L, Mariotti S, Monzani F
**Journal:** Horm Res (1982)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000179520](https://doi.org/10.1159/000179520)

## Content

1. Horm Res. 1982;16(5):317-28. doi: 10.1159/000179520.

Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins.

Pinchera A, Fenzi GF, Macchia E, Bartalena L, Mariotti S, Monzani F.

The presence of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins in patients with Graves' 
disease is well established. Considerable evidence has accumulated that these 
immunoglobulins are antibodies to a thyroid plasma membrane antigen whose 
precise nature remains to be identified. The question whether the antigen is 
related to the TSH receptor is still debated. The causative role of 
thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins in the hyperthyroidism of Graves' disease is 
widely recognized. The use of human specific stimulation assays has circumvented 
the objection of the relatively low frequency of 
long-acting-thyroid-stimulator-(LATS)-positive patients. Individual variations 
in the thyroid response may account for the lack of correlation between the 
levels of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins and most parameters of thyroid 
function. In this respect, the interference of nonstimulatory thyroid antibodies 
and of other autoimmune mechanisms may be of importance. An important clinical 
implication of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin determinations is their value 
in predicting the relapse of hyperthyroidism in treated patients. This clinical 
application has been so far limited by the technical difficulties of the assays. 
This emphasizes the need for a simple and reliable test, which can be used for 
routine measurements of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins.

DOI: 10.1159/000179520
PMID: 6129186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]