---
reference_id: "PMID:17901201"
title: Space flight alters bacterial gene expression and virulence and reveals a role for global regulator Hfq.
authors:
- Wilson JW
- Ott CM
- Höner zu Bentrup K
- Ramamurthy R
- Quick L
- Porwollik S
- Cheng P
- McClelland M
- Tsaprailis G
- Radabaugh T
- Hunt A
- Fernandez D
- Richter E
- Shah M
- Kilcoyne M
- Joshi L
- Nelman-Gonzalez M
- Hing S
- Parra M
- Dumars P
- Norwood K
- Bober R
- Devich J
- Ruggles A
- Goulart C
- Rupert M
- Stodieck L
- Stafford P
- Catella L
- Schurr MJ
- Buchanan K
- Morici L
- McCracken J
- Allen P
- Baker-Coleman C
- Hammond T
- Vogel J
- Nelson R
- Pierson DL
- Stefanyshyn-Piper HM
- Nickerson CA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0707155104
keywords:
- Animals
- "Biofilms/growth & development"
- Female
- Gene Expression
- "Genes, Bacterial"
- Host Factor 1 Protein/physiology
- Iron/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Proteomics
- Regulon
- "Salmonella Infections, Animal/etiology"
- "Salmonella typhimurium/genetics, pathogenicity, physiology"
- Space Flight
- Virulence
- Weightlessness Simulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Space flight alters bacterial gene expression and virulence and reveals a role for global regulator Hfq.
**Authors:** Wilson JW, Ott CM, Höner zu Bentrup K, Ramamurthy R, Quick L, Porwollik S, Cheng P, McClelland M, Tsaprailis G, Radabaugh T, Hunt A, Fernandez D, Richter E, Shah M, Kilcoyne M, Joshi L, Nelman-Gonzalez M, Hing S, Parra M, Dumars P, Norwood K, Bober R, Devich J, Ruggles A, Goulart C, Rupert M, Stodieck L, Stafford P, Catella L, Schurr MJ, Buchanan K, Morici L, McCracken J, Allen P, Baker-Coleman C, Hammond T, Vogel J, Nelson R, Pierson DL, Stefanyshyn-Piper HM, Nickerson CA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0707155104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0707155104)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Oct 9;104(41):16299-304. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0707155104. Epub 2007 Sep 27.

Space flight alters bacterial gene expression and virulence and reveals a role 
for global regulator Hfq.

Wilson JW(1), Ott CM, Höner zu Bentrup K, Ramamurthy R, Quick L, Porwollik S, 
Cheng P, McClelland M, Tsaprailis G, Radabaugh T, Hunt A, Fernandez D, Richter 
E, Shah M, Kilcoyne M, Joshi L, Nelman-Gonzalez M, Hing S, Parra M, Dumars P, 
Norwood K, Bober R, Devich J, Ruggles A, Goulart C, Rupert M, Stodieck L, 
Stafford P, Catella L, Schurr MJ, Buchanan K, Morici L, McCracken J, Allen P, 
Baker-Coleman C, Hammond T, Vogel J, Nelson R, Pierson DL, Stefanyshyn-Piper HM, 
Nickerson CA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, The Biodesign Institute, 
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.

A comprehensive analysis of both the molecular genetic and phenotypic responses 
of any organism to the space flight environment has never been accomplished 
because of significant technological and logistical hurdles. Moreover, the 
effects of space flight on microbial pathogenicity and associated infectious 
disease risks have not been studied. The bacterial pathogen Salmonella 
typhimurium was grown aboard Space Shuttle mission STS-115 and compared with 
identical ground control cultures. Global microarray and proteomic analyses 
revealed that 167 transcripts and 73 proteins changed expression with the 
conserved RNA-binding protein Hfq identified as a likely global regulator 
involved in the response to this environment. Hfq involvement was confirmed with 
a ground-based microgravity culture model. Space flight samples exhibited 
enhanced virulence in a murine infection model and extracellular matrix 
accumulation consistent with a biofilm. Strategies to target Hfq and related 
regulators could potentially decrease infectious disease risks during space 
flight missions and provide novel therapeutic options on Earth.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0707155104
PMCID: PMC2042201
PMID: 17901201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.