---
reference_id: "PMID:32867706"
title: "Epidemiologic, clinical, and laboratory findings of the COVID-19 in the current pandemic: systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Xie Y
- Wang Z
- Liao H
- Marley G
- Wu D
- Tang W
journal: BMC Infect Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s12879-020-05371-2
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Aged
- Betacoronavirus/physiology
- COVID-19
- Comorbidity
- "Coronavirus Infections/epidemiology, mortality, pathology, transmission"
- Cough/epidemiology
- Demography
- Disease Progression
- Dyspnea/epidemiology
- Fatigue/epidemiology
- Female
- Fever/epidemiology
- Humans
- Laboratories
- Lymphopenia/epidemiology
- Male
- Pandemics
- "Pneumonia, Viral/epidemiology, mortality, pathology, transmission"
- Respiratory Distress Syndrome/epidemiology
- Risk Factors
- SARS-CoV-2
- Sex Factors
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiologic, clinical, and laboratory findings of the COVID-19 in the current pandemic: systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Xie Y, Wang Z, Liao H, Marley G, Wu D, Tang W
**Journal:** BMC Infect Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12879-020-05371-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-020-05371-2)

## Content

1. BMC Infect Dis. 2020 Aug 31;20(1):640. doi: 10.1186/s12879-020-05371-2.

Epidemiologic, clinical, and laboratory findings of the COVID-19 in the current 
pandemic: systematic review and meta-analysis.

Xie Y(1), Wang Z(1), Liao H(1), Marley G(1)(2), Wu D(1)(3), Tang W(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Hospital of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(4)Dermatology Hospital of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. 
weimingtangscience@gmail.com.
(5)University of North Carolina Project-China, Guangzhou, China. 
weimingtangscience@gmail.com.

Update of
    Res Sq. 2020 Aug 25:rs.3.rs-28367. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-28367/v3.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has affected the world deeply, with more than 
14,000,000 people infected and nearly 600,000 deaths. This review aimed to 
summarize the epidemiologic traits, clinical spectrum, CT results and laboratory 
findings of the COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS: We scoped for relevant literatures published during 1st December 2019 
to 16th July 2020 based on three databases using English and Chinese languages. 
We reviewed and analyzed the relevant outcomes.
RESULTS: The COVID-19 pandemic was found to have a higher transmission rate 
compared to SARS and MERS and involved 4 stages of evolution. The basic 
reproduction number (R0) is 3.32 (95% CI:3.24-3.39), the incubation period was 
5.24 days (95% CI:3.97-6.50, 5 studies) on average, and the average time for 
symptoms onset varied by countries. Common clinical spectrums identified 
included fever (38.1-39.0 °C), cough and fatigue, with Acute Respiratory 
Distress Syndrome (ARDS) being the most common complication reported. Body 
temperatures above 39.0 °C, dyspnea, and anorexia were more common symptoms in 
severe patients. Aged over 65 years old, having co-morbidities, and developing 
complications were the commonest high-risk factors associated with severe 
conditions. Leucopenia and lymphopenia were the most common signs of infection 
while liver and kidney damage were rare but may cause bad outcomes for patients. 
The bilateral, multifocal Ground-Glass Opacification (GGO) on peripheral, and 
the consolidative pulmonary opacity were the most frequent CT results and the 
tendency of mortality rates differed by region.
CONCLUSIONS: We provided a bird's-eye view of the COVID-19 during the current 
pandemic, which will help better understanding the key traits of the disease. 
The findings could be used for disease's future research, control and 
prevention.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-020-05371-2
PMCID: PMC7457225
PMID: 32867706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr.Weiming Tang is the Associate Editor of this 
journal.