---
reference_id: "PMID:39817629"
title: The clinical presentation and genetic diagnosis of Tangier disease in the pediatric age group.
authors:
- Öztürk S
- Doğan ME
- Kadıoğlu Yılmaz B
- Güleç A
- Soylu Üstkoyuncu P
- Kardaş F
- Gümüş H
- Per H
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2024-0335
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Child
- Retrospective Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Male
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Tangier Disease/diagnosis, genetics"
- Prognosis
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genetic Testing
- Adolescent
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical presentation and genetic diagnosis of Tangier disease in the pediatric age group.
**Authors:** Öztürk S, Doğan ME, Kadıoğlu Yılmaz B, Güleç A, Soylu Üstkoyuncu P, Kardaş F, Gümüş H, Per H
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2024-0335](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2024-0335)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2025 Jan 16;38(3):271-278. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2024-0335. Print 2025 Mar 26.

The clinical presentation and genetic diagnosis of Tangier disease in the
pediatric age group.

Öztürk S(1), Doğan ME(2), Kadıoğlu Yılmaz B(3), Güleç A(1), Soylu Üstkoyuncu
P(4), Kardaş F(5), Gümüş H(1), Per H(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics and Child Health,
Erciyes University, Faculty of Medicine, Kayseri, Türkiye.
(2)Clinic of Medical Genetics, Kayseri City Training and Research Hospital,
Kayseri, Türkiye.
(3)Division of Pediatric Metabolism and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics and
Child Health, Selcuk University, Faculty of Medicine, Konya, Türkiye.
(4)Division of Pediatric Metabolism and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics and
Child Health, Kayseri City Training and Research Hospital, Kayseri, Türkiye.
(5)Division of Pediatric Metabolism and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics and
Child Health, Erciyes University, Faculty of Medicine, Kayseri, Türkiye.

OBJECTIVES: Tangier disease (TD) is a rare autosomal recessive condition
characterized by high-density lipoprotein (HDL) deficiency; involving symptoms
of polyneuropathy, hyperplastic orange-yellow tonsils, vision disorder, and
sudden cardiac death. The major clinical symptoms of TD may not all be
co-present. This study evaluates patients diagnosed with TD in childhood to
improve the possibility of early diagnosis of asymptomatic cases by reporting
our patients' clinical characteristics in order to minimize delayed diagnosis
and emphasize the importance of TD, easily detected by HDL measurement.
METHODS: This retrospective and cross-sectional study investigated seven
patients from three different families diagnosed with TD.
RESULTS: Four of seven patients were girls. Median age was 5.7 years at symptom
onset and 6.5 years at diagnosis. The index case presented with neuropathy
findings, and TD was diagnosed based on genetic analysis. Low lipid levels were
determined in a sibling and cousins with cardiac death and gait disturbance in
the family. TD was confirmed by genetic investigation. Our other patients were
evaluated due to anemia, thrombocytopenia, yellow-orange hypertrophy in the
tonsils, and organomegaly. Diagnosis was established with genetic analysis and
low HDL. No coronary artery disease or ocular involvement was observed in any
case.
CONCLUSIONS: All patients presenting with neuropathy and gait disorders should
undergo detailed tonsil examinations and HDL tests. Genetic analysis should be
carried out if necessary. Family screening should be recommended to patients
with consanguineous marriages after diagnosis of TD.

© 2024 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2024-0335
PMID: 39817629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
