---
reference_id: "PMID:39329978"
title: "The Potential of CRISPR/Cas9 to Circumvent the Risk Factor Neurotoxin β-N-oxalyl-L-α, β-diaminopropionic acid Limiting Wide Acceptance of the Underutilized Grass Pea (Lathyrus sativus L.)."
authors:
- Bekele-Alemu A
- Girma-Tola D
- Ligaba-Osena A
journal: Curr Issues Mol Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cimb46090626
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Potential of CRISPR/Cas9 to Circumvent the Risk Factor Neurotoxin β-N-oxalyl-L-α, β-diaminopropionic acid Limiting Wide Acceptance of the Underutilized Grass Pea (Lathyrus sativus L.).
**Authors:** Bekele-Alemu A, Girma-Tola D, Ligaba-Osena A
**Journal:** Curr Issues Mol Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cimb46090626](https://doi.org/10.3390/cimb46090626)

## Content

1. Curr Issues Mol Biol. 2024 Sep 21;46(9):10570-10589. doi:
10.3390/cimb46090626.

The Potential of CRISPR/Cas9 to Circumvent the Risk Factor Neurotoxin 
β-N-oxalyl-L-α, β-diaminopropionic acid Limiting Wide Acceptance of the 
Underutilized Grass Pea (Lathyrus sativus L.).

Bekele-Alemu A(1), Girma-Tola D(2), Ligaba-Osena A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Plant Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Department of 
Biology, University of North Carolina Greensboro, Greensboro, NC 27412, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Salale University, Fitche 
P.O. Box 245, Ethiopia.

Grass pea (Lathyrus sativus L.) is a protein-rich crop that is resilient to 
various abiotic stresses, including drought. However, it is not cultivated 
widely for human consumption due to the neurotoxin β-N-oxalyl-L-α, 
β-diaminopropionic acid (β-ODAP) and its association with neurolathyrism. Though 
some varieties with low β-ODAP have been developed through classical breeding, 
the β-ODAP content is increasing due to genotype x environment interactions. 
This review covers grass pea nutritional quality, β-ODAP biosynthesis, mechanism 
of paralysis, traditional ways to reduce β-ODAP, candidate genes for boosting 
sulfur-containing amino acids, and the potential and targets of gene editing to 
reduce β-ODAP content. Recently, two key enzymes (β-ODAP synthase and 
β-cyanoalanine synthase) have been identified in the biosynthetic pathway of 
β-ODAP. We proposed four strategies through which the genes encoding these 
enzymes can be targeted and suppressed using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. Compared 
to its homology in Medicago truncatula, the grass pea β-ODAP synthase gene 
sequence and β-cyanoalanine synthase showed 62.9% and 95% similarity, 
respectively. The β-ODAP synthase converts the final intermediate L-DAPA into 
toxic β-ODAP, whist β-cyanoalanine synthase converts O-Acetylserine into 
β-isoxazolin-5-on-2-yl-alanine. Since grass pea is low in methionine and 
cysteine amino acids, improvement of these amino acids is also needed to boost 
its protein content. This review contains useful resources for grass pea 
improvement while also offering potential gene editing strategies to lower 
β-ODAP levels.

DOI: 10.3390/cimb46090626
PMCID: PMC11430654
PMID: 39329978

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.