---
reference_id: "PMID:34747551"
title: "Acute flaccid myelitis and Guillain-Barré syndrome in children: A comparative study with evaluation of diagnostic criteria."
authors:
- Helfferich J
- Roodbol J
- de Wit MC
- Brouwer OF
- Jacobs BC
- 2016 Enterovirus D68 Acute Flaccid Myelitis Working Group and the Dutch Pediatric GBS Study Group
journal: Eur J Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/ene.15170
keywords:
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/complications, diagnosis"
- Child
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/complications, diagnosis"
- Humans
- Myelitis/diagnosis
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/complications, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute flaccid myelitis and Guillain-Barré syndrome in children: A comparative study with evaluation of diagnostic criteria.
**Authors:** Helfferich J, Roodbol J, de Wit MC, Brouwer OF, Jacobs BC, 2016 Enterovirus D68 Acute Flaccid Myelitis Working Group and the Dutch Pediatric GBS Study Group
**Journal:** Eur J Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ene.15170](https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.15170)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurol. 2022 Feb;29(2):593-604. doi: 10.1111/ene.15170. Epub 2021 Nov
24.

Acute flaccid myelitis and Guillain-Barré syndrome in children: A comparative
study with evaluation of diagnostic criteria.

Helfferich J(1), Roodbol J(2), de Wit MC(3), Brouwer OF(1), Jacobs BC(4); 2016
Enterovirus D68 Acute Flaccid Myelitis Working Group and the Dutch Pediatric GBS
Study Group.

Collaborators: Aberle SW, Popow-Kraupp T, Nikolaeva-Glomb L, Rainetova P,
Midgley S, Fischer TK, Simonlatser G, Savolainen-Kopra C, Lina B, Schuffenecker
I, Aubart M, Gitiaux C, Antona D, Eis-Hübinger AM, Buderus S, Panning M, Nowotny
M, Kiechle L, Böttcher S, Takács M, Farkas Á, Löve A, Baldanti F, Capobianchi
MR, Valli MB, Esposito S, Pariani E, Binda S, Neuteboom R, Pas S, Benschop K,
Meijer A, Nordbø SA, Hafstrøm M, Dudman SG, Viekilde Pfeiffer HC, Guiomar R,
Palminha P, Costa I, Dias AS, Tecu C, Cherciu CM, Lazarevic I,
Filipović-Vignjević S, Berginc N, Margüello MG, Cabrerizo M, García Iñiguez JP,
Castro SP, Rodrigo C, Antón A, Garcia NR, Dyrdak R, Albert J, Kramer R,
Stacpoole S, Thomas R, O'Flaherty N, Drew R, Templeton K, McDougall C, Eunson P,
Chinchankar N, Shetty J, Moore C, Williams C, Knoester M, Poelman R, van
Leer-Buter C, Niesters B, Engelen M, Erasmus CE, Geleijns K, Kotsopoulos IAW,
Nicolai J, Niermeijer JF, Niks EH, Samijn JPA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology and Pediatric Neurology, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's
Hospital, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's Hospital,
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurology and Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Differentiation between acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) and
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) can be difficult, particularly in children. Our
objective was to improve the diagnostic accuracy by giving recommendations based
on a comparison of clinical features and diagnostic criteria in children with
AFM or GBS.
METHODS: A cohort of 26 children with AFM associated with enterovirus D68 was
compared to a cohort of 156 children with GBS. The specificity of the Brighton
criteria, used for GBS diagnosis, was evaluated in the AFM cohort and the
specificity of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) AFM
diagnostic criteria in the GBS cohort.
RESULTS: Children with AFM compared to those with GBS had a shorter interval
between onset of weakness and nadir (3 vs. 8 days, p < 0.001), more often had
asymmetric limb weakness (58% vs. 0%, p < 0.001), and less frequently had
sensory deficits (0% vs. 40%, p < 0.001). In AFM, cerebrospinal fluid leukocyte
counts were higher, whereas protein concentrations were lower. Spinal cord
lesions on magnetic resonance imaging were only found in AFM patients. No GBS
case fulfilled CDC criteria for definite AFM. Of the AFM cases, 8% fulfilled the
Brighton criteria for GBS, when omitting the criterion of excluding an alternate
diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the overlap in clinical presentation, we found distinctive
early clinical and diagnostic characteristics for differentiating AFM from GBS
in children. Diagnostic criteria for AFM and GBS usually perform well, but some
AFM cases may fulfill clinical diagnostic criteria for GBS. This underlines the
need to perform diagnostic tests early to exclude AFM in children suspected of
atypical GBS.

© 2021 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.15170
PMCID: PMC9299116
PMID: 34747551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.C.d.W. has received honoraria paid to her
institution by Novartis for serving on a steering committee and presenting at a
conference, and has received research funding from the Epilepsiefonds (Dutch
Epilepsy Foundation), Hersenstichting, and Sophia Foundation. B.C.J. has
received funding for travel from Baxter International, and has received research
funding from the Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Development,
Erasmus MC, Prinses Beatrix Spierfonds, Stichting Spieren voor Spieren,
CSL‐Behring, Grifols, Annexon, Hansa Biopharma, and the GBS‐CIDP Foundation
International. None of the other authors has any conflict of interest to
disclose.
