---
reference_id: "PMID:24056717"
title: Mutations in genes encoding the cadherin receptor-ligand pair DCHS1 and FAT4 disrupt cerebral cortical development.
authors:
- Cappello S
- Gray MJ
- Badouel C
- Lange S
- Einsiedler M
- Srour M
- Chitayat D
- Hamdan FF
- Jenkins ZA
- Morgan T
- Preitner N
- Uster T
- Thomas J
- Shannon P
- Morrison V
- Di Donato N
- Van Maldergem L
- Neuhann T
- Newbury-Ecob R
- Swinkells M
- Terhal P
- Wilson LC
- Zwijnenburg PJ
- Sutherland-Smith AJ
- Black MA
- Markie D
- Michaud JL
- Simpson MA
- Mansour S
- McNeill H
- Götz M
- Robertson SP
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/ng.2765
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Cadherin Related Proteins
- Cadherins/genetics
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Proliferation
- "Cerebral Cortex/cytology, embryology, metabolism"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Joint Instability/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Neural Stem Cells/metabolism
- Neurogenesis/genetics
- Neurons/metabolism
- Periventricular Nodular Heterotopia/genetics
- Phosphoproteins/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics
- YAP-Signaling Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in genes encoding the cadherin receptor-ligand pair DCHS1 and FAT4 disrupt cerebral cortical development.
**Authors:** Cappello S, Gray MJ, Badouel C, Lange S, Einsiedler M, Srour M, Chitayat D, Hamdan FF, Jenkins ZA, Morgan T, Preitner N, Uster T, Thomas J, Shannon P, Morrison V, Di Donato N, Van Maldergem L, Neuhann T, Newbury-Ecob R, Swinkells M, Terhal P, Wilson LC, Zwijnenburg PJ, Sutherland-Smith AJ, Black MA, Markie D, Michaud JL, Simpson MA, Mansour S, McNeill H, Götz M, Robertson SP
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2765](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2765)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2013 Nov;45(11):1300-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.2765. Epub 2013 Sep 22.

Mutations in genes encoding the cadherin receptor-ligand pair DCHS1 and FAT4
disrupt cerebral cortical development.

Cappello S(1), Gray MJ, Badouel C, Lange S, Einsiedler M, Srour M, Chitayat D,
Hamdan FF, Jenkins ZA, Morgan T, Preitner N, Uster T, Thomas J, Shannon P,
Morrison V, Di Donato N, Van Maldergem L, Neuhann T, Newbury-Ecob R, Swinkells
M, Terhal P, Wilson LC, Zwijnenburg PJ, Sutherland-Smith AJ, Black MA, Markie D,
Michaud JL, Simpson MA, Mansour S, McNeill H, Götz M, Robertson SP.

Author information:
(1)Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Institute for Stem Cell Research, Neuherberg, Germany.

The regulated proliferation and differentiation of neural stem cells before the
generation and migration of neurons in the cerebral cortex are central aspects
of mammalian development. Periventricular neuronal heterotopia, a specific form
of mislocalization of cortical neurons, can arise from neuronal progenitors that
fail to negotiate aspects of these developmental processes. Here we show that
mutations in genes encoding the receptor-ligand cadherin pair DCHS1 and FAT4
lead to a recessive syndrome in humans that includes periventricular neuronal
heterotopia. Reducing the expression of Dchs1 or Fat4 within mouse embryonic
neuroepithelium increased progenitor cell numbers and reduced their
differentiation into neurons, resulting in the heterotopic accumulation of cells
below the neuronal layers in the neocortex, reminiscent of the human phenotype.
These effects were countered by concurrent knockdown of Yap, a transcriptional
effector of the Hippo signaling pathway. These findings implicate Dchs1 and Fat4
upstream of Yap as key regulators of mammalian neurogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2765
PMID: 24056717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
