---
reference_id: "PMID:40818249"
title: "Diffuse neuropsychiatric lupus: Clinical evidence, immune-mediated mechanisms, and therapeutic insights."
authors:
- Weissman-Tsukamoto R
- Carroll KR
- Diamond B
journal: Semin Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2025.101981
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/therapy, immunology, diagnosis, etiology"
- Animals
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- "Brain/immunology, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Blood-Brain Barrier/immunology, pathology"
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diffuse neuropsychiatric lupus: Clinical evidence, immune-mediated mechanisms, and therapeutic insights.
**Authors:** Weissman-Tsukamoto R, Carroll KR, Diamond B
**Journal:** Semin Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.smim.2025.101981](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smim.2025.101981)

## Content

1. Semin Immunol. 2025 Sep;79:101981. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2025.101981. Epub 2025
Aug 15.

Diffuse neuropsychiatric lupus: Clinical evidence, immune-mediated mechanisms,
and therapeutic insights.

Weissman-Tsukamoto R(1), Carroll KR(1), Diamond B(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, The Feinstein Institutes for Medical
Research, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA.
(2)Institute of Molecular Medicine, The Feinstein Institutes for Medical
Research, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA. Electronic address: bdiamond@northwell.edu.

Neuropsychiatric manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE) occur in
more than half of patients with SLE, with symptoms including fatigue, anxiety,
depression, pain, psychosis, and cognitive dysfunction. These symptoms are often
present at the time of diagnosis of SLE and can be insidious. Patients consider
these to be among their most debilitating symptoms which most diminish their
quality of life, but recognition and attribution of these frequently non-acute
symptoms can be difficult, resulting in underassessment, underdiagnosis, and
poor understanding of the underlying pathogenic mechanisms and how to treat
them. In this review, we highlight findings from neuroimaging studies which have
been critical in proving the existence of structural and functional brain
alterations that associate with symptomatology, and pathophysiological findings
from animal models of diffuse NPSLE, focusing principally on blood brain barrier
injury and brain-reactive autoantibodies. Most importantly, we demonstrate that
mechanistic progress can be made with respect to these manifestations of NPSLE
and that this progress leads to therapeutic strategies which can be tested in
clinical trials.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smim.2025.101981
PMID: 40818249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
