---
reference_id: "PMID:16859601"
title: "Epidemiology of Wegener's granulomatosis: Lessons from descriptive studies and analyses of genetic and environmental risk determinants."
authors:
- Mahr AD
- Neogi T
- Merkel PA
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2006'
keywords:
- Demography
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Epidemiologic Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Geography
- "Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis/epidemiology, ethnology, etiology, genetics"
- Humans
- Occupational Exposure/adverse effects
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- Seasons
- Silicon Dioxide/adverse effects
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of Wegener's granulomatosis: Lessons from descriptive studies and analyses of genetic and environmental risk determinants.
**Authors:** Mahr AD, Neogi T, Merkel PA
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2006)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2006 Mar-Apr;24(2 Suppl 41):S82-91.

Epidemiology of Wegener's granulomatosis: Lessons from descriptive studies and 
analyses of genetic and environmental risk determinants.

Mahr AD(1), Neogi T, Merkel PA.

Author information:
(1)Section of Rheumatology and the Clinical Epidemiology Unit, Boston University 
School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA. amahr@bu.edu

During the past 15 years, the epidemiology of Wegener's granulomatosis (WG) has 
become better understood. Descriptive epidemiological studies carried out 
primarily in European countries estimate a prevalence of WG ranging from 24 to 
157 per million and annual incidence rates from 3 to 14 per million. These 
studies suggest a North-South declining gradient in disease risk in the Northern 
Hemisphere and an increase in incidence over time, although the latter is likely 
largely due to improved diagnostic ascertainment. Data also indicate the 
presence of potential secular and seasonal variations in WG incidence and a 
decreasing disease risk among non-Caucasians. Furthermore, analytic 
epidemiological studies have pointed out putative genetic and non-genetic risk 
factors for WG. Genetic investigations have identified various candidate genes, 
with alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency being the most consistently reported genetic 
susceptibility factor to date. Even though much less research has been devoted 
to environmental risk factors, evidence has grown for a possible relationship 
between WG and occupational exposure to crystalline silica. Thus far, data 
support the concept of WG as a multifactorial disease in which genetic and 
environmental determinants are involved but a major gap in understanding 
persists regarding the extent to which both factors contribute to its 
development. This and many other questions remain to be answered by future 
structured epidemiological research. This review focuses on the current 
knowledge of descriptive epidemiology and genetic and environmental factors 
associated with WG.

PMID: 16859601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]