---
reference_id: "PMID:18463159"
title: A variant in the sonic hedgehog regulatory sequence (ZRS) is associated with triphalangeal thumb and deregulates expression in the developing limb.
authors:
- Furniss D
- Lettice LA
- Taylor IB
- Critchley PS
- Giele H
- Hill RE
- Wilkie AO
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn141
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7/genetics"
- Cohort Studies
- "Enhancer Elements, Genetic"
- "Extremities/embryology, growth & development"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Genetic Linkage
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/embryology, genetics"
- Haplotypes
- Hedgehog Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Polydactyly/embryology, genetics"
- Sequence Alignment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A variant in the sonic hedgehog regulatory sequence (ZRS) is associated with triphalangeal thumb and deregulates expression in the developing limb.
**Authors:** Furniss D, Lettice LA, Taylor IB, Critchley PS, Giele H, Hill RE, Wilkie AO
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddn141](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddn141)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Aug 15;17(16):2417-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn141. Epub 2008 
May 7.

A variant in the sonic hedgehog regulatory sequence (ZRS) is associated with 
triphalangeal thumb and deregulates expression in the developing limb.

Furniss D(1), Lettice LA, Taylor IB, Critchley PS, Giele H, Hill RE, Wilkie AO.

Author information:
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John 
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

A locus for triphalangeal thumb, variably associated with pre-axial polydactyly, 
was previously identified in the zone of polarizing activity regulatory sequence 
(ZRS), a long range limb-specific enhancer of the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) gene at 
human chromosome 7q36.3. Here, we demonstrate that a 295T>C variant in the human 
ZRS, previously thought to represent a neutral polymorphism, acts as a dominant 
allele with reduced penetrance. We found this variant in three independently 
ascertained probands from southern England with triphalangeal thumb, 
demonstrated significant linkage of the phenotype to the variant (LOD = 4.1), 
and identified a shared microsatellite haplotype around the ZRS, suggesting that 
the probands share a common ancestor. An individual homozygous for the 295C 
allele presented with isolated bilateral triphalangeal thumb resembling the 
heterozygous phenotype, suggesting that the variant is largely dominant to the 
wild-type allele. As a functional test of the pathogenicity of the 295C allele, 
we utilized a mutated ZRS construct to demonstrate that it can drive ectopic 
anterior expression of a reporter gene in the developing mouse forelimb. We 
conclude that the 295T>C variant is in fact pathogenic and, in southern England, 
appears to be the most common cause of triphalangeal thumb. Depending on the 
dispersal of the founding mutation, it may play a wider role in the aetiology of 
this disorder.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn141
PMCID: PMC2486440
PMID: 18463159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]