---
reference_id: "PMID:23673909"
title: "Neurological outcome in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis treated with chenodeoxycholic acid: early versus late diagnosis."
authors:
- Yahalom G
- Tsabari R
- Molshatzki N
- Ephraty L
- Cohen H
- Hassin-Baer S
journal: Clin Neuropharmacol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/WNF.0b013e318288076a
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Chenodeoxycholic Acid/therapeutic use
- Cholestanetriol 26-Monooxygenase/genetics
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Delayed Diagnosis
- Early Diagnosis
- Educational Status
- Employment
- Female
- Gastrointestinal Agents/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Male
- "Mental Disorders/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Nervous System Diseases/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- "Xanthomatosis, Cerebrotendinous/diagnosis, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurological outcome in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis treated with chenodeoxycholic acid: early versus late diagnosis.
**Authors:** Yahalom G, Tsabari R, Molshatzki N, Ephraty L, Cohen H, Hassin-Baer S
**Journal:** Clin Neuropharmacol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WNF.0b013e318288076a](https://doi.org/10.1097/WNF.0b013e318288076a)

## Content

1. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2013 May-Jun;36(3):78-83. doi:
10.1097/WNF.0b013e318288076a.

Neurological outcome in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis treated with
chenodeoxycholic acid: early versus late diagnosis.

Yahalom G(1), Tsabari R, Molshatzki N, Ephraty L, Cohen H, Hassin-Baer S.

Author information:
(1)The Parkinson Disease and Movement Disorders Clinic, Department of Neurology
and Sagol Neuroscience Center, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: To present the long-term neurological outcome of Jewish Israeli
patients with cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX) after several years of
chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) treatment.
METHODS: A cross sectional observational study of all patients with a diagnosis
of CTX followed in a referral outpatient clinic during the years 2003-2012.
RESULTS: Eighteen patients (10 men) from 11 families were enrolled. Sixteen
patients were included in the analysis (2 patients had low compliance for
treatment). The mean ± SD age at last evaluation was 35.0 ± 9.2 years (range,
16-45 years). After their diagnosis, at age 22.6 ± 10.8 years, all patients were
treated with CDCA. Patients who started treatment after the age of 25 years had
worse outcome and were significantly more limited in ambulation (P = 0.004) and
more cognitively impaired (P = 0.047). Five patients who started treatment after
25 years of age continued to deteriorate despite CDCA treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Beginning CDCA treatment as early as possible is crucial to
preventing neurological damage and deterioration in CTX. After significant
neurological pathology is established, the effect of treatment is limited and
deterioration may continue.

DOI: 10.1097/WNF.0b013e318288076a
PMID: 23673909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
