---
reference_id: "PMID:35100745"
title: "Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children: Examining Emerging Data and Identifying Key Knowledge Gaps."
authors:
- Sartori LF
- Balamuth F
journal: Pediatr Emerg Care
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000002633
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children: Examining Emerging Data and Identifying Key Knowledge Gaps.
**Authors:** Sartori LF, Balamuth F
**Journal:** Pediatr Emerg Care (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PEC.0000000000002633](https://doi.org/10.1097/PEC.0000000000002633)

## Content

1. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2022 Feb 1;38(2):83-91. doi: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000002633.

Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children: Examining Emerging Data and 
Identifying Key Knowledge Gaps.

Sartori LF(1), Balamuth F.

Author information:
(1)From the Assistant Professor and Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman 
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania; and Division of Pediatric 
Emergency Medicine and Pediatric Sepsis Program, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.

Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a syndrome of abnormal 
immune response after severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection 
that can result in organ dysfunction including severe cardiovascular compromise 
in children. Increased evidence supports a clinical and laboratory profile in 
MIS-C distinct from Kawasaki disease, with MIS-C typically occurring in older 
children and with more prominent gastrointestinal and neurologic symptoms, as 
well as increased inflammation, lymphopenia, and cardiac injury on laboratory 
testing. However, high-level evidence regarding best practices for treatment and 
long-term outcomes in MIS-C is limited.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000002633
PMCID: PMC8855966
PMID: 35100745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]