---
reference_id: PMID:36599349
title: "Hallmarks of aging: An expanding universe."
authors:
- López-Otín C
- Blasco MA
- Partridge L
- Serrano M
- Kroemer G
journal: Cell
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.11.001
keywords:
- Cellular Senescence
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Proteostasis
- Stem Cells
- "Aging/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Hallmarks of aging: An expanding universe.
**Authors:** López-Otín C, Blasco MA, Partridge L, Serrano M, Kroemer G
**Journal:** Cell (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2022.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.11.001)

## Content

1. Cell. 2023 Jan 19;186(2):243-278. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.11.001. Epub 2023
Jan  3.

Hallmarks of aging: An expanding universe.

López-Otín C(1), Blasco MA(2), Partridge L(3), Serrano M(4), Kroemer G(5).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Instituto Universitario de 
Oncología (IUOPA), Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain; Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA), Oviedo, Spain; Centro 
de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid, Spain. 
Electronic address: clo@uniovi.es.
(2)Telomeres and Telomerase Group, Molecular Oncology Program, Spanish National 
Cancer Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, Institute of Healthy 
Ageing, University College London, London, UK; Max Planck Institute for Biology 
of Ageing, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona Institute of 
Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain; Catalan Institution for 
Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain; Altos Labs, Cambridge, 
UK.
(5)Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Equipe labellisée par la Ligue contre le 
cancer, Université de Paris, Sorbonne Université, INSERM U1138, Institut 
Universitaire de France, Paris, France; Metabolomics and Cell Biology Platforms, 
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; Institut du Cancer Paris CARPEM, Department 
of Biology, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris, France. Electronic 
address: kroemer@orange.fr.

Comment in
    Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2023 Nov;50(13):3820-3823. doi: 
10.1007/s00259-023-06377-z.

Aging is driven by hallmarks fulfilling the following three premises: (1) their 
age-associated manifestation, (2) the acceleration of aging by experimentally 
accentuating them, and (3) the opportunity to decelerate, stop, or reverse aging 
by therapeutic interventions on them. We propose the following twelve hallmarks 
of aging: genomic instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, loss 
of proteostasis, disabled macroautophagy, deregulated nutrient-sensing, 
mitochondrial dysfunction, cellular senescence, stem cell exhaustion, altered 
intercellular communication, chronic inflammation, and dysbiosis. These 
hallmarks are interconnected among each other, as well as to the recently 
proposed hallmarks of health, which include organizational features of spatial 
compartmentalization, maintenance of homeostasis, and adequate responses to 
stress.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.11.001
PMID: 36599349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests M.A.B. is founder and 
shareholder of Life Length, SL, which commercializes telomere length 
measurements for biomedical use. M.S. is shareholder and advisor of Rejuveron 
Senescence Therapeutics, AG, and Altos Labs, Inc.; and shareholder of Senolytic 
Therapeutics, Inc., and Life Biosciences, Inc. G.K. has been holding research 
contracts with Daiichi Sankyo, Eleor, Kaleido, Lytix Pharma, PharmaMar, Osasuna 
Therapeutics, Samsara Therapeutics, Sanofi, Sotio, Tollys, Vascage, and 
Vasculox/Tioma; consulting for Reithera and is on the Board of Directors of the 
Bristol Myers Squibb Foundation France. G.K. is a scientific co-founder of 
everImmune, Osasuna Therapeutics, Samsara Therapeutics, and Therafast Bio. G.K. 
is the inventor of patents covering therapeutic targeting of aging, cancer, 
cystic fibrosis, and metabolic disorders and has been holding research contracts 
with Daiichi Sankyo, Eleor, Kaleido, Lytix Pharma, PharmaMar, Osasuna 
Therapeutics, Samsara Therapeutics, Sanofi, Tollys, and Vascage; has been 
consulting for Reithera; is on the Board of Directors of the Bristol Myers 
Squibb Foundation France, and is a scientific co-founder of everImmune, Osasuna 
Therapeutics, Samsara Therapeutics, and Therafast Bio. G.K.’s wife, Laurence 
Zitvogel has held research contracts with 9 Meters Biopharma, Daiichi Sankyo, 
Pilege, was on the on the Board of Directors of Transgene, is a co-founder of 
everImmune, and holds patents covering the treatment of cancer and the 
therapeutic manipulation of the microbiota. G.K.’s brother, Romano Kroemer, was 
an employee of Sanofi and has consulted for Boehringer-Ingelheim. None of the 
funders had any role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to 
publish, or preparation of the manuscript.