---
reference_id: "PMID:22351070"
title: Synaptic dysfunction in schizophrenia.
authors:
- Yin DM
- Chen YJ
- Sathyamurthy A
- Xiong WC
- Mei L
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0932-8_22
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synaptic dysfunction in schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Yin DM, Chen YJ, Sathyamurthy A, Xiong WC, Mei L
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-7091-0932-8_22](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7091-0932-8_22)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;970:493-516. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0932-8_22.

Synaptic dysfunction in schizophrenia.

Yin DM(1), Chen YJ, Sathyamurthy A, Xiong WC, Mei L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Schizophrenia alters basic brain processes of perception, emotion, and judgment 
to cause hallucinations, delusions, thought disorder, and cognitive deficits. 
Unlike neurodegeneration diseases that have irreversible neuronal degeneration 
and death, schizophrenia lacks agreeable pathological hallmarks, which makes it 
one of the least understood psychiatric disorders. With identification of 
schizophrenia susceptibility genes, recent studies have begun to shed light on 
underlying pathological mechanisms. Schizophrenia is believed to result from 
problems during neural development that lead to improper function of synaptic 
transmission and plasticity, and in agreement, many of the susceptibility genes 
encode proteins critical for neural development. Some, however, are also 
expressed at high levels in adult brain. Here, we will review evidence for 
altered neurotransmission at glutamatergic, GABAergic, dopaminergic, and 
cholinergic synapses in schizophrenia and discuss roles of susceptibility genes 
in neural development as well as in synaptic plasticity and how their 
malfunction may contribute to pathogenic mechanisms of schizophrenia. We propose 
that mouse models with precise temporal and spatial control of mutation or 
overexpression would be useful to delineate schizophrenia pathogenic mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0932-8_22
PMID: 22351070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]