---
reference_id: "PMID:38402273"
title: "The spectrum of psychological disorders in family members of patients suffering from delirium associated with critical illness: a prospective, observational study."
authors:
- Kotfis K
- Maj P
- Szylińska A
- Pankowiak M
- Reszka E
- Ely EW
- Marra A
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-53968-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The spectrum of psychological disorders in family members of patients suffering from delirium associated with critical illness: a prospective, observational study.
**Authors:** Kotfis K, Maj P, Szylińska A, Pankowiak M, Reszka E, Ely EW, Marra A
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-53968-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-53968-3)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Feb 24;14(1):4562. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-53968-3.

The spectrum of psychological disorders in family members of patients suffering 
from delirium associated with critical illness: a prospective, observational 
study.

Kotfis K(1), Maj P(2), Szylińska A(3), Pankowiak M(4), Reszka E(4), Ely 
EW(5)(6)(7), Marra A(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Intensive Care and Pain Management, Pomeranian 
Medical University, Szczecin, Poland. katarzyna.kotfis@pum.edu.pl.
(2)Individual Psychotherapy Center, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, 
Poland.
(4)Student Science Club at the Department of Anesthesiology, Intensive Care and 
Pain Management, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland.
(5)Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction, and Survivorship (CIBS) Center, Center 
for Health Services Research, Nashville, TN, USA.
(6)Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(7)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center (GRECC) Service, Nashville 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, 
TN, USA.
(8)Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive and Odontostomatological Sciences, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Via Sergio Pansini, 5, 80131, Napoli, NA, 
Italy.

During intensive care unit admission, relatives of critically ill patients can 
experience emotional distress. The authors hypothesized that families of 
patients who are diagnosed with intensive care unit (ICU) delirium experience 
more profound depression and anxiety disorders related to stress than do 
families of patients without delirium. We performed a prospective observational 
single-center study including families of adult patients (age above 18 years) 
hospitalized in a 17-bed ICU of a university hospital for at least 48 h who 
completed research questionnaires at day 2 after admission and day 30 after 
initial evaluation using dedicated questionnaires (HADS, CECS, IES, PTSD-C). A 
total of 98 family members of patients hospitalized in the ICU were included in 
the final analysis (50 family members whose relatives were CAM-ICU positive 
(DEL+), and 48 family members of patients without delirium (DEL-)). No 
statistically significant differences in demographics and psychosocial data were 
found between the groups. In the follow-up 30 days after the first conversation 
with a family member, the mean PTSD score for the relatives of patients with 
delirium was 11.02 (Me = 13.0; SD = 5.74), and the mean score for nondelirious 
patients' family members was 6.42 (Me = 5.5; SD = 5.50; p < 0.001). A 
statistically significant increase in IES scores for family members of patients 
with delirium was observed for total PTSD (p = 0.001), IES-intrusion 
(p < 0.001), and IES-hyperarousal (p = 0.002). The prevalence of anxiety 
symptoms, depression, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) was higher in 
families of patients diagnosed with ICU delirium within 48 h of admission to the 
ICU. No factors increasing the depth of these disorders in family members of 
patients with ICU delirium were identified. Taking appropriate actions and thus 
providing families with appropriate support will contribute to the understanding 
of unfavorable emotional states, including anxiety, stress, depression, anger, 
agitation, or avoidance.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-53968-3
PMCID: PMC10894193
PMID: 38402273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.