---
reference_id: "PMID:34837014"
title: "Clostridioides difficile toxins: mechanisms of action and antitoxin therapeutics."
authors:
- Kordus SL
- Thomas AK
- Lacy DB
journal: Nat Rev Microbiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41579-021-00660-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clostridioides difficile toxins: mechanisms of action and antitoxin therapeutics.
**Authors:** Kordus SL, Thomas AK, Lacy DB
**Journal:** Nat Rev Microbiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41579-021-00660-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-021-00660-2)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2022 May;20(5):285-298. doi: 10.1038/s41579-021-00660-2.
Epub  2021 Nov 26.

Clostridioides difficile toxins: mechanisms of action and antitoxin 
therapeutics.

Kordus SL(#)(1)(2), Thomas AK(#)(1)(2), Lacy DB(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Center for Structural Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. borden.lacy@vanderbilt.edu.
(4)Center for Structural Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA. 
borden.lacy@vanderbilt.edu.
(5)The Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN, USA. 
borden.lacy@vanderbilt.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Clostridioides difficile is a Gram-positive anaerobe that can cause a spectrum 
of disorders that range in severity from mild diarrhoea to fulminant colitis 
and/or death. The bacterium produces up to three toxins, which are considered 
the major virulence factors in C. difficile infection. These toxins promote 
inflammation, tissue damage and diarrhoea. In this Review, we highlight recent 
biochemical and structural advances in our understanding of the mechanisms that 
govern host-toxin interactions. Understanding how C. difficile toxins affect the 
host forms a foundation for developing novel strategies for treatment and 
prevention of C. difficile infection.

© 2021. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41579-021-00660-2
PMCID: PMC9018519
PMID: 34837014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.