---
reference_id: "PMID:7872395"
title: Acute annular outer retinopathy as a variant of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy.
authors:
- Gass JD
- Stern C
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1016/s0002-9394(14)71176-6
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adult
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Fundus Oculi
- Humans
- Male
- Retinal Diseases/pathology
- Retinitis/pathology
- Scotoma/pathology
- Vision Disorders/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute annular outer retinopathy as a variant of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy.
**Authors:** Gass JD, Stern C
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0002-9394(14)71176-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9394(14)71176-6)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 1995 Mar;119(3):330-4. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9394(14)71176-6.

Acute annular outer retinopathy as a variant of acute zonal occult outer 
retinopathy.

Gass JD(1), Stern C.

Author information:
(1)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Miami, FL 33101.

PURPOSE: A 23-year-old man developed a rapid-onset, large, dense scotoma that 
was associated with a peculiar gray intraretinal ring corresponding to the edge 
of the scotoma and normal fluorescein angiographic findings. This disorder may 
represent a variant of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy.
METHODS: We studied one patient by ophthalmoscopic examination and fluorescein 
angiography.
RESULTS: The patient experienced a short period of concentric enlargement of the 
scotoma and narrowing of the retinal vessels within the ring, followed by 
stabilization of the scotoma and slow progressive depigmentation and 
intraretinal migration of the retinal pigment epithelium within the zone of 
visual loss. The cause of this disorder, which affects primarily the outer 
retina, was not determined.
CONCLUSIONS: We speculate that this disorder is part of the spectrum of acute 
zonal occult outer retinopathy and that the gray border, which separates the 
normal from the abnormal retina, represents an immune ring phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9394(14)71176-6
PMID: 7872395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]