---
reference_id: "PMID:36114979"
title: "Fibrocartilaginous embolism: a rare cause leading to spinal cord infarction?"
authors:
- Ciceri EF
- Opancina V
- Pellegrino C
- Scarabelli A
- Botturi AG
- Bersano A
- "D'arrigo S"
- Erbetta A
- Chiapparini L
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-022-06398-w
keywords:
- Male
- Adult
- Child
- Humans
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- "Spinal Cord/diagnostic imaging, blood supply"
- "Spinal Cord Diseases/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- "Embolism/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Infarction/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- Cartilage Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibrocartilaginous embolism: a rare cause leading to spinal cord infarction?
**Authors:** Ciceri EF, Opancina V, Pellegrino C, Scarabelli A, Botturi AG, Bersano A, D'arrigo S, Erbetta A, Chiapparini L
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-022-06398-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-022-06398-w)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2023 Jan;44(1):263-271. doi: 10.1007/s10072-022-06398-w. Epub 2022
 Sep 17.

Fibrocartilaginous embolism: a rare cause leading to spinal cord infarction?

Ciceri EF(1), Opancina V(2)(3), Pellegrino C(1), Scarabelli A(1)(4), Botturi
AG(5), Bersano A(5), D'arrigo S(6), Erbetta A(7), Chiapparini L(7).

Author information:
(1)Diagnostic Imaging and Interventional Neuroradiology Unit, Department of
Neurosurgery, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.
(2)Diagnostic Imaging and Interventional Neuroradiology Unit, Department of
Neurosurgery, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.
valentina.opancina@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of
Kragujevac, Kragujevac, Serbia. valentina.opancina@gmail.com.
(4)Postgraduation School in Radiodiagnostics, Università Degli Studi Di Milano,
Milan, Italy.
(5)Clinical Neurology Unit, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Fondazione
IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.
(6)Child Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatric Neuroscience, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.
(7)Department of Technology and Diagnosis, Neuroradiology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.

PURPOSE: Fibrocartilaginous nucleus pulposus components herniation and embolism
rarely causes acute ischaemic events involving the spinal cord. Few reports have
suggested this as a mechanism leading to anterior spinal artery syndrome. The
purpose of this study was to evaluate the topography and pattern of this rare
myelopathy by MRI.
METHODS: A retrospective observational case series of patients, admitted to our
Institute between 2008 and 2021, with a diagnosis of fibrocartilaginous embolism
based on typical clinical and radiological features.
RESULTS: Five patients were identified (2 men and 3 women; range 13-38 years).
No one had pre-existing vascular risk factors. All referred potential
precipitating event in the 24 h prior to symptom onset. MRI findings showed
increased signal intensity of the spinal cord on T2-weighted images in all cases
and degenerative disc changes opposite to it in four of them. The outcome was
poor: three showed only partial sensitivity and motor improvement (mRs 4, 3, and
2, respectively); one completely recovered except for isolated hand paresis (mRs
1); and one remained severely neurologically affected (mRs 5).
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrocartilaginous embolism must be a differential diagnosis in
case of otherwise unexplained spinal cord infarction in adult and paediatric low
risk population. Neuroradiological findings such as abnormal spinal cord signal
intensity and degenerative disc changes can aid in early diagnosis of this rare
myelopathy. The prevalent myelopathy location was thoracic. All signal
alterations were detected in the anterior region of the spinal cord in the
territories of the anterior spinal artery.

© 2022. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-022-06398-w
PMID: 36114979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
