---
reference_id: "PMID:32919526"
title: "Association of tumour mutational burden with outcomes in patients with advanced solid tumours treated with pembrolizumab: prospective biomarker analysis of the multicohort, open-label, phase 2 KEYNOTE-158 study."
authors:
- Marabelle A
- Fakih M
- Lopez J
- Shah M
- Shapira-Frommer R
- Nakagawa K
- Chung HC
- Kindler HL
- Lopez-Martin JA
- Miller WH Jr
- Italiano A
- Kao S
- Piha-Paul SA
- Delord JP
- McWilliams RR
- Fabrizio DA
- Aurora-Garg D
- Xu L
- Jin F
- Norwood K
- Bang YJ
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30445-9
keywords:
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Immunological/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics, metabolism"
- Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions
- Female
- Humans
- Immunotherapy
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Prospective Studies
- Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
- Survival Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of tumour mutational burden with outcomes in patients with advanced solid tumours treated with pembrolizumab: prospective biomarker analysis of the multicohort, open-label, phase 2 KEYNOTE-158 study.
**Authors:** Marabelle A, Fakih M, Lopez J, Shah M, Shapira-Frommer R, Nakagawa K, Chung HC, Kindler HL, Lopez-Martin JA, Miller WH Jr, Italiano A, Kao S, Piha-Paul SA, Delord JP, McWilliams RR, Fabrizio DA, Aurora-Garg D, Xu L, Jin F, Norwood K, Bang YJ
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30445-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30445-9)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2020 Oct;21(10):1353-1365. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30445-9. 
Epub 2020 Sep 10.

Association of tumour mutational burden with outcomes in patients with advanced 
solid tumours treated with pembrolizumab: prospective biomarker analysis of the 
multicohort, open-label, phase 2 KEYNOTE-158 study.

Marabelle A(1), Fakih M(2), Lopez J(3), Shah M(4), Shapira-Frommer R(5), 
Nakagawa K(6), Chung HC(7), Kindler HL(8), Lopez-Martin JA(9), Miller WH Jr(10), 
Italiano A(11), Kao S(12), Piha-Paul SA(13), Delord JP(14), McWilliams RR(15), 
Fabrizio DA(16), Aurora-Garg D(17), Xu L(17), Jin F(17), Norwood K(17), Bang 
YJ(18).

Author information:
(1)Gustave Roussy, INSERM U1015, Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France. 
Electronic address: aurelien.marabelle@gustaveroussy.fr.
(2)City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, USA.
(3)The Royal Marsden Foundation Trust and the Institute of Cancer Research, 
London, UK.
(4)Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, USA.
(5)Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(6)Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Yonsei Cancer Center and Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South 
Korea.
(8)University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(9)12 de Octubre University Hospital & Research Institute, Madrid, Spain.
(10)Jewish General Hospital and McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(11)Institut Bergonié and University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(12)Chris O'Brien Lifehouse, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(13)University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(14)Institut Claudius Regaud IUCT-Oncopole, Toulouse, France.
(15)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(16)Foundation Medicine, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(17)Merck & Co, Kenilworth, NJ, USA.
(18)Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2020 Oct;21(10):1255-1257. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30433-2.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2020 Dec;17(12):718. doi: 10.1038/s41571-020-00438-0.
    Lancet Oncol. 2020 Dec;21(12):e551. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30617-3.
    Lancet Oncol. 2020 Dec;21(12):e552. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30697-5.

BACKGROUND: Tumour mutational burden (TMB) has been retrospectively correlated 
with response to immune checkpoint blockade. We prospectively explored the 
association of high tissue TMB (tTMB-high) with outcomes in ten 
tumour-type-specific cohorts from the phase 2 KEYNOTE-158 study, which assessed 
the anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody pembrolizumab in patients with selected, 
previously treated, advanced solid tumours.
METHODS: In the multi-cohort, open-label, non-randomised, phase 2 KEYNOTE-158 
study, patients were enrolled from 81 academic facilities and community-based 
institutions across 21 countries in Africa, the Americas, Asia, and Europe. 
Eligible patients were aged 18 years or older, had a histologically or 
cytologically confirmed advanced (ie, unresectable or metastatic, or both) 
incurable solid tumour (eligible tumour types were anal, biliary, cervical, 
endometrial, mesothelioma, neuroendocrine, salivary, small-cell lung, thyroid, 
and vulvar), progression on or intolerance to one or more lines of standard 
therapy, had measurable disease per Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors 
(RECIST; version 1.1) assessed by independent central radiological review, 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 or 1, life expectancy 
of at least 3 months, adequate organ function, and a tumour sample for biomarker 
analysis. Participants were given pembrolizumab 200 mg intravenously every 3 
weeks for up to 35 cycles. Tissue TMB (tTMB) was assessed in formalin-fixed 
paraffin-embedded tumour samples using the FoundationOne CDx assay (Foundation 
Medicine, Cambridge, MA, USA). The prespecified definition of tTMB-high status 
was at least 10 mutations per megabase. The primary endpoint was the proportion 
of patients with an objective response (complete or partial response) as per 
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours (version 1.1) by independent 
central review. This prespecified analysis assessed the association between 
antitumour activity and tTMB in treated patients with evaluable tTMB data. 
Efficacy was assessed in all participants who received at least one dose of 
pembrolizumab, had evaluable tTMB data, and were enrolled at least 26 weeks 
before data cutoff (June 27, 2019), and safety was assessed in all participants 
who received at least one dose of pembrolizumab and had tTMB-high status. 
KEYNOTE-158 is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02628067, and is ongoing.
FINDINGS: Between Jan 15, 2016, and June 25, 2019, 1073 patients were enrolled. 
1066 participants were treated as of data cutoff (June 27, 2019), of whom 805 
(76%) were evaluable for TMB, and 105 (13%) of 805 had tTMB-high status and were 
assessed for safety. 1050 (98%) of 1066 patients enrolled by at least 26 weeks 
before data cutoff, of whom 790 (75%) were evaluable for TMB and included in 
efficacy analyses. 102 (13%) of these 790 patients had tTMB-high status (≥10 
mutations per megabase), and 688 (87%) patients had non-tTMB-high status (<10 
mutations per megabase). Median study follow-up was 37·1 months (IQR 35·0-38·3). 
Objective responses were observed in 30 (29%; 95% CI 21-39) of 102 patients in 
the tTMB-high group and 43 (6%; 5-8) of 688 in the non-tTMB-high group. 11 (10%) 
of 105 patients had treatment-related serious adverse events. 16 (15%) 
participants had a grade 3-5 treatment-related adverse event, of which colitis 
was the only such adverse event that occurred in more than one patient (n=2). 
One patient had fatal pneumonia that was assessed by the investigator to be 
treatment related.
INTERPRETATION: tTMB-high status identifies a subgroup of patients who could 
have a robust tumour response to pembrolizumab monotherapy. tTMB could be a 
novel and useful predictive biomarker for response to pembrolizumab monotherapy 
in patients with previously treated recurrent or metastatic advanced solid 
tumours.
FUNDING: Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp, a subsidiary of Merck & Co, Inc.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30445-9
PMID: 32919526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]