---
reference_id: "PMID:20301703"
title: Waardenburg Syndrome Type I.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Milunsky JM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Waardenburg Syndrome Type I.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Milunsky JM

## Content

1. Waardenburg Syndrome Type I.

Milunsky JM(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2001 Jul 30 [updated 2022 Oct 20].

Author information:
(1)Director, Clinical Genetics, Senior Director, Molecular Genetics, 
Co-Director, Center for Human Genetics, Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Waardenburg syndrome type I (WS1) is an 
auditory-pigmentary disorder comprising congenital sensorineural hearing loss 
and pigmentary disturbances of the iris, hair, and skin along with dystopia 
canthorum (lateral displacement of the inner canthi). The hearing loss in WS1, 
observed in approximately 60% of affected individuals, is congenital, typically 
non-progressive, either unilateral or bilateral, and sensorineural. Most 
commonly, hearing loss in WS1 is bilateral and profound (>100 dB). The majority 
of individuals with WS1 have either a white forelock or early graying of the 
scalp hair before age 30 years. The classic white forelock observed in 
approximately 45% of individuals is the most common hair pigmentation anomaly 
seen in WS1. Affected individuals may have complete heterochromia iridium, 
partial/segmental heterochromia, or hypoplastic or brilliant blue irides. 
Congenital leukoderma is frequently seen on the face, trunk, or limbs.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of WS1 is established in most individuals by 
physical examination for clinical criteria including: sensorineural hearing 
loss, pigmentary changes in the hair and eyes, dystopia canthorum identified by 
calculation of the W index, and specific facial features. Identification of a 
heterozygous PAX3 pathogenic variant by molecular genetic testing establishes 
the diagnosis if clinical features are inconclusive.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management of the hearing loss depends 
on its severity; cochlear implantation has been successfully used in individuals 
with WS1. Evaluation of relatives at risk: If the family-specific PAX3 
pathogenic variant is known, molecular genetic testing of relatives at risk 
allows for early screening of those at risk for hearing loss. Pregnancy 
management: Folic acid supplementation in pregnancy is recommended for women at 
increased risk of having a child with WS1 because of the possibly increased risk 
for neural tube defects associated with WS1.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Waardenburg syndrome type I (WS1) is inherited in an 
autosomal dominant manner. The majority of probands have an affected parent. A 
minority of probands do not have an affected parent and are presumed to have WS1 
as a result of a de novo pathogenic variant. Offspring of an individual with WS1 
have a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. If the pathogenic 
variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal testing for a 
pregnancy at increased risk may be available from a clinical laboratory that 
offers either testing for this disease/gene or custom prenatal testing. Although 
this testing can determine whether the fetus has inherited the PAX3 pathogenic 
variant, it cannot determine the clinical manifestations or their severity.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301703