---
reference_id: "PMID:23236640"
title: KAT6B Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Lemire G
- Campeau PM
- Lee BH
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KAT6B Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Lemire G, Campeau PM, Lee BH

## Content

1. KAT6B Disorders.

Lemire G(1), Campeau PM(1), Lee BH(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2012 Dec 13 [updated 2020 Jan 2].

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Service Sainte-Justine Hospital Montreal, Quebec, Canada
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institutes Department of Molecular and Human Genetics 
Baylor College of Medicine Houston, Texas

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: KAT6B disorders include genitopatellar syndrome (GPS) 
and Say-Barber-Biesecker-Young-Simpson variant of Ohdo syndrome (SBBYSS) which 
are part of a broad phenotypic spectrum with variable expressivity; individuals 
presenting with a phenotype intermediate between GPS and SBBYSS have been 
reported. Both phenotypes are characterized by some degree of global 
developmental delay / intellectual disability; hypotonia; genital abnormalities; 
and skeletal abnormalities including patellar hypoplasia/agenesis, flexion 
contractures of the knees and/or hips, and anomalies of the digits, spine, 
and/or ribs. Congenital heart defects, small bowel malrotation, feeding 
difficulties, slow growth, cleft palate, hearing loss, and dental anomalies have 
been observed in individuals with either phenotype.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a KAT6B disorder is established by the 
identification of a heterozygous pathogenic variant in KAT6B on molecular 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Medical problems associated with 
gastrointestinal, genitourinary, cardiac, palatal or dental anomalies; abnormal 
vision or lacrimal duct abnormality; hearing loss; or hypothyroidism associated 
with KAT6B disorders are treated or managed in the standard manner by the 
appropriate specialist. Referral to an early intervention program to access 
occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy beginning in infancy. 
Orthopedic intervention as needed for contractures and clubfoot; physical 
therapy to increase joint mobility. Surveillance: Evaluations of developmental 
progress and educational needs, assessment for feeding issues, and monitoring 
for hearing loss, amblyopia, hypothyroidism, and contractures and/or scoliosis 
should occur annually. Evaluation and monitoring of cardiac malformation and/or 
renal function (if hydronephrosis or renal cysts are present) as needed.
GENETIC COUNSELING: KAT6B disorders are inherited in an autosomal dominant 
manner. To date, most individuals with a KAT6B disorder have had a de novo 
pathogenic variant. Prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible 
for families in which the pathogenic variant has been identified.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 23236640