---
reference_id: "PMID:27096540"
title: "Intralesional (incision) biopsy for melanoma diagnosis: the rules and the exception."
authors:
- Moscarella E
- Argenziano G
- Moreno C
- Piana S
- Lallas A
- Lombardi M
- Longo C
- Ferrara G
journal: G Ital Dermatol Venereol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.23736/S0392-0488.16.05376-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intralesional (incision) biopsy for melanoma diagnosis: the rules and the exception.
**Authors:** Moscarella E, Argenziano G, Moreno C, Piana S, Lallas A, Lombardi M, Longo C, Ferrara G
**Journal:** G Ital Dermatol Venereol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S0392-0488.16.05376-1](https://doi.org/10.23736/S0392-0488.16.05376-1)

## Content

1. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2017 Dec;152(6):658-662. doi: 
10.23736/S0392-0488.16.05376-1. Epub 2016 Apr 20.

Intralesional (incision) biopsy for melanoma diagnosis: the rules and the 
exception.

Moscarella E(1), Argenziano G(2), Moreno C(3), Piana S(4), Lallas A(5), Lombardi 
M(5), Longo C(5), Ferrara G(6).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Dermatology and Skin Cancer - elvira.moscarella@gmail.com.
(2)st Medical Department, Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova Institute for Research 
and Care, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Clinical Hospital University of Chile, Santiago, 
Chile.
(5)Unit of Dermatology and Skin Cancer.
(6)Department of Dermatopathology, Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova Institute for 
Research and Care, Reggio Emilia, Italy.

Intralesional (incision) biopsy for melanoma diagnosis can be warranted for 
large lesions or for those lesions whose in-toto excision leads to cosmetic 
and/or functional impairment. However, this diagnostic approach carries a risk 
of underdiagnosis, if a clinicopathologic diagnostic approach is not 
implemented. As a rule, in large pigmented lesions from special body areas 
(scalp and acral skin), clinicodermoscopic differential diagnosis of melanoma 
includes non-melanocytic skin lesions, traumatic skin changes, and nevi. The 
unique indication to incision biopsy for the differential diagnosis between 
nevus and melanoma is a relatively small nodular proliferation developing within 
a medium-large congenital nevus.

DOI: 10.23736/S0392-0488.16.05376-1
PMID: 27096540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]