---
reference_id: "PMID:33068776"
title: GLP-1 receptor agonists in the treatment of type 2 diabetes - state-of-the-art.
authors:
- Nauck MA
- Quast DR
- Wefers J
- Meier JJ
journal: Mol Metab
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2020.101102
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GLP-1 receptor agonists in the treatment of type 2 diabetes - state-of-the-art.
**Authors:** Nauck MA, Quast DR, Wefers J, Meier JJ
**Journal:** Mol Metab (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molmet.2020.101102](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2020.101102)

## Content

1. Mol Metab. 2021 Apr;46:101102. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2020.101102. Epub 2020
Oct  14.

GLP-1 receptor agonists in the treatment of type 2 diabetes - state-of-the-art.

Nauck MA(1), Quast DR(2), Wefers J(2), Meier JJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Division, Katholisches Klinikum Bochum, St. Josef Hospital, Ruhr 
University Bochum, Bochum, Germany. Electronic address: michael.nauck@rub.de.
(2)Diabetes Division, Katholisches Klinikum Bochum, St. Josef Hospital, Ruhr 
University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.

BACKGROUND: GLP-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) with exenatide b.i.d. first 
approved to treat type 2 diabetes in 2005 have been further developed to yield 
effective compounds/preparations that have overcome the original problem of 
rapid elimination (short half-life), initially necessitating short intervals 
between injections (twice daily for exenatide b.i.d.).
SCOPE OF REVIEW: To summarize current knowledge about GLP-1 receptor agonist.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: At present, GLP-1 RAs are injected twice daily (exenatide 
b.i.d.), once daily (lixisenatide and liraglutide), or once weekly (exenatide 
once weekly, dulaglutide, albiglutide, and semaglutide). A daily oral 
preparation of semaglutide, which has demonstrated clinical effectiveness close 
to the once-weekly subcutaneous preparation, was recently approved. All GLP-1 
RAs share common mechanisms of action: augmentation of hyperglycemia-induced 
insulin secretion, suppression of glucagon secretion at hyper- or euglycemia, 
deceleration of gastric emptying preventing large post-meal glycemic increments, 
and a reduction in calorie intake and body weight. Short-acting agents 
(exenatide b.i.d., lixisenatide) have reduced effectiveness on overnight and 
fasting plasma glucose, but maintain their effect on gastric emptying during 
long-term treatment. Long-acting GLP-1 RAs (liraglutide, once-weekly exenatide, 
dulaglutide, albiglutide, and semaglutide) have more profound effects on 
overnight and fasting plasma glucose and HbA1c, both on a background of oral 
glucose-lowering agents and in combination with basal insulin. Effects on 
gastric emptying decrease over time (tachyphylaxis). Given a similar, if not 
superior, effectiveness for HbA1c reduction with additional weight reduction and 
no intrinsic risk of hypoglycemic episodes, GLP-1RAs are recommended as the 
preferred first injectable glucose-lowering therapy for type 2 diabetes, even 
before insulin treatment. However, GLP-1 RAs can be combined with (basal) 
insulin in either free- or fixed-dose preparations. More recently developed 
agents, in particular semaglutide, are characterized by greater efficacy with 
respect to lowering plasma glucose as well as body weight. Since 2016, several 
cardiovascular (CV) outcome studies have shown that GLP-1 RAs can effectively 
prevent CV events such as acute myocardial infarction or stroke and associated 
mortality. Therefore, guidelines particularly recommend treatment with GLP-1 RAs 
in patients with pre-existing atherosclerotic vascular disease (for example, 
previous CV events). The evidence of similar effects in lower-risk subjects is 
not quite as strong. Since sodium/glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitor 
treatment reduces CV events as well (with the effect mainly driven by a 
reduction in heart failure complications), the individual risk of ischemic or 
heart failure complications should guide the choice of treatment. GLP-1 RAs may 
also help prevent renal complications of type 2 diabetes. Other active research 
areas in the field of GLP-1 RAs are the definition of subgroups within the type 
2 diabetes population who particularly benefit from treatment with GLP-1 RAs. 
These include pharmacogenomic approaches and the characterization of 
non-responders. Novel indications for GLP-1 RAs outside type 2 diabetes, such as 
type 1 diabetes, neurodegenerative diseases, and psoriasis, are being explored. 
Thus, within 15 years of their initial introduction, GLP-1 RAs have become a 
well-established class of glucose-lowering agents that has the potential for 
further development and growing impact for treating type 2 diabetes and 
potentially other diseases.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2020.101102
PMCID: PMC8085572
PMID: 33068776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]