---
reference_id: "PMID:26611270"
title: Country break-out session highlights.
authors:
- Fazekas F
- Gehring K
- Gallo P
- Lebrun-Frénay C
- Moral E
- Myhr KM
journal: Neurodegener Dis Manag
year: '2015'
doi: 10.2217/nmt.15.58
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Country break-out session highlights.
**Authors:** Fazekas F, Gehring K, Gallo P, Lebrun-Frénay C, Moral E, Myhr KM
**Journal:** Neurodegener Dis Manag (2015)
**DOI:** [10.2217/nmt.15.58](https://doi.org/10.2217/nmt.15.58)

## Content

1. Neurodegener Dis Manag. 2015;5(6 Suppl):31-7. doi: 10.2217/nmt.15.58.

Country break-out session highlights.

Fazekas F(1), Gehring K(2), Gallo P(3), Lebrun-Frénay C(4), Moral E(5), Myhr 
KM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 22, 
8036 Graz, Austria.
(2)Neurozentrum am Klosterforst, Itzehoe, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, DNS University Hospital of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(4)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Nice, France.
(5)Department of Neurology, Hospital Sant Joan Despí Moisès Broggi, Sant Joan 
Despí, Spain.
(6)Department of Neurology, Haukeland University Hospital, & University of 
Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

Individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS) spasticity present a wide range of 
symptoms and disability levels that are frequently challenging to manage. At the 
MS Experts Summit 2015, five country breakout sessions were conducted in 
parallel, and mainly in the native language, to examine various aspects about 
the management of treatment-resistant MS spasticity. Topics covered included 
video documentation of MS spasticity management (Germany), use of cannabinoid 
medicines in daily practice (Italy), multidisciplinary approach to MS spasticity 
care (France), titration and adherence to treatments for MS spasticity (Spain) 
and management of MS symptoms (Norway/Rest of World). For the benefit of all 
attendees, session highlights were collated and presented in a Plenary Session 
which is summarized herein.

DOI: 10.2217/nmt.15.58
PMID: 26611270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]