---
reference_id: "PMID:37336036"
title: Predictive factors for nodal recurrence in differentiated thyroid cancers.
authors:
- Kaur J
- Nadarajan A
- Janardhan D
- George NA
- Thomas S
- Varghese BT
- Krishna J
journal: Cancer Treat Res Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ctarc.2023.100728
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, surgery"
- Iodine Radioisotopes
- Retrospective Studies
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Papillary/pathology, surgery"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/epidemiology, pathology"
- Adenocarcinoma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictive factors for nodal recurrence in differentiated thyroid cancers.
**Authors:** Kaur J, Nadarajan A, Janardhan D, George NA, Thomas S, Varghese BT, Krishna J
**Journal:** Cancer Treat Res Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ctarc.2023.100728](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctarc.2023.100728)

## Content

1. Cancer Treat Res Commun. 2023;36:100728. doi: 10.1016/j.ctarc.2023.100728.
Epub  2023 Jun 16.

Predictive factors for nodal recurrence in differentiated thyroid cancers.

Kaur J(1), Nadarajan A(1), Janardhan D(1), George NA(2), Thomas S(1), Varghese
BT(1), Krishna J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Services, Regional Cancer Centre, Thiruvananthapuram,
India.
(2)Department of Surgical Services, Regional Cancer Centre, Thiruvananthapuram,
India. Electronic address: georgeabe@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Regional Cancer Centre, Thiruvananthapuram,
India.

INTRODUCTION: Differentiated thyroid carcinoma usually has a good prognosis.
Primary treatment is surgery, followed by radioactive iodine ablation based on
risk stratification. The incidence of local and distant recurrence is 30%.
Recurrence can be managed surgically or with multiple cycles of radioactive
iodine ablation. There are multiple risk factors for structural disease
recurrence proposed by the American Thyroid Association. In this study, we
attempted to study the risk factors of structural recurrence in differentiated
carcinoma thyroid and the pattern of recurrence in patients with node negative
thyroid cancer who underwent total thyroidectomy.
METHODOLOGY: This study selected a retrospective cohort of 1498 patients with
differentiated thyroid cancer: out of these, 137 patients who presented after
thyroidectomy with cervical nodal recurrence from January 2017 to December 2020
were included. The risk factors for central and lateral lymph node metastasis
were analysed by univariate and multivariate analyses, including age, gender,
T-stage, extrathyroidal extension, multifocality and high-risk variants. In
addition, the presence of TERT/BRAF mutations was studied as a risk factor for
central and lateral nodal recurrence.
RESULTS: Out of 1498 patients, 137 who fit the inclusion criteria were analysed.
Majority were female (73%); mean age was 43.1 years. Lateral compartment neck
nodal recurrence was more common (84%), while isolated central compartment nodal
recurrence occurred only in 16%. Most recurrences were seen in the first 1 year
(23.3%) or after 10 years post-total thyroidectomy (35.7%). On univariate
variate analysis, multifocality, extrathyroidal extension and high-risk variants
stage were significant factors for nodal recurrence. However, on multivariate
analysis for lateral compartment recurrence, multifocality, extrathyroidal
extension and age were found to be significant. On multivariate analysis,
multifocality, extrathyroidal extension and presence of high-risk variants were
significant predictors of central compartment nodal metastasis. ROC curve
analysis showed AUC for ETE (AUC-0.795), multifocality (AUC-0.860), presence of
high-risk variants (AUC-0.727) and T-stage (AUC-0.771) as sensitive predictive
factors for central compartment. 69 percent patients with very early recurrences
(<6 month) had TERT/BRAF V600 E mutations.
CONCLUSION: In our study, we have noted extrathyroidal extension and
multifocality as significant risk factors for nodal recurrence. BRAF and TERT
mutations are associated with aggressive clinical course and early recurrences.
There is limited role of prophylactic central compartment node dissection.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctarc.2023.100728
PMID: 37336036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
