---
reference_id: "PMID:21706934"
title: Use of dengue NS1 antigen for early diagnosis of dengue virus infection.
authors:
- Kassim FM
- Izati MN
- TgRogayah TA
- Apandi YM
- Saat Z
journal: Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health
year: '2011'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Use of dengue NS1 antigen for early diagnosis of dengue virus infection.
**Authors:** Kassim FM, Izati MN, TgRogayah TA, Apandi YM, Saat Z
**Journal:** Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health (2011)

## Content

1. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2011 May;42(3):562-9.

Use of dengue NS1 antigen for early diagnosis of dengue virus infection.

Kassim FM(1), Izati MN, TgRogayah TA, Apandi YM, Saat Z.

Author information:
(1)Virology Unit, Institute for Medical Research, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
fauziah@imr.gov.my

Accurate and timely diagnosis of dengue virus is important for early detection 
of dengue virus infection. In this study, the usefulness of the dengue NS1 
antigen test was evaluated as a routine, rapid diagnostic test for dengue virus 
infection. A total of 208 sera from patients suspected of having dengue virus 
infection were collected and tested for dengue antibody, dengue genome and 
dengue NS1 antigen. Dengue antibody test, dengue PCR test and dengue antigen 
test were able to detect dengue virus infection from Days 1 to 8 in 72.8, 52.8 
and 44.0% of samples, respectively. Of the 208 sera tested, 69.2% (144/208) of 
the acute sera were positive for dengue virus infection based on IgM antibody, 
IgG antibody, NS1 antigen and PCR tests. Thirty-two point two percent of the 
samples (67/208) were found positive for dengue NS1 antigen, 38.5% (80/208) were 
PCR positive, 40.9% (85/208) were IgM positive and 36.1% (75/208) were IgG 
positive for dengue virus. The results reveal the detection rate of dengue virus 
infection was similar for PCR and dengue antibody (65.9%) and for NS1 antigen 
and dengue antibody (62.0%) combinations. Therefore, the dengue NS1 antigen test 
can be used to complement the current antibody test used in peripheral 
laboratories. Thus, the combination of the NS1 antigen and antibody tests could 
increase the diagnostic efficiency for early diagnosis of dengue infection.

PMID: 21706934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]