---
reference_id: "PMID:26621554"
title: Recognition and Management of Acute Flaccid Myelitis in Children.
authors:
- Nelson GR
- Bonkowsky JL
- Doll E
- Green M
- Hedlund GL
- Moore KR
- Bale JF Jr
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2015.10.007
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cranial Nerve Diseases/diagnosis
- Female
- Gray Matter/pathology
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Myelitis/diagnosis
- Northwestern United States
- Paralysis/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recognition and Management of Acute Flaccid Myelitis in Children.
**Authors:** Nelson GR, Bonkowsky JL, Doll E, Green M, Hedlund GL, Moore KR, Bale JF Jr
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2015.10.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2015.10.007)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2016 Feb;55:17-21. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2015.10.007.
Epub 2015 Oct 20.

Recognition and Management of Acute Flaccid Myelitis in Children.

Nelson GR(1), Bonkowsky JL(2), Doll E(2), Green M(3), Hedlund GL(4), Moore
KR(4), Bale JF Jr(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah. Electronic address:
gary.nelson@hsc.utah.edu.
(2)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(3)Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah.
(4)Department of Medical Imaging, Primary Children's Hospital, Salt Lake City,
Utah; Department of Radiology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah.

BACKGROUND: In 2014-2015, several regions of the United States experienced an
outbreak of acute flaccid myelitis in pediatric patients. A common, unique
feature was disease localization to the gray matter of the spinal cord.
METHODS: We report 11 children, ages 13 months to 14 years (median 9 years), in
the Intermountain West who presented with extremity weakness (n = 10) or cranial
neuropathy (n = 1) of varying severity without an apparent etiology.
RESULTS: All children experienced acute paralysis, and 10 had symptoms or signs
that localized to the spinal cord. Maximum paralysis occurred within 4 days of
onset in all patients. All had spinal gray matter lesions consistent with acute
myelitis detected by magnetic resonance imaging; no single infectious cause was
identified. Despite therapy with intravenous immunoglobulin, corticosteroids, or
plasma exchange, nine of 10 (90%) children had motor deficits at follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Recognition of this disorder enables clinicians to obtain
appropriate imaging and laboratory testing, initiate treatment, and provide
families with accurate prognostic information. In contrast to other causes of
acute flaccid paralysis in childhood, most children with acute flaccid myelitis
have residual neurological deficits.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2015.10.007
PMID: 26621554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
