---
reference_id: "PMID:27428231"
title: "Etiologies and prognostic factors of leukocytoclastic vasculitis with skin involvement: A retrospective study in 112 patients."
authors:
- Bouiller K
- Audia S
- Devilliers H
- Collet E
- Aubriot MH
- Leguy-Seguin V
- Berthier S
- Bonniaud P
- Chavanet P
- Besancenot JF
- Vabres P
- Martin L
- Samson M
- Bonnotte B
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000004238
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- France
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/etiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Etiologies and prognostic factors of leukocytoclastic vasculitis with skin involvement: A retrospective study in 112 patients.
**Authors:** Bouiller K, Audia S, Devilliers H, Collet E, Aubriot MH, Leguy-Seguin V, Berthier S, Bonniaud P, Chavanet P, Besancenot JF, Vabres P, Martin L, Samson M, Bonnotte B
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000004238](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000004238)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Jul;95(28):e4238. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000004238.

Etiologies and prognostic factors of leukocytoclastic vasculitis with skin
involvement: A retrospective study in 112 patients.

Bouiller K(1), Audia S, Devilliers H, Collet E, Aubriot MH, Leguy-Seguin V,
Berthier S, Bonniaud P, Chavanet P, Besancenot JF, Vabres P, Martin L, Samson M,
Bonnotte B.

Author information:
(1)Service de médecine interne et immunologie clinique Service de médecine
interne et maladies systémiques Service de dermatologie Laboratoire
d'anatomopathologie Service de pneumologie Service de maladies infectieuses, CHU
François Mitterrand, Dijon, France.

In this study, outcomes of patients with leukocytoclastic vasculitis (LCV) were
analyzed focusing on clinical, histopathology and laboratory findings, relapses,
and survival.Data from patients with cutaneous vasculitis diagnosed between
January 1, 2000, and December 31, 2010, at Dijon University Hospital (France)
were retrospectively reviewed. LCV was defined as perivascular neutrophilic
infiltrate, endothelial cell nuclear swelling, extravasation of red blood cells,
and/or fibrin deposition in vessels. Patients were classified according to the
2012 Chapel Hill Consensus Conference. Relapses were defined as the recurrence
of vasculitis symptoms after a period of remission >1 month. Time to relapse
and/or death was calculated from the date of diagnosis. Univariate and
multivariate (Cox model) analyses were performed.A total of 112 patients (57
males and 55 females), with a mean age of 60 ± 19 (18-98) years, were analyzed.
Overall follow-up was 61 ± 38 months. At diagnosis, all patients had skin
lesions, purpura being the most common (n = 83). Lesions were associated with
systemic involvement in 55 (51%) patients. Only 41 (36.6%) patients received
specific treatment: glucocorticoids in 29 of 41 (70.7%) and immunosuppressants
in 9 of 41 (22%). Sixty-two patients (55%) had LCV due to underlying causes, 29
(25.9%) had single-organ cutaneous small vessel vasculitis (SoCSVV), and 21
(18.8%) had unclassifiable LCV. Twenty patients of the cohort (18%) experienced
relapse, 14 ± 13 (1-40) months after the diagnosis of LCV. None of the 29
patients with SoCSVV relapsed. Independent risk factors for relapse were
vascular thrombosis in the biopsy [hazard ratio (HR) = 4.9; P = 0.017],
peripheral neuropathy (HR = 9.8; P = 0.001), hepatitis (HR = 3.1; P = 0.004),
and positive antineutrophil cytoplasm antibodies (ANCA, HR = 5.9 P = 0.005). In
contrast, SoCSVV was a protective factor for relapse (HR = 0.12; P = 0.043).The
1-, 3-, and 6-year overall survival rates were 99%, 83%, and 71%, respectively,
with no difference between relapsers and nonrelapsers (P = 0.960) or between
SoCSVV and unclassifiable LCV (P = 0.588).This study demonstrates that global
survival for LCV patients is good but relapses remain frequent, especially when
the cutaneous biopsy shows vascular thrombosis, or in patients with peripheral
neuropathy or hepatitis. Conversely, SoCSVV is a protective factor for relapse.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000004238
PMCID: PMC4956825
PMID: 27428231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest.
