---
reference_id: "PMID:24198271"
title: "Antifibrotic, nephroprotective effects of paricalcitol versus calcitriol on top of ACE-inhibitor therapy in the COL4A3 knockout mouse model for progressive renal fibrosis."
authors:
- Rubel D
- Stock J
- Ciner A
- Hiller H
- Girgert R
- Müller GA
- Gross O
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gft434
keywords:
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Animals
- Autoantigens/physiology
- Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use
- Calcitriol/therapeutic use
- Collagen Type IV/physiology
- Cytokines/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Ergocalciferols/therapeutic use
- "Extracellular Matrix/drug effects, metabolism"
- Female
- "Fibrosis/drug therapy, etiology, pathology"
- Immunoblotting
- Immunoenzyme Techniques
- "Kidney Diseases/drug therapy, etiology, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Ramipril/therapeutic use
- "Receptors, Calcitriol/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antifibrotic, nephroprotective effects of paricalcitol versus calcitriol on top of ACE-inhibitor therapy in the COL4A3 knockout mouse model for progressive renal fibrosis.
**Authors:** Rubel D, Stock J, Ciner A, Hiller H, Girgert R, Müller GA, Gross O
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gft434](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gft434)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2014 May;29(5):1012-9. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gft434. Epub
2013 Nov 5.

Antifibrotic, nephroprotective effects of paricalcitol versus calcitriol on top
of ACE-inhibitor therapy in the COL4A3 knockout mouse model for progressive
renal fibrosis.

Rubel D(1), Stock J, Ciner A, Hiller H, Girgert R, Müller GA, Gross O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, University Medicine Goettingen,
Goettingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The COL4A3-/- mouse serves as animal model for progressive renal
fibrosis. Using this animal model, the present study investigates the
nephroprotective effects of Paricalcitol versus Calcitriol alone and on top of
ACE-inhibitor therapy.
METHODS: Eighty six mice were divided into six groups: (PC) with Paricalcitol
0.1 mcg/kg, (CA) Calcitriol 0.03 mcg/kg (dose equipotent), (PLAC) vehicle 0.1 mL
i.p. five times per week, (ACE + PC) Paricalcitol plus Ramipril, (ACE + CA)
Calcitriol plus Ramipril and (ACE + PLAC) vehicle plus Ramipril 10 mg/kg/day
p.o. ACE therapy started pre-emptively in Week 4, PC/CA therapy was initiated in
6-week-old animals with ongoing renal fibrosis and lasted for 8 weeks. Four to
six animals were sacrificed after 9.5 weeks and kidneys were further
investigated using histological, immunohistological and Western-blot techniques.
Survival until end-stage renal failure was determined in the remaining animals.
RESULTS: PC, but not CA, prolonged lifespan until renal failure by 13% compared
with untreated controls (P = 0.069). ACE-inhibition prolonged lifespan by >50%.
Added on top of ACE inhibition, ACE + PC (but not ACE + CA) even further
prolonged lifespan by additional 18.0% (P < 0.01 versus ACE + PLAC) and improved
renal function (blood urea nitrogen; P < 0.05 versus ACE + CA). Accumulation of
extracellular matrix and renal scarring was decreased in PC and ACE + PC-treated
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrated a substantial nephroprotective and
antifibrotic effect of the vitamin D-receptor activator Paricalcitol on top of
early ACE inhibition in the COL4A3-/- model of progressive kidney fibrosis. The
synergistic effect of Paricalcitol on top of RAAS-blockade might as well be
valuable in other chronic kidney diseases.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gft434
PMID: 24198271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
