---
reference_id: "PMID:39850993"
title: Genetic Variants in the SCN9A Gene are Detected in a Minority of Erythromelalgia Patients.
authors:
- Skystad Kvernebo M
- Grayson C
- Stylianou IM
- Woloshen V
- Radomski C
- Mørk C
- Kvernebo K
journal: Acta Derm Venereol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2340/actadv.v105.42022
keywords:
- Humans
- "Erythromelalgia/genetics, diagnosis"
- NAV1.7 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel/genetics
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Aged
- Phenotype
- Prospective Studies
- Gain of Function Mutation
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Variants in the SCN9A Gene are Detected in a Minority of Erythromelalgia Patients.
**Authors:** Skystad Kvernebo M, Grayson C, Stylianou IM, Woloshen V, Radomski C, Mørk C, Kvernebo K
**Journal:** Acta Derm Venereol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2340/actadv.v105.42022](https://doi.org/10.2340/actadv.v105.42022)

## Content

1. Acta Derm Venereol. 2025 Jan 24;105:adv42022. doi: 10.2340/actadv.v105.42022.

Genetic Variants in the SCN9A Gene are Detected in a Minority of Erythromelalgia 
Patients.

Skystad Kvernebo M(1), Grayson C(2), Stylianou IM(2), Woloshen V(2), Radomski 
C(2), Mørk C(3), Kvernebo K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, 
Norway; Aleris Medical Center, Stømmen, Norway. mari.kvernebo@gmail.com.
(2)Xenon Pharmaceuticals Inc., Burnaby, Canada.
(3)Akershus Dermatology Centre, Lørenskog, Norway.
(4)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway.

Gain-of-function variants in the voltage-gated sodium channel Nav1.7, encoded by 
the SCN9A gene, have previously been identified in patients with 
erythromelalgia, a clinical diagnosis defined by intermittent attacks of 
painful, hot, swollen, and red skin, predominantly involving the hands and feet. 
Symptoms are induced or aggravated by warming and relieved by cooling. In 
primary erythromelalgia there is no known underlying disease. This study 
investigated the frequency of SCN9A variants in a cohort of primary 
erythromelalgia patients collected at a single centre, and examined the clinical 
signs and symptoms associated with identified variants. One hundred patients 
with possible erythromelalgia were collected prospectively and evaluated by 
clinical examination. Thirty-five patients fulfilling the clinical criteria of 
primary erythromelalgia were screened for variants in SCN9A. Five were found to 
carry likely causal variants, including a variant found in 2 related individuals 
and a variant not previously described in patients with erythromelalgia. The 
clinical findings differed significantly between the patients. Overall, in this 
cohort only 4/34 (11.7%) of unrelated patients had erythromelalgia likely caused 
by gain-of-function variants in SCN9A. Variants in SCN9A are therefore likely to 
cause or contribute to primary erythromelalgia in only a small proportion of 
patients.

DOI: 10.2340/actadv.v105.42022
PMCID: PMC11780545
PMID: 39850993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MK and KK are family related.