---
reference_id: "PMID:39062601"
title: Investigation of a Large Kindred Reveals Cardiac Calsequestrin (CASQ2) as a Cause of Brugada Syndrome.
authors:
- "d'Apolito M"
- Santoro F
- Ranaldi A
- Ragnatela I
- Colia AL
- Cannito S
- Margaglione A
- "D'Arienzo G"
- "D'Andrea G"
- Pellegrino P
- Santacroce R
- Brunetti ND
- Margaglione M
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/genes15070822
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Brugada Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Calsequestrin/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigation of a Large Kindred Reveals Cardiac Calsequestrin (CASQ2) as a Cause of Brugada Syndrome.
**Authors:** d'Apolito M, Santoro F, Ranaldi A, Ragnatela I, Colia AL, Cannito S, Margaglione A, D'Arienzo G, D'Andrea G, Pellegrino P, Santacroce R, Brunetti ND, Margaglione M
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes15070822](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes15070822)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Jun 21;15(7):822. doi: 10.3390/genes15070822.

Investigation of a Large Kindred Reveals Cardiac Calsequestrin (CASQ2) as a
Cause of Brugada Syndrome.

d'Apolito M(1), Santoro F(2), Ranaldi A(1), Ragnatela I(2), Colia AL(1), Cannito
S(1), Margaglione A(2), D'Arienzo G(2), D'Andrea G(1), Pellegrino P(2),
Santacroce R(1), Brunetti ND(2), Margaglione M(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Foggia, 71122 Foggia, Italy.
(2)Cardiology Unit, Department of Medical and Surgery Sciences, University of
Foggia, 71122 Foggia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Brugada syndrome (BrS) is an inherited primary channelopathy
syndrome associated with the risk of ventricular fibrillation (VF) and sudden
cardiac death in a structurally normal heart.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The aim of this study was to clinically and genetically
evaluate a large family with severe autosomal dominant Brugada syndrome.
METHODS: Clinical and genetic studies were performed. Genetic analysis was
conducted with NGS technologies (WES) using the Illumina instrument. According
to the standard procedure, variants found by WES were confirmed in all available
families by Sanger sequencing. The effect of the variants was studied by using
in silico prediction of pathogenicity.
RESULTS: The proband was a 52-year-old man who was admitted to the emergency
department for syncope at rest. WES of the index case identified a heterozygous
VUS CASQ2, c.532T>C, p.(Tyr178His). We studied the segregation of the variation
in all pedigree members. All the patients were heterozygous for the variation
CASQ2 p.(Tyr178His), whereas the remaining healthy individuals in the family
were homozygous for the normal allele. Structural analysis of CASQ2
p.(Tyr178His) was performed and revealed an important effect of the missense
variation on monomer stability. The CASQ2 Tyr180 residue is located inside the
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) junctional face membrane interaction domain and is
predicted to disrupt filamentation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the p.Tyr178His substitution is associated
with BrS in the family investigated, affecting the stability of the protein,
disrupting filamentation at the interdimer interface, and affecting the
subsequent formation of tetramers and polymers that contain calcium-binding
sites.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15070822
PMCID: PMC11275647
PMID: 39062601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
