---
reference_id: "PMID:37565978"
title: "Penetrance and Prognosis of MYH7 Variant-Associated Cardiomyopathies: Results From a Dutch Multicenter Cohort Study."
authors:
- Jansen M
- de Brouwer R
- Hassanzada F
- Schoemaker AE
- Schmidt AF
- Kooijman-Reumerman MD
- Bracun V
- Slieker MG
- Dooijes D
- Vermeer AMC
- Wilde AAM
- Amin AS
- Lekanne Deprez RH
- Herkert JC
- Christiaans I
- de Boer RA
- Jongbloed JDH
- van Tintelen JP
- Asselbergs FW
- Baas AF
journal: JACC Heart Fail
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2023.07.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Penetrance and Prognosis of MYH7 Variant-Associated Cardiomyopathies: Results From a Dutch Multicenter Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Jansen M, de Brouwer R, Hassanzada F, Schoemaker AE, Schmidt AF, Kooijman-Reumerman MD, Bracun V, Slieker MG, Dooijes D, Vermeer AMC, Wilde AAM, Amin AS, Lekanne Deprez RH, Herkert JC, Christiaans I, de Boer RA, Jongbloed JDH, van Tintelen JP, Asselbergs FW, Baas AF
**Journal:** JACC Heart Fail (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jchf.2023.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jchf.2023.07.007)

## Content

1. JACC Heart Fail. 2024 Jan;12(1):134-147. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2023.07.007. Epub
 2023 Aug 9.

Penetrance and Prognosis of MYH7 Variant-Associated Cardiomyopathies: Results 
From a Dutch Multicenter Cohort Study.

Jansen M(1), de Brouwer R(2), Hassanzada F(3), Schoemaker AE(3), Schmidt AF(4), 
Kooijman-Reumerman MD(3), Bracun V(5), Slieker MG(6), Dooijes D(3), Vermeer 
AMC(7), Wilde AAM(8), Amin AS(8), Lekanne Deprez RH(7), Herkert JC(9), 
Christiaans I(9), de Boer RA(10), Jongbloed JDH(9), van Tintelen JP(11), 
Asselbergs FW(12), Baas AF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, the Netherlands; Department of Cardiology, University 
Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 
Netherlands Heart Institute, Utrecht, the Netherlands; European Reference 
Network for Rare, Low Prevalence and Complex Diseases of the Heart (ERN 
GUARD-Heart). Electronic address: m.jansen-48@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Netherlands Heart Institute, Utrecht, the Netherlands; Department of 
Cardiology, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, 
Groningen, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, the Netherlands; European Reference Network for Rare, Low 
Prevalence and Complex Diseases of the Heart (ERN GUARD-Heart).
(4)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, the Netherlands; European Reference Network for Rare, Low 
Prevalence and Complex Diseases of the Heart (ERN GUARD-Heart); Institute of 
Cardiovascular Science, Faculty of Population Health Sciences, University 
College London, London, United Kingdom; Department of Cardiology, University 
Medical Centre Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; 
Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Heart Failure and Arrhythmias, University 
Medical Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(6)European Reference Network for Rare, Low Prevalence and Complex Diseases of 
the Heart (ERN GUARD-Heart); Department of Pediatric Cardiology, University 
Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht University, the Netherlands.
(7)European Reference Network for Rare, Low Prevalence and Complex Diseases of 
the Heart (ERN GUARD-Heart); Department of Human Genetics, University Medical 
Centre Amsterdam Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(8)European Reference Network for Rare, Low Prevalence and Complex Diseases of 
the Heart (ERN GUARD-Heart); Department of Cardiology, University Medical Centre 
Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Amsterdam 
Cardiovascular Sciences, Heart Failure and Arrhythmias, University Medical 
Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(10)European Reference Network for Rare, Low Prevalence and Complex Diseases of 
the Heart (ERN GUARD-Heart); Department of Cardiology, University Medical Centre 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; Department of 
Cardiology, Thorax Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Erasmus University 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, the Netherlands; Netherlands Heart Institute, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands; European Reference Network for Rare, Low Prevalence and Complex 
Diseases of the Heart (ERN GUARD-Heart).
(12)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, the Netherlands; European Reference Network for Rare, Low 
Prevalence and Complex Diseases of the Heart (ERN GUARD-Heart); Institute of 
Cardiovascular Science, Faculty of Population Health Sciences, University 
College London, London, United Kingdom; Department of Cardiology, University 
Medical Centre Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; 
Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Heart Failure and Arrhythmias, University 
Medical Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Health Data Research UK 
and Institute of Health Informatics, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

Comment in
    JACC Heart Fail. 2024 Jan;12(1):148-149. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2023.08.009.

BACKGROUND: MYH7 variants cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), noncompaction 
cardiomyopathy (NCCM), and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Screening of relatives 
of patients with genetic cardiomyopathy is recommended from 10 to 12 years of 
age onward, irrespective of the affected gene.
OBJECTIVES: This study sought to study the penetrance and prognosis of MYH7 
variant-associated cardiomyopathies.
METHODS: In this multicenter cohort study, penetrance and major 
cardiomyopathy-related events (MCEs) were assessed in carriers of (likely) 
pathogenic MYH7 variants by using Kaplan-Meier curves and log-rank tests. 
Prognostic factors were evaluated using Cox regression with time-dependent 
coefficients.
RESULTS: In total, 581 subjects (30.1% index patients, 48.4% male, median age 
37.0 years [IQR: 19.5-50.2 years]) were included. HCM was diagnosed in 226 
subjects, NCCM in 70, and DCM in 55. Early penetrance and MCEs (age <12 years) 
were common among NCCM-associated variant carriers (21.2% and 12.0%, 
respectively) and DCM-associated variant carriers (15.3% and 10.0%, 
respectively), compared with HCM-associated variant carriers (2.9% and 2.1%, 
respectively). Penetrance was significantly increased in carriers of converter 
region variants (adjusted HR: 1.87; 95% CI: 1.15-3.04; P = 0.012) and at age ≤1 
year in NCCM-associated or DCM-associated variant carriers (adjusted HR: 21.17; 
95% CI: 4.81-93.20; P < 0.001) and subjects with a family history of early MCEs 
(adjusted HR: 2.45; 95% CI: 1.09-5.50; P = 0.030). The risk of MCE was increased 
in subjects with a family history of early MCEs (adjusted HR: 1.82; 95% CI: 
1.15-2.87; P = 0.010) and at age ≤5 years in NCCM-associated or DCM-associated 
variant carriers (adjusted HR: 38.82; 95% CI: 5.16-291.88; P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: MYH7 variants can cause cardiomyopathies and MCEs at a young age. 
Screening at younger ages may be warranted, particularly in carriers of NCCM- or 
DCM-associated variants and/or with a family history of MCEs at <12 years.

Copyright © 2024 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchf.2023.07.007
PMID: 37565978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding Support and Author Disclosures This work 
was supported by the Netherlands Cardiovascular Research Initiative with the 
support of the Dutch Heart Foundation. Dr Jansen has received support from the 
Netherlands Cardiovascular Research Initiative with the support of the Dutch 
Heart Foundation (CVON2014-40 DOSIS, DCVA [Dutch Cardiovascular Alliance] 
2020B005 DoubleDose) and from the Dutch Heart Foundation (Dekker 2015T041). Dr 
Christiaans has received support from the Netherlands Cardiovascular Research 
Initiative with the support of the Dutch Heart Foundation (CVON2015-12 
e-Detect). Dr de Boer has received support from the Netherlands Cardiovascular 
Research Initiative with the support of the Dutch Heart Foundation (CVON2014-40 
DOSIS, DCVA 2020B005 DoubleDose). Dr van Tintelen has received support from the 
Netherlands Cardiovascular Research Initiative with the support of the Dutch 
Heart Foundation (CVON2014-40 DOSIS, DCVA 2020B005 DoubleDose and CVON2015-12 
e-Detect). Dr Asselbergs has received support from the Netherlands 
Cardiovascular Research Initiative with the support of the Dutch Heart 
Foundation (CVON2014-40 DOSIS, DCVA 2020B005 DoubleDose and CVON2015-12 
e-Detect) and from the UCL Hospitals NIHR Biomedical Research Centre. Dr Baas 
has received support from the Netherlands Cardiovascular Research Initiative 
with the support of the Dutch Heart Foundation (CVON2014-40 DOSIS, DCVA 2020B005 
DoubleDose and CVON2015-12 e-Detect) and from the Dutch Heart Foundation (Dekker 
2015T041). All other authors have reported that they have no relationships 
relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.