---
reference_id: "PMID:39926260"
title: Belzutifan for the treatment of renal cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Wu X
- Lazris D
- Wong R
- Tykodi SS
journal: Ther Adv Med Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/17588359251317846
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Belzutifan for the treatment of renal cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Wu X, Lazris D, Wong R, Tykodi SS
**Journal:** Ther Adv Med Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/17588359251317846](https://doi.org/10.1177/17588359251317846)

## Content

1. Ther Adv Med Oncol. 2025 Feb 8;17:17588359251317846. doi: 
10.1177/17588359251317846. eCollection 2025.

Belzutifan for the treatment of renal cell carcinoma.

Wu X(1)(2), Lazris D(3), Wong R(4)(5), Tykodi SS(6)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of 
Washington/Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue N - M1-B208, 
Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA.
(2)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Internal Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(5)UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Belzutifan received its first FDA approval in 2021 for treating clinical 
manifestations of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease including renal cell carcinoma 
(RCC) followed by approval in 2023 for treating advanced sporadic RCC that has 
progressed through multiple lines of treatment. It is the first FDA-approved 
drug to target hypoxia-inducible factor 2 alpha (HIF-2α). By inhibiting the 
HIF-2α transcription factor, belzutifan prevents HIF-2α from dimerizing with 
HIF-1β, thereby preventing the transcription of downstream oncogenes. Most clear 
cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) tumors are associated with VHL deletion or 
inactivation resulting in HIF-2α overexpression that represents a key 
contributor to tumorigenesis, thereby making belzutifan a uniquely optimal drug 
for targeting ccRCC. Belzutifan has demonstrated activity in clinical trials as 
a front- and later-line therapy, and in combination with tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors. It has been largely well tolerated, although anemia represents a 
common on-target side effect and, along with hypoxia, requires monitoring during 
treatment. Ongoing phase III trials are investigating belzutifan in combination 
regimens in the relapsed/refractory, front-line, and adjuvant settings. Future 
studies will focus on identifying predictive biomarkers and resistance pathways.

© The Author(s), 2025.

DOI: 10.1177/17588359251317846
PMCID: PMC11806488
PMID: 39926260

Conflict of interest statement: S.S.T. has received research funding 
(Institutional) from Merck, Xencor, AVEO Oncology, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Exelixis, Pfizer, Nektar Therapeutics, Iovance Biotherapeutics and HiberCell; 
Consulting fees from FirstWord, Bristol-Myers Squibb, AVEO Oncology, and 
Exelixis; Honoraria from OncLive/MJH Life Sciences, Targeted Oncology, 
CancerNetwork and Topline Bio; Support for attending meetings and/or travel from 
DAVA Oncology. X.W., D.L., and R.W. declare no potential conflicts of interest 
with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.