---
reference_id: "PMID:12831425"
title: Neurogenic pulmonary edema in enterovirus 71 encephalitis is not uniformly fatal but causes severe morbidity in survivors.
authors:
- Prager P
- Nolan M
- Andrews IP
- Williams GD
journal: Pediatr Crit Care Med
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1097/01.PCC.0000074274.58997.FE
keywords:
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- "Child, Preschool"
- Echocardiography
- "Encephalitis, Viral/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Enterovirus/classification
- "Enterovirus Infections/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intensive Care Units, Pediatric"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Oxadiazoles/therapeutic use
- Oxazoles
- "Pulmonary Edema/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- "Respiration, Artificial"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurogenic pulmonary edema in enterovirus 71 encephalitis is not uniformly fatal but causes severe morbidity in survivors.
**Authors:** Prager P, Nolan M, Andrews IP, Williams GD
**Journal:** Pediatr Crit Care Med (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.PCC.0000074274.58997.FE](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.PCC.0000074274.58997.FE)

## Content

1. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2003 Jul;4(3):377-81. doi: 
10.1097/01.PCC.0000074274.58997.FE.

Neurogenic pulmonary edema in enterovirus 71 encephalitis is not uniformly fatal 
but causes severe morbidity in survivors.

Prager P(1), Nolan M, Andrews IP, Williams GD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Intensive Care, Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, 
Australia.

During the Australian summer of 2000/2001, there was an outbreak of enterovirus 
71 infection in Sydney. Between December 2000 and May 2001, approximately 200 
children presented to Sydney Children's Hospital with hand-foot-and-mouth 
disease and 18 experienced neurologic complications. Four presented with acute 
invasive central nervous system disease and severe pulmonary edema. We describe 
the cardiorespiratory disturbances and intensive care management of these four 
consecutive children successfully treated for neurogenic pulmonary edema 
attributed to proven enterovirus 71 infection. All four survived the acute stage 
of the illness. However, all four have been left with significant debilitating 
morbidity. Epidemic enterovirus 71 brainstem encephalitis presenting as 
neurogenic pulmonary edema can be successfully managed in the pediatric 
intensive care unit but has great potential to yield a large number of 
handicapped toddlers and become "the poliomyelitis of the 21st century."

DOI: 10.1097/01.PCC.0000074274.58997.FE
PMID: 12831425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]