---
reference_id: "PMID:34606075"
title: "Axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease: from Common Pathogenic Mechanisms to Emerging Treatment Opportunities."
authors:
- McCray BA
- Scherer SS
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s13311-021-01099-2
keywords:
- Axonal Transport/genetics
- Axons/pathology
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease: from Common Pathogenic Mechanisms to Emerging Treatment Opportunities.
**Authors:** McCray BA, Scherer SS
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13311-021-01099-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-021-01099-2)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2021 Oct;18(4):2269-2285. doi: 10.1007/s13311-021-01099-2. 
Epub 2021 Oct 4.

Axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease: from Common Pathogenic Mechanisms to 
Emerging Treatment Opportunities.

McCray BA(1), Scherer SS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA. bmccray3@jhmi.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
19104, USA.

Inherited peripheral neuropathies are a genetically and phenotypically diverse 
group of disorders that lead to degeneration of peripheral neurons with 
resulting sensory and motor dysfunction. Genetic neuropathies that primarily 
cause axonal degeneration, as opposed to demyelination, are most often 
classified as Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2 (CMT2) and are the focus of 
this review. Gene identification efforts over the past three decades have 
dramatically expanded the genetic landscape of CMT and revealed several common 
pathological mechanisms among various forms of the disease. In some cases, 
identification of the precise genetic defect and/or the downstream pathological 
consequences of disease mutations have yielded promising therapeutic 
opportunities. In this review, we discuss evidence for pathogenic overlap among 
multiple forms of inherited neuropathy, highlighting genetic defects in axonal 
transport, mitochondrial dynamics, organelle-organelle contacts, and local 
axonal protein translation as recurrent pathological processes in inherited 
axonal neuropathies. We also discuss how these insights have informed emerging 
treatment strategies, including specific approaches for single forms of 
neuropathy, as well as more general approaches that have the potential to treat 
multiple types of neuropathy. Such therapeutic opportunities, made possible by 
improved understanding of molecular and cellular pathogenesis and advances in 
gene therapy technologies, herald a new and exciting phase in inherited 
peripheral neuropathy.

© 2021. The American Society for Experimental NeuroTherapeutics, Inc.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-021-01099-2
PMCID: PMC8804038
PMID: 34606075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.S.S. has been compensated for serving on the 
scientific advisory boards of Mitochondria in Motion, which is developing drugs 
to treat CMT2A, and Disarm Therapeutics, which is developing drugs to block 
SARM1 as a treatment of peripheral neuropathies.