---
reference_id: "PMID:37973258"
title: Extreme Weather Events and Asthma.
authors:
- Luedders J
- Poole JA
- Rorie AC
journal: Immunol Allergy Clin North Am
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.iac.2023.07.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extreme Weather Events and Asthma.
**Authors:** Luedders J, Poole JA, Rorie AC
**Journal:** Immunol Allergy Clin North Am (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.iac.2023.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iac.2023.07.001)

## Content

1. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2024 Feb;44(1):35-44. doi: 
10.1016/j.iac.2023.07.001. Epub 2023 Aug 21.

Extreme Weather Events and Asthma.

Luedders J(1), Poole JA(2), Rorie AC(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy & Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Nebraska Medical Center, 985990 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, 
USA. Electronic address: jennilee.luedders@unmc.edu.
(2)Division of Allergy & Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Nebraska Medical Center, 985990 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, 
USA.

The objective of this article is to review recent literature on the implications 
of extreme weather events such as thunderstorms, wildfires, tropical cyclones, 
freshwater flooding, and temperature extremes in relationship to asthma 
symptoms. Several studies have shown worsening of asthma symptoms with 
thunderstorms, wildfires, tropical cyclones, freshwater flooding, and 
temperature extremes. In particular, thunderstorm asthma can be exacerbated by 
certain factors such as temperature, precipitation, and allergen sensitization. 
Therefore, it is imperative that the allergy and immunology community be aware 
of the health effects associated with these extreme weather events in order to 
educate patients and engage in mitigation strategies.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.iac.2023.07.001
PMCID: PMC11472832
PMID: 37973258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]