---
reference_id: "PMID:17366775"
title: Access to drinking-water and arsenicosis in Bangladesh.
authors:
- Caldwell BK
- Smith WT
- Lokuge K
- Ranmuthugala G
- Dear K
- Milton AH
- Sim MR
- Ng JC
- Mitra SN
journal: J Health Popul Nutr
year: '2006'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Access to drinking-water and arsenicosis in Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Caldwell BK, Smith WT, Lokuge K, Ranmuthugala G, Dear K, Milton AH, Sim MR, Ng JC, Mitra SN
**Journal:** J Health Popul Nutr (2006)

## Content

1. J Health Popul Nutr. 2006 Sep;24(3):336-45.

Access to drinking-water and arsenicosis in Bangladesh.

Caldwell BK(1), Smith WT, Lokuge K, Ranmuthugala G, Dear K, Milton AH, Sim MR, 
Ng JC, Mitra SN.

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, Australian National 
University, Canberra, Australia. bruce.caldwell@anu.edu.au

The discovery of arsenic contamination in groundwater has challenged efforts to 
provide safe drinking-water to households in rural Bangladesh. Two 
nationally-representative surveys in 2000 and 2002 investigated water-usage 
patterns, water-testing, knowledge of arsenic poisoning, and behavioural 
responses to arsenic contamination. Knowledge of arsenicosis rose between the 
two surveys among women from 42% to 64% but awareness of consequences of arsenic 
remained limited; only 13% knew that it could lead to death. Behavioural 
responses to arsenic have been limited, probably in part because of the lack of 
concern but also because households are uncertain of how best to respond and 
have a strong preference for tubewell water even when wells are known to be 
contaminated. Further work conducted by the survey team highlighted the 
difficulties in providing alternative sources of water, with many households 
switching back to their original sources of water.

PMCID: PMC3013254
PMID: 17366775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]