---
reference_id: "PMID:39091928"
title: Unraveling cardiomyocyte responses and intercellular communication alterations in primary carnitine deficiency cardiomyopathy via single-nucleus RNA sequencing.
authors:
- Yin Y
- Ye L
- Chen M
- Liu H
- Miao J
journal: Heliyon
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e33581
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unraveling cardiomyocyte responses and intercellular communication alterations in primary carnitine deficiency cardiomyopathy via single-nucleus RNA sequencing.
**Authors:** Yin Y, Ye L, Chen M, Liu H, Miao J
**Journal:** Heliyon (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e33581](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e33581)

## Content

1. Heliyon. 2024 Jun 24;10(13):e33581. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e33581. 
eCollection 2024 Jul 15.

Unraveling cardiomyocyte responses and intercellular communication alterations 
in primary carnitine deficiency cardiomyopathy via single-nucleus RNA 
sequencing.

Yin Y(1)(2), Ye L(1)(2), Chen M(1)(2), Liu H(1)(2), Miao J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chongqing Health Center for Women and Children, 
Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Women and Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Primary Carnitine Deficiency (PCD) is a potentially life-threatening 
autosomal recessive monogenic disorder arising from mutations in the organic 
cation transporter 2 (OCTN2) gene. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a prevalent 
symptom associated with this condition, and episodes of metabolic disturbance 
may lead to sudden death. However, the pathogenic mechanism remains unclear. 
Here, we sought to investigate the response of cardiomyocytes and alterations in 
the intercellular communication in individuals with PCD DCM.
METHODS: The GSE211650 dataset was downloaded. Subsequently, modular analysis 
was performed using hdWGCNA. SCENIC was employed for transcription factor 
analysis. Monocle2 and SCP were applied to conduct trajectory inference and 
characterize dynamic features. CellChat was used to investigate intercellular 
interactions.
RESULTS: OCTN2-deficient cardiomyocytes displayed transcriptomic alterations 
indicative of reduced contractility, developmental abnormalities, and fibrosis. 
The reduced expression of genes encoding troponin, myosin, and calcium ion 
transporters may underlie the observed decrease in contractility. Suppressed Wnt 
signaling and downregulated transcription factors associated with myocardial 
development suggest potential developmental disturbances in cardiomyocytes. 
Growth arrest-specific 6 (GAS6) secreted by TNNC1 high cardiomyocytes is 
implicated in myocardial inflammation and fibrosis. Macrophages-derived secreted 
phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1) promotes the activation of fibroblasts. Furthermore, 
there was a reduction in neuronal genes in the OCTN2-deficient group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our research has unveiled, for the first time, the responses of 
cardiomyocytes and alterations in the intercellular communication in PCD DCM, 
offering valuable insights for the precision treatment of this condition.

© 2024 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e33581
PMCID: PMC11292504
PMID: 39091928

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.