---
reference_id: "PMID:23805942"
title: The preclinical profile of crizotinib for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer and other neoplastic disorders.
authors:
- Roskoski R Jr
journal: Expert Opin Drug Discov
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1517/17460441.2013.813015
keywords:
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- Animals
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Crizotinib
- Drug Discovery
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- Humans
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-met/metabolism
- "Pyrazoles/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Pyridines/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, chemistry, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The preclinical profile of crizotinib for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer and other neoplastic disorders.
**Authors:** Roskoski R Jr
**Journal:** Expert Opin Drug Discov (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1517/17460441.2013.813015](https://doi.org/10.1517/17460441.2013.813015)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2013 Sep;8(9):1165-79. doi:
10.1517/17460441.2013.813015. Epub 2013 Jun 28.

The preclinical profile of crizotinib for the treatment of non-small-cell lung
cancer and other neoplastic disorders.

Roskoski R Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Blue Ridge Institute for Medical Research, 3754 Brevard Road, Suite 116, Box
19, Horse Shoe, NC 28742, USA. rrj@brimr.org

INTRODUCTION: The critical role of the activity of the nucleophosmin- anaplastic
lymphoma kinase (NPM-ALK) fusion protein in anaplastic large-cell lymphoma
prompted drug discovery programs directed against ALK. Drug discovery efforts
increased after finding that about 4% of non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs)
possess an EML4-ALK fusion protein.
AREAS COVERED: The author provides a review of the development of crizotinib, an
orally effective c-Met and ALK protein kinase inhibitor. The article highlights
its beginning with the X-ray crystallographic structure of a lead compound
(PHA-0665752) bound to the active site of the kinase domain of c-Met.
EXPERT OPINION: Studies of patients with EML4-ALK-positive NSCLC showed that
crizotinib was clinically effective and led to its approval in August 2011. The
use of lipophilic efficiency played a crucial role in the development of
crizotinib from a lead c-Met inhibitor. The use of X-ray crystal structures from
lead compounds, bound to their targets, is increasing in the drug discovery
process owing to its effectiveness. That the drug also inhibits ALK and
ALK-fusion proteins was serendipitous, however. The discovery of the EML4-ALK
fusion protein in some NSCLC patients has led to the testing and rapid approval
of the compound.

DOI: 10.1517/17460441.2013.813015
PMID: 23805942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
