---
reference_id: "PMID:34630437"
title: "Lynch Syndrome and MSI-H Cancers: From Mechanisms to \"Off-The-Shelf\" Cancer Vaccines."
authors:
- Roudko V
- Cimen Bozkus C
- Greenbaum B
- Lucas A
- Samstein R
- Bhardwaj N
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757804
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lynch Syndrome and MSI-H Cancers: From Mechanisms to "Off-The-Shelf" Cancer Vaccines.
**Authors:** Roudko V, Cimen Bozkus C, Greenbaum B, Lucas A, Samstein R, Bhardwaj N
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.757804](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.757804)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 Sep 24;12:757804. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757804. 
eCollection 2021.

Lynch Syndrome and MSI-H Cancers: From Mechanisms to "Off-The-Shelf" Cancer 
Vaccines.

Roudko V(1)(2)(3), Cimen Bozkus C(3)(4), Greenbaum B(5)(6), Lucas A(7), Samstein 
R(2)(3)(8), Bhardwaj N(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, United States.
(2)Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, United States.
(3)Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, United States.
(4)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States.
(5)Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Computational Oncology program, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, United States.
(6)Physiology, Biophysics & Systems Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NY, United States.
(7)Henry D. Janowitz Division of Gastroenterology, Samuel D. Bronfman Department 
of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United 
States.
(8)Department of Radiation Oncology, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, United 
States.

Defective DNA mismatch repair (dMMR) is associated with many cancer types 
including colon, gastric, endometrial, ovarian, hepatobiliary tract, urinary 
tract, brain and skin cancers. Lynch syndrome - a hereditary cause of dMMR - 
confers increased lifetime risk of malignancy in different organs and tissues. 
These Lynch syndrome pathogenic alleles are widely present in humans at a 1:320 
population frequency of a single allele and associated with an up to 80% risk of 
developing microsatellite unstable cancer (microsatellite instability - high, or 
MSI-H). Advanced MSI-H tumors can be effectively treated with checkpoint 
inhibitors (CPI), however, that has led to response rates of only 30-60% despite 
their high tumor mutational burden and favorable immune gene signatures in the 
tumor microenvironment (TME). We and others have characterized a subset of MSI-H 
associated highly recurrent frameshift mutations that yield shared immunogenic 
neoantigens. These frameshifts might serve as targets for off-the-shelf cancer 
vaccine designs. In this review we discuss the current state of research around 
MSI-H cancer vaccine development, its application to MSI-H and Lynch syndrome 
cancer patients and the utility of MSI-H as a biomarker for CPI therapy. We also 
summarize the tumor intrinsic mechanisms underlying the high occurrence rates of 
certain frameshifts in MSI-H. Finally, we provide an overview of pivotal 
clinical trials investigating MSI-H as a biomarker for CPI therapy and MSI-H 
vaccines. Overall, this review aims to inform the development of novel research 
paradigms and therapeutics.

Copyright © 2021 Roudko, Cimen Bozkus, Greenbaum, Lucas, Samstein and Bhardwaj.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757804
PMCID: PMC8498209
PMID: 34630437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.