---
reference_id: "PMID:28508035"
title: Flashing Lights Induce Prolonged Distortions in Visual Cortical Responses and Visual Perception.
authors:
- Minamisawa G
- Funayama K
- Matsumoto N
- Matsuki N
- Ikegaya Y
journal: eNeuro
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0304-16.2017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Flashing Lights Induce Prolonged Distortions in Visual Cortical Responses and Visual Perception.
**Authors:** Minamisawa G, Funayama K, Matsumoto N, Matsuki N, Ikegaya Y
**Journal:** eNeuro (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1523/ENEURO.0304-16.2017](https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0304-16.2017)

## Content

1. eNeuro. 2017 May 11;4(3):ENEURO.0304-16.2017. doi:
10.1523/ENEURO.0304-16.2017.  eCollection 2017 May-Jun.

Flashing Lights Induce Prolonged Distortions in Visual Cortical Responses and 
Visual Perception.

Minamisawa G(1), Funayama K(1), Matsumoto N(1), Matsuki N(1), Ikegaya Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Pharmacology Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(2)Center for Information and Neural Networks, National Institute of Information 
and Communications Technology, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The primary sensory neocortex generates an internal representation of the 
environment, and its circuit reorganization is thought to lead to a modification 
of sensory perception. This reorganization occurs primarily through 
activity-dependent plasticity and has been well documented in animals during 
early developmental stages. Here, we describe a new method for the noninvasive 
induction of long-term plasticity in the mature brain: simple transient visual 
stimuli (i.e., flashing lights) can be used to induce prolonged modifications in 
visual cortical processing and visually driven behaviors. Our previous studies 
have shown that, in the primary visual cortex (V1) of mice, a flashing light 
stimulus evokes a long-delayed response that persists for seconds. When the mice 
were repetitively presented with drifting grating stimuli (conditioned stimuli) 
during the flash stimulus-evoked delayed response period, the V1 neurons 
exhibited a long-lasting decrease in responsiveness to the conditioned stimuli. 
The flash stimulus-induced underrepresentation of the grating motion was 
specific to the direction of the conditioned stimuli and was associated with a 
decrease in the animal's ability to detect the motion of the drifting gratings. 
The neurophysiological and behavioral plasticity both persisted for at least 
several hours and required N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor activation in the 
visual cortex. We propose that flashing light stimuli can be used as an 
experimental tool to investigate the visual function and plasticity of neuronal 
representations and perception after a critical period of neocortical 
plasticity.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0304-16.2017
PMCID: PMC5429040
PMID: 28508035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]