---
reference_id: "PMID:36237484"
title: Lack of UBE3A-Mediated Regulation of Synaptic SK2 Channels Contributes to Learning and Memory Impairment in the Female Mouse Model of Angelman Syndrome.
authors:
- Sun J
- Liu Y
- Hao X
- Baudry M
- Bi X
journal: Neural Plast
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1155/2022/3923384
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lack of UBE3A-Mediated Regulation of Synaptic SK2 Channels Contributes to Learning and Memory Impairment in the Female Mouse Model of Angelman Syndrome.
**Authors:** Sun J, Liu Y, Hao X, Baudry M, Bi X
**Journal:** Neural Plast (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2022/3923384](https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/3923384)

## Content

1. Neural Plast. 2022 Oct 4;2022:3923384. doi: 10.1155/2022/3923384. eCollection 
2022.

Lack of UBE3A-Mediated Regulation of Synaptic SK2 Channels Contributes to 
Learning and Memory Impairment in the Female Mouse Model of Angelman Syndrome.

Sun J(1), Liu Y(1), Hao X(1), Baudry M(2), Bi X(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific, Western University of Health 
Sciences, Pomona, California 91766, USA.
(2)College of Dental Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, 
California 91766, USA.

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by 
severe developmental delay, motor impairment, language and cognition deficits, 
and often with increased seizure activity. AS is caused by deficiency of UBE3A, 
which is both an E3 ligase and a cofactor for transcriptional regulation. We 
previously showed that the small conductance potassium channel protein SK2 is a 
UBE3A substrate, and that increased synaptic SK2 levels contribute to 
impairments in synaptic plasticity and fear-conditioning memory, as inhibition 
of SK2 channels significantly improved both synaptic plasticity and fear memory 
in male AS mice. In the present study, we investigated UBE3a-mediated regulation 
of synaptic plasticity and fear-conditioning in female AS mice. Results from 
both western blot and immunofluorescence analyses showed that synaptic SK2 
levels were significantly increased in hippocampus of female AS mice, as 
compared to wild-type (WT) littermates. Like in male AS mice, long-term 
potentiation (LTP) was significantly reduced while long-term depression (LTD) 
was enhanced at hippocampal CA3-CA1 synapses of female AS mice, as compared to 
female WT mice. Both alterations were significantly reduced by treatment with 
the SK2 inhibitor, apamin. The shunting effect of SK2 channels on NMDA receptor 
was significantly larger in female AS mice as compared to female WT mice. Female 
AS mice also showed impairment in both contextual and tone memory recall, and 
this impairment was significantly reduced by apamin treatment. Our results 
indicate that like male AS mice, female AS mice showed significant impairment in 
both synaptic plasticity and fear-conditioning memory due to increased levels of 
synaptic SK2 channels. Any therapeutic strategy to reduce SK2-mediated 
inhibition of NMDAR should be beneficial to both male and female patients.

Copyright © 2022 Jiandong Sun et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/3923384
PMCID: PMC9553421
PMID: 36237484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.