---
reference_id: "PMID:9425902"
title: Sox10 mutation disrupts neural crest development in Dom Hirschsprung mouse model.
authors:
- Southard-Smith EM
- Kos L
- Pavan WJ
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1038/ng0198-60
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sox10 mutation disrupts neural crest development in Dom Hirschsprung mouse model.
**Authors:** Southard-Smith EM, Kos L, Pavan WJ
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0198-60](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0198-60)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1998 Jan;18(1):60-4. doi: 10.1038/ng0198-60.

Sox10 mutation disrupts neural crest development in Dom Hirschsprung mouse 
model.

Southard-Smith EM(1), Kos L, Pavan WJ.

Author information:
(1)Mouse Embryology Section, Laboratory of Genetic Disease Research, National 
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892-4472, USA.

Hirschsprung disease (HSCR, MIM #142623) is a multigenic neurocristopathy 
(neural crest disorder) characterized by absence of enteric ganglia in a 
variable portion of the distal colon. Subsets of HSCR individuals also present 
with neural crest-derived melanocyte deficiencies (Hirschsprung-Waardenburg, 
HSCR-WS, MIM #277580). Murine models have been instrumental in the 
identification and analysis of HSCR disease genes. These include mice with 
deficiencies of endothelin B receptor (Ednrb(s-l); refs 1,2) endothelin 3 
(Edn3(ls): refs 1,3) the tyrosine kinase receptor cRet and glial-derived 
neurotrophic factor. Another mouse model of HSCR disease, Dom, arose 
spontaneously at the Jackson Laboratory. While Dom/+ heterozygous mice display 
regional deficiencies of neural crest-derived enteric ganglia in the distal 
colon, Dom/Dom homozygous animals are embryonic lethal. We have determined that 
premature termination of Sox10, a member of the SRY-like HMG box family of 
transcription factors, is responsible for absence of the neural crest 
derivatives in Dom mice. We demonstrate expression of Sox10 in normal neural 
crest cells, disrupted expression of both Sox10 and the HSCR disease gene Ednrb 
in Dom mutant embryos, and loss of neural crest derivatives due to apoptosis. 
Our studies suggest that Sox10 is essential for proper peripheral nervous system 
development. We propose SOX10 as a candidate disease gene for individuals with 
HSCR whose disease does not have an identified genetic origin.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0198-60
PMID: 9425902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]