---
reference_id: "PMID:35477108"
title: "Liver injury in Wilson's disease: An immunohistochemical study."
authors:
- Szeligowska J
- Ilczuk T
- Nehring P
- Górnicka B
- Litwin T
- Członkowska A
- Przybyłkowski A
journal: Adv Med Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.advms.2022.04.003
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/metabolism, pathology"
- Copper
- Cyclooxygenase 2/metabolism
- Cytochromes c/metabolism
- Liver/metabolism
- "Liver Cirrhosis/etiology, pathology"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Oxidoreductases/metabolism
- Peroxiredoxins/metabolism
- Thioredoxins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver injury in Wilson's disease: An immunohistochemical study.
**Authors:** Szeligowska J, Ilczuk T, Nehring P, Górnicka B, Litwin T, Członkowska A, Przybyłkowski A
**Journal:** Adv Med Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.advms.2022.04.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advms.2022.04.003)

## Content

1. Adv Med Sci. 2022 Sep;67(2):203-207. doi: 10.1016/j.advms.2022.04.003. Epub
2022  Apr 25.

Liver injury in Wilson's disease: An immunohistochemical study.

Szeligowska J(1), Ilczuk T(2), Nehring P(1), Górnicka B(2), Litwin T(3),
Członkowska A(3), Przybyłkowski A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Internal Medicine, Medical University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Pathomorphology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Second Department of Neurology, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology,
Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Internal Medicine, Medical University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: aprzybylkowski@wum.edu.pl.

PURPOSE: Wilson's disease (WD) is an inherited disorder involving copper
accumulation in the liver and brain. An important mechanism responsible for
hepatocyte injury in WD is mitochondria destruction, although damage may also be
caused by oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation.
PATIENTS/METHODS: The study included 54 treated patients with WD without liver
cirrhosis and 10 healthy controls. All patients had liver biopsy and
immunohistochemical analysis of liver samples was performed using targeted
staining for markers of mitochondrial injury (thioredoxin-2 [TRX2], cytochrome c
oxidases subunit 2 [COX2], and cytochrome c oxidases complex IV subunit 4
isoform 1 [COX4-1]), of oxidative stress (peroxiredoxin-1 [PRDX1] and
8-hydroxyguanosine [8-OHdG]), and of lipid peroxidation (4-hydroxynonenal
[4-HNE]).
RESULTS: Expression, measured as mean strengths of intensity (SI) of
immunohistochemical reactions per 5 fields of view, was significantly lower in
patients with WD compared to controls for COX2 (2.9 vs 8.3), 8-OHdG (0.05 vs
3.8), TRX2 (4.9 vs 10.1), and PRDX1 (4.6 vs 10.1) (all P ​< ​10-5). COX4-1
expression was undetected in patients with WD but detected in control specimens
(8.1) (P ​< ​10-5). 4-HNE was overexpressed in patients with WD compared to
controls (10.1 vs 9.1; P ​< ​0.07).
CONCLUSIONS: Negligible COX4-1 and low COX2 expression in liver specimens may
serve as markers of inner mitochondrial membrane injury in treated patients with
WD and early stages of liver fibrosis.

Copyright © 2022 Medical University of Bialystok. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.advms.2022.04.003
PMID: 35477108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflict of interests.
