---
reference_id: "PMID:38497591"
title: Manifestations of X-linked pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency in female PDHA1 carriers.
authors:
- Savvidou A
- Sofou K
- Eklund EA
- Aronsson J
- Darin N
journal: Eur J Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/ene.16283
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Pyruvate Dehydrogenase (Lipoamide)/genetics
- Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency Disease/genetics
- Adult
- Heterozygote
- Middle Aged
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Phenotype
- Child
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Manifestations of X-linked pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency in female PDHA1 carriers.
**Authors:** Savvidou A, Sofou K, Eklund EA, Aronsson J, Darin N
**Journal:** Eur J Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ene.16283](https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.16283)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurol. 2024 Jul;31(7):e16283. doi: 10.1111/ene.16283. Epub 2024 Mar 18.

Manifestations of X-linked pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency in female
PDHA1 carriers.

Savvidou A(1)(2), Sofou K(1)(2), Eklund EA(3), Aronsson J(4), Darin N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Queen Silvia Children's Hospital, Region Västra
Götaland, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Section of Pediatrics, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University,
Lund, Sweden.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Ryhov Hospital, Jönköping, Sweden.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency is in up to
90% caused by pathogenic variants in the X-linked PDHA1 gene. We aimed to
investigate female relatives of index patients with PDHA1-related disease to (i)
describe the prevalence of female PDHA1 carriers, (ii) determine whether they
had symptoms and signs, and (iii) delineate the associated phenotype.
METHODS: In a national population-based study, we identified 37 patients with
pathogenic variants in PDHA1. Sanger sequencing for the presence of the
pathogenic variant was performed in their mothers and female relatives. The
identified female carriers were clinically assessed, and their medical records
were reviewed.
RESULTS: The proportion carrying a de novo variant was 86%. We identified seven
female PDHA1 carriers from five families. Five of them exhibited clinical
features of the disease and were previously undiagnosed; all had signs of
peripheral axonal neuropathy, four presented with strokelike episodes including
two with Leigh-like lesions, and three had facial stigmata.
CONCLUSIONS: PDHA1-related disease is underrecognized in heterozygous female
carriers. Peripheral axonal neuropathy, strokelike and Leigh-like changes, and
facial dysmorphism should raise suspicion of the disorder. Genetic analysis and
clinical examination of potential female carriers are important for genetic
counseling and have implications for treatment.

© 2024 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.16283
PMCID: PMC11235877
PMID: 38497591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors has any conflict of interest
to disclose.
