---
reference_id: "PMID:37347055"
title: "Case report: Autosomal recessive type 3 Stickler syndrome caused by compound heterozygous mutations in COL11A2."
authors:
- Su Y
- Ran CQ
- Liu ZL
- Yang Y
- Yuan G
- Hu SH
- Yu XF
- He WT
journal: Front Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1154087
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Autosomal recessive type 3 Stickler syndrome caused by compound heterozygous mutations in COL11A2.
**Authors:** Su Y, Ran CQ, Liu ZL, Yang Y, Yuan G, Hu SH, Yu XF, He WT
**Journal:** Front Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2023.1154087](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1154087)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Jun 6;14:1154087. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1154087.
eCollection  2023.

Case report: Autosomal recessive type 3 Stickler syndrome caused by compound
heterozygous mutations in COL11A2.

Su Y(1)(2), Ran CQ(1)(2), Liu ZL(1)(2), Yang Y(1)(2), Yuan G(1)(2), Hu SH(1)(2),
Yu XF(1)(2), He WT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Tongji Hospital,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
China.
(2)Branch of National Clinical Research Center for Metabolic Diseases, Wuhan,
China.

Background: Stickler syndrome (SS) is a group of hereditary collagenopathies
caused by a variety of collagen and non-collagen genes. Affected patients have
characteristic manifestations involving ophthalmic, articular, craniofacial and
auditory disorders. SS is classified into several subtypes according to clinical
and molecular features. Type 3 SS is an ultra-rare disease, known as non-ocular
SS or otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED) with only a few pathogenic
COL11A2 variants reported to date. Case presentation: A 29-year-old Chinese male
was referred to our hospital for hearing loss and multiple joint pain. He
presented a phenotype highly suggestive of OSMED, including progressive
sensorineural deafness, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with large epiphyses,
platyspondyly, degenerative osteoarthritis, and sunken nasal bridge. We detected
compound heterozygous mutations in COL11A2, both of which were predicted to be
splicing mutations. One is synonymous mutation c.3774C>T (p.Gly1258Gly) supposed
to be a splice site mutation, the other is a novel intron mutation c.4750 +
5 G>A, which is a highly conservative site across several species. We also
present a review of the current known pathogenic mutation spectrum of COL11A2 in
patients with type 3 SS. Conclusion: Both synonymous extonic and intronic
variants are easily overlooked by whole-exome sequencing. For patients with
clinical manifestations suspected of SS syndrome, next-generation whole-genome
sequencing is necessary for precision diagnosis and genetic counseling.

Copyright © 2023 Su, Ran, Liu, Yang, Yuan, Hu, Yu and He.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1154087
PMCID: PMC10279880
PMID: 37347055

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
