---
reference_id: "PMID:30144155"
title: "Immunological dysfunction in chronic arsenic exposure: From subclinical condition to skin cancer."
authors:
- Yu S
- Liao WT
- Lee CH
- Chai CY
- Yu CL
- Yu HS
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.14620
keywords:
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- Arsenic/toxicity
- "Bowen's Disease/chemically induced, immunology, pathology"
- "CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/drug effects, immunology, pathology"
- Chronic Disease
- DNA Damage/drug effects
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate/drug effects"
- "Langerhans Cells/drug effects, immunology, pathology"
- "Macrophages/drug effects, immunology, pathology"
- "Neutrophils/drug effects, immunology, pathology"
- "Skin/cytology, drug effects, immunology, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/chemically induced, immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunological dysfunction in chronic arsenic exposure: From subclinical condition to skin cancer.
**Authors:** Yu S, Liao WT, Lee CH, Chai CY, Yu CL, Yu HS
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1346-8138.14620](https://doi.org/10.1111/1346-8138.14620)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2018 Nov;45(11):1271-1277. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.14620. Epub 2018
 Aug 25.

Immunological dysfunction in chronic arsenic exposure: From subclinical 
condition to skin cancer.

Yu S(1)(2)(3), Liao WT(4), Lee CH(5), Chai CY(6), Yu CL(7), Yu HS(1)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University of California Davis School of Medicine, 
Sacramento, California, USA.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang 
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(7)Department of International Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Exposure to arsenic is a global health issue. Long-term arsenic exposure may 
associate with various cancers and many other pathological effects. Over 100 
million people worldwide are exposed to arsenic particularly in countries such 
as Bangladesh, Chile, China, India, Mexico, Taiwan and the USA. Drinking of 
water contaminated with arsenic is the major route of human exposure. Skin 
lesions are considered to be the most common adverse effects associated with 
chronic arsenic exposure. Skin lesions usually develop with the latency period 
spanning more than 20 years from first exposure. Arsenic-induced Bowen's 
disease, the most frequently encountered carcinoma in situ resulting from 
chronic arsenic exposure, is characterized by multiple and recrudescent lesions. 
Long-term arsenic exposure results in impaired immunity in susceptible 
individuals. In the prenatal stage, enhanced placental inflammatory responses 
and reduced placental T cells by arsenic may result in decreased thymic size and 
functions in newborns. In childhood, arsenic exposure may reduce peripheral CD4+ 
cells and interleukin-2 secretion which leads to susceptibility to opportunistic 
infections. There was an impairment of macrophage function and oxidative DNA 
damage of peripheral polymorphonuclear leukocytes in adults with skin lesions. 
In arsenic-induced Bowen's disease lesions, a decrease in the number and 
functions of Langerhans cells and, in parallel, a selective CD4+ cell apoptosis 
was noticed. These findings provide scientific evidence for understanding the 
phenomenon of arsenic-induced immune escape in the early stage of carcinogenesis 
and a reasonable explanation for multiple and recrudescent arsenic cancers in 
the skin.

© 2018 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.14620
PMID: 30144155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]