---
reference_id: "PMID:22934315"
title: CSF1R-Related Disorder.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Dulski J
- Sundal C
- Wszolek ZK
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CSF1R-Related Disorder.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Dulski J, Sundal C, Wszolek ZK

## Content

1. CSF1R-Related Disorder.

Dulski J(1)(2)(3), Sundal C(4)(5)(6), Wszolek ZK(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2012 Aug 30 [updated 2024 Apr 4].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida
(2)Division of Neurological and Psychiatric Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland
(3)Neurology Department, St Adalbert Hospital, Copernicus PL Ltd, Gdansk, Poland
(4)NeuroClinicNorway, Lillestrøm, Norway
(5)Department of Neuromedicine and Movement Science, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway
(6)NorHEAD, Norwegian Centre for Headache Research, Norway

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The spectrum of CSF1R-related disorder ranges from 
early-onset disease (age <18 years) to late-onset disease (age ≥18 years). 
Early-onset disease is associated with hypotonia, delayed acquisition of 
developmental milestones, and non-neurologic manifestations (such as skeletal 
abnormalities); both early- and late-onset disease have similar 
neurodegenerative involvement. Most affected individuals eventually become 
bedridden with spasticity, rigidity, and loss of the ability to walk. They lose 
speech and voluntary movement and appear to be generally unaware of their 
surroundings. The last stage of disease progresses to a vegetative state with 
presence of primitive reflexes, such as visual and tactile grasp, mouth-opening 
reflex, and sucking reflex. Death most commonly results from pneumonia or other 
infections. About 500 individuals with CSF1R-related disorder have been reported 
to date.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CSF1R-related disorder is established in a 
proband with suggestive findings and a heterozygous CSF1R pathogenic variant or 
biallelic CSF1R pathogenic variants identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Multidisciplinary care by specialists 
in neurology, psychotherapy, neuropsychological rehabilitation, physical 
therapy, occupational therapy, speech-language therapy, social services for 
family support, and genetic counseling. Surveillance: Monitoring of existing 
manifestations, the individual's response to supportive care, and the emergence 
of new manifestations as specified by the multidisciplinary care providers. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: For individuals with gait problems and cognitive 
decline, sedatives, antipsychotics, and other medications that may decrease 
alertness and increase the risk of falling should be used cautiously.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Early-onset CSF1R-related disorder is typically caused by 
biallelic pathogenic variants and inherited in an autosomal recessive manner; 
rarely, early-onset CSF1R-related disorder may be caused by a heterozygous 
pathogenic variant. Late-onset CSF1R-related disorder is typically caused by a 
heterozygous pathogenic variant and inherited in an autosomal dominant manner; 
rarely, late-onset CSF1R-related disorder may be caused by biallelic CSF1R 
pathogenic variants. While biallelic pathogenic variants are usually associated 
with early-onset disease and heterozygous pathogenic variants are usually 
associated with late-onset disease, definitive prediction of phenotype based on 
CSF1R genotype is not possible at this time. Autosomal recessive inheritance: 
The parents of an individual with CSF1R-related disorder caused by biallelic 
pathogenic variants are presumed to be heterozygous for a CSF1R pathogenic 
variant. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a pathogenic variant, 
each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting 
neither of the familial CSF1R pathogenic variants. Sibs who inherit the same 
biallelic CSF1R pathogenic variants do not necessarily have the same clinical 
manifestations early in the disease course; however, in the end stage, all 
individuals with CSF1R-related disorder typically have devastating neurologic 
involvement. The heterozygous sibs of an individual with CSF1R-related disorder 
caused by biallelic pathogenic variants are typically asymptomatic. Autosomal 
dominant inheritance: Many individuals with CSF1R-related disorder caused by a 
heterozygous pathogenic variant have an affected parent. Some individuals with 
CSF1R-related disorder caused by a heterozygous pathogenic variant represent a 
simplex case; such individuals may have the disorder as the result of a 
pathogenic variant that occurred de novo in the proband; a pathogenic variant 
inherited from a mosaic parent; or a pathogenic variant inherited from an 
asymptomatic heterozygous parent. Each child of an individual with a 
heterozygous CSF1R pathogenic variant has a 50% chance of inheriting the 
pathogenic variant. Family members who are heterozygous for the same CSF1R 
pathogenic variant do not necessarily have the same clinical manifestations 
early in the disease course; however, in the end stage, all individuals with 
CSF1R-related disorder typically have devastating neurologic involvement. Once 
the CSF1R pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family 
member, predictive testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal and 
preimplantation genetic testing for CSF1R-related disorder are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 22934315