---
reference_id: "PMID:37190044"
title: "Gene Fusion Detection in NSCLC Routine Clinical Practice: Targeted-NGS or FISH?"
authors:
- Pecciarini L
- Brunetto E
- Grassini G
- De Pascali V
- Ogliari FR
- Talarico A
- Marra G
- Magliacane G
- Redegalli M
- Arrigoni G
- Lazzari C
- Gregorc V
- Bulotta A
- Doglioni C
- Cangi MG
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12081135
keywords:
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms/pathology
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence/methods"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/pathology"
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Adenocarcinoma of Lung
- RNA/therapeutic use
- Gene Fusion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene Fusion Detection in NSCLC Routine Clinical Practice: Targeted-NGS or FISH?
**Authors:** Pecciarini L, Brunetto E, Grassini G, De Pascali V, Ogliari FR, Talarico A, Marra G, Magliacane G, Redegalli M, Arrigoni G, Lazzari C, Gregorc V, Bulotta A, Doglioni C, Cangi MG
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12081135](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12081135)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Apr 11;12(8):1135. doi: 10.3390/cells12081135.

Gene Fusion Detection in NSCLC Routine Clinical Practice: Targeted-NGS or FISH?

Pecciarini L(1), Brunetto E(1), Grassini G(1), De Pascali V(1), Ogliari FR(2),
Talarico A(1), Marra G(1), Magliacane G(1), Redegalli M(1), Arrigoni G(1),
Lazzari C(3), Gregorc V(3), Bulotta A(2), Doglioni C(1), Cangi MG(1).

Author information:
(1)Pathology Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Oncology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan,
Italy.
(3)Candiolo Cancer Institute, FPO-IRCCS, 10060 Turin, Italy.

The ability to identify the broadest range of targetable gene fusions is crucial
to facilitate personalized therapy selection for advanced lung adenocarcinoma
(LuADs) patients harboring targetable receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) genomic
alterations. In order to evaluate the most effective testing approach for LuAD
targetable gene fusion detection, we analyzed 210 NSCLC selected clinical
samples, comparing in situ (Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization, FISH, and
ImmunoHistoChemistry, IHC) and molecular (targeted RNA Next-Generation
Sequencing, NGS, and RealTime-PCR, RT-PCR) approaches. The overall concordance
among these methods was high (>90%), and targeted RNA NGS was confirmed to be
the most efficient technique for gene fusion identification in clinical
practice, allowing the simultaneous analysis of a large set of genomic
rearrangements at the RNA level. However, we observed that FISH was useful to
detect targetable fusions in those samples with inadequate tissue material for
molecular testing as well as in those few cases whose fusions were not
identified by the RNA NGS panel. We conclude that the targeted RNA NGS analysis
of LuADs allows accurate RTK fusion detection; nevertheless, standard methods
such as FISH should not be dismissed, as they can crucially contribute to the
completion of the molecular characterization of LuADs and, most importantly, the
identification of patients as candidates for targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12081135
PMCID: PMC10137127
PMID: 37190044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
