---
reference_id: "PMID:3119940"
title: "Zellweger syndrome: biochemical procedures in diagnosis, prevention and treatment."
authors:
- Schutgens RB
- Wanders RJ
- Heymans HS
- Schram AW
- Tager JM
- Schrakamp G
- van den Bosch H
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1007/BF01812845
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zellweger syndrome: biochemical procedures in diagnosis, prevention and treatment.
**Authors:** Schutgens RB, Wanders RJ, Heymans HS, Schram AW, Tager JM, Schrakamp G, van den Bosch H
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF01812845](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01812845)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 1987;10 Suppl 1:33-45. doi: 10.1007/BF01812845.

Zellweger syndrome: biochemical procedures in diagnosis, prevention and 
treatment.

Schutgens RB(1), Wanders RJ, Heymans HS, Schram AW, Tager JM, Schrakamp G, van 
den Bosch H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

In patients with cerebro-hepato-renal (Zellweger) syndrome, the absence of 
peroxisomes results in an impairment of metabolic processes in which peroxisomes 
are normally involved. These include the catabolism of very long chain (greater 
than C22) fatty acids, the biosynthesis of ether-phospholipids and of bile 
acids, the catabolism of phytanic acid and the catabolism of pipecolic acid. 
Many diagnostic tests for Zellweger syndrome have become available in recent 
years. In classic Zellweger syndrome abnormal C27-bile acids, very long chain 
fatty acids, dicarboxylic acids and pipecolic acid accumulate in the plasma of 
the patients. Moreover, depending upon the diet, plasma phytanic acid 
concentrations may be elevated. In platelets the activity of acyl-CoA: 
dihydroxyacetone phosphate acyltransferase is deficient; in erythrocytes from 
young (less than 4 months) patients the plasmalogen content of the phospholipids 
is decreased. In cultured fibroblasts from skin and from chorionic villus and 
cultured amniotic fluid cells from Zellweger patients the plasmalogen level is 
lowered; there is a decreased activity of acyl-CoA: dihydroxyacetone phosphate 
acyltransferase, alkyl dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase and phytanic acid 
oxidase; the de novo biosynthesis of plasmalogens and the peroxisomal 
beta-oxidation of fatty acids are impaired and the intracellular localization of 
catalase is abnormal. Dietary treatment of patients with Zellweger syndrome has 
not so far resulted in an objective clinical improvement. As Zellweger syndrome 
is usually fatal in early life, prenatal diagnosis of the disease is important.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01812845
PMID: 3119940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]