---
reference_id: "PMID:38098475"
title: Prominent muscle involvement in a familial form of mitochondrial disease due to a COA8 variant.
authors:
- Rimoldi M
- Magri F
- Antognozzi S
- Ripolone M
- Salani S
- Piga D
- Bertolasi L
- Zanotti S
- Ciscato P
- Fortunato F
- Moggio M
- Corti S
- Comi GP
- Ronchi D
journal: Front Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1278572
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prominent muscle involvement in a familial form of mitochondrial disease due to a COA8 variant.
**Authors:** Rimoldi M, Magri F, Antognozzi S, Ripolone M, Salani S, Piga D, Bertolasi L, Zanotti S, Ciscato P, Fortunato F, Moggio M, Corti S, Comi GP, Ronchi D
**Journal:** Front Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2023.1278572](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1278572)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Nov 30;14:1278572. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1278572. 
eCollection 2023.

Prominent muscle involvement in a familial form of mitochondrial disease due to 
a COA8 variant.

Rimoldi M(1), Magri F(2), Antognozzi S(2), Ripolone M(1), Salani S(2), Piga 
D(2), Bertolasi L(2), Zanotti S(1), Ciscato P(1), Fortunato F(2), Moggio M(1), 
Corti S(1)(3), Comi GP(2)(3), Ronchi D(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular and Rare Diseases Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(2)Neurology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Dino Ferrari Center, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.

Isolated mitochondrial respiratory chain Complex IV (Cytochrome c Oxidase or 
COX) deficiency is the second most frequent isolated respiratory chain defect. 
Causative mutations are mainly identified in structural COX subunits or in 
proteins involved in the maturation and assembly of the COX holocomplex. We 
describe an Italian familial case of mitochondrial myopathy due to a variant in 
the COX assembly factor 8 gene (COA8). Patient 1 is a 52-year-old woman who 
presented generalized epilepsy and retinitis pigmentosa at 10 years of age. From 
her early adulthood she complained about cramps and myalgia after exercise, and 
bilateral hearing loss emerged. Last neurological examination (52 years of age) 
showed bilateral ptosis, muscle weakness, peripheral neuropathy, mild dysarthria 
and dysphonia, cognitive impairment. Muscle biopsy had shown the presence of 
ragged-red fibers. Patient 2 (Patient 1's sister) is a 53-year-old woman 
presenting fatigability, myalgia, and hearing loss. Neurological examination 
showed ptosis and muscle weakness. Muscle biopsy displayed a diffuse reduction 
of COX activity staining and ragged-red fibers. Both sisters presented secondary 
amenorrhea. After ruling out mtDNA mutations, Whole Exome Sequencing analysis 
identified the novel homozygous COA8 defect c.170_173dupGACC, p.(Pro59fs) in the 
probands. Loss-of-function COA8 mutations have been associated with cavitating 
leukoencephalopathy with COX deficiency in 9 reported individuals. Disease 
course shows an early-onset rapid clinical deterioration, affecting both 
cognitive and motor functions over months, followed by stabilization and slow 
improvement over several years. Our findings expand the clinical spectrum of 
COA8-related disease. We confirm the benign course of this rare disorder, 
highlighting its (intrafamilial) clinical variability.

Copyright © 2023 Rimoldi, Magri, Antognozzi, Ripolone, Salani, Piga, Bertolasi, 
Zanotti, Ciscato, Fortunato, Moggio, Corti, Comi and Ronchi.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1278572
PMCID: PMC10720436
PMID: 38098475

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.