---
reference_id: "PMID:19117954"
title: Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 promotes osteogenic differentiation in mesenchymal cells via ERK1/2 and protein kinase C signaling.
authors:
- Miraoui H
- Oudina K
- Petite H
- Tanimoto Y
- Moriyama K
- Marie PJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805432200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 promotes osteogenic differentiation in mesenchymal cells via ERK1/2 and protein kinase C signaling.
**Authors:** Miraoui H, Oudina K, Petite H, Tanimoto Y, Moriyama K, Marie PJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M805432200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M805432200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 20;284(8):4897-904. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805432200. Epub
2008  Dec 30.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 promotes osteogenic differentiation in 
mesenchymal cells via ERK1/2 and protein kinase C signaling.

Miraoui H(1), Oudina K, Petite H, Tanimoto Y, Moriyama K, Marie PJ.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U606, Paris, France.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are able to differentiate into several lineages 
including osteoblasts. The signaling mechanisms involved in the osteogenic 
differentiation of MSCs are however not fully understood. We investigated the 
role of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) in osteoblast committment 
and differentiation of murine mesenchymal C3H10T1/2 cells stably transfected 
with wild type (WT) or activated FGFR2 due to Apert S252W genetic mutation (MT). 
WT FGFR2 slightly increased, whereas MT FGFR2 strongly increased, FGFR2 tyrosine 
phosphorylation, indicating activation of the receptor. WT and MT FGFR2 
increased C3H10T1/2 cell proliferation but not survival. Both WT and MT FGFR2 
increased early and late osteoblast gene expression and matrix mineralization. 
Forced expression of WT and MT FGFR2 also increased osteoblast gene expression 
in MC3T3-E1 calvaria osteoblasts. In both cell types, MT FGFR2 was more 
effective than WT FGFR2. In contrast, WT and MT FGFR2 decreased adipocyte 
differentiation of C3H10T1/2 cells. WT and MT FGFR2 induced ERK1/2 but not JNK 
or PI3K/AKT phosphorylation. MT, but not WT, also increased protein kinase C 
(PKC) activity. Pharmacological inhibition of ERK1/2 prevented cell 
proliferation induced by WT and MT FGFR2. Using dominant-negative ERK and 
PKCalpha vectors, we demonstrated that WT and MT FGFR2 promoted osteoblast gene 
expression through ERK1/2 and PKCalpha signaling, respectively. This study 
identifies FGFR2 as a novel regulatory molecule that promotes osteogenic 
differentiation in murine MSCs. The promoting effect of WT and MT FGFR2 is 
mediated by ERK1/2 and PKCalpha pathways that play essential and distinct roles 
in FGFR2-induced osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M805432200
PMID: 19117954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]