---
reference_id: "PMID:16131501"
title: Well defined symptoms are of value in the diagnosis of childhood pulmonary tuberculosis.
authors:
- Marais BJ
- Gie RP
- Obihara CC
- Hesseling AC
- Schaaf HS
- Beyers N
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1136/adc.2004.070797
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Well defined symptoms are of value in the diagnosis of childhood pulmonary tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Marais BJ, Gie RP, Obihara CC, Hesseling AC, Schaaf HS, Beyers N
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1136/adc.2004.070797](https://doi.org/10.1136/adc.2004.070797)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 2005 Nov;90(11):1162-5. doi: 10.1136/adc.2004.070797. Epub
2005  Aug 30.

Well defined symptoms are of value in the diagnosis of childhood pulmonary 
tuberculosis.

Marais BJ(1), Gie RP, Obihara CC, Hesseling AC, Schaaf HS, Beyers N.

Author information:
(1)Desmond Tutu TB Centre and the Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, 
Tygerberg Children's Hospital and the Faculty of Health Sciences, Stellenbosch 
University, Cape Town, South Africa. bjmarais@sun.ac.za

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of childhood pulmonary tuberculosis presents a major 
challenge as symptoms traditionally associated with tuberculosis are extremely 
common in children from endemic areas. The natural history of tuberculosis in 
children shows that progressive disease is associated with symptoms which have a 
persistent, non-remitting character. The aims of this study were to investigate 
whether improved symptom definition is possible in a clinical setting, and 
whether use of these well defined symptoms has improved value in the diagnosis 
of childhood pulmonary tuberculosis.
METHODS: A prospective, community based study was conducted in two suburbs of 
Cape Town, South Africa. All children (<13 years) presenting to the local 
community clinic with a cough of >2 weeks duration, were referred to the 
investigator. Parents completed a symptom based questionnaire, whereafter 
reported symptoms were characterised in a standard fashion.
RESULTS: Of the 151 children enrolled, 21 (15.6%) reported symptoms with a 
persistent, non-remitting character. Tuberculosis was diagnosed in 16 (10.5%) 
children, all of whom reported these symptom characteristics. A persistent, 
non-remitting cough was reported in 15/16 (93.8%) children with tuberculosis and 
in 2/135 (1.5%) children without tuberculosis, indicating a specificity of 98.5% 
(135/137). Persistent fatigue of recent onset was also sensitive (13/16, 81.3%) 
and specific (134/135, 99.3%). Persistent fever and/or chest pain were 
exclusively reported in children with tuberculosis, but were present in only 
4/16 (25.0%) children with tuberculosis.
CONCLUSION: The use of well defined symptoms is feasible, even in resource 
limited settings, and may offer significantly improved value in the diagnosis of 
childhood pulmonary tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1136/adc.2004.070797
PMCID: PMC1720155
PMID: 16131501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]