---
reference_id: PMID:30509385
title: Molecular mimicry and autoimmunity.
authors:
- Rojas M
- Restrepo-Jiménez P
- Monsalve DM
- Pacheco Y
- Acosta-Ampudia Y
- Ramírez-Santana C
- Leung PSC
- Ansari AA
- Gershwin ME
- Anaya JM
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2018.10.012
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antigens, Bacterial/genetics, immunology"
- "Antigens, Viral/genetics, immunology"
- Autoantibodies/biosynthesis
- "Autoantigens/genetics, immunology"
- "Autoimmune Diseases/genetics, immunology, microbiology, virology"
- Autoimmunity
- B-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Cross Reactions
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Mice
- Molecular Mimicry/immunology
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell/genetics, immunology"
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular mimicry and autoimmunity.
**Authors:** Rojas M, Restrepo-Jiménez P, Monsalve DM, Pacheco Y, Acosta-Ampudia Y, Ramírez-Santana C, Leung PSC, Ansari AA, Gershwin ME, Anaya JM
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2018.10.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2018.10.012)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2018 Dec;95:100-123. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2018.10.012. Epub 2018
Oct  26.

Molecular mimicry and autoimmunity.

Rojas M(1), Restrepo-Jiménez P(2), Monsalve DM(2), Pacheco Y(2), Acosta-Ampudia 
Y(2), Ramírez-Santana C(2), Leung PSC(3), Ansari AA(3), Gershwin ME(4), Anaya 
JM(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Autoimmune Diseases Research (CREA), School of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, Colombia; Doctoral Program in 
Biomedical Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, Colombia.
(2)Center for Autoimmune Diseases Research (CREA), School of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, Colombia.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of 
California Davis, School of Medicine, Davis, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of 
California Davis, School of Medicine, Davis, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
megershwin@ucdavis.edu.
(5)Center for Autoimmune Diseases Research (CREA), School of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, Colombia. Electronic address: 
juan.anaya@urosario.edu.co.

Molecular mimicry is one of the leading mechanisms by which infectious or 
chemical agents may induce autoimmunity. It occurs when similarities between 
foreign and self-peptides favor an activation of autoreactive T or B cells by a 
foreign-derived antigen in a susceptible individual. However, molecular mimicry 
is unlikely to be the only underlying mechanism for autoimmune responses; other 
factors such as breach in central tolerance, non-specific bystander activation, 
or persistent antigenic stimuli (amongst others) may also contribute to the 
development of autoimmune diseases. Host genetics, exposure to microbiota and 
environmental chemicals are additional links to our understanding of molecular 
mimicry. Our current knowledge of the detailed mechanisms of molecular mimicry 
is limited by the issues of prolonged periods of latency before the appearance 
of disease, the lack of enough statistical power in epidemiological studies, the 
limitations of the potential role of genetics in human studies, the relevance of 
inbred murine models to the diverse human population and especially the limited 
technology to systematically dissect the human T-cell repertoire and B-cell 
responses. Nevertheless, studies on the role of autoreactive T-cells that are 
generated secondary to molecular mimicry, the diversity of the T-cell receptor 
repertoires of auto-reactive T-cells, the role of exposure to cryptic antigens, 
the generation of autoimmune B-cell responses, the interaction of microbiota and 
chemical adjuvants with the host immune systems all provide clues in advancing 
our understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in the evolving concept 
of molecular mimicry and also may potentially aid in the prevention and 
treatment of autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2018.10.012
PMID: 30509385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]