---
reference_id: "PMID:37481223"
title: "FDXR-associated disease in a Chinese cohort: Unraveling expanded ocular phenotypes and genetic spectrum."
authors:
- Wei X
- Li H
- Zhu T
- Yao F
- Sui R
journal: Exp Eye Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2023.109600
keywords:
- Humans
- East Asian People
- Retina
- Phenotype
- Retinal Dystrophies/genetics
- Optic Atrophy
- Pedigree
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FDXR-associated disease in a Chinese cohort: Unraveling expanded ocular phenotypes and genetic spectrum.
**Authors:** Wei X, Li H, Zhu T, Yao F, Sui R
**Journal:** Exp Eye Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exer.2023.109600](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2023.109600)

## Content

1. Exp Eye Res. 2023 Sep;234:109600. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2023.109600. Epub 2023
Jul  20.

FDXR-associated disease in a Chinese cohort: Unraveling expanded ocular 
phenotypes and genetic spectrum.

Wei X(1), Li H(1), Zhu T(1), Yao F(2), Sui R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)Medical Research Center, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare 
Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. 
Electronic address: hrfsui@163.com.

FDXR: associated disease is characterized by optic atrophy, acoustic neuropathy, 
and developmental delays. This study evaluated the ocular phenotypes and genetic 
features of patients with biallelic FDXR variants. Five individuals from 
unrelated non-consanguineous Chinese families with biallelic FDXR variants were 
identified using whole exome sequencing, Sanger sequencing, and co-segregation 
validation. In addition to optic atrophy and diverse extraocular manifestations, 
all patients presented with retinal dystrophy, and electroretinogram showed 
severely impaired cone and rod functions in their first decades. Three of the 
five patients showed attenuated retinal vessels that appeared as white lines on 
the fundus, and fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) further revealed vascular 
abnormalities including delayed filling, completely occluded retinal 
vasculature, and severe retinal vascular nonperfusion of the peripheral retina. 
Five novel FDXR variants were identified: c.383C > T (p.A128V), c.963delG 
(p.R322fs*7), c.1052_1053delTC (p.L351Pfs*12), c.394-11T > G and c.1002+1G > A. 
Retinal dystrophy with attenuated retinal vessels appearing as white lines was 
observed in this cohort, and the FFA images revealed that retinal vascular 
occlusion could be a distinct clinical characteristic of FDXR-associated 
disease. Probands with FDXR revealed severe early onset ophthalmic features with 
rapid-progression, indicating the importance of early diagnosis and treatment. 
Moreover, this is the first study to report FFA manifestations in an FDXR 
cohort, expanding the FDXR-associated ocular disease phenotype and genetic 
spectrum.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2023.109600
PMID: 37481223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest.