---
reference_id: "PMID:39291161"
title: New phenotyping questionnaire for diagnosing sarcoidosis-associated small fiber neuropathy.
authors:
- Raasing LRM
- Vogels OJM
- Datema M
- Ambarus CA
- Tannemaat MR
- Grutters JC
- Veltkamp M
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae289
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New phenotyping questionnaire for diagnosing sarcoidosis-associated small fiber neuropathy.
**Authors:** Raasing LRM, Vogels OJM, Datema M, Ambarus CA, Tannemaat MR, Grutters JC, Veltkamp M
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcae289](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcae289)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2024 Aug 28;6(5):fcae289. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae289. 
eCollection 2024.

New phenotyping questionnaire for diagnosing sarcoidosis-associated small fiber 
neuropathy.

Raasing LRM(1), Vogels OJM(2), Datema M(3), Ambarus CA(4), Tannemaat MR(5), 
Grutters JC(1)(6), Veltkamp M(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)ILD Center of Excellence, Department of Pulmonology, St Antonius Hospital, 
3435 CM Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(2)ILD Center of Excellence, Department of Neurology, St Antonius Hospital, 3435 
CM Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(3)ILD Center of Excellence, Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, St Antonius 
Hospital, 3435 CM Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(4)ILD Center of Excellence, Department of Pathology, St Antonius Hospital, 3435 
CM Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Leiden University Medical Center, 
2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.
(6)Division of Heart and Lungs, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CX 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Small fiber neuropathy is a common complication in patients with sarcoidosis and 
its prevalence is estimated at 40-86%. The underlying mechanism influences the 
presentation of small fiber neuropathy. For example, patients with metabolic 
diseases are often associated with a classic length-dependent small fiber 
neuropathy pattern, while patients with inflammatory diseases are more often 
present with a non-length-dependent small fiber neuropathy. Detailed phenotyping 
may be useful to improve diagnostic efficiency, as a clue to underlying 
mechanisms and as a precondition for personalized medicine. This study examined 
four phenotypes distinguishing between length-dependent and non-length-dependent 
presentation with a new subdivision for continuous and intermittent 
presentation. Forty-eight sarcoid patients with symptoms and at least two 
clinical signs of small fiber neuropathy and normal nerve conduction studies 
were classified as having probable small fiber neuropathy. A new small fiber 
neuropathy phenotyping questionnaire has been developed that allows patients to 
mark the anatomical locations of pain at three different levels: the skin, 
muscles, and joints. The location of symptoms was used to define length 
dependence, and two colors were used to distinguish continuous (red) from 
intermittent (blue) symptoms. In addition, skin biopsy, corneal confocal 
microscopy, Sudoscan and water immersion skin wrinkling were used to investigate 
a correlation between the four phenotypes, sensory function, nerve fiber 
density, and autonomic nerve function. Overall, 35% of patients with probable 
small fiber neuropathy showed length-dependent symptoms and 44% showed 
non-length-dependent symptoms while 21% suffered from non-neuropathic 
musculoskeletal pain. The distinction between intermittent and continuous 
symptoms showed significantly less continuous than intermittent 
non-length-dependent symptoms (odds ratio = 0.3, P = 0.01). Moreover, continuous 
length-dependent symptoms were the only phenotype that correlated with thermal 
threshold testing (R = 0.3; P = 0.02) and the small fiber neuropathy screening 
list (R = 0.3; P = 0.03). In addition, thermal threshold testing (TTT) also 
correlated with the small fiber neuropathy (SFN) screening list (R = 0.3; P = 
0.03). Other diagnostic methods showed no correlation with any of the four 
defined phenotypes. A novel finding is that TTT is only associated with 
continuous length-dependent pain, suggesting that TTT could result in more false 
negatives in patients with other pain phenotypes. Determining the 
pathophysiologic mechanisms could help develop new diagnostic methods. If 
patients suspected of SFN show symptoms without a length-dependent continuous 
presentation, the diagnosis should focus less on the diagnostic methods used.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae289
PMCID: PMC11406462
PMID: 39291161

Conflict of interest statement: Each author declares that he or she has no 
commercial associations (e.g. consultancies, stock ownership, equity interest, 
patent/licensing arrangement, etc.) that might pose a conflict of interest in 
connection with the submitted article.