---
reference_id: "PMID:19628685"
title: "Sustained low efficiency dialysis in the continuous mode (C-SLED): dialysis efficacy, clinical outcomes, and survival predictors in critically ill cancer patients."
authors:
- Salahudeen AK
- Kumar V
- Madan N
- Xiao L
- Lahoti A
- Samuels J
- Nates J
- Price K
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.02130309
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/blood, complications, mortality, physiopathology, therapy"
- Adult
- Aged
- Biomarkers/blood
- Blood Pressure
- Blood Urea Nitrogen
- Creatine/blood
- Critical Illness
- Female
- Humans
- Hydrogen-Ion Concentration
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Multiple Organ Failure/etiology, mortality"
- "Neoplasms/complications, mortality, therapy"
- "Parenteral Nutrition, Total"
- Proportional Hazards Models
- "Renal Dialysis/adverse effects, mortality"
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Serum Albumin/metabolism
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sustained low efficiency dialysis in the continuous mode (C-SLED): dialysis efficacy, clinical outcomes, and survival predictors in critically ill cancer patients.
**Authors:** Salahudeen AK, Kumar V, Madan N, Xiao L, Lahoti A, Samuels J, Nates J, Price K
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.02130309](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.02130309)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 Aug;4(8):1338-46. doi: 10.2215/CJN.02130309. Epub
2009 Jul 23.

Sustained low efficiency dialysis in the continuous mode (C-SLED): dialysis
efficacy, clinical outcomes, and survival predictors in critically ill cancer
patients.

Salahudeen AK(1), Kumar V, Madan N, Xiao L, Lahoti A, Samuels J, Nates J, Price
K.

Author information:
(1)Nephrology Section, Department of General Internal Medicine AT&EC, The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. aksalahudeen@mdanderson.org

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Oliguric, hypotensive patients who require large
amounts of fluids may benefit from sustained low-efficiency dialysis performed
continuously (C-SLED). C-SLED through higher clearance may improve survival, or
through greater nutritional loss may worsen survival. No studies have assessed
survival on C-SLED. The objective was to examine patient outcomes and survival
predictors on C-SLED.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: The data of 199 consecutive
cancer patients treated with C-SLED were analyzed. The median duration of C-SLED
was 50 h. With 48 h of C-SLED, the blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum
creatinine levels had decreased by 80% and 73%, respectively. The mean arterial
pressure (MAP) was maintained despite higher ultrafiltration and reduced
vasopressor use. The 30-d mortality rate was 65%. Despite excellent dialysis,
the sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score remained predictive of
mortality. In the univariate model, higher SOFA scores and lower values for MAP,
blood pH, and serum albumin and creatinine levels were associated with higher
mortality. Administration of total parenteral nutrition (TPN) was, however,
associated with lower mortality.
RESULTS: In the multivariate model, the higher SOFA score and lower blood pH,
MAP and C-SLED duration were associated with higher mortality. In a subset
analysis of 129 patients who received C-SLED for at least 48 h, those with
higher BUN levels, which were associated with higher TPN infusion, had a lower
mortality risk.
CONCLUSION: This first detailed report on C-SLED indicates that C-SLED can be
effective and suggests a link between nutrition and survival.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.02130309
PMCID: PMC2723965
PMID: 19628685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
