---
reference_id: "PMID:34318016"
title: "Scimitar syndrome: A new multipatch technique and incidence of postoperative pulmonary vein obstruction."
authors:
- Geggel RL
- Gauvreau K
- Callahan R
- Feins EN
- Baird CW
journal: JTCVS Tech
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.xjtc.2020.07.027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scimitar syndrome: A new multipatch technique and incidence of postoperative pulmonary vein obstruction.
**Authors:** Geggel RL, Gauvreau K, Callahan R, Feins EN, Baird CW
**Journal:** JTCVS Tech (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xjtc.2020.07.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xjtc.2020.07.027)

## Content

1. JTCVS Tech. 2020 Aug 1;4:208-216. doi: 10.1016/j.xjtc.2020.07.027. eCollection
 2020 Dec.

Scimitar syndrome: A new multipatch technique and incidence of postoperative 
pulmonary vein obstruction.

Geggel RL(1)(2), Gauvreau K(1)(2), Callahan R(1)(2), Feins EN(3)(4), Baird 
CW(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Mass.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.
(3)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Mass.
(4)Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.

OBJECTIVE: A review of our center's experience before March 2011 showed that one 
half of 36 patients who had a baffling or reimplantation procedure to repair 
scimitar syndrome developed pulmonary vein obstruction. We analyzed the results 
of a new operation that enlarges the left atrium and avoids circuitous pathways 
or tension on the scimitar pulmonary vein.
METHODS: Between April 2011 and November 2018, 22 patients underwent scimitar 
vein surgery; 11 had baffling or reimplantation and 11 only had the new 
operation that included resection of the atrial septum with removal of the 
muscular limbus. The left atrium was pulled down toward the scimitar vein and a 
V-shaped incision made at the scimitar vein atrial junction with the space 
filled with a pulmonary homograft. If the scimitar vein coursed adjacent to the 
atrium, a V-shaped incision was made into the scimitar vein and directly 
anastomosed to the atrium. A patch of autologous pericardium was used to septate 
the atrium and an additional patch placed anteriorly to augment the inferior 
vena cava.
RESULTS: Of the 11 patients who had baffling or reimplantation, 5 developed 
pulmonary vein obstruction between 45 days and 9.5 months after surgery 
associated with baffle thrombosis or tension on the pulmonary vein. None of the 
11 patients who only had the new procedure developed pulmonary vein obstruction 
during postoperative monitoring up to 3.6 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients having only the multipatch procedure for repair of 
scimitar syndrome have not developed postoperative pulmonary vein obstruction in 
the short to intermediate term.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xjtc.2020.07.027
PMCID: PMC8303092
PMID: 34318016