---
reference_id: "PMID:34017006"
title: Phenylketonuria.
authors:
- van Spronsen FJ
- Blau N
- Harding C
- Burlina A
- Longo N
- Bosch AM
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-021-00267-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenylketonuria.
**Authors:** van Spronsen FJ, Blau N, Harding C, Burlina A, Longo N, Bosch AM
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-021-00267-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-021-00267-0)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2021 May 20;7(1):36. doi: 10.1038/s41572-021-00267-0.

Phenylketonuria.

van Spronsen FJ(1), Blau N(2), Harding C(3), Burlina A(4), Longo N(5), Bosch 
AM(6).

Author information:
(1)Beatrix Children's Hospital, University Medical Centre Groningen, University 
of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. f.j.van.spronsen@umcg.nl.
(2)University Children's Hospital in Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics and Department of Pediatrics, 
Oregon Health & Science University, Oregon, USA.
(4)University Hospital of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(6)University of Amsterdam, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Metabolic 
Disorders, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Phenylketonuria (PKU; also known as phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency) 
is an autosomal recessive disorder of phenylalanine metabolism, in which 
especially high phenylalanine concentrations cause brain dysfunction. If 
untreated, this brain dysfunction results in severe intellectual disability, 
epilepsy and behavioural problems. The prevalence varies worldwide, with an 
average of about 1:10,000 newborns. Early diagnosis is based on newborn 
screening, and if treatment is started early and continued, intelligence is 
within normal limits with, on average, some suboptimal neurocognitive function. 
Dietary restriction of phenylalanine has been the mainstay of treatment for over 
60 years and has been highly successful, although outcomes are still suboptimal 
and patients can find the treatment difficult to adhere to. Pharmacological 
treatments are available, such as tetrahydrobiopterin, which is effective in 
only a minority of patients (usually those with milder PKU), and pegylated 
phenylalanine ammonia lyase, which requires daily subcutaneous injections and 
causes adverse immune responses. Given the drawbacks of these approaches, other 
treatments are in development, such as mRNA and gene therapy. Even though PAH 
deficiency is the most common defect of amino acid metabolism in humans, brain 
dysfunction in individuals with PKU is still not well understood and further 
research is needed to facilitate development of pathophysiology-driven 
treatments.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-021-00267-0
PMCID: PMC8591558
PMID: 34017006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]