---
reference_id: "PMID:23033313"
title: "Novel mutations including deletions of the entire OFD1 gene in 30 families with type 1 orofaciodigital syndrome: a study of the extensive clinical variability."
authors:
- Bisschoff IJ
- Zeschnigk C
- Horn D
- Wellek B
- Rieß A
- Wessels M
- Willems P
- Jensen P
- Busche A
- Bekkebraten J
- Chopra M
- Hove HD
- Evers C
- Heimdal K
- Kaiser AS
- Kunstmann E
- Robinson KL
- Linné M
- Martin P
- McGrath J
- Pradel W
- Prescott KE
- Roesler B
- Rudolf G
- Siebers-Renelt U
- Tyshchenko N
- Wieczorek D
- Wolff G
- Dobyns WB
- Morris-Rosendahl DJ
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22224
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel mutations including deletions of the entire OFD1 gene in 30 families with type 1 orofaciodigital syndrome: a study of the extensive clinical variability.
**Authors:** Bisschoff IJ, Zeschnigk C, Horn D, Wellek B, Rieß A, Wessels M, Willems P, Jensen P, Busche A, Bekkebraten J, Chopra M, Hove HD, Evers C, Heimdal K, Kaiser AS, Kunstmann E, Robinson KL, Linné M, Martin P, McGrath J, Pradel W, Prescott KE, Roesler B, Rudolf G, Siebers-Renelt U, Tyshchenko N, Wieczorek D, Wolff G, Dobyns WB, Morris-Rosendahl DJ
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22224](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22224)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2013 Jan;34(1):237-47. doi: 10.1002/humu.22224. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Novel mutations including deletions of the entire OFD1 gene in 30 families with 
type 1 orofaciodigital syndrome: a study of the extensive clinical variability.

Bisschoff IJ(1), Zeschnigk C, Horn D, Wellek B, Rieß A, Wessels M, Willems P, 
Jensen P, Busche A, Bekkebraten J, Chopra M, Hove HD, Evers C, Heimdal K, Kaiser 
AS, Kunstmann E, Robinson KL, Linné M, Martin P, McGrath J, Pradel W, Prescott 
KE, Roesler B, Rudolf G, Siebers-Renelt U, Tyshchenko N, Wieczorek D, Wolff G, 
Dobyns WB, Morris-Rosendahl DJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Clinic Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

OFD1, now recognized as a ciliopathy, is characterized by malformations of the 
face, oral cavity and digits, and is transmitted as an X-linked condition with 
lethality in males. Mutations in OFD1 also cause X-linked Joubert syndrome 
(JBTS10) and Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome type 2 (SGBS2). We have studied 55 
sporadic and six familial cases of suspected OFD1. Comprehensive mutation 
analysis in OFD1 revealed mutations in 37 female patients from 30 families; 22 
mutations have not been previously described including two heterozygous 
deletions spanning OFD1 and neighbouring genes. Analysis of clinical findings in 
patients with mutations revealed that oral features are the most reliable 
diagnostic criteria. A first, detailed evaluation of brain MRIs from seven 
patients with cognitive defects illustrated extensive variability with the 
complete brain phenotype consisting of complete agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
large single or multiple interhemispheric cysts, striking cortical infolding of 
gyri, ventriculomegaly, mild molar tooth malformation and moderate to severe 
cerebellar vermis hypoplasia. Although the OFD1 gene apparently escapes 
X-inactivation, skewed inactivation was observed in seven of 14 patients. The 
direction of skewing did not correlate with disease severity, reinforcing the 
hypothesis that additional factors contribute to the extensive intrafamilial 
variability.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22224
PMCID: PMC5497464
PMID: 23033313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement: The authors declare no 
financial conflict of interest.