---
reference_id: "PMID:40217974"
title: "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome: A Review of Complement Dysregulation, Genetic Susceptibility and Multiorgan Involvement."
authors:
- Bogdan RG
- Anderco P
- Ichim C
- Cimpean AM
- Todor SB
- Glaja-Iliescu M
- Crainiceanu ZP
- Popa ML
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/jcm14072527
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome: A Review of Complement Dysregulation, Genetic Susceptibility and Multiorgan Involvement.
**Authors:** Bogdan RG, Anderco P, Ichim C, Cimpean AM, Todor SB, Glaja-Iliescu M, Crainiceanu ZP, Popa ML
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm14072527](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm14072527)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2025 Apr 7;14(7):2527. doi: 10.3390/jcm14072527.

Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome: A Review of Complement Dysregulation,
Genetic Susceptibility and Multiorgan Involvement.

Bogdan RG(1)(2), Anderco P(3), Ichim C(3), Cimpean AM(1), Todor SB(3),
Glaja-Iliescu M(1)(2), Crainiceanu ZP(1)(2), Popa ML(3).

Author information:
(1)Plastic Surgery Department, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, 300041 Timisoara, Romania.
(2)County Clinical Emergency Hospital Pius Branzeu, 300723 Timisoara, Romania.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, "Lucian Blaga" University of Sibiu, 550024 Sibiu,
Romania.

Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a rare, life-threatening thrombotic
microangiopathy (TMA) characterized by complement dysregulation, leading to
microvascular thrombosis and multi-organ injury. TMAs are defined by
thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia and organ dysfunction caused
by small-vessel thrombosis. Unlike thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, which
results from severe ADAMTS13 deficiency, aHUS is driven by uncontrolled
activation of the alternative complement pathway. While the kidneys are most
frequently affected, other vital organs can also be involved. Genetic
susceptibility contributes significantly to disease risk, but a trigger such as
infection, pregnancy or autoimmune disease is usually required. Diagnosis is
challenging due to overlapping features with other TMAs and relies on exclusion
and complement testing. C5 inhibitors, such as eculizumab and ravulizumab, have
revolutionized treatment but necessitate prophylactic vaccination and ongoing
clinical surveillance. While these therapies provide effective disease control,
discontinuing treatment remains complex, especially in patients with complement
gene mutations. New therapies targeting various points in the complement cascade
are under investigation and may offer safer, more cost-effective options.
Progress in genetic profiling and biomarker discovery is essential for earlier
diagnosis, individualized therapy and relapse prevention. This review highlights
recent advances in the understanding of aHUS pathophysiology, clinical features
and evolving therapeutic strategies aimed at improving patient outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm14072527
PMCID: PMC11989465
PMID: 40217974

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.
