---
reference_id: "PMID:30370846"
title: "Novel Biosynthesis, Metabolism and Physiological Functions of L-Homoarginine."
authors:
- Adams S
- Che D
- Qin G
- Farouk MH
- Hailong J
- Rui H
journal: Curr Protein Pept Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2174/1389203719666181026170049
keywords:
- Amidinotransferases/metabolism
- Animals
- Biosynthetic Pathways/physiology
- Cardiovascular Diseases/metabolism
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/metabolism"
- Energy Metabolism
- Female
- Fetal Growth Retardation/metabolism
- "Homoarginine/biosynthesis, metabolism, pharmacology"
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Biosynthesis, Metabolism and Physiological Functions of L-Homoarginine.
**Authors:** Adams S, Che D, Qin G, Farouk MH, Hailong J, Rui H
**Journal:** Curr Protein Pept Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1389203719666181026170049](https://doi.org/10.2174/1389203719666181026170049)

## Content

1. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2019;20(2):184-193. doi:
10.2174/1389203719666181026170049.

Novel Biosynthesis, Metabolism and Physiological Functions of L-Homoarginine.

Adams S(1)(2), Che D(1)(2)(3), Qin G(1)(2)(3), Farouk MH(1)(4), Hailong
J(1)(2)(3), Rui H(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun 130118, China.
(2)Jilin Provincial Key Lab of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, Jilin
Agricultural University, Changchun 130118, China.
(3)Key Lab of Animal Production, Product Quality, and Security, Ministry of
Education, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun 130118, China.
(4)Animal Production Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Al-Azhar University,
Cairo 11884, Nasr City, Egypt.

L-Homoarginine (hArg) ((2S)-amino-6-Carbamimidamidohexanoic acid) is a
non-essential cationic amino acid that may be synthesised from the lysine
catabolism or the transamination of its precursor (Arginine: Arg). These
processes involve the use of the ornithine transcarbamoylase (OTC), an enzyme
from the urea cycle or the arginine: glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT), an
enzyme from the creatine biosynthesis pathway. These enzymes are
tissue-specific, hence they synthesised L-hArg in animals and human organs such
as the liver, kidneys, brains, and the small intestines. L-hArg plays some
important roles in the pathophysiological conditions, endothelial functions, and
the energy metabolic processes in different organs. These functions depend on
the concentrations of the available LhArg in the body. These different
concentrations of the L-hArg in the body are related to the different disease
conditions such as the T2D mellitus, the cardiovascular and the cerebrovascular
diseases, the chronic kidney diseases, the intrauterine growth restriction
(IUGR) and the preeclampsia (PE) in pregnancy disorders, and even mortality.
However, the applications of the L-hArg in both human and animal studies is in
its juvenile stage, and the mechanism of action in this vital amino acid is not
fully substantiated and requires more research attention. Hence, we review the
evidence with the perspective of the LhArg usage in the monogastric and human
nutrition and its related health implications.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1389203719666181026170049
PMID: 30370846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
