---
reference_id: "PMID:15095409"
title: "Reduced type I collagen utilization: a pathogenic mechanism in COL5A1 haplo-insufficient Ehlers-Danlos syndrome."
authors:
- Wenstrup RJ
- Florer JB
- Cole WG
- Willing MC
- Birk DE
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/jcb.20024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced type I collagen utilization: a pathogenic mechanism in COL5A1 haplo-insufficient Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Wenstrup RJ, Florer JB, Cole WG, Willing MC, Birk DE
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.20024](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.20024)

## Content

1. J Cell Biochem. 2004 May 1;92(1):113-24. doi: 10.1002/jcb.20024.

Reduced type I collagen utilization: a pathogenic mechanism in COL5A1 
haplo-insufficient Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Wenstrup RJ(1), Florer JB, Cole WG, Willing MC, Birk DE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital Research Foundation, 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA. richard.wenstrup@cchmc.org

To examine mechanisms by which reduced type V collagen causes weakened 
connective tissues in the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), we examined matrix 
deposition and collagen fibril morphology in long-term dermal fibroblast 
cultures. EDS cells with COL5A1 haplo-insufficiency deposited less than one-half 
of hydroxyproline as collagen compared to control fibroblasts, though total 
collagen synthesis rates are near-normal because type V collagen represents a 
small fraction of collagen synthesized. Cells from patients with osteogenesis 
imperfecta (OI) and haplo-insufficiency for proalpha1(I) chains of type I 
collagen also incorporated about one-half the collagen as controls, but this 
amount was proportional to their reduced rates of total collagen synthesis. 
Collagen fibril diameter was inversely proportional to type V/type I collagen 
ratios (EDS > control > OI). However, a reduction of type V collagen, in the EDS 
derived cells, was associated with the assembly of significantly fewer fibrils 
compared to control and OI cells. These data indicate that in cell culture, the 
quantity of collagen fibrils deposited in matrix is highly sensitive to 
reduction in type V collagen, far out of proportion to type V collagen's 
contribution to collagen mass.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.20024
PMID: 15095409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]