---
reference_id: "PMID:37988664"
title: "Germline PRKACA amplification-associated primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Yang WR
- Liang XH
- Qin YF
- Yang HY
- He SZ
- Huang ZX
- Liu YP
- Luo ZJ
journal: Arch Endocrinol Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.20945/2359-4292-2022-0491
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Female
- "Adrenal Cortex Diseases/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Cushing Syndrome/genetics
- Adrenalectomy/adverse effects
- Hydrocortisone
- Adrenocorticotropic Hormone
- Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinase Catalytic Subunits
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germline PRKACA amplification-associated primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Yang WR, Liang XH, Qin YF, Yang HY, He SZ, Huang ZX, Liu YP, Luo ZJ
**Journal:** Arch Endocrinol Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.20945/2359-4292-2022-0491](https://doi.org/10.20945/2359-4292-2022-0491)

## Content

1. Arch Endocrinol Metab. 2023 Nov 17;68:e220491. doi: 
10.20945/2359-4292-2022-0491.

Germline PRKACA amplification-associated primary pigmented nodular 
adrenocortical disease: a case report and literature review.

Yang WR(1)(2)(3), Liang XH(1)(3), Qin YF(1), Yang HY(1), He SZ(2), Huang ZX(1), 
Liu YP(1), Luo ZJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, the Ruikang Hospital of Guangxi University of 
Chinese Medicine, Nanning, China.
(3)These authors contributed equally to this work.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, China, zluo888@163.com.

Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD) is a rare 
adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH)-independent Cushing's syndrome (CS). 
Pediatric patients with PPNAD typically have unusual skin lesions and slow 
growth with unknown causes. We present a case of a female Chinese patient with 
PPNAD caused by the germline PRKACA gene copy number gain of chromosome 19. The 
patient initially presented with kidney stones, short stature, and obesity. 
After further testing, it was discovered that the patient had diabetes, mild 
hypertension, low bone mass, a low ACTH level, and hypercortisolemia, and 
neither the low-dose or high-dose dexamethasone suppression test was able to 
inhibit hematuric cortisol, which paradoxically increased. PPNAD was 
pathologically diagnosed after unilateral adrenalectomy. Chromosome microarrays 
and whole exon sequencing analyses of the peripheral blood, as well as testing 
of sectioned adrenal tissue, showed a rise in the copy number of the 
duplication-containing PRKACA gene on chromosome 19p13.13p13.12, a de novo but 
not heritable gene defect that causes disease. The clinical signs and symptoms 
supported the diagnosis of Carney complex (CNC). One significant mechanism of 
CNC pathogenesis may be the rise in germline PRKACA copy number of chromosome 
19. When assessing PPNAD patients for CNC, the possibility of PRKACA gene 
amplification should be considered. The effect of PRKACA gene amplification on 
the clinical manifestations of CNC needs to be confirmed by more cases.

DOI: 10.20945/2359-4292-2022-0491
PMCID: PMC10916803
PMID: 37988664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: no potential conflict of interest 
relevant to this article was reported.