---
reference_id: "PMID:12368987"
title: "Screening for adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency: clinical, biochemical and molecular findings in four patients."
authors:
- Castro M
- Pérez-Cerdá C
- Merinero B
- García MJ
- Bernar J
- Gil Nagel A
- Torres J
- Bermúdez M
- Garavito P
- Marie S
- Vincent F
- Van den Berghe G
- Ugarte M
journal: Neuropediatrics
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1055/s-2002-34493
keywords:
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Neonatal Screening
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening for adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency: clinical, biochemical and molecular findings in four patients.
**Authors:** Castro M, Pérez-Cerdá C, Merinero B, García MJ, Bernar J, Gil Nagel A, Torres J, Bermúdez M, Garavito P, Marie S, Vincent F, Van den Berghe G, Ugarte M
**Journal:** Neuropediatrics (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2002-34493](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2002-34493)

## Content

1. Neuropediatrics. 2002 Aug;33(4):186-9. doi: 10.1055/s-2002-34493.

Screening for adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency: clinical, biochemical and
molecular findings in four patients.

Castro M(1), Pérez-Cerdá C, Merinero B, García MJ, Bernar J, Gil Nagel A, Torres
J, Bermúdez M, Garavito P, Marie S, Vincent F, Van den Berghe G, Ugarte M.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, Departamento de Biología
Molecular, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency is an autosomal recessive defect of purine
metabolism. Succinyladenosine (S-Ado) and succinylaminoimidazole carboxamide
riboside (SAICAr) are the disease marker metabolites in physiological fluids.
The Bratton-Marshall test for detection of SAICAr in urine has been added to the
selective screening for inborn errors of metabolism that is carried out in our
lab. During the last three years, around 2,000 patients have been screened by
this method, resulting in the detection of four new cases with this disease.
They all presented with severe psychomotor delay, hypotonia and refractory
epilepsy since the neonatal period. The S-Ado/SAICAr ratio in cerebrospinal
fluid was below 2, indicating that they correspond to the most severe form of
the disease. New missense mutations were found in a heterozygous fashion in
three patients. The study of purines in all patients with neurological disease
of unknown etiology is highly recommended.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2002-34493
PMID: 12368987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
