---
reference_id: "PMID:27170093"
title: Bardet-Biedl syndrome 3 regulates the development of cranial base midline structures.
authors:
- Kawasaki M
- Izu Y
- Hayata T
- Ideno H
- Nifuji A
- Sheffield VC
- Ezura Y
- Noda M
journal: Bone
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2016.02.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bardet-Biedl syndrome 3 regulates the development of cranial base midline structures.
**Authors:** Kawasaki M, Izu Y, Hayata T, Ideno H, Nifuji A, Sheffield VC, Ezura Y, Noda M
**Journal:** Bone (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2016.02.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2016.02.017)

## Content

1. Bone. 2017 Aug;101:179-190. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2016.02.017. Epub 2016 May 8.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome 3 regulates the development of cranial base midline 
structures.

Kawasaki M(1), Izu Y(1), Hayata T(1), Ideno H(2), Nifuji A(2), Sheffield VC(3), 
Ezura Y(1), Noda M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo 
Medical and Dental University, Japan.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Tsurumi University School of Dental Medicine, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa College of Medicine, United 
States.
(4)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo 
Medical and Dental University, Japan; Department of Orthopedics, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Japan; Yokohama City Minato Red Cross Hospital, Japan. 
Electronic address: noda.mph@mri.tmd.ac.jp.

Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder and is classified 
as one of the ciliopathy. The patients manifest a characteristic craniofacial 
dysmorphology but the effects of Bbs3 deficiency in the developmental process 
during the craniofacial pathogenesis are still incompletely understood. Here, we 
analyzed a cranial development of a BBS model Bbs3-/- mouse. It was previously 
reported that these mutant mice exhibit a dome-shape cranium. We show that 
Bbs3-/- mouse embryos present mid-facial hypoplasia and solitary central upper 
incisor. Morphologically, these mutant mice show synchondrosis of the cranial 
base midline due to the failure to fuse in association with loss of 
intrasphenoidal synchondrosis. The cranial base was laterally expanded and 
longitudinally shortened. In the developing cartilaginous primordium of cranial 
base, cells present in the midline were less in Bbs3-/- embryos. Expression of 
BBS3 was observed specifically in a cell population lying between condensed 
ectomesenchyme in the midline and the ventral midbrain at this stage. Finally, 
siRNA-based knockdown of Bbs3 in ATDC5 cells impaired migration in culture. Our 
data suggest that BBS3 is required for the development of cranial base via 
regulation of cell migration toward the midline where they promote the 
condensation of ectomesenchyme and form the future cartilaginous templates of 
cranial base.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2016.02.017
PMCID: PMC5519131
PMID: 27170093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.