---
reference_id: "PMID:15835487"
title: Kawasaki disease.
authors:
- Singh S
- Kansra S
journal: Natl Med J India
year: '2005'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Singh S, Kansra S
**Journal:** Natl Med J India (2005)

## Content

1. Natl Med J India. 2005 Jan-Feb;18(1):20-4.

Kawasaki disease.

Singh S(1), Kansra S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh 160012, India. surjitsinghpgi@hotmail.com

Kawasaki disease (KD) is a common vasculitic disorder usually seen in children 
below 5 years of age. The disease can present with protean clinical 
manifestations which include high grade fever (for at least 5 days), rash, 
redness of the lips and a typical strawberry tongue, cervical lymph node 
enlargement (often unilateral), swelling over the hands/feet and, later a 
characteristic peripheral desquamation over the fingers and toes. These clinical 
features appear sequentially and the findings may change from day-to-day. Thus, 
all these features may not be seen together at any one point of time. The 
diagnosis rests on the recognition of this characteristic temporal sequence of 
clinical events, none of which are, by themselves, pathognomonic. Establishing a 
diagnosis of KD may be further complicated by the occurrence of several other, 
seemingly unrelated, clinical features. These include irritability, neck 
stiffness, sterile pyuria, pneumonitis, hydrops of the gallbladder and hepatitis 
among many others. There is no laboratory test that can help in confirming a 
diagnosis of KD. Left untreated, up to 20% of children with KD can develop 
coronary aneurysms with catastrophic long term sequelae. It is important to 
diagnose KD in the first 10 days of the illness so that appropriate therapy with 
intravenous immunoglobulin and aspirin can be Initiated. All paediatricians, and 
physicians looking after children, need to be aware of this condition which is 
now being increasingly recognized in India.

PMID: 15835487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]