---
reference_id: "PMID:38238086"
title: Absence of the RING domain in MID1 results in patterning defects in the developing human brain.
authors:
- Frank S
- Gabassi E
- Käseberg S
- Bertin M
- Zografidou L
- Pfeiffer D
- Brennenstuhl H
- Falk S
- Karow M
- Schweiger S
journal: Life Sci Alliance
year: '2024'
doi: 10.26508/lsa.202302288
keywords:
- Humans
- Brain/metabolism
- Esophagus/abnormalities
- Hypertelorism
- Hypospadias
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Microtubule Proteins/chemistry
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Absence of the RING domain in MID1 results in patterning defects in the developing human brain.
**Authors:** Frank S, Gabassi E, Käseberg S, Bertin M, Zografidou L, Pfeiffer D, Brennenstuhl H, Falk S, Karow M, Schweiger S
**Journal:** Life Sci Alliance (2024)
**DOI:** [10.26508/lsa.202302288](https://doi.org/10.26508/lsa.202302288)

## Content

1. Life Sci Alliance. 2024 Jan 18;7(4):e202302288. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202302288. 
Print 2024 Apr.

Absence of the RING domain in MID1 results in patterning defects in the 
developing human brain.

Frank S(1), Gabassi E(1), Käseberg S(2), Bertin M(2), Zografidou L(2), Pfeiffer 
D(2), Brennenstuhl H(3), Falk S(1), Karow M(4), Schweiger S(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center of the Johannes 
Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
Erlangen, Germany marisa.karow@fau.de.

The X-linked form of Opitz BBB/G syndrome (OS) is a monogenic disorder in which 
symptoms are established early during embryonic development. OS is caused by 
pathogenic variants in the X-linked gene MID1 Disease-associated variants are 
distributed across the entire gene locus, except for the N-terminal really 
interesting new gene (RING) domain that encompasses the E3 ubiquitin ligase 
activity. By using genome-edited human induced pluripotent stem cell lines, we 
here show that absence of isoforms containing the RING domain of MID1 causes 
severe patterning defects in human brain organoids. We observed a prominent 
neurogenic deficit with a reduction in neural tissue and a concomitant increase 
in choroid plexus-like structures. Transcriptome analyses revealed a 
deregulation of patterning pathways very early on, even preceding neural 
induction. Notably, the observed phenotypes starkly contrast with those observed 
in MID1 full-knockout organoids, indicating the presence of a distinct mechanism 
that underlies the patterning defects. The severity and early onset of these 
phenotypes could potentially account for the absence of patients carrying 
pathogenic variants in exon 1 of the MID1 gene coding for the N-terminal RING 
domain.

© 2024 Frank et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202302288
PMCID: PMC10796562
PMID: 38238086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.