---
reference_id: "PMID:15210883"
title: "Autosomal dominant striatal degeneration (ADSD): clinical description and mapping to 5q13-5q14."
authors:
- Kuhlenbäumer G
- Lüdemann P
- Schirmacher A
- De Vriendt E
- Hünermund G
- Young P
- Hund-Georgiadis M
- Schuierer G
- Möller H
- Ringelstein EB
- Van Broeckhoven C
- Timmerman V
- Stögbauer F
journal: Neurology
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000130485.89814.10
keywords:
- "Basal Ganglia Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Caudate Nucleus/pathology
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 5"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Dysarthria/etiology
- Female
- Ferritins/genetics
- Gait
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Hypokinesia/etiology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Pedigree
- Putamen/pathology
- "Tomography, Emission-Computed, Single-Photon"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal dominant striatal degeneration (ADSD): clinical description and mapping to 5q13-5q14.
**Authors:** Kuhlenbäumer G, Lüdemann P, Schirmacher A, De Vriendt E, Hünermund G, Young P, Hund-Georgiadis M, Schuierer G, Möller H, Ringelstein EB, Van Broeckhoven C, Timmerman V, Stögbauer F
**Journal:** Neurology (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1212/01.wnl.0000130485.89814.10](https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000130485.89814.10)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2004 Jun 22;62(12):2203-8. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000130485.89814.10.

Autosomal dominant striatal degeneration (ADSD): clinical description and
mapping to 5q13-5q14.

Kuhlenbäumer G(1), Lüdemann P, Schirmacher A, De Vriendt E, Hünermund G, Young
P, Hund-Georgiadis M, Schuierer G, Möller H, Ringelstein EB, Van Broeckhoven C,
Timmerman V, Stögbauer F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Münster, Germany.
gkuhlen@uni-muenster.de

OBJECTIVE: To describe the clinical and neuroradiologic features and chromosomal
mapping of a novel autosomal dominant disease affecting the basal ganglia.
METHODS: The authors characterized a large family with autosomal dominant basal
ganglia disease (ADSD) clinically and by MRI, MR spectroscopy (MRS), and SPECT.
The authors performed a whole genome genetic linkage scan to map the underlying
genetic defect.
RESULTS: The main clinical features of the disease are dysarthria and gait
disturbance without any apparent reduction in life expectancy. MRI demonstrated
a distinctive lesion pattern restricted mainly to the putamen and caudate
nucleus. Genetic linkage analysis localized the causative genetic defect to a
3.25 megabase candidate region on chromosome 5q13.3-q14.1.
CONCLUSIONS: ADSD is an autosomal dominant basal ganglia disease mapping to
chromosome 5q13.3-q14.1.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000130485.89814.10
PMID: 15210883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
