---
reference_id: "PMID:22417841"
title: Effect of mutations in LDLR and PCSK9 genes on phenotypic variability in Tunisian familial hypercholesterolemia patients.
authors:
- Slimani A
- Jelassi A
- Jguirim I
- Najah M
- Rebhi L
- Omezzine A
- Maatouk F
- Hamda KB
- Kacem M
- Rabès JP
- Abifadel M
- Boileau C
- Rouis M
- Slimane MN
- Varret M
journal: Atherosclerosis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.02.018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of mutations in LDLR and PCSK9 genes on phenotypic variability in Tunisian familial hypercholesterolemia patients.
**Authors:** Slimani A, Jelassi A, Jguirim I, Najah M, Rebhi L, Omezzine A, Maatouk F, Hamda KB, Kacem M, Rabès JP, Abifadel M, Boileau C, Rouis M, Slimane MN, Varret M
**Journal:** Atherosclerosis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.02.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.02.018)

## Content

1. Atherosclerosis. 2012 May;222(1):158-66. doi: 
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.02.018. Epub 2012 Feb 19.

Effect of mutations in LDLR and PCSK9 genes on phenotypic variability in 
Tunisian familial hypercholesterolemia patients.

Slimani A(1), Jelassi A, Jguirim I, Najah M, Rebhi L, Omezzine A, Maatouk F, 
Hamda KB, Kacem M, Rabès JP, Abifadel M, Boileau C, Rouis M, Slimane MN, Varret 
M.

Author information:
(1)Research Unit of Genetic and Biological Factors of Atherosclerosis, Faculty 
of Medicine, Monastir 5000, Tunisia. afefslimani@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is commonly caused by 
mutations in the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene (LDLR), in the 
apolipoprotein B-100 gene (APOB), or in the proprotein convertase subtilisin 
kexine 9 gene (PCSK9). ADH subjects carrying a mutation in LDLR present highly 
variable plasma LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C). This variability might be due to 
environmental factors or the effect of some modifying genes such as PCSK9 and 
APOE.
AIMS: We investigated the molecular basis of thirteen Tunisian ADH families and 
attempted to determine the impact of PCSK9 and APOE gene variations on 
LDL-cholesterol levels and on the variable phenotypic expression of the disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Fifty six subjects were screened for mutations in the LDLR 
gene through direct sequencing. The causative mutation was found to segregate 
with the disease in each family and a new frameshift mutation, p.Met767CysfsX21, 
was identified in one family. The distribution of total- and LDL-cholesterol 
levels, adjusted for age and gender, among homozygous and heterozygous ADH 
patients varied widely. Within seven families, nine subjects presented low 
LDL-cholesterol levels despite carrying a mutation in the LDLR gene. To identify 
the molecular actors underlying this phenotypic variability, the PCSK9 gene was 
screened using direct sequencing and/or enzymatic restriction analysis, and the 
apo E genotypes were determined. A new missense variation (p.Pro174Ser) in the 
PCSK9 gene was identified and characterized as a new putative loss-of-function 
mutation.
CONCLUSION: Genetic variations in PCSK9 and APOE genes could explain only part 
of the variability observed in the phenotypic expression in Tunisian ADH 
patients carrying mutations in the LDLR gene. Other genetic variants and 
environmental factors very probably act to fully explain this phenotypic 
variability.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.02.018
PMID: 22417841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]