---
reference_id: "PMID:29571849"
title: Oligoclonal bands and periventricular lesions in multiple sclerosis will not increase blood-brain barrier permeability.
authors:
- Akaishi T
- Takahashi T
- Nakashima I
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2018.02.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oligoclonal bands and periventricular lesions in multiple sclerosis will not increase blood-brain barrier permeability.
**Authors:** Akaishi T, Takahashi T, Nakashima I
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2018.02.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2018.02.020)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2018 Apr 15;387:129-133. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2018.02.020. Epub
2018  Feb 6.

Oligoclonal bands and periventricular lesions in multiple sclerosis will not 
increase blood-brain barrier permeability.

Akaishi T(1), Takahashi T(2), Nakashima I(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Japan; Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Yonezawa 
Hospital, Japan. Electronic address: t-akaishi@med.tohoku.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Neurology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Japan; Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Yonezawa 
Hospital, Japan. Electronic address: t-toshiyuki@mta.biglobe.ne.jp.
(3)Department of Neurology, Tohoku Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Japan. 
Electronic address: nakashima@hosp.tohoku-mpu.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the etiology and clinical significance of 
periventricular lesions (PVLs) and oligoclonal bands (OB) in multiple sclerosis 
(MS).
METHODS: We enrolled a total of 97 MS patients (67 OB-positive and 30 
OB-negative) who were negative both for anti-aquaporin-4 (AQP4) autoantibody and 
anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibody. In these patients, 
comprehensive data including clinical, laboratory, and MRI were collected to 
investigate the significance of OB and PVLs.
RESULTS: Within the MS patients, OB-positivity and the number of PVLs were 
associated each other. Both of OB-positivity and PVLs did not affect clinical 
severity or relapse rate, though the patients with ≥3 PVLs showed faster 
cerebral atrophy than those with <3 PVLs. The patients with OB or ≥3 PVLs showed 
lower values of quotient of albumin (QAlb), a biomarker of blood-brain barrier 
(BBB)-permeability and possibly reflects the ongoing disease activity, and lower 
protein levels in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The causal relationship between the 
decreased QAlb and OB or ≥3 PVLs was not determined.
CONCLUSIONS: OB and PVLs were associated each other, but they did not affect the 
clinical course or increased the BBB-permeability within MS patients.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2018.02.020
PMID: 29571849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]