---
reference_id: "PMID:25323095"
title: "Immunohistochemical expression of receptor tyrosine kinase PDGFR-α, c-Met, and EGFR in skull base chordoma."
authors:
- Akhavan-Sigari R
- Abili M
- Gaab MR
- Rohde V
- Zafar N
- Emami P
- Ostertag H
journal: Neurosurg Rev
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s10143-014-0579-x
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Chordoma/metabolism, pathology"
- Disease-Free Survival
- ErbB Receptors/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/metabolism"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-met/metabolism
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor alpha/metabolism"
- Skull Base Neoplasms/metabolism
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunohistochemical expression of receptor tyrosine kinase PDGFR-α, c-Met, and EGFR in skull base chordoma.
**Authors:** Akhavan-Sigari R, Abili M, Gaab MR, Rohde V, Zafar N, Emami P, Ostertag H
**Journal:** Neurosurg Rev (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10143-014-0579-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10143-014-0579-x)

## Content

1. Neurosurg Rev. 2015 Jan;38(1):89-98; discussion 98-9. doi: 
10.1007/s10143-014-0579-x. Epub 2014 Oct 17.

Immunohistochemical expression of receptor tyrosine kinase PDGFR-α, c-Met, and 
EGFR in skull base chordoma.

Akhavan-Sigari R(1), Abili M, Gaab MR, Rohde V, Zafar N, Emami P, Ostertag H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Robert-Koch-Strasse 40, 37075, Göttingen, 
Germany, reza.akhavan-sigari@med.uni-goettingen.de.

Chordomas are rare, locally aggressive malignancies that often exhibit an 
insidious natural history and are difficult to eradicate. Surgery and 
radiotherapy are the treatment mainstays of chordoma, but the chance of local 
recurrence remains high. Reports of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) expression in 
chordoma suggest that these tumors may respond to kinase inhibitor therapy. 
Currently, there are no effective chemotherapeutic protocols for chordoma. A 
tissue microarray containing 74 tumor specimens from primary chordoma patients 
and 71 from their recurrent tumors for a total of 145 tumor specimens was 
immunohistochemically analyzed for expression of a number of proteins involved 
in signal transduction from RTKs. Platelet-derived growth factor receptor-α 
(PDGFR-α), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), c-Met, and CD-34 were 
detected in 100, 92, 100, and 59% of cases, respectively. PDGFR-α and c-Met 
staining was of moderate to strong intensity in all cases. In contrast, total 
EGFR staining was variable; weak staining was detected in 10 cases. Our results 
contribute to the understanding of the expression of RTKs in skull base 
chordomas and support the development of targeted therapies that inhibit RTKs, 
which may have a synergistic effect for chemotherapy in patients. There were 
statistically significant correlations between the expression of PDGFR-α, c-Met, 
and EGFR and disease-free survival. The results nonetheless suggest that 
chordomas may respond to RTK inhibitors or modulators of other downstream 
signaling.

DOI: 10.1007/s10143-014-0579-x
PMID: 25323095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]