---
reference_id: "PMID:11687797"
title: Mutation of a new gene encoding a putative pyrin-like protein causes familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome and Muckle-Wells syndrome.
authors:
- Hoffman HM
- Mueller JL
- Broide DH
- Wanderer AA
- Kolodner RD
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/ng756
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of a new gene encoding a putative pyrin-like protein causes familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome and Muckle-Wells syndrome.
**Authors:** Hoffman HM, Mueller JL, Broide DH, Wanderer AA, Kolodner RD
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng756](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng756)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Nov;29(3):301-5. doi: 10.1038/ng756.

Mutation of a new gene encoding a putative pyrin-like protein causes familial 
cold autoinflammatory syndrome and Muckle-Wells syndrome.

Hoffman HM(1), Mueller JL, Broide DH, Wanderer AA, Kolodner RD.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, University of California School of 
Medicine, San Diego, California, USA. hahoffman@ucsd.edu

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2001 Nov;29(3):241-2. doi: 10.1038/ng1101-241.

Familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome (FCAS, MIM 120100), commonly known as 
familial cold urticaria (FCU), is an autosomal-dominant systemic inflammatory 
disease characterized by intermittent episodes of rash, arthralgia, fever and 
conjunctivitis after generalized exposure to cold. FCAS was previously mapped to 
a 10-cM region on chromosome 1q44 (refs. 5,6). Muckle-Wells syndrome (MWS; MIM 
191900), which also maps to chromosome 1q44, is an autosomal-dominant periodic 
fever syndrome with a similar phenotype except that symptoms are not 
precipitated by cold exposure and that sensorineural hearing loss is frequently 
also present. To identify the genes for FCAS and MWS, we screened exons in the 
1q44 region for mutations by direct sequencing of genomic DNA from affected 
individuals and controls. This resulted in the identification of four distinct 
mutations in a gene that segregated with the disorder in three families with 
FCAS and one family with MWS. This gene, called CIAS1, is expressed in 
peripheral blood leukocytes and encodes a protein with a pyrin domain, a 
nucleotide-binding site (NBS, NACHT subfamily) domain and a leucine-rich repeat 
(LRR) motif region, suggesting a role in the regulation of inflammation and 
apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1038/ng756
PMCID: PMC4322000
PMID: 11687797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]