---
reference_id: "PMID:35730566"
title: Alu RNA induces NLRP3 expression through TLR7 activation in α-1-antitrypsin-deficient macrophages.
authors:
- Lee J
- Mohammad N
- Lu Y
- Kang K
- Han K
- Brantly M
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.158791
keywords:
- Humans
- Macrophages/metabolism
- "NLR Family, Pyrin Domain-Containing 3 Protein/genetics"
- RNA
- Toll-Like Receptor 7/genetics
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alu RNA induces NLRP3 expression through TLR7 activation in α-1-antitrypsin-deficient macrophages.
**Authors:** Lee J, Mohammad N, Lu Y, Kang K, Han K, Brantly M
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.158791](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.158791)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2022 Jun 22;7(12):e158791. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.158791.

Alu RNA induces NLRP3 expression through TLR7 activation in
α-1-antitrypsin-deficient macrophages.

Lee J(1), Mohammad N(1), Lu Y(1), Kang K(2), Han K(2)(3), Brantly M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Dankook University College of Natural Science,
Cheonan, Republic of Korea.
(3)Center for Bio-Medical Engineering Core Facility, Dankook University,
Cheonan, Republic of Korea.

α-1 antitrypsin (AAT) is a serine protease inhibitor that plays a pivotal role
in maintaining lung homeostasis. The most common AAT allele associated with AAT
deficiency (AATD) is PiZ. Z-AAT accumulates in cells due to misfolding, causing
severe AATD. The major function of AAT is to neutralize neutrophil elastase in
the lung. It is generally accepted that loss of antiprotease function is a major
cause of COPD in individuals with AATD. However, it is now being recognized that
the toxic gain-of-function effect of Z-AAT in macrophage likely contributes to
lung disease. In the present study, we determined that TLR7 signaling is
activated in Z-MDMs, and the expression level of NLRP3, one of the targets of
TLR7 signaling, is significantly higher in Z- compared with M-MDMs. We also
determined that the level of endosomal Alu RNA is significantly higher in
Z-compared with M-MDMs. Alu RNA is a known endogenous ligand that activates TLR7
signaling. Z-AAT likely induces the expression of Alu elements in MDMs and
accelerates monocyte death, leading to the higher level of endosomal Alu RNA in
Z-MDMs. Taken together,this study identifies a mechanism responsible for the
toxic gain of function of Z-AAT macrophages.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.158791
PMCID: PMC9309046
PMID: 35730566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared
that no conflict of interest exists.
