---
reference_id: "PMID:16048294"
title: "Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors of the central nervous system: management and outcomes."
authors:
- Chen ML
- McComb JG
- Krieger MD
journal: Neurosurg Focus
year: '2005'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Central Nervous System Neoplasms/mortality, pathology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/mortality, pathology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Teratoma/mortality, pathology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors of the central nervous system: management and outcomes.
**Authors:** Chen ML, McComb JG, Krieger MD
**Journal:** Neurosurg Focus (2005)

## Content

1. Neurosurg Focus. 2005 Jun 15;18(6A):E8.

Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors of the central nervous system: management and
outcomes.

Chen ML(1), McComb JG, Krieger MD.

Author information:
(1)Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, Department of Neurological Surgery,
University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles,
California, USA.

OBJECT: Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (ATRTs) represent a relatively newly
categorized neoplastic entity. They commonly present in childhood, and have a
rapidly progressive clinical course with a survival time of less than 1 year.
Treatment regimens have been nonuniform. In this retrospective review of
patients with ATRTs who were treated at the authors' institution according to a
uniform protocol, the goal was to assess the efficacy of the treatment and its
outcome.
METHODS: Over a 7-year period, ATRT was diagnosed in 11 patients (six boys and
five girls). The median age of the patients was 61 months, and their ages ranged
from 3 months to 17 years. Signs and symptoms began, on average, a little more
than 1 month before diagnosis and included the following: headache (36%), nausea
and vomiting (46%), lethargy (18%), seizures (27%), cranial nerve findings
(46%), ataxia (18%), long tract findings (18%), and hydrocephalus (46%). Tumor
location was cortical in four patients, in the pineal region in four, in the
posterior fossa in two, and spinal in one. In one patient disseminated disease
was revealed on the initial imaging study; seven patients had disseminated tumor
subsequently. Treatment consisted of chemotherapy in 11 patients, chemotherapy
and local radiation in five, and chemotherapy and craniospinal radiation in
three. Six patients are alive, three have died, and two were lost to follow-up
review. The mean time to death was 24 months, and ranged from 2 to 67 months.
Among the surviving patients the mean duration of follow up is 18.5 months and
ranges from 2 to 37 months. The median time to progression was 3.5 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors are malignant lesions with rapid
progression. Further study is necessary to determine the efficacy of therapy.

PMID: 16048294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
