---
reference_id: "PMID:31759654"
title: "Functional outcome, quality of life, and 'failures' following pull-through surgery for hirschsprung's disease: A review of practice at a single-center."
authors:
- Townley OG
- Lindley RM
- Cohen MC
- Murthi GV
journal: J Pediatr Surg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2019.10.042
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional outcome, quality of life, and 'failures' following pull-through surgery for hirschsprung's disease: A review of practice at a single-center.
**Authors:** Townley OG, Lindley RM, Cohen MC, Murthi GV
**Journal:** J Pediatr Surg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2019.10.042](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2019.10.042)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Surg. 2020 Feb;55(2):273-277. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2019.10.042. 
Epub 2019 Nov 5.

Functional outcome, quality of life, and 'failures' following pull-through 
surgery for hirschsprung's disease: A review of practice at a single-center.

Townley OG(1), Lindley RM(2), Cohen MC(3), Murthi GV(4).

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Surgical Unit, Sheffield Children's Hospital, Sheffield, S10 2TH, 
United Kingdom; The Medical School, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Paediatric Surgical Unit, Sheffield Children's Hospital, Sheffield, S10 2TH, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Paediatric Histopathology, Sheffield Children's Hospital, 
Sheffield, S10 2TH, United Kingdom.
(4)Paediatric Surgical Unit, Sheffield Children's Hospital, Sheffield, S10 2TH, 
United Kingdom. Electronic address: govind.murthi@nhs.net.

AIMS: The purpose of this study was to assess bowel function and quality of life 
(QoL) in patients with Hirschsprung's disease (HD) and identify patients who 
have 'failed' treatment.
METHODS: A review of a single-center HD cohort treated with pull-through surgery 
from 2004 to 2017 was completed. Bowel function of patients five years and above 
and QoL of all patients were assessed using validated questionnaires. Patients 
who 'failed' treatment were defined as above five years with one or more of: a) 
long-term stoma, b) needing an antegrade continence enema or transanal 
irrigation, c) severe soiling, or d) severe constipation. Statistical analysis 
was performed with P < 0.05 deemed significant. Data are given as mean [range].
RESULTS: Seventy-one patients presented with HD within the study period. Mean 
follow-up was 5.4 years [0.7-13.3]. Of 38 eligible patients, bowel function was 
assessed in 24 patients (nine had a stoma, five lost to follow-up). The mean 
incontinence score was 17 [0-28)], and the mean constipation score was 17 
[5-25]. Incontinence and constipation scores were worse than healthy controls 
(P < 0.001 and P = 0.001, respectively) and did not improve with age. Fifty-six 
patients had QoL assessed with no difference between our cohort (81 [25-100]) 
and healthy controls (81 [unknown]); (P = 0.85). Thirty-three patients were 
assessed for 'failure' (bowel function score n = 24; stoma n = 9). Thirty of 33 
(91%) children older than five years can be considered to have 'failed' 
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients have worse bowel function than healthy children, which 
does not improve with age. QoL is comparable to healthy controls. A significant 
proportion of patients have poor outcomes and have 'failed' treatment.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level III.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2019.10.042
PMID: 31759654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]