---
reference_id: "PMID:35204601"
title: "Rapid Identification of Patients Eligible for Direct Emergent Computed Tomography Angiography during Acute Ischemic Stroke: The DARE-PACE Assessment."
authors:
- Yiang GT
- Chen YH
- Chen PY
- Hsiao CL
- Lin SK
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics12020511
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapid Identification of Patients Eligible for Direct Emergent Computed Tomography Angiography during Acute Ischemic Stroke: The DARE-PACE Assessment.
**Authors:** Yiang GT, Chen YH, Chen PY, Hsiao CL, Lin SK
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics12020511](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics12020511)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2022 Feb 16;12(2):511. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics12020511.

Rapid Identification of Patients Eligible for Direct Emergent Computed
Tomography Angiography during Acute Ischemic Stroke: The DARE-PACE Assessment.

Yiang GT(1)(2), Chen YH(1), Chen PY(2)(3), Hsiao CL(3), Lin SK(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Taipei Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi
Medical Foundation, New Taipei City 23142, Taiwan.
(2)School of Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien 97004, Taiwan.
(3)Stroke Center, Department of Neurology, Taipei Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu
Chi Medical Foundation, New Taipei City 23142, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: We investigated the clinical signs to establish a method for rapid
identification of patients with the National Institute of Health Stroke Scale
(NIHSS) score ≥ 8 eligible for direct brain CTA study; Methods: We
retrospectively enrolled 2895 in patients with acute ischemic stroke (AIS). Four
items in the NIHSS were selected as the main clinical signs of stroke; Results:
A total of 922 (31.8%) patients had an initial NIHSS score of ≥8. The average
door-to-CT time and door-to-CTA time were 13.4 ± 1.8 and 75.5 ± 44.5 min,
respectively. Among 658 patients who had the priority signs, namely dense
hemiplegia (D), aphasia with right arm drop (AR), and eyeball forced deviation
(E), 634 patients (96.4%) with an NIHSS score ≥ 8 were identified. By using a
classification and regression tree analysis, 153 patients with an NIHSS ≥ 8 were
identified among 175 patients (87.4%) who had the secondary signs, namely
hemiparesis with limb falls (P), aphasia (A), drowsy or worse consciousness (C),
and eyeball limitation (E). The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy were
85.4%, 97.7%, and 95.3%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The DARE-PACE assessment involving a checkbox list provides
excellent accuracy for rapid identification of AIS patients with an NIHSS score
≥ 8 for direct CTA study to reduce the time delay for endovascular thrombectomy.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics12020511
PMCID: PMC8871088
PMID: 35204601

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.