---
reference_id: "PMID:23259425"
title: Immunosuppression and risk of cervical cancer.
authors:
- Dugué PA
- Rebolj M
- Garred P
- Lynge E
journal: Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1586/era.12.159
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunosuppression and risk of cervical cancer.
**Authors:** Dugué PA, Rebolj M, Garred P, Lynge E
**Journal:** Expert Rev Anticancer Ther (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1586/era.12.159](https://doi.org/10.1586/era.12.159)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2013 Jan;13(1):29-42. doi: 10.1586/era.12.159.

Immunosuppression and risk of cervical cancer.

Dugué PA(1), Rebolj M, Garred P, Lynge E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Øster Farimagsgade 5, 
DK 1014 København K, Denmark. pidu@sund.ku.dk

A markedly increased risk of cervical cancer is known in women immunosuppressed 
due to AIDS or therapy following organ transplantation. The aim of this review 
is to determine the association between other conditions affecting the immune 
system and the risk of cervical cancer. Patients with end-stage renal disease 
seem to be at an increased risk of cervical cancer. A higher risk of cervical 
precancerous lesions was found in patients with some autoimmune diseases; 
particularly if treated with immunosuppressants. Among behavioral factors 
weakening the immune system, smoking appeared to strongly increase the risk of 
cervical cancer, while poor diet only moderately increased the risk. It is 
difficult to determine whether sexually transmitted infections other than human 
papillomavirus infection are independent risk factors. Identifying those groups 
of women likely to fail in clearing persistent human papillomavirus infections 
would help individualize screening guidelines and target immune-associated 
factors in the cervical cancer etiology.

DOI: 10.1586/era.12.159
PMID: 23259425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]