---
reference_id: "PMID:27156759"
title: "Diabetes insipidus: Differential diagnosis and management."
authors:
- Robertson GL
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2016.02.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetes insipidus: Differential diagnosis and management.
**Authors:** Robertson GL
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beem.2016.02.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2016.02.007)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Mar;30(2):205-18. doi: 
10.1016/j.beem.2016.02.007. Epub 2016 Feb 18.

Diabetes insipidus: Differential diagnosis and management.

Robertson GL(1).

Author information:
(1)Feinberg Medical School of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA. 
Electronic address: glr388@northwestern.edu.

Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a syndrome characterized by the excretion of 
abnormally large volumes of dilute urine. It can be caused by any of 4 
fundamentally different defects that must be distinguished for safe and 
effective management. They are: (1) pituitary DI, due to inadequate production 
and secretion of antidiuretic hormone, arginine-vasopressin (AVP); (2) 
gestational DI due to degradation of AVP by an enzyme made in placenta; (3) 
primary polydipsia, due to suppression of AVP secretion by excessive fluid 
intake; and (4) nephrogenic DI due to renal insensitivity to the antidiuretic 
effect of AVP. This review describes several methods of differential diagnosis, 
indicates the advantages and disadvantages of each and presents a new approach 
that is simpler and less costly but just as reliable as the best of the older 
methods. The various treatments for the different types of DI and recent 
findings on the genetic basis of the familial forms of DI are also discussed 
with emphasis on their contributions to improved diagnosis and management.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2016.02.007
PMID: 27156759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]