---
reference_id: "PMID:39600146"
title: Proteomic Analysis of Tissue Proteins Related to Lateral Lymph Node Metastasis in Papillary Thyroid Microcarcinoma.
authors:
- Zhang Q
- Cao Z
- Wang Y
- Wu H
- Zhang Z
- Liu Z
journal: J Proteome Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.4c00737
keywords:
- Humans
- Lymphatic Metastasis
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/pathology, metabolism"
- Proteomics/methods
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism, genetics"
- Female
- "Carcinoma, Papillary/pathology, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Lymph Nodes/pathology
- Machine Learning
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteomic Analysis of Tissue Proteins Related to Lateral Lymph Node Metastasis in Papillary Thyroid Microcarcinoma.
**Authors:** Zhang Q, Cao Z, Wang Y, Wu H, Zhang Z, Liu Z
**Journal:** J Proteome Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.jproteome.4c00737](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.4c00737)

## Content

1. J Proteome Res. 2025 Jan 3;24(1):256-267. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.4c00737.
Epub 2024 Nov 27.

Proteomic Analysis of Tissue Proteins Related to Lateral Lymph Node Metastasis
in Papillary Thyroid Microcarcinoma.

Zhang Q(1), Cao Z(1), Wang Y(1), Wu H(1), Zhang Z(2), Liu Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, P.
R. China.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and
Rare Diseases, National Infrastructure for Translational Medicine, Peking Union
Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100730, P. R. China.

Patients with lateral lymph node metastasis (LLNM) may experience higher
locoregional recurrence rates and poorer prognoses compared to those without
LLNM, highlighting the need for effective preoperative stratification to
reliably assess risk LLNM. In this study, we collected PTMC samples from Peking
Union Medical College Hospital and employed data-independent acquisition mass
spectrometry proteomics technique to identify protein profiles in PTMC tissues
with and without LLNM. Pseudo temporal analysis and single sample gene set
enrichment analysis were conducted in combination with The Cancer Genome Atlas
Thyroid Carcinoma for functional coordination analysis and the construction of a
prediction model based on random forest. Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF)
clustering was utilized to classify molecular subtypes of PTMC. Our findings
revealed that the differential activation of pathways such as MAPK and PI3K was
critical in enhancing the lateral lymph node metastatic potential of PTMC. We
successfully screened biomarkers via machine learning and public databases,
creating an effective prediction model for metastasis. Additionally, we explored
the mechanism of metastasis-associated PTMC subtypes via NMF clustering. These
insights into LLNM mechanisms in PTMC may contribute to future biomarker
screening and the identification of therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.4c00737
PMCID: PMC11705366
PMID: 39600146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.
