---
reference_id: "PMID:21368286"
title: "Neuromyelitis optica unique area postrema lesions: nausea, vomiting, and pathogenic implications."
authors:
- Popescu BF
- Lennon VA
- Parisi JE
- Howe CL
- Weigand SD
- Cabrera-Gómez JA
- Newell K
- Mandler RN
- Pittock SJ
- Weinshenker BG
- Lucchinetti CF
journal: Neurology
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318214332c
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuromyelitis optica unique area postrema lesions: nausea, vomiting, and pathogenic implications.
**Authors:** Popescu BF, Lennon VA, Parisi JE, Howe CL, Weigand SD, Cabrera-Gómez JA, Newell K, Mandler RN, Pittock SJ, Weinshenker BG, Lucchinetti CF
**Journal:** Neurology (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e318214332c](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e318214332c)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2011 Apr 5;76(14):1229-37. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318214332c. Epub 
2011 Mar 2.

Neuromyelitis optica unique area postrema lesions: nausea, vomiting, and 
pathogenic implications.

Popescu BF(1), Lennon VA, Parisi JE, Howe CL, Weigand SD, Cabrera-Gómez JA, 
Newell K, Mandler RN, Pittock SJ, Weinshenker BG, Lucchinetti CF.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2011 Apr 5;76(14):1202-3. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182143355.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the neuropathologic features of neuromyelitis optica 
(NMO) at the medullary floor of the fourth ventricle and area postrema. 
Aquaporin-4 (AQP4) autoimmunity targets this region, resulting in intractable 
nausea associated with vomiting or hiccups in NMO.
METHODS: This neuropathologic study was performed on archival brainstem tissue 
from 15 patients with NMO, 5 patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), and 8 
neurologically normal subjects. Logistic regression was used to evaluate whether 
the presence of lesions at this level increased the odds of a patient with NMO 
having an episode of nausea/vomiting.
RESULTS: Six patients with NMO (40%), but no patients with MS or normal 
controls, exhibited unilateral or bilateral lesions involving the area postrema 
and the medullary floor of the fourth ventricle. These lesions were 
characterized by tissue rarefaction, blood vessel thickening, no obvious 
neuronal or axonal pathology, and preservation of myelin in the subependymal 
medullary tegmentum. AQP4 immunoreactivity was lost or markedly reduced in all 6 
cases, with moderate to marked perivascular and parenchymal lymphocytic 
inflammatory infiltrates, prominent microglial activation, and in 3 cases, 
eosinophils. Complement deposition in astrocytes, macrophages, and/or 
perivascularly, and a prominent astroglial reaction were also present. The odds 
of nausea/vomiting being documented clinically was 16-fold greater in NMO cases 
with area postrema lesions (95% confidence interval 1.43-437, p = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: These neuropathologic findings suggest the area postrema may be a 
selective target of the disease process in NMO, and are compatible with clinical 
reports of nausea and vomiting preceding episodes of optic neuritis and 
transverse myelitis or being the heralding symptom of NMO.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318214332c
PMCID: PMC3068006
PMID: 21368286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]