---
reference_id: "PMID:41677500"
title: "Clinical Characteristics and Management of Pediatric Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A Canadian Single-Centre Multidisciplinary Experience."
authors:
- Dienes S
- Rahmani A
- Lara-Corrales I
- Levy R
- Alhusayen R
- Barnett A
- Croitoru D
- George R
- Hamilton J
- Johnson K
- Joseph M
- Palmer L
- Mirza R
- Piguet V
- Sangha N
- Liy Wong C
- Sibbald C
journal: J Cutan Med Surg
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1177/12034754251404461
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characteristics and Management of Pediatric Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A Canadian Single-Centre Multidisciplinary Experience.
**Authors:** Dienes S, Rahmani A, Lara-Corrales I, Levy R, Alhusayen R, Barnett A, Croitoru D, George R, Hamilton J, Johnson K, Joseph M, Palmer L, Mirza R, Piguet V, Sangha N, Liy Wong C, Sibbald C
**Journal:** J Cutan Med Surg (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1177/12034754251404461](https://doi.org/10.1177/12034754251404461)

## Content

1. J Cutan Med Surg. 2026 Feb 12:12034754251404461. doi:
10.1177/12034754251404461.  Online ahead of print.

Clinical Characteristics and Management of Pediatric Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A 
Canadian Single-Centre Multidisciplinary Experience.

Dienes S(1), Rahmani A(2), Lara-Corrales I(3), Levy R(3), Alhusayen R(4)(5), 
Barnett A(6), Croitoru D(4)(7)(8), George R(9), Hamilton J(10)(11), Johnson 
K(12), Joseph M(3)(4)(8), Palmer L(13), Mirza R(14), Piguet V(4)(8), Sangha 
N(15), Liy Wong C(16), Sibbald C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Queen's School of Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
(3)Division of Dermatology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Independent Researcher.
(7)Division of Dermatology, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)Division of Dermatology, Women's College Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(9)Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(10)Division of Endocrinology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(12)Department of Nursing, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(13)Hidradenitis and Me Support Group, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(14)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(15)Department of Social Work, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(16)Division of Dermatology and Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a highly comorbid condition 
understudied in pediatric populations. Furthermore, the underrepresentation of 
Canadians in HS research limits our evaluation of care in real-world Canadian 
settings.
OBJECTIVES: To describe the demographics, clinical characteristics, psychosocial 
burden, and management of pediatric HS at a Canadian hospital.
METHODS: We developed the infrastructure for a Canada-wide HS registry and 
piloted it at a pediatric HS tertiary care centre. A retrospective review of 
patients seen was performed using data collection forms (DCFs) developed for the 
registry.
RESULTS: The 39 patients included were 53.8% female and 100.0% nonsmokers. 
Asians were overrepresented compared to other North American studies. Most had 
Hurley stage II (60.5%) or III (28.9%) disease. Mean delay to diagnosis was 
2.1 ± 2.0 years. Obesity (57.9%), acne (30.7%), folliculitis (23.1%), and 
trisomy 21 (23.1%) were the most common comorbidities. Patients with trisomy 21 
had an age of HS onset 3 years younger (P = .0087), and 44.0% had concomitant 
disseminate and recurrent infundibulofolliculitis. Moderate-to-severe quality of 
life (QOL) impact was seen in 56.8% of patients, and 17.6% had reported 
bullying. Of patients prescribed biologics (59.0%), most used 1 (56.6%), while 
39.1% switched to a second and 4.3% to a third biologic. Most 
adalimumab-initiated patients clinically improved (81.0%), but only 2 patients 
achieved complete remission. Follow-up patients (n = 14) had significant 
improvements in QOL (P = .038) and pain (P = .026) scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Distinct demographics, severe disease, and low remission rates 
characterized our complex HS cohort. Prospective use of these DCFs will enhance 
our understanding of HS in Canada.

DOI: 10.1177/12034754251404461
PMID: 41677500