---
reference_id: "PMID:38148368"
title: "Modulating the PI3K Signalling Pathway in Activated PI3K Delta Syndrome: a Clinical Perspective."
authors:
- Berglund LJ
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-023-01626-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics
- Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase/therapeutic use
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modulating the PI3K Signalling Pathway in Activated PI3K Delta Syndrome: a Clinical Perspective.
**Authors:** Berglund LJ
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-023-01626-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-023-01626-0)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2023 Dec 27;44(1):34. doi: 10.1007/s10875-023-01626-0.

Modulating the PI3K Signalling Pathway in Activated PI3K Delta Syndrome: a 
Clinical Perspective.

Berglund LJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 
Lucinda.Berglund@sydney.edu.au.
(2)Department of Immunopathology, Westmead Hospital, NSW Health Pathology, 
Westmead, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Lucinda.Berglund@sydney.edu.au.

Activated phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) δ syndrome (APDS) is an inborn error 
of immunity characterised by immune dysregulation. Since the discovery of 
genetic mutations resulting in PI3Kδ overactivation, treatment of APDS patients 
has begun to focus on modulation of the PI3K pathway in addition to supportive 
therapies. The mTOR inhibitor sirolimus has been used effectively for some 
clinical manifestations of this condition, however the arrival of specific PI3Kδ 
inhibitor leniolisib has shown promising early results and may provide a more 
targeted approach. This review summarizes key aspects of PI3K pathway biology 
and discusses potential options for nuanced modulation of the PI3K pathway in 
APDS from a clinical perspective, highlighting differences from PI3K inhibition 
in haematological malignancies.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-023-01626-0
PMCID: PMC10751257
PMID: 38148368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.J.B. is a consultant on an advisory board for 
Pharming, without honorarium.