---
reference_id: "PMID:32987576"
title: Global dynamics and optimal control of a cholera transmission model with vaccination strategy and multiple pathways.
authors:
- Song C
- Xu R
- Bai N
- Tian XH
- Lin JZ
journal: Math Biosci Eng
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3934/mbe.2020233
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global dynamics and optimal control of a cholera transmission model with vaccination strategy and multiple pathways.
**Authors:** Song C, Xu R, Bai N, Tian XH, Lin JZ
**Journal:** Math Biosci Eng (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3934/mbe.2020233](https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2020233)

## Content

1. Math Biosci Eng. 2020 Jun 15;17(4):4210-4224. doi: 10.3934/mbe.2020233.

Global dynamics and optimal control of a cholera transmission model with 
vaccination strategy and multiple pathways.

Song C(1), Xu R(1), Bai N(1), Tian XH(1), Lin JZ(2).

Author information:
(1)Complex Systems Research Center, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, Shanxi, 
P. R. China.
(2)Institute of Applied Mathematics, Army Engineering University, Shijiazhuang 
050003, Hebei, P. R. China.

In this paper, we consider a cholera infection model with vaccination and 
multiple transmission pathways. Dynamical properties of the model are analyzed 
in detail. It is shown that the disease-free equilibrium is globally 
asymptotically stable if the basic reproduction number is less than unity; the 
endemic equilibrium exists and is globally asymptotically stable if the basic 
reproduction number is greater than unity. In addition, the model is 
successfully used to fit the real disease situation of cholera outbreak in 
Somalia. We consider an optimal control problem of cholera transmission with 
vaccination, quarantine, treatment and sanitation control strategies, and use 
Pontryagin's minimum principle to determine the optimal control level. The 
optimal control problem is solved numerically.

DOI: 10.3934/mbe.2020233
PMID: 32987576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]