---
reference_id: "PMID:29793265"
title: "HLA-B genotyping to detect carbamazepine-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome: implications for personalizing medicine."
authors:
- Hung SI
- Chung WH
- Chen YT
journal: Per Med
year: '2005'
doi: 10.2217/17410541.2.3.225
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA-B genotyping to detect carbamazepine-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome: implications for personalizing medicine.
**Authors:** Hung SI, Chung WH, Chen YT
**Journal:** Per Med (2005)
**DOI:** [10.2217/17410541.2.3.225](https://doi.org/10.2217/17410541.2.3.225)

## Content

1. Per Med. 2005 Aug;2(3):225-237. doi: 10.2217/17410541.2.3.225.

HLA-B genotyping to detect carbamazepine-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome: 
implications for personalizing medicine.

Hung SI(1), Chung WH(1)(2), Chen YT(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, 128 Academia Road, 
Section 2, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan. chen0010@ibms.sinica.edu.tw.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Preventing severe adverse drug reactions by identifying people at risk with a 
simple genetic test is the goal of many pharmacogenomic studies. Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are related, 
life-threatening cutaneous adverse reactions, most often caused by medication. 
The overall incidence and the commonly offending drugs vary among different 
ethnic populations. Susceptibility to such idiosyncratic reactions is thought to 
be genetically determined and immune mediated. Finding a strong genetic 
association between a particular human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B allele and the 
reaction to a specific drug provides evidence that the pathogenesis of the 
severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions involves major histocompatibility 
complex-restricted presentation of a drug or its metabolites for T-cell 
activation. In the case of carbamazepine-induced SJS/TEN, the tight association 
of the HLA-B*1502 allele (sensitivity 100%, specificity 97% and odds ratio 2504) 
provides a plausible basis for further development of such a test to identify 
individuals at risk of developing this life-threatening condition.

DOI: 10.2217/17410541.2.3.225
PMID: 29793265