---
reference_id: "PMID:37750724"
title: Molecular characterization of the 2022 Sudan virus disease outbreak in Uganda.
authors:
- Balinandi S
- Whitmer S
- Mulei S
- Nassuna C
- Pimundu G
- Muyigi T
- Kainulainen M
- Shedroff E
- Krapiunaya I
- Scholte F
- Nyakarahuka L
- Tumusiime A
- Kyondo J
- Baluku J
- Kiconco J
- Harris JR
- Ario AR
- Kagirita A
- Bosa HK
- Ssewanyana I
- Nabadda S
- Mwebesa HG
- Aceng JR
- Atwine D
- Lutwama JJ
- Shoemaker TR
- Montgomery JM
- Kaleebu P
- Klena JD
journal: J Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1128/jvi.00590-23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular characterization of the 2022 Sudan virus disease outbreak in Uganda.
**Authors:** Balinandi S, Whitmer S, Mulei S, Nassuna C, Pimundu G, Muyigi T, Kainulainen M, Shedroff E, Krapiunaya I, Scholte F, Nyakarahuka L, Tumusiime A, Kyondo J, Baluku J, Kiconco J, Harris JR, Ario AR, Kagirita A, Bosa HK, Ssewanyana I, Nabadda S, Mwebesa HG, Aceng JR, Atwine D, Lutwama JJ, Shoemaker TR, Montgomery JM, Kaleebu P, Klena JD
**Journal:** J Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.00590-23](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.00590-23)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2023 Oct 31;97(10):e0059023. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00590-23. Epub 2023 Sep
 26.

Molecular characterization of the 2022 Sudan virus disease outbreak in Uganda.

Balinandi S(#)(1), Whitmer S(#)(2), Mulei S(1), Nassuna C(1), Pimundu G(3), 
Muyigi T(3), Kainulainen M(2), Shedroff E(2), Krapiunaya I(2), Scholte F(2), 
Nyakarahuka L(1)(4), Tumusiime A(1), Kyondo J(1), Baluku J(1), Kiconco J(1), 
Harris JR(5), Ario AR(5), Kagirita A(6), Bosa HK(6)(7), Ssewanyana I(3), Nabadda 
S(3), Mwebesa HG(6), Aceng JR(6), Atwine D(6), Lutwama JJ(1), Shoemaker TR(2), 
Montgomery JM(2), Kaleebu P(1)(8), Klena JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Uganda Virus Research Institute , Entebbe, Uganda.
(2)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , 
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Uganda National Health Laboratory Services, Ministry of Health , Kampala, 
Uganda.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Animal Resources and Biosecurity, Makerere 
University , Kampala, Uganda.
(5)Uganda Public Health Fellowship Program , Kampala, Uganda.
(6)Ministry of Health , Kampala, Uganda.
(7)Kellogg College , University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(8)MRC/UVRI & LSHTM Uganda Research Unit , Entebbe, Uganda.
(#)Contributed equally

Ebola disease (EBOD) is a public health threat with a high case fatality rate. 
Most EBOD outbreaks have occurred in remote locations, but the 2013-2016 Western 
Africa outbreak demonstrated how devastating EBOD can be when it reaches an 
urban population. Here, the 2022 Sudan virus disease (SVD) outbreak in Mubende 
District, Uganda, is summarized, and the genetic relatedness of the new variant 
is evaluated. The Mubende variant exhibited 96% amino acid similarity with 
historic SUDV sequences from the 1970s and a high degree of conservation 
throughout the outbreak, which was important for ongoing diagnostics and highly 
promising for future therapy development. Genetic differences between viruses 
identified during the Mubende SVD outbreak were linked with epidemiological data 
to better interpret viral spread and contact tracing chains. This methodology 
should be used to better integrate discrete epidemiological and sequence data 
for future viral outbreaks.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00590-23
PMCID: PMC10617429
PMID: 37750724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.