---
reference_id: "PMID:25103076"
title: Volume changes in remnant thyroid tissue after thyroidectomy in Graves disease.
authors:
- Chen PY
- Chao CM
- Wu TJ
- Huang SM
journal: J Formos Med Assoc
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2012.08.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Volume changes in remnant thyroid tissue after thyroidectomy in Graves disease.
**Authors:** Chen PY, Chao CM, Wu TJ, Huang SM
**Journal:** J Formos Med Assoc (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jfma.2012.08.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfma.2012.08.013)

## Content

1. J Formos Med Assoc. 2014 Sep;113(9):629-33. doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2012.08.013. 
Epub 2012 Sep 15.

Volume changes in remnant thyroid tissue after thyroidectomy in Graves disease.

Chen PY(1), Chao CM(2), Wu TJ(3), Huang SM(4).

Author information:
(1)National Cheng Kung University, College of Medicine and Hospital, Dou-Liou 
Branch, Yunlin, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, Yunlin, Taiwan, ROC.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, 
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC.
(4)Department of Surgery, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic 
address: smhuang@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Surgery is one of the treatment choices for Graves disease. 
The residual thyroid tissue may shrink or become larger. The object of this 
study was trying to find out what factors affect the residual thyroid gland 
volume change after thyroidectomy in Graves disease.
METHODS: We followed thyroid volume changes by ultrasonography in 101 patients 
with Graves disease who underwent one side lobectomy and another side subtotal 
thyroidectomy from 1996 to 2006. These patients were divided into three groups 
according to the residual thyroid size increasing, no change in size, and 
shrinking. We checked the factors as follows: age, body weight, 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level, TSH-receptor antibody level, 
anti-thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibody level, total thyroid volume before and 
after thyroidectomy, and degree of lymphocyte infiltration.
RESULTS: We found that young age and lower residual volume ratio were the most 
powerful two factors affecting remnant thyroid gland volume changing. We also 
found that there is no significant correlation between TSH levels and thyroid 
volume change, nor TSH-receptor antibody titer or thyroid volume change.
CONCLUSION: Age and residual volume ratio were the most powerful two factors in 
this study.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfma.2012.08.013
PMID: 25103076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]