---
reference_id: "PMID:31971980"
title: Primary ciliary dyskinesia and psychological well-being in adolescence.
authors:
- Valero-Moreno S
- Castillo-Corullón S
- Montoya-Castilla I
- Pérez-Marín M
journal: PLoS One
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227888
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary ciliary dyskinesia and psychological well-being in adolescence.
**Authors:** Valero-Moreno S, Castillo-Corullón S, Montoya-Castilla I, Pérez-Marín M
**Journal:** PLoS One (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0227888](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0227888)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2020 Jan 23;15(1):e0227888. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227888. 
eCollection 2020.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia and psychological well-being in adolescence.

Valero-Moreno S(1), Castillo-Corullón S(2), Montoya-Castilla I(1), Pérez-Marín 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Personality, Assessment and Psychological Treatments, Faculty 
of Psychology, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Pediatric Pneumology Unit, Hospital Clinico Universitario de Valencia, 
Valencia, Spain.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare autosomal recessive disease with low 
prevalence in pediatrics. Health studies have not sufficiently analyzed the role 
of psychological variables in rare diseases such as PCD. This paper studies the 
psychological characteristics of a group of pediatric patients diagnosed with 
PCD compared to their healthy peers. The sample consisted of 48 
preadolescents-adolescents, aged 9-18 years (M = 12.96; SD = 2.71), with similar 
distribution by sex, and 25% of the patients having dyskinesia. Clinical 
anxiety-depression, self-esteem and psychological well-being were evaluated 
using questionnaires: the Adolescent Psychological Well-being Scale (BIEPS-J), 
the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) and the Rosenberg Self-Esteem 
Scale (RSE). Data were analysed using descriptive, mean comparison (t-test) and 
diffuse comparative qualitative analysis (QCA). The results show no differences 
were found between healthy and PCD patients in the variables analyzed, except 
for social ties showing the latter greater well-being in this aspect. In QCA 
models, the variables that best explained the high or low levels of well-being 
were depression and self-esteem, and primary ciliary dyskinesia was not a 
necessary condition for presenting low levels of well-being. In conclusion, our 
results highlight the need to explore psychological aspects in pediatric 
patients with rare diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227888
PMCID: PMC6977723
PMID: 31971980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.