---
reference_id: "PMID:26483779"
title: NK cell function and receptor diversity in the context of HCV infection.
authors:
- Gardiner CM
journal: Front Microbiol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01061
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NK cell function and receptor diversity in the context of HCV infection.
**Authors:** Gardiner CM
**Journal:** Front Microbiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmicb.2015.01061](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2015.01061)

## Content

1. Front Microbiol. 2015 Sep 30;6:1061. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01061.
eCollection  2015.

NK cell function and receptor diversity in the context of HCV infection.

Gardiner CM(1).

Author information:
(1)NK Cell Group, School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical
Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin Dublin, Ireland.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infects over 170 million people in the world. While a
minority of individuals are able to naturally clear this hepatotropic virus
using their immune system, most people go on to develop a lifetime chronic
infection that can result in severe liver pathology, potentially leading to
liver cirrhosis and hepatic cellular carcinoma. Investigations into acute immune
responses and spontaneous clearance of the virus are severely hampered by
difficulties in identification of relevant patient cohorts. While the role for
the adaptive immune response in viral clearance is well established, it is
becoming clear that the innate immune system also impacts on HCV outcome. The
innate immune response to infection is likely to influence the type of adaptive
immune response that develops and will ultimately influence if the virus is
cleared or develops into a chronic infection. Natural Killer (NK) cells are
lymphocytes that have important anti-viral functions including direct
cytotoxicity of infected cells and the production of inflammatory cytokines,
e.g., IFN-γ. They are generally considered to be cells of the innate immune
system, although there is increasing evidence that NK cells adapt and persist in
response to particular viral infections. NK cells are altered in patients with
acute and chronic HCV infection. There is increasing evidence from both cellular
and genetic studies that NK cells modulate HCV outcome. This review will
describe and discuss the current experimental and clinical evidence of a role
for NK cells in HCV infection and describe recent discoveries that are likely to
play a role in future research.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01061
PMCID: PMC4588102
PMID: 26483779
