---
reference_id: "PMID:17141155"
title: "Monounsaturated fatty acid modification of Wnt protein: its role in Wnt secretion."
authors:
- Takada R
- Satomi Y
- Kurata T
- Ueno N
- Norioka S
- Kondoh H
- Takao T
- Takada S
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2006.10.003
keywords:
- Acylation
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Embryo, Nonmammalian"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- "Fatty Acids, Monounsaturated/metabolism"
- Immunoblotting
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Microinjections
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Nanotechnology
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- Protein Transport
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Serine/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Spectrometry, Mass, Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption-Ionization"
- "Wnt Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Xenopus laevis/embryology, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monounsaturated fatty acid modification of Wnt protein: its role in Wnt secretion.
**Authors:** Takada R, Satomi Y, Kurata T, Ueno N, Norioka S, Kondoh H, Takao T, Takada S
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2006.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2006.10.003)

## Content

1. Dev Cell. 2006 Dec;11(6):791-801. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2006.10.003.

Monounsaturated fatty acid modification of Wnt protein: its role in Wnt 
secretion.

Takada R(1), Satomi Y, Kurata T, Ueno N, Norioka S, Kondoh H, Takao T, Takada S.

Author information:
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Biosciences, National Institutes of Natural 
Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2006 Dec;11(6):751-2. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2006.11.007.

The secretion and extracellular transport of Wnt protein are thought to be 
well-regulated processes. Wnt is known to be acylated with palmitic acid at a 
conserved cysteine residue (Cys77 in murine Wnt-3a), and this residue appears to 
be required for the control of extracellular transport. Here, we show that 
murine Wnt-3a is also acylated at a conserved serine residue (Ser209). Of note, 
we demonstrated that this residue is modified with a monounsaturated fatty acid, 
palmitoleic acid. Wnt-3a defective in acylation at Ser209 is not secreted from 
cells in culture or in Xenopus embryos, but it is retained in the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER). Furthermore, Porcupine, a protein with structural similarities 
to membrane-bound O-acyltransferases, is required for Ser209-dependent 
acylation, as well as for Wnt-3a transport from the ER for secretion. These 
results strongly suggest that Wnt protein requires a particular lipid 
modification for proper intracellular transport during the secretory process.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2006.10.003
PMID: 17141155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]