---
reference_id: "PMID:38910032"
title: "Tetanus prophylaxis in horses: guidelines for New Zealand and Australia based on a critical appraisal of the evidence."
authors:
- Lovett AL
- Riley CB
- Chapman V
- Bell B
- Bishop B
- Grierson A
- Johnstone LJ
- Sykes BW
journal: N Z Vet J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/00480169.2024.2365283
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tetanus prophylaxis in horses: guidelines for New Zealand and Australia based on a critical appraisal of the evidence.
**Authors:** Lovett AL, Riley CB, Chapman V, Bell B, Bishop B, Grierson A, Johnstone LJ, Sykes BW
**Journal:** N Z Vet J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00480169.2024.2365283](https://doi.org/10.1080/00480169.2024.2365283)

## Content

1. N Z Vet J. 2024 Sep;72(5):241-255. doi: 10.1080/00480169.2024.2365283. Epub
2024  Jun 23.

Tetanus prophylaxis in horses: guidelines for New Zealand and Australia based on 
a critical appraisal of the evidence.

Lovett AL(1), Riley CB(1)(2), Chapman V(3), Bell B(4), Bishop B(5), Grierson 
A(6), Johnstone LJ(1), Sykes BW(1).

Author information:
(1)Tāwharau Ora - School of Veterinary Science, Massey University, Palmerston 
North, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada.
(3)Zoetis New Zealand Ltd., Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)VetSouth Equine, Invercargill, New Zealand.
(5)Canterbury Equine Surgical Consultancy Ltd., Prebbleton, New Zealand.
(6)Auckland Veterinary Centre, Takanini, New Zealand.

Horses are exquisitely sensitive to tetanus neurotoxin and are exposed to the 
risk of infection with Clostridium tetani throughout life. The vaccine against 
tetanus is highly effective at preventing disease, whereas tetanus in 
unvaccinated populations is associated with high mortality rates. Current 
guidelines in New Zealand and Australia for the available vaccine contain 
contradictions and limitations surrounding the optimal tetanus immunisation 
protocols for both adult horses and foals. This review critically evaluates the 
scientific literature on tetanus prophylaxis in horses within the context of 
equine practice and available products in New Zealand and Australia. The review 
was conducted by a panel of industry and specialist veterinarians to obtain 
agreement on nine equine tetanus prophylaxis guidelines for practising 
veterinarians. The primary protocol for tetanus toxoid (TT) immunisation 
consists of a three-dose series IM for all horses ≥ 6 months of age, and a 
four-dose series IM is proposed if commencing vaccination in foals between 3 and 
6 months of age. Tetanus prophylaxis in foals < 3 months of age relies on 
passive immunity strategies. Following the completion of the primary protocol, a 
TT booster dose IM should be administered within 5 years, and every 5 years 
thereafter. When followed, these protocols should provide adequate protection 
against tetanus in horses. Additional tetanus prophylaxis guidelines are 
provided for veterinarians attending a horse experiencing a known "risk event" 
(e.g. wound, hoof abscess, surgery, umbilical infection). When a correctly 
vaccinated horse experiences a risk event, pre-existing immunity provides 
protection against tetanus. When an unvaccinated horse or one with unknown 
vaccination status, or a foal born to an unvaccinated dam, experiences a risk 
event, TT IM and tetanus antitoxin (TAT) 1,500 IU SC should be administered 
simultaneously at separate sites, and the TT primary immunisation protocol 
should subsequently be completed for the horse's respective age. In previously 
immunised pregnant broodmares, a TT booster dose administered 4-8 weeks prior to 
parturition optimises the transfer of passive immunity against tetanus to the 
newborn foal via colostrum; provided that post-natal IgG concentration in serum 
is > 800 mg/dL (8 g/L), such foals should be passively protected against tetanus 
up to 6 months of age. Survivors of clinical tetanus must still receive the 
primary protocol for vaccination against tetanus. In summary, all horses in New 
Zealand and Australia should be vaccinated against tetanus with protection 
maintained throughout life via TT booster doses, facilitated by accurate medical 
record keeping and client education.

DOI: 10.1080/00480169.2024.2365283
PMID: 38910032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]