---
reference_id: "PMID:27083887"
title: "What is Menière's disease? A contemporary re-evaluation of endolymphatic hydrops."
authors:
- Gürkov R
- Pyykö I
- Zou J
- Kentala E
journal: J Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-015-7930-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What is Menière's disease? A contemporary re-evaluation of endolymphatic hydrops.
**Authors:** Gürkov R, Pyykö I, Zou J, Kentala E
**Journal:** J Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-015-7930-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-015-7930-1)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2016 Apr;263 Suppl 1:S71-81. doi: 10.1007/s00415-015-7930-1. Epub
2016  Apr 15.

What is Menière's disease? A contemporary re-evaluation of endolymphatic 
hydrops.

Gürkov R(1), Pyykö I(2), Zou J(3), Kentala E(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of 
Munich, Marchioninistr. 15, 81377, Munich, Germany. 
rguerkov@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(2)German Centre for Vertigo and Balance Disorder, University of Munich, 
Marchioninistr. 15, 81377, Munich, Germany.
(3)Hearing and Balance Research Unit, Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, 
University of Tampere, 33520, Tampere, Finland.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, 
Haartmaninkatu 4E, 00290, Helsinki, Finland.

Menière's disease is a chronic condition with a prevalence of 200-500 per 
100,000 and characterized by episodic attacks of vertigo, fluctuating hearing 
loss, tinnitus, aural pressure and a progressive loss of audiovestibular 
functions. Over 150 years ago, Prosper Menière was the first to recognize the 
inner ear as the site of lesion for this clinical syndrome. Over 75 years ago, 
endolymphatic hydrops was discovered as the pathologic correlate of Menière's 
disease. However, this pathologic finding could be ascertained only in 
post-mortem histologic studies. Due to this diagnostic dilemma and the variable 
manifestation of the various audiovestibular symptoms, diagnostic classification 
systems based on clinical findings have been repeatedly modified and have not 
been uniformly used in scientific publications on Menière's disease. 
Furthermore, the higher level measures of impact on quality of life such as 
vitality and social participation have been neglected hitherto. Recent 
developments of high-resolution MR imaging of the inner ear have now enabled us 
to visualize in vivo endolymphatic hydrops in patients with suspected Menière's 
disease. In this review, we summarize the existing knowledge from temporal bone 
histologic studies and from the emerging evidence on imaging-based evaluation of 
patients with suspected Menière's disease. These indicate that endolymphatic 
hydrops is responsible not only for the full-blown clinical triad of 
simultaneous attacks of auditory and vestibular dysfunction, but also for other 
clinical presentations such as "vestibular" and "cochlear Menière's disease". As 
a consequence, we propose a new terminology which is based on symptomatic and 
imaging characteristics of these clinical entities to clarify and simplify their 
diagnostic classification.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-015-7930-1
PMCID: PMC4833790
PMID: 27083887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]