---
reference_id: "PMID:28677371"
title: Neuropathological characteristics of the brain in two patients with SLC19A3 mutations related to the biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease.
authors:
- Pronicki M
- Piekutowska-Abramczuk D
- Jurkiewicz E
- Rokicki D
- Ciara E
- Trubicka J
- Iwanicka-Pronicka K
- Pajdowska M
- Migdał M
- Grajkowska WA
journal: Folia Neuropathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.5114/fn.2017.68581
keywords:
- "Basal Ganglia Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Brain/pathology
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropathological characteristics of the brain in two patients with SLC19A3 mutations related to the biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease.
**Authors:** Pronicki M, Piekutowska-Abramczuk D, Jurkiewicz E, Rokicki D, Ciara E, Trubicka J, Iwanicka-Pronicka K, Pajdowska M, Migdał M, Grajkowska WA
**Journal:** Folia Neuropathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.5114/fn.2017.68581](https://doi.org/10.5114/fn.2017.68581)

## Content

1. Folia Neuropathol. 2017;55(2):146-153. doi: 10.5114/fn.2017.68581.

Neuropathological characteristics of the brain in two patients with SLC19A3
mutations related to the biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease.

Pronicki M, Piekutowska-Abramczuk D, Jurkiewicz E, Rokicki D, Ciara E, Trubicka
J, Iwanicka-Pronicka K, Pajdowska M, Migdał M, Grajkowska WA.

Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease is a severe form of a rare
neurogenetic disorder caused by pathogenic molecular variants in the thiamine
transporter gene. Nowadays, a potentially effective treatment is known,
therefore the early diagnosis is mandatory. The aim of the paper was to assess
the contribution of neuropathological and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
studies to a proper diagnosis. We present the brain study of two Polish patients
with SLC19A3 mutations, including (1) an infant with an intriguing "walnut"
appearance of the brain autopsied many years before the discovery of the SLC19A3
defect, and (2) a one-year-old patient with clinical features of Leigh syndrome.
In patient 2, biotin/thiamine responsiveness was not tested at the time of
diagnosis and causal treatment started with one-year delay. The central nervous
system lesions found in the patients displayed almost clearly a specific pattern
for SLC19A3 defect, as previously proposed in diagnostic criteria. Our study
presents a detailed description of neuropathological and MRI findings of both
patients. We confirm that the autopsy and/or MRI of the brain is sufficient to
qualify a patient with an unknown neuropathological disorder directly for
SLC19A3 mutations testing and a prompt trial of specific treatment. .

DOI: 10.5114/fn.2017.68581
PMID: 28677371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
