---
reference_id: "PMID:25525402"
title: "A case of fallopian tube adenofibroma: difficulties associated with differentiation from ectopic pregnancy."
authors:
- Fukushima A
- Shoji T
- Tanaka S
- Sugiyama T
journal: Clin Med Insights Case Rep
year: '2014'
doi: 10.4137/CCRep.S18859
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of fallopian tube adenofibroma: difficulties associated with differentiation from ectopic pregnancy.
**Authors:** Fukushima A, Shoji T, Tanaka S, Sugiyama T
**Journal:** Clin Med Insights Case Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4137/CCRep.S18859](https://doi.org/10.4137/CCRep.S18859)

## Content

1. Clin Med Insights Case Rep. 2014 Nov 27;7:135-7. doi: 10.4137/CCRep.S18859. 
eCollection 2014.

A case of fallopian tube adenofibroma: difficulties associated with 
differentiation from ectopic pregnancy.

Fukushima A(1), Shoji T(2), Tanaka S(2), Sugiyama T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, School of Medicine, Iwate Medical 
University, Morioka, Japan.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Iwate Medical 
University, Morioka, Japan.

Benign solid tumors of the fallopian tubes are extremely rare and often 
difficult to differentiate from tumors associated with adjacent organs or from 
various inflammatory diseases. Here, we present a patient who was diagnosed with 
ectopic pregnancy, based on preoperative tests and intraoperative macroscopic 
findings, but was later diagnosed with a fallopian tube adenofibroma, based on 
histopathological evidence, and intrauterine pregnancy. Although initial 
pregnancy test results were positive, no gestational sac (GS) was seen in the 
uterus and the patient was diagnosed with an ectopic pregnancy and underwent 
emergency laparoscopic surgery. A 20-mm, fetus-like solid mass was noted inside 
the GS-like cystic tumor of the left fallopian tube. From histopathological 
findings, the lesion was identified as a serous fallopian tube adenofibroma. The 
baby was born healthy with no problems. This case report suggests that fallopian 
tube adenofibroma should be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
suspected ectopic pregnancies.

DOI: 10.4137/CCRep.S18859
PMCID: PMC4246679
PMID: 25525402