---
reference_id: "PMID:3540019"
title: The non-specific theory in microbial etiology of inflammatory periodontal diseases.
authors:
- Theilade E
journal: J Clin Periodontol
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-051x.1986.tb01425.x
keywords:
- Bacterial Physiological Phenomena
- Dental Plaque/microbiology
- Humans
- Periodontitis/microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The non-specific theory in microbial etiology of inflammatory periodontal diseases.
**Authors:** Theilade E
**Journal:** J Clin Periodontol (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-051x.1986.tb01425.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-051x.1986.tb01425.x)

## Content

1. J Clin Periodontol. 1986 Nov;13(10):905-11. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-051x.1986.tb01425.x.

The non-specific theory in microbial etiology of inflammatory periodontal 
diseases.

Theilade E.

In the absence of toothbrushing, the gingival crevice is colonized by a complex 
indigenous microflora causing gingivitis, a non-specific inflammation. 
Subgingival plaque may develop by downgrowth into the inflamed pocket of those 
micro-organisms from supragingival plaque which can multiply there. By direct 
microscopy, increased proportions of motile rods and spirochetes have been found 
in diseased pockets. Cultures on selective media have demonstrated increased 
prevalence of various gram-negative rods. Cultures on non-selective media have 
revealed the complexity and variability of the subgingival microflora, 
comprising more than 200 species. Destructive periodontitis is the result of 
subgingival colonization, which is favored by such ecological changes as plaque 
accumulation, gingivitis, and gingival exudate. These changes increase the 
numbers of micro-organisms and alter their proportions, but no single species 
appears in active sites which is not also commonly present in inactive sites. 
The subgingival micro-organisms have several virulence factors which promote 
colonization of the pockets, destroy host defense mechanisms, and provoke 
inflammation. It appears that different combinations of indigenous bacteria, 
rather than just a single species, can produce the pathogenic potential 
necessary to cause progression from gingivitis to destructive periodontitis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-051x.1986.tb01425.x
PMID: 3540019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]