---
reference_id: "PMID:22949511"
title: "Mutations in FKBP10, which result in Bruck syndrome and recessive forms of osteogenesis imperfecta, inhibit the hydroxylation of telopeptide lysines in bone collagen."
authors:
- Schwarze U
- Cundy T
- Pyott SM
- Christiansen HE
- Hegde MR
- Bank RA
- Pals G
- Ankala A
- Conneely K
- Seaver L
- Yandow SM
- Raney E
- Babovic-Vuksanovic D
- Stoler J
- Ben-Neriah Z
- Segel R
- Lieberman S
- Siderius L
- Al-Aqeel A
- Hannibal M
- Hudgins L
- McPherson E
- Clemens M
- Sussman MD
- Steiner RD
- Mahan J
- Smith R
- Anyane-Yeboa K
- Wynn J
- Chong K
- Uster T
- Aftimos S
- Sutton VR
- Davis EC
- Kim LS
- Weis MA
- Eyre D
- Byers PH
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds371
keywords:
- Arthrogryposis/genetics
- Collagen Type I/metabolism
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Hydroxylation
- Lysine/metabolism
- Male
- Mutation
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- Tacrolimus Binding Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in FKBP10, which result in Bruck syndrome and recessive forms of osteogenesis imperfecta, inhibit the hydroxylation of telopeptide lysines in bone collagen.
**Authors:** Schwarze U, Cundy T, Pyott SM, Christiansen HE, Hegde MR, Bank RA, Pals G, Ankala A, Conneely K, Seaver L, Yandow SM, Raney E, Babovic-Vuksanovic D, Stoler J, Ben-Neriah Z, Segel R, Lieberman S, Siderius L, Al-Aqeel A, Hannibal M, Hudgins L, McPherson E, Clemens M, Sussman MD, Steiner RD, Mahan J, Smith R, Anyane-Yeboa K, Wynn J, Chong K, Uster T, Aftimos S, Sutton VR, Davis EC, Kim LS, Weis MA, Eyre D, Byers PH
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/dds371](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds371)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jan 1;22(1):1-17. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds371. Epub 2012 Sep
4.

Mutations in FKBP10, which result in Bruck syndrome and recessive forms of 
osteogenesis imperfecta, inhibit the hydroxylation of telopeptide lysines in 
bone collagen.

Schwarze U(1), Cundy T, Pyott SM, Christiansen HE, Hegde MR, Bank RA, Pals G, 
Ankala A, Conneely K, Seaver L, Yandow SM, Raney E, Babovic-Vuksanovic D, Stoler 
J, Ben-Neriah Z, Segel R, Lieberman S, Siderius L, Al-Aqeel A, Hannibal M, 
Hudgins L, McPherson E, Clemens M, Sussman MD, Steiner RD, Mahan J, Smith R, 
Anyane-Yeboa K, Wynn J, Chong K, Uster T, Aftimos S, Sutton VR, Davis EC, Kim 
LS, Weis MA, Eyre D, Byers PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-7470, 
USA.

Although biallelic mutations in non-collagen genes account for <10% of 
individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta, the characterization of these genes 
has identified new pathways and potential interventions that could benefit even 
those with mutations in type I collagen genes. We identified mutations in 
FKBP10, which encodes the 65 kDa prolyl cis-trans isomerase, FKBP65, in 38 
members of 21 families with OI. These include 10 families from the Samoan 
Islands who share a founder mutation. Of the mutations, three are missense; the 
remainder either introduce premature termination codons or create frameshifts 
both of which result in mRNA instability. In four families missense mutations 
result in loss of most of the protein. The clinical effects of these mutations 
are short stature, a high incidence of joint contractures at birth and 
progressive scoliosis and fractures, but there is remarkable variability in 
phenotype even within families. The loss of the activity of FKBP65 has several 
effects: type I procollagen secretion is slightly delayed, the stabilization of 
the intact trimer is incomplete and there is diminished hydroxylation of the 
telopeptide lysyl residues involved in intermolecular cross-link formation in 
bone. The phenotype overlaps with that seen with mutations in PLOD2 (Bruck 
syndrome II), which encodes LH2, the enzyme that hydroxylates the telopeptide 
lysyl residues. These findings define a set of genes, FKBP10, PLOD2 and 
SERPINH1, that act during procollagen maturation to contribute to molecular 
stability and post-translational modification of type I procollagen, without 
which bone mass and quality are abnormal and fractures and contractures result.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds371
PMCID: PMC3606010
PMID: 22949511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]