---
reference_id: "PMID:33896616"
title: Optimal treatment of pneumothorax in adolescents with Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Sunouchi T
- Watanabe Y
- Tomonaga K
- Watanabe E
- Ichijo C
- Hoshino N
- Suzuki K
- Fujishiro J
journal: J Pediatr Surg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2021.03.021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optimal treatment of pneumothorax in adolescents with Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Sunouchi T, Watanabe Y, Tomonaga K, Watanabe E, Ichijo C, Hoshino N, Suzuki K, Fujishiro J
**Journal:** J Pediatr Surg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2021.03.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2021.03.021)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Surg. 2021 Jul;56(7):1103-1106. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2021.03.021.
 Epub 2021 Mar 27.

Optimal treatment of pneumothorax in adolescents with Marfan syndrome.

Sunouchi T(1), Watanabe Y(2), Tomonaga K(2), Watanabe E(2), Ichijo C(2), Hoshino 
N(2), Suzuki K(2), Fujishiro J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1 
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. Electronic address: 
snow.tomohiro@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1 
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

PURPOSE: Pneumothorax often develops in patients with Marfan syndrome (MFS). 
Here, we examined the effects of conservative and surgical pneumothorax 
treatments in children with MFS.
METHODS: In this study, 23 patients, less than 20 years old, diagnosed with both 
MFS and pneumothorax between 1999 and 2019 were included. All data were 
collected retrospectively from patients' medical records.
RESULTS: In total, 18 of 23 patients (78%) had relapsed pneumothorax either on 
the ipsilateral or contralateral side. Among these 18 patients, 6 (26%) patients 
had multiple relapses. Conservative and surgical treatments of pneumothorax were 
attempted in 33 and 29 lungs, respectively. The conservative treatment was 
attempted as a definitive therapy in 21 lungs. Twelve conservative treatments 
(57%) failed, which required surgical intervention. In 9 lungs (43%) with 
successful conservative treatment, 6 (67%) had ipsilateral relapses. In contrast 
to the above findings, only 4 (13%) ipsilateral relapses were observed in 29 
surgical treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed a low response and high relapse rate when MFS 
adolescents who diagnosed pneumothorax were subjected to the conservative 
treatment modality. Thus, we recommend surgical intervention as the first line 
of therapy to treat pneumothorax in adolescents diagnosed with MFS.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Ⅲ (Treatment Study).

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2021.03.021
PMID: 33896616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]