---
reference_id: "PMID:33811546"
title: Pathogenic variants in CDH11 impair cell adhesion and cause Teebi hypertelorism syndrome.
authors:
- Li D
- March ME
- Fortugno P
- Cox LL
- Matsuoka LS
- Monetta R
- Seiler C
- Pyle LC
- Bedoukian EC
- Sánchez-Soler MJ
- Caluseriu O
- Grand K
- Tam A
- Aycinena ARP
- Camerota L
- Guo Y
- Sleiman P
- Callewaert B
- Kumps C
- Dheedene A
- Buckley M
- Kirk EP
- Turner A
- Kamien B
- Patel C
- Wilson M
- Roscioli T
- Christodoulou J
- Cox TC
- Zackai EH
- Brancati F
- Hakonarson H
- Bhoj EJ
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-021-02274-3
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cadherins/genetics
- Cell Adhesion/genetics
- Cell Movement/genetics
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- Female
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Genetic Variation/genetics
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Hypertelorism/genetics
- Male
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Esophagus/abnormalities
- Hypospadias
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic variants in CDH11 impair cell adhesion and cause Teebi hypertelorism syndrome.
**Authors:** Li D, March ME, Fortugno P, Cox LL, Matsuoka LS, Monetta R, Seiler C, Pyle LC, Bedoukian EC, Sánchez-Soler MJ, Caluseriu O, Grand K, Tam A, Aycinena ARP, Camerota L, Guo Y, Sleiman P, Callewaert B, Kumps C, Dheedene A, Buckley M, Kirk EP, Turner A, Kamien B, Patel C, Wilson M, Roscioli T, Christodoulou J, Cox TC, Zackai EH, Brancati F, Hakonarson H, Bhoj EJ
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-021-02274-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-021-02274-3)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2021 Jul;140(7):1061-1076. doi: 10.1007/s00439-021-02274-3. Epub
2021  Apr 3.

Pathogenic variants in CDH11 impair cell adhesion and cause Teebi hypertelorism 
syndrome.

Li D(#)(1), March ME(#)(2), Fortugno P(3)(4), Cox LL(5), Matsuoka LS(2), Monetta 
R(3)(4), Seiler C(6), Pyle LC(7), Bedoukian EC(7), Sánchez-Soler MJ(8), 
Caluseriu O(9)(10), Grand K(11), Tam A(12), Aycinena ARP(12), Camerota L(4), Guo 
Y(2), Sleiman P(2)(13), Callewaert B(14)(15), Kumps C(14), Dheedene A(14), 
Buckley M(16), Kirk EP(16)(17), Turner A(17), Kamien B(18), Patel C(19), Wilson 
M(20), Roscioli T(16)(17)(21), Christodoulou J(22)(23)(24), Cox TC(5), Zackai 
EH(13)(25), Brancati F(4)(26)(27), Hakonarson H(2)(13)(25), Bhoj EJ(28)(29)(30).

Author information:
(1)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA. lid2@email.chop.edu.
(2)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, Istituto Dermopatico 
dell'Immacolata, IDI-IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, University of 
L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(5)Departments of Oral and Craniofacial Sciences and Pediatrics, University of 
Missouri-Kansas City School of Dentistry, Kansas City, MO, 64108, USA.
(6)Zebrafish Core Facility, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research 
Institute, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Individualized Medical Genetics Center, Division of Human Genetics, The 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)Sección de Genética Médica, Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Clínico 
Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, IMIB-Arrixaca, Murcia, España.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2H7, 
Canada.
(10)The Stollery Pediatric Hospital, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2H7, Canada.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(12)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(14)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(15)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(16)NSW Health Pathology Genomics Laboratory, Prince of Wales Hospital, 
Randwick, NSW, Australia.
(17)Centre for Clinical Genetics, Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, NSW, 
Australia.
(18)Genetic Services of Western Australia, King Edward Memorial Hospital, Perth, 
Australia.
(19)Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane, 
QLD, Australia.
(20)Department of Clinical Genetics, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia.
(21)Neuroscience Research Australia and Prince of Wales Clinical School, 
University of New South Wales, Kensington, NSW, Australia.
(22)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(23)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(24)Discipline of Child and Adolescent Health, Sydney Medical School, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(25)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(26)Institute of Translational Pharmacology, National Research Council, Rome, 
Italy.
(27)IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Rome, Italy.
(28)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA. bhoje@email.chop.edu.
(29)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. bhoje@email.chop.edu.
(30)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA. bhoje@email.chop.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Teebi hypertelorism syndrome (THS; OMIM 145420) is a rare craniofacial disorder 
characterized by hypertelorism, prominent forehead, short nose with broad or 
depressed nasal root. Some cases of THS have been attributed to SPECC1L 
variants. Homozygous variants in CDH11 truncating the transmembrane and 
intracellular domains have been implicated in Elsahy-Waters syndrome (EWS; OMIM 
211380) with hypertelorism. We report THS due to CDH11 heterozygous missense 
variants on 19 subjects from 9 families. All affected residues in the 
extracellular region of Cadherin-11 (CHD11) are highly conserved across 
vertebrate species and classical cadherins. Six of the variants that cluster 
around the EC2-EC3 and EC3-EC4 linker regions are predicted to affect Ca2+ 
binding that is required for cadherin stability. Two of the additional variants 
[c.164G > C, p.(Trp55Ser) and c.418G > A, p.(Glu140Lys)] are also notable as 
they are predicted to directly affect trans-homodimer formation. 
Immunohistochemical study demonstrates that CDH11 is strongly expressed in human 
facial mesenchyme. Using multiple functional assays, we show that five variants 
from the EC1, EC2-EC3 linker, and EC3 regions significantly reduced the 
cell-substrate trans adhesion activity and one variant from EC3-EC4 linker 
results in changes in cell morphology, focal adhesion, and migration, suggesting 
dominant negative effect. Characteristic features in this cohort included 
depressed nasal root, cardiac and umbilical defects. These features 
distinguished this phenotype from that seen in SPECC1L-related hypertelorism 
syndrome and CDH11-related EWS. Our results demonstrate heterozygous variants in 
CDH11, which decrease cell-cell adhesion and increase cell migratory behavior, 
cause a form of THS, as termed CDH11-related THS.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-021-02274-3
PMCID: PMC9245547
PMID: 33811546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Conflict of interest None of the 
authors has any conflicts of interests to declare.