---
reference_id: "PMID:33296981"
title: A longitudinal study of symptom botheration in Multiple Sclerosis.
authors:
- Kister I
- Bacon T
- Cutter GR
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2020.102585
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A longitudinal study of symptom botheration in Multiple Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Kister I, Bacon T, Cutter GR
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2020.102585](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2020.102585)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2020 Nov;46:102585. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2020.102585.
 Epub 2020 Oct 17.

A longitudinal study of symptom botheration in Multiple Sclerosis.

Kister I(1), Bacon T(2), Cutter GR(3).

Author information:
(1)NYU Multiple Sclerosis Comprehensive Care Center, NYU Langone Medical Center, 
New York, NY; NJ, USA. Electronic address: ilya.kister@nyulangone.org.
(2)NYU Multiple Sclerosis Comprehensive Care Center, NYU Langone Medical Center, 
New York, NY; NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, UAB School of Public Health, Birmingham, AL.

BACKGROUND: It is well documented that ambulatory disability in MS worsens over 
time, but there is a dearth of information on symptom evolution in other domains 
commonly affected by MS.
METHODS: SymptoMScreen (SyMS) is a validated tool for assessing symptom severity 
in 12 domains commonly affected by MS. Patients who attended two specialized MS 
centers filled out SyMS at each visit. We included in the study patients with 
neurologist-diagnosed MS who completed two SyMS questionnaires separated at 
least 12 months. We used the first and final assessment and adjusted for time on 
study, baseline SyMS score, age, sex, race, MS type, disability strata, and 
site. Changes over time were also examined using Markov chain estimates of 
moving from one level of botheration to another for each domain over 1-year 
periods.
RESULTS: A total of 1,014 MS patients met the inclusion criteria. Mean composite 
SyMS score was 1.4 (±1.16) at baseline and increased by 0.084 (±0.73) points 
during 21.0 (±5.5) months of followup (p<0.0001). The initial mean composite 
SyMS score correlated strongly with the final mean composite SyMS score 
(r=0.81). Individual domain SyMS scores at baseline were highest for fatigue: 
2.2 (±1.7), and lowest for vision: 1.1 (±1.3) and dexterity: 1.1 (±1.4). Small 
but significant increases during followup were seen in dexterity, bladder, 
vision, and pain domains, while significant decreases were seen in anxiety and 
sensory domains. We observed a high degree of inter-individual variability in 
symptom severity with the more extreme scores tending to resolve over time.
CONCLUSIONS: Symptom botheration increases modestly year-to-year, as would be 
expected in a slowly progressive disease that evolves over decades. Initial 
symptom burden strongly correlated with final symptom burden, but there was a 
high degree of individual variability in symptom severity.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2020.102585
PMID: 33296981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]