---
reference_id: "PMID:35250870"
title: "Pubertal Timing and Growth Dynamics in Children With Severe Primary IGF-1 Deficiency: Results From the European Increlex(®) Growth Forum Database Registry."
authors:
- Bang P
- Polak M
- Perrot V
- Sert C
- Shaikh H
- Woelfle J
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2022.812568
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Clinical Studies as Topic
- Female
- Growth Disorders
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural"
- Humans
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/deficiency
- Male
- Recombinant Proteins
- Registries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pubertal Timing and Growth Dynamics in Children With Severe Primary IGF-1 Deficiency: Results From the European Increlex(®) Growth Forum Database Registry.
**Authors:** Bang P, Polak M, Perrot V, Sert C, Shaikh H, Woelfle J
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2022.812568](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2022.812568)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Feb 18;13:812568. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.812568. eCollection 2022.

Pubertal Timing and Growth Dynamics in Children With Severe Primary IGF-1 
Deficiency: Results From the European Increlex(®) Growth Forum Database 
Registry.

Bang P(1), Polak M(2), Perrot V(3), Sert C(3), Shaikh H(4), Woelfle J(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Paediatrics, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, 
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(2)Paediatric Endocrinology, Gynaecology and Diabetology, Centre de Référence 
des Maladies Endocriniennes Rares de la Croissance, Hôpital Universitaire Necker 
Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(3)Ipsen Pharma, Boulogne-Billancourt, France.
(4)Ipsen Pharma, Milton Park, United Kingdom.
(5)Endocrinology and Diabetology, University Children's Hospital, 
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Puberty is delayed in untreated children and adolescents with severe 
primary IGF-1 deficiency (SPIGFD); to date, it has not been reported whether 
recombinant human insulin-like growth factor-1 mecasermin (rhIGF-1) treatment 
affects this. Pubertal growth outcomes were extracted from the European 
Increlex® Growth Forum Database (Eu-IGFD) Registry (NCT00903110).
METHODS: The Eu-IGFD Registry includes children and adolescents aged 2 to 18 
years with growth failure associated with SPIGFD who are treated with rhIGF-1. 
Reported outcomes include: age at last registration of Tanner stage 1 and first 
registration of Tanner stage 2-5 (T2-T5; based on breast development for girls 
and genital development for boys, respectively); maximum height velocity during 
each Tanner stage; and pubertal peak height velocity (PPHV). Data cut-off was 13 
May 2019.
RESULTS: This analysis included 213 patients (132 boys and 81 girls). Mean (SD) 
age at last registration of T1 and first registration of T5 was 13.0 (2.0) and 
16.3 (1.6) years, respectively, in boys and 11.6 (1.8) and 14.7 (1.5) years, 
respectively, in girls. Among patients reaching the end of puberty (25 boys and 
11 girls), mean (SD) height SDS increased from -3.7 (1.4) at baseline in the 
Eu-IGFD Registry to -2.6 (1.4) at T5 in boys and from -3.1 (1.1) to -2.3 (1.5) 
in girls. Maximum height velocity was observed during T2 in girls and T3 in 
boys. Median (range) PPHV was 8.0 (0.3-13.0) cm/year in boys and 6.8 (1.3-9.6) 
cm/year in girls and occurred most frequently during T2. Overall, the adverse 
events seen in this analysis were in line with the known safety profile of 
rhIGF-1.
CONCLUSION: Children and adolescents treated with rhIGF-1 for SPIGFD with growth 
failure experienced an increase in height SDS in prepubertal years compared with 
baseline. Despite 1.5 years delay in pubertal start and a delayed and slightly 
lower PPHV, height SDS gain during puberty was maintained.

Copyright © 2022 Bang, Polak, Perrot, Sert, Shaikh and Woelfle.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.812568
PMCID: PMC8895479
PMID: 35250870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PB has attended advisory boards and received 
board of directors fees from Ipsen and Lilly, and has received consulting fees 
from Ipsen, Sandoz, Pfizer, Lilly and Versatis. JW has attended advisory boards 
and received board of directors fees from Ipsen and Novo Nordisk, and has 
received corporate-sponsored research fees from Pfizer and Ipsen, as well as 
speaker fees from Merck-Serono, Hexal, Pfizer and Novo Nordisk. MP has attended 
advisory boards and received board of directors fees from Ipsen (Increlex 
Registry), Novo Nordisk (Global Norditropin Advisory board), Pfizer France, and 
has received corporate-sponsored research fees from Ipsen, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, 
Sandoz, Merck and Sanofi, as well as speaker fees from Novo Nordisk and Ipsen. 
VP and CS are both employees of Ipsen. The authors declare that this study 
received funding from Ipsen. The funder contributed to the study design, data 
collection and analysis, decision to publish, and funded editorial support for 
preparation of the manuscript.