---
reference_id: "PMID:10522212"
title: "Noma (cancrum oris): questions and answers."
authors:
- Enwonwu CO
- Falkler WA Jr
- Idigbe EO
- Savage KO
journal: Oral Dis
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.1999.tb00080.x
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Africa South of the Sahara/epidemiology
- Child
- Developing Countries
- "Gingivitis, Necrotizing Ulcerative/complications, microbiology"
- Humans
- Immunocompromised Host
- "Noma/epidemiology, etiology, immunology, pathology"
- Nutrition Disorders/complications
- Poverty
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Noma (cancrum oris): questions and answers.
**Authors:** Enwonwu CO, Falkler WA Jr, Idigbe EO, Savage KO
**Journal:** Oral Dis (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1601-0825.1999.tb00080.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1601-0825.1999.tb00080.x)

## Content

1. Oral Dis. 1999 Apr;5(2):144-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.1999.tb00080.x.

Noma (cancrum oris): questions and answers.

Enwonwu CO(1), Falkler WA Jr, Idigbe EO, Savage KO.

Author information:
(1)School of Dentistry, University of Maryland, Baltimore 21201, USA.

Noma (cancrum oris) is an infectious disease which destroys the oro-facial
tissues and other neighboring structures in its fulminating course. It affects
predominantly children aged 2-16 years in sub-Saharan Africa where the estimated
frequency in some communities may vary from one to seven cases per 1000
children. The key risk factors are poverty, malnutrition, poor oral hygiene,
deplorable environmental sanitation, close residential proximity to livestock,
and infectious diseases, particularly measles. Malnutrition acts synergistically
with endemic infections in promoting an immunodeficient state, and noma results
from the interaction of general and local factors with a weakened immune system
as the common denominator. Acute necrotizing gingivitis (ANG) is considered the
antecedent lesion. Current studies suggest that evolution of ANG to noma
requires infection by a consortium of microorganisms with Fusobacterium
necrophorum and Prevotella intermedia as the suspected key players. Without
appropriate treatment, mortality rate is 70-90%. Survivors suffer the two-fold
affliction of oro-facial disfigurement and functional impairment. Reconstructive
surgery of the resulting deformity is time-consuming and financially prohibitive
for the victims who are poor.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.1999.tb00080.x
PMID: 10522212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
