---
reference_id: "PMID:37550530"
title: Genome-wide analysis of a model-derived binge eating disorder phenotype identifies risk loci and implicates iron metabolism.
authors:
- Burstein D
- Griffen TC
- Therrien K
- Bendl J
- Venkatesh S
- Dong P
- Modabbernia A
- Zeng B
- Mathur D
- Hoffman G
- Sysko R
- Hildebrandt T
- Voloudakis G
- Roussos P
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41588-023-01464-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Binge-Eating Disorder/genetics, psychology"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Obesity/genetics
- Phenotype
- Iron
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide analysis of a model-derived binge eating disorder phenotype identifies risk loci and implicates iron metabolism.
**Authors:** Burstein D, Griffen TC, Therrien K, Bendl J, Venkatesh S, Dong P, Modabbernia A, Zeng B, Mathur D, Hoffman G, Sysko R, Hildebrandt T, Voloudakis G, Roussos P
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41588-023-01464-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-023-01464-1)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2023 Sep;55(9):1462-1470. doi: 10.1038/s41588-023-01464-1. Epub
2023  Aug 7.

Genome-wide analysis of a model-derived binge eating disorder phenotype 
identifies risk loci and implicates iron metabolism.

Burstein D(#)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Griffen TC(#)(1)(8)(9), Therrien 
K(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Bendl J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Venkatesh 
S(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Dong P(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Modabbernia A(1), Zeng 
B(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Mathur D(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Hoffman G(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), 
Sysko R(1)(8), Hildebrandt T(1)(8), Voloudakis G(10)(11)(12)(13)(14)(15)(16), 
Roussos P(17)(18)(19)(20)(21)(22).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(2)Center for Disease Neurogenomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, USA.
(3)Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genomic Science, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Icahn Institute for Data Science and Genomic Technology, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center (VISN 2 South), James 
J. Peters VA Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(8)Center of Excellence in Eating and Weight Disorders, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New 
York, NY, USA.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA. georgios.voloudakis@mssm.edu.
(11)Center for Disease Neurogenomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, USA. georgios.voloudakis@mssm.edu.
(12)Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA. georgios.voloudakis@mssm.edu.
(13)Department of Genetics and Genomic Science, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. georgios.voloudakis@mssm.edu.
(14)Icahn Institute for Data Science and Genomic Technology, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. georgios.voloudakis@mssm.edu.
(15)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, USA. georgios.voloudakis@mssm.edu.
(16)Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center (VISN 2 South), 
James J. Peters VA Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. 
georgios.voloudakis@mssm.edu.
(17)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA. panagiotis.roussos@mssm.edu.
(18)Center for Disease Neurogenomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, USA. panagiotis.roussos@mssm.edu.
(19)Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA. panagiotis.roussos@mssm.edu.
(20)Department of Genetics and Genomic Science, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. panagiotis.roussos@mssm.edu.
(21)Icahn Institute for Data Science and Genomic Technology, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. panagiotis.roussos@mssm.edu.
(22)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, USA. panagiotis.roussos@mssm.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Binge eating disorder (BED) is the most common eating disorder, yet its genetic 
architecture remains largely unknown. Studying BED is challenging because it is 
often comorbid with obesity, a common and highly polygenic trait, and it is 
underdiagnosed in biobank data sets. To address this limitation, we apply a 
supervised machine-learning approach (using 822 cases of individuals diagnosed 
with BED) to estimate the probability of each individual having BED based on 
electronic medical records from the Million Veteran Program. We perform a 
genome-wide association study of individuals of African (n = 77,574) and 
European (n = 285,138) ancestry while controlling for body mass index to 
identify three independent loci near the HFE, MCHR2 and LRP11 genes and suggest 
APOE as a risk gene for BED. We identify shared heritability between BED and 
several neuropsychiatric traits, and implicate iron metabolism in the 
pathophysiology of BED. Overall, our findings provide insights into the genetics 
underlying BED and suggest directions for future translational research.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41588-023-01464-1
PMCID: PMC10947608
PMID: 37550530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests Statement Dr. Hildebrandt is 
a scientific advisory board member of Noom, Inc. and Drs. Hildebrandt and Sysko 
receive funding from and have equity in Noom, Inc. (non-publicly traded 
company). Dr. Sysko receives royalties from Wolters Kluwer Health.