---
reference_id: "PMID:18713450"
title: "Progressive joint limitations as the first alarming signs in a boy with short - limbed dwarfism: A case report."
authors:
- Al Kaissi A
- Klaushofer K
- Grill F
journal: Cases J
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1757-1626-1-112
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progressive joint limitations as the first alarming signs in a boy with short - limbed dwarfism: A case report.
**Authors:** Al Kaissi A, Klaushofer K, Grill F
**Journal:** Cases J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1757-1626-1-112](https://doi.org/10.1186/1757-1626-1-112)

## Content

1. Cases J. 2008 Aug 19;1(1):112. doi: 10.1186/1757-1626-1-112.

Progressive joint limitations as the first alarming signs in a boy with short - 
limbed dwarfism: A case report.

Al Kaissi A(1), Klaushofer K, Grill F.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig-Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at the Hanusch Hospital of WGKK and 
AUVA Trauma Centre Meidling, 4th Medical Department, Hanusch Hospital, Vienna, 
Austria. ali.alkaissi@osteologie.at.

INTRODUCTION: Contracture is a condition of abnormal shortening or shrinkage of 
a muscle, and or a tendon often with persistent flexion or distortion at a 
joint. Careful documentation of the kind of contractures encountered in 
different paediatric disorders is important in distinguishing a specific 
subtype. Achondroplasia has been considered as the most common short-limbed 
dwarfism syndrome, but there are a variety of other syndromes within this 
category, and other types of limb shortening.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report on a 5-year-old boy of Austrian origin who 
manifests progressive joint limitations in connection with a dysplastic form of 
short-limbed dwarfism namely chondrodysplasia punctata-tibial-metacarpal-type. 
Progressive joint limitations of maximal intensity over the hip, and the ankle 
joints were the main presenting features.
CONCLUSION: Osteochondrodysplasias involve abnormal bone or cartilage growth 
leading to skeletal maldevelopment, often short-limbed dwarfism. Diagnosis is by 
physical examination, radiographic documentation, and, in some cases, genetic 
testing. In patients with chondrodysplasia punctata, early life radiographic 
examination is fundamental, since resolution of the punctate calcifications 
leaving abnormal epiphyses and flared and irregular metaphyses after age one to 
three years seems to be characteristic.

DOI: 10.1186/1757-1626-1-112
PMCID: PMC2527495
PMID: 18713450