---
reference_id: "PMID:12051967"
title: "Alkaptonuria in Slovakia: thirty-two years of research on phenotype and genotype."
authors:
- Srsen S
- Müller CR
- Fregin A
- Srsnova K
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/S1096-7192(02)00002-1
keywords:
- "Alkaptonuria/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Dioxygenases
- Genotype
- "Homogentisate 1,2-Dioxygenase"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Molecular Epidemiology
- Mutation
- Oxygenases/genetics
- Phenotype
- Prevalence
- Research
- Slovakia/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alkaptonuria in Slovakia: thirty-two years of research on phenotype and genotype.
**Authors:** Srsen S, Müller CR, Fregin A, Srsnova K
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1096-7192(02)00002-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1096-7192(02)00002-1)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2002 Apr;75(4):353-9. doi: 10.1016/S1096-7192(02)00002-1.

Alkaptonuria in Slovakia: thirty-two years of research on phenotype and
genotype.

Srsen S(1), Müller CR, Fregin A, Srsnova K.

Author information:
(1)Jessenius Medical Faculty, Comenius University, Thurzova 2, Martin SK-03601,
Slovak Republic.

Research on alkaptonuria (AKU; OMIM # 230500) in Slovakia started in 1968 by the
Research Laboratory (later on the Institute) for Clinical Genetics at Martin.
Its first stage was focused on clinical, biochemical, genetic and epidemiologic
questions and on the reasons for the high prevalence of AKU in Slovakia. Based
on a screening programme of now over 611,000 inhabitants (509,000 newborns) the
world-wide highest incidence of AKU (1 in 19,000) was recorded, and a total of
208 patients (110 children) were registered. Extensive genealogical studies
(sometimes over two centuries) resulted in the fusion of several "unrelated"
nuclear families into larger pedigrees and enabled tracing most AKU ancestors to
their original geographic localities, predominantly in remote mountain areas. A
likely founder effect was detected among the shepherd population of the
so-called Valachian colonization that resulted in a high degree of inbreeding
and persisting genetic isolation. These epidemiologic data formed the basis for
molecular studies in collaboration with the Würzburg group. The AKU locus was
mapped to human chromosome 3q2 by orthology to the mouse locus aku. Following
the cloning of the homogentisate-1,2 dioxygenase (HGD) genes from human and
mouse, nine different mutations were identified in 21 AKU index patients. These
include 4 missense, 2 splice-site, 2 single-base insertion and 1 deletion
mutation. The most frequent mutations among the 42 AKU chromosomes of the index
cases are c.648G > A (Gly161Arg; 42.9%), and c.1278insC (Pro370fs; 19.1%). To
date, the genotypes of 29 patients and of 74 gene carriers from 21 families have
been established. The highest prevalence and allelic heterogeneity were observed
in the Kysuce district with five different mutations. Molecular epidemiology
studies by haplotyping were carried out to uncover the original geographic
localities of all AKU index chromosomes. This strongly suggests that several
founders have contributed to the HGD gene mutation pool. While there is no
straightforward explanation for the clustering of independent mutations, the
genetic isolation in the past is likely to be responsible for the high
prevalence of AKU in Slovakia.

DOI: 10.1016/S1096-7192(02)00002-1
PMID: 12051967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
