---
reference_id: PMID:27181683
title: "Loss of MAFB Function in Humans and Mice Causes Duane Syndrome, Aberrant Extraocular Muscle Innervation, and Inner-Ear Defects."
authors:
- Park JG
- Tischfield MA
- Nugent AA
- Cheng L
- Di Gioia SA
- Chan WM
- Maconachie G
- Bosley TM
- Summers CG
- Hunter DG
- Robson CD
- Gottlob I
- Engle EC
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.03.023
keywords:
- Animals
- "Duane Retraction Syndrome/etiology, pathology"
- "Embryo, Mammalian/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- "Hearing Loss/etiology, pathology"
- Humans
- "Labyrinth Diseases/etiology, pathology"
- "MafB Transcription Factor/genetics, physiology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Oculomotor Muscles/innervation, pathology"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of MAFB Function in Humans and Mice Causes Duane Syndrome, Aberrant Extraocular Muscle Innervation, and Inner-Ear Defects.
**Authors:** Park JG, Tischfield MA, Nugent AA, Cheng L, Di Gioia SA, Chan WM, Maconachie G, Bosley TM, Summers CG, Hunter DG, Robson CD, Gottlob I, Engle EC
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.03.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.03.023)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Jun 2;98(6):1220-1227. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.03.023. 
Epub 2016 May 12.

Loss of MAFB Function in Humans and Mice Causes Duane Syndrome, Aberrant 
Extraocular Muscle Innervation, and Inner-Ear Defects.

Park JG(1), Tischfield MA(2), Nugent AA(3), Cheng L(4), Di Gioia SA(2), Chan 
WM(5), Maconachie G(6), Bosley TM(7), Summers CG(8), Hunter DG(9), Robson 
CD(10), Gottlob I(6), Engle EC(11).

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA; Department of 
Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; F.M. Kirby 
Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; 
Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Duke 
University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; 
F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; 
F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA; Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; 
F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA; Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA; Department of 
Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; F.M. Kirby 
Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; 
Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(6)Ulverscroft Eye Unit, University of Leicester, Leicester LE2 7LX, UK; 
Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, and Behavior, University of Leicester, 
Leicester LE2 7LX, UK.
(7)Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Neurosciences, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA; Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(10)Department of Radiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; 
Department of Radiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(11)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA; Department of 
Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; F.M. Kirby 
Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; 
Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Program 
in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of 
Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of 
Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Broad Institute of 
Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: 
elizabeth.engle@childrens.harvard.edu.

Duane retraction syndrome (DRS) is a congenital eye-movement disorder defined by 
limited outward gaze and retraction of the eye on attempted inward gaze. Here, 
we report on three heterozygous loss-of-function MAFB mutations causing DRS and 
a dominant-negative MAFB mutation causing DRS and deafness. Using 
genotype-phenotype correlations in humans and Mafb-knockout mice, we propose a 
threshold model for variable loss of MAFB function. Postmortem studies of DRS 
have reported abducens nerve hypoplasia and aberrant innervation of the lateral 
rectus muscle by the oculomotor nerve. Our studies in mice now confirm this 
human DRS pathology. Moreover, we demonstrate that selectively disrupting 
abducens nerve development is sufficient to cause secondary innervation of the 
lateral rectus muscle by aberrant oculomotor nerve branches, which form at 
developmental decision regions close to target extraocular muscles. Thus, we 
present evidence that the primary cause of DRS is failure of the abducens nerve 
to fully innervate the lateral rectus muscle in early development.

Copyright © 2016 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.03.023
PMCID: PMC4908193
PMID: 27181683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]