---
reference_id: "PMID:9020844"
title: Mutation of HOXA13 in hand-foot-genital syndrome.
authors:
- Mortlock DP
- Innis JW
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1038/ng0297-179
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of HOXA13 in hand-foot-genital syndrome.
**Authors:** Mortlock DP, Innis JW
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0297-179](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0297-179)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1997 Feb;15(2):179-80. doi: 10.1038/ng0297-179.

Mutation of HOXA13 in hand-foot-genital syndrome.

Mortlock DP(1), Innis JW.

Author information:
(1)Dept of Human Genetics, Univ of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor 
48109-0618, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1997 Feb;15(2):117-8. doi: 10.1038/ng0297-117.

There are several human syndromes which involve defects of the limbs and the 
Müllerian ducts or its derivatives. The hand-foot-genital (HFG) syndrome is an 
autosomal dominant, fully penetrant disorder that was originally described by 
Stern et al. Additional reports describing other affected families have also 
been published. Limb anomalies include short first metacarpals of normal 
thickness, small distal phalanges of the thumbs, short middle phalanges of the 
fifth fingers, and fusion or delayed ossification of wrist bones. In the feet, 
the great toe is shorter due to a short first metatarsal and a small, pointed 
distal phalanx. Uterine anomalies are common in females with HFG, and typically 
involve a partially divided (bicornuate) or completely divided (didelphic) 
uterus, representing defects of Müllerian duct fusion. Urinary tract 
malformations in affected HFG females include a displaced urethral opening and 
malposition of ureteral orifices in the bladder wall; affected males may have 
hypospadias (ventrally misplaced urethral opening) of variable severity. We 
report the identification of a HOXA13 nonsense mutation in a family with 
hand-foot-genital syndrome. The mutation converts a highly conserved tryptophan 
residue in the homeodomain to a stop codon, which truncates 20 amino acids from 
the protein and likely eliminates or greatly reduces the ability of the protein 
to bind to DNA.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0297-179
PMID: 9020844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]