---
reference_id: "PMID:16188994"
title: T-cell tropism and the role of ORF66 protein in pathogenesis of varicella-zoster virus infection.
authors:
- Schaap A
- Fortin JF
- Sommer M
- Zerboni L
- Stamatis S
- Ku CC
- Nolan GP
- Arvin AM
journal: J Virol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1128/JVI.79.20.12921-12933.2005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# T-cell tropism and the role of ORF66 protein in pathogenesis of varicella-zoster virus infection.
**Authors:** Schaap A, Fortin JF, Sommer M, Zerboni L, Stamatis S, Ku CC, Nolan GP, Arvin AM
**Journal:** J Virol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.79.20.12921-12933.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.79.20.12921-12933.2005)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2005 Oct;79(20):12921-33. doi: 10.1128/JVI.79.20.12921-12933.2005.

T-cell tropism and the role of ORF66 protein in pathogenesis of varicella-zoster 
virus infection.

Schaap A(1), Fortin JF, Sommer M, Zerboni L, Stamatis S, Ku CC, Nolan GP, Arvin 
AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA 
94305-5208, USA. aschaap@stanford.edu

The pathogenesis of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) involves a cell-associated 
viremia during which infectious virus is carried from sites of respiratory 
mucosal inoculation to the skin. We now demonstrate that VZV infection of T 
cells is associated with robust virion production and modulation of the 
apoptosis and interferon pathways within these cells. The VZV serine/threonine 
protein kinase encoded by ORF66 is essential for the efficient replication of 
VZV in T cells. Preventing ORF66 protein expression by stop codon insertion 
(pOka66S) impaired the growth of the parent Oka (pOka) strain in T cells in 
SCID-hu T-cell xenografts in vivo and reduced formation of VZV virions. The lack 
of ORF66 protein also increased the susceptibility of infected T cells to 
apoptosis and reduced the capacity of the virus to interfere with induction of 
the interferon (IFN) signaling pathway following exposure to IFN-gamma. However, 
preventing ORF66 protein expression only slightly reduced growth in melanoma 
cells in culture and did not diminish virion formation in these cells. The 
pOka66S virus showed only a slight defect in growth in SCID-hu skin implants 
compared with intact pOka. These observations suggest that the ORF66 kinase 
plays a unique role during infection of T cells and supports VZV T-cell tropism 
by contributing to immune evasion and enhancing survival of infected T cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.20.12921-12933.2005
PMCID: PMC1235817
PMID: 16188994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]