---
reference_id: "PMID:24056535"
title: "Periventricular heterotopia in 6q terminal deletion syndrome: role of the C6orf70 gene."
authors:
- Conti V
- Carabalona A
- Pallesi-Pocachard E
- Parrini E
- Leventer RJ
- Buhler E
- McGillivray G
- Michel FJ
- Striano P
- Mei D
- Watrin F
- Lise S
- Pagnamenta AT
- Taylor JC
- Kini U
- Clayton-Smith J
- Novara F
- Zuffardi O
- Dobyns WB
- Scheffer IE
- Robertson SP
- Berkovic SF
- Represa A
- Keays DA
- Cardoso C
- Guerrini R
journal: Brain
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awt249
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- "Brain/abnormalities, pathology, physiopathology"
- Child
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6/genetics"
- Cohort Studies
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Malformations of Cortical Development, Group II/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Periventricular Nodular Heterotopia/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Rats
- "Rats, Wistar"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Periventricular heterotopia in 6q terminal deletion syndrome: role of the C6orf70 gene.
**Authors:** Conti V, Carabalona A, Pallesi-Pocachard E, Parrini E, Leventer RJ, Buhler E, McGillivray G, Michel FJ, Striano P, Mei D, Watrin F, Lise S, Pagnamenta AT, Taylor JC, Kini U, Clayton-Smith J, Novara F, Zuffardi O, Dobyns WB, Scheffer IE, Robertson SP, Berkovic SF, Represa A, Keays DA, Cardoso C, Guerrini R
**Journal:** Brain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awt249](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt249)

## Content

1. Brain. 2013 Nov;136(Pt 11):3378-94. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt249. Epub 2013 Sep
20.

Periventricular heterotopia in 6q terminal deletion syndrome: role of the
C6orf70 gene.

Conti V(1), Carabalona A, Pallesi-Pocachard E, Parrini E, Leventer RJ, Buhler E,
McGillivray G, Michel FJ, Striano P, Mei D, Watrin F, Lise S, Pagnamenta AT,
Taylor JC, Kini U, Clayton-Smith J, Novara F, Zuffardi O, Dobyns WB, Scheffer
IE, Robertson SP, Berkovic SF, Represa A, Keays DA, Cardoso C, Guerrini R.

Author information:
(1)1 Paediatric Neurology and Neurogenetics Unit and Laboratories, A. Meyer
Children's Hospital - Department of Neuroscience, Pharmacology and Child Health,
University of Florence, 50139, Florence, Italy.

Periventricular nodular heterotopia is caused by defective neuronal migration
that results in heterotopic neuronal nodules lining the lateral ventricles.
Mutations in filamin A (FLNA) or ADP-ribosylation factor guanine
nucleotide-exchange factor 2 (ARFGEF2) cause periventricular nodular
heterotopia, but most patients with this malformation do not have a known
aetiology. Using comparative genomic hybridization, we identified 12 patients
with developmental brain abnormalities, variably combining periventricular
nodular heterotopia, corpus callosum dysgenesis, colpocephaly, cerebellar
hypoplasia and polymicrogyria, harbouring a common 1.2 Mb minimal critical
deletion in 6q27. These anatomic features were mainly associated with epilepsy,
ataxia and cognitive impairment. Using whole exome sequencing in 14 patients
with isolated periventricular nodular heterotopia but no copy number variants,
we identified one patient with periventricular nodular heterotopia,
developmental delay and epilepsy and a de novo missense mutation in the
chromosome 6 open reading frame 70 (C6orf70) gene, mapping in the minimal
critical deleted region. Using immunohistochemistry and western blots, we
demonstrated that in human cell lines, C6orf70 shows primarily a cytoplasmic
vesicular puncta-like distribution and that the mutation affects its stability
and subcellular distribution. We also performed in utero silencing of C6orf70
and of Phf10 and Dll1, the two additional genes mapping in the 6q27 minimal
critical deleted region that are expressed in human and rodent brain. Silencing
of C6orf70 in the developing rat neocortex produced periventricular nodular
heterotopia that was rescued by concomitant expression of wild-type human
C6orf70 protein. Silencing of the contiguous Phf10 or Dll1 genes only produced
slightly delayed migration but not periventricular nodular heterotopia. The
complex brain phenotype observed in the 6q terminal deletion syndrome likely
results from the combined haploinsufficiency of contiguous genes mapping to a
small 1.2 Mb region. Our data suggest that, of the genes within this minimal
critical region, C6orf70 plays a major role in the control of neuronal migration
and its haploinsufficiency or mutation causes periventricular nodular
heterotopia.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt249
PMID: 24056535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
