---
reference_id: "PMID:19259384"
title: "Lesch-Nyhan disease: from mechanism to model and back again."
authors:
- Jinnah HA
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.002543
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Models, Biological"
- "Models, Genetic"
- Rats
- Research Design
- Self Mutilation/physiopathology
- Uric Acid/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lesch-Nyhan disease: from mechanism to model and back again.
**Authors:** Jinnah HA
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.002543](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.002543)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2009 Mar-Apr;2(3-4):116-21. doi: 10.1242/dmm.002543.

Lesch-Nyhan disease: from mechanism to model and back again.

Jinnah HA(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology and Human Genetics, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. hjinnah@emory.edu

Lesch-Nyhan disease (LND) is a rare inherited disorder caused by mutations in 
the gene encoding hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT). LND is 
characterized by overproduction of uric acid, leading to gouty arthritis and 
nephrolithiasis. Affected patients also have characteristic neurological and 
behavioral anomalies. Multiple cell models have been developed to study the 
molecular and metabolic aspects of LND, and several animal models have been 
developed to elucidate the basis for the neurobehavioral syndrome. The models 
have different strengths and weaknesses rendering them suitable for studying 
different aspects of the disease. The extensive modeling efforts in LND have 
questioned the concept that an 'ideal' disease model is one that replicates all 
of its features because the pathogenesis of different elements of the disease 
involves different mechanisms. Instead, the modeling efforts have suggested a 
more fruitful approach that involves developing specific models, each tailored 
for addressing specific experimental questions.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.002543
PMCID: PMC2650214
PMID: 19259384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]