---
reference_id: "PMID:7476057"
title: Endothelium-mediated control of coronary vascular tone after chronic exercise training.
authors:
- Laughlin MH
journal: Med Sci Sports Exerc
year: '1995'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endothelium-mediated control of coronary vascular tone after chronic exercise training.
**Authors:** Laughlin MH
**Journal:** Med Sci Sports Exerc (1995)

## Content

1. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1995 Aug;27(8):1135-44.

Endothelium-mediated control of coronary vascular tone after chronic exercise 
training.

Laughlin MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Biomedical Sciences, Dalton Cardiovascular Research 
Center, University of Missouri, Columbia 65211, USA.

The purpose of this paper is to examine the role of endothelium-derived relaxing 
factors in the control of coronary vascular resistance in conditioned subjects 
(i.e., after exercise training for a period of time sufficient to complete 
adaptation processes). Results from studies with exercise trained (EX) dogs, 
miniature swine, and rats are summarized. Since the relative importance of 
vascular control mechanisms differ in various segments of the coronary arterial 
tree, the effects of EX on conduit arteries and the coronary arterial 
microcirculation are discussed separately. Results indicate that 
endothelium-mediated vasodilator responses are normal in conduit coronary 
arteries of EX dogs, miniature swine, and rats. It is proposed that 
endothelium-mediated vasodilation of conduit coronary arteries is enhanced early 
in the exercise-adaptive process but returns to normal as adaptation to EX is 
complete, when structural adaptations produce a relative decrease in coronary 
shear during exercise. EX miniature swine manifest enhanced endothelium-mediated 
vasodilation stimulated by bradykinin and flow in isolated coronary resistance 
arteries and appear to have increased expression of NO synthase (ecNOS). Brief 
training also appears to increase the expression of ecNOS. The role of 
endothelium-mediated vasodilation in regulation of coronary blood flow in EX 
animals remains uncertain.

PMID: 7476057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]