---
reference_id: "PMID:17273966"
title: First reported patient with human ERCC1 deficiency has cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome with a mild defect in nucleotide excision repair and severe developmental failure.
authors:
- Jaspers NG
- Raams A
- Silengo MC
- Wijgers N
- Niedernhofer LJ
- Robinson AR
- Giglia-Mari G
- Hoogstraten D
- Kleijer WJ
- Hoeijmakers JH
- Vermeulen W
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/512486
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Animals
- Brain/abnormalities
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- DNA Repair/genetics
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- "Endonucleases/deficiency, genetics"
- Eye Abnormalities/genetics
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, drug effects, radiation effects"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Skin/cytology
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First reported patient with human ERCC1 deficiency has cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome with a mild defect in nucleotide excision repair and severe developmental failure.
**Authors:** Jaspers NG, Raams A, Silengo MC, Wijgers N, Niedernhofer LJ, Robinson AR, Giglia-Mari G, Hoogstraten D, Kleijer WJ, Hoeijmakers JH, Vermeulen W
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/512486](https://doi.org/10.1086/512486)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Mar;80(3):457-66. doi: 10.1086/512486. Epub 2007 Jan 29.

First reported patient with human ERCC1 deficiency has 
cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome with a mild defect in nucleotide excision 
repair and severe developmental failure.

Jaspers NG(1), Raams A, Silengo MC, Wijgers N, Niedernhofer LJ, Robinson AR, 
Giglia-Mari G, Hoogstraten D, Kleijer WJ, Hoeijmakers JH, Vermeulen W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
n.jaspers@erasmusmc.nl

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is a genome caretaker mechanism responsible for 
removing helix-distorting DNA lesions, most notably ultraviolet photodimers. 
Inherited defects in NER result in profound photosensitivity and the 
cancer-prone syndrome xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) or two progeroid syndromes: 
Cockayne and trichothiodystrophy syndromes. The heterodimer ERCC1-XPF is one of 
two endonucleases required for NER. Mutations in XPF are associated with mild XP 
and rarely with progeria. Mutations in ERCC1 have not been reported. Here, we 
describe the first case of human inherited ERCC1 deficiency. Patient cells 
showed moderate hypersensitivity to ultraviolet rays and mitomycin C, yet the 
clinical features were very severe and, unexpectedly, were compatible with a 
diagnosis of cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome. This discovery represents a 
novel complementation group of patients with defective NER. Further, the 
clinical severity, coupled with a relatively mild repair defect, suggests novel 
functions for ERCC1.

DOI: 10.1086/512486
PMCID: PMC1821117
PMID: 17273966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]