---
reference_id: "PMID:38444259"
title: "Okur-Chung neurodevelopmental syndrome: Implications for phenotype and genotype expansion."
authors:
- Nan H
- Chu M
- Zhang J
- Jiang D
- Wang Y
- Wu L
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2398
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Asian People
- "Databases, Factual"
- Genotype
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Phenotype
- Casein Kinase II
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Okur-Chung neurodevelopmental syndrome: Implications for phenotype and genotype expansion.
**Authors:** Nan H, Chu M, Zhang J, Jiang D, Wang Y, Wu L
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.2398](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.2398)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2024 Mar;12(3):e2398. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2398.

Okur-Chung neurodevelopmental syndrome: Implications for phenotype and genotype
expansion.

Nan H(1), Chu M(1), Zhang J(1), Jiang D(1), Wang Y(1), Wu L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, China.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Diseases, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Okur-Chung neurodevelopmental syndrome (OCNDS) is a rare autosomal
dominant disorder caused by pathogenic variants in CSNK2A1. It is characterized
by intellectual disability, developmental delay, and multisystemic
abnormalities.
METHODS: We performed the whole-exome sequencing for a patient in a Chinese
family. The co-segregation study using the Sanger sequencing method was
performed among family members. Reverse transcription and quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction were carried out using total RNA from blood samples of
the proband and wild-type control subjects. A review of patients with OCNDS
harboring CSNK2A1 pathogenic variants was conducted through a comprehensive
search of the PubMed database.
RESULTS: We identified a novel CSNK2A1 frameshift variant p.Tyr323Leufs*16 in a
Chinese family. The proband, a 31-year-old female, presented with abnormal
eating habits, recurrent seizures, language impairment, and intellectual
disability. Her mother exhibited postnatal hernias, splenomegaly, and a
predisposition to infections, but showed no significant developmental
impairments or intellectual disability. Genetic studies revealed the presence of
this variant in CSNK2A1 in both the proband and her mother. Transcription
analysis revealed this variant may lead to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay,
suggesting haploinsufficiency as a potential disease mechanism. We reviewed 47
previously reported OCNDS cases and discovered that individuals carrying CSNK2A1
null variants may exhibit a diminished frequency of symptoms linked to language
deficits, dysmorphic facial features, or intellectual disability, consequently
presenting an overall milder phenotype when compared to those with missense
variants.
CONCLUSION: We report a novel frameshift variant, p.Tyr323Leufs*16, in an OCNDS
family with a generally mild phenotype. This study may broaden the spectrum of
clinical presentations associated with OCNDS and contribute novel insights into
the genotype-phenotype correlation of this condition.

© 2024 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.2398
PMCID: PMC10915366
PMID: 38444259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
