---
reference_id: "PMID:30252065"
title: "The Natural History of Adrenal Insufficiency in X-Linked Adrenoleukodystrophy: An International Collaboration."
authors:
- Huffnagel IC
- Laheji FK
- Aziz-Bose R
- Tritos NA
- Marino R
- Linthorst GE
- Kemp S
- Engelen M
- Eichler F
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2018-01307
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Adrenal Insufficiency/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/complications, epidemiology, pathology"
- Adult
- Aged
- Biomarkers
- "Brain Diseases/epidemiology, etiology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Endpoint Determination
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
- Spinal Cord Diseases/etiology
- Survival Analysis
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Natural History of Adrenal Insufficiency in X-Linked Adrenoleukodystrophy: An International Collaboration.
**Authors:** Huffnagel IC, Laheji FK, Aziz-Bose R, Tritos NA, Marino R, Linthorst GE, Kemp S, Engelen M, Eichler F
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2018-01307](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2018-01307)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2019 Jan 1;104(1):118-126. doi:
10.1210/jc.2018-01307.

The Natural History of Adrenal Insufficiency in X-Linked Adrenoleukodystrophy:
An International Collaboration.

Huffnagel IC(1), Laheji FK(2), Aziz-Bose R(2), Tritos NA(3), Marino R(4),
Linthorst GE(5), Kemp S(6), Engelen M(1), Eichler F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology/Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(3)Neuroendocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(6)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.

CONTEXT: Primary adrenal insufficiency is an important clinical manifestation of
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). Other manifestations include spinal cord
disease and/or inflammatory demyelinating cerebral disease. Implementation of
newborn screening requires natural history data to develop follow-up
recommendations.
OBJECTIVE: To delineate the natural history of adrenal insufficiency in male
patients with ALD and to assess associations between the risk for developing
adrenal insufficiency, spinal cord disease, or cerebral disease and plasma
C26:0/C22:0 and C24:0/C22:0 ratios, which are diagnostic biomarkers for ALD.
DESIGN: Retrospective review of medical records.
SETTING: Two international tertiary referral centers of expertise for ALD.
PATIENTS: Male patients with ALD followed at the centers between 2002 and 2016.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary endpoint was adrenal insufficiency; secondary
endpoints were spinal cord and cerebral disease.
RESULTS: Data on 159 male patients was available. The probability of developing
adrenal insufficiency was described with survival analysis. Median time until
adrenal insufficiency was 14 years (95% CI, 9.70 to 18.30 years). The cumulative
proportion of patients who developed adrenal insufficiency was age-dependent and
highest in early childhood [0 to 10 years, 46.8% (SEM 0.041%); 11 to 40 years,
28.6% (SEM, 0.037%); >40 years, 5.6% (SEM, 0.038%)]. No association between
clinical manifestations and plasma ratios was detected with Cox model or
Spearman correlation.
CONCLUSIONS: Lifetime prevalence of adrenal insufficiency in male patients with
ALD is ~80%. Adrenal insufficiency risk is time-dependent and warrants
age-dependent follow-up. Besides on-demand testing if symptoms manifest, we
suggest a minimum of adrenal testing every 4 to 6 months for patients age ≤10
years, annual testing for those age 11 to 40 years, and solely on-demand testing
for those age >40 years.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2018-01307
PMID: 30252065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
