---
reference_id: "PMID:37645267"
title: "Tooth agenesis: An overview of diagnosis, aetiology and management."
authors:
- Meade MJ
- Dreyer CW
journal: Jpn Dent Sci Rev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jdsr.2023.07.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tooth agenesis: An overview of diagnosis, aetiology and management.
**Authors:** Meade MJ, Dreyer CW
**Journal:** Jpn Dent Sci Rev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jdsr.2023.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdsr.2023.07.001)

## Content

1. Jpn Dent Sci Rev. 2023 Dec;59:209-218. doi: 10.1016/j.jdsr.2023.07.001. Epub 
2023 Jul 7.

Tooth agenesis: An overview of diagnosis, aetiology and management.

Meade MJ(1), Dreyer CW(1).

Author information:
(1)Orthodontic Unit, Adelaide Dental School, The University of Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia.

Patients with one or more developmentally absent teeth are routinely encountered 
in dental practice. Tooth agenesis can be associated with significant 
functional, aesthetic and psycho-social problems. The present article provides 
an overview of the prevalence and aetiology of tooth agenesis, as well as the 
condition's clinical characteristics and management options with reference to 
the evidence base. A timely diagnosis can facilitate the appropriate planning 
and management which might not be straightforward, and patient care will likely 
require multi- and inter-disciplinary input. It is critical that dental care 
practitioners are aware of the clinical characteristics and management options 
for tooth agenesis.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdsr.2023.07.001
PMCID: PMC10461125
PMID: 37645267

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.