---
reference_id: "PMID:31270110"
title: 2018 Update of the EULAR recommendations for the management of large vessel vasculitis.
authors:
- Hellmich B
- Agueda A
- Monti S
- Buttgereit F
- de Boysson H
- Brouwer E
- Cassie R
- Cid MC
- Dasgupta B
- Dejaco C
- Hatemi G
- Hollinger N
- Mahr A
- Mollan SP
- Mukhtyar C
- Ponte C
- Salvarani C
- Sivakumar R
- Tian X
- Tomasson G
- Turesson C
- Schmidt W
- Villiger PM
- Watts R
- Young C
- Luqmani RA
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-215672
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Aortitis/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, pathology"
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Methotrexate/therapeutic use
- "Takayasu Arteritis/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2018 Update of the EULAR recommendations for the management of large vessel vasculitis.
**Authors:** Hellmich B, Agueda A, Monti S, Buttgereit F, de Boysson H, Brouwer E, Cassie R, Cid MC, Dasgupta B, Dejaco C, Hatemi G, Hollinger N, Mahr A, Mollan SP, Mukhtyar C, Ponte C, Salvarani C, Sivakumar R, Tian X, Tomasson G, Turesson C, Schmidt W, Villiger PM, Watts R, Young C, Luqmani RA
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-215672](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-215672)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2020 Jan;79(1):19-30. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-215672.
Epub  2019 Jul 3.

2018 Update of the EULAR recommendations for the management of large vessel
vasculitis.

Hellmich B(1), Agueda A(2), Monti S(3), Buttgereit F(4), de Boysson H(5),
Brouwer E(6), Cassie R(7), Cid MC(8), Dasgupta B(9), Dejaco C(10)(11), Hatemi
G(12), Hollinger N(13), Mahr A(14), Mollan SP(15)(16), Mukhtyar C(17), Ponte
C(18)(19), Salvarani C(20), Sivakumar R(21), Tian X(22), Tomasson G(23),
Turesson C(24), Schmidt W(25), Villiger PM(26), Watts R(27), Young C(28),
Luqmani RA(29).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Rheumatology and Immunology, Medius
Kliniken, University of Tübingen, Kirchheim-Teck, Germany
b.hellmich@medius-kliniken.de.
(2)Rheumatology Department, Centro Hospitalar do Baixo Vouga E.P.E, Aveiro,
Portugal.
(3)Rheumatology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, University of Pavia,
Pavia, Italy.
(4)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, University Hospital Charité,
Berlin, Germany.
(5)Internal Medicine, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Caen, Caen,
Basse-Normandie, France.
(6)Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, UMCG, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(7)Leicester, UK.
(8)Department of Autoimmune Diseases, Hospital Clinic, University of Barcelona,
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona,
Spain.
(9)Rheumatology, Southend Hospital NHS Trust, Westcliff-on-sea, UK.
(10)Rheumatology, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria.
(11)Rheumatology, Hospital of Bruneck, Bruneck, Italy.
(12)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul
University Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
(13)Department of Internal Medicine, Rheumatology and Immunology, Medus Klinken,
Karl-Albrechts-Universität Tübingen, Kirchheim-Teck, Germany.
(14)Hospital Saint-Louis, University Paris Diderot, Paris, France.
(15)Ophthalmology, University Hospitals Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(16)Neurometabolism, Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(17)Rheumatology, Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Norwich, UK.
(18)Rheumatology, Hospital de Santa Maria - CHLN, Lisbon Academic Medical
Centre, Lisbon, Portugal.
(19)Rheumatology Research Unit; Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Instituto de
Medicina Molecular, Lisboa, Portugal.
(20)Arcispedale S Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(21)Stroke and Neurocritical Care, GLB Hospitals and Acute Stroke Centers,
Chennai, India.
(22)Rheumatology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, China.
(23)University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(24)Department of Rheumatology, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(25)Medical Centre for Rheumatology Berlin-Buch, Immanuel Krankenhaus Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.
(26)Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology / Allerg, University Hospital
(Inselspital), Bern, Switzerland.
(27)Norwich Medical School, Bob Champion Research and Education Building,
University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(28)Steyning, UK.
(29)Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal
Science (NDORMs), University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND: Since the publication of the European League Against Rheumatism
(EULAR) recommendations for the management of large vessel vasculitis (LVV) in
2009, several relevant randomised clinical trials and cohort analyses have been
published, which have the potential to change clinical care and therefore
supporting the need to update the original recommendations.
METHODS: Using EULAR standardised operating procedures for EULAR-endorsed
recommendations, the EULAR task force undertook a systematic literature review
and sought opinion from 20 experts from 13 countries. We modified existing
recommendations and created new recommendations.
RESULTS: Three overarching principles and 10 recommendations were formulated. We
recommend that a suspected diagnosis of LVV should be confirmed by imaging or
histology. High dose glucocorticoid therapy (40-60 mg/day prednisone-equivalent)
should be initiated immediately for induction of remission in active giant cell
arteritis (GCA) or Takayasu arteritis (TAK). We recommend adjunctive therapy in
selected patients with GCA (refractory or relapsing disease, presence of an
increased risk for glucocorticoid-related adverse events or complications) using
tocilizumab. Methotrexate may be used as an alternative. Non-biological
glucocorticoid-sparing agents should be given in combination with
glucocorticoids in all patients with TAK and biological agents may be used in
refractory or relapsing patients. We no longer recommend the routine use of
antiplatelet or anticoagulant therapy for treatment of LVV unless it is
indicated for other reasons.
CONCLUSIONS: We have updated the recommendations for the management of LVV to
facilitate the translation of current scientific evidence and expert opinion
into better management and improved outcome of patients in clinical practice.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-215672
PMID: 31270110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: EB received consultancies
from Roche (payed to the University Medical Center Groningen). FB received
grants from Horizon and Mundipharma and speaker fees and/or consultancies from
Horizon, Mundipharma, Roche and Sanofi. HB received a grant and speaker fees
from Roche. BD received consultancies and/or speaker fees from BMS, Chugai, GSK
and Roche. CD received and grant from Celgene and speaker fees and/or
consultancies from Abbvie, BMS, Lilly, MSD, Pfizer, Novartis, UCB, Roche and
Sanofi. BH received speaker fees and/or consultancies from Abbvie, Boehringer,
Chugai, Celgene, MSD, Pfizer, Novartis and Roche. SM received speaker fees and
consultancies from Roche and Chugai. WS received a grant from Roche and speaker
fees and consultancies from Chugai, GSG, Novartis, Roche and Sanofi. CT received
a grant from BMS and speaker fees and/or consultancies from Abbvie, BMS, Pfizer
and Roche. PV received a grant for conducting an RCT in GCA from Roche. All
other authors have no competing interests.
