---
reference_id: "PMID:39992563"
title: Unilateral best vitelliform macular dystrophy- a case series.
authors:
- Ratra D
- Karra A
journal: Doc Ophthalmol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s10633-025-10008-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Central Serous Chorioretinopathy/diagnosis
- Diagnostic Errors
- Electrooculography
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Multimodal Imaging
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/diagnosis, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unilateral best vitelliform macular dystrophy- a case series.
**Authors:** Ratra D, Karra A
**Journal:** Doc Ophthalmol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10633-025-10008-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10633-025-10008-3)

## Content

1. Doc Ophthalmol. 2025 Apr;150(2):111-116. doi: 10.1007/s10633-025-10008-3. Epub
 2025 Feb 24.

Unilateral best vitelliform macular dystrophy- a case series.

Ratra D(1), Karra A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vitreoretinal Diseases, Sankara Nethralaya, 41/18, College
Road, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 600006, India. dhanashreeratra@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Vitreoretinal Diseases, Sankara Nethralaya, 41/18, College
Road, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 600006, India.

PURPOSE: To report 2 cases with unilateral Best vitelliform macular dystrophy
(VMD) and describe their multimodal investigations findings.
METHODS: Two patients in their fifties who were misdiagnosed as central serous
chorioretinopathy were carefully evaluated using multimodal imaging and
electrooculography (EOG) investigations.
RESULTS: Both patients showed neurosensory elevation at the macula in one eye
only leading to reduced vision. The optical coherence tomography showed
subretinal hyperreflective material lining the undersurface of the elevated
retina with thinning of the overlying photoreceptor layer. There was no
choroidal thickening or pachy vessels. There was no leakage seen on fluorescein
angiography nor any choroidal hyperpermeability on indocyanine green
angiography. There was no choroidal neovascular membrane noted. The left eye was
clinically unaffected for both. The EOG showed a reduced light peak to dark
trough (LP:DT) ratio in both the eyes of these patients confirming the diagnosis
of Best VMD. No change was seen in the eye condition over 2 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Best VMD can present in unilateral fashion in rare instances. EOG
can be confirmatory along with genetic testing. It can be misdiagnosed as CSCR
where multimodal imaging and EOG can help differentiate it as Best VMD.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10633-025-10008-3
PMID: 39992563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: None.
Consent to publish: Written informed consent was taken from the patients.
