---
reference_id: PMID:26303319
title: "Pathophysiology of Calcium, Phosphorus, and Magnesium Dysregulation in Chronic Kidney Disease."
authors:
- Felsenfeld AJ
- Levine BS
- Rodriguez M
journal: Semin Dial
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/sdi.12411
keywords:
- Calcium/metabolism
- Disease Progression
- Fibroblast Growth Factor-23
- Glomerular Filtration Rate/physiology
- Humans
- Kidney/physiopathology
- Magnesium/metabolism
- "Metabolic Diseases/etiology, metabolism"
- Phosphorus/metabolism
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications, metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of Calcium, Phosphorus, and Magnesium Dysregulation in Chronic Kidney Disease.
**Authors:** Felsenfeld AJ, Levine BS, Rodriguez M
**Journal:** Semin Dial (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/sdi.12411](https://doi.org/10.1111/sdi.12411)

## Content

1. Semin Dial. 2015 Nov-Dec;28(6):564-77. doi: 10.1111/sdi.12411. Epub 2015 Aug
25.

Pathophysiology of Calcium, Phosphorus, and Magnesium Dysregulation in Chronic 
Kidney Disease.

Felsenfeld AJ(1), Levine BS(1), Rodriguez M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System and the 
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California.
(2)Nephrology Service, IMIBIC, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofia, University of 
Cordoba, Cordoba, Spain.

Calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium homeostasis is altered in chronic kidney 
disease (CKD). Hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and hypermagnesemia are not seen 
until advanced CKD because adaptations develop. Increased parathyroid hormone 
(PTH) secretion maintains serum calcium normal by increasing calcium efflux from 
bone, renal calcium reabsorption, and phosphate excretion. Similarly, renal 
phosphate excretion in CKD is maintained by increased secretion of fibroblast 
growth factor 23 (FGF23) and PTH. However, the phosphaturic effect of FGF23 is 
reduced by downregulation of its cofactor Klotho necessary for binding FGF23 to 
FGF receptors. Intestinal phosphate absorption is diminished in CKD due in part 
to reduced levels of 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D. Unlike calcium and phosphorus, 
magnesium is not regulated by a hormone, but fractional excretion of magnesium 
increases as CKD progresses. As 60-70% of magnesium is reabsorbed in the thick 
ascending limb of Henle, activation of the calcium-sensing receptor by magnesium 
may facilitate magnesium excretion in CKD. Modification of the TRPM6 channel in 
the distal tubule may also have a role. Besides abnormal bone morphology and 
vascular calcification, abnormalities in mineral homeostasis are associated with 
increased cardiovascular risk, increased mortality and progression of CKD.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/sdi.12411
PMID: 26303319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]