---
reference_id: "PMID:37685964"
title: Glutaryl-CoA Dehydrogenase Misfolding in Glutaric Acidemia Type 1.
authors:
- Barroso M
- Gertzen M
- Puchwein-Schwepcke AF
- Preisler H
- Sturm A
- Reiss DD
- Danecka MK
- Muntau AC
- Gersting SW
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241713158
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glutaryl-CoA Dehydrogenase Misfolding in Glutaric Acidemia Type 1.
**Authors:** Barroso M, Gertzen M, Puchwein-Schwepcke AF, Preisler H, Sturm A, Reiss DD, Danecka MK, Muntau AC, Gersting SW
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241713158](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241713158)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Aug 24;24(17):13158. doi: 10.3390/ijms241713158.

Glutaryl-CoA Dehydrogenase Misfolding in Glutaric Acidemia Type 1.

Barroso M(1), Gertzen M(2)(3), Puchwein-Schwepcke AF(2)(4), Preisler H(2), Sturm 
A(2), Reiss DD(2)(5), Danecka MK(1), Muntau AC(1)(6), Gersting SW(1).

Author information:
(1)University Children's Research, UCR@Kinder-UKE, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular Pediatrics, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 80337 Munich, Germany.
(3)Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Augsburg, 
86156 Augsburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology and Developmental Medicine, University of 
Basel Children's Hospital, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der Universität München, 
81377 Munich, Germany.
(6)University Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
20246 Hamburg, Germany.

Glutaric acidemia type 1 (GA1) is a neurotoxic metabolic disorder due to 
glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase (GCDH) deficiency. The high number of missense 
variants associated with the disease and their impact on GCDH activity suggest 
that disturbed protein conformation can affect the biochemical phenotype. We 
aimed to elucidate the molecular basis of protein loss of function in GA1 by 
performing a parallel analysis in a large panel of GCDH missense variants using 
different biochemical and biophysical methodologies. Thirteen GCDH variants were 
investigated in regard to protein stability, hydrophobicity, oligomerization, 
aggregation, and activity. An altered oligomerization, loss of protein stability 
and solubility, as well as an augmented susceptibility to aggregation were 
observed. GA1 variants led to a loss of enzymatic activity, particularly when 
present at the N-terminal domain. The reduced cellular activity was associated 
with loss of tetramerization. Our results also suggest a correlation between 
variant sequence location and cellular protein stability (p < 0.05), with a more 
pronounced loss of protein observed with variant proximity to the N-terminus. 
The broad panel of variant-mediated conformational changes of the GCDH protein 
supports the classification of GA1 as a protein-misfolding disorder. This work 
supports research toward new therapeutic strategies that target this molecular 
disease phenotype.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241713158
PMCID: PMC10487539
PMID: 37685964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Ania C. Muntau and Søren W. Gersting are 
shareholders of Iniuva GmbH. All other authors declare no conflict of interest.