---
reference_id: "PMID:16826526"
title: Homozygous nonsense mutation in the FOXE3 gene as a cause of congenital primary aphakia in humans.
authors:
- Valleix S
- Niel F
- Nedelec B
- Algros MP
- Schwartz C
- Delbosc B
- Delpech M
- Kantelip B
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1086/505654
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Aphakia/genetics
- Child
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Female
- Forkhead Transcription Factors/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Lens, Crystalline/abnormalities, embryology"
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous nonsense mutation in the FOXE3 gene as a cause of congenital primary aphakia in humans.
**Authors:** Valleix S, Niel F, Nedelec B, Algros MP, Schwartz C, Delbosc B, Delpech M, Kantelip B
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1086/505654](https://doi.org/10.1086/505654)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Aug;79(2):358-64. doi: 10.1086/505654. Epub 2006 Jun 8.

Homozygous nonsense mutation in the FOXE3 gene as a cause of congenital primary 
aphakia in humans.

Valleix S(1), Niel F, Nedelec B, Algros MP, Schwartz C, Delbosc B, Delpech M, 
Kantelip B.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Genetique Moleculaire, Hopital Cochin, 123 
Boulevard de Port-Royal, 75014 Paris, France. sophie.valleix@cch.ap-hop-paris.fr

Congenital primary aphakia (CPA) is a rare developmental disorder characterized 
by the absence of lens, the development of which is normally induced during the 
4th-5th wk of human embryogenesis. This original failure leads, in turn, to 
complete aplasia of the anterior segment of the eye, which is the diagnostic 
histological criterion for CPA. So far, the genetic basis for this human 
condition has remained unclear. Here, we present the analysis of a 
consanguineous family with three siblings who had bilateral aphakia, 
microphthalmia, and complete agenesis of the ocular anterior segment. We show 
that a null mutation in the FOXE3 gene segregates and, in the homozygous state, 
produces the mutant phenotype in this family. Therefore, this study 
identifies--to our knowledge, for the first time--a causative gene for CPA in 
humans. Furthermore, it indicates a possible critical role for FOXE3 very early 
in the lens developmental program, perhaps earlier than any role recognized 
elsewhere for this gene.

DOI: 10.1086/505654
PMCID: PMC1559477
PMID: 16826526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]