---
reference_id: "PMID:16722554"
title: Lowe syndrome.
authors:
- Loi M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-16
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Eye Diseases/diagnosis, therapy"
- Female
- Genetic Carrier Screening/methods
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Kidney Diseases/diagnosis, therapy"
- Middle Aged
- "Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Phosphatidylinositols/deficiency
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis/methods
- Prognosis
- Quality of Life
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lowe syndrome.
**Authors:** Loi M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-1-16](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-1-16)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2006 May 18;1:16. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-16.

Lowe syndrome.

Loi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Paediatric Neurology, G. Brotzu Hospital, Cagliari, Italy.
marioloi@aob.it

Lowe syndrome (the oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe, OCRL) is a multisystem
disorder characterised by anomalies affecting the eye, the nervous system and
the kidney. It is a uncommon, panethnic, X-linked disease, with estimated
prevalence in the general population of approximately 1 in 500,000. Bilateral
cataract and severe hypotonia are present at birth. In the subsequent weeks or
months, a proximal renal tubulopathy (Fanconi-type) becomes evident and the
ocular picture may be complicated by glaucoma and cheloids. Psychomotor
retardation is evident in childhood, while behavioural problems prevail and
renal complications arise in adolescence. The mutation of the gene OCRL1
localized at Xq26.1, coding for the enzyme phosphatidylinositol (4,5)
bisphosphate 5 phosphatase, PtdIns (4,5)P2, in the trans-Golgi network is
responsible for the disease. Both enzymatic and molecular testing are available
for confirmation of the diagnosis and for prenatal detection of the disease. The
treatment includes: cataract extraction, glaucoma control, physical and speech
therapy, use of drugs to address behavioural problems, and correction of the
tubular acidosis and the bone disease with the use of bicarbonate, phosphate,
potassium and water. Life span rarely exceeds 40 years.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-16
PMCID: PMC1526415
PMID: 16722554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
