---
reference_id: "PMID:26035378"
title: Molecular characterization of hepatocarcinogenesis using mouse models.
authors:
- Teoh WW
- Xie M
- Vijayaraghavan A
- Yaligar J
- Tong WM
- Goh LK
- Sabapathy K
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.017624
keywords:
- Aflatoxin B1/toxicity
- Animals
- "Carcinogenesis/chemically induced, genetics"
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/genetics, pathology"
- Cell Proliferation
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Hepatitis B/complications, pathology"
- Hepatitis B Surface Antigens/genetics
- Humans
- "Liver/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Liver Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Liver Neoplasms, Experimental/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular characterization of hepatocarcinogenesis using mouse models.
**Authors:** Teoh WW, Xie M, Vijayaraghavan A, Yaligar J, Tong WM, Goh LK, Sabapathy K
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.017624](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.017624)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2015 Jul 1;8(7):743-53. doi: 10.1242/dmm.017624. Epub 2015 May
 5.

Molecular characterization of hepatocarcinogenesis using mouse models.

Teoh WW(1), Xie M(1), Vijayaraghavan A(2), Yaligar J(3), Tong WM(4), Goh LK(2),
Sabapathy K(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cellular & Molecular Research, Humphrey Oei Institute of Cancer
Research, National Cancer Centre, 11 Hospital Drive, 169610, Singapore.
(2)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology Program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School,
Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 8 College Road, 169857, Singapore.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Imaging, Singapore Bioimaging Consortium, 11 Biopolis
Way, Helios, 138667, Singapore.
(4)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences School of Basic Medicine, Chinese Academy
of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College 5, Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing
100005, China.
(5)Division of Cellular & Molecular Research, Humphrey Oei Institute of Cancer
Research, National Cancer Centre, 11 Hospital Drive, 169610, Singapore Cancer
and Stem Cell Biology Program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Duke-NUS
Graduate Medical School, 8 College Road, 169857, Singapore Department of
Biochemistry, National University of Singapore, 8 Medical Drive, 117597,
Singapore cmrksb@nccs.com.sg.

Erratum in
    Dis Model Mech. 2023 Oct 1;16(10):dmm050441. doi: 10.1242/dmm.050441.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a deadly disease, often unnoticed until the
late stages, when treatment options become limited. Thus, there is a crucial
need to identify biomarkers for early detection of developing HCC, as well as
molecular pathways that would be amenable to therapeutic intervention. Although
analysis of human HCC tissues and serum components may serve these purposes,
inability of early detection also precludes possibilities of identification of
biomarkers or pathways that are sequentially perturbed at earlier phases of
disease progression. We have therefore explored the option of utilizing mouse
models to understand in a systematic and longitudinal manner the molecular
pathways that are progressively deregulated by various etiological factors in
contributing to HCC formation, and we report the initial findings in
characterizing their validity. Hepatitis B surface antigen transgenic mice,
which had been exposed to aflatoxin B1 at various stages in life, were used as a
hepatitis model. Our findings confirm a synergistic effect of both these
etiological factors, with a gender bias towards males for HCC predisposition.
Time-based aflatoxin B1 treatment also demonstrated the requirement of
non-quiescent liver for effective transformation. Tumors from these models with
various etiologies resemble human HCCs histologically and at the molecular
level. Extensive molecular characterization revealed the presence of an 11-gene
HCC-expression signature that was able to discern transformed human hepatocytes
from primary cells, regardless of etiology, and from other cancer types.
Moreover, distinct molecular pathways appear to be deregulated by various
etiological agents en route to formation of HCCs, in which common pathways
converge, highlighting the existence of etiology-specific as well as common
HCC-specific molecular perturbations. This study therefore highlights the
utility of these mouse models, which provide a rich resource for the
longitudinal analysis of molecular changes and biomarkers associated with HCC
that could be exploited further for therapeutic targeting.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.017624
PMCID: PMC4486853
PMID: 26035378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no
competing or financial interests.
