---
reference_id: "PMID:36112747"
title: "Risk of livedo with antiphospholipid antibodies in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Loiseau P
- Foret T
- DeFilippis EM
- Risse J
- Etienne AD
- Dufrost V
- Moulinet T
- Erkan D
- Devilliers H
- Wahl D
- Zuily S
journal: Lupus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/09612033221126852
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk of livedo with antiphospholipid antibodies in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Loiseau P, Foret T, DeFilippis EM, Risse J, Etienne AD, Dufrost V, Moulinet T, Erkan D, Devilliers H, Wahl D, Zuily S
**Journal:** Lupus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/09612033221126852](https://doi.org/10.1177/09612033221126852)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2022 Nov;31(13):1595-1605. doi: 10.1177/09612033221126852. Epub 2022
Sep  15.

Risk of livedo with antiphospholipid antibodies in patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Loiseau P(1), Foret T(2), DeFilippis EM(3), Risse J(4), Etienne AD(5), Dufrost 
V(6)(7), Moulinet T(5), Erkan D(8), Devilliers H(9), Wahl D(6)(7), Zuily 
S(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)CHU Amiens-Picardie, 36673Department of Internal Medicine, Amiens, France.
(2)CHU de Besançon, Vascular Medicine Unit, 55049Vascular Surgery Department, 
Besançon, France.
(3)Division of Cardiology, 21611Columbia University Irving Medical Center, NY, 
USA.
(4)373199CH de Sarreguemines, Sarreguemines, France.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, 26920CHRU de Nancy, Nancy, France.
(6)26920Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France.
(7)Vascular Medicine Division And Regional Competence Centre For Rare Vascular 
And Systemic Autoimmune Diseases, 26920CHRU de Nancy, Nancy, France.
(8)Barbara Volcker Center for Women and Rheumatic Diseases, 25062Hospital for 
Special Surgery, Weill Cornell Medicine, NY, USA.
(9)CHRU de Dijon, Department of Internal Medicine, Regional Competence Centre 
For Systemic Autoimmune Diseases, Dijon, France.

BACKGROUND: Livedo is a well-known skin condition in patients with systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE) which correspond to small vessels involvement. The 
influence of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) on the occurrence of livedo is 
controversial. The aim of our study was to estimate the risk of livedo 
associated with aPL in patients with SLE.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature 
from 1977 to 2021 to estimate the risk of livedo in SLE patients according to 
different aPL profiles. Data sources were PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, hand 
search, and reference lists of studies. Studies were selected if they included 
SLE patients with descriptions of the exposure to aPL and the outcome (livedo). 
Two independent investigators assessed study eligibility, quality, and extracted 
patient characteristics from each study as well as exposure (aPL) and outcome 
(livedo). Risk estimates were pooled using random effects models and sensitivity 
analyses. For all stages of the meta-analysis, we followed the PRISMA 
guidelines. PROSPERO registration number: CRD42015027377.
RESULTS: Of the 2,355 articles identified, 27 were included with a total of 
4,810 SLE patients. The frequency of livedo was 25.5% in aPL-positive patients 
and 13.3% in aPL-negative patients. The overall Odds Ratio (OR) for livedo in 
aPL-positive patients compared to aPL-negative patients was 2.91 (95% CI; 
2.17-3.90). The risk of livedo was significantly increased for most of aPL 
subtypes, including lupus anticoagulant (LA) (OR = 4.45 [95% CI; 2.21-8.94]), 
IgG anticardiolipin (OR = 3.95 [95% CI; 2.34-6.65]), and IgG 
anti-β2-glycoprotein 1 (OR = 3.49 [95% CI; 1.68-7.27]).
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated in this meta-analysis an excess risk of livedo in 
aPL-positive SLE patients compared to aPL-negative patients. For daily practice, 
in patients with SLE, livedo associated with aPL could correspond to a peculiar 
group of patients with small vessel disease. Livedo could be a good candidate 
for inclusion in future classification criteria for antiphospholipid syndrome.

DOI: 10.1177/09612033221126852
PMID: 36112747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]