---
reference_id: "PMID:32755394"
title: "Cardiac Emerinopathy: A Nonsyndromic Nuclear Envelopathy With Increased Risk of Thromboembolic Stroke Due to Progressive Atrial Standstill and Left Ventricular Noncompaction."
authors:
- Ishikawa T
- Mishima H
- Barc J
- Takahashi MP
- Hirono K
- Terada S
- Kowase S
- Sato T
- Mukai Y
- Yui Y
- Ohkubo K
- Kimoto H
- Watanabe H
- Hata Y
- Aiba T
- Ohno S
- Chishaki A
- Shimizu W
- Horie M
- Ichida F
- Nogami A
- Yoshiura KI
- Schott JJ
- Makita N
journal: Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCEP.120.008712
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Cardiac Conduction System Disease/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Cardiomyopathies/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heart Atria/abnormalities
- "Heart Block/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Isolated Noncompaction of the Ventricular Myocardium/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Sick Sinus Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- "Stroke/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- "Thromboembolism/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- "X-Linked Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac Emerinopathy: A Nonsyndromic Nuclear Envelopathy With Increased Risk of Thromboembolic Stroke Due to Progressive Atrial Standstill and Left Ventricular Noncompaction.
**Authors:** Ishikawa T, Mishima H, Barc J, Takahashi MP, Hirono K, Terada S, Kowase S, Sato T, Mukai Y, Yui Y, Ohkubo K, Kimoto H, Watanabe H, Hata Y, Aiba T, Ohno S, Chishaki A, Shimizu W, Horie M, Ichida F, Nogami A, Yoshiura KI, Schott JJ, Makita N
**Journal:** Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCEP.120.008712](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCEP.120.008712)

## Content

1. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2020 Oct;13(10):e008712. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCEP.120.008712. Epub 2020 Jul 29.

Cardiac Emerinopathy: A Nonsyndromic Nuclear Envelopathy With Increased Risk of 
Thromboembolic Stroke Due to Progressive Atrial Standstill and Left Ventricular 
Noncompaction.

Ishikawa T(1), Mishima H(2), Barc J(3), Takahashi MP(4), Hirono K(5), Terada 
S(6), Kowase S(7), Sato T(8), Mukai Y(9), Yui Y(10), Ohkubo K(11), Kimoto H(12), 
Watanabe H(8), Hata Y(13), Aiba T(14), Ohno S(15), Chishaki A(16), Shimizu 
W(17), Horie M(18), Ichida F(5), Nogami A(10), Yoshiura KI(2), Schott JJ(3), 
Makita N(1).

Author information:
(1)Omics Research Center (T.I., N.M.), National Cerebral and Cardiovascular 
Center, Suita, Japan.
(2)Department of Human Genetics (H.M., K.-I.Y.), Nagasaki University Graduate 
School of Biomedical Sciences, Japan.
(3)L'institut du thorax, INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, CHU Nantes, France (J.B., 
J.-J.S.).
(4)Department of Neurology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, 
Japan (M.P.T.).
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toyama Graduate School of Medicine 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Japan (K.H., F.I.).
(6)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Shin-Oyama City Hospital, Japan 
(S.T.).
(7)Division of Cardiology, Yokohama Rosai Hospital, Japan (S.K.).
(8)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Akita University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Japan (T.S., H.W.).
(9)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, 
Japan (Y.M.).
(10)Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Tsukuba University, Japan 
(Y.Y., A.N.).
(11)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Nihon University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan (K.O.).
(12)Department of Molecular Physiology (H.K.), Nagasaki University Graduate 
School of Biomedical Sciences, Japan.
(13)Department of Legal Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Toyama, Japan (Y.H.).
(14)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine (T.A.), National Cerebral and 
Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan.
(15)Department of Bioscience and Genetics (S.O.), National Cerebral and 
Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan.
(16)Clinical Nursing Laboratory, School of Medicine, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 
Japan (A.C.).
(17)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan 
(W.S.).
(18)Center for Epidemiologic Research in Asia, Shiga University of Medical 
Science, Ohtsu, Japan (M.H.).

Comment in
    Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2020 Oct;13(10):e009338. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCEP.120.009338.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the nuclear envelope genes encoding LMNA and EMD are 
responsible for Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. However, LMNA mutations often 
manifest dilated cardiomyopathy with conduction disturbance without obvious 
skeletal myopathic complications. On the contrary, the phenotypic spectrums of 
EMD mutations are less clear. Our aims were to determine the prevalence of 
nonsyndromic forms of emerinopathy, which may underlie genetically undefined 
isolated cardiac conduction disturbance, and the etiology of thromboembolic 
complications associated with EMD mutations.
METHODS: Targeted exon sequencing was performed in 87 probands with familial 
sick sinus syndrome (n=36) and a progressive cardiac conduction defect (n=51).
RESULTS: We identified 3 X-linked recessive EMD mutations (start-loss, splicing, 
missense) in families with cardiac conduction disease. All 3 probands shared a 
common clinical phenotype of progressive atrial arrhythmias that ultimately 
resulted in atrial standstill associated with left ventricular noncompaction 
(LVNC), but they lacked early contractures and progressive muscle wasting and 
weakness characteristic of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. Because the 
association of LVNC with EMD has never been reported, we further genetically 
screened 102 LVNC patients and found a frameshift EMD mutation in a boy with 
progressive atrial standstill and LVNC without complications of muscular 
dystrophy. All 6 male EMD mutation carriers of 4 families underwent pacemaker or 
defibrillator implantation, whereas 2 female carriers were asymptomatic. 
Notably, a strong family history of stroke observed in these families was 
probably due to the increased risk of thromboembolism attributable to both 
atrial standstill and LVNC.
CONCLUSIONS: Cardiac emerinopathy is a novel nonsyndromic X-linked progressive 
atrial standstill associated with LVNC and increased risk of thromboembolism.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCEP.120.008712
PMID: 32755394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]