---
reference_id: "PMID:24928340"
title: "Ectodysplasin research--where to next?"
authors:
- Lefebvre S
- Mikkola ML
journal: Semin Immunol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2014.05.002
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ectodysplasins/genetics, metabolism"
- Edar Receptor/metabolism
- Humans
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ectodysplasin research--where to next?
**Authors:** Lefebvre S, Mikkola ML
**Journal:** Semin Immunol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.smim.2014.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smim.2014.05.002)

## Content

1. Semin Immunol. 2014 Jun;26(3):220-8. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2014.05.002. Epub
2014  Jun 10.

Ectodysplasin research--where to next?

Lefebvre S(1), Mikkola ML(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Signaling and Cell Death Unit, Inflammation Research Center, VIB, 
Ghent, Belgium; Molecular Signaling and Cell Death Unit, Inflammation Research 
Center, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: 
Sylvie.lefebvre@irc.ugent.be.
(2)Developmental Biology Program, Institute of Biotechnology, University of 
Helsinki, P.O.B. 56, 00014 Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address: 
marja.mikkola@helsinki.fi.

Ectodysplasin (Eda) is the most studied tumor necrosis ligand in the field of 
developmental biology. In all vertebrates studied so far, inactivating germline 
mutations in Eda lead to the genetic disease called hypohidrotic ectodermal 
dysplasia (HED). In humans, HED is a life-threatening condition in particular in 
infants due to absent or severely reduced sweating leading to hyperthermia. HED 
is also characterized by sparse hair, and oligo- or anodontia. Research of the 
Eda pathway has not only increased our knowledge on ectodermal appendage 
development and etiology of developmental disorders, but also on evolution of 
several vertebrate species including humankind. Studies on mouse and dog models 
of HED has led to one of the most stunning breakthroughs in applied 
developmental biology research by showing that a short-term treatment of 
neonates with a synthetic ligand corrects many of the HED-associated traits. 
Eighteen years after the identification of EDA as the causative gene in HED, a 
phase II trial aiming at permanent correction of the disease is now ongoing. 
This review summarizes the latest discoveries in the Eda field and points to 
areas that need further investigation such as the possible involvement of Eda in 
cell migration, stem cell maintenance, or cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smim.2014.05.002
PMID: 24928340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]