---
reference_id: "PMID:29474529"
title: "EPIC-CoGe: managing and analyzing genomic data."
authors:
- Nelson ADL
- Haug-Baltzell AK
- Davey S
- Gregory BD
- Lyons E
journal: Bioinformatics
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EPIC-CoGe: managing and analyzing genomic data.
**Authors:** Nelson ADL, Haug-Baltzell AK, Davey S, Gregory BD, Lyons E
**Journal:** Bioinformatics (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bioinformatics/bty106](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty106)

## Content

1. Bioinformatics. 2018 Aug 1;34(15):2651-2653. doi:
10.1093/bioinformatics/bty106.

EPIC-CoGe: managing and analyzing genomic data.

Nelson ADL(1), Haug-Baltzell AK(1), Davey S(1), Gregory BD(2), Lyons E(1).

Author information:
(1)BIO5 Institute, School of Plant Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 
USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

SUMMARY: The EPIC-CoGe browser is a web-based genome visualization utility that 
integrates the GMOD JBrowse genome browser with the extensive CoGe genome 
database (currently containing over 30 000 genomes). In addition, the EPIC-CoGe 
browser boasts many additional features over basic JBrowse, including enhanced 
search capability and on-the-fly analyses for comparisons and analyses between 
all types of functional and diversity genomics data. There is no installation 
required and data (genome, annotation, functional genomic and diversity data) 
can be loaded by following a simple point and click wizard, or using a REST API, 
making the browser widely accessible and easy to use by researchers of all 
computational skill levels. In addition, EPIC-CoGe and data tracks are easily 
embedded in other websites and JBrowse instances.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: EPIC-CoGe Browser is freely available for use 
online through CoGe (https://genomevolution.org). Source code (MIT open source) 
is available: https://github.com/LyonsLab/coge.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics 
online.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty106
PMCID: PMC6061785
PMID: 29474529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]