---
reference_id: "PMID:33543710"
title: Protective effect of Mediterranean-type glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency against Plasmodium vivax malaria.
authors:
- Awab GR
- Aaram F
- Jamornthanyawat N
- Suwannasin K
- Pagornrat W
- Watson JA
- Woodrow CJ
- Dondorp AM
- Day NP
- Imwong M
- White NJ
journal: Elife
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.62448
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protective effect of Mediterranean-type glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency against Plasmodium vivax malaria.
**Authors:** Awab GR, Aaram F, Jamornthanyawat N, Suwannasin K, Pagornrat W, Watson JA, Woodrow CJ, Dondorp AM, Day NP, Imwong M, White NJ
**Journal:** Elife (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.62448](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62448)

## Content

1. Elife. 2021 Feb 5;10:e62448. doi: 10.7554/eLife.62448.

Protective effect of Mediterranean-type glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency against Plasmodium vivax malaria.

Awab GR(1)(2), Aaram F(3), Jamornthanyawat N(4), Suwannasin K(4), Pagornrat 
W(4), Watson JA(1)(5), Woodrow CJ(1)(5), Dondorp AM(1)(5), Day NP(1)(5), Imwong 
M(4), White NJ(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Mahidol Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical 
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Nangarhar Medical Faculty, Jalalabad, Afghanistan.
(3)Kabul Medical University, Kabul, Afghanistan.
(4)Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical 
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

X-linked glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is the most common 
human enzymopathy. The severe Mediterranean variant (G6PD Med) found across 
Europe and Asia is thought to confer protection against malaria, but its effect 
is unclear. We fitted a Bayesian statistical model to observed G6PD Med allele 
frequencies in 999 Pashtun patients presenting with acute Plasmodium vivax 
malaria and 1408 population controls. G6PD Med was associated with reductions in 
symptomatic P. vivax malaria incidence of 76% (95% credible interval [CI], 
58-88) in hemizygous males and homozygous females combined and 55% (95% CI, 
38-68) in heterozygous females. Unless there is very large population 
stratification within the Pashtun (confounding these results), the G6PD Med 
genotype confers a very large and gene-dose proportional protective effect 
against acute vivax malaria. The proportion of patients with vivax malaria at 
risk of haemolysis following 8-aminoquinoline radical cure is substantially 
overestimated by studies measuring G6PD deficiency prevalence in healthy 
subjects.

© 2021, Awab et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.62448
PMCID: PMC7884069
PMID: 33543710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: GA, FA, NJ, KS, WP, JW, CW, AD, ND, MI, NW No 
competing interests declared