---
reference_id: "PMID:23661206"
title: Ocular features and management challenges of Marfan's Syndrome in Benin City, Nigeria.
authors:
- Ukponmwan CU
journal: Niger Postgrad Med J
year: '2013'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular features and management challenges of Marfan's Syndrome in Benin City, Nigeria.
**Authors:** Ukponmwan CU
**Journal:** Niger Postgrad Med J (2013)

## Content

1. Niger Postgrad Med J. 2013 Mar;20(1):24-8.

Ocular features and management challenges of Marfan's Syndrome in Benin City, 
Nigeria.

Ukponmwan CU(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Ophthalmology, University of Benin Teaching Hospital, School of 
Medicine, University of Benin.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study is to describe the ocular 
features of Marfan's Syndrome in Benin City, Nigeria and highlight problems 
associated with their management
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A study of all consecutive patients with a diagnosis of 
Marfan's syndrome at the eye clinic of the University of Benin Teaching 
Hospital, Benin City, Nigeria was done between June 1st 2009 and December 31st 
2010.
RESULTS: There were 13 patients (8 males and 5 females). The age range was 10 to 
50 years with a mean age of 23+10.1 years. The duration of symptoms was 1 year 
to 22 years with a mean of 7.9 years. The ocular features were ectopia lentis in 
92.3% of the patients, cataract in 69.2%, glaucoma and myopia in 30.8% each. 
Others were strabismus (7.7%), unilateral corneal opacities from the use of 
traditional eye medication (15.4%), phthisis bulbi and retinal detachment in 
7.7% each. Three (23%) patients were bilaterally blind while 7(53.8%) had 
unilateral blindness. The best corrected visual acuity in 4 out of 5 patients 
who had cataract extraction at 8 weeks post op. was 6/60 to 6/12. There was no 
improvement in 1 patient.
CONCLUSION: Patients with Marfan's syndrome in Benin City, Nigeria have visual 
impairment and blindness due to delay in presentation and the use of traditional 
eye medications. Health education and early presentation to hospital is 
recommended. This will help in reducing avoidable visual impairment and 
blindness and thus improve survival and quality of life in these patients.

PMID: 23661206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]