---
reference_id: "PMID:26425749"
title: Nuclear Gene-Encoded Leigh Syndrome Spectrum Overview.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Rahman S
- Thorburn DR
- Ball M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nuclear Gene-Encoded Leigh Syndrome Spectrum Overview.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Rahman S, Thorburn DR, Ball M

## Content

1. Nuclear Gene-Encoded Leigh Syndrome Spectrum Overview.

Rahman S(1), Thorburn DR(2)(3)(4), Ball M(3)(4)(5).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2015 Oct 1 [updated 2025 May 1].

Author information:
(1)Professor of Paediatric Metabolic Medicine, Genetics and Genomic Medicine 
Programme, UCL Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom
(2)Senior Principal Research Fellow, Murdoch Children's Research Institute and 
Genetic Health Services Victoria, Victoria, Australia
(3)Royal Children's Hospital, Victoria, Australia
(4)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
(5)Metabolic Fellow, PhD Candidate, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Victoria, Australia

The purpose of this overview is to: 1.. Briefly describe the clinical 
characteristics of nuclear gene-encoded Leigh syndrome spectrum (LSS); 2.. 
Review the genetic causes of nuclear gene-encoded LSS; 3.. Review the 
differential diagnosis of nuclear gene-encoded LSS with a focus on genetic 
conditions; 4.. Provide an evaluation strategy to identify the genetic cause of 
nuclear gene-encoded LSS in a proband (when possible); 5.. Review management of 
nuclear gene-encoded LSS with a focus on disorders with targeted therapies; 6.. 
Inform genetic counseling of family members of an individual with nuclear 
gene-encoded LSS.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 26425749