---
reference_id: "PMID:38722225"
title: Clinicopathologic and molecular correlates to neoadjuvant chemotherapy-induced pathologic response in breast angiosarcoma.
authors:
- Chang HY
- Dermawan JK
- Kuba MG
- Crago AM
- Singer S
- Tap W
- Chi P
- "D'Angelo S"
- Rosenbaum E
- Antonescu CR
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.23240
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hemangiosarcoma/genetics, pathology, drug therapy"
- Female
- Neoadjuvant Therapy/methods
- "Breast Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy, pathology"
- Aged
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Mutation
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Anthracyclines/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathologic and molecular correlates to neoadjuvant chemotherapy-induced pathologic response in breast angiosarcoma.
**Authors:** Chang HY, Dermawan JK, Kuba MG, Crago AM, Singer S, Tap W, Chi P, D'Angelo S, Rosenbaum E, Antonescu CR
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.23240](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.23240)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2024 May;63(5):e23240. doi: 10.1002/gcc.23240.

Clinicopathologic and molecular correlates to neoadjuvant chemotherapy-induced 
pathologic response in breast angiosarcoma.

Chang HY(1)(2), Dermawan JK(3), Kuba MG(2), Crago AM(4)(5), Singer S(4), Tap 
W(6)(7), Chi P(6)(7), D'Angelo S(6)(7), Rosenbaum E(6)(7), Antonescu CR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Robert J. Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, Gastric Mixed Tumor Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Sarcoma Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New York, 
USA.

Both primary and secondary breast angiosarcoma (AS) are characterized by 
multifocal presentation and aggressive behavior. Despite multimodality therapy, 
local and distant relapse rates remain high. Therefore, neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
(NACT) is employed to improve the R0 resection rates and survival, but its 
benefits remain controversial. Herein, we investigate pathologic and molecular 
correlates to NACT-induced histologic response in a group of 29 breast AS, 4 
primary and 25 radiation-associated (RA). The two NACT regimens applied were 
anthracycline- and non-anthracycline-based. The pathologic response grade was 
defined as: I: ≤ 50%, II: 51%-90%, III: 91%-99%, and IV: 100%. An additional 45 
primary AS and 102 RA-AS treated by surgery alone were included for survival 
comparison. The genomic landscape was analyzed in a subset of cases and compared 
to a cohort of AS without NACT on a paired tumor-normal targeted DNA NGS 
platform. All patients were females, with a median age of 31 years in primary AS 
and 68 years in RA-AS. All surgical margins were negative in NACT group. The 
NACT response was evenly divided between poor (Grades I-II; n = 15) and good 
responders (Grades III-IV; n = 14). Mitotic count >10/mm2 was the only factor 
inversely associated with pathologic response. By targeted NGS, all 10 post-NACT 
RA-AS demonstrated MYC amplification, while both primary AS harbored KDR 
mutations. TMB or other genomic alterations did not correlate with pathologic 
response. All four patients with Grade IV response remained free of disease. The 
good responders had a significantly better disease-specific survival (p = 0.04). 
There was no survival difference with NACT status or the NACT regimens applied. 
However, NACT patients with MYC-amplified tumors showed better disease-free 
survival (p = 0.04) compared to MYC-amplified patients without NACT. The overall 
survival of NACT group correlated with size >10 cm (p = 0.02), pathologic 
response (p = 0.04), and multifocality (p = 0.01) by univariate, while only size 
>10 cm (p = 0.03) remained significant by multivariate analysis.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.23240
PMCID: PMC11740977
PMID: 38722225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]