---
reference_id: "PMID:29914385"
title: "Tonsillar Plasmacytoma: clues on magnetic resonance imaging."
authors:
- Çelebi İ
- Bozkurt G
- Polat N
journal: BMC Med Imaging
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12880-018-0261-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tonsillar Plasmacytoma: clues on magnetic resonance imaging.
**Authors:** Çelebi İ, Bozkurt G, Polat N
**Journal:** BMC Med Imaging (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12880-018-0261-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12880-018-0261-9)

## Content

1. BMC Med Imaging. 2018 Jun 18;18(1):19. doi: 10.1186/s12880-018-0261-9.

Tonsillar Plasmacytoma: clues on magnetic resonance imaging.

Çelebi İ(1), Bozkurt G(2)(3), Polat N(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Sisli Hamidiye Etfal Education and Research 
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Acıbadem University Faculty of Medicine, 
Istanbul, Turkey. gptalayhan@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Acıbadem Üniversitesi 
Atakent Hastanesi, Halkalı Merkez Mahallesi, Halkalı Altınşehir İstanbul Cd. 
No:16, 34303 Küçükçekmece, İstanbul, Türkiye. gptalayhan@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Pathology, Beykent University Medical Faculty, Istanbul, 
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Malignant plasma cell proliferation may present as a disseminated 
disease (multiple myeloma), a solitary plasmacytoma of bone, or an 
extramedullary plasmacytoma of soft tissue. The latter plasmacytomas represent 
approximately 3% of all plasma cell proliferations, and 80% develop in the 
head-and-neck region. The unexpected clinical presentation of such masses may be 
present.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here, we report a rare case of primary tonsillar plasmacytoma 
in a 42-year-old female. The patient presented with asymmetric tonsillar 
hypertrophy that was resistant to antibiotherapy. Upon further workup, we found 
no evidence of multiple myeloma or light-chain disease. The patient underwent 
surgery and, at the last follow-up, exhibited no evidence of such disease.
CONCLUSIONS: In adults presenting with asymptomatic tonsillar enlargement, the 
possibility of submucosal masses should be considered, thus encouraging the 
radiologist to evaluate crypts within the palatine tonsil on a postcontrast MRI, 
besides enlargement and signal change.

DOI: 10.1186/s12880-018-0261-9
PMCID: PMC6006941
PMID: 29914385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent was obtained from 
the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: There authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.