---
reference_id: "PMID:2039180"
title: "[Hirschsprung's disease: a commentary]."
authors:
- Carcassonne M
journal: Ann Pediatr (Paris)
year: '1991'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Hirschsprung's disease: a commentary].
**Authors:** Carcassonne M
**Journal:** Ann Pediatr (Paris) (1991)

## Content

1. Ann Pediatr (Paris). 1991 Mar;38(3):133-6.

[Hirschsprung's disease: a commentary].

[Article in French]

Carcassonne M.

Hirschsprung disease has become a neonatal diagnosis. Most cases identified now 
are children who would previously have died before the diagnosis of their 
condition which was usually established only after the age of two. Management of 
the disease should be adjusted to suit this new population of patients. Clinical 
features consist mainly in evidence of intestinal obstruction and enterocolitis 
shortly after birth and require the use of several investigative procedures 
since therapy cannot be initiated before the diagnosis is firmly established. 
Non-aggressive investigations are now available and include rectomanometry, 
conventional radiology, and suction mucosal biopsy of the rectum with histologic 
and cytologic studies of specimens. No single test is diagnostic, but taken in 
concert results of the different investigations are conclusive. Advances in 
nursing have made colostomy unnecessary and even harmful since it delays 
defecation by the natural route. Regardless of the technique selected (Duhamel, 
Soave or above all, Swenson), surgical treatment can be carried out before two 
months of age. A review of 90 patients, prove treatment is easy to perform at 
this age and yields satisfactory immediate and long term results.

PMID: 2039180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]