---
reference_id: "PMID:15523636"
title: Developmental outcome in Kabuki syndrome.
authors:
- Vaux KK
- Jones KL
- Jones MC
- Schelley S
- Hudgins L
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30338
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/pathology, psychology"
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cleft Palate/pathology
- Cognition
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/pathology
- Developmental Disabilities/pathology
- Growth Disorders/pathology
- Humans
- Infant
- Intellectual Disability/pathology
- Language Development
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developmental outcome in Kabuki syndrome.
**Authors:** Vaux KK, Jones KL, Jones MC, Schelley S, Hudgins L
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30338](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30338)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Jan 30;132A(3):263-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30338.

Developmental outcome in Kabuki syndrome.

Vaux KK(1), Jones KL, Jones MC, Schelley S, Hudgins L.

Author information:
(1)Division of Dysmorphology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.

Over the last 20 years, a wide spectrum of congenital anomalies have been 
described in association with Kabuki syndrome (KS). However, very little 
information is available on developmental outcome. As more individuals with this 
syndrome are recognized and reported, it appears that as many as one-sixth may 
have normal intelligence. The purpose of this report is to describe the 
developmental outcome in 15 patients with KS, to determine whether a 
recognizable pattern of disabilities exist, and whether developmental outcome 
correlates with the presence of malformations. We ascertained 15 patients with 
KS from three dysmorphology and clinical genetics services in which 
developmental milestones and formal developmental testing were available. Based 
on these patients and a review of the literature, in the absence of major 
structural brain anomalies, the average intelligence quotient (IQ) in patients 
with this condition fall within the mild mental retardation range, however, 
specific developmental outcomes are widely variable, ranging from severe MR to 
normal intelligence. The presence or absence of hearing loss or major 
malformations, other than those involving the brain, was not predictive of 
developmental outcome.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30338
PMID: 15523636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]