---
reference_id: "PMID:24827501"
title: Cholera outbreaks in Africa.
authors:
- Mengel MA
- Delrieu I
- Heyerdahl L
- Gessner BD
journal: Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/82_2014_369
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera outbreaks in Africa.
**Authors:** Mengel MA, Delrieu I, Heyerdahl L, Gessner BD
**Journal:** Curr Top Microbiol Immunol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/82_2014_369](https://doi.org/10.1007/82_2014_369)

## Content

1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2014;379:117-44. doi: 10.1007/82_2014_369.

Cholera outbreaks in Africa.

Mengel MA(1), Delrieu I, Heyerdahl L, Gessner BD.

Author information:
(1)Agence de Médecine Préventive, 164 rue de Vaugirard, 75015, Paris, France, 
mmengel@aamp.org.

During the current seventh cholera pandemic, Africa bore the major brunt of 
global disease burden. More than 40 years after its resurgence in Africa in 
1970, cholera remains a grave public health problem, characterized by large 
disease burden, frequent outbreaks, persistent endemicity, and high CFRs, 
particularly in the region of the central African Great Lakes which might act as 
reservoirs for cholera. There, cases occur year round with a rise in incidence 
during the rainy season. Elsewhere in sub-Saharan Africa, cholera occurs mostly 
in outbreaks of varying size with a constant threat of widespread epidemics. 
Between 1970 and 2011, African countries reported 3,221,050 suspected cholera 
cases to the World Health Organization, representing 46 % of all cases reported 
globally. Excluding the Haitian epidemic, sub-Saharan Africa accounted for 86 % 
of reported cases and 99 % of deaths worldwide in 2011. The number of cholera 
cases is possibly much higher than what is reported to the WHO due to the 
variation in modalities, completeness, and case definition of national cholera 
data. One source on country specific incidence rates for Africa, adjusting for 
underreporting, estimates 1,341,080 cases and 160,930 deaths (52.6 % of 
2,548,227 estimated cases and 79.6 % of 209,216 estimated deaths worldwide). 
Another estimates 1,411,453 cases and 53,632 deaths per year, respectively (50 % 
of 2,836,669 estimated cases and 58.6 % of 91,490 estimated deaths worldwide). 
Within Africa, half of all cases between 1970 and 2011 were notified from only 
seven countries: Angola, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mozambique, Nigeria, 
Somalia, Tanzania, and South Africa. In contrast to a global trend of decreasing 
case fatality ratios (CFRs), CFRs have remained stable in Africa at 
approximately 2 %. Early propagation of cholera outbreaks depends largely on the 
extent of individual bacterial shedding, host and organism characteristics, the 
likelihood of people coming into contact with an infectious dose of Vibrio 
cholerae and on the virulence of the implicated strain. Cholera transmission can 
then be amplified by several factors including contamination of human water- or 
food sources; climate and extreme weather events; political and economic crises; 
high population density combined with poor quality informal housing and poor 
hygiene practices; spread beyond a local community through human travel and 
animals, e.g., water birds. At an individual level, cholera risk may increase 
with decreasing immunity and hypochlorhydria, such as that induced by 
Helicobacter pylori infection, which is endemic in much of Africa, and may 
increase individual susceptibility and cholera incidence. Since contaminated 
water is the main vehicle for the spread of cholera, the obvious long-term 
solution to eradicate the disease is the provision of safe water to all African 
populations. This requires considerable human and financial resources and time. 
In the short and medium term, vaccination may help to prevent and control the 
spread of cholera outbreaks. Regardless of the intervention, further 
understanding of cholera biology and epidemiology is essential to identify 
populations and areas at increased risk and thus ensure the most efficient use 
of scarce resources for the prevention and control of cholera.

DOI: 10.1007/82_2014_369
PMID: 24827501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]