---
reference_id: "PMID:35308911"
title: Cognitive Function Characterization Using Electronic Health Records Notes.
authors:
- Pichon A
- Idnay B
- Marder K
- Schnall R
- Weng C
journal: AMIA Annu Symp Proc
year: '2021'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive Function Characterization Using Electronic Health Records Notes.
**Authors:** Pichon A, Idnay B, Marder K, Schnall R, Weng C
**Journal:** AMIA Annu Symp Proc (2021)

## Content

1. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2022 Feb 21;2021:999-1008. eCollection 2021.

Cognitive Function Characterization Using Electronic Health Records Notes.

Pichon A(1), Idnay B(2)(3)(4), Marder K(3)(4), Schnall R(2), Weng C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics.
(2)School of Nursing.
(3)Department of Neurology.
(4)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, 
Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

Cognitive impairment is a defining feature of neurological disorders such as 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), one of the leading causes of disability and mortality 
in the elderly population. Assessing cognitive impairment is important for 
diagnostic, clinical management, and research purposes. The Folstein Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) is the most common screening measure of cognitive 
function, yet this score is not consistently available in the electronic health 
records. We conducted a pilot study to extract frequently used concepts 
characterizing cognitive function from the clinical notes of AD patients in an 
Aging and Dementia clinical practice. Then we developed a model to infer the 
severity of cognitive impairment and created a subspecialized taxonomy for 
concepts associated with MMSE scores. We evaluated the taxonomy and the severity 
prediction model and presented example use cases of this model.

©2021 AMIA - All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC8861713
PMID: 35308911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]