---
reference_id: "PMID:29161709"
title: Impact of Local and Systemic Factors on Kidney Dysfunction in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome.
authors:
- Zacchia M
- Capolongo G
- Trepiccione F
- Marion V
journal: Kidney Blood Press Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1159/000484301
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of Local and Systemic Factors on Kidney Dysfunction in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome.
**Authors:** Zacchia M, Capolongo G, Trepiccione F, Marion V
**Journal:** Kidney Blood Press Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000484301](https://doi.org/10.1159/000484301)

## Content

1. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2017;42(5):784-793. doi: 10.1159/000484301. Epub 2017 
Nov 21.

Impact of Local and Systemic Factors on Kidney Dysfunction in Bardet-Biedl 
Syndrome.

Zacchia M(1), Capolongo G(1), Trepiccione F(1), Marion V(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Cardio-Thoracic and Respiratory 
Sciences, Università della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(2)INSERM, U1112, Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale , Ciliopathies modeling and 
associated therapies team, Faculté de Medecine, Strasbroug Cedex, France.

Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare inherited syndromic condition 
characterized by renal and extra-renal disorders. Renal defect, at either 
structural or functional level, is one of the cardinal clinical features, and is 
a major cause of morbidity. However, the pathogenic mechanism underlying its 
dysfunction remains largely unknown, and to date only symptomatic treatment with 
no specific therapy is available for these patients. Elucidating aberrant 
cellular and/or systemic processes that impact kidney function is therefore a 
prerequisite to develop targeted innovative therapeutic strategies for the BBS 
patients. Given the proven role of BBS proteins in the function of the primary 
cilium (PC) and considering the clinical overlapping of BBS with other 
ciliopathies, BBS is considered the result of disruption of ciliary activities. 
The present review aims at giving an updated overview of the spectrum of renal 
abnormalities in BBS patients according to the existing scientific literature, 
and discusses the possible role of intrinsic PC dysfunction into the 
pathogenesis of renal defects based on the most recent findings demonstrating a 
possible role of systemic factors in favoring the progression of renal disease.

© 2017 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000484301
PMID: 29161709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]