---
reference_id: "PMID:19689269"
title: The mechanism of mucus production in bronchial asthma.
authors:
- Izuhara K
- Ohta S
- Shiraishi H
- Suzuki S
- Taniguchi K
- Toda S
- Tanabe T
- Yasuo M
- Kubo K
- Hoshino T
- Aizawa H
journal: Curr Med Chem
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2174/092986709788803196
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The mechanism of mucus production in bronchial asthma.
**Authors:** Izuhara K, Ohta S, Shiraishi H, Suzuki S, Taniguchi K, Toda S, Tanabe T, Yasuo M, Kubo K, Hoshino T, Aizawa H
**Journal:** Curr Med Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2174/092986709788803196](https://doi.org/10.2174/092986709788803196)

## Content

1. Curr Med Chem. 2009;16(22):2867-75. doi: 10.2174/092986709788803196.

The mechanism of mucus production in bronchial asthma.

Izuhara K(1), Ohta S, Shiraishi H, Suzuki S, Taniguchi K, Toda S, Tanabe T, 
Yasuo M, Kubo K, Hoshino T, Aizawa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Saga Medical School, Japan. 
kizuhara@cc.saga-u.ac.jp

Mucus production is a cardinal feature of bronchial asthma, contributing to 
morbidity and mortality in the disease. Goblet cells are major mucus-producing 
cells, and goblet cell hyperplasia (GCH) is one feature of airway remodeling, 
defined as structural changes occurring in the airway. A number of studies have 
demonstrated that Th2-type cells play critical roles in this process and that 
particularly interleukin-13 (IL-13), among Th2-type cytokines, is a central 
mediator for GCH. However, the mechanism underlying how Th2 cytokines induce 
mucus production or GCH is poorly understood. Mouse calcium-activated chloride 
channel-3 (mCLCA-3; gob-5)/human CLCA-1 acts as a downstream molecule of Th2 
cytokines, IL-4/IL-9/IL-13 signals, playing an important role in mucus 
production. Moreover, we have recently found that pendrin, an anion transporter, 
is induced by IL-13 and causes mucus production in airway epithelial cells. It 
is hoped that if we can clarify how mucus is produced, this will lead to 
development of novel therapeutic reagents to suppress mucus production in 
bronchial asthma.

DOI: 10.2174/092986709788803196
PMID: 19689269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]