---
reference_id: "PMID:33594261"
title: "Syndromic disorders caused by gain-of-function variants in KCNH1, KCNK4, and KCNN3-a subgroup of K(+) channelopathies."
authors:
- Gripp KW
- Smithson SF
- Scurr IJ
- Baptista J
- Majumdar A
- Pierre G
- Williams M
- Henderson LB
- Wentzensen IM
- McLaughlin H
- Leeuwen L
- Simon MEH
- van Binsbergen E
- Dinulos MBP
- Kaplan JD
- McRae A
- Superti-Furga A
- Good JM
- Kutsche K
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-021-00818-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Syndromic disorders caused by gain-of-function variants in KCNH1, KCNK4, and KCNN3-a subgroup of K(+) channelopathies.
**Authors:** Gripp KW, Smithson SF, Scurr IJ, Baptista J, Majumdar A, Pierre G, Williams M, Henderson LB, Wentzensen IM, McLaughlin H, Leeuwen L, Simon MEH, van Binsbergen E, Dinulos MBP, Kaplan JD, McRae A, Superti-Furga A, Good JM, Kutsche K
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-021-00818-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-021-00818-9)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2021 Sep;29(9):1384-1395. doi: 10.1038/s41431-021-00818-9.
Epub  2021 Feb 16.

Syndromic disorders caused by gain-of-function variants in KCNH1, KCNK4, and 
KCNN3-a subgroup of K(+) channelopathies.

Gripp KW(1), Smithson SF(2), Scurr IJ(2), Baptista J(3)(4), Majumdar A(5), 
Pierre G(6), Williams M(7), Henderson LB(8), Wentzensen IM(8), McLaughlin H(9), 
Leeuwen L(10), Simon MEH(11), van Binsbergen E(11), Dinulos MBP(12), Kaplan 
JD(1), McRae A(13), Superti-Furga A(14), Good JM(14), Kutsche K(15).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, 
Wilmington, DE, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospitals Bristol and Weston, 
Bristol, UK.
(3)Exeter Genomics Laboratory, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, 
Exeter, UK.
(4)College of Medicine and Health, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.
(5)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, 
Bristol, UK.
(6)Department of Paediatric Metabolic Medicine, Bristol Royal Hospital for 
Children, Bristol, UK.
(7)Bristol Genetics Laboratory, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK.
(8)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(9)Invitae, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(12)Section of Genetics and Child Development, Children's Hospital at Dartmouth, 
Lebanon, NH, USA.
(13)Division of Genetics, Birth Defects and Metabolism, Ann & Robert H. Lurie 
Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(14)Division of Genetic Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(15)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany. kkutsche@uke.de.

Decreased or increased activity of potassium channels caused by loss-of-function 
and gain-of-function (GOF) variants in the corresponding genes, respectively, 
underlies a broad spectrum of human disorders affecting the central nervous 
system, heart, kidney, and other organs. While the association of epilepsy and 
intellectual disability (ID) with variants affecting function in genes encoding 
potassium channels is well known, GOF missense variants in K+ channel encoding 
genes in individuals with syndromic developmental disorders have only recently 
been recognized. These syndromic phenotypes include Zimmermann-Laband and 
Temple-Baraitser syndromes, caused by dominant variants in KCNH1, FHEIG syndrome 
due to dominant variants in KCNK4, and the clinical picture associated with 
dominant variants in KCNN3. Here we review the presentation of these 
individuals, including five newly reported with variants in KCNH1 and three 
additional individuals with KCNN3 variants, all variants likely affecting 
function. There is notable overlap in the phenotypic findings of these syndromes 
associated with dominant KCNN3, KCNH1, and KCNK4 variants, sharing developmental 
delay and/or ID, coarse facial features, gingival enlargement, distal digital 
hypoplasia, and hypertrichosis. We suggest to combine the phenotypes and define 
a new subgroup of potassium channelopathies caused by increased K+ conductance, 
referred to as syndromic neurodevelopmental K+ channelopathies due to dominant 
variants in KCNH1, KCNK4, or KCNN3.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-021-00818-9
PMCID: PMC8440610
PMID: 33594261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KWG is the CMO for FDNA, the company providing 
the Face2Gene application. IMW and LBH are employees of GeneDx, Inc. HM is an 
employee and shareholder at Invitae Corporation. All other authors declare no 
competing interests.