---
reference_id: "PMID:22635013"
title: Diagnosis and treatment in anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency.
authors:
- Kawai T
- Nishikomori R
- Heike T
journal: Allergol Int
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2332/allergolint.12-RAI-0446
keywords:
- Animals
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Early Diagnosis
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- I-kappa B Kinase/genetics
- I-kappa B Proteins/genetics
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- NF-KappaB Inhibitor alpha
- "NF-kappa B/immunology, metabolism"
- "Signal Transduction/genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and treatment in anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency.
**Authors:** Kawai T, Nishikomori R, Heike T
**Journal:** Allergol Int (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2332/allergolint.12-RAI-0446](https://doi.org/10.2332/allergolint.12-RAI-0446)

## Content

1. Allergol Int. 2012 Jun;61(2):207-17. doi: 10.2332/allergolint.12-RAI-0446.

Diagnosis and treatment in anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with 
immunodeficiency.

Kawai T(1), Nishikomori R, Heike T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.

Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (EDA-ID) is characterized 
according to its various manifestations, which include ectodermal dysplasia, 
vascular anomalies, osteopetrosis, and diverse immunological abnormalities such 
as susceptibility to pathogens, impaired antibody responses to polysaccharides, 
hypogammaglobulinemia, hyper-IgM syndrome, impaired natural killer cell 
cytotoxicity, and autoimmune diseases. Two genes responsible for EDA-ID have 
been identified: nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) essential modulator (NEMO) for 
X-linked EDA-ID (XL-EDA-ID) and IκBα for autosomal-dominant EDA-ID (AD-EDA-ID). 
Both genes are involved in NF-κB activation, such that mutations or related 
defects cause impaired NF-κB signaling. In particular, NEMO mutations are 
scattered across the entire NEMO gene in XL-EDA-ID patients, which explains the 
broad spectrum of clinical manifestations and the difficulties associated with 
making a diagnosis. In this review, we focus on the pathophysiology of EDA-ID 
and different diagnostic strategies, which will be beneficial for early 
diagnosis and appropriate treatment.

DOI: 10.2332/allergolint.12-RAI-0446
PMID: 22635013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]