---
reference_id: "PMID:34432172"
title: "Predisposing conditions for bacterial meningitis in children: what radiologists need to know."
authors:
- Masuoka S
- Miyazaki O
- Takahashi H
- Tsutsumi Y
- Hiyama T
- Kitamura M
- Okamoto R
- Miyasaka M
- Minami M
- Nosaka S
journal: Jpn J Radiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11604-021-01191-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predisposing conditions for bacterial meningitis in children: what radiologists need to know.
**Authors:** Masuoka S, Miyazaki O, Takahashi H, Tsutsumi Y, Hiyama T, Kitamura M, Okamoto R, Miyasaka M, Minami M, Nosaka S
**Journal:** Jpn J Radiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11604-021-01191-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11604-021-01191-9)

## Content

1. Jpn J Radiol. 2022 Jan;40(1):1-18. doi: 10.1007/s11604-021-01191-9. Epub 2021 
Aug 25.

Predisposing conditions for bacterial meningitis in children: what radiologists 
need to know.

Masuoka S(1)(2), Miyazaki O(3), Takahashi H(4), Tsutsumi Y(3), Hiyama T(5), 
Kitamura M(3), Okamoto R(3), Miyasaka M(3), Minami M(6), Nosaka S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan. 
m.sohta.1987@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1, Tennoudai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575, Japan. 
m.sohta.1987@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Mayo Clinic Minnesota, 200 First St. SW, 
Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(5)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, 
6-5-1 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba, 277-8577, Japan.
(6)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1, Tennoudai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575, Japan.

A variety of underlying diseases can predispose infants and children to 
bacterial meningitis (BM). For the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of its 
recurrence, radiologists should be familiar with its predisposing conditions so 
that they can suggest the appropriate imaging approach. Predisposing conditions 
of BM can be broadly classified into two categories: infection spread from the 
adjacent tissue to the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) space and immunodeficiency. 
Diseases in the former category are further divided according to regardless of 
whether there is a structural defect between the CSF space and the adjacent 
tissue. When a structural defect is suspected in a patient with BM, computed 
tomography (CT) of the head and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging are first-line 
imaging examinations. Radionuclide cisternography should be implemented as a 
second-line step to identify the CSF leak site. In patients with suspected 
parameningeal infection without any structural defect, such as sinusitis or 
otitis media/mastoiditis, CT or MR images can identify not only the disease 
itself but also the associated intracranial complications. The purpose of this 
article is to discuss the diagnostic approach and imaging findings associated 
with the variety of conditions predisposing patients to recurrent BM, focusing 
on the role of radiology in their management.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11604-021-01191-9
PMCID: PMC8732808
PMID: 34432172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.