---
reference_id: "PMID:36465638"
title: Adrenal insufficiency in patients with Prader-Willi syndrome.
authors:
- Kusz MJ
- Gawlik AM
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2022.1021704
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/complications, drug therapy"
- Hypothalamo-Hypophyseal System
- Pituitary-Adrenal System
- Hydrocortisone
- Human Growth Hormone/therapeutic use
- "Adrenal Insufficiency/complications, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adrenal insufficiency in patients with Prader-Willi syndrome.
**Authors:** Kusz MJ, Gawlik AM
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2022.1021704](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2022.1021704)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Nov 17;13:1021704. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.1021704. eCollection 2022.

Adrenal insufficiency in patients with Prader-Willi syndrome.

Kusz MJ(1)(2), Gawlik AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Endocrinology, Medical University of 
Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(2)The Faculty of Medical Sciences, The Doctoral School of the Medical 
University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.

The generalized dysfunction of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis in patients with 
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is the most likely cause of hypogonadism, inadequate 
growth hormone secretion, excessive appetite and associated obesity, impaired 
body temperature regulation, and hypothyroidism. The syndrome is also related to 
an increased risk of central adrenal insufficiency, although its prevalence 
remains unknown. The results of the studies in which different methods of 
pharmacological stimulation were used do not provide conclusive outcomes. As a 
result, there are no clear guidelines with regard to diagnosis, prevention, or 
long-term care when adrenal insufficiency is suspected in patients with PWS. 
Currently, most patients with PWS are treated with recombinant human growth 
hormone (rhGH). It has been confirmed that rhGH therapy has a positive effect on 
growth, body composition, body mass index (BMI), and potentially on psychomotor 
development in children with PWS. Additionally, rhGH may reduce the conversion 
of cortisone to cortisol through inhibition of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
type 1. However, its influence on basal adrenal function and adrenal stress 
response remains unexplained in children with PWS. This paper reviews the 
literature related to the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis dysfunction in the 
PWS patient population with a focus on children.

Copyright © 2022 Kusz and Gawlik.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.1021704
PMCID: PMC9714690
PMID: 36465638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.