---
reference_id: "PMID:21729035"
title: Jeavons syndrome existing as occipital cortex initiating generalized epilepsy.
authors:
- Viravan S
- Go C
- Ochi A
- Akiyama T
- Carter Snead O 3rd
- Otsubo H
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03068.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Jeavons syndrome existing as occipital cortex initiating generalized epilepsy.
**Authors:** Viravan S, Go C, Ochi A, Akiyama T, Carter Snead O 3rd, Otsubo H
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03068.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03068.x)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2011 Jul;52(7):1273-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03068.x. Epub 
2011 Apr 19.

Jeavons syndrome existing as occipital cortex initiating generalized epilepsy.

Viravan S(1), Go C, Ochi A, Akiyama T, Carter Snead O 3rd, Otsubo H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, the Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PURPOSE: Jeavons syndrome (JS) is one of the underreported epileptic syndromes 
characterized by eyelid myoclonia (EM), eye closure-induced 
seizures/electroencephalography (EEG) paroxysms, and photosensitivity. JS has 
been proposed as idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) because of normal 
posterior dominant background activity and paroxysmal generalized ictal 
epileptiform discharges (EDs). However, we noticed subtle occipital EDs 
preceding EM and interictal posterior EDs using digital video-EEG. We studied 
clinical and EEG findings in JS to determine the specific occipital lobe 
relation to this "eye closure-induced" reflex IGE.
METHODS: We identified 12 children who met the diagnostic criteria of JS from 
January 2004 to April 2009 at the Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada. 
All patients had EM captured by video-EEG. We reviewed and described ictal EEG 
patterns, interictal abnormalities, and demographics, clinical, and neuroimaging 
findings.
KEY FINDINGS: All patients but one were female (92%). Age at seizure onset 
ranged from 1.5 to 9 years, with a mean age of 4.9 years. Six patients (50%) 
were previously diagnosed as having absence epilepsy and 10 patients were on 
antiepileptic medications. All 12 patients had normal posterior dominant alpha 
rhythm, reactive to eye opening and closure. Spiky posterior alpha activity was 
noted with sustained eye closure in six patients (50%). Interictally, there were 
generalized EDs found in 10 patients (83%); four of them also had focal 
interictal EDs over the posterior head region. Eleven patients (92%) had 
evidence of focal posterior ictal EDs. EM and/or paroxysmal EDs were induced by 
photic stimulation in 9 (75%) and hyperventilation in 7 (58%).
SIGNIFICANCE: We observed two neurophysiologic findings in JS: (1) focal 
interictal EDs from posterior head region; and (2) predominant focal posterior 
ictal EDs preceding generalized EDs. Further clinical observations of seizures 
induced by eye closure, photic stimulation, and hyperventilation along with EEG 
paroxysms would raise the possibility of the occipital cortex initiating 
generalized epilepsy network involving the brainstem, and thalamocortical and 
transcortical pathways in JS.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2011 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03068.x
PMID: 21729035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]