---
reference_id: "PMID:39883449"
title: Origin and In-Office Treatment of Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction.
authors:
- Mailly M
- Baudouin R
- Thibault C
- Hans S
- Lechien JR
journal: JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1001/jamaoto.2024.5046
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Origin and In-Office Treatment of Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction.
**Authors:** Mailly M, Baudouin R, Thibault C, Hans S, Lechien JR
**Journal:** JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaoto.2024.5046](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoto.2024.5046)

## Content

1. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2025 Apr 1;151(4):396-400. doi: 
10.1001/jamaoto.2024.5046.

Origin and In-Office Treatment of Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction.

Mailly M(1), Baudouin R(1), Thibault C(2), Hans S(1), Lechien JR(1)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Foch Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Paris Saclay University, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire (CHU) de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(3)Department of Surgery, Research Institute for Health Sciences and Technology, 
University of Mons, Mons, Belgium.
(4)Division of Laryngology and Broncho-esophagology, Department of 
Otolaryngology-Head Neck Surgery, EpiCURA Hospital, Baudour, Belgium.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Elsan Polyclinic de l'Atlantique, Poitiers, 
France.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, CHU Saint-Pierre, 
Brussels, Belgium.

IMPORTANCE: Retrograde cricopharyngeus dysfunction (R-CPD) is an emerging 
disorder associated with disabling symptoms. The origin of R-CPD remains 
unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the development of symptoms, diagnosis approach, and 
therapeutic outcomes of R-CPD in patients treated with in-office botulinum toxin 
injection (BTI) into the cricopharyngeus.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a case series including patients 
with R-CPD who were consecutively and prospectively recruited from April 2022 to 
May 2024 in an academic hospital. Semistructured interviews were conducted to 
collect and analyze data on each patient's clinical history, potential causes or 
factors associated with R-CPD development, diagnostic approaches, and symptom 
presentation.
INTERVENTION: Clinic-based (in-office) BTI into the cricopharyngeus.
OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Associations with laryngopharyngeal reflux disease, 
patients' Reflux Symptom Score-12 (RSS-12), and BTI effectiveness, revisions, 
and complications were evaluated.
RESULTS: The case series comprised 106 patients with R-CPD treated with BTI (52 
females [49.1%] and 54 males [51.9%]). Their mean (SD) age at symptom onset was 
13.6 (7.7) years, and at diagnosis, 30.4 (6.4) years. Sixty-eight patients 
(64.2%) had potential congenital R-CPD, according to the parents' testimonies. A 
family history was reported in 18 of 62 cases (29.0%). In 105 cases (99.1%), 
patients made the diagnosis themselves despite medical consultations (n = 162), 
empirical treatments (n = 113), and additional examinations (n = 92). The 
cumulative success rate of BTI was 90.6% (96 of 106 patients). In 26 cases 
(24.5%), additional injections were administered to address the symptoms. Family 
history of R-CPD was a negative predictor of single-BTI success. Dysphagia was 
the primary adverse effect occurring after 89 of 126 BTIs (70.6%) and lasted a 
mean (SD) of 16.3 (12.0) days. In 10 cases, operating-room BTI was administered 
after primary in-office BTI.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: R-CPD is an emerging and poorly known disorder 
associated with high rates of ineffective consultations, additional 
examinations, and self-diagnosis by patients. In-office BTI was associated with 
a high rate of partial or total symptom relief and long-term effectiveness.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoto.2024.5046
PMCID: PMC11783244
PMID: 39883449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.