---
reference_id: "PMID:27683196"
title: "Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction in children and adults: diagnosis and therapeutic options."
authors:
- Di Nardo G
- Di Lorenzo C
- Lauro A
- Stanghellini V
- Thapar N
- Karunaratne TB
- Volta U
- De Giorgio R
journal: Neurogastroenterol Motil
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/nmo.12945
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Chronic Disease
- "Gastrointestinal Agents/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- "Intestinal Pseudo-Obstruction/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, therapy"
- Manometry/methods
- Nutritional Support/methods
- Stem Cell Transplantation/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction in children and adults: diagnosis and therapeutic options.
**Authors:** Di Nardo G, Di Lorenzo C, Lauro A, Stanghellini V, Thapar N, Karunaratne TB, Volta U, De Giorgio R
**Journal:** Neurogastroenterol Motil (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nmo.12945](https://doi.org/10.1111/nmo.12945)

## Content

1. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2017 Jan;29(1). doi: 10.1111/nmo.12945. Epub 2016
Sep  29.

Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction in children and adults: diagnosis and 
therapeutic options.

Di Nardo G(1)(2), Di Lorenzo C(3), Lauro A(4), Stanghellini V(5), Thapar N(6), 
Karunaratne TB(5), Volta U(5), De Giorgio R(5).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Unit, Orvieto Hospital, Orvieto, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Gastroenterology Unit, International Hospital Salvator Mundi, Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.
(4)Liver and Multiorgan Transplant Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi University 
Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(5)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Centro di Ricerca BioMedica 
Applicata (C.R.B.A.), University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, Institute of 
Child Health, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction (CIPO) represents the most 
severe form of gastrointestinal dysmotility with debilitating and potentially 
lethal consequences. Symptoms can be non-specific, and result in this condition 
being diagnosed incorrectly or too late with consequences for morbidity and even 
mortality.
PURPOSE: The present article aims to provide pediatric and adult 
gastroenterologists with an up to date review about clinical features, diagnosis 
and therapeutic options for CIPO. Although pediatric and adult CIPO share many 
clinical aspects distinctive features can be identified. There is no single 
diagnostic test or pathognomonic finding of CIPO, thus a stepwise approach 
including radiology, endoscopy, laboratory, manometry, and histopathology should 
be considered in the diagnostic work-up. Treatment of patients with CIPO is 
challenging and requires a multidisciplinary effort with participation of 
appropriately experienced gastroenterologists, pathologists, dieticians, 
surgeons, psychologists, and other subspecialists based on the presence of 
comorbidities. Current treatment options invariably involve surgery and 
specialized nutritional support, especially in children. Medical therapies are 
mainly aimed to avoid complications such as sepsis or intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth and, where possible, restore intestinal propulsion. More efficacious 
therapeutic options are eagerly awaited for such difficult patients.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/nmo.12945
PMID: 27683196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]