---
reference_id: "PMID:38952118"
title: "<italic>IGF1</italic> Haploinsufficiency: Phenotype and Response to Growth Hormone Treatment in 9 Patients."
authors:
- Joustra SD
- Punt LD
- van der Kaay DCM
- van Setten PA
- de Groote K
- Kruijsen AR
- Bocca G
- de Munnik SA
- Renes JS
- de Bruin C
- Losekoot M
- van Duyvenvoorde HA
- Wit JM
- Joustra SD
journal: Horm Res Paediatr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1159/000540053
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- "Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/genetics, metabolism"
- Haploinsufficiency
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Human Growth Hormone/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Growth Disorders/drug therapy, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Infant
- Adolescent
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor Binding Protein 3/blood
- Body Height
content_type: abstract_only
---

# <italic>IGF1</italic> Haploinsufficiency: Phenotype and Response to Growth Hormone Treatment in 9 Patients.
**Authors:** Joustra SD, Punt LD, van der Kaay DCM, van Setten PA, de Groote K, Kruijsen AR, Bocca G, de Munnik SA, Renes JS, de Bruin C, Losekoot M, van Duyvenvoorde HA, Wit JM, Joustra SD
**Journal:** Horm Res Paediatr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000540053](https://doi.org/10.1159/000540053)

## Content

1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2025;98(6):622-632. doi: 10.1159/000540053. Epub 2024 Jun
28.

<italic>IGF1</italic> Haploinsufficiency: Phenotype and Response to Growth 
Hormone Treatment in 9 Patients.

Joustra SD, Punt LD(1), van der Kaay DCM(2), van Setten PA(3), de Groote K(1), 
Kruijsen AR(1), Bocca G(4), de Munnik SA(5), Renes JS(6)(7), de Bruin C(1), 
Losekoot M(8), van Duyvenvoorde HA(8), Wit JM(1), Joustra SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Paediatric Endocrinology, Department of Paediatrics, 
Willem-Alexander Children's Hospital, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Division of Paediatric Endocrinology, Department of Paediatrics, Erasmus 
University Medical Centre, Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Amalia Childrens Hospital, Radboud University 
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Division of Paediatric Endocrinology, Department of Paediatrics, Beatrix 
Children's Hospital, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(6)Dutch Growth Research Foundation, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: The clinical features of bi-allelic IGF1 defects are well 
established, i.e., severe growth failure and microcephaly, delayed psychomotor 
development, and sensorineural deafness. However, information on clinical and 
endocrine consequences of heterozygous IGF1 variants and treatment options is 
scarce. We aimed at extending the knowledge base of the clinical presentation 
and growth response to recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) of patients 
carrying such variants.
METHODS: Retrospective case series of patients with pathogenic heterozygous IGF1 
variants.
RESULTS: Nine patients from six families were included, harbouring five whole or 
partial gene deletions and one frameshift variant resulting in a premature stop 
codon (three de novo, one unknown inheritance). In the other two families, 
variants segregated with short stature. Mean (SD) birth length was -1.9 (1.3) 
SDS (n = 7), height -3.8 (0.6) SDS, head circumference -2.5 (0.6) SDS, serum 
IGF-I -1.9 (0.7) SDS, serum IGFBP-3 1.1 (0.4) SDS (n = 7), and GH peak range 
5-31 μg/L (n = 4). Five patients showed feeding problems in infancy. Average 
height increased after 1 and 2 years of rhGH treatment by 0.8 SDS (range 0.3-1.3 
SDS) and 1.3 SDS (range 0.5-2.0 SDS), respectively. Adult height in 2 patients 
was -2.8 and -1.3 SDS, which was, respectively, 1.3 and 2.9 SDS taller than 
predicted before start of treatment.
CONCLUSION: Haploinsufficiency of IGF1 causes a variable phenotype of prenatal 
and postnatal growth failure, microcephaly, feeding difficulties, low/low-normal 
serum IGF-I values in contrast to serum IGFBP-3 in the upper-normal range. 
Treatment with rhGH increased growth in the first 2 years of treatment, and in 2 
patients adult height after treatment was higher than predicted at treatment 
initiation.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000540053
PMCID: PMC12668710
PMID: 38952118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.