---
reference_id: "PMID:36806787"
title: Rare molecular subtypes of lung cancer.
authors:
- Harada G
- Yang SR
- Cocco E
- Drilon A
journal: Nat Rev Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41571-023-00733-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare molecular subtypes of lung cancer.
**Authors:** Harada G, Yang SR, Cocco E, Drilon A
**Journal:** Nat Rev Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41571-023-00733-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41571-023-00733-6)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2023 Apr;20(4):229-249. doi: 10.1038/s41571-023-00733-6. 
Epub 2023 Feb 20.

Rare molecular subtypes of lung cancer.

Harada G(#)(1), Yang SR(#)(2), Cocco E(3), Drilon A(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology/Sylvester Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, University of Miami/Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA. 
exc2752@miami.edu.
(4)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
USA. drilona@mskcc.org.
(5)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA. 
drilona@mskcc.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Oncogenes that occur in ≤5% of non-small-cell lung cancers have been defined as 
'rare'; nonetheless, this frequency can correspond to a substantial number of 
patients diagnosed annually. Within rare oncogenes, less commonly identified 
alterations (such as HRAS, NRAS, RIT1, ARAF, RAF1 and MAP2K1 mutations, or ERBB 
family, LTK and RASGRF1 fusions) can share certain structural or oncogenic 
features with more commonly recognized alterations (such as KRAS, BRAF, MET and 
ERBB family mutations, or ALK, RET and ROS1 fusions). Over the past 5 years, a 
surge in the identification of rare-oncogene-driven lung cancers has challenged 
the boundaries of traditional clinical grade diagnostic assays and profiling 
algorithms. In tandem, the number of approved targeted therapies for patients 
with rare molecular subtypes of lung cancer has risen dramatically. Rational 
drug design has iteratively improved the quality of small-molecule 
therapeutic agents and introduced a wave of antibody-based therapeutics, 
expanding the list of actionable de novo and resistance alterations in lung 
cancer. Getting additional molecularly tailored therapeutics approved for 
rare-oncogene-driven lung cancers in a larger range of countries will require 
ongoing stakeholder cooperation. Patient advocates, health-care agencies, 
investigators and companies with an interest in diagnostics, therapeutics and 
real-world evidence have already taken steps to surmount the challenges 
associated with research into low-frequency drivers.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41571-023-00733-6
PMCID: PMC10413877
PMID: 36806787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]