---
reference_id: "PMID:34476477"
title: Molecular genetic evaluation of pediatric renovascular hypertension due to renal artery stenosis and abdominal aortic coarctation in neurofibromatosis type 1.
authors:
- Coleman DM
- Wang Y
- Yang ML
- Hunker KL
- Birt I
- Bergin IL
- Li JZ
- Stanley JC
- Ganesh SK
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab241
keywords:
- "Aortic Coarctation/complications, genetics, surgery"
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Renovascular/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Molecular Biology
- "Neurofibromatosis 1/complications, genetics"
- "Renal Artery Obstruction/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular genetic evaluation of pediatric renovascular hypertension due to renal artery stenosis and abdominal aortic coarctation in neurofibromatosis type 1.
**Authors:** Coleman DM, Wang Y, Yang ML, Hunker KL, Birt I, Bergin IL, Li JZ, Stanley JC, Ganesh SK
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddab241](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddab241)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2022 Feb 3;31(3):334-346. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab241.

Molecular genetic evaluation of pediatric renovascular hypertension due to renal 
artery stenosis and abdominal aortic coarctation in neurofibromatosis type 1.

Coleman DM, Wang Y, Yang ML, Hunker KL, Birt I, Bergin IL, Li JZ, Stanley JC, 
Ganesh SK.

The etiology of renal artery stenosis (RAS) and abdominal aortic coarctation 
(AAC) causing the midaortic syndrome (MAS), often resulting in renovascular 
hypertension (RVH), remains ill-defined. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-1) is 
frequently observed in children with RVH. Consecutive pediatric patients 
(N = 102) presenting with RVH secondary to RAS with and without concurrent AAC 
were prospectively enrolled in a clinical data base, and blood, saliva and 
operative tissue, when available, were collected. Among the 102 children, 13 
were having a concurrent clinical diagnosis of NF-1 (12.5%). Whole exome 
sequencing was performed for germline variant detection, and RNA-Seq analysis of 
NF1, MAPK pathway genes and MCP1 levels were undertaken in five NF-1 stenotic 
renal arteries, as well as control renal and mesenteric arteries from children 
with no known vasculopathy or NF-1. In 11 unrelated children with sequencing 
data, 11 NF1 genetic variants were identified, of which 10 had not been reported 
in gnomAD. Histologic analysis of NF-1 RAS specimens consistently revealed 
intimal thickening, disruption of the internal elastic lamina and medial 
thinning. Analysis of transcript expression in arterial lesions documented an 
approximately 5-fold reduction in NF1 expression, confirming heterozygosity, 
MAPK pathway activation and increased MCP1 expression. In summary, NF-1-related 
RVH in children is rare but often severe and progressive and, as such, important 
to recognize. It is associated with histologic and molecular features consistent 
with an aggressive adverse vascular remodeling process. Further research is 
necessary to define the mechanisms underlying these findings.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddab241
PMCID: PMC8825256
PMID: 34476477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]