---
reference_id: "PMID:35487478"
title: Contribution of rare variants in monogenic diabetes-genes to early-onset type 2 diabetes.
authors:
- Pezzilli S
- Tohidirad M
- Biagini T
- Scarale MG
- Alberico F
- Mercuri L
- Mannino GC
- Garofolo M
- Filardi T
- Tang Y
- Giuffrida F
- Mendonca C
- Andreozzi F
- Baroni MG
- Buzzetti R
- Cavallo MG
- Cossu E
- "D'Angelo P"
- De Cosmo S
- Lamacchia O
- Leonetti F
- Morano S
- Morviducci L
- Penno G
- Pozzilli P
- Pugliese G
- Sesti G
- Mazza T
- Doria A
- Trischitta V
- Prudente S
journal: Diabetes Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2022.101353
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contribution of rare variants in monogenic diabetes-genes to early-onset type 2 diabetes.
**Authors:** Pezzilli S, Tohidirad M, Biagini T, Scarale MG, Alberico F, Mercuri L, Mannino GC, Garofolo M, Filardi T, Tang Y, Giuffrida F, Mendonca C, Andreozzi F, Baroni MG, Buzzetti R, Cavallo MG, Cossu E, D'Angelo P, De Cosmo S, Lamacchia O, Leonetti F, Morano S, Morviducci L, Penno G, Pozzilli P, Pugliese G, Sesti G, Mazza T, Doria A, Trischitta V, Prudente S
**Journal:** Diabetes Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.diabet.2022.101353](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diabet.2022.101353)

## Content

1. Diabetes Metab. 2022 Sep;48(5):101353. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2022.101353. Epub
 2022 Apr 26.

Contribution of rare variants in monogenic diabetes-genes to early-onset type 2 
diabetes.

Pezzilli S(1), Tohidirad M(1), Biagini T(2), Scarale MG(3), Alberico F(1), 
Mercuri L(1), Mannino GC(4), Garofolo M(5), Filardi T(6), Tang Y(7), Giuffrida 
F(8), Mendonca C(8), Andreozzi F(9), Baroni MG(10), Buzzetti R(6), Cavallo 
MG(6), Cossu E(11), D'Angelo P(12), De Cosmo S(13), Lamacchia O(14), Leonetti 
F(15), Morano S(6), Morviducci L(16), Penno G(4), Pozzilli P(17), Pugliese 
G(18), Sesti G(18), Mazza T(2), Doria A(7), Trischitta V(19), Prudente S(20).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit of Metabolic and Cardiovascular Diseases, Fondazione IRCCS Casa 
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(2)Unit of Bioinformatics, Fondazione IRCSS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San 
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(3)Research Unit of Diabetes and Endocrine Diseases, Fondazione IRCSS Casa 
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University "Magna Graecia" of 
Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.
(5)Section of Diabetes and Metabolic Disease, Department of Clinical and 
Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(6)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
(7)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, United States; 
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA United States.
(8)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, United States.
(9)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University "Magna Graecia" of 
Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy; Research Center for the Prevention and Treatment of 
Metabolic Diseases (CR METDIS), University Magna Grecia, Catanzaro, Italy.
(10)Department of Clinical Medicine, Life, Health & Environmental Sciences, 
University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy; Neuroendocrinology and Metabolic 
Diseases, IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli, Italy.
(11)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, University of Cagliari, 
Cagliari, Italy.
(12)Unit of Diabetology, Sandro Pertini Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(13)Department of Medicine, Fondazione IRCSS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San 
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(14)Unit of Endocrinology, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, 
University Hospital of Foggia, Foggia, Italy.
(15)Diabetes Unit, Department of Medical-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, 
Santa Maria Goretti Hospital, Sapienza University of Rome, Latina, Italy.
(16)Unit of Diabetology, S. Spirito Hospital - AslRM1, Rome, Italy.
(17)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Campus Bio-Medico University of 
Rome, Rome, Italy.
(18)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, 
Italy.
(19)Research Unit of Diabetes and Endocrine Diseases, Fondazione IRCSS Casa 
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; Department of 
Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
(20)Research Unit of Metabolic and Cardiovascular Diseases, Fondazione IRCCS 
Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. Electronic address: 
s.prudente@css-mendel.it.

AIM: This study investigated whether rare, deleterious variants in monogenic 
diabetes-genes are associated with early-onset type 2 diabetes (T2D).
METHODS: A nested case-control study was designed from 9712 Italian patients 
with T2D. Individuals with age at diabetes onset ≤35 yrs (n = 300; cases) or ≥65 
yrs (n = 300; controls) were selected and screened for variants in 27 monogenic 
diabetes-genes by targeted resequencing. Rare (minor allele frequency-MAF <1%) 
and possibly deleterious variants were collectively tested for association with 
early-onset T2D. The association of a genetic risk score (GRS) based on 17 
GWAS-SNPs for T2D was also tested.
RESULTS: When all rare variants were considered together, each increased the 
risk of early-onset T2D by 65% (allelic OR =1.64, 95% CI: 1.08-2.48, p = 0.02). 
Effects were similar when the 600 study participants were stratified according 
to their place of recruitment (Central-Southern Italy, 182 cases vs. 142 
controls, or Rome urban area, 118 vs. 158, p for heterogeneity=0.53). 
Progressively less frequent variants showed increasingly stronger effects in the 
risk of early-onset T2D for those with MAF <0.001% (OR=6.34, 95% CI: 1.87-22.43, 
p = 0.003). One unit of T2D-GRS significantly increased the risk of early-onset 
T2D (OR 1.09, 95% CI: 1.01-1.18; p = 0.02). This association was stronger among 
rare variants carriers as compared to non-carriers (p = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: Rare variants in monogenic-diabetes genes are associated with an 
increased risk of early-onset T2D, and interact with common T2D susceptibility 
variants in shaping it. These findings might help develop prediction tools to 
identify individuals at high risk of developing T2D in early adulthood.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diabet.2022.101353
PMCID: PMC12635831
PMID: 35487478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest No potential 
conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported.