---
reference_id: "PMID:38017450"
title: "Natural vertical transmission of dengue virus in Latin America and the Caribbean: highlighting its detection limitations and potential significance."
authors:
- Golding MAJ
- Noble SAA
- Khouri NK
- Layne-Yarde RNA
- Ali I
- Sandiford SL
journal: Parasit Vectors
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13071-023-06043-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural vertical transmission of dengue virus in Latin America and the Caribbean: highlighting its detection limitations and potential significance.
**Authors:** Golding MAJ, Noble SAA, Khouri NK, Layne-Yarde RNA, Ali I, Sandiford SL
**Journal:** Parasit Vectors (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13071-023-06043-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-023-06043-1)

## Content

1. Parasit Vectors. 2023 Nov 28;16(1):442. doi: 10.1186/s13071-023-06043-1.

Natural vertical transmission of dengue virus in Latin America and the 
Caribbean: highlighting its detection limitations and potential significance.

Golding MAJ(1), Noble SAA(2), Khouri NK(1), Layne-Yarde RNA(1), Ali I(3)(4), 
Sandiford SL(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Pharmacology and Pharmacy Section, 
Faculty of Medical Sciences, The University of the West Indies, Mona, Kingston, 
Jamaica.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, The University of 
the West Indies, Mona, Kingston, Jamaica.
(3)College of Health and Wellness, Department of Health Sciences, Barry 
University, Miami Shores, FL, 33161, USA.
(4)Microbiology Laboratory, Memorial Healthcare System, Hollywood, FL, 33021, 
USA.
(5)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Pharmacology and Pharmacy Section, 
Faculty of Medical Sciences, The University of the West Indies, Mona, Kingston, 
Jamaica. simone.sandiford@uwimona.edu.jm.
(6)Mosquito Control and Research Unit, The University of the West Indies, Mona, 
Kingston, Jamaica. simone.sandiford@uwimona.edu.jm.

Dengue continues to be a major public health concern in Latin America and the 
Caribbean with many countries in the region having experienced drastic increases 
in the incidence of dengue over the past few years. Dengue virus is 
predominantly transmitted by the bite of an infected female Aedes aegypti 
mosquito via a process called horizontal transmission. However, the virus may 
also be transmitted from an infected female mosquito to her offspring by 
vertical transmission, which occurs via viral invasion of the ovary either at 
the time of fertilization or during oviposition. In this way, mosquitoes may 
become dengue virus infected before ever encountering a human host. While some 
researchers have reported this phenomenon and suggested it may serve as a 
reservoir for the dengue virus in nature, others have questioned its 
epidemiological significance because of the low frequency at which it has been 
observed. Several researchers have either altogether failed to detect it or 
observed its occurrence at low frequencies. However, some studies have 
attributed these failures to small sample sizes as well as poor sensitivities of 
screening methods employed. Therefore, an overview of the occurrence, 
significance and limitations of detection of vertical transmission of dengue 
virus in Aedes mosquitoes in nature within Latin America and the Caribbean will 
be the focus of this review.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-023-06043-1
PMCID: PMC10685567
PMID: 38017450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any potential competing interest.