---
reference_id: "PMID:39502943"
title: Plasma phosphorylated-tau217 is increased in Niemann-Pick disease type C.
authors:
- Gonzalez-Ortiz F
- Karikari TK
- Taylor-Te Vruchte D
- Shepherd D
- Kirsebom BE
- Fladby T
- Platt F
- Blennow K
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae375
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plasma phosphorylated-tau217 is increased in Niemann-Pick disease type C.
**Authors:** Gonzalez-Ortiz F, Karikari TK, Taylor-Te Vruchte D, Shepherd D, Kirsebom BE, Fladby T, Platt F, Blennow K
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcae375](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcae375)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2024 Oct 25;6(6):fcae375. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae375. 
eCollection 2024.

Plasma phosphorylated-tau217 is increased in Niemann-Pick disease type C.

Gonzalez-Ortiz F(1)(2), Karikari TK(1)(3), Taylor-Te Vruchte D(4), Shepherd 
D(4), Kirsebom BE(5)(6), Fladby T(7)(8), Platt F(4), Blennow K(1)(2)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, 
43180, Sweden.
(2)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, 
43180, Sweden.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15203, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, UK.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, 9019, 
Norway.
(6)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Health Sciences, The Arctic University 
of Norway, Tromsø, 9031, Norway.
(7)Department of Neurology, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, 1478, 
Norway.
(8)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Campus Ahus, University of Oslo, Oslo, 0316, 
Norway.
(9)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), Pitié-Salpêtrière 
Hospital, Sorbonne Université, Paris, 75013, France.
(10)University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230026, China.

Niemann-Pick disease type C and Alzheimer's disease are distinct 
neurodegenerative disorders that share the presence of neurofibrillary tangle 
pathology. In this multicentre study, we measured plasma phosphorylated-tau217 
in controls (n = 60), Niemann-Pick disease type C (n = 71) and Alzheimer's 
disease (n = 30 positive for amyloid and negative for tau in CSF [A+T-] and n = 
30 positive for both [A+T+]). Annual Severity Increment Score and Lysotracker 
measurements were evaluated in the Niemann-Pick disease type C group to estimate 
the rate of progression and lysosomal enlargement, respectively. In the 
cross-sectional analysis, plasma phosphorylated-tau217 was increased in 
Niemann-Pick disease type C compared with controls (2.52 ± 1.93 versus 1.02 ± 
0.34 pg/mL, respectively, P < 0.001) and inversely correlated with age at 
disease onset (R = -0.54, P < 0.001). In the longitudinal analysis, plasma 
phosphorylated-tau217 was associated with disease progression determined by 
Annual Severity Increment Score (R = 0.48, P < 0.001) and lysosomal enlargement 
(R = 0.26, P = 0.004). We found no differences between A+T- Alzheimer's disease 
and Niemann-Pick disease type C (2.67 ± 1.18 versus 2.52 ± 1. 93 pg/mL, P = 
0.31); however, A+T+ Alzheimer's disease had significantly higher levels than 
Niemann-Pick disease type C (3.26 ± 1.36 versus 2.52 ± 1.93 pg/mL, P = 0.001). 
Our findings suggest that plasma p-tau217 can increase in brain disorders with 
isolated tau pathology. Plasma p-tau217 associations with disease progression 
and severity make it a potential marker in Niemann-Pick disease type C.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae375
PMCID: PMC11535543
PMID: 39502943

Conflict of interest statement: K.B. has served as a consultant and at advisory 
boards for Acumen, ALZPath, BioArctic, Biogen, Eisai, Lilly, Moleac Pte Ltd, 
Novartis, Ono Pharma, Prothena, Roche Diagnostics and Siemens Healthineers; has 
served at data monitoring committees for Julius Clinical and Novartis; and has 
given lectures, produced educational materials and participated in educational 
programmes for AC Immune, Biogen, BioArctic, Celdara Medical, Eisai and Roche 
Diagnostics. K.B. is a co-founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB, 
a GU Ventures-based platform company at the University of Gothenburg. B.-E.K. 
has served as a consultant for Biogen. The other authors declare no competing 
interest.