---
reference_id: "PMID:38638763"
title: "Two Incidental Sibling Diagnoses of Netherton Syndrome in Separate Visits: A Case Report."
authors:
- AlMoosawi S
- Alkhanaizi S
- Albaharna M
- Khamdan F
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.56439
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two Incidental Sibling Diagnoses of Netherton Syndrome in Separate Visits: A Case Report.
**Authors:** AlMoosawi S, Alkhanaizi S, Albaharna M, Khamdan F
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.56439](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.56439)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Mar 19;16(3):e56439. doi: 10.7759/cureus.56439. eCollection 2024 
Mar.

Two Incidental Sibling Diagnoses of Netherton Syndrome in Separate Visits: A 
Case Report.

AlMoosawi S(1), Alkhanaizi S(1), Albaharna M(1), Khamdan F(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology, Salmaniya Medical Complex, Manama, BHR.

Netherton syndrome (NTS) is a genetic disorder that predominantly affects the 
hair and the skin, and it can have a wide variety of presentations. The genetic 
syndrome is more common with consanguineous parents. Given the rarity and 
varying presentation of the condition, a few cases have been reported in the 
literature. We present an unusual case of two incidental diagnoses of NTS in 
siblings of consanguineous parents, manifesting as erythroderma and other 
symptoms that were initially diagnosed as pityriasis rubra pilaris and psoriasis 
in separate visits. Physicians must maintain a high index of suspicion when 
faced with chronic skin conditions and hair shaft abnormalities that may have 
been present since childhood to avoid the sequela of inadvertent prolonged or 
misdiagnosis.

Copyright © 2024, AlMoosawi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.56439
PMCID: PMC11024762
PMID: 38638763

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.