---
reference_id: "PMID:39010964"
title: Treponematosis in critically endangered Western chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus) in Senegal.
authors:
- Sereme Y
- Zarza SM
- Medkour H
- Mezouar S
- Dotras L
- Barciela A
- Hernandez-Aguilar RA
- Vitte J
- Šmajs D
- Louni M
- Mulot B
- Leclerc A
- Guéry JP
- Orain N
- Diatta G
- Sokhna C
- Raoult D
- Davoust B
- Fenollar F
- Mediannikov O
journal: One Health
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.onehlt.2024.100694
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treponematosis in critically endangered Western chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus) in Senegal.
**Authors:** Sereme Y, Zarza SM, Medkour H, Mezouar S, Dotras L, Barciela A, Hernandez-Aguilar RA, Vitte J, Šmajs D, Louni M, Mulot B, Leclerc A, Guéry JP, Orain N, Diatta G, Sokhna C, Raoult D, Davoust B, Fenollar F, Mediannikov O
**Journal:** One Health (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.onehlt.2024.100694](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.onehlt.2024.100694)

## Content

1. One Health. 2024 Feb 13;18:100694. doi: 10.1016/j.onehlt.2024.100694.
eCollection 2024 Jun.

Treponematosis in critically endangered Western chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes
verus) in Senegal.

Sereme Y(1)(2)(3), Zarza SM(1)(2), Medkour H(1)(2), Mezouar S(1)(2), Dotras
L(4)(5), Barciela A(4), Hernandez-Aguilar RA(4)(5)(6), Vitte J(1)(2), Šmajs
D(7), Louni M(1)(2), Mulot B(8), Leclerc A(8), Guéry JP(8), Orain N(1)(2),
Diatta G(9)(10), Sokhna C(1)(9)(10), Raoult D(1)(2), Davoust B(1)(2), Fenollar
F(1)(9), Mediannikov O(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)IHU-Méditerranée Infection, Marseille, France.
(2)Aix-Marseille Univ., IRD, AP-HM, MEPHI, Marseille, France.
(3)Université Paris Cité, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Necker Enfants Malades, Paris,
France.
(4)Jane Goodall Institute Spain and Senegal, Dindefelo Biological Station,
Dindefelo, Kedougou, Senegal.
(5)Department of Social Psychology and Quantitative Psychology, University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Serra Hunter Programme, Generalitat de Catalunya, Spain.
(7)Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Kamenice,
Czech Republic.
(8)ZooParc de Beauval, Saint-Aignan, France.
(9)Aix-Marseille Univ., IRD, AP-HM, SSA, VITROME, Marseille, France.
(10)VITROME, Campus International UCAD-IRD, Dakar, Senegal.

Treponematoses encompass a group of chronic and debilitating bacterial diseases
transmitted sexually or by direct contact and attributed to Treponema pallidum.
Despite being documented since as far back as 1963, the epidemiology of
treponematoses in wild primates has remained an uninvestigated territory due to
the inherent challenges associated with conducting examinations and obtaining
invasive biological samples from wild animals. The primary aim of this study was
to investigate the presence of treponemal infections in the critically
endangered Western chimpanzees in Senegal, utilizing an innovative non-invasive
stool serology method. We provide compelling evidence of the existence of
anti-Treponema-specific antibodies in 13 out of 29 individual chimpanzees. Our
study also underscores the significant potential of stool serology as a valuable
non-invasive tool for monitoring and surveilling crucial emerging diseases in
wild animals. We recognize two major implications: (1) the imperative need to
assess the risks of treponematosis in Western chimpanzee populations and (2) the
necessity to monitor and manage this disease following a holistic One Health
approach.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.onehlt.2024.100694
PMCID: PMC11247300
PMID: 39010964

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest with this work.
