---
reference_id: "PMID:31396201"
title: Preponderance of CTLA4 Variation Associated With Autosomal Dominant Immune Dysregulation in the MYPPPY Motif.
authors:
- Siggs OM
- Russell A
- Singh-Grewal D
- Wong M
- Chan P
- Craig ME
- "O'Loughlin T"
- Stormon M
- Goodnow CC
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01544
keywords:
- Abatacept/therapeutic use
- Amino Acid Motifs
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Arthritis, Juvenile/drug therapy, genetics"
- CTLA-4 Antigen/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Hepatitis, Autoimmune/drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preponderance of CTLA4 Variation Associated With Autosomal Dominant Immune Dysregulation in the MYPPPY Motif.
**Authors:** Siggs OM, Russell A, Singh-Grewal D, Wong M, Chan P, Craig ME, O'Loughlin T, Stormon M, Goodnow CC
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2019.01544](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2019.01544)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2019 Jul 23;10:1544. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01544. eCollection
 2019.

Preponderance of CTLA4 Variation Associated With Autosomal Dominant Immune
Dysregulation in the MYPPPY Motif.

Siggs OM(1)(2), Russell A(1), Singh-Grewal D(3), Wong M(3), Chan P(3), Craig
ME(3), O'Loughlin T(3), Stormon M(3), Goodnow CC(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, NSW, Australia.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Flinders University, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(3)The Children's Hospitals Network, The University of New South Wales, Sydney,
NSW, Australia.
(4)St. Vincent's Clinical School, The University of New South Wales, Sydney,
NSW, Australia.

One of the primary targets of immune checkpoint inhibition is the negative
immune regulatory molecule CTLA-4. Immune-related adverse events are commonly
observed following CTLA-4 inhibition in melanoma treatment, and a spectrum of
these conditions are also observed in individuals with germline
haploinsufficiency of CTLA4. Here we describe a heterozygous de novo missense
variant of CTLA4 in a young girl with childhood-onset autoimmune hepatitis and
polyarthritis, the latter responding to treatment with CTLA-4-Ig fusion protein.
This variant lay within the highly conserved MYPPPY motif of CTLA-4: a critical
structural determinant of ligand binding, which is also bound by the anti-CTLA-4
monoclonal antibody ipilimumab. Within the spectrum of CTLA4 variants reported,
missense variants in the MYPPPY motif were overrepresented when compared to
variants within a control population, highlighting the physiological importance
of this motif in both the genetic and pharmacological regulation of autoimmunity
and anti-tumor immunity.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01544
PMCID: PMC6664875
PMID: 31396201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
