---
reference_id: PMID:30537570
title: "Insomnia as a predictor of mental disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Hertenstein E
- Feige B
- Gmeiner T
- Kienzler C
- Spiegelhalder K
- Johann A
- Jansson-Fröjmark M
- Palagini L
- Rücker G
- Riemann D
- Baglioni C
journal: Sleep Med Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2018.10.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insomnia as a predictor of mental disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Hertenstein E, Feige B, Gmeiner T, Kienzler C, Spiegelhalder K, Johann A, Jansson-Fröjmark M, Palagini L, Rücker G, Riemann D, Baglioni C
**Journal:** Sleep Med Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.smrv.2018.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2018.10.006)

## Content

1. Sleep Med Rev. 2019 Feb;43:96-105. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2018.10.006. Epub 2018 
Nov 16.

Insomnia as a predictor of mental disorders: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Hertenstein E(1), Feige B(2), Gmeiner T(2), Kienzler C(2), Spiegelhalder K(2), 
Johann A(2), Jansson-Fröjmark M(3), Palagini L(4), Rücker G(5), Riemann D(2), 
Baglioni C(2).

Author information:
(1)University Psychiatric Services Bern (UPD), Bern, Switzerland. Electronic 
address: elisabeth.hertenstein@upd.ch.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical Center - University of 
Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine University of Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, Sweden.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pisa, Italy.
(5)Institute for Medical Biometry and Statistics, Medical Center - University of 
Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine University of Freiburg, Germany.

Previous research has identified insomnia as a predictor for the onset of 
depression. The aim of this meta-analysis is to investigate whether insomnia 
also predicts the onset of other mental disorders. Longitudinal studies were 
eligible for inclusion if they investigated insomnia at baseline (including 
nighttime- and daytime-symptoms) as a predictor of the later onset of 
psychopathology within a follow-up time-frame of at least 12 mo. Thirteen 
primary studies were included. The results suggest that insomnia is a 
significant predictor for the onset of depression (10 studies, OR 2.83, CI 
1.55-5.17), anxiety (six studies, OR 3.23, CI 1.52-6.85), alcohol abuse (two 
studies, OR 1.35, CI 1.08-1.67, and psychosis (one study, OR 1.28, CI 
1.03-1.59). The overall risk of bias in the primary studies was moderate. This 
meta-analysis provides evidence that insomnia increases the risk for 
psychopathology. A future research agenda should include more prospective 
studies using established diagnostic criteria, assessing insomnia at baseline 
and including long-term follow-up intervals evaluating a wider range of mental 
disorders. In addition, prospective long-term interventional studies 
investigating the efficacy of insomnia treatment for the prevention of mental 
disorders are called for.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smrv.2018.10.006
PMID: 30537570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]