---
reference_id: "PMID:40174959"
title: "Risk of malignant transformation and infections in congenital lung malformations in adults: a systematic review."
authors:
- Pederiva F
- Dalena P
- Pasqua N
- Bresesti I
- Testa V
- Zirpoli S
- Gentilino V
journal: Eur Respir Rev
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1183/16000617.0254-2024
keywords:
- Humans
- Risk Factors
- Adult
- "Lung Neoplasms/pathology, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Lung/abnormalities, surgery, diagnostic imaging"
- Risk Assessment
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/pathology"
- Adolescent
- Female
- Young Adult
- Middle Aged
- Male
- Aged
- "Respiratory Tract Infections/epidemiology, diagnosis"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Respiratory System Abnormalities/complications, surgery"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation of Lung, Congenital/surgery, complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk of malignant transformation and infections in congenital lung malformations in adults: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Pederiva F, Dalena P, Pasqua N, Bresesti I, Testa V, Zirpoli S, Gentilino V
**Journal:** Eur Respir Rev (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1183/16000617.0254-2024](https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0254-2024)

## Content

1. Eur Respir Rev. 2025 Apr 2;34(176):240254. doi: 10.1183/16000617.0254-2024. 
Print 2025 Apr.

Risk of malignant transformation and infections in congenital lung malformations 
in adults: a systematic review.

Pederiva F(1), Dalena P(2)(3), Pasqua N(4), Bresesti I(5)(6), Testa V(7), 
Zirpoli S(8), Gentilino V(4).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Surgery, "F. Del Ponte" Hospital, ASST Settelaghi, Varese, Italy 
federica_pederiva@yahoo.it.
(2)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, 
Italy.
(3)University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
(4)Pediatric Surgery, "F. Del Ponte" Hospital, ASST Settelaghi, Varese, Italy.
(5)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, "F. Del Ponte" Hospital, ASST Settelaghi, 
Varese, Italy.
(6)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy.
(7)University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(8)Department of Radiology, "Vittore Buzzi" Children's Hospital, Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Although there is agreement on surgically removing symptomatic 
congenital lung malformations (CLMs), the management of asymptomatic cases 
remains controversial. Some paediatric surgeons suggest conservative management 
for asymptomatic cases due to the low perceived risk of developing symptoms or 
malignancy. This study aimed to investigate the characteristics and management 
of adults with CLMs.
METHODS: Following PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses) guidelines, a systematic review was conducted to find studies 
reporting on adult patients (aged ≥15 years) with CLMs.
RESULTS: Out of 12 908 studies reviewed from 1947 to 2024, 653 studies met the 
inclusion criteria, covering 980 patients. None of the patients had a prenatal 
diagnosis. The mean±sd age at surgery was 39.4±15.7 years (range 15-86). A total 
of 74.4% of adults with CLMs presented with symptoms, leading to the detection 
of CLM. Pneumonia was the most common symptom in congenital pulmonary airway 
malformation (CPAM) and intralobar sequestration, with over 30% of these 
patients experiencing recurrent respiratory infections. In 11.7% of adults, CLMs 
harboured tumours at the time of surgical removal, with CPAM associated with 
lung tumours in over 20% of cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Thoracic surgeons recommend surgical resection for all adult CLM 
patients, including asymptomatic cases, due to risks of infections and 
malignancy. Conservative management was considered only when surgery was not 
feasible.

Copyright ©The authors 2025.

DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0254-2024
PMCID: PMC11963009
PMID: 40174959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest relevant to this article to disclose.