---
reference_id: "PMID:39365630"
title: A clinical case of pityriasis lichenoides chronica presenting with palpable purpura after streptococcal infection.
authors:
- Gancheva R
- Pozharashka J
- Koundurdjiev A
- Nikolova-Vlahova M
- Yankova P
- Marinchev L
journal: Folia Med (Plovdiv)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3897/folmed.66.e111548
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Streptococcal Infections/complications, drug therapy"
- Purpura/etiology
- Methylprednisolone/therapeutic use
- Hydroxychloroquine/therapeutic use
- "Pharyngitis/drug therapy, complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A clinical case of pityriasis lichenoides chronica presenting with palpable purpura after streptococcal infection.
**Authors:** Gancheva R, Pozharashka J, Koundurdjiev A, Nikolova-Vlahova M, Yankova P, Marinchev L
**Journal:** Folia Med (Plovdiv) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3897/folmed.66.e111548](https://doi.org/10.3897/folmed.66.e111548)

## Content

1. Folia Med (Plovdiv). 2024 Jun 30;66(3):426-430. doi:
10.3897/folmed.66.e111548.

A clinical case of pityriasis lichenoides chronica presenting with palpable
purpura after streptococcal infection.

Gancheva R(1), Pozharashka J(2), Koundurdjiev A(3), Nikolova-Vlahova M(3),
Yankova P(4), Marinchev L(1).

Author information:
(1)Sofiamed University Hospital, St Kliment Ohridski University, Sofia,
Bulgaria.
(2)Sofia Dermatology Clinic, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(3)St Ivan Rilski University Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(4)Alexandrovska University Hospital, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia,
Bulgaria.

Pityriasis lichenoides is a rare inflammatory skin condition presenting with
diffuse red-brown papules with evolution polymorphism and mica-like crust on
older skin lesions. We present a 60-year-old female patient with pityriasis
lichenoides chronica that manifested ten days after streptococcal pharyngitis.
Initially, palpable purpura appeared on the lower extremities and later,
erythematous-squamous papules and plaques appeared at the site of the palpable
purpura and on the upper limbs and trunk. The patient had no history of
hematological malignancy, viral hepatitis, kidney involvement, systemic
rheumatic disease, or ANCA-associated vasculitis. After administration of
methylprednisolone 20 mg for one month and an antimalarial agent
(hydroxychloroquine 200 mg, 1 tablet bid) for three months, the skin lesions
subsided without recurrence.

This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and
source are credited.

DOI: 10.3897/folmed.66.e111548
PMID: 39365630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
