---
reference_id: PMID:25435309
title: Molecular mechanisms of antibiotic resistance.
authors:
- Blair JM
- Webber MA
- Baylay AJ
- Ogbolu DO
- Piddock LJ
journal: Nat Rev Microbiol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/nrmicro3380
keywords:
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/metabolism, pharmacology"
- "Bacteria/drug effects, metabolism, pathogenicity"
- "Drug Resistance, Bacterial"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular mechanisms of antibiotic resistance.
**Authors:** Blair JM, Webber MA, Baylay AJ, Ogbolu DO, Piddock LJ
**Journal:** Nat Rev Microbiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrmicro3380](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro3380)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2015 Jan;13(1):42-51. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro3380. Epub 2014
Dec  1.

Molecular mechanisms of antibiotic resistance.

Blair JM(1), Webber MA(1), Baylay AJ(2), Ogbolu DO(2), Piddock LJ(2).

Author information:
(1)1] Antimicrobials Research Group, School of Immunity and Infection, Institute 
for Microbiology and Infection, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham 
B15 2TT, UK. [2].
(2)Antimicrobials Research Group, School of Immunity and Infection, Institute 
for Microbiology and Infection, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham 
B15 2TT, UK.

Antibiotic-resistant bacteria that are difficult or impossible to treat are 
becoming increasingly common and are causing a global health crisis. Antibiotic 
resistance is encoded by several genes, many of which can transfer between 
bacteria. New resistance mechanisms are constantly being described, and new 
genes and vectors of transmission are identified on a regular basis. This 
article reviews recent advances in our understanding of the mechanisms by which 
bacteria are either intrinsically resistant or acquire resistance to 
antibiotics, including the prevention of access to drug targets, changes in the 
structure and protection of antibiotic targets and the direct modification or 
inactivation of antibiotics.

DOI: 10.1038/nrmicro3380
PMID: 25435309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]