---
reference_id: "PMID:34302960"
title: Evaluation of immature platelet fraction as a marker of dengue fever progression.
authors:
- Looi KW
- Matsui Y
- Kono M
- Samudi C
- Kojima N
- Ong JX
- Tan CA
- Ang CS
- Tan PHY
- Shamnugam H
- Sekaran SD
- Syed Omar SF
- Lum LCS
journal: Int J Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2021.07.048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of immature platelet fraction as a marker of dengue fever progression.
**Authors:** Looi KW, Matsui Y, Kono M, Samudi C, Kojima N, Ong JX, Tan CA, Ang CS, Tan PHY, Shamnugam H, Sekaran SD, Syed Omar SF, Lum LCS
**Journal:** Int J Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijid.2021.07.048](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2021.07.048)

## Content

1. Int J Infect Dis. 2021 Sep;110:187-194. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2021.07.048. Epub 
2021 Jul 22.

Evaluation of immature platelet fraction as a marker of dengue fever 
progression.

Looi KW(1), Matsui Y(2), Kono M(2), Samudi C(1), Kojima N(2), Ong JX(1), Tan 
CA(1), Ang CS(1), Tan PHY(1), Shamnugam H(1), Sekaran SD(3), Syed Omar SF(1), 
Lum LCS(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Scientific Affairs, Sysmex Corporation, Kobe, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, UCSI University, Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia. Electronic address: shamala@ucsiuniversity.edu.my.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Electronic 
address: lumcs@ummc.edu.my.

OBJECTIVES: Progression of dengue is often associated with thrombocytopenia 
resulting from viral-induced bone marrow suppression and immune-mediated 
peripheral platelet consumption. Immature platelet fraction (IPF), which can be 
measured using a haematology analyser, is a precursor indicating platelet 
formation in the bone marrow. This study evaluated the trend of IPF as an early 
recovery indicator of platelets in dengue patients with thrombocytopenia, and 
its relationship with severe dengue in conjunction with reticulocyte count.
METHODS: Hospitalized patients with dengue were enrolled and followed-up daily 
until discharge. Blood investigations included daily full blood counts and IPF 
measured using a haematology analyser.
RESULTS: In total, 287 patients with confirmed dengue were enrolled in this 
study, 25 of whom had severe dengue. All patients had a decreasing trend in 
platelet count in the first week of illness, concomitant with an increasing 
trend in the percentage of immature platelets to total platelets (IPF%) for more 
than 3 days prior to platelet recovery. IPF% was significantly increased in 
patients with severe dengue compared with patients with non-severe dengue on 
days 3-5 after the onset of fever. Reticulocyte count increased significantly in 
patients with severe dengue on day 5.
CONCLUSIONS: IPF can be utilized as an early recovery indicator of platelets in 
patients with dengue and thrombocytopenia.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2021.07.048
PMID: 34302960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement YM, MK and NK are 
employees of Sysmex Corporation.