---
reference_id: "PMID:33958142"
title: Autoinmune polyendocrinopathy.
authors:
- Fernández Miró M
- Colom Comí C
- Godoy Lorenzo R
journal: Med Clin (Barc)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2021.02.004
keywords:
- "Addison Disease/diagnosis, genetics"
- Autoantibodies
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Hypoparathyroidism/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoinmune polyendocrinopathy.
**Authors:** Fernández Miró M, Colom Comí C, Godoy Lorenzo R
**Journal:** Med Clin (Barc) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.medcli.2021.02.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medcli.2021.02.004)

## Content

1. Med Clin (Barc). 2021 Sep 10;157(5):241-246. doi:
10.1016/j.medcli.2021.02.004.  Epub 2021 May 3.

Autoinmune polyendocrinopathy.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Fernández Miró M(1), Colom Comí C(2), Godoy Lorenzo R(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Medicina Interna y Especialidades Médicas, Centre d'Atenció 
Integral Dos de Maig, Consorci Sanitari Integral, Barcelona, España. Electronic 
address: mfmiro79@gmail.com.
(2)Departamento de Medicina Interna y Especialidades Médicas, Centre d'Atenció 
Integral Dos de Maig, Consorci Sanitari Integral, Barcelona, España.

Pluriglandular autoimmune syndrome (APS) can affect multiple endocrine glands 
and is associated with other autoimmune diseases. APS type 1 presents with 
hypoparathyroidism, mucocutaneous candidiasis and Addison's disease. It is 
caused by AutoImmune Regulator (AIRE) gene mutation. The diagnosis includes 
clinical manifestations in addition to AIRE gene sequencing. SPA type 2 presents 
with Addison's disease, type 1 diabetes, or autoimmune thyroid disease. Multiple 
genes have been implicated, including those of the class II major 
histocompatibility complex. SPA type 3 is characterized by autoimmune thyroid 
disease and other autoimmune disease, excluding Addison's disease and 
hypoparathyroidism, 4 genes have been implicated and confer susceptibility. The 
diagnosis of APS type 2 and type 3 includes clinical manifestations, 
nevertheless, the determination of autoantibodies can be useful to predict the 
risk of disease manifestation and to confirm the autoimmune disease in some 
cases.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medcli.2021.02.004
PMID: 33958142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]