---
reference_id: "PMID:36672416"
title: "Outcomes of Patients Treated for Hepatoblastoma with Low Alpha-Fetoprotein and/or Small Cell Undifferentiated Histology: A Report from the Children's Hepatic Tumors International Collaboration (CHIC)."
authors:
- Trobaugh-Lotrario AD
- Maibach R
- Aronson DC
- Rangaswami A
- Häberle B
- "O'Neill AF"
- Schmid I
- Ansari M
- Hishiki T
- Ranganathan S
- Alaggio R
- de Krijger RR
- Tanaka Y
- Cho SJ
- Vokuhl C
- Maxwell R
- Krailo M
- Hiyama E
- Czauderna P
- Finegold M
- Feusner JH
- Malogolowkin MH
- Meyers RL
- Lopez-Terrada D
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers15020467
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes of Patients Treated for Hepatoblastoma with Low Alpha-Fetoprotein and/or Small Cell Undifferentiated Histology: A Report from the Children's Hepatic Tumors International Collaboration (CHIC).
**Authors:** Trobaugh-Lotrario AD, Maibach R, Aronson DC, Rangaswami A, Häberle B, O'Neill AF, Schmid I, Ansari M, Hishiki T, Ranganathan S, Alaggio R, de Krijger RR, Tanaka Y, Cho SJ, Vokuhl C, Maxwell R, Krailo M, Hiyama E, Czauderna P, Finegold M, Feusner JH, Malogolowkin MH, Meyers RL, Lopez-Terrada D
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers15020467](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15020467)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Jan 11;15(2):467. doi: 10.3390/cancers15020467.

Outcomes of Patients Treated for Hepatoblastoma with Low Alpha-Fetoprotein 
and/or Small Cell Undifferentiated Histology: A Report from the Children's 
Hepatic Tumors International Collaboration (CHIC).

Trobaugh-Lotrario AD(1), Maibach R(2), Aronson DC(3), Rangaswami A(4), Häberle 
B(5), O'Neill AF(6), Schmid I(7), Ansari M(8), Hishiki T(9), Ranganathan S(10), 
Alaggio R(11), de Krijger RR(12)(13), Tanaka Y(14), Cho SJ(15), Vokuhl C(16), 
Maxwell R(5), Krailo M(17), Hiyama E(18), Czauderna P(19), Finegold M(20), 
Feusner JH(21), Malogolowkin MH(22), Meyers RL(23), Lopez-Terrada D(20).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Providence Sacred Heart 
Children's Hospital, Spokane, WA 99204, USA.
(2)IBCSG Coordinating Center, 3008 Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Children's Hospital Zurich, 8032 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(5)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, 80337 Munich, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston 
Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Dr. von Hauner Children's 
Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, 80337 Munich, Germany.
(8)Pediatric Department, Onco-Hematology Unit, University of Geneva Hospitals, 
1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
(9)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Chiba University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Chiba 260-8677, Japan.
(10)Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology, Bambino Gesu Children's Hospital, 00165 Rome, 
Italy.
(12)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 
100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(13)Laboratory for Childhood Cancer Pathology, Princess Maxima Center for 
Pediatric Oncology, Heidelberglaan 25, 3584 CS Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(14)Department of Pathology, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama 
232-0066, Japan.
(15)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, 
USA.
(16)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(17)Department of Population and Public Health Sciences, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90032, USA.
(18)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 734-8551, 
Japan.
(19)Department of Surgery for Children and Adolescents, Medical University of 
Gdansk, 80-210 Gdansk, Poland.
(20)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine Houston, 
TX 77030, USA.
(21)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital & Research Center 
Oakland, Oakland, CA 94618, USA.
(22)Division of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, University of California-Davis, 
Davis, CA 95817, USA.
(23)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Primary Children's Hospital, Salt Lake City, 
UT 84113, USA.

Small cell undifferentiated (SCU) histology and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) levels 
below 100 ng/mL have been reported as poor prognostic factors in hepatoblastoma 
(HB); subsequent studies reported SMARCB1 mutations in some SCU HBs confirming 
the diagnosis of rhabdoid tumor. The Children's Hepatic tumors International 
Collaboration (CHIC) database was queried for patients with HB who had AFP 
levels less than 100 ng/mL at diagnosis or were historically diagnosed as SCU 
HBs. Seventy-three of 1605 patients in the CHIC database were originally 
identified as SCU HB, HB with SCU component, or HB with low AFP levels. Upon 
retrospective review, they were re-classified as rhabdoid tumors (n = 11), HB 
with SCU component (n = 41), and HB with low AFP (n = 14). Seven were excluded 
for erroneously low AFP levels. Overall survival was 0% for patients with 
rhabdoid tumors, 76% for patients with HB with SCU component, and 64% for 
patients with HB with AFP less than 100 ng/mL. Patients with HB with SCU 
component or low AFP should be assessed for SMARCB1 mutations and, if confirmed, 
treated as rhabdoid tumors. When rhabdoid tumors are excluded, the presence of 
SCU component and low AFP at diagnosis were not associated with poor prognosis 
in patients diagnosed with HB.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15020467
PMCID: PMC9857147
PMID: 36672416

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.