---
reference_id: "PMID:34169200"
title: Long-Term Efficacy and Safety of the Long-Acting Complement C5 Inhibitor Ravulizumab for the Treatment of Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome in Adults.
authors:
- Barbour T
- Scully M
- Ariceta G
- Cataland S
- Garlo K
- Heyne N
- Luque Y
- Menne J
- Miyakawa Y
- Yoon SS
- Kavanagh D
- 311 Study Group Members
journal: Kidney Int Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2021.03.884
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Efficacy and Safety of the Long-Acting Complement C5 Inhibitor Ravulizumab for the Treatment of Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome in Adults.
**Authors:** Barbour T, Scully M, Ariceta G, Cataland S, Garlo K, Heyne N, Luque Y, Menne J, Miyakawa Y, Yoon SS, Kavanagh D, 311 Study Group Members
**Journal:** Kidney Int Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ekir.2021.03.884](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ekir.2021.03.884)

## Content

1. Kidney Int Rep. 2021 Mar 24;6(6):1603-1613. doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2021.03.884. 
eCollection 2021 Jun.

Long-Term Efficacy and Safety of the Long-Acting Complement C5 Inhibitor 
Ravulizumab for the Treatment of Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome in Adults.

Barbour T(1), Scully M(2), Ariceta G(3), Cataland S(4), Garlo K(5), Heyne N(6), 
Luque Y(7), Menne J(8), Miyakawa Y(9), Yoon SS(10), Kavanagh D(11)(12); 311 
Study Group Members.

Collaborators: Babu S, Broeders N, Lietar N, Brown F, Campbell P, Campistol JM, 
Chowdhury P, Kasimatis T, Cirami L, Caroti L, Antognoli G, Delmas Y, Dobronravov 
V, Gaeckler A, Garrouste C, Greenwood G, Griffin S, Huang CC, Chen IR, Huang S, 
Kim JS, La Manna G, Le Quintrec M, Jeantet G, Fumie I, Rondeau E, Haller H, 
Morelle J, Goffin E, Muhlfeld A, Nagaraj S, Arepally G, Oh D, Okumi M, Terente 
MP, Provot F, Schönermarck U, Fischereder M, Terrada NR, Seitz-Polski B, Favre 
G, Boyer-Suavet S, Vinogradova M, Kirsanova T, Wong EK.

Author information:
(1)Kidney Care, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Department of Haematology, University College London Hospitals, London, UK.
(3)Paediatric Nephrology Department, University Hospital Vall d'Hebron, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Division of Hematology, The Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, 
Ohio, USA.
(5)Clinical Development, Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(6)Section of Nephrology and Hypertension, Tübingen University Hospital, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(7)Intensive Care Nephrology and Transplantation Department, APHP, Sorbonne 
Université, Paris, France.
(8)KRH Klinikum Mitte-Location Siloah, Hannover, Germany.
(9)Department of General Internal Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, 
Japan.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(11)Complement Therapeutics Research Group, Translational and Clinical Research 
Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(12)National Renal Complement Therapeutics Centre, Royal Victoria Infirmary, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a rare, complex, 
multisystem disease of dysregulated complement activity, characterized by 
progressive thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA), acute kidney injury, and 
multiorgan dysfunction, which often progresses to chronic kidney disease. 
Results from the prospective clinical trial of ravulizumab (NCT02949128) reveal 
rapid resolution of TMA in patients with aHUS, with sustained efficacy and 
safety in a 26-week initial evaluation period.
METHODS: The aim of this analysis was to characterize the long-term efficacy and 
the safety profile of ravulizumab in adults with aHUS who had completed the 
initial evaluation period of the trial. Complete TMA response, hematologic and 
kidney functions, and safety were evaluated for all patients available for 
follow-up in the extension period (median follow-up: 76.7 weeks; range: 
0.6-118.3). This trial included a total of 58 patients, 49 of whom entered the 
extension period.
RESULTS: A total of 4 additional patients achieved complete TMA response during 
the follow-up period. Normalization of platelet count, serum lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH), and hemoglobin observed in the 26-week initial evaluation 
period was sustained until the last available follow-up, as were the 
improvements in the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and patient 
quality of life. All efficacy endpoints were correlated with the sustained 
inhibition of complement C5. Most adverse events (AEs) occurred early during the 
initial evaluation period and decreased substantially during the extension 
period. No patient developed a meningococcal infection or died during the 
extension period.
CONCLUSION: This analysis reveals that ravulizumab administered every 8 weeks is 
efficacious with an acceptable safety profile for the long-term treatment of 
adults with aHUS and provides additional clinical benefit beyond 6 months of 
treatment.

© 2021 Published by Elsevier, Inc., on behalf of the International Society of 
Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ekir.2021.03.884
PMCID: PMC8207473
PMID: 34169200