---
reference_id: "PMID:26936822"
title: Ciliopathy-associated protein CEP290 modifies the severity of retinal degeneration due to loss of RPGR.
authors:
- Rao KN
- Zhang W
- Li L
- Ronquillo C
- Baehr W
- Khanna H
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw075
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "Cilia/genetics, pathology"
- "Ciliopathies/genetics, pathology"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Eye Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Neoplasm Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Photoreceptor Cells/pathology
- Protein Interaction Maps/genetics
- "Retina/metabolism, pathology"
- "Retinal Degeneration/genetics, pathology"
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ciliopathy-associated protein CEP290 modifies the severity of retinal degeneration due to loss of RPGR.
**Authors:** Rao KN, Zhang W, Li L, Ronquillo C, Baehr W, Khanna H
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddw075](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddw075)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 May 15;25(10):2005-2012. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw075. Epub
2016  Mar 2.

Ciliopathy-associated protein CEP290 modifies the severity of retinal 
degeneration due to loss of RPGR.

Rao KN(1), Zhang W(1), Li L(1), Ronquillo C(2), Baehr W(2), Khanna H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Horae Gene Therapy Center, UMASS Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, USA and.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A. Moran Eye Center, 
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Horae Gene Therapy Center, UMASS Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, USA and hemant.khanna@umassmed.edu.

Mutations in RPGR (retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator) are the most common 
cause of X-linked RP, a severe blindness disorder. RPGR mutations result in 
clinically variable disease with early- to late-onset phenotypic presentation. 
Molecular mechanisms underlying such heterogeneity are unclear. Here we show 
that phenotypic expression of Rpgr-loss in mice is influenced genetically by the 
loss of Cep290, a human ciliopathy gene. We found that Rpgrko/Y mice with a 
heterozygous hypomorphic allele of Cep290 (Cep290rd16/+) but not of a 
heterozygous null allele of Cep290 (Cep290null/+) or of other ciliopathy genes, 
Rpgrip1, Nphp1, Nphp4 and Nphp5, exhibit relatively early onset (by 3 months of 
age) retinal degeneration and dysfunction when compared with the onset at ∼7 
months of age in the Rpgrko/Y mice. We also observed disorganized photoreceptor 
outer-segment morphology and defective trafficking of opsins in the 
Rpgrko/Y::Cep290rd16/+ mice. Together with a physical interaction between RPGR 
and the C-terminal domain of CEP290, our data suggest that RPGR and CEP290 
genetically interact and highlight the involvement of hypomorphic alleles of 
genes as potential modifiers of heterogeneous retinal ciliopathies.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddw075
PMCID: PMC5062589
PMID: 26936822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]