---
reference_id: "PMID:29310960"
title: "Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: Pathophysiology and Treatment in the Emergency Department."
authors:
- Richards JR
journal: J Emerg Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2017.12.010
keywords:
- Benzodiazepines/therapeutic use
- "Cannabinoids/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Dopamine Antagonists/therapeutic use
- "Emergency Service, Hospital/organization & administration"
- Evidence-Based Medicine/methods
- Humans
- "Hypothalamo-Hypophyseal System/drug effects, physiopathology"
- Marijuana Smoking/adverse effects
- Nausea/drug therapy
- "Vomiting/complications, etiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: Pathophysiology and Treatment in the Emergency Department.
**Authors:** Richards JR
**Journal:** J Emerg Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jemermed.2017.12.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jemermed.2017.12.010)

## Content

1. J Emerg Med. 2018 Mar;54(3):354-363. doi: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2017.12.010. Epub
 2018 Jan 5.

Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: Pathophysiology and Treatment in the Emergency
Department.

Richards JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of California Davis Medical
Center, Sacramento, California.

BACKGROUND: Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS) is a challenging clinical
disorder. CHS patients frequently present to the emergency department and may
require treatment for intractable emesis, dehydration, and electrolyte
abnormalities. Thought to be a variant of cyclic vomiting syndrome, CHS has
become more prevalent with increasing cannabis potency and use, as enabled by
various states having legalized the recreational use of cannabis.
OBJECTIVE: This aim of this review is to investigate the pathophysiology of CHS
and evaluate the published literature on pharmacologic treatment in the
emergency department. This information may be helpful in providing
evidence-based, efficacious antiemetic treatment grounded in knowledge of
antiemetic medications' mechanisms of action, potentially precluding unnecessary
tests, and reducing duration of stay.
DISCUSSION: The endocannabinoid system is a complex and important regulator of
stress response and allostasis, and it is occasionally overwhelmed from
excessive cannabis use. Acute episodes of CHS may be precipitated by stress or
fasting in chronic cannabis users who may have pre-existing abnormal
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis feedback and sympathetic nervous system
response. The reasons for this may lie in the physiology of the endocannabinoid
system, the pathophysiology of CHS, and the pharmacologic properties of specific
classes of antiemetics and sedatives. Treatment failure with standard
antiemetics is common, necessitating the use of mechanistically logical sedating
agents such as benzodiazepines and antipsychotics.
CONCLUSION: Despite the increasing prevalence of CHS, there is a limited body of
high-quality research. Benzodiazepines and antipsychotics represent logical
choices for treatment of CHS because of their powerful sedating effects. Topical
capsaicin holds promise based on a totally different pharmacologic mechanism.
Discontinuation of cannabis use is the only assured cure for CHS.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2017.12.010
PMID: 29310960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
