---
reference_id: "PMID:35625351"
title: The BDNF Val66Met Polymorphism Does Not Increase Susceptibility to Activity-Based Anorexia in Rats.
authors:
- Pietrucci CL
- Milton LK
- Greaves E
- Stefanidis A
- van den Buuse M
- Oldfield BJ
- Foldi CJ
journal: Biology (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/biology11050623
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The BDNF Val66Met Polymorphism Does Not Increase Susceptibility to Activity-Based Anorexia in Rats.
**Authors:** Pietrucci CL, Milton LK, Greaves E, Stefanidis A, van den Buuse M, Oldfield BJ, Foldi CJ
**Journal:** Biology (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biology11050623](https://doi.org/10.3390/biology11050623)

## Content

1. Biology (Basel). 2022 Apr 19;11(5):623. doi: 10.3390/biology11050623.

The BDNF Val66Met Polymorphism Does Not Increase Susceptibility to
Activity-Based Anorexia in Rats.

Pietrucci CL(1), Milton LK(1)(2), Greaves E(1), Stefanidis A(1)(2), van den
Buuse M(3), Oldfield BJ(1)(2), Foldi CJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Australia.
(2)Metabolism, Diabetes and Obesity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery
Institute, Clayton 3800, Australia.
(3)School of Psychology and Public Health, La Trobe University, Kingsbury Drive,
Bundoora 3086, Australia.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is abundantly expressed in brain
regions involved in both homeostatic and hedonic feeding, and it circulates at
reduced levels in patients with anorexia nervosa (AN). A single nucleotide
polymorphism in the gene encoding for BDNF (Val66Met) has been associated with
worse outcomes in patients with AN, and it is shown to promote anorectic
behaviour in a mouse model of caloric restriction paired with social isolation
stress. Previous animal models of the Val66Met polymorphism have been in mice
because of the greater ease in modification of the mouse genome, however, the
most widely-accepted animal model of AN, known as activity-based anorexia (ABA),
is most commonly conducted in rats. Here, we examine ABA outcomes in a novel rat
model of the BDNF Val66Met allelic variation (Val68Met), and we investigate the
role of this polymorphism in feeding, food choice and sucrose preference, and
energy expenditure. We demonstrate that the BDNF Val68Met polymorphism does not
influence susceptibility to ABA or any aspect of feeding behaviour. The
discrepancy between these results and previous reports in mice may relate to
species-specific differences in stress reactivity.

DOI: 10.3390/biology11050623
PMCID: PMC9138045
PMID: 35625351

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
