---
reference_id: "PMID:38458507"
title: "Investigating the influence of probiotics in preventing Traveler's diarrhea: Meta-analysis based systematic review."
authors:
- Alharbi BF
- Alateek AA
journal: Travel Med Infect Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2024.102703
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigating the influence of probiotics in preventing Traveler's diarrhea: Meta-analysis based systematic review.
**Authors:** Alharbi BF, Alateek AA
**Journal:** Travel Med Infect Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tmaid.2024.102703](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tmaid.2024.102703)

## Content

1. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2024 May-Jun;59:102703. doi:
10.1016/j.tmaid.2024.102703.  Epub 2024 Mar 7.

Investigating the influence of probiotics in preventing Traveler's diarrhea: 
Meta-analysis based systematic review.

Alharbi BF(1), Alateek AA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Health Science, College of Applied Medical Sciences, 
Qassim University, Buraydah, 51452, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: 
B.alwahbi@qu.edu.sa.
(2)Department of Medical Laboratory, College of Applied Medical Sciences, Qassim 
University, Buraydah, 51452, Saudi Arabia.

INTRODUCTION: Approximately 10-40 million travelers get Traveler's Diarrhea (TD) 
yearly. A significant decrease in TD incidence has not been achieved by 
depending solely on antibiotic prophylaxis and educational initiatives. Using 
prebiotics to prevent TD has also not been examined in previous evaluations of 
probiotics for TD, which failed to consider the strain-specificity of probiotic 
efficacy. This review investigates the overall effects of probiotics on 
preventing TD, including the impact of dosage, duration, and age.
METHODS: Standard literature databases were searched without restriction on 
publication year or language. The following criteria are included: randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs) in English or non-English unrestricted to publication 
year, excluding animal and observational studies. This systematic review applied 
the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses.
RESULTS: Of the 166 screened papers, 10 RCTs were included. Lactobacillus 
acidophilus showed no efficacy in preventing TD except when mixed with other 
strains. Other genera of lactobacilli showed a protection rate of up to 39% 
against TD. Similarly, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces boulardii have 
been effective in preventing TD.
CONCLUSION: Studies investigating probiotics as a preventive measure for TD 
remain limited. Only a few probiotics that reduce TD risk exist. Based on this 
systematic review and meta-analysis, specific probiotic strains, including L. 
acidophilus, L. rhamnosus, L. fermentum, S. cerevisiae, and S. boulardii, may 
prevent TD. The effect of additional probiotic strains on TD prevention must be 
further investigated.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2024.102703
PMID: 38458507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.