---
reference_id: "PMID:31177235"
title: Ancillary Service Utilization and Impact in Huntington's Disease.
authors:
- Yomtoob J
- Yeh C
- Bega D
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3233/JHD-190349
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ancillary Service Utilization and Impact in Huntington's Disease.
**Authors:** Yomtoob J, Yeh C, Bega D
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JHD-190349](https://doi.org/10.3233/JHD-190349)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2019;8(3):301-310. doi: 10.3233/JHD-190349.

Ancillary Service Utilization and Impact in Huntington's Disease.

Yomtoob J(1), Yeh C(2), Bega D(3).

Author information:
(1)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Preventative Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prior Huntington's disease (HD) studies suggest ancillary services 
improve motor symptoms, cognition, mood, and quality of life but frequency of 
use and clinicalcharacteristics are unclear.
OBJECTIVE: Describe ancillary service utilization in a cohort of individuals 
with HD and determine which participant characteristics are associated with 
ancillary service utilization.
METHODS: Retrospective cross-sectional analysis of Enroll-HD database. 
Participants were grouped by therapy: physical and/or occupational (PT/OT), 
psychotherapy and/or counseling (PC), speech and/or swallowing (ST). We 
performed bivariate comparisons analysis of demographic and disease 
characteristics between those with/without each therapy and to analyze one-year 
mean change in assessment scores.
RESULTS: Of 4751 participants, 1537 (32.35%) utilized therapies (11.82% PT/OT, 
5.33% PC, 3.01% ST, 1.98% all three, 10.21% two therapies). PT/OT participants 
had worse motor and functional scores: mean UHDRS motor score (41.17 vs. 38.05, 
p = 0.002), median total functional capacity score (TFC) (8.00 vs. 9.00, 
p < 0.001). PC participants had worse mood but better cognitive and functional 
scores: median depression score (7.00 vs. 2.00, p < 0.001), median MMSE (28.00 
vs. 26.00, p < 0.001), median TFC (10.00 vs. 8.00, p < 0.001). ST participants 
had more dysarthria, and worse cognitive and functional scores: dysarthria 
(32.2% vs. 20.1% p < 0.001), mean correct Symbol Digit Modality Test (16.79 vs. 
23.27, p < 0.001), median TFC (6.00 vs. 9.00, p < 0.001). Over one year, PC 
participants' depression scores improved compared to untreated (- 1.24 vs. - 
0.11, p = 0.040). ST participants' depression scores worsened (1.14 vs. - 0.23, 
p = 0.044). Mean change in TFC was not significant for any therapies.
CONCLUSIONS: Only 32% of Enroll-HD site participants received ancillary 
services. Use correlated with expected clinical characteristics, though impact 
of use remains unclear.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-190349
PMID: 31177235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]