---
reference_id: "PMID:11179006"
title: "Bone dysplasia sclerosteosis results from loss of the SOST gene product, a novel cystine knot-containing protein."
authors:
- Brunkow ME
- Gardner JC
- Van Ness J
- Paeper BW
- Kovacevich BR
- Proll S
- Skonier JE
- Zhao L
- Sabo PJ
- Fu Y
- Alisch RS
- Gillett L
- Colbert T
- Tacconi P
- Galas D
- Hamersma H
- Beighton P
- Mulligan J
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/318811
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone dysplasia sclerosteosis results from loss of the SOST gene product, a novel cystine knot-containing protein.
**Authors:** Brunkow ME, Gardner JC, Van Ness J, Paeper BW, Kovacevich BR, Proll S, Skonier JE, Zhao L, Sabo PJ, Fu Y, Alisch RS, Gillett L, Colbert T, Tacconi P, Galas D, Hamersma H, Beighton P, Mulligan J
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/318811](https://doi.org/10.1086/318811)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Mar;68(3):577-89. doi: 10.1086/318811. Epub 2001 Feb 9.

Bone dysplasia sclerosteosis results from loss of the SOST gene product, a novel 
cystine knot-containing protein.

Brunkow ME(1), Gardner JC, Van Ness J, Paeper BW, Kovacevich BR, Proll S, 
Skonier JE, Zhao L, Sabo PJ, Fu Y, Alisch RS, Gillett L, Colbert T, Tacconi P, 
Galas D, Hamersma H, Beighton P, Mulligan J.

Author information:
(1)Celltech Inc., Bothell, WA 98021, USA. mary.brunkow@sea.celltechgroup.com

Sclerosteosis is an autosomal recessive sclerosing bone dysplasia characterized 
by progressive skeletal overgrowth. The majority of affected individuals have 
been reported in the Afrikaner population of South Africa, where a high 
incidence of the disorder occurs as a result of a founder effect. Homozygosity 
mapping in Afrikaner families along with analysis of historical recombinants 
localized sclerosteosis to an interval of approximately 2 cM between the loci 
D17S1787 and D17S930 on chromosome 17q12-q21. Here we report two independent 
mutations in a novel gene, termed "SOST." Affected Afrikaners carry a nonsense 
mutation near the amino terminus of the encoded protein, whereas an unrelated 
affected person of Senegalese origin carries a splicing mutation within the 
single intron of the gene. The SOST gene encodes a protein that shares 
similarity with a class of cystine knot-containing factors including dan, 
cerberus, gremlin, prdc, and caronte. The specific and progressive effect on 
bone formation observed in individuals affected with sclerosteosis, along with 
the data presented in this study, together suggest that the SOST gene encodes an 
important new regulator of bone homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1086/318811
PMCID: PMC1274471
PMID: 11179006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]