---
reference_id: "PMID:35505663"
title: Gene therapy for guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency restores cerebral and myocardial creatine while resolving behavioral abnormalities.
authors:
- Khoja S
- Lambert J
- Nitzahn M
- Eliav A
- Zhang Y
- Tamboline M
- Le CT
- Nasser E
- Li Y
- Patel P
- Zhuravka I
- Lueptow LM
- Tkachyova I
- Xu S
- Nissim I
- Schulze A
- Lipshutz GS
journal: Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.omtm.2022.03.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene therapy for guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency restores cerebral and myocardial creatine while resolving behavioral abnormalities.
**Authors:** Khoja S, Lambert J, Nitzahn M, Eliav A, Zhang Y, Tamboline M, Le CT, Nasser E, Li Y, Patel P, Zhuravka I, Lueptow LM, Tkachyova I, Xu S, Nissim I, Schulze A, Lipshutz GS
**Journal:** Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.omtm.2022.03.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2022.03.015)

## Content

1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2022 Mar 28;25:278-296. doi: 
10.1016/j.omtm.2022.03.015. eCollection 2022 Jun 9.

Gene therapy for guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency restores cerebral 
and myocardial creatine while resolving behavioral abnormalities.

Khoja S(1), Lambert J(1), Nitzahn M(2), Eliav A(1), Zhang Y(3), Tamboline 
M(4)(5), Le CT(1), Nasser E(1), Li Y(6), Patel P(1), Zhuravka I(7), Lueptow 
LM(7), Tkachyova I(8), Xu S(4)(5)(9), Nissim I(10), Schulze A(11)(12)(8), 
Lipshutz GS(1)(2)(3)(5)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90025, USA.
(2)Molecular Biology Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90025, USA.
(3)Semel Institute for Neuroscience, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90025, USA.
(4)Crump Institute for Molecular Imaging, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90025, USA.
(5)Departments of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Universtiy of California, 
Los Angeles, CA 90025, USA.
(6)Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 
90025, USA.
(7)Behavioral Testing Core, Department of Psychology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 
90025, USA.
(8)Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, 
Canada.
(9)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center at UCLA, David Geffen School of Medicine 
at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90025, USA.
(10)Division of Metabolism and Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, and the Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perlman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(11)Department of Paediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, 
Canada.
(12)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, 
Canada.
(13)Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, UCLA, Los 
Angeles, CA 90025, USA.

Creatine deficiency disorders are inborn errors of creatine metabolism, an 
energy homeostasis molecule. One of these, guanidinoacetate N-methyltransferase 
(GAMT) deficiency, has clinical characteristics that include features of autism, 
self-mutilation, intellectual disability, and seizures, with approximately 40% 
having a disorder of movement; failure to thrive can also be a component. Along 
with low creatine levels, guanidinoacetic acid (GAA) toxicity has been 
implicated in the pathophysiology of the disorder. Present-day therapy with oral 
creatine to control GAA lacks efficacy; seizures can persist. Dietary management 
and pharmacological ornithine treatment are challenging. Using an AAV-based gene 
therapy approach to express human codon-optimized GAMT in hepatocytes, in situ 
hybridization, and immunostaining, we demonstrated pan-hepatic GAMT expression. 
Serial collection of blood demonstrated a marked early and sustained reduction 
of GAA with normalization of plasma creatine; urinary GAA levels also markedly 
declined. The terminal time point demonstrated marked improvement in cerebral 
and myocardial creatine levels. In conjunction with the biochemical findings, 
treated mice gained weight to nearly match their wild-type littermates, while 
behavioral studies demonstrated resolution of abnormalities; PET-CT imaging 
demonstrated improvement in brain metabolism. In conclusion, a gene therapy 
approach can result in long-term normalization of GAA with increased creatine in 
guanidinoacetate N-methyltransferase deficiency and at the same time resolves 
the behavioral phenotype in a murine model of the disorder. These findings have 
important implications for the development of a new therapy for this abnormality 
of creatine metabolism.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2022.03.015
PMCID: PMC9051621
PMID: 35505663

Conflict of interest statement: G.S.L. has served as a consultant to Audentes 
Therapeutics and is on the scientific advisory board (SAB) of Taysha in areas 
unrelated to this work. A.S. has served as consultant to and has received 
research funds from Aeglea BioTherapeutics. He is on the SAB of and has received 
fellowship grants from the Association of Creatine Deficiencies. All of the 
other authors declare no competing interests.