---
reference_id: "PMID:36809420"
title: "MRI and steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis: first report of conus medullaris involvement and literature review of the known neuroimaging profiles."
authors:
- Cipriano L
- Miele G
- Ugga L
- Abbadessa G
- Caranci F
- Bonavita S
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-06642-x
keywords:
- Neuroimaging
- Steroids
- "Brain Diseases/complications, diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- "Thyroiditis, Autoimmune/complications, diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Spinal Cord/diagnostic imaging
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Hashimoto Disease
- Encephalitis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MRI and steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis: first report of conus medullaris involvement and literature review of the known neuroimaging profiles.
**Authors:** Cipriano L, Miele G, Ugga L, Abbadessa G, Caranci F, Bonavita S
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-023-06642-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-023-06642-x)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2023 May;44(5):1773-1776. doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-06642-x. Epub
2023  Feb 21.

MRI and steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune 
thyroiditis: first report of conus medullaris involvement and literature review 
of the known neuroimaging profiles.

Cipriano L(1), Miele G(2), Ugga L(3), Abbadessa G(2), Caranci F(4), Bonavita 
S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Campania 
"L. Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy. lorenzo.cipriano@studenti.unicampania.it.
(2)Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Campania 
"L. Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Advanced Biomedical Sciences, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, 
Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune 
thyroiditis (SREAT) is a rare but potentially reversible autoimmune 
encephalopathy. The most frequent neuroimaging correlates are normal brain MRI 
or non-specific white matter hyperintensities.
METHODS: We present the first description of conus medullaris involvement, also 
providing an extensive review of MRI patterns described so far.
RESULTS: Our results show that in less than 30% of cases, it is possible to find 
focal SREAT neuroanatomical correlates. Among these, T2w/FLAIR temporal 
hyperintensities are the most frequent, followed by basal ganglia/thalamic and 
brainstem involvement, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Unfortunately, spinal cord investigation is an uncommon practice in 
the diagnostic approach of encephalopathies, thus neglecting potential 
pathological lesions of the medulla spinalis. In our opinion, the extension of 
the MRI study to the cervical, thoracic, and lumbosacral regions may allow 
finding new, and hopefully specific, anatomical correlates.

© 2023. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-023-06642-x
PMID: 36809420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]