---
reference_id: "PMID:16929062"
title: Reduced bone mineral density and hyaloid vasculature remnants in a consanguineous recessive FEVR family with a mutation in LRP5.
authors:
- Downey LM
- Bottomley HM
- Sheridan E
- Ahmed M
- Gilmour DF
- Inglehearn CF
- Reddy A
- Agrawal A
- Bradbury J
- Toomes C
journal: Br J Ophthalmol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1136/bjo.2006.092114
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Bone Density/genetics
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/complications, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- LDL-Receptor Related Proteins/genetics
- Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-5
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Osteoporosis/complications, genetics"
- Pedigree
- "Retinal Diseases/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced bone mineral density and hyaloid vasculature remnants in a consanguineous recessive FEVR family with a mutation in LRP5.
**Authors:** Downey LM, Bottomley HM, Sheridan E, Ahmed M, Gilmour DF, Inglehearn CF, Reddy A, Agrawal A, Bradbury J, Toomes C
**Journal:** Br J Ophthalmol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjo.2006.092114](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjo.2006.092114)

## Content

1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2006 Sep;90(9):1163-7. doi: 10.1136/bjo.2006.092114.

Reduced bone mineral density and hyaloid vasculature remnants in a 
consanguineous recessive FEVR family with a mutation in LRP5.

Downey LM(1), Bottomley HM, Sheridan E, Ahmed M, Gilmour DF, Inglehearn CF, 
Reddy A, Agrawal A, Bradbury J, Toomes C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Opthalmology, Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds, UK.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR) is an inherited 
blinding condition characterised by abnormal development of the retinal 
vasculature. FEVR has multiple modes of inheritance, and homozygous mutations in 
LRP5 have recently been reported as underlying the recessive form of this 
disease. The aim of this study was to examine LRP5 in a consanguineous recessive 
FEVR family and to clarify the eye and bone phenotype associated with recessive 
FEVR.
METHODS: All family members were examined by slit lamp biomicroscopy and 
indirect ophthalmoscopy. Linkage to LRP5 was determined by genotyping 
microsatellite markers, constructing haplotypes and calculating lod scores. 
Mutation screening of LRP5 was performed by polymerase chain reaction 
amplification of genomic DNA followed by direct sequencing. Bone mineral density 
(BMD) was evaluated in all family members using dual energy x ray absorptiometry 
(DEXA).
RESULTS: The clinical features observed in this family were consistent with a 
diagnosis of recessive FEVR. A homozygous LRP5 missense mutation, G550R, was 
identified in all affected individuals and all unaffected family members 
screened were heterozygous carriers of this mutation. Reduced BMD, hyaloid 
vasculature remnants, and nystagmus were features of the phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Recessive mutations in LRP5 can cause FEVR with reduced BMD and 
hyaloid vasculature remnants. Assessment of a patient with a provisional 
diagnosis of FEVR should therefore include investigation of BMD, with reduced 
levels suggestive of an underlying LRP5 mutation.

DOI: 10.1136/bjo.2006.092114
PMCID: PMC1857417
PMID: 16929062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests.