---
reference_id: "PMID:19728363"
title: Common epigenetic changes of D4Z4 in contraction-dependent and contraction-independent FSHD.
authors:
- de Greef JC
- Lemmers RJ
- van Engelen BG
- Sacconi S
- Venance SL
- Frants RR
- Tawil R
- van der Maarel SM
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21091
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 4"
- DNA Methylation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Muscle Contraction/genetics
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Facioscapulohumeral/genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Common epigenetic changes of D4Z4 in contraction-dependent and contraction-independent FSHD.
**Authors:** de Greef JC, Lemmers RJ, van Engelen BG, Sacconi S, Venance SL, Frants RR, Tawil R, van der Maarel SM
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21091](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21091)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2009 Oct;30(10):1449-59. doi: 10.1002/humu.21091.

Common epigenetic changes of D4Z4 in contraction-dependent and
contraction-independent FSHD.

de Greef JC(1), Lemmers RJ, van Engelen BG, Sacconi S, Venance SL, Frants RR,
Tawil R, van der Maarel SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Hum Mutat. 2009 Oct;30(10):v. doi: 10.1002/humu.21124.

Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD), caused by partial deletion of the
D4Z4 macrosatellite repeat on chromosome 4q, has a complex genetic and
epigenetic etiology. To develop FSHD, D4Z4 contraction needs to occur on a
specific genetic background. Only contractions associated with the 4qA161
haplotype cause FSHD. In addition, contraction of the D4Z4 repeat in FSHD
patients is associated with significant D4Z4 hypomethylation. To date, however,
the methylation status of contracted repeats on nonpathogenic haplotypes has not
been studied. We have performed a detailed methylation study of the D4Z4 repeat
on chromosome 4q and on a highly homologous repeat on chromosome 10q. We show
that patients with a D4Z4 deletion (FSHD1) have D4Z4-restricted hypomethylation.
Importantly, controls with a D4Z4 contraction on a nonpathogenic chromosome 4q
haplotype or on chromosome 10q also demonstrate hypomethylation. In 15 FSHD
families without D4Z4 contractions but with at least one 4qA161 haplotype
(FSHD2), we observed D4Z4-restricted hypomethylation on chromosomes 4q and 10q.
This finding implies that a genetic defect resulting in D4Z4 hypomethylation
underlies FSHD2. In conclusion, we describe two ways to develop FSHD: (1)
contraction-dependent or (2) contraction-independent D4Z4 hypomethylation on the
4qA161 subtelomere.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21091
PMID: 19728363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
