---
reference_id: "PMID:25943292"
title: Severe osteogenesis imperfecta Type-III and its challenging treatment in newborn and preschool children. A systematic review.
authors:
- Sinikumpu JJ
- Ojaniemi M
- Lehenkari P
- Serlo W
journal: Injury
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2015.04.021
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- "Fractures, Bone/etiology, prevention & control, therapy"
- Humans
- Immobilization
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Orthopedic Procedures/trends
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Pamidronate
- Physical Therapy Modalities
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe osteogenesis imperfecta Type-III and its challenging treatment in newborn and preschool children. A systematic review.
**Authors:** Sinikumpu JJ, Ojaniemi M, Lehenkari P, Serlo W
**Journal:** Injury (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.injury.2015.04.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.injury.2015.04.021)

## Content

1. Injury. 2015 Aug;46(8):1440-6. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2015.04.021. Epub 2015
Apr  22.

Severe osteogenesis imperfecta Type-III and its challenging treatment in newborn 
and preschool children. A systematic review.

Sinikumpu JJ(1), Ojaniemi M(2), Lehenkari P(3), Serlo W(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Paediatric Surgery and orthopaedics, Oulu University Hospital; 
Oulu Cranifacial Centre, Oulu; Medical Research Center Oulu; PEDEGO Research 
Center, Finland. Electronic address: juha-jaakko.sinikumpu@ppshp.fi.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of Oulu 
and Department of Pediatrics and Adolescence, Oulu University Hospital; Medical 
Research Center Oulu; PEDEGO Research Center, Finland.
(3)Surgery Clinic, Oulu University Hospital; Department of Anatomy and Molecular 
Cell Biology; Oulu University; Medical Research Center Oulu, Finland.
(4)Department of Children and Adolescents, Oulu University Hospital; Oulu 
Craniofacial Centre, Oulu; Medical Research Center Oulu; PEDEGO Research Center, 
Finland.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a group of genetic disorders, of which Type III 
is the most severe among survivors. The disease is characterised in particular 
by bone fragility, decreased bone mass and increased incidence of fractures. 
Other usual findings are muscle hypotonia, joint hypermobility and short 
stature. Fractures and weak bones may consequently cause limb and spinal 
deformity and chronic physical disability. Bisphosphonates have revolutionised 
the treatment of newborn children with severe OI type III. Surgery is still 
needed in most patients due to high frequency of the fractures. In this 
systematic review we describe the present state-of-art in treating the most 
severe type of OI in newborn and preschool children with their bone fractures.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.injury.2015.04.021
PMID: 25943292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]