---
reference_id: "PMID:40706746"
title: Usefulness of 18F-FDG PET-CT in detecting subclinical arteritis and cancer associated with polymyalgia rheumatica.
authors:
- Le Madec A
- Querellou S
- Binard A
- Saraux A
- Quere B
- Marhadour T
- Jousse-Joulin S
- Tison A
- Cornec D
- Guellec D
- Devauchelle-Pensec V
journal: Joint Bone Spine
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2025.105950
keywords:
- Humans
- "Polymyalgia Rheumatica/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, complications"
- Positron Emission Tomography Computed Tomography/methods
- Fluorodeoxyglucose F18
- Retrospective Studies
- Female
- Aged
- Male
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Radiopharmaceuticals
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- Prevalence
- Cohort Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Usefulness of 18F-FDG PET-CT in detecting subclinical arteritis and cancer associated with polymyalgia rheumatica.
**Authors:** Le Madec A, Querellou S, Binard A, Saraux A, Quere B, Marhadour T, Jousse-Joulin S, Tison A, Cornec D, Guellec D, Devauchelle-Pensec V
**Journal:** Joint Bone Spine (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbspin.2025.105950](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbspin.2025.105950)

## Content

1. Joint Bone Spine. 2026 Jan;93(1):105950. doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2025.105950.
Epub  2025 Jul 22.

Usefulness of 18F-FDG PET-CT in detecting subclinical arteritis and cancer
associated with polymyalgia rheumatica.

Le Madec A(1), Querellou S(2), Binard A(3), Saraux A(4), Quere B(3), Marhadour
T(3), Jousse-Joulin S(3), Tison A(3), Cornec D(4), Guellec D(5),
Devauchelle-Pensec V(4).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Department, Brest University Hospital, Brest, France. Electronic
address: lemadecarthur@gmail.com.
(2)Nuclear Medicine Department, Brest University Hospital, Brest, France;
University of Western Brittany (UBO), Brest, France; Inserm, Univ Brest, CHRU
Brest, UMR 1304, GETBO, Brest cedex, France.
(3)Rheumatology Department, Brest University Hospital, Brest, France.
(4)Rheumatology Department, Brest University Hospital, Brest, France; Inserm
1227, UBO, Brest, France.
(5)Rheumatology Department, Brest University Hospital, Brest, France; Clinical
Investigations Centre (CIC) 1412, National Health and Medical Research Institute
(Inserm), Brest, France.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the prevalence of giant cell arteritis (GCA) or cancer
detected via 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed
tomography (PET-CT) in patients with polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR) without
clinical signs suggestive of GCA.
METHOD: This monocentric retrospective cohort study analyzed PET-CT scans
performed for clinical suspicion of PMR since 2018. Patients meeting the 2012
ACR/EULAR criteria for PMR without clinical indications of GCA or cancer were
included. Observations were divided into two groups: new-onset PMR and treatment
failure. A nuclear medicine physician evaluated qualitative liver uptake scores
at articular/periarticular sites and large vessels typically involved in PMR.
Increased 18F-FDG uptake suggesting cancer was also assessed.
RESULTS: Of 1223 PET-CT scans screened, 94 met the inclusion criteria: 38 for
new-onset PMR and 56 for treatment failure. Subclinical GCA was identified in 10
(10.6%) patients, with a prevalence of 5.3% in the new-onset group and 14.2% in
the treatment failure group. Aortic uptake was present in 90% of subclinical GCA
cases. Sites with increased 18F-FDG uptake included hips (90%), shoulders,
lumbar interspinous bursa (80%), and ischial tuberosity (60%). PET-CT identified
eight (8.5%) cancer cases, equally distributed between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: PET-CT detects subclinical GCA in approximately 10% of PMR patients
without suggestive symptoms, three times more frequently in the treatment
failure group. Aortitis is present in 90% of subclinical GCA cases. Cancer
prevalence is 4.7%, with a heterogeneous spectrum and unclear association with
PMR symptoms.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2025.105950
PMID: 40706746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of interest The authors declare that
they have no competing interest.
