---
reference_id: "PMID:40199599"
title: "Paediatric extra-axial medulloblastoma presenting with obstructive hydrocephalus and tonsillar herniation: clinical presentation and treatment challenges."
authors:
- Zhu L
- Helal A
- Doorenbosch X
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2024-263710
keywords:
- Humans
- "Medulloblastoma/complications, therapy, diagnosis, pathology, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Hydrocephalus/etiology, surgery"
- "Cerebellar Neoplasms/complications, therapy, diagnosis, surgery, pathology, diagnostic imaging"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Encephalocele/etiology, surgery"
- Male
- Craniotomy/methods
- Child
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paediatric extra-axial medulloblastoma presenting with obstructive hydrocephalus and tonsillar herniation: clinical presentation and treatment challenges.
**Authors:** Zhu L, Helal A, Doorenbosch X
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2024-263710](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2024-263710)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2025 Apr 8;18(4):e263710. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2024-263710.

Paediatric extra-axial medulloblastoma presenting with obstructive hydrocephalus 
and tonsillar herniation: clinical presentation and treatment challenges.

Zhu L(1), Helal A(2), Doorenbosch X(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical School, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia palaeontology8@gmail.com.
(2)Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(3)Paediatric Neurosurgery, Women's and Children's Hospital Adelaide, North 
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Medulloblastoma is the most common paediatric tumour presenting in the posterior 
fossa. Typically, they are found midline and intra-axially located. 
Medulloblastomas presenting in an extra-axial location, however, are rare, and 
of those, they are usually found in the cerebellopontine angle. We present a 
case of an extra-axial medulloblastoma projecting from the lateral cerebellar 
hemisphere. As far as we know, there have only been two other cases of a 
paediatric extra-axial medulloblastoma in the cerebellar hemisphere reported in 
the literature. After initial medical stabilisation and insertion of an external 
ventricular drain, further imaging was obtained. MRI demonstrated a 
heterogeneously enhancing mass with diffusion restriction, a dural tail and a 
CSF cleft in the left lateral cerebellar hemisphere. A far lateral craniotomy 
was performed, with the tumour being encountered immediately on dural opening 
and a defined cleavage plane seen between the tumour and the cerebellar 
hemisphere. Gross total resection was achieved, and after a short recovery 
period, adjuvant craniospinal irradiation plus chemotherapy is started. This 
case illustrates an exceptionally rare location of a relatively common 
paediatric malignant brain tumour.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2025. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2024-263710
PMID: 40199599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.