---
reference_id: "PMID:35084692"
title: Clinical Outcome and Underlying Genetic Cause of Functional Terminal Complement Pathway Deficiencies in a Multicenter UK Cohort.
authors:
- Shears A
- Steele C
- Craig J
- Jolles S
- Savic S
- Hague R
- Coulter T
- Herriot R
- Arkwright PD
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-022-01213-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- COVID-19
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Complement System Proteins/genetics
- Hereditary Complement Deficiency Diseases
- Humans
- Meningococcal Infections/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Sepsis
- United Kingdom/epidemiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Outcome and Underlying Genetic Cause of Functional Terminal Complement Pathway Deficiencies in a Multicenter UK Cohort.
**Authors:** Shears A, Steele C, Craig J, Jolles S, Savic S, Hague R, Coulter T, Herriot R, Arkwright PD
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-022-01213-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-022-01213-9)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2022 Apr;42(3):665-671. doi: 10.1007/s10875-022-01213-9. Epub 
2022 Jan 27.

Clinical Outcome and Underlying Genetic Cause of Functional Terminal Complement 
Pathway Deficiencies in a Multicenter UK Cohort.

Shears A(1), Steele C(2), Craig J(3), Jolles S(4), Savic S(5), Hague R(6), 
Coulter T(7), Herriot R(8), Arkwright PD(9).

Author information:
(1)NIHR Paediatric Academic Clinical Fellow, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.
(2)NHS Tayside, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, Scotland.
(3)University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland.
(4)University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, Wales.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, & NIHR-BRC, Leeds, UK.
(6)Immunology, Royal Hospital for Children, Glasgow, Scotland.
(7)Immunology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, Northern Ireland.
(8)Immunology, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen, Scotland.
(9)Paediatric Immunology, Lydia Becker Institute, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK. peter.arkwright@nhs.net.

BACKGROUND: Terminal complement pathway deficiencies often present with severe 
and recurrent infections. There is a lack of good-quality data on these rare 
conditions. This study investigated the clinical outcome and genetic variation 
in a large UK multi-center cohort with primary and secondary terminal complement 
deficiencies.
METHODS: Clinicians from seven UK centers provided anonymised demographic, 
clinical, and laboratory data on patients with terminal complement deficiencies, 
which were collated and analysed.
RESULTS: Forty patients, median age 19 (range 3-62) years, were identified with 
terminal complement deficiencies. Ten (62%) of 16 patients with low serum C5 
concentrations had underlying pathogenic CFH or CFI gene variants. Two-thirds 
were from consanguineous Asian families, and 80% had an affected family member. 
The median age of the first infection was 9 years. Forty-three percent suffered 
meningococcal serotype B and 43% serotype Y infections. Nine (22%) were treated 
in intensive care for meningococcal septicaemia. Two patients had died, one from 
intercurrent COVID-19. Twenty-one (52%) were asymptomatic and diagnosed based on 
family history. All but one patient had received booster meningococcal vaccines 
and 70% were taking prophylactic antibiotics.
DISCUSSION: The genetic etiology and clinical course of patients with primary 
and secondary terminal complement deficiency are variable. Patients with low 
antigenic C5 concentrations require genetic testing, as the low level may 
reflect consumption secondary to regulatory defects in the pathway. Screening of 
siblings is important. Only half of the patients develop septicaemia, but all 
should have a clear management plan.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-022-01213-9
PMCID: PMC8793329
PMID: 35084692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.