---
reference_id: PMID:39271178
title: "Global, regional and national burdens of acne vulgaris in adolescents and young adults aged 10-24 years from 1990 to 2021: a trend analysis."
authors:
- Zhu Z
- Zhong X
- Luo Z
- Liu M
- Zhang H
- Zheng H
- Li J
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae352
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global, regional and national burdens of acne vulgaris in adolescents and young adults aged 10-24 years from 1990 to 2021: a trend analysis.
**Authors:** Zhu Z, Zhong X, Luo Z, Liu M, Zhang H, Zheng H, Li J
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bjd/ljae352](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjd/ljae352)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2025 Jan 24;192(2):228-237. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae352.

Global, regional and national burdens of acne vulgaris in adolescents and young 
adults aged 10-24 years from 1990 to 2021: a trend analysis.

Zhu Z(1)(2)(3), Zhong X(3), Luo Z(4), Liu M(1)(2)(3), Zhang H(1)(2), Zheng 
H(1)(2), Li J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, Peking Union 
Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union 
Medical College, Beijing, China.
(3)4+4 Medical Doctor Program, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking 
Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(4)Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Acne vulgaris is a common skin condition affecting adolescents and 
young adults worldwide, yet data on the burden and trends of this disease remain 
limited. We aimed to investigate trends in the burden of acne vulgaris among 
adolescents and young adults aged 10-24 years at global, regional and national 
levels.
METHODS: We retrieved data from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021 for 
individuals aged 10-24 years in 204 countries and territories from 1990 to 2021. 
We analysed the numbers, age-standardized rates and average annual percentage 
changes (AAPCs) of the prevalence, incidence and disability-adjusted life years 
(DALYs) for acne vulgaris at the global, regional and national levels. 
Additionally, we examined these global trends by age, sex and Sociodemographic 
Index (SDI).
RESULTS: Globally, the age-standardized prevalence rate of acne vulgaris among 
adolescents and young adults increased from 8563.4 per 100 000 population [95% 
uncertainty interval (UI) 7343.5-9920.1] in 1990 to 9790.5 (95% UI 8420.9-11 
287.2) per 100 000 population in 2021, with an AAPC of 0.43 [95% confidence 
interval (CI) 0.41-0.46]. The age-standardized incidence rate and 
age-standardized DALY rate also showed a similar upward trend. Regionally, 
Western Europe had the highest age-standardized prevalence, incidence and DALY 
rates, while North Africa and the Middle East had the largest increase in these 
rates. By SDI quintile, the high SDI region had the highest age-standardized 
prevalence, incidence and DALY rates from 1990 to 2021, whereas the low-middle 
SDI region had the lowest burden of acne vulgaris but experienced the most 
significant increase in these rates. Globally, the age-standardized prevalence 
rate of acne vulgaris in 2021 was approximately 25% higher in young women than 
in young men (10 911.8 per 100 000 population vs. 8727.8 per 100 000 
population). Among all age groups, adolescents aged 15-19 years had the highest 
age-specific prevalence rate, while adolescents aged 10-14 years experienced the 
largest increase from 1990 to 2021 (AAPC 0.50, 95% CI 0.48-0.52).
CONCLUSIONS: The burden of acne vulgaris among adolescents and young adults has 
continued to increase in nearly all countries since the 1990s. Managing this 
condition remains a significant challenge, necessitating more effective and 
targeted interventions to control the acne burden.

Plain Language Summary: Acne is a skin condition that causes pimples, blackheads 
and cysts. The condition commonly affects teenagers and young adults and can 
impact self-esteem. This study aimed to understand the prevalence of acne among 
young people aged 10–24 years globally and track how its frequency has changed 
over time. We used data from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021, which 
includes information from 204 countries and territories over three decades. We 
analysed the number of acne cases, how common it is, the number of new cases, 
and its impact on people’s lives. We found that the prevalence of acne increased 
worldwide from 1990 to 2021, with the highest rates observed in teenagers aged 
15–19 years. The most significant rise in cases was among the 10–14 years age 
group. In 2021, acne was around 25% more common in young women than in young 
men. Western Europe had the highest rates, while North Africa and the Middle 
East saw the largest increase. We also found that more developed regions had 
higher rates of acne, while less developed regions experienced the largest 
increases. These trends identified in our study highlight the growing prevalence 
of acne among young people globally, and emphasize the need for better 
treatments and further research to understand and manage the condition 
effectively.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British 
Association of Dermatologists. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, 
please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bjd/ljae352
PMID: 39271178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors declare they 
have no conflicts of interest.