---
reference_id: "PMID:32610343"
title: Suppression of proteolipid protein rescues Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease.
authors:
- Elitt MS
- Barbar L
- Shick HE
- Powers BE
- Maeno-Hikichi Y
- Madhavan M
- Allan KC
- Nawash BS
- Gevorgyan AS
- Hung S
- Nevin ZS
- Olsen HE
- Hitomi M
- Schlatzer DM
- Zhao HT
- Swayze A
- LePage DF
- Jiang W
- Conlon RA
- Rigo F
- Tesar PJ
journal: Nature
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2494-3
keywords:
- Animals
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Gene Editing
- Hypoxia/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Motor Activity/genetics
- "Myelin Proteolipid Protein/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Myelin Sheath/metabolism
- Oligodendroglia/metabolism
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/administration & dosage, genetics"
- "Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Point Mutation
- Respiratory Function Tests
- Survival Analysis
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Suppression of proteolipid protein rescues Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease.
**Authors:** Elitt MS, Barbar L, Shick HE, Powers BE, Maeno-Hikichi Y, Madhavan M, Allan KC, Nawash BS, Gevorgyan AS, Hung S, Nevin ZS, Olsen HE, Hitomi M, Schlatzer DM, Zhao HT, Swayze A, LePage DF, Jiang W, Conlon RA, Rigo F, Tesar PJ
**Journal:** Nature (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-020-2494-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2494-3)

## Content

1. Nature. 2020 Sep;585(7825):397-403. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2494-3. Epub 2020 
Jul 1.

Suppression of proteolipid protein rescues Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease.

Elitt MS(1), Barbar L(1), Shick HE(1), Powers BE(2), Maeno-Hikichi Y(1), 
Madhavan M(1), Allan KC(1), Nawash BS(1), Gevorgyan AS(1), Hung S(1), Nevin 
ZS(1), Olsen HE(1), Hitomi M(3), Schlatzer DM(4), Zhao HT(2), Swayze A(2), 
LePage DF(1), Jiang W(1), Conlon RA(1), Rigo F(2), Tesar PJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA, USA.
(3)Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(4)Case Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, Department of Medicine, Case 
Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA. paul.tesar@case.edu.

Mutations in PLP1, the gene that encodes proteolipid protein (PLP), result in 
failure of myelination and neurological dysfunction in the X-chromosome-linked 
leukodystrophy Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD)1,2. Most PLP1 mutations, 
including point mutations and supernumerary copy variants, lead to severe and 
fatal disease. Patients who lack PLP1 expression, and Plp1-null mice, can 
display comparatively mild phenotypes, suggesting that PLP1 suppression might 
provide a general therapeutic strategy for PMD1,3-5. Here we show, using 
CRISPR-Cas9 to suppress Plp1 expression in the jimpy (Plp1jp) point-mutation 
mouse model of severe PMD, increased myelination and restored nerve conduction 
velocity, motor function and lifespan of the mice to wild-type levels. To 
evaluate the translational potential of this strategy, we identified antisense 
oligonucleotides that stably decrease the levels of Plp1 mRNA and PLP protein 
throughout the neuraxis in vivo. Administration of a single dose of 
Plp1-targeting antisense oligonucleotides in postnatal jimpy mice fully restored 
oligodendrocyte numbers, increased myelination, improved motor performance, 
normalized respiratory function and extended lifespan up to an eight-month end 
point. These results suggest that PLP1 suppression could be developed as a 
treatment for PMD in humans. More broadly, we demonstrate that 
oligonucleotide-based therapeutic agents can be delivered to oligodendrocytes in 
vivo to modulate neurological function and lifespan, establishing a new 
pharmaceutical modality for myelin disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2494-3
PMCID: PMC7810164
PMID: 32610343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests P.J.T. and M.S.E. are listed 
as inventors on pending patent claims (PCT/US2017/064870) filed by CWRU covering 
methods of PLP1 suppression. P.J.T. is a co-founder and consultant for Convelo 
Therapeutics, which has licensed patents unrelated to the current study from 
CWRU inventors (P.J.T., M.S.E., Z.S.N., and M.M.). P.J.T. and CWRU retain equity 
in Convelo Therapeutics. P.J.T. is a consultant and on the Scientific Advisory 
Board of Cell Line Genetics, which performed karyotyping in this study. P.J.T. 
is Chair of the Scientific Advisory Board (volunteer position) for the 
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease Foundation. B.E.P., H.T.Z., A.S., and F.R. are 
employees of Ionis Pharmaceuticals. No other authors declare competing 
interests.

Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD; MIM 312080) is a fatal, X-linked
leukodystrophy characterized by extensive loss of myelinating oligodendrocytes in the
central nervous system (CNS). Mutations in the proteolipid protein 1
(PLP1; MIM 300401) gene, which codes for the highly conserved
tetraspan, oligodendrocyte protein PLP, cause PMD1,2. Symptoms typically
present connatally or in childhood, and include a constellation of nystagmus,
spasticity, hypotonia, and cognitive dysfunction, with mortality often prior to
adulthood. Preclinical efforts to extend lifespan have demonstrated only limited
success, and no therapy has shown efficacy in patients6–13.

Most PMD patients harbor PLP1 duplication mutations, causing
overexpression of otherwise normal PLP protein1,2. However, hundreds of
unique PMD-causative point mutations, which result in abnormal PLP protein, have also
been identified. Notably, rare PLP1-null patients display symptoms that
are delayed and milder compared to those with more severe duplications or point
mutations3–5. Null patients can live for 40–60 years,
do not develop spastic paraparesis until the 2nd-3rd decade of
life, and maintain intact cognition until the 3rd-4th decade of
life (Supplementary Table 1),
possibly explained by a lack of cellular stress responses and oligodendrocyte death
triggered by excess or abnormal PLP1,2,12,14,15.

This clinical landscape suggests several opportunities for therapeutic
development. Specifically, reducing PLP1 expression to normal levels in
patients with gene duplications would theoretically be curative. More broadly, the
milder presentation of null patients implies a wide therapeutic window for titrating
PLP1 expression, which could be leveraged to restore functional
oligodendrocytes in point mutation patients who generate abnormal PLP. Here, we
demonstrate therapeutic Plp1-supression using germline- and
postnatal-based approaches in PMD mice expressing abnormal PLP.

To test if Plp1-suppression provides a generalizable
therapeutic approach for PMD we utilized the jimpy
(Plp1jp) mouse model of PMD that
expresses abnormal PLP and recapitulates the cellular, molecular, and neurologic
features seen in severe PMD. We targeted Plp1 with CRISPR16,17, using guide RNAs (sgRNAs) with high on-target, germline
cutting efficiency (Supplementary
Table 2), to generate a CRISPR-modified jimpy
(CR-impy) founder with a complex deletion in
Plp1 (Fig. 1a and Extended Data Fig. 1a–c). Prior to subsequent analyses, rare off-target
mutations were eliminated by backcrossing (Extended
Data Fig. 1b, d–e).

While jimpy mice showed severe tremor, ataxia, seizures
(lasting >30 seconds), and death by the third postnatal week,
CR-impy demonstrated a 21-fold increase in lifespan (mean
survival = 489 and 23 days for CR-impy, and jimpy,
respectively) with no evidence of tremor, ataxia, or seizures through the terminal
endpoint of 18 months of age (Fig. 1b, Supplementary Data 1, Supplementary Video 1, and
Supplementary Video 2).
CR-impy Plp1 transcript was reduced by 61–74% relative
to wild-type in multiple CNS regions at 6 months of age (Extended Data Fig. 2a), with undetectable PLP protein
(Supplementary Table
3).

To explore the effects of germline Plp1-suppression on
cellular pathology, we assessed for markers of oligodendrocyte lineage and
neuroinflammation. The mature myelin marker myelin basic protein (MBP) was grossly
and stably restored to near wild-type levels throughout the neuraxis in
CR-impy (Fig. 1c). In
contrast to nearly nonexistent Mbp expression in
jimpy, CR-impy demonstrated substantially
increased transcript (83–91% of wild-type at 6 months of age) and protein
(40–95% and 114–130% of wild-type at 3 weeks and 6 months of age,
respectively) in multiple CNS regions (Extended Data
Fig. 2b–d, Supplementary Data 2a–b, and Supplementary Data 3–5). Quantification of myelin
regulatory factor (MyRF) positive oligodendrocytes showed their complete restoration
throughout multiple CNS regions in CR-impy (94–117% and
89–126% of wild-type at 3 weeks and 6 months of age, respectively),
contrasted by their depletion in jimpy (36–59% of wild-type
at 3 weeks of age) (Fig. 1d–e and Supplementary Data 3–5). The glial lineage marker
SOX10, which is expressed by oligodendrocytes and oligodendrocyte progenitor cells
(OPCs), showed no differences across genotypes (Fig.
1d–e and Supplementary Data 3–5). CR-impy
showed minimal evidence of astrogliosis or microglial activation through 6 months of
age, in contrast to elevated neuroinflammatory markers in
jimpy18
(Extended Data Fig. 3a–d and Supplementary Data 3–5).

To investigate Plp1-suppression in oligodendrocytes isolated
from cell-extrinsic developmental or inflammatory cues, we generated and
characterized induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines (Extended Data Fig. 4a–b), which were differentiated to oligodendrocytes in
vitro. Notably, CR-impy lines showed cell
type-specific rescue in oligodendrocyte number and arborized morphology relative to
jimpy (Extended Data Fig.
4c–g). Collectively, these
data confirm that Plp1-suppression has a cell-intrinsic effect on
oligodendrocytes that is sufficient to rescue jimpy cellular
phenotypes.

To assess the effect of germline Plp1-suppression on
myelination we quantified electron micrograph data. In contrast to nearly absent
myelination in jimpy, CR-impy demonstrated a
profound increase in myelinated axons throughout the neuraxis, reaching nearly 50%
of wild-type at 3 weeks of age, with stability through 18-months (Fig. 1f–h).
CR-impy myelin sheaths showed incomplete compaction compared to
wild-type, consistent with PLP’s role in myelin ultrastructure (Fig. 1f–g)5,19. To determine if CR-impy
myelin was functional, we measured compound action potential speed in the optic
nerve. At 3 weeks of age, we found a significant increase in conduction velocity in
CR-impy relative to jimpy (Fig. 1i) (reaching ~55% of wild-type), which was
well-correlated with the level of myelination in CR-impy
(~35% of wild-type) (Fig. 1j). Notably,
CR-impy and wild-type showed comparable conduction velocities
at 6 months of age (Fig. 1i).

To determine whether restored myelin altered complex motor function, we used longitudinal open-field and rotarod testing. Overall locomotion was decreased in jimpy mice, but similar between CR-impy and wild-type mice across all time points (Fig. 1k). Rotarod testing revealed that CR-impy mice showed similar performance to wild-type mice up to 6 months of age, whereas jimpy mice exhibited significant impairment. At 18 months of age, the CR-impy mice displayed slightly reduced performance (Fig. 1l), potentially reflecting late-onset neuronal phenotypes [REFERENCE 4]. Together, these results establish that germline suppression of Plp1 restores oligodendrocytes, functional myelin and lifespan in jimpy mice.

After validating Plp1 as a therapeutic target for PMD using
germline suppression, we pursued a clinically translatable strategy for in
vivo, postnatal Plp1-suppression using newer
generation antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs). These ASOs, characterized by
highly-efficient modulation of CNS target transcripts with multi-month in
vivo half-lives, underlie several therapies for fatal neuronal-based
disorders20–22, however their ability to target
the oligodendrocyte lineage in vivo was unknown. To establish their
therapeutic potential for this lineage, we administered well-characterized ASOs
targeting Hdac2, whose nuclear localized protein product enables
clear visualization of target suppression, to adult wild-type mice by
intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection, demonstrating a substantial reduction of
HDAC2 in oligodendrocytes and OPCs (Fig.
2a–b). Next we identified two
independent ASOs targeting the 5th intron (ASOPlp1.a)
and 3’UTR (ASOPlp1.b) of Plp1 (Fig. 2c), along with a non-targeting ASO control
(ASOctr), which we administered to wild-type mice (wtASOPlp1.a and
wtASOPlp1.b, and wtASOctr, respectively). ASOs exhibited
dose-dependent suppression of Plp1 transcript (up to 90% and 98% in
neonatal and adult wild-type mice, respectively) and PLP protein (up to 63% in
neonatal wild-type mice) in multiple CNS regions (Fig.
2d–g, Extended Data Fig. 5a). ASOs distributed widely across the
neuroaxis, lacked significant off-targeting, and did not affect wild-type MBP
protein levels (Extended Data Fig.
5b–h, 6a–b, 7a, and Supplementary Data 7a).

We evaluated the therapeutic effect of Plp1-targeting ASOs
on the severe jimpy phenotype using a single ICV injection at birth
(Fig. 3a). Remarkably,
jimpy mice injected with ASO Plp1.a
(jpASOPlp1.a) or ASO Plp1.b
(jpASOPlp1.b) demonstrated a ~12-fold
(jpASOPlp1.a) and ~11-fold
(jpASOPlp1.b) increase in lifespan compared to ASO control-injected
jimpy (jpASOctr) (mean survival = 20, 239, and 217 days for
jpASOctr, jpASOPlp1.a, and jpASOPlp1.b,
respectively) through a predetermined terminal endpoint of 8 months of age (Fig. 3b, Supplementary Data 6, Supplementary Video 3, and Supplementary Video 4).

MBP expression was grossly increased in jpASOPlp1.a and
jpASOPlp1.b relative to jpASOctr, through 8-months, without
additional ASO dosing (Fig 3c–d). Mbp transcript and MBP
protein were significantly increased across the neuraxis in
jpASOPlp1.a and jpASOPlp1.b relative to
jpASOctr (up to a 39-fold increase in MBP protein), along with a concomitant
reduction of apoptotic cells (Fig.
3c–d, Extended Data Fig. 7b–e, Supplementary Data 7b, and Supplementary Data 8–10). MyRF positive
oligodendrocytes were restored throughout the neuraxis at 3 weeks of age in
jpASOPlp1.a and jpASOPlp1.b (81–101% of
wtASOctr), contrasted by their substantial depletion in jpASOctr (Fig. 3e and Supplementary Data 8–10). These trends were
further validated using the orthogonal, oligodendrocyte marker set, CC1/OLIG2 (Extended Data Fig. 7f and Supplementary Data 11–13). SOX10 and OLIG2 positive
oligodendrocyte lineage cells showed similar levels across groups (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig.
7g, and Supplementary
Data 8–13). PDGFRα/OLIG2 double-positive OPCs, while comparable in wtASOctr,
jpASOPlp1.a and jpASOPlp1.b, were elevated in
jpASOctr (Extended Data Fig. 7h and Supplementary Data
11–13),
suggesting a jimpy-specific compensatory increase in
progenitors23. Myelinated
axons were significantly increased throughout the neuraxis in
jpASOPlp1.a and jpASOPlp1.b relative to
jpASOctr at 3 weeks of age (~5 to 6-fold and 12 to 15-fold higher in the
corpus callosum and brainstem, respectively) (Fig.
3g–h). While oligodendrocyte
numbers were fully restored, this increased myelination reached ~10% of
wtASOctr at 3 weeks of age and persisted through our terminal 8-month endpoint,
albeit with less compaction (Fig.
3g–h and Extended Data 8a–b).

Strikingly, jpASOPlp1.a and jpASOPlp1.b
showed only minor jimpy phenotypes, including markedly reduced
tremor and occasional short duration seizures (<15 seconds), but otherwise
appeared overtly normal in daily activities, including the ability to breed (Supplementary Data 6). While
rotarod performance was only variably and partial improved in
jpASOPlp1.a and jpASOPlp1.b (to a maximum of
36% of wild-type), overall locomotion was restored to wild-type levels across
multiple time points (Fig. 4a–b). To assess whether myelin could be
contributing to these functional improvements we measured compound action potential
speed in the optic nerve. At 3 weeks of age we found a modest but significant
increase in conduction velocity in jpASOPlp1.b versus jpASOctr
(Fig. 4c), representing ~17% of
wtASOctr levels, which directly correlated with the level of myelination relative to
wtASOctr (~10%) (Fig. 4d). Together
these data demonstrate that a single postnatal administration of
Plp1-targeting ASOs elicits a sustained reduction in
Plp1 expression that restores oligodendrocytes and increases
functional myelin, with improvements in motor performance and lifespan in
jimpy.

Respiratory distress and dysfunction has been associated with premature
death in PMD models and patients24–27, which is
notable given the profound increase in survival of jpASOPlp1.a and
jpASOPlp1.b in light of the relatively modest increases in
myelin globally, with the highest levels consistently observed in the brainstem
(Fig. 3g–h and Extended Data
7b–c). Interestingly,
brainstem respiratory control centers alter breathing patterns in response to
physiologic derangements seen during hypoxia or hypercapnia. Seizures, as observed
in jimpy mice beginning around the third postnatal week, can
trigger such derangements (Fig. 4e) and, when
coupled with a reduced capacity to achieve homeostasis, could be lethal.

To explore whether respiratory function is a therapeutic component of
Plp1-targeting ASOs, we used plethysmography to measure minute
ventilation in normal air, hypercapnic (5% CO2), and hypoxic (10.5%
O2) conditions (Supplementary Data 14). When transitioned from normal air to either
hypercapnic or hypoxic environments, jpASOctr exhibited high variability in minute
ventilation, indicative of dysfunctional respiratory control (Fig. 4f) while jpASOPlp1.b showed less
variability, and magnitudes of response more similar to wtASOctr (Fig. 4f–j).
Specifically, jpASOctr showed weak compensatory decrease in minute ventilation when
exposed to hypercapnic conditions relative to wtASOctr, which was restored in
jpASOPlp1.b (Fig.
4g–h). During early
transition to hypoxia, wtASOctr and jpASOPlp1.b demonstrated
similar compensatory increases in minute ventilation while jpASOctr showed a blunted
response (Fig. 4g, i). In extended hypoxia, jpASOctr showed an exaggerated
decrease in minute ventilation relative to wtASOctr, which was restored in
jpASOPlp1.b (Fig. 4j).
Strikingly, during this hypoxic challenge, 38% of jpASOctr died spontaneously while
100% of jpASOPlp1.b and wtASOctr survived (Fig. 4k). Together, these results suggest that
dysregulated control of respiration is a component of the jimpy
phenotype and potentially underlies the premature mortality that occurs coincident
with the onset of seizures, which can be partially rescued by suppression of
Plp1.

In summary, we have validated a clinically feasible therapeutic strategy for
PMD based on a mutation-agnostic, PLP1-suppression approach. We
demonstrate both CRISPR-Cas9 germline-based and postnatal ASO-mediated suppression
of Plp1 expression that each result in rescue of major PMD
phenotypes in a severe PMD mouse model. Furthermore, we establish
oligonucleotide-based drugs, delivered postnatally, to modulate a disease target in
oligodendrocytes and restore both functional myelin and lifespan in a fatal genetic
disorder.

This study provides the foundational data for the development of clinically
relevant ASO technology to achieve postnatal reduction of Plp1.
While additional preclinical development is needed to optimize dosage and timing,
including treating later in disease, our results highlight that even a single ASO
injection can elicit a sustained phenotypic improvement relative to the natural
history of the disease, even with only ~10% of myelin restored relative to
wild-type. These data could reflect a previously unappreciated functional tolerance
to incomplete myelination or may be indicative of a neuronal supportive function of
the oligodendrocytes28–30, whose levels were completely
restored in jimpy injected with Plp1-targeting
ASOs.

Complete elimination of mutant PLP could convert severe PMD patients to a
PLP1-null phenotype, characterized by milder disease that
presents later, progresses slower, and shows improved clinical outcomes1,3–5. Importantly,
titration of abnormal or excessive PLP to a level that relieves cellular
stress-mediated oligodendrocyte death but maintains PLP’s neuronal supportive
function3–5,19
could potentially supersede this benefit. This strategy would be especially
amendable to the 70% of PMD patients who harbor gene duplications leading to excess,
but otherwise normal, PLP protein1,
as a reduction to wild-type levels of PLP1 expression may be
curative.

Collectively our studies, combined with the feasibility of ASO delivery to
the human CNS and current safety data in other CNS indications, support advancement
of PLP1-suppression into the clinic as a therapeutic with potential
applicability across the spectrum of PMD patients. More broadly, our data provide a
framework for transcript modulation in oligodendrocytes to restore myelination in
genetic and sporadic disorders of myelin.

All data was reproduced with biological replicates as indicated. Blinding
was employed, as indicated. No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample
size and the experiments were not randomized. p-values stated for p<0.1,
otherwise not significant (n.s).

All procedures were in accordance with the National Institutes of Health
Guidelines for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the
Case Western Reserve University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC).

Wild-type (B6CBACa-Aw-J/A) and jimpy
(B6CBACa-Aw-J/A-Plp1jp EdaTa/J; RRID:IMSR_JAX:000287) mice used in this study
were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Jimpy
males possess a point mutation in the splice acceptor site of
Plp1 intron 4 (c.623–2A>G), which results in
exclusion of exon 5 and a frameshift of the final 70 amino acids of
PLP31. The colony was
maintained by breeding heterozygous females, which lack a phenotype, to
wild-type males to generate affected jimpy males. Mice were
housed under a temperature-controlled environment, 12-h light-dark cycle with ad
libitum access to water and rodent chow. All mice were genotyped approximately a
week after birth using genomic DNA isolated from tail tips or toes at two loci:
1) the jimpy mutation (NM_011123.4:c.623–2A>G) in
Plp1 intron 4, which causes skipping of exon 5 and a
truncated PLP protein and 2) the complex indel in Plp1 exon 3
from dual cutting of CRISPR/Cas9 sgRNAs in CR-impy mice
(c.[242_318del; 328_330del]). This causes a frameshift in Plp1,
a premature stop codon in exon 4, and is predicted to cause nonsense mediated
decay of the transcript and loss of protein. Genotyping was performed by
standard Sanger sequencing or a custom real time PCR assays (Probe identifiers:
Plp1–2 Mut [for jimpy mutation in intron 4] and
Plp1–5 WT [for CR-impy complex deletion in exon 3],
Transnetyx, Cordova, TN).

Primers for Sanger sequencing provided in Supplementary Table 4.

Mouse Plp1 sequence was entered into the
Streptococcus pyogenes clustered regularly interspaced
short palindromic repeat-associated 9 (CRISPR-spCas9) sgRNA design tool at
crispr.mit.edu32 and analyzed against the mm10 target genome.
Plp1-targeting sgRNAs were sorted based on their on-target
efficiency while minimizing off-target mutations. On-target nuclease activity
was confirmed for each sgRNA using the Guide-it sgRNA Screening Kit (631440,
Clontech) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The following
sgRNAs were tested:

sgRNA1: CCCCTGTTACCGTTGCGCTC

sgRNA2: TGGCCACCAGGGAAGCAAAG

sgRNA3: AAGACCACCATCTGCGGCAA

sgRNA4: GGCCTGAGCGCAACGGTAAC

sgRNA5: GCCTGAGCGCAACGGTAACA

sgRNA6: TCTACACCACCGGCGCAGTC

sgRNA7: CCAGCAGGAGGGCCCCATAA

sgRNA8: GAAGGCAATAGACTGACAGG

This list was further filtered based on the ability of each sgRNA to
target Plp1’s splice isoform Dm20, in
addition to Plp1. We selected two sgRNAs (3 and 7) that
targeted exon 3 of Plp1 for combined use in zygote studies,
which enabled the rapid detection of large deletion events by PCR and provided
redundancy for on-target cutting.

Carrier female oocyte donors were administered 5 IU pregnant
mare’s serum gonadotropin by intraperitoneal injection (G4877,
Sigma-Aldrich), followed by 2.5 IU human chorionic gonadotropin (GC10,
Sigma-Aldrich) 48 hours later. These superovulated females were mated to
wild-type males. Zygotes were harvested in FHM medium (MR-025 Sigma-Aldrich)
with 0.1% hyaluronidase (H3501, Sigma-Aldrich) and the surrounding cumulus cells
were separated. The zona pellucida of each zygote was partially dissected using
0.3M sucrose (S7903, Sigma-Aldrich) in FHM as previously described33.

Zygotes were placed in 2x KSOM medium (MR-106, Sigma-Aldrich) with an
equal volume of solution containing 100ng/μL sgRNA3, 100ng/μL
sgRNA7 (AR01, PNAbio), and 200ng/μL spCas9 mRNA (CR01, PNAbio). Given the
low frequency of jimpy zygotes and unknown in
vivo targeting of the sgRNAs, both sgRNAs were used simultaneously
to maximize the chance of Plp1 frameshift. Electroporation was
performed in a chamber with a 1mm gap between two electrodes using an ECM 830
Square Wave Electroporation System (BTX). Electroporation parameters were set as
follows: 32V, 3ms pulse duration, 5 repeats, and 100ms inter-pulse interval.
Electroporated zygotes were moved to KSOM medium and then transferred into the
oviducts of pseudopregnant females (CD1). Electroporation settings were
optimized to achieve maximal cutting efficiency in a separate strain but
resulted in a higher rate of embryo loss in our B6CBACa/J strain. Zygotes were
electroporated in batches of 54, 56, and 61, which resulted in 4, 3, and 0 pups
born. The 7 surviving mice were genotyped after birth and monitored daily for
onset of typical jimpy phenotypes including tremors, seizures,
and early death by postnatal day 21. A founder jimpy male with
complex deletion containing 80-bp of total deleted sequence in exon 3 of
Plp1, denoted CR-impy, showed no overt
phenotype and was backcrossed for two generations to the wild-type parental
strain to reduce potential off-target Cas9 cutting effects (Extended Data Fig. 1b–e). A colony of mice was bred to evaluate cellular,
molecular, and functional phenotypes of contemporaneous isogenic wild-type,
jimpy, and CR-impy male mice. Mice were
monitored daily to determine lifespan with statistical significance among groups
determined using the log-rank test. Additionally, animals surviving beyond 3
weeks were analyzed using behavioral (rotarod and open field testing for motor
performance), histology (immunostaining of the CNS for myelin proteins and
electron microscopy for myelin ultrastructure), and electrophysiology
(conduction velocity of the optic nerve). Details and metadata for all mice in
this study including censoring of animals in the survival analysis are found in
Supplementary Data
1.

CRISPR on-target cutting efficiencies were assessed by high throughput
sequencing. PCR primers were designed to encompass each guide on-target site.
Primer sequences were generated using NCBI Primer-BLAST and are provided in
Supplementary Table
4. The following tails were added to the primer sequences:

Forward: TCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT

Reverse: AGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCT

PCR amplification on tail-tip genomic DNA was performed using the KAPA
HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (07958935001, Roche) to minimize PCR-based error.
Libraries were prepared by adding unique indices by PCR using KAPA HiFi HotStart
ReadyMix. All libraries were pooled evenly and quantified using NEBNext®
Library Quant Kit for Illumina® (E7630, New England Biolabs) then
denatured and diluted per Illumina’s MiSeq instructions. 250bp paired-end
sequencing was performed using an Illumina MiSeq at the Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine Genomics Core Facility. Reads were compared
against the consensus sequence and CRISPR-induced indel percentages were
determined using the OutKnocker tool at outknocker.org34.

Genomic DNA was isolated from brain tissue from the
CR-impy founder male, three F2 generation
CR-impy male mice (each from a unique breeding pair using
independent F1 generation carrier females), and a jimpy male
from a contemporaneous but independent cohort in our colony. Libraries were
prepared for whole genome sequencing using Nextera DNA Flex Library prep
(20018705, Illumina) and 150bp paired-end sequencing was performed using an
Illumina NovaSeq. Reads were aligned to the mouse genome (mm10) using
BWA35 (version
0.7.17-r1188) with default parameters for paired reads. Local indel realignment
was performed using GATK RealignerTargetCreator and IndelRealigner (version
3.3–2-gec30cee) at the on-target and off-target sites. Reads aligned to
the window chrX:136831817–136832360 at the Plp1 locus
were re-aligned using Blat (v. 36×2) to fully capture the
CR-impy complex deletion.

The top 50 potential off-target sites for each sgRNA were identified
using the CCTop - CRISPR/Cas9 target online predictor tool36, with a maximum total mismatch number of
4. Additionally, each site was identified using the RGEN Cas-OFFinder37 and CRISPOR38 off-target prediction
algorithms, providing two independent validations of this off-target location
list. The indel-realigned reads were visually inspected in Integrative Genomics
Viewer (IGV)39, and indels
occurring at a frequency of at least 5% after filtering known polymorphisms from
dbSNP (build 142) at these 50 potential off-target sites were considered
CRISPR-induced mutations.

All recording was performed using video recording function on an Apple
iPhone. Videos were color corrected, stabilized, and trimmed to a discrete range
using Apple iMovie. Videos were collated and converted to MP4 format using Adobe
After Effects.

Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and sacrificed by transcardial
perfusion with PBS followed by 4% PFA. Tissue was harvested and placed in 4% PFA
overnight at 4°C. Samples were rinsed with PBS, equilibrated in 30%
sucrose, and frozen in Tissue-Tek® Optimum Cutting Temperature compound
(O.C.T.; 25608–930, VWR). Samples were cryosectioned at a 20μm
thickness. Sections were washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated
overnight in antibody solution containing 2.5% normal donkey serum (NDS;
017-000-121, Jackson Labs) and 0.25% Triton X-100 (T8787, Sigma).

Alternatively, as noted elsewhere in the methods, mice were sacrificed
by CO2 asphyxiation, followed by tissue harvesting, emersion fixation
overnight in 10% neutral buffered formalin, and paraffin embedding. Sections 5
μm thick were cut onto charged glass slides and dried overnight at
60°C. Sections were deparaffinized and hydrated using graded
concentrations of ethanol to deionized water. Sections were subjected to antigen
retrieval by sodium citrate buffer at pH 6 (H-3300; Vector Laboratories) at
100˚C for 45 min, gently washed in deionized water, and then transferred
into 0.05 M Tris-based solution in 0.15 M NaCl with 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100, pH
7.6 (TBST). For chromagen staining, endogenous peroxidase was blocked with 3%
hydrogen peroxide for 20 min. Nonspecific background staining was blocked in 3%
normal goat serum for 30 min (Sigma) at room temperature. For mouse antibodies,
sections were incubated for 30 min in Mouse Blocking Reagent (Vector
Laboratories). All slides were then incubated at 4°C overnight with
cocktails of primary antibodies in TBST. For DAB reactions, after washing with
TBST, sections were then incubated with the species-appropriate immunoglobulin G
(IgG)-horseradish peroxidase (HRP) (1:300, SC2004; Santa Cruz), then reacted
with diaminobenzidine (DAB; ScyTek Laboratories, Logan, UT) and counterstained
with hematoxylin (no. 7211; Richard-Allen Scientific).

Sections were stained using the following antibodies at the indicated
concentrations or dilutions: mouse anti-MBP (2μg/mL; 808401, Biolegend;
RRID:AB_2564741), rabbit anti-MBP (1:1000; Abcam, ab40390; RRID:AB_1141521),
rabbit anti-MyRF polyclonal antibody (1:500; kindly provided by Dr. Michael
Wegner), goat anti-SOX10 (0.4μg/mL; AF2864, R&D Systems;
RRID:AB_442208), rabbit anti-GFAP (1:1000; Z0334, Dako; RRID:AB_10013382), goat
anti-IBA1 (0.1mg/mL; ab5076, Abcam), rabbit anti-IBA1 (1:2000; 019–19741,
WAKO; RRID:AB_839504), rabbit anti-ASO (1:2500; Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad,
CA), rabbit anti-HDAC2 (1:250; Abcam, ab16032; RRID:AB_2118543), mouse
anti-APC/CC1 (2.5 μg/ml; ab16794, Abcam; RRID:AB_443473), mouse
anti-APC/CC1 (1:250; MABC200, Millipore; RRID:AB_11203645), rat anti-NG2 (25
μg/mL; MAB6689, R&D Systems; RRID:AB_10890940), goat
anti-PDGFRα (1:500; AF1062, R&D systems; RRID:AB_2236897), and rabbit
anti-OLIG2 (1:250; 13999–1-AP, ProteinTech; RRID:AB_2157541). For MBP
immunohistochemistry, sections were post fixed in methanol at
−20°C for 20 minutes followed by overnight incubation in a PBS
based primary antibody solution containing 0.1% Saponin and 2.5% normal donkey
serum. Secondary immunostaining was performed with Alexa Fluor®
antibodies (ThermoFisher) used at 1μg/ml. Nuclei were identified using
DAPI (100ng/ml; D8417, Sigma). Stained sections were imaged using the
Operetta® High Content Imaging and Analysis system (PerkinElmer) and
Harmony® software (PerkinElmer) for whole section images and a NanoZoomer
S60 Digital slide scanner (Hamamatsu) for all other immunohistochemical imaging,
unless otherwise noted.

To quantify MyRF, SOX10, OLIG2, CC1, or PDGFα positive cells,
counts were performed along the length of the whole corpus callosum, the
cerebellum, and the brainstem in medial sagittal sections from three animals per
genotype. CC1 and OLIG2 or PDGFα and OLIG2 double-positive were
determined from these counts. Counts were performed in a semi-automated manner
using ImageJ (National Institutes of Health). To quantify GFAP and IBA1
staining, fluorescence intensity was measured using Adobe Photoshop along the
length of the whole corpus callosum, the cerebellum, and the brainstem from
medial sagittal sections from three animals per genotype. To quantify cleaved
caspase 3 staining, sections from regions starting at the sagittal midline to
600 microns from the midline were used and cleaved caspase 3 positive cells were
counted along the entire length of the corpus callosum, white matter of the
cerebellum and entire brainstem to determine the total number of apoptotic cells
per treatment group. All counts and quantifications were performed in a blinded
manner. One-way ANOVA with Tukey correction and two-way unpaired t-tests, or a
one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s correction for multiple comparisons were
used to determine statistical significance across CRISPR or ASO cohorts,
respectively.

Mice from CRISPR or ASO studies were euthanized using isoflurane
overdose. Different brain regions (cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and brainstem)
were harvested and flash frozen. Each region was split in two and half was used
for RNA quantification using qRT-PCR, the other for western blot analysis (see
below). TRI Reagent (R2050-1-200, Zymo Research) was separately added to tissue
and samples were homogenized using Kontes Pellet Pestle Grinders
(KT749520–0000, VWR). RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini Kit (74104,
Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse
transcription was performed using the iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (1708891,
Biorad) with 1μg of RNA per reaction. Real-Time PCR was then performed on
an Applied Biosystems 7300 Real-time PCR system with 10ng cDNA per sample in
quadruplicate using Taqman gene expression master mix (4369016, ThermoFisher)
and the following pre-designed Taqman gene expression assays (4351370,
ThermoFisher): Plp1 (Mm01297210_m1), Mbp
(Mm01266402_m1) and Actb (Mm00607939_s1) (endogenous control).
Expression values were normalized to Actb and to wild-type
samples (for CRISPR cohort) or wild-type untreated samples (for ASO-treated
wild-type cohort). One-way ANOVA with Tukey correction and two-way unpaired
t-tests, or a one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s correction for multiple
comparisons were used to determine statistical significance across CRISPR or ASO
cohorts, respectively.

Tissues were obtained as described above. Protein lysis buffer
consisting of RIPA buffer (R0278, Sigma), cOmplete™ Mini EDTA-free
Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (11836170001, Sigma), Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail
3 (P0044, Sigma), Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 (P5726, Sigma), and BGP-15
(B4813, Sigma) was added to each sample. Tissue was homogenized using Dounce
Tissue Grinders (D8938, Sigma). Lysate was separated by centrifugation at 17000g
for 15 minutes at 4°C. A BCA standard curve was generated using the
Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (23225, Thermo Scientific) and used to samples to
an equivalent protein concentration. Equal amounts of sample were run on a
NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris Protein gel (NP0335BOX or NP0329BOX, Thermo
Fisher), then electrophoretically transferred to a PVDF membrane (LC2002,
Invitrogen or 926–31097, Li-Cor). The membrane was blocked with 5% milk
in TBS-T for an hour, then hybridized with mouse anti-MBP antibody
(1μg/mL; 808401, Biolegend; RRID:AB_2564741) or rat anti-PLP antibody
(1:1000; clone AA3, Lerner Research Institute Hybridoma Core, Cleveland, OH)
overnight at 4°C. Blots were then washed in TBS-T and incubated in goat
anti-mouse HRP (1:2500, 7076, Cell Signaling), goat anti-rat HRP (1:2500, 7077,
Cell Signaling), or IRDye secondaries (1:20000, 925, Li-Cor). Each sample was
normalized to B-actin using HRP-conjugated mouse anti-B-actin (1:10000, A3854,
Sigma-Aldrich; RRID:AB_262011). All secondary antibodies were incubated for one
hour at room temperature. Blots were analyzed with the Odyssey® Fc
imaging system (Li-Cor). One-way ANOVA with Tukey correction and two-way
unpaired t-tests, or a one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s correction for
multiple comparisons were used to determine statistical significance across
CRISPR or ASO cohorts, respectively. Raw annotated images of full western blots
are provided in Supplementary
Data 2 and 7.

Samples in protein lysis buffer were cleaned of detergent using a
previously published filter-aided sample preparation protocol with a 10-kDa
molecular weight cutoff filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA) and buffer exchanged
with 8M Urea in 50mM Tris-pH-8.0 to a final volume of 50μL40. Proteins were reduced on
filter with 10mM dithiothreitol (8M Urea, 50mM Tris-pH-8.0) for 1-hour at
37°C, followed by alkylation with 25mM iodoacetaminde (8M Urea, 50mM
Tris-pH-8.0) for 30min in the dark. The 8M urea was then adjusted to 4M (50mM
Tris-pH-8.0) and samples were concentrated to a final volume of 50μL.
Next, 10μg of total protein were digested with lysyl endopeptidase (Wako
Chemicals, Richmond, VA) at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:30 for 2-hours at
37°C. The urea concentration was then adjusted to 2M using 50mM Tris, pH
8, followed by an overnight trypsin digestion using sequencing grade trypsin
(Promega, Madison, WI) at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:30 at 37°C.

Three hundred nanograms of each sample were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a
LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped
with a nanoAcquity™ Ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system
(Waters, Taunton, MA). The injection order on the LC-MS was randomized over all
samples. Blank injections were run after each sample to minimize carry-over
between samples. Mobile phases were organic phase A (0.1% formic acid in water)
and aqueous phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Peptides were loaded
onto a nanoACQUITY UPLC® 2G-V/M C18 desalting trap column (180 μm
× 20 mm nano column, 5 μm, 100 Å) at flow rate of
0.300μl/minute. Subsequently, peptides were resolved in a nanoACQUITY
UPLC® BEH300 C18 reversed phase column (75μm × 250 mm nano
column, 1.7μm, 100 Å; Waters, Milford, MA) followed by a gradient
elution of 1–40 % of phase B over 240 minutes (isocratic at 1% B,
0–1 min; 2–42% B, 2–212 min; 42–90% B,
212–223 min; and 90–1% B, 223–240 min). A nano ES ion
source at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, 1.5 kV spray voltage, and 270 °C
capillary temperature was utilized to ionize peptides. Full scan MS spectra (m/z
380–1800) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 followed by twenty data
dependent MS/MS scans. LC-MS/MS raw data were acquired using the Xcalibur
software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 2.2 SP1).

The LC-MS/MS raw files (one for each sample) were imported into
PeaksStudio (BioinformaticsSolutions, Ontario, Canada) and processed as
previously described41,42. A database was created that
included PLP wild-type and predicted mutant isoforms. Search settings were as
follow: trypsin enzyme specificity; mass accuracy window for precursor ion, 10
ppm; mass accuracy window for fragment ions, 0.8 Da; carbamidomethylation of
cysteines as fixed modifications; oxidation of methionine as variable
modification; and one missed cleavage. Peptide identification criteria were a
mass accuracy of ≤10 ppm, and an estimated False Discovery Rate (FDR) of
less than 2%. Normalization of signal intensities across samples was performed
using the average signal intensities obtained in each sample. The fold change
(FC) was then calculated using these average intensity values for the protein
across the two samples.

Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and tissue was collected after
terminal transcardial perfusion with PBS followed by 4% paraformaldehyde and 2%
glutaraldehyde (16216, Electron Microscopy Sciences) in 0.1M sodium cacodylate
buffer, pH 7.4 (11652, Electron Microscopy Sciences), except for 6 month optic
nerve samples which were placed directly into fixative without perfusion.
Samples were post-fixed with 1% osmium tetroxide (19150, Electron Microscopy
Sciences) and stained with 0.25% uranyl acetate (22400, Electron Microscopy
Sciences), en bloc. Samples were dehydrated using increasing concentrations of
ethanol, passed through propylene oxide, and embedded in Eponate 12™
epoxy resin (18012, Ted Pella). Silver–colored sections were prepared
(Leica EM UC6), placed on 300 mesh nickel grids (T300-Ni, Electron Microscopy
Sciences), stained with 2% uranyl acetate in 50 % methanol, and stained with
lead citrate (17800, Electron Microscopy Sciences). Sections were imaged using a
FEI Tecnai Spirit electron microscope at 80 kV. Myelinated axons were manually
counted from the sections made on the middle portion of the optic nerve
lengthwise, the medial portion of the genu for the corpus collosum, and
corticospinal tracts at the pontine level of the brainstem. Three independent
areas were counted for each region using Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems).
Two-way unpaired t-tests or a one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s correction for
multiple comparisons were used to determine statistical significance across
CRISPR or ASO cohorts, respectively.

Mice were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane and euthanized. Each eye
with its attached optic nerve was dissected and placed in Tyrode’s
solution consisting of 129mM NaCl (BP358–212, Fisher Scientific), 3mM KCl
(BP366–500, Fisher Scientific), 1.2mM NaH2PO4
(1–3818, J. T. Baker Chemical), 2.4mM CaCl2 (C79–500,
Fisher Scientific), 1.3mM MgSO4 (M2643, Sigma), 20mM
NaHCO3 (S233–500, Fisher Scientific), 3mM HEPES (H3375,
Sigma), 10mM glucose (G5767, Sigma), oxygenated using a 95%O2/5%
CO2 gas mixture. Each nerve was carefully cleaned, transected
behind the eye, at the optic chiasm, and allowed to recover for one hour in
oxygenated Tyrode’s solution at room temperature (22–24°C).
Each end of the nerve was set in suction electrodes, pulled from polyethylene
tubing (PE-190, BD Biosciences). Monophasic electrical stimuli were applied to
the proximal end of the nerve and recordings were captured at the distal end.
The recovery of the response was monitored every 20 min for one hour, and only
fully recovered samples were subjected to additional stimuli. Stimuli were
generated with a S48 stimulator (Grass Technologies) and isolated from ground
with PSIU6B unit (Grass Technologies). Supra-threshold stimulus was determined
using 30μs stimulus duration. The response was amplified 100X with P15D
preamplifier (Grass Technologies), monitored with oscilloscope (V1585, Hitachi),
digitized with Digidata1550A (Axon Instruments) and recorded using 50kHz
sampling rate with AxoScope software (Axon Instruments). The distance between
the electrodes was measured and used to calculate the conduction velocity of the
compound action potential (CAP) peaks at their latency. Recorded signals were
analyzed using AxoScope software. One-way ANOVA with Tukey correction and
two-way unpaired t-tests, or a one-way t-test were used to determine statistical
significance across CRISPR or ASO cohorts, respectively.

Locomotion was assessed by open field testing. Animals were placed in
the center of a 20-inch by 20-inch square box and all movements were captured
for a total of five minutes using ANY-maze software version 5.0 (Stoelting Co).
Total distance traveled was reported for each animal. One-way ANOVA with Tukey
correction and two-way unpaired t-tests, or a one-way ANOVA with
Dunnett’s correction for multiple comparisons were used to determine
statistical significance across CRISPR or ASO cohorts, respectively.

Motor performance was assessed using a Rota Rod Rotomax 5 (Columbus
Instruments) with a 3cm diameter rotating rod. Immediately prior to testing
animals were trained at a constant speed of 4 rounds per minute (rpm) for a
total of two minutes. Testing began at 4 rpm with an acceleration of 0.1 rpm/s.
Time to fall was recorded from three independent trials, and the average value
for each animal was reported. Animals were allowed to rest for at least five
minutes between training and each experimental trial. Animals that failed
training were assigned a value of 0 for all three trials for a particular
timepoint. One-way ANOVA with Tukey correction and two-way unpaired t-tests, or
a one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s correction for multiple comparisons were
used to determine statistical significance across CRISPR or ASO cohorts,
respectively.

Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in phosphate buffered
saline (PBS). After fixation, cells were permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 in
PBS followed by blocking in 10% donkey serum in PBS. Cells were stained
overnight at 4°C with the following primary antibodies diluted in
blocking solution: mouse anti-MBP (1:500; 808401, Biolegend; RRID:AB_2564741),
rat anti-PLP (1:5000; clone AA3, Lerner Research Institute Hybridoma Core,
Cleveland, OH), goat anti-SOX10 (2μg/mL; AF2864, R&D Systems;
RRID:AB_442208), rabbit anti-OLIG2 (1:1000; 13999–1-AP, ProteinTech;
RRID:AB_2157541), rabbit anti-NANOG (0.4μg/mL; AB21624, Abcam;
RRID:AB_446437), mouse anti-OCT3/4 (0.4μg/mL; SC-5279, Santa Cruz;
RRID:AB_628051). For secondary immunostaining, Alexa Fluor® antibodies
(ThermoFisher) were used at 1μg/ml, and DAPI (100ng/mL) was employed to
identify nuclei. Images were captured using Leica DMi8 fluorescence microscope
(iPSCs) or Operetta® High Content Imaging and Analysis system and
Harmony® software (OPCs and oligodendroctytes), the latter quantified
using Columbus software (PerkinElmer).

Tail tips (2 mm piece from 8 day old CR-impy mice) were
bisected, placed on Nunclon-Δ 12-well plates (150628, ThermoFisher), and
covered with a circular glass coverslip (12-545-102; Fisher Scientific) to
maintain tissue contact with the plate and enable fibroblast outgrowth. Tail-tip
fibroblasts were cultured in ‘fibroblast medium’ consisting of
DMEM (11960069, ThermoFisher) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; 16000044,
ThermoFisher), 1x non-essential amino acids (11140050, ThermoFisher), 1x
Glutamax (35050061, ThermoFisher), and 0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (M3148, Sigma
Aldrich) supplemented with 100U/mL penicillin-streptomycin (15070–063,
ThermoFisher). Medium was changed every day for the first 3 days and then every
other day.

Fibroblasts were seeded at approximately 1.4×104
cells/cm2 on Nunclon-Δ dishes in fibroblast medium, and
allowed to equilibrate overnight. The following day medium was removed and
replaced with an equal volume of pHAGE2-TetOminiCMV-STEMCCA-W-loxp lentivirus
encoding a floxed, doxycycline-inducible polycistronic Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and
c-Myc construct and pLVX-Tet-On-Puro (632162, Clontech) lentivirus supplemented
with 8μg/mL polybrene (107689, Sigma). Lentivirus was prepared using the
Lenti-X Packaging Single Shots (631275, Clontech) according to
manufacturer’s instructions. Three hours later lentivirus medium was
removed and replaced with fibroblast medium supplemented with 2 μg/ml
doxycycline (631311, Clontech). The following day media was removed and replaced
with an equal volume of pHAGE2-TetOminiCMV-STEMCCA-Wloxp and pLVX-Tet-On-Puro
lentivirus supplemented with 8μg/mL polybrene. Three hours later
lentivirus media was diluted 1:2 with fibroblast medium. Medium was changed each
day with fibroblast medium supplemented with 2 μg/ml doxycycline and
103 units/ml LIF. After 3 days fibroblasts were lifted using
Accutase and seeded on Nunclon-Δ plates, atop a feeder layer of
irradiated mouse embryonic fibroblasts (iMEFs; produced in-house) previously
plated at 1.7×104 cells/cm2 on 0.1% gelatin (1890,
Sigma) coated Nunclon-Δ plates in “pluripotency medium”
consisting of Knockout DMEM (10829–018, ThermoFisher), 5% FBS, 15%
knockout replacement serum (10828028, ThermoFisher), 1x Glutamax, 1x
nonessential amino acids, 0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, and 103 units/ml
LIF (LIF; ESG1107, EMD Millipore) supplemented with 2 μg/ml doxycycline.
Medium was changed every day until iPSC colonies began to emerge. Individual
colonies were picked and dissociated in Accutase and were individually plated in
single wells of Nunclon-Δ 12-well plates, atop an iMEF feeder layer in
pluripotency medium supplemented with 2 μg/ml doxycycline. Clones were
further expanded, with daily medium changes. iPSC colonies were stained for
pluripotency markers Nanog and Oct4 and karyotyped at the seventh passage after
derivation (Cell Line Genetics; Madison, WI). CR-impy iPSCs
were derived and characterized for this study (line identifier jpCR100.1).
Isogenic comparator jimpy (line identifier i.jp-1.6) and
wild-type (line identifier i.wt-1.0) iPSC lines were described and characterized
separately14. All cell
cultures in the laboratory are routinely tested for mycoplasma contamination
with consistently negative results. Genotypes of iPSCs were re-verified prior to
use. For characterization iPSCs were immunostained for NANOG and OCT3/4, and
counterstained with DAPI.

iPSCs were differentiated to OPCs as previously described43,44. In brief, iPSCs were isolated from their iMEF feeder
layer using 1.5mg/mL collagenase type IV (17104019, ThermoFisher) and
dissociated with either 0.25% Typsin-EDTA or Accutase and seeded at
7.8×104 cells/cm2 on Costar Ultra-Low attachment 6-well
plates (3471, Corning). Cultures were then directed through a stepwise
differentiation process to generate pure populations of OPCs. OPCs were
maintained in “OPC medium” consisting of DMEM/F12 (11320082,
ThermoFisher), 1x N2 supplement (AR009, R&D Systems), 1x B-27 without
vitamin A supplement (12587–010, ThermoFisher), and 1x Glutamax
(collectively “N2B27 medium”), supplemented with 20 ng/mL
fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2; 233-FB, R&D Systems) and 20 ng/mL
platelet-derived growth factor-AA (PDGF-AA; 221-AA, R&D Systems). Medium was
changed every other day. All cell cultures in the laboratory are routinely
tested for mycoplasma contamination with consistently negative results. For
characterization of purity, iPSC-derived OPCs were fixed with 4% PFA and
immunostained for canonical OPC transcription factors, OLIG2 and SOX10, and
counterstained with DAPI.

OPCs from each genotype were plated in parallel onto Nunclon-Δ
96-well plates (150628, ThermoFisher) that were first coated with 100
μg/mL poly(L-ornithine) (P3655, Sigma), followed by 10 μg/ml
laminin solution (L2020, Sigma). For the oligodendrocyte differentiation assay,
25,000 cells were seeded per well in media that consisted of DMEM/F12 (11320082,
ThermoFisher), 1x N2 supplement (AR009, R&D Systems), 1x B-27 without
vitamin A supplement (12587–010, ThermoFisher), and 1x Glutamax,
supplemented with T3 (40ng/ml), Noggin (100ng/ml), cAMP (10μM), IGF
(100ng/ml) and NT3 (10ng/ml). All plates were incubated at 37°C and 5%
CO2 for 3 days. Cells were fixed and immunostained for MBP and
PLP, and counterstained with DAPI. All quantifications were normalized to
initial cell counts at plating.

Two ASOs were designed to target mouse Hdac2.
ASO-Hdac2.a consisted of a 20-mer nucleotide sequence
(5′- CTCACTTTTCGAGGTTCCTA-3′) with 2′-O-methoxyethyl (MOE)
modifications and a mixed backbone of phosphorothioate and phosphodiester
internucelotide linkages. ASO-Hdac2.b consisted of a 16-mer
nucleotide sequence (5′- CATCATCTATACCATC-3′) with
2’-O-ethyl (cEt) modifications with a full backbone of phosphorothioate
internucelotide linkages. To determine if ASOs could reduce effectively target
oligodendrocyte linage cells and reduce gene expression, we administered
Hdac2-targeting ASOs to 8 week old C57BL/6J mice (Jackson
Labs) via single 300μg ICV injection. After 2 weeks mice were sacrificed
and processed for histology. Formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded brain and spinal
cord sections were stained for NG2 to label OPCs in the study dosed with
Hdac2.a ASO, and APC/CC1 to oligodendrocytes in the study
dosed with Hdac2.b ASO, as well for HDAC2 to examine
ASO-mediated knockdown of this target. Images were captured using an
epifluorescent imaging system (EVOS, ThermoFisher Scientific).

Second generation ASOs were designed to target mouse
Plp1. ASOs consisted of 20-mer nucleotide sequences with
2′-O-methoxyethyl (MOE) modifications and a mixed backbone of
phosphorothioate and phosphodiester internucelotide linkages. ASOs were screened
for efficacy in primary E16 cortical cultures, as previously described45. Briefly, cells were treated
with ASOs at 37°C/5% CO2 for 3 days, RNA was isolated, and
Plp1 transcript level was quantified with qRT-PCR on Step
One instruments (Thermo Fisher). Plp1 mRNA was normalized to
total RNA measured with the Quant-iTTM RiboGreen® RNA reagent. ASOs that
efficiently reduced Plpl mRNA were selected for in
vivo screening and tolerability studies.

Lead ASOs were administered to 8 week old C57BL/6J mice via single
500μg ICV injection and Plp1 mRNA levels were measured
by qRT-PCR in cortex and spinal cord tissue after 2 weeks. ASOs with greater
than 90% Plp1 mRNA reduction were selected for further
characterization. Selected ASOs were administered to mice via single
300μg ICV bolus injection to test for efficacy and tolerability, as
measured by markers of glial cell activation, 8 weeks post-ICV injection. Levels
of Plp1 mRNA as well as markers of astrocytes, microglia, and
monocytes (Gfap, Aif1, and CD68,
respectively) were assessed by qRT-PCR using the custom primer and
probe sets (Integrated DNA Technologies) listed in Supplementary Table 4.

Immunohistochemical staining was used to assess morphology of
astrocytes, microglia, and oligodendrocyte using anti-GFAP, IBA1 (DAKO), and MBP
(Abcam) antibodies, respectively, in formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded brain and
spinal cord sections. Plp1 ASO.a (intron 5) and ASO.b
(3’ UTR) were selected for use in jimpy mice, as well as
a control ASO with no known murine target. ASO sequences were as follows:

ASO control: 5′- CCTATAGGACTATCCAGGAA-3′

ASO Plp1.a:
5′-GCTCATTGATTCAAGTACAT-3′

ASO Plp1.b,
5′-GCATTTACCCGAAGGCCATT-3′

Each Plp1-targeting ASO was further evaluated for
potential off-target effects. Bowtie aligner 58 was used to identify
putative ASO off-target transcript sequences, with up to three base mismatches.
This analysis identified potential off-target sequence in Xylt1
for ASO Plp1.a and Scfd1 and
Tpk1 for ASO Plp1.b, each having exactly
two mismatches. To determine if these transcripts were targeted by
Plp1 ASO.a or ASO.b, adult mice (8 weeks of age, C57Bl6/J)
were administered 30, 100, or 300μg of each ASO by ICV injection. After
two weeks spinal cord tissues were collected and levels of
Xylt1, Scfd1, and Tpk1
were measured by qRT-PCR using the custom primer and probe sets (Integrated DNA
Technologies) listed in Supplementary Table 4.

Optimum therapeutic dosage for use in early postnatal injection was
determined by injecting wild-type C57BL/6J mice pups at postnatal day 1 using
three different doses (10, 30, or 60 μg) of ASO Plp1.a
or ASO Plp1.b, along with a control non-targeting ASO. Mice
were sacrificed three weeks later and analyzed by for levels of
Plp1 mRNA in the spinal cord using qRT-PCR. One-way ANOVA
with Dunnett’s correction for multiple comparisons was used to determine
statistical significance across treatments.

Male pups from crosses between jimpy mutation carrier
females and wild-type males were administered 30μg of either
Plp1-targeting ASOs Plp1.a,
Plp1.b, a control non-targeting ASO, or left untreated.
ASOs were administered using a Hamilton 1700 gastight syringe (7653–01,
Hamilton Company) by ICV injection to cryoanesthetized mice. The needle was
placed between bregma and the eye, 2/5 the distance from bregma, and inserted to
a depth of 2mm46. A total
volume of 2μl was administered to the left ventricle. Mice were allowed
to recover on a heating pad and subsequently reintroduced to the dam. Injections
were performed with the investigator blinded to the genotype.

Mice were genotyped during the first postnatal week and monitored daily
for onset of typical jimpy phenotypes including tremors,
seizures, and early death by 3 weeks of age. Lifespan was determined for each
animal with statistical significance among groups determined using the log-rank
test. All mice surviving to a pre-determined endpoint of 8 months of age were
sacrificed for histological analysis. Additionally, animals were analyzed using
rotarod, open field, and optic nerve electrophysiology. Details and metadata for
all mice in this study are found in Supplementary Data 6.

At postnatal day 19 or 20, male pups were placed in a plethysmograph
chamber and pressure changes caused by animal respiration were measured using a
differential pressure transducer (Emka). The data collection was started when
the mice were placed in the chamber and continuously recorded at 1 KHz sampling
rate. After placing the mice in the chamber, it was first flushed with normal
air (79% nitrogen, 21% oxygen) over a 1 hour period to acclimate the mice and
determine basal breathing activity. The chamber was then flushed with
hypercapnic gas (74% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, 5% carbon dioxide) for 15 minutes and
the data collected over the subsequent 15–30 minute period was used for
analysis. Next, the chamber was flushed with normal air for 15 minutes. Hypoxic
gas (89.5% nitrogen, 10.5% oxygen) was then introduced to the chamber over 10
minutes, with the data collected over this period used for analysis. After the
hypoxic gas challenge mice were weighed and sacrificed. Gas flow rate over the
entire experiment was 0.75L/min per chamber. Recorded breaths lasting for at
least 20 seconds, continuously, and marked with a 100% success rate using IOX2
software (Emka) were used for subsequent data analysis for the normal air and
hypercapnic conditions. Recorded breaths in the hypoxic condition were not
continuous for more than 20 seconds so only breaths marked with a 100% success
rate in the IOX2 software were used for further data analysis. Survival during
hypoxic challenge was determined for each animal with statistical significance
among groups determined using the log-rank test. Variability of respiration was
determined with statistical significance among groups determined using the Brown
and Forsythe’s test.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.

All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this
article and its supplementary
information files. Source data for animal survival cohorts in Figs. 1b, k–l, and 3b, 4a–b are provided in
Supplementary Data
1 and 6. Raw
annotated western blot images for Extended Data
Fig. 2b, d and Extended Data Fig. 7a, c are provided as Supplementary Data 2 and 7. Source data for all graphs are
provided as separate Excel files. Animals and iPSC lines are available from
P.J.T. upon request.

a, Annotated Sanger sequencing traces of wild-type,
jimpy, and CR-impy mice showing the
complex, frameshift in Plp1 exon 3 from dual cutting of
CRISPR/spCas9 sgRNAs in CR-impy mice as well as the
jimpy point mutation in intron 4. sgRNA 3 and 7
sequences outlined by black boxes with the predicted double strand break
site shown a black arrow. b, Table showing the top predicted
on- and off-target sites for sgRNAs 3 and 7. CRISPR-induced indels were
detected by whole genome sequencing of the CR-impy founder
and three independent CR-impy F2 generation males, and
consisted of an on-target 80bp complex deletion (CR-impy
deletion) in exon 3 of Plp1 (green), an off-target 1 bp
insertion in chromosome 6 (red), and an off-target 1 bp insertion in
chromosome 11 (yellow). c-e, Integrative Genomics Viewer
browser images showing aligned reads for the CR-impy
founder, the jimpy control, and three
CR-impy F2 males along with the detected indels at the
on-target locus at exon 3 of Plp1 on chromosome X
(c), and off-targets on chromosome 6 (d) and
chromosome 11 (e) depicted by the dashed green, red, and yellow
boxes, respectively. sgRNA 3 or sgRNA 7 targeted sequences are depicted by
black bars.

a, RT-qPCR data showing the levels of
Plp1 transcript at 6 months (n=3 mice). b,
Western blot data demonstrating the levels of MBP protein at 3 weeks (n=3
mice). c, RT-qPCR data showing the levels of
Mbp transcript at 6 months (n=3 mice). d,
Western blot data demonstrating the levels of MBP protein at 6 months (n=3
mice).

Individual data points represent the mean value of 4 technical
replicates for each biological replicate (a, c) or independent
biological replicates (b, d). Biological replicates (individual
mice) indicated by open circles. Graph bars indicate mean ± standard
deviation. p-values calculated using one-way ANOVA with Tukey correction at
3 weeks or two-way, an unpaired two-sided t-test at later time points.
p-values stated for p<0.1, otherwise not significant (n.s). See Supplementary Data 2
for full western blot images for all samples.

. a, Immunohistochemical images of whole-brain sagittal
sections showing Iba1+ microglia (red) and DAPI+
nuclei (blue) across genotypes. Scale bar, 2mm. b,
Immunohistochemical images of whole-brain sagittal sections showing
GFAP+ astrocytes (red) and DAPI+ nuclei (blue)
staining across genotypes. Scale bar, 2mm. c-d, Normalized mean
signal intensity of (c) Iba1+ microglia and
(d) GFAP+ astrocytes across genotypes and CNS
regions (n=3 mice).

Biological replicates (individual mice) indicated by open circles.
Graph bars indicate mean ± standard deviation. p-values calculated
using one-way ANOVA with Tukey correction. p-values stated for p<0.1,
otherwise not significant (n.s). See Supplementary Data
3–5 for representative source images of Iba-1 and GFAP
staining.

a, Phase and immunocytochemistry images of
Oct4+ and Nanog+ iPSCs, along with
DAPI+ nuclei and b, normal karyotype of a
CR-impy iPSC line used to generate OPCs. Scale bar,
50μm. c, Immunocytochemistry images showing
Olig2+ and Sox10+ cells in OPC cultures, along
with DAPI+ nuclei, derived from iPSCs. Scale bar, 100μm.
d, Percentage of Sox10+ and Olig2+
cells in OPC cultures. e, Immunocytochemistry images of
MBP+ and PLP+ oligodendrocytes. f-g,
Quantification of (f) MBP+ oligodendrocytes and
(g) total cell number (DAPI+ nuclei) from
iPSC-derived OPCs differentiated in vitro for 3 days. Scale
bar, 50μm.

Technical replicates (individual wells) for a single cell line per
genotype indicated by black circles. Graph bars indicate mean ±
standard deviation.

a-b, RT-qPCR data showing the level of (a)
Plp1 transcript levels or (b) expression levels of
off-target transcripts (up to 3 base mismatches) in the spinal cord for
Plp1-tageting ASOs, including Xylt1
(off-target for ASO Plp1.a), Scfd1, or
Tpk1 (off-targets for ASO Plp1.b), 2
weeks post-injection of Plp1-targeting ASOs (30μg,
100μg, and 300μg doses) or PBS control in 8 week old adult
wild-type (wt) mice (n=3 mice). c-d, RT-qPCR data showing
Plp1 transcript levels or tolerability by expression
levels of Gfap, Aif1, and Cd68 transcripts
in the cerebral cortex and spinal cord, 8 weeks post-injection with the
indicated ASOs (300μg dose) or PBS control in 8 week old wild-type
mice (n=3 mice). e-h, Immunohistochemistry images with
hematoxylin counterstain showing Iba1+ or GFAP+
astrocytes in (e) Cortical layers I-IV (Iba1), (f)
cortical layers I-III (GFAP), (g) spinal cord dorsal horn
grey/white matter intersection (Iba1), and (h) spinal cord
(GFAP), 8 weeks post-injection with the indicated ASOs (300μg dose)
or PBS control in 8 week old wild-type mice. Scale bar, 500μm.

Biological replicates (individual mice) indicated by open circles,
representing the mean value of 3 technical replicates. Graph bars indicate
mean ± standard deviation. p-values calculated using one-way ANOVA
with Dunnett’s correction for multiple comparisons. p-values stated
for p<0.1, otherwise not significant (n.s).

a-b, Immunohistochemical images of brain sagittal
sections showing ASO+ staining and DAPI+ nuclei (blue)
of (a) wtASOPlp1.a,
wtASOPlp1.b, and wild-type uninjected or
(b) jpASOPlp1.a,
jpASOPlp1.b, and uninjected jimpy
mice, 3 weeks post-ASO injection (30μg dose at birth). Scale bar,
50μm.

a, Western blot data showing the level of MBP protein
(n=3 mice). b, RT-qPCR data showing the level of
Mbp transcript (n=3 mice). c, Western blot
data showing the level of MBP (n=3 mice). d,
Immunohistochemistry images with hematoxylin counterstain of whole brain
sagittal sections showing MBP+ myelin. Scale bar,
1mm. e, Quantification of cleaved-caspase
3+ apoptotic cells (n=3 mice). f,
Quantification of
CC1+/Olig2+
oligodendrocytes (n=4 mice). g, Quantification of the number of
Olig2+ glial lineage cells (n=4 mice).
h, Quantification of the number of
PDGFRα+/Olig2+ OPCs (n=4 mice).

All data collected at 3 weeks post-ASO injection (30μg dose
at birth). Individual data points represent the mean value of 4 technical
replicates for each biological replicate (individual mice) (b)
or independent biological replicates (individual mice) (a,
c-h), indicated by open circles. Graph bars indicate mean ±
standard deviation. p-values calculated using one-way ANOVA with
Dunnett’s correction for multiple comparisons. p-values stated for
p<0.1, otherwise not significant (n.s). See Supplementary Data 4 for full
western blot images for all samples.

a-b, Electron micrograph images showing myelination of
wtASOctr or jpASOPlp1.b at (a) 2 months and
(b) 8 months. For a, scale bar, 0.5μm. For b, lower
panel is a higher magnification of red boxed area in the upper panel. Upper
panel scale bar, 5μm and lower panel scale bar, 0.5μm.