---
reference_id: "PMID:19568269"
title: HPGD mutations cause cranioosteoarthropathy but not autosomal dominant digital clubbing.
authors:
- Seifert W
- Beninde J
- Hoffmann K
- Lindner TH
- Bassir C
- Aksu F
- Hübner C
- Verbeek NE
- Mundlos S
- Horn D
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.104
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 4/genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Fingers/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- Genetic Loci/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Hydroxyprostaglandin Dehydrogenases/genetics
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Osteoarthropathy, Primary Hypertrophic/diagnostic imaging, enzymology, genetics"
- Pregnancy
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HPGD mutations cause cranioosteoarthropathy but not autosomal dominant digital clubbing.
**Authors:** Seifert W, Beninde J, Hoffmann K, Lindner TH, Bassir C, Aksu F, Hübner C, Verbeek NE, Mundlos S, Horn D
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2009.104](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2009.104)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Dec;17(12):1570-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.104. Epub 2009
 Jul 1.

HPGD mutations cause cranioosteoarthropathy but not autosomal dominant digital 
clubbing.

Seifert W(1), Beninde J, Hoffmann K, Lindner TH, Bassir C, Aksu F, Hübner C, 
Verbeek NE, Mundlos S, Horn D.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Charité, University Medicine of Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.

Cranio-osteoarthropathy, clinically classified as a variant of primary 
hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, is a very rare autosomal-recessive condition 
characterized by delayed closure of the cranial sutures and fontanels, digital 
clubbing, arthropathy, and periostosis. Recently, mutations in the gene HPGD, 
which encodes the NAD(+)-dependent 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase, were 
reported in four families affected with primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy 
and one family with autosomal-recessive isolated nail clubbing. We report the 
clinical and molecular findings in four patients from two families affected with 
cranio-osteoarthropathy and one family with isolated, autosomal dominant digital 
clubbing. Genome-wide homozygosity mapping identified a locus for 
cranio-osteoarthropathy harboring the HPGD gene in one affected family. We 
detected two novel homozygous mutations in HPGD in these families: a missense 
mutation affecting the NAD(+) binding motif and a frameshift mutation. The 
clinical presentation in our patients was variable. Digital clubbing and 
hyperhidrosis were present in all cases. Delayed closure of the cranial sutures 
and fontanels, periostosis, and arthropathy were not consistent clinical 
features. No HPGD mutation was detected in a familial case of autosomal dominant 
isolated digital clubbing. The failure to identify any mutation in a family with 
an autosomal dominant type of isolated digital clubbing suggests that HPGD is 
not the major gene for this condition.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.104
PMCID: PMC2987025
PMID: 19568269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]