---
reference_id: "PMID:36598417"
title: Genomic Patterns of Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumor (MPNST) Evolution Correlate with Clinical Outcome and Are Detectable in Cell-Free DNA.
authors:
- Cortes-Ciriano I
- Steele CD
- Piculell K
- Al-Ibraheemi A
- Eulo V
- Bui MM
- Chatzipli A
- Dickson BC
- Borcherding DC
- Feber A
- Galor A
- Hart J
- Jones KB
- Jordan JT
- Kim RH
- Lindsay D
- Miller C
- Nishida Y
- Proszek PZ
- Serrano J
- Sundby RT
- Szymanski JJ
- Ullrich NJ
- Viskochil D
- Wang X
- Snuderl M
- Park PJ
- Flanagan AM
- Hirbe AC
- Pillay N
- Miller DT
- Genomics of MPNST (GeM) Consortium
journal: Cancer Discov
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-22-0786
keywords:
- Humans
- "Neurofibrosarcoma/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Histones/metabolism
- DNA Methylation
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurofibromatosis 1/genetics
- Genomics
- "Nerve Sheath Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic Patterns of Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumor (MPNST) Evolution Correlate with Clinical Outcome and Are Detectable in Cell-Free DNA.
**Authors:** Cortes-Ciriano I, Steele CD, Piculell K, Al-Ibraheemi A, Eulo V, Bui MM, Chatzipli A, Dickson BC, Borcherding DC, Feber A, Galor A, Hart J, Jones KB, Jordan JT, Kim RH, Lindsay D, Miller C, Nishida Y, Proszek PZ, Serrano J, Sundby RT, Szymanski JJ, Ullrich NJ, Viskochil D, Wang X, Snuderl M, Park PJ, Flanagan AM, Hirbe AC, Pillay N, Miller DT, Genomics of MPNST (GeM) Consortium
**Journal:** Cancer Discov (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1158/2159-8290.CD-22-0786](https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-22-0786)

## Content

1. Cancer Discov. 2023 Mar 1;13(3):654-671. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-22-0786.

Genomic Patterns of Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumor (MPNST) Evolution
Correlate with Clinical Outcome and Are Detectable in Cell-Free DNA.

Cortes-Ciriano I(#)(1), Steele CD(2), Piculell K(3), Al-Ibraheemi A(4), Eulo
V(5), Bui MM(6), Chatzipli A(7), Dickson BC(8)(9), Borcherding DC(10), Feber
A(11), Galor A(12), Hart J(13), Jones KB(14), Jordan JT(15), Kim RH(16)(17),
Lindsay D(18), Miller C(1), Nishida Y(19), Proszek PZ(11), Serrano J(20), Sundby
RT(21), Szymanski JJ(22), Ullrich NJ(23), Viskochil D(24), Wang X(25), Snuderl
M(20), Park PJ(7), Flanagan AM(#)(2)(18), Hirbe AC(#)(10), Pillay N(#)(2)(18),
Miller DT(#)(3); Genomics of MPNST (GeM) Consortium.

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute,
Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Research Department of Pathology, University College London Cancer Institute,
Bloomsbury, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Division of Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
(6)Department of Pathology, Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa,
Florida.
(7)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(10)Division of Oncology, Departments of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics,
Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri.
(11)Clinical Genomics Translational Research, Institute of Cancer Research,
Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(12)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(13)Department of Pathology, Lifespan Laboratories, Rhode Island Hospital,
Providence, Rhode Island.
(14)Departments of Orthopaedics and Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer
Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(15)Pappas Center for Neuro-oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(16)Division of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre, Sinai Health System, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(17)Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Ontario Institute for
Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(18)Department of Histopathology, Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital, NHS
Trust, Middlesex, United Kingdom.
(19)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya,
Aichi, Japan.
(20)Department of Pathology, New York University Langone Health, Perlmutter
Cancer Center, New York City, New York.
(21)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(22)Division of Cancer Biology, Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(23)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(24)Division of Medical Genetics, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, Utah.
(25)GeneHome, Department of Individualized Cancer Management, H. Lee Moffitt
Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    2159-8274. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-3-ITI.

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST), an aggressive soft-tissue
sarcoma, occurs in people with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and sporadically.
Whole-genome and multiregional exome sequencing, transcriptomic, and methylation
profiling of 95 tumor samples revealed the order of genomic events in tumor
evolution. Following biallelic inactivation of NF1, loss of CDKN2A or TP53 with
or without inactivation of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) leads to
extensive somatic copy-number aberrations (SCNA). Distinct pathways of tumor
evolution are associated with inactivation of PRC2 genes and H3K27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) status. Tumors with H3K27me3 loss evolve through
extensive chromosomal losses followed by whole-genome doubling and chromosome 8
amplification, and show lower levels of immune cell infiltration. Retention of
H3K27me3 leads to extensive genomic instability, but an immune cell-rich
phenotype. Specific SCNAs detected in both tumor samples and cell-free DNA
(cfDNA) act as a surrogate for H3K27me3 loss and immune infiltration, and
predict prognosis.
SIGNIFICANCE: MPNST is the most common cause of death and morbidity for
individuals with NF1, a relatively common tumor predisposition syndrome. Our
results suggest that somatic copy-number and methylation profiling of tumor or
cfDNA could serve as a biomarker for early diagnosis and to stratify patients
into prognostic and treatment-related subgroups. This article is highlighted in
the In This Issue feature, p. 517.

©2023 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-22-0786
PMCID: PMC9983734
PMID: 36598417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
