---
reference_id: "PMID:28242110"
title: Peptic ulcer disease.
authors:
- Lanas A
- Chan FKL
journal: Lancet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32404-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peptic ulcer disease.
**Authors:** Lanas A, Chan FKL
**Journal:** Lancet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32404-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32404-7)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2017 Aug 5;390(10094):613-624. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32404-7.
Epub  2017 Feb 25.

Peptic ulcer disease.

Lanas A(1), Chan FKL(2).

Author information:
(1)Service of Digestive Diseases, University Clinic Hospital Lozano Blesa, 
University of Zaragoza, IIS Aragón, CIBEREHD, Zaragoza, Spain. Electronic 
address: alanas@unizar.es.
(2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.

The rapidly declining prevalence of Helicobacter pylori infection and widespread 
use of potent anti-secretory drugs means peptic ulcer disease has become 
substantially less prevalent than it was two decades ago. Management has, 
however, become more challenging than ever because of the threat of increasing 
antimicrobial resistance worldwide and widespread use of complex anti-thrombotic 
therapy in the ageing population. Peptic ulcers not associated with H pylori 
infection or the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are now also 
imposing substantial diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. This Seminar aims to 
provide a balanced overview of the latest advances in the pathogenetic 
mechanisms of peptic ulcers, guidelines on therapies targeting H pylori 
infection, approaches to treatment of peptic ulcer complications associated with 
anti-inflammatory analgesics and anti-thrombotic agents, and the unmet needs in 
terms of our knowledge and management of this increasingly challenging 
condition.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32404-7
PMID: 28242110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]