---
reference_id: "PMID:5697815"
title: "Oral maintenance of water-electrolyte and acid-base balance in cholera: a preliminary report."
authors:
- Pierce NF
- Banwell JG
- Mitra RC
- Caranasos GJ
- Keimowitz RI
- Mondal A
- Manji PM
journal: Indian J Med Res
year: '1968'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral maintenance of water-electrolyte and acid-base balance in cholera: a preliminary report.
**Authors:** Pierce NF, Banwell JG, Mitra RC, Caranasos GJ, Keimowitz RI, Mondal A, Manji PM
**Journal:** Indian J Med Res (1968)

## Content

1. Indian J Med Res. 1968 May;56(5):640-5.

Oral maintenance of water-electrolyte and acid-base balance in cholera: a 
preliminary report.

Pierce NF, Banwell JG, Mitra RC, Caranasos GJ, Keimowitz RI, Mondal A, Manji PM.

PIP: A study was undertaken to determine whether the absorption of glucose from 
the normal small bowel also involves increased absorption of sodium and water. 9 
adult males suffering from severe cholera were studied. They were divided into 2 
groups, each of which received a different oral electrolyte solution, on an 
alternating schedule with control periods of intravenous fluid therapy. The 
solution formulae are tabulated. Balance data and study results are tabulated. 
The study shows that water and electrolytes were absorbed from both the 
glucose-electrolyte solutions studied. Increased content of glucose in the 
solution reduced the amount of fluid necessary to maintain the fluid balance. 
This study leads to a conclusion that orally-administered glucose-electrolyte 
solutions can be valuable in cholera management, especially in situations where 
intravenous fluids are insufficient or inappropriate or where personnel skilled 
in their administration are lacking.

PMID: 5697815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]