---
reference_id: "PMID:38154062"
title: Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency detection in human fibroblasts using scanning electrochemical microscopy.
authors:
- Thind S
- Lima D
- Booy E
- Trinh D
- McKenna SA
- Kuss S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2310288120
keywords:
- Infant
- Humans
- Adolescent
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics
- "Microscopy, Electrochemical, Scanning"
- Quality of Life
- Electron Transport Complex IV/metabolism
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency detection in human fibroblasts using scanning electrochemical microscopy.
**Authors:** Thind S, Lima D, Booy E, Trinh D, McKenna SA, Kuss S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2310288120](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2310288120)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2024 Jan 2;121(1):e2310288120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2310288120. Epub 2023 Dec 28.

Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency detection in human fibroblasts using scanning 
electrochemical microscopy.

Thind S(1), Lima D(1), Booy E(2), Trinh D(3), McKenna SA(2), Kuss S(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Bioanalytics and Electrochemical Sensing, Department of 
Chemistry, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3T 2N2, Canada.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3T 2N2, 
Canada.
(3)Laboratoire des Sciences de l'Ingénieur Pour l'Environnement, UMR CNRS 7356, 
Université de La Rochelle, Pôle Sciences et Technologie 17042, La Rochelle, 
Cedex 1, France.

Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency (COXD) is an inherited disorder characterized by 
the absence or mutation in the genes encoding for the cytochrome c oxidase 
protein (COX). COX deficiency results in severe muscle weakness, heart, liver, 
and kidney disorders, as well as brain damage in infants and adolescents, 
leading to death in many cases. With no cure for this disorder, finding an 
efficient, inexpensive, and early means of diagnosis is essential to minimize 
symptoms and long-term disabilities. Furthermore, muscle biopsy, the traditional 
detection method, is invasive, expensive, and time-consuming. This study 
demonstrates the applicability of scanning electrochemical microscopy to 
quantify COX activity in living human fibroblast cells. Taking advantage of the 
interaction between the redox mediator N, N, N', 
N'-tetramethyl-para-phenylene-diamine, and COX, the enzymatic activity was 
successfully quantified by monitoring current changes using a platinum 
microelectrode and determining the apparent heterogeneous rate constant k0 using 
numerical modeling. This study provides a foundation for developing a diagnostic 
method for detecting COXD in infants, which has the potential to increase 
treatment effectiveness and improve the quality of life of affected individuals.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2310288120
PMCID: PMC10769844
PMID: 38154062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:The authors 
declare no competing interest.