---
reference_id: "PMID:20463014"
title: Molecular consequences of the ACVR1(R206H) mutation of fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
authors:
- Song GA
- Kim HJ
- Woo KM
- Baek JH
- Kim GS
- Choi JY
- Ryoo HM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.094557
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular consequences of the ACVR1(R206H) mutation of fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
**Authors:** Song GA, Kim HJ, Woo KM, Baek JH, Kim GS, Choi JY, Ryoo HM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.094557](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.094557)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 16;285(29):22542-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.094557. Epub 
2010 May 12.

Molecular consequences of the ACVR1(R206H) mutation of fibrodysplasia ossificans 
progressiva.

Song GA(1), Kim HJ, Woo KM, Baek JH, Kim GS, Choi JY, Ryoo HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, BK21 Program, School of Dentistry and 
Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-749, Korea.

Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP), a rare genetic and catastrophic 
disorder characterized by progressive heterotopic ossification, is caused by a 
point mutation, c.617G>A; p.R206H, in the activin A receptor type 1 (ACVR1) 
gene, one of the bone morphogenetic protein type I receptors (BMPR-Is). Although 
altered BMP signaling has been suggested to explain the pathogenesis, the 
molecular consequences of this mutation are still elusive. Here we studied the 
impact of ACVR1 R206H mutation on BMP signaling and its downstream signaling 
cascades in murine myogenic C2C12 cells and HEK 293 cells. We found that ACVR1 
was the most abundant of the BMPR-Is expressed in mesenchymal cells but its 
contribution to osteogenic BMP signal transduction was minor. The R206H mutant 
caused weak activation of the BMP signaling pathway, unlike the Q207D mutant, a 
strong and constitutively active form. The R206H mutant showed a decreased 
binding affinity for FKBP1A/FKBP12, a known safeguard molecule against the 
leakage of transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta or BMP signaling. The decreased 
binding affinity of FKBP1A to the mutant R206H ACVR1 resulted in leaky 
activation of the BMP signal, and moreover, it decreased steady-state R206H 
ACVR1 protein levels. Interestingly, while WT ACVR1 and FKBP1A were broadly 
distributed in plasma membrane and cytoplasm without BMP-2 stimulation and then 
localized in plasma membrane on BMP-2 stimulation, R206H ACVR1 and FKBP1A were 
mainly distributed in plasma membrane regardless of BMP-2 stimulation. The 
impaired binding to FKBP1A and an altered subcellular distribution by R206H 
ACVR1 mutation may result in mild activation of osteogenic BMP-signaling in 
extraskeletal sites such as muscle, which eventually lead to delayed and 
progressive ectopic bone formation in FOP patients.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.094557
PMCID: PMC2903413
PMID: 20463014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]