---
reference_id: "PMID:25996952"
title: Identification of the Adapter Molecule MTSS1 as a Potential Oncogene-Specific Tumor Suppressor in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.
authors:
- Schemionek M
- Kharabi Masouleh B
- Klaile Y
- Krug U
- Hebestreit K
- Schubert C
- Dugas M
- Büchner T
- Wörmann B
- Hiddemann W
- Berdel WE
- Brümmendorf TH
- Müller-Tidow C
- Koschmieder S
journal: PLoS One
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125783
keywords:
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Cluster Analysis
- Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit/genetics
- Gene Expression
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic/drug effects"
- Humans
- Karyotype
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics, metabolism, mortality"
- "Microfilament Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Prognosis
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- RUNX1 Translocation Partner 1 Protein
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- fms-Like Tyrosine Kinase 3/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of the Adapter Molecule MTSS1 as a Potential Oncogene-Specific Tumor Suppressor in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.
**Authors:** Schemionek M, Kharabi Masouleh B, Klaile Y, Krug U, Hebestreit K, Schubert C, Dugas M, Büchner T, Wörmann B, Hiddemann W, Berdel WE, Brümmendorf TH, Müller-Tidow C, Koschmieder S
**Journal:** PLoS One (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0125783](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0125783)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2015 May 21;10(5):e0125783. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125783.
eCollection 2015.

Identification of the Adapter Molecule MTSS1 as a Potential Oncogene-Specific
Tumor Suppressor in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Schemionek M(1), Kharabi Masouleh B(1), Klaile Y(2), Krug U(3), Hebestreit K(4),
Schubert C(1), Dugas M(4), Büchner T(3), Wörmann B(5), Hiddemann W(6), Berdel
WE(3), Brümmendorf TH(1), Müller-Tidow C(3), Koschmieder S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, Hemostaseology, and Stem Cell
Transplantation, Faculty of Medicine, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Department of Urology, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine A, Hematology, Oncology, Pneumology, University of
Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
(4)Institute for Medical Informatics, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
(5)Membership of the German Society of Hematology and Oncology (DGHO), Berlin,
Germany.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine III, University of Munich, Munich, Germany;
Clinical Cooperation Group Acute Myeloid Leukemia, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich,
German Research Center for Environmental Health, Munich, Germany.

The adapter protein metastasis suppressor 1 (MTSS1) is implicated as a tumor
suppressor or tumor promoter, depending on the type of solid cancer. Here, we
identified Mtss1 expression to be increased in AML subsets with favorable
outcome, while suppressed in high risk AML patients. High expression of MTSS1
predicted better clinical outcome of patients with normal-karyotype AML.
Mechanistically, MTSS1 expression was negatively regulated by FLT3-ITD signaling
but enhanced by the AML1-ETO fusion protein. DNMT3B, a negative regulator of
MTSS1, showed strong binding to the MTSS1 promoter in PML-RARA positive but not
AML1-ETO positive cells, suggesting that AML1-ETO leads to derepression of
MTSS1. Pharmacological treatment of AML cell lines carrying the FLT3-ITD
mutation with the specific FLT3 inhibitor PKC-412 caused upregulation of MTSS1.
Moreover, treatment of acute promyelocytic cells (APL) with all-trans retinoic
acid (ATRA) increased MTSS1 mRNA levels. Taken together, our findings suggest
that MTSS1 might have a context-dependent function and could act as a tumor
suppressor, which is pharmacologically targetable in AML patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125783
PMCID: PMC4440712
PMID: 25996952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors certify that
“Klinikum Leverkusen GmbH” provided support in the form of salaries for author
Utz Krug, but did not have any additional role in the study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
The specific roles of this author are articulated in the ‘author contributions’
section. The employment of Utz Krug by the commercial company “Klinikum
Leverkusen GmbH” does not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on
sharing data and materials.
