---
reference_id: "PMID:39455656"
title: ETFDH mutation involves excessive apoptosis and neurite outgrowth defect via Bcl2 pathway.
authors:
- Lin CY
- Liang WC
- Yu YC
- Chang SC
- Lai MC
- Jong YJ
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-75286-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ETFDH mutation involves excessive apoptosis and neurite outgrowth defect via Bcl2 pathway.
**Authors:** Lin CY, Liang WC, Yu YC, Chang SC, Lai MC, Jong YJ
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-75286-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-75286-4)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Oct 25;14(1):25374. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-75286-4.

ETFDH mutation involves excessive apoptosis and neurite outgrowth defect via 
Bcl2 pathway.

Lin CY(1)(2), Liang WC(3)(4)(5)(6), Yu YC(1), Chang SC(7), Lai MC(8), Jong 
YJ(7)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Environmental Biology, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Regenerative Medicine and Cell Therapy Research Center, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. wen.chen.liang@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. wen.chen.liang@gmail.com.
(5)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. wen.chen.liang@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. wen.chen.liang@gmail.com.
(7)Departments of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Chi-Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan. 
vickylai621@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, 
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(10)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

The most common mutation in southern Chinese individuals with late-onset 
multiple acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD; a fatty acid metabolism 
disorder) is c.250G > A (p.Ala84Thr) in the electron transfer flavoprotein 
dehydrogenase gene (ETFDH). Various phenotypes, including episodic weakness or 
rhabdomyolysis, exercise intolerance, and peripheral neuropathy, have been 
reported in both muscular and neuronal contexts. Our cellular models of MADD 
exhibit neurite growth defects and excessive apoptosis. Given that axonal 
degeneration and neuronal apoptosis may be regulated by B-cell lymphoma (BCL)-2 
family proteins and mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization through the 
activation of proapoptotic molecules, we measured the expression levels of 
proapoptotic BCL-2 family proteins (e.g., BCL-2-associated X protein and 
p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis), cytochrome c, caspase-3, and caspase-9 
in NSC-34 cells carrying the most common ETFDH mutation. The levels of these 
proteins were higher in the mutant cells than in the wide-type cells. Subsequent 
treatment of the mutant cells with coenzyme Q10 downregulated activated protein 
expression and mitigated neurite growth defects. These results suggest that the 
activation of the BCL-2/mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization/apoptosis 
pathway promotes apoptosis in cellular models of MADD and that coenzyme Q10 can 
reverse this effect. Our findings aid the development of novel therapeutic 
strategies for reducing axonal degeneration and neuronal apoptosis in MADD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-75286-4
PMCID: PMC11511830
PMID: 39455656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.