---
reference_id: "PMID:34424380"
title: Dehiscence or thinning of bone overlying the superior semicircular canal in idiopathic intracranial hypertension.
authors:
- Berkiten G
- Gürbüz D
- Akan O
- Tutar B
- Tunç MK
- Karaketir S
- Bircan HS
- Berkiten E
- Sarı H
- Atar Y
- Uyar Y
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-021-07020-z
keywords:
- Cohort Studies
- Humans
- "Pseudotumor Cerebri/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- Retrospective Studies
- Semicircular Canals/diagnostic imaging
- Temporal Bone
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dehiscence or thinning of bone overlying the superior semicircular canal in idiopathic intracranial hypertension.
**Authors:** Berkiten G, Gürbüz D, Akan O, Tutar B, Tunç MK, Karaketir S, Bircan HS, Berkiten E, Sarı H, Atar Y, Uyar Y
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-021-07020-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-021-07020-z)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2022 Jun;279(6):2899-2904. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-021-07020-z. Epub 2021 Aug 23.

Dehiscence or thinning of bone overlying the superior semicircular canal in 
idiopathic intracranial hypertension.

Berkiten G(1), Gürbüz D(2), Akan O(3), Tutar B(4), Tunç MK(2), Karaketir S(5), 
Bircan HS(4), Berkiten E(6), Sarı H(4), Atar Y(4), Uyar Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University Health of 
Sciences Prof. Dr. Cemil Taşçioğlu Training and Research Hospital Hospital, 
Darulaceze Cad. No: 25 Okmeydani, Sisli/Istanbul, Turkey. 
gulerberkiten@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Radiology, Prof. Dr. Cemil Taşçioğlu Training and Research 
Hospital Hospital, Darulaceze Cad. No: 25 Okmeydani, Sisli/Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Neurology, Prof. Dr. Cemil Taşçioğlu Training and Research 
Hospital Hospital, Darulaceze Cad. No: 25 Okmeydani, Sisli/Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University Health of 
Sciences Prof. Dr. Cemil Taşçioğlu Training and Research Hospital Hospital, 
Darulaceze Cad. No: 25 Okmeydani, Sisli/Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Bulanik State 
Hospital, Muş, Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey.

STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of the study is to evaluate a relationship between 
idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) and superior semicircular canal 
dehiscence (SSCD) of bone overlying the superior semicircular canal (SSC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 57 (114 ears) individuals, 20 of whom were 
controls and 37 of whom were IIH, were included in the study. Individuals were 
evaluated with 0.8 mm slice thickness computed tomography (CT) images for SSC 
bony roof thickness and SSCD. Thickness of the bony roof over the SSC was graded 
from Grade 1 to Grade 4. Grade 3 was defined as pre-dehiscence and Grade 4 as 
dehiscence.
RESULTS: Bony roof thickness was 1.25 mm in the control group and 0.76 mm in the 
IIH group. When bony roof thickness was compared between the groups, it was 
found to be significantly thinner in the IIH group (p = 0.012). In the IIH 
group, while dehiscence was detected in 25 of 74 ears, no dehiscence was 
detected in 49 ears. In the control group, while dehiscence was detected in 5 
ears, no dehiscence was detected in 35 ears. The difference is statistically 
significant (p = 0.015). The correlation between bony roof thickness and 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure in the IIH group was not statistically 
significant (p = 0.343; rho = 0.110). The correlation between bony roof 
thickness and age in the IIH group was not statistically significant (p = 0.082; 
rho =  - 0.164).
CONCLUSION: Increased CSF pressure in patients with IIH may cause chronic, 
progressive, and irreversible damage to the bone of the SSC and, according to 
our study, the rate of SSCD was found to be high in IIH patients.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-021-07020-z
PMID: 34424380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]