---
reference_id: "PMID:31941797"
title: "Visual snow syndrome: A clinical and phenotypical description of 1,100 cases."
authors:
- Puledda F
- Schankin C
- Goadsby PJ
journal: Neurology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008909
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visual snow syndrome: A clinical and phenotypical description of 1,100 cases.
**Authors:** Puledda F, Schankin C, Goadsby PJ
**Journal:** Neurology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000008909](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000008909)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2020 Feb 11;94(6):e564-e574. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008909.
Epub  2020 Jan 15.

Visual snow syndrome: A clinical and phenotypical description of 1,100 cases.

Puledda F(1), Schankin C(2), Goadsby PJ(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Headache Group (F.P., P.J.G.), Department of Basic and Clinical 
Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College 
London; NIHR-Wellcome Trust King's Clinical Research Facility (F.P., P.J.G.), 
SLaM Biomedical Research Centre, King's College Hospital, London, UK; and 
Department of Neurology (C.S.), Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, 
University of Bern, Switzerland. francesca.puledda@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)From the Headache Group (F.P., P.J.G.), Department of Basic and Clinical 
Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College 
London; NIHR-Wellcome Trust King's Clinical Research Facility (F.P., P.J.G.), 
SLaM Biomedical Research Centre, King's College Hospital, London, UK; and 
Department of Neurology (C.S.), Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, 
University of Bern, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2020 Feb 11;94(6):241-242. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008913.
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2020 Apr;16(4):183. doi: 10.1038/s41582-020-0324-8.

OBJECTIVE: To validate the current criteria of visual snow and to describe its 
common phenotype using a substantial clinical database.
METHODS: We performed a web-based survey of patients with self-assessed visual 
snow (n = 1,104), with either the complete visual snow syndrome (n = 1,061) or 
visual snow without the syndrome (n = 43). We also describe a population of 
patients (n = 70) with possible hallucinogen persisting perception disorder who 
presented clinically with visual snow syndrome.
RESULTS: The visual snow population had an average age of 29 years and had no 
sex prevalence. The disorder usually started in early life, and ≈40% of patients 
had symptoms for as long as they could remember. The most commonly experienced 
static was black and white. Floaters, afterimages, and photophobia were the most 
reported additional visual symptoms. A latent class analysis showed that visual 
snow does not present with specific clinical endophenotypes. Severity can be 
classified by the amount of visual symptoms experienced. Migraine and tinnitus 
had a very high prevalence and were independently associated with a more severe 
presentation of the syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical characteristics of visual snow did not differ from the 
previous cohort in the literature, supporting validity of the current criteria. 
Visual snow likely represents a clinical continuum, with different degrees of 
severity. On the severe end of the spectrum, it is more likely to present with 
its common comorbid conditions, migraine and tinnitus. Visual snow does not 
depend on the effect of psychotropic substances on the brain.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008909
PMCID: PMC7136068
PMID: 31941797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]