---
reference_id: "PMID:35352487"
title: Evaluation of novel compound variants of CEP290 in prenatally suspected case of Meckel syndrome through whole exome sequencing.
authors:
- Peng M
- Han S
- Sun J
- He X
- Lv Y
- Yang L
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1935
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of novel compound variants of CEP290 in prenatally suspected case of Meckel syndrome through whole exome sequencing.
**Authors:** Peng M, Han S, Sun J, He X, Lv Y, Yang L
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.1935](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.1935)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2022 May;10(5):e1935. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1935. Epub 2022
 Mar 30.

Evaluation of novel compound variants of CEP290 in prenatally suspected case of 
Meckel syndrome through whole exome sequencing.

Peng M(1), Han S(1), Sun J(2), He X(3), Lv Y(2), Yang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics, Zhejiang 
Provincial People's Hospital (Affiliated People's Hospital, Hangzhou Medical 
College), Hangzhou, China.
(2)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Department of Ultrasound Medicine, Zhejiang 
Provincial People's Hospital (Affiliated People's Hospital, Hangzhou Medical 
College), Hangzhou, China.
(3)Cancer Center, Department of Radiology, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital 
(Affiliated People's Hospital, Hangzhou Medical College), Hangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Meckel syndrome (MKS) is a fatal disease characterized by 
multisystem fibrosis during the prenatal or perinatal period. It has an 
autosomal recessive genetic pattern and is characterized by meningo occipital 
encephalocele, polycystic kidney dysplasia, polydactyly, and hepatobiliary 
ductal plate malformation. Germline variations in CEP290 have been shown to 
cause MKS4.
METHODS: In this study, a 23-year-old Chinese woman who was 18 weeks pregnant 
was examined. The pregnancy was terminated due to occipital meningocele and 
enlarged cystic dysplastic kidney revealed by ultrasonography. In addition, the 
patient had a history of adverse pregnancy whereby the fetus presented with 
double kidney enlargement. Karyotype analysis and chromosomal microarray 
examination (CMA) were carried out using amniotic fluid samples. Whole exome 
sequencing (WES) was performed using tissue specimens of the aborted fetus.
RESULTS: Karyotype and CMA analyses showed normal results. However, compound 
heterozygous mutations of CEP290 c.3175dup and CEP290 c.1201dup were detected 
through WES. CEP290 c.1201dup is a novel heterozygous mutation of CEP290 that 
has not been reported previously.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study provide information on the correlation 
between MKS phenotype and genotype in CEP290. In addition, these findings 
indicate that WES is an effective method for detecting genetic causes of 
multiple structural defects especially those showing normal karyotype and CMA 
results.

© 2022 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.1935
PMCID: PMC9034663
PMID: 35352487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.