---
reference_id: "PMID:17218254"
title: Mutations in alpha-tubulin cause abnormal neuronal migration in mice and lissencephaly in humans.
authors:
- Keays DA
- Tian G
- Poirier K
- Huang GJ
- Siebold C
- Cleak J
- Oliver PL
- Fray M
- Harvey RJ
- Molnár Z
- Piñon MC
- Dear N
- Valdar W
- Brown SD
- Davies KE
- Rawlins JN
- Cowan NJ
- Nolan P
- Chelly J
- Flint J
journal: Cell
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.017
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Anxiety/genetics, pathology"
- "Behavior, Animal"
- Cell Movement
- "Cerebral Cortex/abnormalities, pathology"
- Chromosome Mapping
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Dimerization
- Female
- Glutamic Acid/genetics
- Guanosine Triphosphate/metabolism
- "Hippocampus/abnormalities, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- "Memory Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Neurons/pathology
- Phenotype
- Serine/genetics
- "Tubulin/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in alpha-tubulin cause abnormal neuronal migration in mice and lissencephaly in humans.
**Authors:** Keays DA, Tian G, Poirier K, Huang GJ, Siebold C, Cleak J, Oliver PL, Fray M, Harvey RJ, Molnár Z, Piñon MC, Dear N, Valdar W, Brown SD, Davies KE, Rawlins JN, Cowan NJ, Nolan P, Chelly J, Flint J
**Journal:** Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.017)

## Content

1. Cell. 2007 Jan 12;128(1):45-57. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.017.

Mutations in alpha-tubulin cause abnormal neuronal migration in mice and 
lissencephaly in humans.

Keays DA(1), Tian G, Poirier K, Huang GJ, Siebold C, Cleak J, Oliver PL, Fray M, 
Harvey RJ, Molnár Z, Piñon MC, Dear N, Valdar W, Brown SD, Davies KE, Rawlins 
JN, Cowan NJ, Nolan P, Chelly J, Flint J.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 
7BN, UK.

The development of the mammalian brain is dependent on extensive neuronal 
migration. Mutations in mice and humans that affect neuronal migration result in 
abnormal lamination of brain structures with associated behavioral deficits. 
Here, we report the identification of a hyperactive N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea 
(ENU)-induced mouse mutant with abnormalities in the laminar architecture of the 
hippocampus and cortex, accompanied by impaired neuronal migration. We show that 
the causative mutation lies in the guanosine triphosphate (GTP) binding pocket 
of alpha-1 tubulin (Tuba1) and affects tubulin heterodimer formation. Phenotypic 
similarity with existing mouse models of lissencephaly led us to screen a cohort 
of patients with developmental brain anomalies. We identified two patients with 
de novo mutations in TUBA3, the human homolog of Tuba1. This study demonstrates 
the utility of ENU mutagenesis in the mouse as a means to discover the basis of 
human neurodevelopmental disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.017
PMCID: PMC1885944
PMID: 17218254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]