---
reference_id: "PMID:30427554"
title: Homozygous splicing mutation in NUP133 causes Galloway-Mowat syndrome.
authors:
- Fujita A
- Tsukaguchi H
- Koshimizu E
- Nakazato H
- Itoh K
- Kuraoka S
- Komohara Y
- Shiina M
- Nakamura S
- Kitajima M
- Tsurusaki Y
- Miyatake S
- Ogata K
- Iijima K
- Matsumoto N
- Miyake N
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ana.25370
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/growth & development, metabolism, pathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Family Health
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects, genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- "Hernia, Hiatal/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Japan
- "Kidney/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Lymphocytes/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Male
- "Microcephaly/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/metabolism
- "Minor Histocompatibility Antigens/genetics, ultrastructure"
- "Morpholinos/administration & dosage"
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Nephrosis/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- "Nuclear Pore Complex Proteins/genetics, ultrastructure"
- Phosphopyruvate Hydratase/metabolism
- Young Adult
- Zebrafish
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous splicing mutation in NUP133 causes Galloway-Mowat syndrome.
**Authors:** Fujita A, Tsukaguchi H, Koshimizu E, Nakazato H, Itoh K, Kuraoka S, Komohara Y, Shiina M, Nakamura S, Kitajima M, Tsurusaki Y, Miyatake S, Ogata K, Iijima K, Matsumoto N, Miyake N
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.25370](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.25370)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2018 Dec;84(6):814-828. doi: 10.1002/ana.25370.

Homozygous splicing mutation in NUP133 causes Galloway-Mowat syndrome.

Fujita A(1), Tsukaguchi H(2), Koshimizu E(1), Nakazato H(3), Itoh K(4), Kuraoka
S(3), Komohara Y(5), Shiina M(6), Nakamura S(1), Kitajima M(7), Tsurusaki Y(8),
Miyatake S(1), Ogata K(6), Iijima K(9), Matsumoto N(1), Miyake N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama.
(2)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Kansai Medical University, Osaka.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto.
(4)Department of Pathology and Applied Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto.
(5)Department of Cell Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama.
(7)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto.
(8)Clinical Research Institute, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,
Japan.

Erratum in
    Ann Neurol. 2019 Mar;85(3):462-463. doi: 10.1002/ana.25427.

OBJECTIVE: Galloway-Mowat syndrome (GAMOS) is a neural and renal disorder,
characterized by microcephaly, brain anomalies, and early onset nephrotic
syndrome. Biallelic mutations in WDR73 and the 4 subunit genes of the KEOPS
complex are reported to cause GAMOS. Furthermore, an identical homozygous NUP107
(nucleoporin 107kDa) mutation was identified in 4 GAMOS-like families, although
biallelic NUP107 mutations were originally identified in steroid-resistant
nephrotic syndrome. NUP107 and NUP133 (nucleoporin 133kDa) are interacting
subunits of the nuclear pore complex in the nuclear envelope during interphase,
and these proteins are also involved in centrosome positioning and spindle
assembly during mitosis.
METHODS: Linkage analysis and whole exome sequencing were performed in a
previously reported GAMOS family with brain atrophy and steroid-resistant
nephrotic syndrome.
RESULTS: We identified a homozygous NUP133 mutation, c.3335-11T>A, which results
in the insertion of 9bp of intronic sequence between exons 25 and 26 in the
mutant transcript. NUP133 and NUP107 interaction was impaired by the NUP133
mutation based on an immunoprecipitation assay. Importantly, focal cortical
dysplasia type IIa was recognized in the brain of an autopsied patient and focal
segmental glomerulosclerosis was confirmed in the kidneys of the 3 examined
patients. A nup133-knockdown zebrafish model exhibited microcephaly, fewer
neuronal cells, underdeveloped glomeruli, and fusion of the foot processes of
the podocytes, which mimicked human GAMOS features. nup133 morphants could be
rescued by human wild-type NUP133 mRNA but not by mutant mRNA.
INTERPRETATION: These data indicate that the biallelic NUP133 loss-of-function
mutation causes GAMOS. Ann Neurol 2018;84:814-828.

© 2018 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.25370
PMID: 30427554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
