---
reference_id: "PMID:33526571"
title: Cystic Fibrosis.
authors:
- Dickinson KM
- Collaco JM
journal: Pediatr Rev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1542/pir.2019-0212
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cystic Fibrosis.
**Authors:** Dickinson KM, Collaco JM
**Journal:** Pediatr Rev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1542/pir.2019-0212](https://doi.org/10.1542/pir.2019-0212)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rev. 2021 Feb;42(2):55-67. doi: 10.1542/pir.2019-0212.

Cystic Fibrosis.

Dickinson KM(1), Collaco JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Eudowood Division of Pediatric Respiratory Sciences, The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most commonly diagnosed genetic disorders. 
Clinical characteristics include progressive obstructive lung disease, 
sinusitis, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency leading to malabsorption and 
malnutrition, liver and pancreatic dysfunction, and male infertility. Although 
CF is a life-shortening disease, survival has continued to improve to a median 
age of 46.2 years due to earlier diagnosis through routine newborn screening, 
promulgation of evidence-based guidelines to optimize nutritional and pulmonary 
health, and the development of CF-specific interdisciplinary care centers. 
Future improvements in health and quality of life for individuals with CF are 
likely with the recent development of mutation-specific modulator therapies. In 
this review, we will cover the current understanding of the disease 
manifestations, diagnosis, and management as well as common complications seen 
in individuals with CF.

© American Academy of Pediatrics, 2021. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1542/pir.2019-0212
PMCID: PMC8972143
PMID: 33526571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHOR DISCLOSUREDrs Dickinson and Collaco have 
disclosed no financial disclosures relevant to this article. This commentary 
does not contain a discussion of an unapproved/investigative use of commercial 
products/devices.