---
reference_id: "PMID:29419375"
title: Tri-phasic fever in dengue fever.
authors:
- D PH
- Rao SB
- B G
- Bhat G
- M C
journal: Trop Doct
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1177/0049475518756518
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tri-phasic fever in dengue fever.
**Authors:** D PH, Rao SB, B G, Bhat G, M C
**Journal:** Trop Doct (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0049475518756518](https://doi.org/10.1177/0049475518756518)

## Content

1. Trop Doct. 2018 Apr;48(2):93-97. doi: 10.1177/0049475518756518. Epub 2018 Feb
8.

Tri-phasic fever in dengue fever.

D PH(1), Rao SB(2), B G(3), Bhat G(4), M C(2).

Author information:
(1)1 PhD Scholar, Department of Internal Medicine, 76798 Kasturba Medical 
College , Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Mangaluru, India.
(2)2 Professor, Department of Internal Medicine, 76798 Kasturba Medical College 
, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Mangaluru, India.
(3)3 Additional Professor, Department of Physiology, 76798 Kasturba Medical 
College , Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, 
Manipal, Mangaluru, India.
(4)4 Additional Professor, Department of Microbiology, Manipal Academy of Higher 
Education, Manipal, Mangaluru, India.

Dengue fever is an acute febrile illness with a duration of 2-12 days. Our 
observational study observed the 24-h continuous tympanic temperature pattern of 
15 patients with dengue fever and compared this with 26 others with fever due to 
a non-dengue aetiology. A tri-phasic fever pattern was seen among two-thirds of 
dengue fever patients, but in only one with an inflammatory disease. One-third 
of dengue fever patients exhibited a single peak temperature. Continuous 
temperature monitoring and temperature pattern analysis in clinical settings can 
aid in the early differentiation of dengue fever from non-dengue aetiology.

DOI: 10.1177/0049475518756518
PMID: 29419375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]