---
reference_id: "PMID:27466520"
title: Symptom Assessment for Patients with Non-small Cell Lung Cancer Scheduled for Chemotherapy.
authors:
- Silvoniemi M
- Vasankari T
- Löyttyniemi E
- Valtonen M
- Salminen E
journal: Anticancer Res
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Symptom Assessment for Patients with Non-small Cell Lung Cancer Scheduled for Chemotherapy.
**Authors:** Silvoniemi M, Vasankari T, Löyttyniemi E, Valtonen M, Salminen E
**Journal:** Anticancer Res (2016)

## Content

1. Anticancer Res. 2016 Aug;36(8):4123-8.

Symptom Assessment for Patients with Non-small Cell Lung Cancer Scheduled for 
Chemotherapy.

Silvoniemi M(1), Vasankari T(2), Löyttyniemi E(3), Valtonen M(4), Salminen E(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland 
Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland 
marber@utu.fi.
(2)Finnish Lung Health Association (Filha ry), Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Biostatistics, University of Turku, Turku, 
Finland.
(4)Department of Radiology, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(5)Department of Oncology and Radiotherapy, Turku University Hospital, Turku, 
Finland Department of Oncology and Radiotherapy, University of Turku, Turku, 
Finland.

AIM: This study assessed the symptoms and health-related quality of life (HRQOL) 
of patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and examined the 
symptom-associated characteristics.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The symptoms of 122 patients with NSCLC scheduled for 
chemotherapy before starting treatment were surveyed using the European 
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) Quality of Life 
Questionnaire and Edmonton Symptom Assessment Scale (ESAS).
RESULTS: The most prevalent symptoms were coughing (EORTC score 41.7), dyspnea 
(33.9), fatigue (31.9), insomnia (30.3) and pain (21.8). The mean EORTC score 
for global QoL was 56.9 (SD=23.5). Physical, cognitive and emotional 
functioning, insomnia, diarrhea, and dyspnea had a significant influence on the 
HRQOL (p<0.05). ESAS assessment correlated with these results and thus was an 
easy-to-use tool for symptom assessment (correlation coefficient 
range=0.546-0.865, p<0.0001 for all symptoms).
CONCLUSION: Patients with advanced NSCLC suffer from multiple symptoms 
influencing HRQOL. ESAS provides a symptom assessment tool that is as reliable 
as but simpler to use than the EORTC questionnaire.

Copyright© 2016 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G. 
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 27466520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]