---
reference_id: "PMID:28372349"
title: Perivascular Epithelioid Cell Tumor in the Stomach.
authors:
- Shin SA
- Choi J
- Moon KC
- Kim WH
journal: J Pathol Transl Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.4132/jptm.2016.09.16
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perivascular Epithelioid Cell Tumor in the Stomach.
**Authors:** Shin SA, Choi J, Moon KC, Kim WH
**Journal:** J Pathol Transl Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.4132/jptm.2016.09.16](https://doi.org/10.4132/jptm.2016.09.16)

## Content

1. J Pathol Transl Med. 2017 Jul;51(4):428-432. doi: 10.4132/jptm.2016.09.16.
Epub  2017 Apr 4.

Perivascular Epithelioid Cell Tumor in the Stomach.

Shin SA(1), Choi J(1), Moon KC(1), Kim WH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

Perivascular epithelioid cell tumors or PEComas can arise in any location in the 
body. However, a limited number of cases of gastric PEComa have been reported. 
We present two cases of gastric PEComas. The first case involved a 62-year-old 
woman who presented with a 4.2 cm gastric subepithelial mass in the prepyloric 
antrum, and the second case involved a 67-year-old man with a 5.0 cm mass 
slightly below the gastroesophageal junction. Microscopic examination revealed 
that both tumors were composed of perivascular epithelioid cells that were 
immunoreactive for melanocytic and smooth muscle markers. Prior to surgery, the 
clinical impression of both tumors was gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), 
and the second case was erroneously diagnosed as GIST even after microscopic 
examination. Although gastric PEComa is a very rare neoplasm, it should be 
considered in the differential diagnosis of gastric submucosal lesions.

DOI: 10.4132/jptm.2016.09.16
PMCID: PMC5525029
PMID: 28372349

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.