---
reference_id: "PMID:21734179"
title: A randomized trial of 4-aminopyridine in EA2 and related familial episodic ataxias.
authors:
- Strupp M
- Kalla R
- Claassen J
- Adrion C
- Mansmann U
- Klopstock T
- Freilinger T
- Neugebauer H
- Spiegel R
- Dichgans M
- Lehmann-Horn F
- Jurkat-Rott K
- Brandt T
- Jen JC
- Jahn K
journal: Neurology
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318225ab07
keywords:
- 4-Aminopyridine/therapeutic use
- Activities of Daily Living
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Ataxia/drug therapy, genetics, psychology"
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- Child
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- "Nystagmus, Pathologic/drug therapy, genetics, psychology"
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- Potassium Channel Blockers/therapeutic use
- Quality of Life
- Young Adult
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A randomized trial of 4-aminopyridine in EA2 and related familial episodic ataxias.
**Authors:** Strupp M, Kalla R, Claassen J, Adrion C, Mansmann U, Klopstock T, Freilinger T, Neugebauer H, Spiegel R, Dichgans M, Lehmann-Horn F, Jurkat-Rott K, Brandt T, Jen JC, Jahn K
**Journal:** Neurology (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e318225ab07](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e318225ab07)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2011 Jul 19;77(3):269-75. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318225ab07. Epub 
2011 Jul 6.

A randomized trial of 4-aminopyridine in EA2 and related familial episodic 
ataxias.

Strupp M(1), Kalla R, Claassen J, Adrion C, Mansmann U, Klopstock T, Freilinger 
T, Neugebauer H, Spiegel R, Dichgans M, Lehmann-Horn F, Jurkat-Rott K, Brandt T, 
Jen JC, Jahn K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Friedrich-Baur-Institute and IFB(LMU), University of 
Munich, Campus Grosshadern, Marchioninistr. 15, 81377 Munich, Germany. 
michael.strupp@med.uni-muenchen.de

Comment in
    J Neurol. 2011 Sep;258(9):1734-6. doi: 10.1007/s00415-011-6215-6.
    Neurology. 2011 Nov 29;77(22):1996-7; author reply 1997. doi: 
10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823c162b.

OBJECTIVE: The therapeutic effects of 4-aminopyridine (4AP) were investigated in 
a randomized, double-blind, crossover trial in 10 subjects with familial 
episodic ataxia with nystagmus.
METHODS: After randomization, placebo or 4AP (5 mg 3 times daily) was 
administered for 2 3-month-long treatment periods separated by a 1-month-long 
washout period. The primary outcome measure was the number of ataxia attacks per 
month; the secondary outcome measures were the attack duration and 
patient-reported quality of life (Vestibular Disorders Activities of Daily 
Living Scale [VDADL]). Nonparametric tests and a random-effects model were used 
for statistical analysis.
RESULTS: The diagnosis of episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2) was genetically confirmed 
in 7 subjects. Patients receiving placebo had a median monthly attack frequency 
of 6.50, whereas patients taking 4AP had a frequency of 1.65 (p = 0.03). Median 
monthly attack duration decreased from 13.65 hours with placebo to 4.45 hours 
with 4AP (p = 0.08). The VDADL score decreased from 6.00 to 1.50 (p = 0.02). 4AP 
was well-tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: This controlled trial on EA2 and familial episodic ataxia with 
nystagmus demonstrated that 4AP decreases attack frequency and improves quality 
of life.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: This crossover study provides Class II evidence that 4AP 
decreases attack frequency and improves the patient-reported quality of life in 
patients with episodic ataxia and related familial ataxias.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318225ab07
PMCID: PMC3136055
PMID: 21734179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]