---
reference_id: "PMID:33278065"
title: An update on Vitiligo pathogenesis.
authors:
- Seneschal J
- Boniface K
- D'Arino A
- Picardo M
journal: Pigment Cell Melanoma Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12949
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An update on Vitiligo pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Seneschal J, Boniface K, D'Arino A, Picardo M
**Journal:** Pigment Cell Melanoma Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pcmr.12949](https://doi.org/10.1111/pcmr.12949)

## Content

1. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2021 Mar;34(2):236-243. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12949.
Epub  2020 Dec 15.

An update on Vitiligo pathogenesis.

Seneschal J(1)(2), Boniface K(1), D'Arino A(3), Picardo M(3).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U1035, Biotherapy of Genetic Diseases, Inflammatory Disorders and 
Cancers (BMGIC), Immunodermatology ATIP-AVENIR, University of Bordeaux, FHU 
ACRONIM, Bordeaux, France.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Pediatric Dermatology and National Reference 
Center for Rare Skin Disorders, Hôpital Saint-André, Bordeaux, France.
(3)San Gallicano Dermatological Institute, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

Vitiligo, the most common depigmenting disorder of the skin, is undergoing a 
period of intense advances in both disease understanding and therapeutic 
possibilities leading the way to the beginning of a new era for the disorder. 
Its pathophysiology has gathered the attention of researchers for years, and 
many advances have been made in the clarification of the interaction between 
different factors that result in depigmented macule formation. The complex 
interplay between non-immunological and immunological factors in vitiligo is key 
for the development of the disease, and the participation of cells other than 
melanocytes, such as keratinocytes, fibroblasts, natural killer cells, and 
innate lymphoid cells, has been shown. Recent advances have also brought to the 
understanding of the complex part played by a specific subtype of T cells: 
T-resident memory cells. This review analyzes some of the most recent insights 
in vitiligo pathogenesis underlining the interactions between different cell 
types, which are the basis for the therapeutic approaches under development.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pcmr.12949
PMID: 33278065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]