---
reference_id: "PMID:38595050"
title: "Paediatric-onset lymphomatoid papulosis: results of a multicentre retrospective cohort study on behalf of the EORTC Cutaneous Lymphoma Tumours Group (CLTG)."
authors:
- Blanchard M
- Morren MA
- Busschots AM
- Hauben E
- Alberti-Violetti S
- Berti E
- Avallone G
- Tavoletti G
- Panzone M
- Quaglino P
- Colonna C
- Melchers RC
- Vermeer MH
- Gniadecki R
- Mitteldorf C
- Gosmann J
- Stadler R
- Jonak C
- Oren-Shabtai M
- Hodak E
- Friedland R
- Gordon E
- Geskin LJ
- Scarisbrick JJ
- Mayo Martínez F
- Noguera Morel L
- Pehr K
- Amarov B
- Faouzi M
- Nicolay JP
- Kempf W
- Blanchard G
- Guenova E
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae150
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lymphomatoid Papulosis/pathology, epidemiology"
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Child
- Female
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- "Skin Neoplasms/pathology, epidemiology, mortality"
- Age of Onset
- Prognosis
- "Diagnostic Errors/statistics & numerical data"
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/epidemiology, pathology, diagnosis"
- "Insect Bites and Stings/epidemiology, complications"
- "Molluscum Contagiosum/epidemiology, pathology, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paediatric-onset lymphomatoid papulosis: results of a multicentre retrospective cohort study on behalf of the EORTC Cutaneous Lymphoma Tumours Group (CLTG).
**Authors:** Blanchard M, Morren MA, Busschots AM, Hauben E, Alberti-Violetti S, Berti E, Avallone G, Tavoletti G, Panzone M, Quaglino P, Colonna C, Melchers RC, Vermeer MH, Gniadecki R, Mitteldorf C, Gosmann J, Stadler R, Jonak C, Oren-Shabtai M, Hodak E, Friedland R, Gordon E, Geskin LJ, Scarisbrick JJ, Mayo Martínez F, Noguera Morel L, Pehr K, Amarov B, Faouzi M, Nicolay JP, Kempf W, Blanchard G, Guenova E
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bjd/ljae150](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjd/ljae150)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2024 Jul 16;191(2):233-242. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae150.

Paediatric-onset lymphomatoid papulosis: results of a multicentre retrospective
cohort study on behalf of the EORTC Cutaneous Lymphoma Tumours Group (CLTG).

Blanchard M(1)(2), Morren MA(1), Busschots AM, Hauben E, Alberti-Violetti S,
Berti E, Avallone G, Tavoletti G, Panzone M, Quaglino P, Colonna C, Melchers RC,
Vermeer MH, Gniadecki R, Mitteldorf C, Gosmann J, Stadler R, Jonak C,
Oren-Shabtai M, Hodak E, Friedland R, Gordon E, Geskin LJ, Scarisbrick JJ, Mayo
Martínez F, Noguera Morel L, Pehr K, Amarov B, Faouzi M, Nicolay JP, Kempf W,
Blanchard G(1)(2), Guenova E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, CHUV Lausanne, University of Lausanne,
Switzerland.
(2)Division of Dermatology and Venereology, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2024 Jul 16;191(2):158-159. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae211.

BACKGROUND: Lymphomatoid papulosis (LyP) is a rare cutaneous T-cell
lymphoproliferative disorder. Comprehensive data on LyP in the paediatric
population are scarce.
OBJECTIVES: To characterize the epidemiological, clinical, histopathological and
prognostic features of paediatric LyP.
METHODS: This was a retrospective multicentre international cohort study that
included 87 children and adolescents with LyP diagnosed between 1998 and 2022.
Patients aged ≤ 18 years at disease onset were included. LyP diagnosis was made
in each centre, based on clinicopathological correlation.
RESULTS: Eighty-seven patients from 12 centres were included. Mean age at
disease onset was 7.0 years (range 3 months-18 years) with a male to female
ratio of 2 : 1. Mean time between the onset of the first cutaneous lesions and
diagnosis was 1.3 years (range 0-14). Initial misdiagnosis concerned 26% of
patients. LyP was most often misdiagnosed as pityriasis lichenoides et
varioliformis acuta, insect bites or mollusca contagiosa. Erythematous papules
or papulonodules were the most frequent clinical presentation. Pruritus was
specifically mentioned in 21% of patients. The main histological subtype was
type A in 55% of cases. When analysed, monoclonal T-cell receptor rearrangement
was found in 77% of skin biopsies. The overall survival rate was 100%, with
follow-up at 5 years available for 33 patients and at 15 years for 8 patients.
Associated haematological malignancy (HM) occurred in 10% of cases (n = 7/73),
including four patients with mycosis fungoides, one with primary cutaneous
anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), one with systemic ALCL and one with acute
myeloid leukaemia. If we compared incidence rates of cancer with the world
population aged 0-19 years from 2001 to 2010, we estimated a significantly
higher risk of associated malignancy in general, occurring before the age of
19 years (incidence rate ratio 87.49, 95% confidence interval 86.01-88.99).
CONCLUSIONS: We report epidemiological data from a large international cohort of
children and adolescents with LyP. Overall, the disease prognosis is good, with
excellent survival rates for all patients. Owing to an increased risk of
associated HM, long-term follow-up should be recommended for patients with LyP.

Plain Language Summary: Lymphomatoid papulosis is a very rare skin condition
caused by an abnormal increase in white blood cells (called ‘lymphocytes’) in
the skin. The condition rarely affects children, so most of the scientific data
published about this disease focuses on adults. This study involved 12 academic
dermatology centres in Europe, the Middle East and North America, and gathered
data from about 87 children who presented with symptoms of lymphomatoid
papulosis before the age of 19 years. The aim of this study was to better
describe this disease in the paediatric population and discuss its treatment
options and evolution. We found that the presentation of the disease in children
is roughly the same as in adults. Safe and effective treatment options exist.
The disease is not life threatening, but it requires investigation by a
dermatologist, both to make a careful diagnosis and to monitor it as sometimes
associated cancers that originate from blood cells can occur, mostly on the
skin.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British
Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1093/bjd/ljae150
PMID: 38595050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare no
conflicts of interest.
