---
reference_id: "PMID:7915731"
title: The AIDS epidemic.
authors:
- Conant MA
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1016/s0190-9622(08)81267-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The AIDS epidemic.
**Authors:** Conant MA
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0190-9622(08)81267-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0190-9622(08)81267-4)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1994 Sep;31(3 Pt 2):S47-50. doi: 
10.1016/s0190-9622(08)81267-4.

The AIDS epidemic.

Conant MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco.

The nature of the clinical presentation of HIV infection continues to evolve 
over time. New cutaneous (e.g., seborrheic dermatitis, onychomycosis, and tinea 
pedis) and systemic (e.g., Aspergillus fumigatus and Penicillium marneffei) 
opportunistic fungal infections can now be added to the classic clinical markers 
for progressive HIV infection, such as Kaposi's sarcoma, Pneumocystis carinii 
pneumonia, Mycobacterium avium intercellulare infections, and cryptococcal 
meningitis. The fact that the appearance of many of these fungal diseases is 
directly correlated with the patient's CD4 cell count is a valuable tool for 
ongoing clinical evaluation. Although systemic manifestations characterize a 
progression from asymptomatic HIV infection to AIDS, many of the signs of 
disease progression are cutaneous. Prophylaxis against many of the potentially 
life-threatening systemic opportunistic infections associated with HIV 
positivity has had a positive impact on the life expectancy of patients with 
AIDS.

DOI: 10.1016/s0190-9622(08)81267-4
PMID: 7915731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]