---
reference_id: "PMID:39140320"
title: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
authors:
- Jespersen C
- Lauritsen MP
- Frokjaer VG
- Schroll JB
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001396.pub4
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Premenstrual Syndrome/drug therapy
- Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder/drug therapy
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Adult
- Bias
- Luteal Phase/drug effects
- "Sertraline/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
**Authors:** Jespersen C, Lauritsen MP, Frokjaer VG, Schroll JB
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD001396.pub4](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001396.pub4)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2024 Aug 14;8(8):CD001396. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD001396.pub4.

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for premenstrual syndrome and 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder.

Jespersen C(1)(2), Lauritsen MP(3)(4), Frokjaer VG(5)(6), Schroll JB(1)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine Odense (CEBMO) and Cochrane Denmark, 
Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(2)Open Patient data Explorative Network (OPEN), Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, 
Denmark.
(4)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Neurobiology Research Unit, Department of Neurology, Rigshospitalet 
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Mental Health Services, Capital Region of Copenhagen, Brondby, Denmark.
(7)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Herlev, Denmark.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Jun 07;(6):CD001396. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD001396.pub3.

BACKGROUND: Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is a combination of physical, 
psychological and social symptoms in women of reproductive age, and premenstrual 
dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is a severe type of the syndrome, previously known as 
late luteal phase dysphoric disorder (LLPDD). Both syndromes cause symptoms 
during the two weeks leading up to menstruation (the luteal phase). Selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are increasingly used as a treatment for 
PMS and PMDD, either administered in the luteal phase or continuously. We 
undertook a systematic review to assess the evidence of the positive effects and 
the harms of SSRIs in the management of PMS and PMDD.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the benefits and harms of SSRIs in treating women 
diagnosed with PMS and PMDD.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Gynaecology and Fertility (CGF) 
Specialised Register of Controlled Trials, CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase and PsycINFO 
for randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in November 2023. We checked reference 
lists of relevant studies, searched trial registers and contacted experts in the 
field for any additional trials. This is an update of a review last published in 
2013.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We considered studies in which women with a prospective 
diagnosis of PMS, PMDD or LLPDD were randomised to receive SSRIs or placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard Cochrane methods. We pooled data 
using a random-effects model. We calculated standardised mean differences (SMDs) 
with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for premenstrual symptom scores, using 
'post-treatment' scores for continuous data. We calculated odds ratios (ORs) 
with 95% CIs for dichotomous outcomes. We stratified analyses by type of 
administration (luteal phase or continuous). We calculated absolute risks and 
the number of women who would need to be taking SSRIs in order to cause one 
additional adverse event (i.e. the number needed to treat for an additional 
harmful outcome (NNTH)). We rated the overall certainty of the evidence for the 
main findings using GRADE.
MAIN RESULTS: We included 34 RCTs in the review. The studies compared SSRIs 
(i.e. fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline, escitalopram and citalopram) to 
placebo. SSRIs probably reduce overall self-rated premenstrual symptoms in women 
with PMS and PMDD (SMD -0.57, 95% CI -0.72 to -0.42; I2 = 51%; 12 studies, 1742 
participants; moderate-certainty evidence). SSRI treatment was probably more 
effective when administered continuously than when administered only in the 
luteal phase (P = 0.03 for subgroup difference; luteal phase group: SMD -0.39, 
95% CI -0.58 to -0.21; 6 studies, 687 participants; moderate-certainty evidence; 
continuous group: SMD -0.69, 95% CI -0.88 to -0.51; 7 studies, 1055 
participants; moderate-certainty evidence). The adverse effects associated with 
SSRIs were nausea (OR 3.30, 95% CI 2.58 to 4.21; I2 = 0%; 18 studies, 3664 
women), insomnia (OR 1.99, 95% CI 1.51 to 2.63; I2 = 0%; 18 studies, 3722 
women), sexual dysfunction or decreased libido (OR 2.32, 95% CI 1.57 to 3.42; I2 
= 0%; 14 studies, 2781 women), fatigue or sedation (OR 1.52, 95% CI 1.05 to 
2.20; I2 = 0%; 10 studies, 1230 women), dizziness or vertigo (OR 1.96, 95% CI 
1.36 to 2.83; I2 = 0%; 13 studies, 2633 women), tremor (OR 5.38, 95% CI 2.20 to 
13.16; I2 = 0%; 4 studies, 1352 women), somnolence and decreased concentration 
(OR 3.26, 95% CI 2.01 to 5.30; I2 = 0%; 8 studies, 2050 women), sweating (OR 
2.17, 95% CI 1.36 to 3.47; I2 = 0%; 10 studies, 2304 women), dry mouth (OR 2.70, 
95% CI 1.75 to 4.17; I2 = 0%; 11 studies, 1753 women), asthenia or decreased 
energy (OR 3.28, 95% CI 2.16 to 4.98; I2 = 0%; 7 studies, 1704 women), diarrhoea 
(OR 2.06, 95% CI 1.37 to 3.08; I2 = 0%; 12 studies, 2681 women), and 
constipation (OR 2.39, 95% CI 1.09 to 5.26; I2 = 0%; 7 studies, 1022 women). 
There was moderate-certainty evidence for all adverse effects other than 
somnolence/decreased concentration, which was low-certainty evidence. Overall, 
the certainty of the evidence was moderate. The main weakness was poor reporting 
of study methodology. Heterogeneity was low or absent for most outcomes, 
although there was moderate heterogeneity in the analysis of overall self-rated 
premenstrual symptoms. Based on the meta-analysis of response rate (the outcome 
with the most included studies), there was suspected publication bias. In total, 
68% of the included studies were funded by pharmaceutical companies. This 
stresses the importance of interpreting the review findings with caution.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: SSRIs probably reduce premenstrual symptoms in women with 
PMS and PMDD and are probably more effective when taken continuously compared to 
luteal phase administration. SSRI treatment probably increases the risk of 
adverse events, with the most common being nausea, asthenia and somnolence.

Copyright © 2024 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001396.pub4
PMCID: PMC11323276
PMID: 39140320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CJ: none. LM: none. VF has received consultancy 
fees from Gedeon Richter, Jannsen‐Cilag and H. Lundbeck A S. JS: none.