---
reference_id: "PMID:23297359"
title: "Cathepsin F mutations cause Type B Kufs disease, an adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis."
authors:
- Smith KR
- Dahl HH
- Canafoglia L
- Andermann E
- Damiano J
- Morbin M
- Bruni AC
- Giaccone G
- Cossette P
- Saftig P
- Grötzinger J
- Schwake M
- Andermann F
- Staropoli JF
- Sims KB
- Mole SE
- Franceschetti S
- Alexander NA
- Cooper JD
- Chapman HA
- Carpenter S
- Berkovic SF
- Bahlo M
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds558
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Anterior Horn Cells/pathology
- Case-Control Studies
- "Cathepsin F/genetics, metabolism"
- Chromosome Mapping
- Consanguinity
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exome
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Lod Score
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Middle Aged
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cathepsin F mutations cause Type B Kufs disease, an adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
**Authors:** Smith KR, Dahl HH, Canafoglia L, Andermann E, Damiano J, Morbin M, Bruni AC, Giaccone G, Cossette P, Saftig P, Grötzinger J, Schwake M, Andermann F, Staropoli JF, Sims KB, Mole SE, Franceschetti S, Alexander NA, Cooper JD, Chapman HA, Carpenter S, Berkovic SF, Bahlo M
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/dds558](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds558)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Apr 1;22(7):1417-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds558. Epub 2013
Jan  7.

Cathepsin F mutations cause Type B Kufs disease, an adult-onset neuronal ceroid 
lipofuscinosis.

Smith KR(1), Dahl HH, Canafoglia L, Andermann E, Damiano J, Morbin M, Bruni AC, 
Giaccone G, Cossette P, Saftig P, Grötzinger J, Schwake M, Andermann F, 
Staropoli JF, Sims KB, Mole SE, Franceschetti S, Alexander NA, Cooper JD, 
Chapman HA, Carpenter S, Berkovic SF, Bahlo M.

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Melbourne 3052, Australia.

Kufs disease, an adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, is challenging to 
diagnose and genetically heterogeneous. Mutations in CLN6 were recently 
identified in recessive Kufs disease presenting as progressive myoclonus 
epilepsy (Type A), whereas the molecular basis of cases presenting with dementia 
and motor features (Type B) is unknown. We performed genome-wide linkage mapping 
of two families with recessive Type B Kufs disease and identified a single 
region on chromosome 11 to which both families showed linkage. Exome sequencing 
of five samples from the two families identified homozygous and compound 
heterozygous missense mutations in CTSF within this linkage region. We 
subsequently sequenced CTSF in 22 unrelated individuals with suspected recessive 
Kufs disease, and identified an additional patient with compound heterozygous 
mutations. CTSF encodes cathepsin F, a lysosomal cysteine protease, dysfunction 
of which is a highly plausible candidate mechanism for a storage disorder like 
ceroid lipofuscinosis. In silico modeling suggested the missense mutations would 
alter protein structure and function. Moreover, re-examination of a previously 
published mouse knockout of Ctsf shows that it recapitulates the light and 
electron-microscopic pathological features of Kufs disease. Although CTSF 
mutations account for a minority of cases of type B Kufs, CTSF screening should 
be considered in cases with early-onset dementia and may avoid the need for 
invasive biopsies.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds558
PMCID: PMC3596852
PMID: 23297359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]