---
reference_id: "PMID:37033381"
title: "The initiator of neuroexcitotoxicity and ferroptosis in ischemic stroke: Glutamate accumulation."
authors:
- Fan G
- Liu M
- Liu J
- Huang Y
journal: Front Mol Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2023.1113081
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The initiator of neuroexcitotoxicity and ferroptosis in ischemic stroke: Glutamate accumulation.
**Authors:** Fan G, Liu M, Liu J, Huang Y
**Journal:** Front Mol Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnmol.2023.1113081](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnmol.2023.1113081)

## Content

1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2023 Mar 23;16:1113081. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2023.1113081. 
eCollection 2023.

The initiator of neuroexcitotoxicity and ferroptosis in ischemic stroke: 
Glutamate accumulation.

Fan G(1), Liu M(1), Liu J(2), Huang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School, Tianjin University of Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Tianjin University of Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, China.

Glutamate plays an important role in excitotoxicity and ferroptosis. 
Excitotoxicity occurs through over-stimulation of glutamate receptors, 
specifically NMDAR, while in the non-receptor-mediated pathway, high glutamate 
concentrations reduce cystine uptake by inhibiting the System Xc-, leading to 
intracellular glutathione depletion and resulting in ROS accumulation, which 
contributes to increased lipid peroxidation, mitochondrial damage, and 
ultimately ferroptosis. Oxidative stress appears to crosstalk between 
excitotoxicity and ferroptosis, and it is essential to maintain glutamate 
homeostasis and inhibit oxidative stress responses in vivo. As researchers work 
to develop natural compounds to further investigate the complex mechanisms and 
regulatory functions of ferroptosis and excitotoxicity, new avenues will be 
available for the effective treatment of ischaemic stroke. Therefore, this paper 
provides a review of the molecular mechanisms and treatment of 
glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity and ferroptosis.

Copyright © 2023 Fan, Liu, Liu and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2023.1113081
PMCID: PMC10076579
PMID: 37033381

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.