---
reference_id: "PMID:35897715"
title: Interplay of Environmental, Individual and Genetic Factors in Rheumatoid Arthritis Provocation.
authors:
- Arleevskaya M
- Takha E
- Petrov S
- Kazarian G
- Renaudineau Y
- Brooks W
- Larionova R
- Korovina M
- Valeeva A
- Shuralev E
- Mukminov M
- Kravtsova O
- Novikov A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23158140
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interplay of Environmental, Individual and Genetic Factors in Rheumatoid Arthritis Provocation.
**Authors:** Arleevskaya M, Takha E, Petrov S, Kazarian G, Renaudineau Y, Brooks W, Larionova R, Korovina M, Valeeva A, Shuralev E, Mukminov M, Kravtsova O, Novikov A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23158140](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23158140)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jul 23;23(15):8140. doi: 10.3390/ijms23158140.

Interplay of Environmental, Individual and Genetic Factors in Rheumatoid 
Arthritis Provocation.

Arleevskaya M(1)(2), Takha E(1), Petrov S(1)(3), Kazarian G(1), Renaudineau 
Y(4), Brooks W(5), Larionova R(1), Korovina M(1)(2), Valeeva A(1), Shuralev 
E(1)(3), Mukminov M(1)(3), Kravtsova O(2), Novikov A(6).

Author information:
(1)Central Research Laboratory, Kazan State Medical Academy, 420012 Kazan, 
Russia.
(2)Institute of Fundamental Medicine and Biology, Kazan (Volga Region) Federal 
University, 420008 Kazan, Russia.
(3)Institute of Environmental Sciences, Kazan (Volga Region) Federal University, 
420008 Kazan, Russia.
(4)Department of Immunology, CHU Toulouse, INSERM U1291, CNRS U5051, University 
Toulouse IIII, 31000 Toulouse, France.
(5)Department of Chemistry, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA.
(6)Mathematical Center, Sobolev Instiute of Mathematics, Siberian Branch of 
Russian Academy of Sciences, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia.

In this review, we explore systemization of knowledge about the triggering 
effects of non-genetic factors in pathogenic mechanisms that contribute to the 
development of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Possible mechanisms involving 
environmental and individual factors in RA pathogenesis were analyzed, namely, 
infections, mental stress, sleep deprivation ecology, age, perinatal and gender 
factors, eating habits, obesity and smoking. The non-genetic factors modulate 
basic processes in the body with the impact of these factors being non-specific, 
but these common challenges may be decisive for advancement of the disease in 
the predisposed body at risk for RA. The provocation of this particular disease 
is associated with the presence of congenital loci minoris resistentia. The more 
frequent non-genetic factors form tangles of interdependent relationships and, 
thereby, several interdependent external factors hit one vulnerable basic 
process at once, either provoking or reinforcing each other. Understanding the 
specific mechanisms by which environmental and individual factors impact an 
individual under RA risk in the preclinical stages can contribute to early 
disease diagnosis and, if the factor is modifiable, might be useful for the 
prevention or delay of its development.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23158140
PMCID: PMC9329780
PMID: 35897715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.