---
reference_id: "PMID:35953230"
title: Treatment Guidelines in Rheumatoid Arthritis.
authors:
- Singh JA
journal: Rheum Dis Clin North Am
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.rdc.2022.03.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment Guidelines in Rheumatoid Arthritis.
**Authors:** Singh JA
**Journal:** Rheum Dis Clin North Am (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rdc.2022.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rdc.2022.03.005)

## Content

1. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2022 Aug;48(3):679-689. doi:
10.1016/j.rdc.2022.03.005.  Epub 2022 Jul 5.

Treatment Guidelines in Rheumatoid Arthritis.

Singh JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Medicine Service, VA Medical Center, 700 19th Street South, Birmingham, AL 
35233, USA; Department of Medicine at the School of Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, 510 20th Street South, Birmingham, AL 35294-0022, USA; 
Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Public 
Health, 1665 University Boulevard, Ryals Public Health Building, Birmingham, AL 
35294-0022, USA. Electronic address: Jasvinder.md@gmail.com.

Rheumatoid arthritis is the most common autoimmune, destructive, inflammatory 
arthritis in adults. Effective treatments include oral conventional synthetic 
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs; eg, methotrexate), injectable 
biologic DMARDs, and targeted synthetic DMARDs (oral). Key recommendations are 
to start effective treatment immediately with DMARDs to reduce disability; use 
effective doses of methotrexate (oral or subcutaneous) with folic acid as the 
initial treatment; rapidly escalate treatment with various DMARDs, if 
methotrexate alone is not effective in controlling rheumatoid arthritis; and aim 
for a treat-to-target strategy with a goal of low disease activity or remission 
by frequently monitoring disease activity and escalating treatment.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rdc.2022.03.005
PMID: 35953230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure J.A. Singh has received consultant 
fees from Schipher, Crealta/Horizon, Medisys, Fidia, PK Med, Two labs Inc, Adept 
Field Solutions, Clinical Care Options, Clearview Healthcare Partners, Putnam 
Associates, Focus Forward, Navigant Consulting, Spherix, MedIQ, Jupiter Life 
Science, UBM LLC, Trio Health, Medscape, WebMD, and Practice Point 
Communications; and the National Institutes of Health and the American College 
of Rheumatology. J.A. Singh has received institutional research support from 
Zimmer Biomet Holdings. J.A. Singh received food and beverage payments from 
Intuitive Surgical/Philips Electronics North America. J.A. Singh owns stock 
options in TPT Global Tech, Vaxart Pharmaceuticals, Atyu Biopharma, Adaptimmune 
Therapeutics, GeoVax Labs, Pieris Pharmaceuticals, Enzolytics Inc, Seres 
Therapeutics, Tonix Pharmaceuticals Holding Corp, and Charlotte’s Web Holdings, 
Inc. J.A. Singh previously owned stock options in Amarin, Viking, and Moderna 
Pharmaceuticals. J.A. Singh is on the speaker’s bureau of Simply Speaking. J.A. 
Singh is a member of the executive of Outcomes Measures in Rheumatology, an 
organization that develops outcome measures in rheumatology and receives 
arms-length funding from eight companies. J.A. Singh serves on the FDA Arthritis 
Advisory Committee. J.A. Singh is the chair of the Veterans Affairs Rheumatology 
Field Advisory Board. J.A. Singh is the editor and the Director of the 
University of Alabama at Birmingham Cochrane Musculoskeletal Group Satellite 
Center on Network Meta-analysis. J.A. Singh previously served as a member of the 
following committees: member, the American College of Rheumatology's (ACR) 
Annual Meeting Planning Committee and Quality of Care Committees; the Chair of 
the ACR Meet-the-Professor, Workshop, and Study Group Subcommittee; and the 
co-chair of the ACR Criteria and Response Criteria subcommittee.