---
reference_id: "PMID:38196429"
title: "Valley Fever: Pathogenesis and Evolving Treatment Options."
authors:
- Zaheri SC
- Field E
- Orvin CA
- Perilloux DM
- Klapper RJ
- Shelvan A
- Ahmadzadeh S
- Shekoohi S
- Kaye AD
- Varrassi G
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.50260
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Valley Fever: Pathogenesis and Evolving Treatment Options.
**Authors:** Zaheri SC, Field E, Orvin CA, Perilloux DM, Klapper RJ, Shelvan A, Ahmadzadeh S, Shekoohi S, Kaye AD, Varrassi G
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.50260](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.50260)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Dec 10;15(12):e50260. doi: 10.7759/cureus.50260. eCollection 2023
 Dec.

Valley Fever: Pathogenesis and Evolving Treatment Options.

Zaheri SC(1), Field E(1), Orvin CA(1), Perilloux DM(1), Klapper RJ(2), Shelvan 
A(3), Ahmadzadeh S(3), Shekoohi S(3), Kaye AD(3), Varrassi G(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 
Shreveport, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 
Shreveport, USA.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences 
Center, Shreveport, USA.
(4)Department of Pain Medicine, Paolo Procacci Foundation, Rome, ITA.

Coccidioidomycosis, also termed Valley fever, is a fungal infection caused by 
the inhalation of Coccidioides endospores. Once inhaled by a human host, the 
arthroconidia endospores travel to the lungs' alveoli to transform into 
spherules that grow and rupture to release more endospores. In the host immune 
response, macrophages, neutrophils, and dendritic cells will recognize the 
fungal antigen, producing pro-inflammatory cytokine. Th2 lymphocytes (type 2 
helper T cells) are theorized to be the main human defense against Coccidioides 
given that Th2 deficiency is seen in patients with disseminated forms of the 
disease. A common triad of symptoms of coccidioidomycosis, also called "desert 
rheumatism," include fever, erythema nodosum, and arthralgia, often accompanied 
by a respiratory problem. In a clinical setting, along with the evaluation of 
symptoms, a medical provider may also test the patient's blood using antibody 
tests or perform microscopy to directly detect the presence of Coccidioides in a 
patient tissue sample for confirmation of a diagnosis. Imaging modalities may 
also be used to determine lung involvement and assess disease progression. A 
majority of coccidioidomycosis cases do not require specific treatment and will 
resolve on their own, so an approach with symptomatic treatment in mind is 
appropriate. If symptoms do not resolve, azoles or amphotericin B may be used, 
with the standard drug of choice being fluconazole (Diflucan, Pfizer, New York, 
New York, United States). Treatment varies depending on the immunocompetency of 
the patient. To name a few, pregnant patients and those with history of human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or transplantation require special considerations.

Copyright © 2023, Zaheri et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.50260
PMCID: PMC10774831
PMID: 38196429

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.