---
reference_id: "PMID:16601194"
title: "Losartan, an AT1 antagonist, prevents aortic aneurysm in a mouse model of Marfan syndrome."
authors:
- Habashi JP
- Judge DP
- Holm TM
- Cohn RD
- Loeys BL
- Cooper TK
- Myers L
- Klein EC
- Liu G
- Calvi C
- Podowski M
- Neptune ER
- Halushka MK
- Bedja D
- Gabrielson K
- Rifkin DB
- Carta L
- Ramirez F
- Huso DL
- Dietz HC
journal: Science
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1126/science.1124287
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Losartan, an AT1 antagonist, prevents aortic aneurysm in a mouse model of Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Habashi JP, Judge DP, Holm TM, Cohn RD, Loeys BL, Cooper TK, Myers L, Klein EC, Liu G, Calvi C, Podowski M, Neptune ER, Halushka MK, Bedja D, Gabrielson K, Rifkin DB, Carta L, Ramirez F, Huso DL, Dietz HC
**Journal:** Science (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1124287](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1124287)

## Content

1. Science. 2006 Apr 7;312(5770):117-21. doi: 10.1126/science.1124287.

Losartan, an AT1 antagonist, prevents aortic aneurysm in a mouse model of Marfan 
syndrome.

Habashi JP(1), Judge DP, Holm TM, Cohn RD, Loeys BL, Cooper TK, Myers L, Klein 
EC, Liu G, Calvi C, Podowski M, Neptune ER, Halushka MK, Bedja D, Gabrielson K, 
Rifkin DB, Carta L, Ramirez F, Huso DL, Dietz HC.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2006 Apr 7;312(5770):36-7. doi: 10.1126/science.312.5770.36b.

Aortic aneurysm and dissection are manifestations of Marfan syndrome (MFS), a 
disorder caused by mutations in the gene that encodes fibrillin-1. Selected 
manifestations of MFS reflect excessive signaling by the transforming growth 
factor-beta (TGF-beta) family of cytokines. We show that aortic aneurysm in a 
mouse model of MFS is associated with increased TGF-beta signaling and can be 
prevented by TGF-beta antagonists such as TGF-beta-neutralizing antibody or the 
angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1) blocker, losartan. AT1 antagonism also 
partially reversed noncardiovascular manifestations of MFS, including impaired 
alveolar septation. These data suggest that losartan, a drug already in clinical 
use for hypertension, merits investigation as a therapeutic strategy for 
patients with MFS and has the potential to prevent the major life-threatening 
manifestation of this disorder.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1124287
PMCID: PMC1482474
PMID: 16601194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]