---
reference_id: "PMID:37263169"
title: "Can neuroimaging measures differentiate the disease course of anorexia nervosa? A systematic review."
authors:
- Bracké KFM
- Steegers CPM
- van der Harst T
- Dremmen MHG
- Vernooij MW
- White TJH
- Dieleman GC
journal: J Psychiatr Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2023.05.059
keywords:
- Humans
- Anorexia Nervosa/pathology
- Brain
- Neuroimaging
- Gray Matter/pathology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Disease Progression
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Can neuroimaging measures differentiate the disease course of anorexia nervosa? A systematic review.
**Authors:** Bracké KFM, Steegers CPM, van der Harst T, Dremmen MHG, Vernooij MW, White TJH, Dieleman GC
**Journal:** J Psychiatr Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpsychires.2023.05.059](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2023.05.059)

## Content

1. J Psychiatr Res. 2023 Jul;163:337-349. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2023.05.059.
Epub 2023 May 22.

Can neuroimaging measures differentiate the disease course of anorexia nervosa?
A systematic review.

Bracké KFM(1), Steegers CPM(2), van der Harst T(2), Dremmen MHG(3), Vernooij
MW(3), White TJH(4), Dieleman GC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry/Psychology, Erasmus MC-Sophia
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Radiology and
Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry/Psychology, Erasmus MC-Sophia
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry/Psychology, Erasmus MC-Sophia
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Radiology and
Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Section of Social and
Cognitive Developmental Neuroscience, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, USA.
(5)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry/Psychology, Erasmus MC-Sophia
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address:
g.dieleman@erasmusmc.nl.

Anorexia nervosa (AN) entails many uncertainties regarding the clinical outcome,
due to large heterogeneity in the disease course. AN is associated with global
decrease in brain volumes and altered brain functioning during acute illness.
However, it is unclear whether structural and functional brain alterations can
predict clinical outcome. We aimed to systematically review the predictive value
of volumetric and functional brain outcome measures of structural and functional
brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on the disease course of AN. Four
databases (Embase, Medline, Psycinfo, and Cochrane Central Register) were
systematically searched. A total of 15 studies (structural MRI: n = 6,
functional MRI: n = 9) were reviewed. In total 464 unique AN patients, and 328
controls were included. Follow-up time ranged between 1 and 43 months.
Structural neuroimaging studies showed that lower brain volumes of the
cerebellum, subcortical grey matter, and cortical white matter at admission
predicted a worse clinical outcome. A smaller increase of the anterior cingulate
cortex volume in the early phase of the disease predicted a worse clinical
outcome. Lower overall gyrification, and a higher clustering coefficient
predicted a worse clinical outcome. Functional MRI studies showed that frontal,
parietal and temporal activity during task-based algorithms predicted follow-up
body mass index, although results were bidirectional possibly due to the large
heterogeneity in methodological approaches. Neuroimaging measures may predict
the clinical outcome of AN. However, there is a lack of replication studies.
Future studies are needed to validate the prognostic utility of neuroimaging
measures in AN patients, and should harmonize demographic, clinical and
neuroimaging features in order to enhance comparability.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2023.05.059
PMID: 37263169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.
