---
reference_id: "PMID:34478581"
title: "Extracorporeal photopheresis and multimodality therapy in patients with T-cell cutaneous lymphomas: Real-life experience in Argentina."
authors:
- Baquero Rey JA
- Zambrano Franco EA
- Andrade Miranda A
- Marciano S
- Mazzuoccolo LD
- Enz PA
journal: J Clin Apher
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jca.21933
keywords:
- Aged
- Argentina
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Cutaneous/therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mycosis Fungoides/therapy
- Photopheresis/methods
- Retrospective Studies
- Sezary Syndrome/therapy
- Skin Neoplasms/therapy
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extracorporeal photopheresis and multimodality therapy in patients with T-cell cutaneous lymphomas: Real-life experience in Argentina.
**Authors:** Baquero Rey JA, Zambrano Franco EA, Andrade Miranda A, Marciano S, Mazzuoccolo LD, Enz PA
**Journal:** J Clin Apher (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jca.21933](https://doi.org/10.1002/jca.21933)

## Content

1. J Clin Apher. 2021 Dec;36(6):815-822. doi: 10.1002/jca.21933. Epub 2021 Sep 3.

Extracorporeal photopheresis and multimodality therapy in patients with T-cell
cutaneous lymphomas: Real-life experience in Argentina.

Baquero Rey JA(1), Zambrano Franco EA(1), Andrade Miranda A(1), Marciano S(2),
Mazzuoccolo LD(1), Enz PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Hospital Italiano de Buenos
Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Department of Research, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

BACKGROUND: Extracorporeal photopheresis (ECP) as a part of multimodality
therapy, is one of the treatments for Sézary syndrome (SS) and advanced stage
mycosis fungoides (MF). This study aims to describe cutaneous and peripheral
blood responses of patients with MF and SS who received multimodality therapy.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional retrospective study, patients with MF or SS who
received ECP treatment in combination with at least one additional systemic
treatment between 2011 and 2018 were included. ECP consisted of a two-session
cycle every 2 to 4 weeks. Cutaneous and blood responses were evaluated with
updated criteria.
RESULTS: Twenty-eight patients (11 (39%) with MF and 17 (51%) with SS) were
included. Their median age at diagnosis was 63 (57-67) years. The median number
of treatments before ECP was 2 (1-3). Seven out of 11 patients with MF (63%)
underwent an assessment of cutaneous response. Five patients (70%) presented a
partial response; 1 (15%), stable disease, and 1 (15%) progressive disease.
Thirteen of the 17 patients with SS (76%) underwent evaluation. One patient (8%)
presented a complete cutaneous response; 6 (46%), a partial response; 5 (38%),
stable disease; and 1 (8%), progressive disease. None of them relapsed during
the study period in both groups. No ECP-related adverse effects occurred during
the study.
CONCLUSION: Most patients with SS and MF who underwent multimodality therapy
with ECP had favorable cutaneous and blood response. It is safe to combine ECP
with other treatments. Studies with large numbers of patients are necessary to
assess the effects of ECP on patient survival.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jca.21933
PMID: 34478581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
