---
reference_id: "PMID:35993098"
title: "EGFR-mutant NSCLC: monitoring the molecular evolution of tumors in 2022."
authors:
- Girard N
- Basse C
journal: Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/14737140.2022.2116004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EGFR-mutant NSCLC: monitoring the molecular evolution of tumors in 2022.
**Authors:** Girard N, Basse C
**Journal:** Expert Rev Anticancer Ther (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737140.2022.2116004](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737140.2022.2116004)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2022 Oct;22(10):1115-1125. doi: 
10.1080/14737140.2022.2116004. Epub 2022 Sep 5.

EGFR-mutant NSCLC: monitoring the molecular evolution of tumors in 2022.

Girard N(1), Basse C(1).

Author information:
(1)Thoracic Oncology Service, Institut Curie, Institut du Thorax Curie 
Montsouris, Paris, France.

INTRODUCTION: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activating mutations 
define a subset of advanced, metastatic non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs), 
which was historically identified along with the clinical development of 
specific EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), opening the era of precision 
medicine in thoracic oncology.
AREAS COVERED: Progression after EGFR TKIs is a major challenge for patients, as 
it occurs ineluctably along with disease evolution. Osimertinib is the current 
standard-of-care for the first-line treatment of EGFR-mutant NSCLC. Mechanisms 
of resistance to osimertinib are challenging to identify, and are dominated by 
MET pathway activation, and acquired EGFR mutations.
EXPERT OPINION: The current vision for clinical practice in patients with 
EGFR-mutant NSCLC developing disease progression after osimertinib includes the 
following 5 steps:- continuation of osimertinib beyond progression, and local 
treatment of oligoprogressive disease, - comprehensive genomic profiling based 
on tissue rebiopsy of progressing sites, - access to new treatment agents 
through clinical trials, - molecular tumor board to discuss the off-label use of 
targeted agents, depending on the availability of drugs and/or expanded access 
programs - chemotherapy may be the best choice, based on combination of 
platinum-based regimen and antiangiogenic agents and possibly immune checkpoint 
inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1080/14737140.2022.2116004
PMID: 35993098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]