---
reference_id: "PMID:24603320"
title: "The global epidemiology of hereditary ataxia and spastic paraplegia: a systematic review of prevalence studies."
authors:
- Ruano L
- Melo C
- Silva MC
- Coutinho P
journal: Neuroepidemiology
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1159/000358801
keywords:
- Cerebellar Ataxia/epidemiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Humans
- Paraplegia/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/epidemiology"
- Spinocerebellar Degenerations/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The global epidemiology of hereditary ataxia and spastic paraplegia: a systematic review of prevalence studies.
**Authors:** Ruano L, Melo C, Silva MC, Coutinho P
**Journal:** Neuroepidemiology (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000358801](https://doi.org/10.1159/000358801)

## Content

1. Neuroepidemiology. 2014;42(3):174-83. doi: 10.1159/000358801. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

The global epidemiology of hereditary ataxia and spastic paraplegia: a 
systematic review of prevalence studies.

Ruano L(1), Melo C, Silva MC, Coutinho P.

Author information:
(1)Hospital de São Sebastião, CHEDV, Santa Maria da Feira, Portugal.

Comment in
    Neuroepidemiology. 2014;42(3):184-5. doi: 10.1159/000360431.

BACKGROUND: Hereditary cerebellar ataxias (HCA) and hereditary spastic 
paraplegias (HSP) are two groups of neurodegenerative disorders that usually 
present with progressive gait impairment, often leading to permanent disability. 
Advances in genetic research in the last decades have improved their diagnosis 
and brought new possibilities for prevention and future treatments. Still, there 
is great uncertainty regarding their global epidemiology.
SUMMARY: Our objective was to assess the global distribution and prevalence of 
HCA and HSP by a systematic review and meta-analysis of prevalence studies. The 
MEDLINE, ISI Web of Science and Scopus databases were searched (1983-2013) for 
studies performed in well-defined populations and geographical regions. Two 
independent reviewers assessed the studies and extracted data and predefined 
methodological parameters. Overall, 22 studies were included, reporting on 
14,539 patients from 16 countries. Multisource population-based studies yielded 
higher prevalence values than studies based primarily on hospitals or genetic 
centres. The prevalence range of dominant HCA was 0.0-5.6/10(5), with an average 
of 2.7/10(5) (1.5-4.0/10(5)). Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 
(SCA3)/Machado-Joseph disease was the most common dominant ataxia, followed by 
SCA2 and SCA6. The autosomal recessive (AR) HCA (AR-HCA) prevalence range was 
0.0-7.2/10(5), the average being 3.3/10(5) (1.8-4.9/10(5)). Friedreich ataxia 
was the most frequent AR-HCA, followed by ataxia with oculomotor apraxia or 
ataxia-telangiectasia. The prevalence of autosomal dominant (AD) HSP (AD-HSP) 
ranged from 0.5 to 5.5/10(5) and that of AR-HSP from 0.0 to 5.3/10(5), with 
pooled averages of 1.8/10(5) (95% CI: 1.0-2.7/10(5)) and 1.8/10(5) (95% CI: 
1.0-2.6/10(5)), respectively. The most common AD-HSP form in every population 
was spastic paraplegia, autosomal dominant, type 4 (SPG4), followed by SPG3A, 
while SPG11 was the most frequent AR-HSP, followed by SPG15. In population-based 
studies, the number of families without genetic diagnosis after systematic 
testing ranged from 33 to 92% in the AD-HCA group, and was 40-46% in the AR-HCA, 
45-67% in the AD-HSP and 71-82% in the AR-HSP groups.
KEY MESSAGES: Highly variable prevalence values for HCA and HSP are reported 
across the world. This variation reflects the different genetic make-up of the 
populations, but also methodological heterogeneity. Large areas of the world 
remain without prevalence studies. From the available data, we estimated that 
around 1:10,000 people are affected by HCA or HSP. In spite of advances in 
genetic research, most families in population-based series remain without 
identified genetic mutation after extensive testing. © 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000358801
PMID: 24603320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]