---
reference_id: "PMID:38717015"
title: Expanded prenatal phenotype of ALG12-associated congenital disorder of glycosylation including bilateral multicystic kidneys.
authors:
- Shanmugasundaram M
- Wang A
- Morand M
- Bixler C
- Jain S
- Ray J
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63660
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics, pathology"
- Exome Sequencing
- Glycosylation
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Polycystic Kidney Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Stillbirth
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanded prenatal phenotype of ALG12-associated congenital disorder of glycosylation including bilateral multicystic kidneys.
**Authors:** Shanmugasundaram M, Wang A, Morand M, Bixler C, Jain S, Ray J
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63660](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63660)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2024 Sep;194(9):e63660. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63660. Epub 2024
 May 8.

Expanded prenatal phenotype of ALG12-associated congenital disorder of 
glycosylation including bilateral multicystic kidneys.

Shanmugasundaram M(1), Wang A(2), Morand M(3), Bixler C(3), Jain S(2), Ray J(3).

Author information:
(1)John Sealy School of Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA.
(3)Division of Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are a group of rare autosomal 
recessive genetic disorders caused by pathogenic variants in genes coding for 
N-glycosylated glycoproteins, which play a role in folding, degrading, and 
transport of glycoproteins in their pathway. ALG12-CDG specifically is caused by 
biallelic pathogenic variants in ALG12. Currently reported features of ALG12-CDG 
include: developmental delay, hypotonia, failure to thrive and/or short stature, 
brain anomalies, recurrent infections, hypogammaglobulinemia, coagulation 
abnormalities, and genitourinary abnormalities. In addition, skeletal 
abnormalities resembling a skeletal dysplasia including shortened long bones and 
talipes equinovarus have been seen in more severe neonatal presentation of this 
disorder. We report on a case expanding the phenotype of ALG12-CDG to include 
bilateral, multicystic kidneys in a neonatal demise identified with homozygous 
pathogenic variants in the ALG12 gene at c.1001del (p.N334Tfs*15) through 
clinical trio exome sequencing.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63660
PMID: 38717015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]