---
reference_id: "PMID:28500693"
title: The clinical spectrum of xanthomatous lesions of the eyelids.
authors:
- Baykal C
- Polat Ekinci A
- Yazganoglu KD
- Buyukbabani N
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/ijd.13637
keywords:
- "Eyelid Diseases/etiology, pathology"
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/complications, pathology"
- "Histiocytosis, Non-Langerhans-Cell/complications, pathology"
- Humans
- Hyperlipidemias/complications
- "Xanthomatosis/etiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical spectrum of xanthomatous lesions of the eyelids.
**Authors:** Baykal C, Polat Ekinci A, Yazganoglu KD, Buyukbabani N
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijd.13637](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.13637)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2017 Oct;56(10):981-992. doi: 10.1111/ijd.13637. Epub 2017 May
 13.

The clinical spectrum of xanthomatous lesions of the eyelids.

Baykal C(1), Polat Ekinci A(1), Yazganoglu KD(1), Buyukbabani N(2).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology and Venereology, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Pathology, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.

Yellowish papules, nodules, or plaques, namely "xanthomatous" lesions, may be 
seen on the eyelids in the course of various disorders. The prototype is 
"xanthelasma palpebrarum" (XP) that is localized only to the eyelids and may be 
associated with hyperlipidemia. On the other hand, different types of 
normolipemic disorders may also cause xanthomatous eyelid lesions. Among these, 
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, diffuse normolipemic xanthoma, and non-Langerhans 
cell histiocytoses (papular xanthoma, juvenile xanthogranuloma, xanthoma 
disseminatum, adult-onset xanthogranuloma, adult-onset asthma and periocular 
xanthogranuloma, necrobiotic xanthogranuloma, Erdheim-Chester disease, 
Rosai-Dorfman disease, and reticulohistiocytosis) can be listed. The eyelid 
findings of this heterogeneous group of disorders are challenging to 
differentiate from each other due to common clinical aspects that may even 
sometimes mimic XP. Nodularity, induration, ulceration, diffuse eyelid 
involvement, and extension from eyelids to the neighboring skin may represent 
the clinical features of xanthomatous lesions other than XP. It is necessary to 
obtain a thorough history and exclude XP and then perform detailed 
dermatological and systemic examination, biopsy for histopathologic 
confirmation, and appropriate specific imaging screens. As some of the 
conditions may be associated with other systemic disorders, especially 
malignancies, the differentiation of xanthomatous eyelid lesions has a critical 
importance, and clinical signs can be guiding.

© 2017 The International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.13637
PMID: 28500693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]