---
reference_id: "PMID:3096583"
title: The physiology and pathophysiology of the factor VIII complex.
authors:
- Hamer RJ
- Houdijk WP
- Sixma JJ
journal: Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1016/s1040-8428(86)80046-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The physiology and pathophysiology of the factor VIII complex.
**Authors:** Hamer RJ, Houdijk WP, Sixma JJ
**Journal:** Crit Rev Oncol Hematol (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1040-8428(86)80046-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1040-8428(86)80046-4)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 1986;6(1):19-54. doi: 10.1016/s1040-8428(86)80046-4.

The physiology and pathophysiology of the factor VIII complex.

Hamer RJ, Houdijk WP, Sixma JJ.

The factor VIII complex consists of two noncovalently linked proteins: von 
Willebrand factor (VWF) and factor VIII (FVIII). VWF plays an important role in 
primary hemostasis by mediating the adherence of blood platelets to the damaged 
vessel wall. A review of the literature on VWF is given with regard to its 
physicochemical properties and mode of action. FVIII acts as a cofactor in the 
factor Xa-generating enzyme complex of the intrinsic coagulation cascade. 
Starting with the recently published primary structure of FVIII, the literature 
is reviewed for structural information on FVIII. Also, an effort is made to 
characterize the interaction of FVIII with VWF and to discuss the possible 
physiological significance of FVIII-VWF complex formation. Interaction of FVIII 
with the clotting factors of the intrinsic pathway of coagulation is described 
in detail. Hemophilia and von Willebrand's disease (VWD) are both congenital 
bleeding disorders affecting a great many people. The different variants of 
these diseases are described with some reference to therapy and detection.

DOI: 10.1016/s1040-8428(86)80046-4
PMID: 3096583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]