---
reference_id: "PMID:34963460"
title: Impact of autoantibodies against the M2-muscarinic acetylcholine receptor on clinical outcomes in peripartum cardiomyopathy patients with standard treatment.
authors:
- Ma G
- Chen L
- Yue Y
- Liu X
- Wang Y
- Shi C
- Song F
- Shi W
- Lo Y
- Zhang L
journal: BMC Cardiovasc Disord
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12872-021-02414-7
keywords:
- Adult
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Autoimmunity
- "Autonomic Nervous System/drug effects, physiopathology"
- "Cardiomyopathies/drug therapy, immunology, mortality, physiopathology"
- Cardiovascular Agents/therapeutic use
- Female
- Heart/innervation
- Humans
- Patient Readmission
- Peripartum Period
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications, Cardiovascular/drug therapy, immunology, mortality, physiopathology"
- Prospective Studies
- "Puerperal Disorders/drug therapy, immunology, mortality, physiopathology"
- "Receptor, Muscarinic M2/immunology"
- Recovery of Function
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- "Ventricular Function, Left/drug effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of autoantibodies against the M2-muscarinic acetylcholine receptor on clinical outcomes in peripartum cardiomyopathy patients with standard treatment.
**Authors:** Ma G, Chen L, Yue Y, Liu X, Wang Y, Shi C, Song F, Shi W, Lo Y, Zhang L
**Journal:** BMC Cardiovasc Disord (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12872-021-02414-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12872-021-02414-7)

## Content

1. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2021 Dec 28;21(1):619. doi: 10.1186/s12872-021-02414-7.

Impact of autoantibodies against the M2-muscarinic acetylcholine receptor on 
clinical outcomes in peripartum cardiomyopathy patients with standard treatment.

Ma G(1), Chen L(2), Yue Y(1), Liu X(2), Wang Y(1), Shi C(2), Song F(2), Shi 
W(2), Lo Y(2), Zhang L(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Hypertension Research, 
Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical University, 8# Gong-Ti South Road, 
Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100020, China.
(2)HTRM Cardiologist Group, BENQ Medical Center, Nanjing Medical University, 
181# Zhuyuan Road, Suzhou City, 215000, JiangSu Province, China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Hypertension Research, 
Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical University, 8# Gong-Ti South Road, 
Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100020, China. zhanglinpeking@aliyun.com.
(4)HTRM Cardiologist Group, BENQ Medical Center, Nanjing Medical University, 
181# Zhuyuan Road, Suzhou City, 215000, JiangSu Province, China. 
zhanglinpeking@aliyun.com.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the impact of autoantibodies against the M2-muscarinic 
receptor (anti-M2-R) on the clinical outcomes of patients receiving the standard 
treatment for peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM).
METHODS: A total of 107 PPCM patients who received standard heart failure (HF) 
treatment between January 1998 and June 2020 were enrolled in this study. 
According to anti-M2-R reactivity, they were classified into negative (n = 59) 
and positive (n = 48) groups, denoted as the anti-M2-R (-) and anti-M2-R (+) 
groups. Echocardiography, 6-min walk distance, serum digoxin concentration 
(SDC), and routine laboratory tests were performed regularly for 2 years. The 
all-cause mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and rehospitalisation rate for HF 
were compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: A total of 103 patients were included in the final data analysis, with 
46 in the anti-M2-R (+) group and 57 in the anti-M2-R (-) group. Heart rate was 
lower in the anti-M2-R (+) group than in the anti-M2-R (-) group at the baseline 
(102.7 ± 6.1 bpm vs. 96.0 ± 6.4 bpm, p < 0.001). The initial SDC was higher in 
the anti-M2-R (+) group than in the anti-M2-R (-) group with the same dosage of 
digoxin (1.25 ± 0.45 vs. 0.78 ± 0.24 ng/mL, p < 0.001). The dosages of 
metoprolol and digoxin were higher in the anti-M2-R (-) patients than in the 
anti-M2-R (+) patients (38.8 ± 4.6 mg b.i.d. vs. 27.8 ± 5.3 mg b.i.d., 
p < 0.0001, respectively, for metoprolol; 0.12 ± 0.02 mg/day vs. 
0.08 ± 0.04 mg/day, p < 0.0001, respectively, for digoxin). Furthermore, there 
was a greater improvement in cardiac function in the anti-M2-R (-) patients than 
in the anti-M2-R (+) patients. Multivariate analysis identified negativity for 
anti-M2-R as the independent predictor for the improvement of cardiac function. 
Rehospitalisation for HF was lower in the anti-M2-R (-) group, but all-cause 
mortality and cardiovascular mortality were the same.
CONCLUSIONS: There were no differences in all-cause mortality or cardiovascular 
mortality between the two groups. Rehospitalisation rate for HF decreased in the 
anti-M2-R (-) group. This difference may be related to the regulation of the 
autonomic nervous system by anti-M2-R.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12872-021-02414-7
PMCID: PMC8713397
PMID: 34963460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.