---
reference_id: "PMID:2084786"
title: Studies of the course of schizophasia.
authors:
- Kirov K
journal: Psychopathology
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1159/000284678
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Studies of the course of schizophasia.
**Authors:** Kirov K
**Journal:** Psychopathology (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000284678](https://doi.org/10.1159/000284678)

## Content

1. Psychopathology. 1990;23(4-6):339-41. doi: 10.1159/000284678.

Studies of the course of schizophasia.

Kirov K(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Academy Sofia, Department of Psychiatry I, Bulgaria.

The course of psychoses of schizophrenic type follows rules which are still not 
adequately understood. It is, however, clear that certain symptoms appear mostly 
early, others only late. With this hypothesis in mind, we studied 44 final phase 
patients whose main symptom was disordered thinking of the schizophasic type and 
whose illness was of at least 10 years' standing. The most important finding of 
this study is that the varied and unspecific initial phase progresses into a 
highly specific syndrome. The symptoms initially registered include various 
disorders of thinking in less than one third of patients. In no case did these 
involve schizophasia. In a second phase symptoms were observed such as 
paralogism, echolalia, verbigeration, circumstantiality, neologism, hypotonic 
thinking, perseveration, blocking. The symptoms of schizophasia are only 
recognizable in a third phase and are highly specific. This enables us to 
confute the claim that psychiatric syndromes are not clinically specific. The 
three phases described above also provide evidence for the biological nature of 
this endogenous psychosis.

DOI: 10.1159/000284678
PMID: 2084786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]