---
reference_id: "PMID:37082823"
title: Inflammation biomarkers in OSA, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease/OSA overlap syndrome.
authors:
- Sanchez-Azofra A
- Gu W
- Masso-Silva JA
- Sanz-Rubio D
- Marin-Oto M
- Cubero P
- Gil AV
- Moya EA
- Barnes LA
- Mesarwi OA
- Marin T
- Simonson TS
- Crotty Alexander LE
- Marin JM
- Malhotra A
journal: J Clin Sleep Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5664/jcsm.10600
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inflammation biomarkers in OSA, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease/OSA overlap syndrome.
**Authors:** Sanchez-Azofra A, Gu W, Masso-Silva JA, Sanz-Rubio D, Marin-Oto M, Cubero P, Gil AV, Moya EA, Barnes LA, Mesarwi OA, Marin T, Simonson TS, Crotty Alexander LE, Marin JM, Malhotra A
**Journal:** J Clin Sleep Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5664/jcsm.10600](https://doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.10600)

## Content

1. J Clin Sleep Med. 2023 Aug 1;19(8):1447-1456. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.10600.

Inflammation biomarkers in OSA, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease/OSA overlap syndrome.

Sanchez-Azofra A(1)(2), Gu W(1)(3), Masso-Silva JA(1)(4), Sanz-Rubio D(5), 
Marin-Oto M(5), Cubero P(5), Gil AV(5), Moya EA(1), Barnes LA(1), Mesarwi OA(1), 
Marin T(1)(6), Simonson TS(1)(7), Crotty Alexander LE(1)(4), Marin JM(5)(8), 
Malhotra A(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine and Physiology, 
Department of Medicine, University of California, La Jolla, California.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine. Hospital Universitario de la 
Princesa, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, España.
(3)Herbert Wertheim School of Public Health and Longevity Sciences, University 
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California.
(4)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care, VA San Diego, La Jolla, California.
(5)Translational Research Unit, IIS Aragón, Hospital Universitario Miguel 
Servet, Zaragoza, Spain.
(6)Health Sciences, Department of Respiratory Therapy, Victor Valley College, 
Victorville, California.
(7)Center for Physiological Genomics of Low Oxygen, University of California, La 
Jolla, California.
(8)CIBERES Instituto Salud Carlos III, and Department of Medicine, University of 
Zaragoza School of Medicine, Zaragoza, Spain.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: The coexistence of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in a single individual, also known as 
overlap syndrome (OVS), is associated with higher cardiovascular risk and 
mortality than either OSA or COPD alone. However, the underlying mechanisms 
remain unclear. We hypothesized that patients with OVS have elevated systemic 
inflammatory biomarkers relative to patients with either disease alone, which 
could explain greater cardiovascular risk observed in OVS.
METHODS: We included 255 participants in the study, 55 with COPD alone, 100 with 
OSA alone, 50 with OVS, and 50 healthy controls. All participants underwent a 
home sleep study, spirometry, and a blood draw for high-sensitivity C-reactive 
protein and total blood count analysis. In a randomly selected subset of 186 
participants, inflammatory protein profiling was performed using Bio-Rad 
Bio-Plex Pro Human Cytokine 27-Plex Assays. Biomarker level differences across 
groups were identified using a mixed linear model.
RESULTS: Levels of interleukin 6 (IL-6), high-sensitivity C-reactive protein 
(hs-CRP), and granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) were higher in 
participants with OVS and COPD compared with healthy controls and participants 
with OSA. Furthermore, participants with OVS had higher circulating levels of 
leukocytes and neutrophils than those with COPD, OSA, and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: COPD and OVS are associated with higher systemic inflammation 
relative to OSA and healthy controls. This work proposes the potential 
utilization of interleukin 6, granulocyte colony stimulating factor, and 
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein as screening biomarkers for COPD in patients 
with OSA. Inflammatory pathways may not fully explain the higher cardiovascular 
risk observed in OVS, indicating the need for further investigation.
CITATION: Sanchez-Azofra A, Gu W, Masso-Silva JA, et al. Inflammation biomarkers 
in OSA, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease/OSA overlap syndrome. J Clin Sleep Med. 2023;19(8):1447-1456.

© 2023 American Academy of Sleep Medicine.

DOI: 10.5664/jcsm.10600
PMCID: PMC10394367
PMID: 37082823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have seen and approved this 
manuscript. Work for this study was performed at University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, and Translational Research Unit, IIS Aragon, Hospital 
Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain. Author’s declarations: A.S.A.: 
Alfonso Martin Escudero Foundation grant. T.S.S.: NIH R01HL145470. O.A.M.: NIH 
K08HL143140. Dr. Malhotra is funded by NIH. He reports income related to medical 
education from LIvanova, Eli Lilly, Zoll and Jazz. ResMed provided a 
philanthropic donation to UCSD. L.C.A: NIH K24 HL155884, R01HL137052, 
R01HL147326, VA Merit 1I01BX004767, TRDRP T30IP0965. J.M.M.: Grants Number 
PI12/02175, PI15/01940 and PI18/01524 from the Instituto Salud Carlos III, 
Spanish Ministry of Health, Madrid, Spain and the European Regional Development 
Fund (FEDER) and by a Grant Number 01/2010 from the SADAR-Pneumo Aragón, 
Zaragoza, Spain. The other authors report no conflicts of interest.