---
reference_id: "PMID:38578387"
title: "Mitochondrial dysfunction in Fragile X syndrome and Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome: prospect use of antioxidants and mitochondrial nutrients."
authors:
- Pagano G
- Lyakhovich A
- Pallardó FV
- Tiano L
- Zatterale A
- Trifuoggi M
journal: Mol Biol Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11033-024-09415-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Fragile X Syndrome/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Tremor/drug therapy, genetics"
- Antioxidants/therapeutic use
- "Ataxia/drug therapy, genetics"
- Mitochondrial Diseases
- Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial dysfunction in Fragile X syndrome and Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome: prospect use of antioxidants and mitochondrial nutrients.
**Authors:** Pagano G, Lyakhovich A, Pallardó FV, Tiano L, Zatterale A, Trifuoggi M
**Journal:** Mol Biol Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11033-024-09415-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11033-024-09415-7)

## Content

1. Mol Biol Rep. 2024 Apr 5;51(1):480. doi: 10.1007/s11033-024-09415-7.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in Fragile X syndrome and Fragile X-associated 
tremor/ataxia syndrome: prospect use of antioxidants and mitochondrial 
nutrients.

Pagano G(1), Lyakhovich A(2), Pallardó FV(3), Tiano L(4), Zatterale A(5), 
Trifuoggi M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, Federico II Naples University, via Cintia, 
Naples, I-80126, Italy. paganog756@gmail.com.
(2)Sabanci University, Tuzla, Istanbul, 34956, Turkey.
(3)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
Valencia-INCLIVA, CIBERER, Valencia, E-46010, Spain.
(4)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Polytechnical University of 
Marche, Ancona, I-60121, Italy.
(5)Department of Genetics, ASL Napoli 1, Naples, I-80144, Italy.
(6)Department of Chemical Sciences, Federico II Naples University, via Cintia, 
Naples, I-80126, Italy.

Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a genetic disorder characterized by mutation in the 
FMR1 gene, leading to the absence or reduced levels of fragile X Messenger 
Ribonucleoprotein 1 (FMRP). This results in neurodevelopmental deficits, 
including autistic spectrum conditions. On the other hand, Fragile X-associated 
tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a distinct disorder caused by the premutation 
in the FMR1 gene. FXTAS is associated with elevated levels of FMR1 mRNA, leading 
to neurodegenerative manifestations such as tremors and ataxia.Mounting evidence 
suggests a link between both syndromes and mitochondrial dysfunction (MDF). In 
this minireview, we critically examine the intricate relationship between FXS, 
FXTAS, and MDF, focusing on potential therapeutic avenues to counteract or 
mitigate their adverse effects. Specifically, we explore the role of 
mitochondrial cofactors and antioxidants, with a particular emphasis on 
alpha-lipoic acid (ALA), carnitine (CARN) and Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10). Findings 
from this review will contribute to a deeper understanding of these disorders 
and foster novel therapeutic strategies to enhance patient outcomes.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-024-09415-7
PMCID: PMC10997711
PMID: 38578387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.