---
reference_id: "PMID:15494907"
title: "Placebo-controlled, double-blind trial of intravenous ribavirin for the treatment of hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome in North America."
authors:
- Mertz GJ
- Miedzinski L
- Goade D
- Pavia AT
- Hjelle B
- Hansbarger CO
- Levy H
- Koster FT
- Baum K
- Lindemulder A
- Wang W
- Riser L
- Fernandez H
- Whitley RJ
- Collaborative Antiviral Study Group
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1086/425007
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antiviral Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- "Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome/drug therapy, mortality"
- Humans
- "Injections, Intravenous"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- North America/epidemiology
- Placebos
- "Ribavirin/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Placebo-controlled, double-blind trial of intravenous ribavirin for the treatment of hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome in North America.
**Authors:** Mertz GJ, Miedzinski L, Goade D, Pavia AT, Hjelle B, Hansbarger CO, Levy H, Koster FT, Baum K, Lindemulder A, Wang W, Riser L, Fernandez H, Whitley RJ, Collaborative Antiviral Study Group
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1086/425007](https://doi.org/10.1086/425007)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2004 Nov 1;39(9):1307-13. doi: 10.1086/425007. Epub 2004 Oct 
11.

Placebo-controlled, double-blind trial of intravenous ribavirin for the 
treatment of hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome in North America.

Mertz GJ(1), Miedzinski L, Goade D, Pavia AT, Hjelle B, Hansbarger CO, Levy H, 
Koster FT, Baum K, Lindemulder A, Wang W, Riser L, Fernandez H, Whitley RJ; 
Collaborative Antiviral Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 
87131-0001, USA. gmertz@salud.unm.edu

Comment in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2005 May 15;40(10):1550-1. doi: 10.1086/429728.

BACKGROUND. Ribavirin is active in vitro against hantaviruses, but the findings 
of an open trial of the use of intravenous ribavirin for the treatment of 
hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (HCPS) were inconclusive.
METHODS: Subjects with suspected HCPS in the prodrome or cardiopulmonary phase 
but without shock were eligible for randomization to receive either intravenous 
ribavirin (33 mg/kg [<or=2 g], followed by 16 mg/kg [<or=1 g] given every 6 h 
for 4 days and by 8 mg/kg [<or=.5 g] given every 8 h for 3 days) or placebo 
(administered for 7 days or until the initial Sin Nombre virus antibody test 
result was confirmed to be negative). The primary outcome was survival at day 28 
of the study without the need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO).
RESULTS: Thirty-six subjects were enrolled in the trial from March 1996 through 
July 2001, at which point the study was terminated prematurely because of both 
the slow rate of accrual of subjects and the findings of a futility analysis. Of 
the 36 subjects enrolled, 23 (all of whom were enrolled during the 
cardiopulmonary stage of HCPS) had HCPS confirmed by serologic testing. The 
severity of illness at entry into the study was similar among the 10 subjects 
with HCPS who received ribavirin and the 13 subjects with HCPS who received 
placebo. The proportion of subjects who survived and who did not require ECMO 
was similar among ribavirin recipients and placebo recipients (70% vs. 62%, 
respectively); 2 ribavirin recipients and 2 placebo recipients died, including 3 
of 7 subjects treated with ECMO. The frequency of adverse events, including 
anemia, was similar between treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The rate of accrual of subjects in the present study was inadequate 
to clearly assess the safety or efficacy of ribavirin in the treatment of HCPS. 
However, ribavirin was well tolerated, and the lack of trends supporting the use 
of intravenous ribavirin suggests that it is probably ineffective in the 
treatment of HCPS in the cardiopulmonary stage.

DOI: 10.1086/425007
PMID: 15494907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]