---
reference_id: "PMID:20080638"
title: "BBS6, BBS10, and BBS12 form a complex with CCT/TRiC family chaperonins and mediate BBSome assembly."
authors:
- Seo S
- Baye LM
- Schulz NP
- Beck JS
- Zhang Q
- Slusarski DC
- Sheffield VC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0910268107
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/enzymology, genetics"
- Cell Line
- Centromere/enzymology
- "Chaperonin Containing TCP-1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Chaperonins/deficiency, metabolism"
- "Group II Chaperonins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- Protein Binding
- "Zebrafish/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BBS6, BBS10, and BBS12 form a complex with CCT/TRiC family chaperonins and mediate BBSome assembly.
**Authors:** Seo S, Baye LM, Schulz NP, Beck JS, Zhang Q, Slusarski DC, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0910268107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0910268107)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 26;107(4):1488-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0910268107. Epub 2010 Jan 4.

BBS6, BBS10, and BBS12 form a complex with CCT/TRiC family chaperonins and
mediate BBSome assembly.

Seo S(1), Baye LM, Schulz NP, Beck JS, Zhang Q, Slusarski DC, Sheffield VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a human genetic disorder resulting in obesity,
retinal degeneration, polydactyly, and nephropathy. Recent studies indicate that
trafficking defects to the ciliary membrane are involved in this syndrome. Here,
we show that a novel complex composed of three chaperonin-like BBS proteins
(BBS6, BBS10, and BBS12) and CCT/TRiC family chaperonins mediates BBSome
assembly, which transports vesicles to the cilia. Chaperonin-like BBS proteins
interact with a subset of BBSome subunits and promote their association with CCT
chaperonins. CCT activity is essential for BBSome assembly, and knockdown of CCT
chaperonins in zebrafish results in BBS phenotypes. Many disease-causing
mutations found in BBS6, BBS10, and BBS12 disrupt interactions among these BBS
proteins. Our data demonstrate that BBS6, BBS10, and BBS12 are necessary for
BBSome assembly, and that impaired BBSome assembly contributes to the etiology
of BBS phenotypes associated with the loss of function of these three BBS genes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0910268107
PMCID: PMC2824390
PMID: 20080638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
