---
reference_id: "PMID:29088943"
title: The role of ICP monitoring in meningitis.
authors:
- Tariq A
- Aguilar-Salinas P
- Hanel RA
- Naval N
- Chmayssani M
journal: Neurosurg Focus
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3171/2017.8.FOCUS17419
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of ICP monitoring in meningitis.
**Authors:** Tariq A, Aguilar-Salinas P, Hanel RA, Naval N, Chmayssani M
**Journal:** Neurosurg Focus (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3171/2017.8.FOCUS17419](https://doi.org/10.3171/2017.8.FOCUS17419)

## Content

1. Neurosurg Focus. 2017 Nov;43(5):E7. doi: 10.3171/2017.8.FOCUS17419.

The role of ICP monitoring in meningitis.

Tariq A(1), Aguilar-Salinas P(2), Hanel RA(2), Naval N(2), Chmayssani M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Division of Cerebrovascular Disease and 
Neurocritical Care, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio; and.
(2)Lyerly Neurosurgery, Baptist Neurological Institute, Jacksonville, Florida.

Intracranial pressure (ICP) monitoring has been widely accepted in the 
management of traumatic brain injury. However, its use in other pathologies that 
affect ICP has not been advocated as strongly, especially in CNS infections. 
Despite the most aggressive and novel antimicrobial therapies for meningitis, 
the mortality rate associated with this disease is far from satisfactory. 
Although intracranial hypertension and subsequent death have long been known to 
complicate meningitis, no specific guidelines targeting ICP monitoring are 
available. A review of the literature was performed to understand the 
pathophysiology of elevated ICP in meningitis, diagnostic challenges, and 
clinical outcomes in the use of ICP monitoring.

DOI: 10.3171/2017.8.FOCUS17419
PMID: 29088943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]