---
reference_id: "PMID:17241857"
title: Mast cell-dependent excitation of visceral-nociceptive sensory neurons in irritable bowel syndrome.
authors:
- Barbara G
- Wang B
- Stanghellini V
- de Giorgio R
- Cremon C
- Di Nardo G
- Trevisani M
- Campi B
- Geppetti P
- Tonini M
- Bunnett NW
- Grundy D
- Corinaldesi R
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2006.11.039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mast cell-dependent excitation of visceral-nociceptive sensory neurons in irritable bowel syndrome.
**Authors:** Barbara G, Wang B, Stanghellini V, de Giorgio R, Cremon C, Di Nardo G, Trevisani M, Campi B, Geppetti P, Tonini M, Bunnett NW, Grundy D, Corinaldesi R
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2006.11.039](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2006.11.039)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2007 Jan;132(1):26-37. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2006.11.039.

Mast cell-dependent excitation of visceral-nociceptive sensory neurons in 
irritable bowel syndrome.

Barbara G(1), Wang B, Stanghellini V, de Giorgio R, Cremon C, Di Nardo G, 
Trevisani M, Campi B, Geppetti P, Tonini M, Bunnett NW, Grundy D, Corinaldesi R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology, and CRBA, University of 
Bologna, St. Orsola Hospital, Via Massarenti 9, I-40138 Bologna, Italy. 
gbarbara@med.unibo.it

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Intestinal mast cell infiltration may participate to 
abdominal pain in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) patients. However, the 
underlying mechanisms remain unknown. We assessed the effect of mast cell 
mediators released from the colonic mucosa of IBS patients on the activation of 
rat sensory neurons in vitro.
METHODS: Colonic mast cell infiltration and mediator release were assessed with 
quantitative immunofluorescence and immunoenzymatic assays. The effect of 
mucosal mediators was tested on mesenteric sensory nerve firing and Ca(2+) 
mobilization in dorsal root ganglia in rats.
RESULTS: Mediators from IBS patients, but not controls, markedly enhanced the 
firing of mesenteric nerves (14.7 +/- 3.2 imp/sec vs 2.8 +/- 1.5 imp/sec; P < 
.05) and stimulated mobilization of Ca(2+) in dorsal root ganglia neurons (29% 
+/- 4% vs 11% +/- 4%; P < .05). On average, 64% of dorsal root ganglia 
responsive to mediators were capsaicin-sensitive, known to mediate nociception. 
Histamine and tryptase were mainly localized to mucosal mast cells. 
IBS-dependent nerve firing and Ca(2+) mobilization were correlated with the area 
of the colonic lamina propria occupied by mast cells (r = 0.74; P < .01, and r = 
0.78; P < .01, respectively). IBS-dependent excitation of dorsal root ganglia 
was inhibited by histamine H(1) receptor blockade and serine protease 
inactivation (inhibition of 51.7%; P < .05 and 74.5%; P < .05; respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Mucosal mast cell mediators from IBS patients excite rat 
nociceptive visceral sensory nerves. These results provide new insights into the 
mechanism underlying visceral hypersensitivity in IBS.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2006.11.039
PMID: 17241857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]