---
reference_id: "PMID:26337264"
title: Outcome following multiple subpial transection in Landau-Kleffner syndrome and related regression.
authors:
- Downes M
- Greenaway R
- Clark M
- Helen Cross J
- Jolleff N
- Harkness W
- Kaliakatsos M
- Boyd S
- White S
- Neville BG
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/epi.13132
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Landau-Kleffner Syndrome/diagnosis, surgery"
- Male
- "Pia Mater/pathology, surgery"
- "Sleep Wake Disorders/diagnosis, surgery"
- "Temporal Lobe/pathology, surgery"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcome following multiple subpial transection in Landau-Kleffner syndrome and related regression.
**Authors:** Downes M, Greenaway R, Clark M, Helen Cross J, Jolleff N, Harkness W, Kaliakatsos M, Boyd S, White S, Neville BG
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.13132](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.13132)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2015 Nov;56(11):1760-6. doi: 10.1111/epi.13132. Epub 2015 Sep 4.

Outcome following multiple subpial transection in Landau-Kleffner syndrome and 
related regression.

Downes M(1), Greenaway R(1)(2), Clark M(1)(2), Helen Cross J(1)(2), Jolleff 
N(1), Harkness W(1)(2), Kaliakatsos M(2), Boyd S(2), White S(2), Neville BG(1).

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Epilepsia. 2016 Apr;57(4):674. doi: 10.1111/epi.13336.
    Epilepsia. 2016 Apr;57(4):674-5. doi: 10.1111/epi.13349.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether multiple subpial transection in the posterior 
temporal lobe has an impact on long-term outcome in children who have 
drug-resistant Landau-Kleffner syndrome (LKS) or other "electrical status 
epilepticus during sleep" (ESES)-related regression. Given the wide variability 
in outcomes reported in the literature, a secondary aim was to explore 
predictors of outcome.
METHODS: The current study includes a surgery group (n = 14) comprising patients 
who underwent multiple subpial transection of the posterior temporal lobe and a 
nonsurgery comparison group (n = 21) comprising patients who underwent 
presurgical investigations for the procedure, but who did not undergo surgery. 
Outcomes were assessed utilizing clinical note review as well as direct 
assessment and questionnaires.
RESULTS: The distribution of nonclassical cases was comparable between groups. 
There were some differences between the surgery and nonsurgery groups at 
presurgical investigation including laterality of discharges, level of language 
impairment, and age; therefore, follow-up analyses focused on change over time 
and predictors of outcome. There were no statistically significant differences 
between the groups in language, nonverbal ability, adaptive behavior, or quality 
of life at follow-up. There was no difference in the proportion of patients 
showing improvement or deterioration in language category over time for either 
group. Continuing seizures and an earlier age of onset were most predictive of 
poorer quality of life at long-term follow-up (F2,23 = 26.2, p = <0.001, R(2) = 
0.714).
SIGNIFICANCE: Both surgery and nonsurgery groups had similar proportions of 
classic LKS and ESES-related regression. Because no significant differences were 
found in the changes observed from baseline to follow-up between the two groups, 
it is argued that there is insufficient evidence to suggest that multiple 
subpial transection provides additional benefits over and above the mixed 
recovery often seen in LKS and related regressive epilepsies.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2015 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.13132
PMID: 26337264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]