---
reference_id: PMID:31131959
title: "A diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis, endometriosis or IBD is associated with later onset of fibromyalgia and chronic widespread pain."
authors:
- Larrosa Pardo F
- Bondesson E
- Schelin MEC
- Jöud A
journal: Eur J Pain
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ejp.1432
keywords:
- Adult
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/complications, epidemiology"
- Chronic Disease
- "Chronic Pain/epidemiology, etiology"
- Cohort Studies
- Comorbidity
- "Endometriosis/complications, epidemiology"
- Female
- "Fibromyalgia/epidemiology, etiology"
- Humans
- "Inflammatory Bowel Diseases/complications, epidemiology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Risk Factors
- Sweden/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis, endometriosis or IBD is associated with later onset of fibromyalgia and chronic widespread pain.
**Authors:** Larrosa Pardo F, Bondesson E, Schelin MEC, Jöud A
**Journal:** Eur J Pain (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ejp.1432](https://doi.org/10.1002/ejp.1432)

## Content

1. Eur J Pain. 2019 Sep;23(8):1563-1573. doi: 10.1002/ejp.1432. Epub 2019 Jun 17.

A diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis, endometriosis or IBD is associated with 
later onset of fibromyalgia and chronic widespread pain.

Larrosa Pardo F(1)(2), Bondesson E(1)(3), Schelin MEC(2)(4), Jöud A(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Department of Pain Rehabilitation, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, Institute for Palliative Care, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(5)Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Department of Laboratory 
Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Widespread pain is a common comorbidity in several chronic diseases 
and is suspected to be caused by pain resulting from the underlying disease that 
has provoked a state of central sensitization. However, this argument is 
currently limited by evidence that has insufficiently captured the temporal 
nature of the relationship between diagnosis of the underlying disease and onset 
of widespread pain. The aim of this study was to investigate if patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), endometriosis or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 
have a higher risk of developing widespread pain (fibromyalgia or chronic 
widespread pain [CWP]).
METHODS: Using the Swedish Skåne Healthcare register on health care 
consultation, a cohort of 889,938 adult patients were followed from 2007 to 2016 
and incident cases of RA, endometriosis or IBD and of fibromyalgia and CWP were 
identified by registered diagnoses. Using Poisson regression, we calculated 
incidence rate ratios (IRR) adjusted for sex, age, education and propensity to 
seek health care.
RESULTS: For patients with RA the IRR for later fibromyalgia was 3.64 (95% CI: 
2.75-4.81) compared to patients without RA, for CWP it was 2.96 (95% CI: 
1.81-4.86). For endometriosis patients the IRR for fibromyalgia was 2.83 (95% 
CI: 1.96-4.08) and for CWP 5.02 (95% CI: 3.10-8.13). IBD patients had an 
IRR = 2.32 (95% CI: 1.58-3.42) for fibromyalgia and 1.42 (95% CI: 0.93-2.17) for 
CWP.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that RA, endometriosis and IBD are all risk 
factors for later fibromyalgia and CWP, consistent with a hypothesis of central 
sensitization as an effect of a painful underlying condition.
SIGNIFICANCE: We show that RA, endometriosis and IBD predisposes for later 
fibromyalgia and CWP, a common hypothesis previously difficult to verify due to 
lack of longitudinal data. The results inform further research regarding the 
aetiology of fibromyalgia and CWP and stress the need of clinical focus on the 
pain itself in chronic diseases with pain as a symptom.

© 2019 European Pain Federation - EFIC®.

DOI: 10.1002/ejp.1432
PMID: 31131959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]