---
reference_id: "PMID:33433320"
title: Diagnostic value of electron microscopy detection using abdominal fat pad biopsy in systemic amyloidosis.
authors:
- Wang D
- Wang Y
- Liu B
- Liu Y
- Sun S
journal: Clin Nephrol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.5414/CN110320
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic value of electron microscopy detection using abdominal fat pad biopsy in systemic amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Wang D, Wang Y, Liu B, Liu Y, Sun S
**Journal:** Clin Nephrol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.5414/CN110320](https://doi.org/10.5414/CN110320)

## Content

1. Clin Nephrol. 2021 Apr;95(4):201-207. doi: 10.5414/CN110320.

Diagnostic value of electron microscopy detection using abdominal fat pad biopsy 
in systemic amyloidosis.

Wang D, Wang Y, Liu B, Liu Y, Sun S.

OBJECTIVE: Electron microscopy (EM) was used to observe the deposition and 
ultrastructural characteristics of amyloids in abdominal adipose tissue, which 
provided a reliable basis for pathological diagnosis of systemic amyloidosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 42 patients with established amyloidosis and 8 controls 
underwent surgical biopsy of subcutaneous abdominal fat. The fat tissues were 
submitted concurrently in 4% buffered neutral formalin for histological sections 
preparation, in glutaraldehyde fixative for EM studies, and in saline solutions 
for immunofluorescence tests.
RESULTS: Light microscopy revealed marked brick-red staining in 11 of 42 
samples, 6 moderate and 11 slight staining in the septum of cells, medium and 
small sized vessel, and apple green double refraction under polarized light 
microscopy. There were no significant differences in fat biopsies between the 
systemic amyloidosis and normal subjects in 14 cases. The EM showed approximate 
10-nm-thick straight filaments in adipose tissue in all 42 cases with 
amyloidosis. The positive rate of diagnosis was 100%. Congo red stained sections 
alone in cases with scant amyloid led to false negative results, but the EM was 
able to characterize the amyloid protein in all cases.
CONCLUSION: Therefore, preliminary diagnosis of suspected cases can be made by 
Congo red staining, but the final diagnosis requires an electron microscopic 
examination.

DOI: 10.5414/CN110320
PMID: 33433320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]