---
reference_id: "PMID:31419349"
title: "Basal cell carcinoma genetic susceptibility increases the rate of skin ageing: a Mendelian randomization study."
authors:
- van der Poort EKJ
- Gunn DA
- Beekman M
- Griffiths CEM
- Slagboom PE
- van Heemst D
- Noordam R
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.15880
keywords:
- Aged
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/genetics, pathology"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- Male
- Mendelian Randomization Analysis
- Middle Aged
- "Skin Aging/genetics, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Basal cell carcinoma genetic susceptibility increases the rate of skin ageing: a Mendelian randomization study.
**Authors:** van der Poort EKJ, Gunn DA, Beekman M, Griffiths CEM, Slagboom PE, van Heemst D, Noordam R
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.15880](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.15880)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2020 Jan;34(1):97-100. doi: 10.1111/jdv.15880.
Epub 2019 Sep 5.

Basal cell carcinoma genetic susceptibility increases the rate of skin ageing: a
Mendelian randomization study.

van der Poort EKJ(1), Gunn DA(2), Beekman M(3), Griffiths CEM(4), Slagboom
PE(3), van Heemst D(1), Noordam R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Gerontology and Geriatrics,
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Colworth Science Park, Unilever Research and Development, Sharnbrook,
Bedfordshire, UK.
(3)Department of Biomedical Data Sciences, Section of Molecular Epidemiology,
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Dermatology Centre, Salford Royal Hospital, University of Manchester,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.

BACKGROUND: Onset of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is connected to skin ageing, but
it is unclear whether higher BCC genetic susceptibility drives skin ageing.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate whether loci increasing genetic susceptibility to BCC
also drive multiple features of skin ageing, independently of confounding
factors, using Mendelian randomization.
METHODS: A Mendelian randomization study was conducted in older adults from the
Leiden Longevity Study (N = 604). A total of 25 BCC loci, selected based on a
published genome-wide association study on BCC (P-value < 5 × 10-8 ), were used
as genetic instruments for the calculation of a standardized (mean = 0, SD = 1)
weighted BCC genetic risk score. Based on facial photographs, we determined
perceived age, and skin wrinkling and pigmented spot grading.
RESULTS: A higher BCC genetic risk score was associated with a higher perceived
age (adjusted for chronological age and sex) of 0.88 years (95% CI: 0.44, 1.31;
P-value = 7.1e-5 ), greater wrinkling by 0.14 grades (95% CI: 0.05, 0.23;
P-value = 2.3e-3 ), and greater pigmented spots by 0.17 grades (95% CI: 0.08,
0.25; P-value = 1.1e-4 ). These findings were weakened but still present after
exclusion of gene variants in MC1R and IRF4 which have potential pleiotropic
effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Mechanisms influenced by genetic loci increasing susceptibility to
BCC also drive skin ageing suggesting shared biology and shared targets for
interventions.

© 2019 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.15880
PMID: 31419349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
