---
reference_id: "PMID:38271099"
title: Lipodystrophy in methylmalonic acidemia associated with elevated FGF21 and abnormal methylmalonylation.
authors:
- Manoli I
- Sysol JR
- Head PE
- Epping MW
- Gavrilova O
- Crocker MK
- Sloan JL
- Koutsoukos SA
- Wang C
- Ktena YP
- Mendelson S
- Pass AR
- Zerfas PM
- Hoffmann V
- Vernon HJ
- Fletcher LA
- Reynolds JC
- Tsokos MG
- Stratakis CA
- Voss SD
- Chen KY
- Brown RJ
- Hamosh A
- Berry GT
- Chen XS
- Yanovski JA
- Venditti CP
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.174097
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lipodystrophy in methylmalonic acidemia associated with elevated FGF21 and abnormal methylmalonylation.
**Authors:** Manoli I, Sysol JR, Head PE, Epping MW, Gavrilova O, Crocker MK, Sloan JL, Koutsoukos SA, Wang C, Ktena YP, Mendelson S, Pass AR, Zerfas PM, Hoffmann V, Vernon HJ, Fletcher LA, Reynolds JC, Tsokos MG, Stratakis CA, Voss SD, Chen KY, Brown RJ, Hamosh A, Berry GT, Chen XS, Yanovski JA, Venditti CP
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.174097](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.174097)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2024 Feb 22;9(4):e174097. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.174097.

Lipodystrophy in methylmalonic acidemia associated with elevated FGF21 and 
abnormal methylmalonylation.

Manoli I(1), Sysol JR(1), Head PE(1), Epping MW(1), Gavrilova O(2), Crocker 
MK(3), Sloan JL(1), Koutsoukos SA(1), Wang C(1), Ktena YP(1), Mendelson S(3), 
Pass AR(1), Zerfas PM(4), Hoffmann V(4), Vernon HJ(5), Fletcher LA(6), Reynolds 
JC(7), Tsokos MG(8), Stratakis CA(9), Voss SD(10), Chen KY(6), Brown RJ(6), 
Hamosh A(5), Berry GT(11)(12), Chen XS(13), Yanovski JA(3), Venditti CP(1).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Medicine Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute.
(2)Mouse Metabolism Core, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases.
(3)Section on Growth and Obesity, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development; and.
(4)Office of Research Services, Division of Veterinary Resources, NIH, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.
(5)Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.
(6)Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Obesity Branch, National Institute of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
(7)Radiology and Imaging Sciences Department, Clinical Center.
(8)Ultrastructural Pathology Section, Center for Cancer Research; and.
(9)Section on Endocrinology & Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(10)Department of Radiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(11)Division of Genetics and Genomics, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease 
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(13)Laboratory of Molecular Imaging and Nanomedicine, National Institute of 
Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

A distinct adipose tissue distribution pattern was observed in patients with 
methylmalonyl-CoA mutase deficiency, an inborn error of branched-chain amino 
acid (BCAA) metabolism, characterized by centripetal obesity with proximal upper 
and lower extremity fat deposition and paucity of visceral fat, that resembles 
familial multiple lipomatosis syndrome. To explore brown and white fat 
physiology in methylmalonic acidemia (MMA), body composition, adipokines, and 
inflammatory markers were assessed in 46 patients with MMA and 99 matched 
controls. Fibroblast growth factor 21 levels were associated with acyl-CoA 
accretion, aberrant methylmalonylation in adipose tissue, and an attenuated 
inflammatory cytokine profile. In parallel, brown and white fat were examined in 
a liver-specific transgenic MMA mouse model (Mmut-/- TgINS-Alb-Mmut). The MMA 
mice exhibited abnormal nonshivering thermogenesis with whitened brown fat and 
had an ineffective transcriptional response to cold stress. Treatment of the MMA 
mice with bezafibrates led to clinical improvement with beiging of subcutaneous 
fat depots, which resembled the distribution seen in the patients. These studies 
defined what we believe to be a novel lipodystrophy phenotype in patients with 
defects in the terminal steps of BCAA oxidation and demonstrated that beiging of 
subcutaneous adipose tissue in MMA could readily be induced with small 
molecules.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.174097
PMCID: PMC10967474
PMID: 38271099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: IM and CPV are inventors 
on patents related to isotopic biomarkers in organic acidemias filed by the NIH 
on their behalf: US-20200345268-A1, Isotopic biomarkers for organic acidemias; 
US-20200217856-A1 and US-11372004-B2, Biomarkers for organic acidemias. JAY 
conducts research for which NIH receives grant support for pharmacotherapy 
trials for human obesity from Hikma Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Soleno Therapeutics, 
Inc.; and Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and reagents (anti–activin receptor 
antibodies) from Versanis Bio for mouse obesity studies. CAS holds patents on 
the PRKAR1A, PDE11A, and GPR101 genes and/or their function — PRKAR1A: 
US-20030022180-A1 and US-6759525-B2, Protein kinase A and carney complex; 
PDE11A: US-7847078-B2, PDE11A mutations in adrenal disease; and GPR101: 
US-10350273-B2, Treatment of hormonal disorders of growth — and has received 
research funding from Pfizer Inc. on the genetics and treatment of abnormalities 
of growth hormone secretion. He is receiving compensation from ELPEN, Inc. and 
Sterotherapeutics.