---
reference_id: "PMID:28971893"
title: The crosstalk between endometrial stromal cells and macrophages impairs cytotoxicity of NK cells in endometriosis by secreting IL-10 and TGF-β.
authors:
- Yang HL
- Zhou WJ
- Chang KK
- Mei J
- Huang LQ
- Wang MY
- Meng Y
- Ha SY
- Li DJ
- Li MQ
journal: Reproduction
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1530/REP-17-0342
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The crosstalk between endometrial stromal cells and macrophages impairs cytotoxicity of NK cells in endometriosis by secreting IL-10 and TGF-β.
**Authors:** Yang HL, Zhou WJ, Chang KK, Mei J, Huang LQ, Wang MY, Meng Y, Ha SY, Li DJ, Li MQ
**Journal:** Reproduction (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1530/REP-17-0342](https://doi.org/10.1530/REP-17-0342)

## Content

1. Reproduction. 2017 Dec;154(6):815-825. doi: 10.1530/REP-17-0342. Epub 2017 Oct
 2.

The crosstalk between endometrial stromal cells and macrophages impairs 
cytotoxicity of NK cells in endometriosis by secreting IL-10 and TGF-β.

Yang HL(1)(2), Zhou WJ(1)(2)(3), Chang KK(1), Mei J(4), Huang LQ(5), Wang MY(1), 
Meng Y(1), Ha SY(1), Li DJ(1)(2)(3), Li MQ(6)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Reproductive ImmunologyHospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Reproduction Regulation of NPFPCSIPPR, IRD, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine Related 
DiseasesShanghai, People's Republic of China.
(4)Reproductive Medicine CenterDepartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanjing 
Drum Tower Hospital, The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University Medicine 
School, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Statistics and PsychologyCollege of Letters and Science, 
University of California Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(6)Laboratory for Reproductive ImmunologyHospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China mqli@fudan.edu.cn.

The dysfunction of NK cells in women with endometriosis (EMS) contributes to the 
immune escape of menstrual endometrial fragments refluxed into the peritoneal 
cavity. The reciprocal communications between endometrial stromal cells (ESCs) 
and lymphocytes facilitate the development of EMS. However, the mechanism of 
these communications on cytotoxicity of natural killer (NK) cells in 
endometriotic milieus is still largely unknown. To imitate the local immune 
microenvironment, the co-culture systems of ESCs from patients with EMS and 
monocyte-derived macrophages or of ESCs, macrophages and NK cells were 
constructed. The cytokine levels in the co-culture unit were evaluated by ELISA. 
The expression of functional molecules in NK cells was detected by flow 
cytometry (FCM). The NK cell behaviors in vitro were analyzed by cell counting 
kit-8 and cytotoxic activation assays. After incubation with ESCs and 
macrophages, the expression of CD16, NKG2D, perforin and IFN-γ, viability and 
cytotoxicity of NK cells were significantly downregulated. The secretion of 
interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-10 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-β in the 
co-culture system of ESCs and macrophages was increased. Exposure with 
anti-IL-10 receptor β neutralizing antibody (αhIL-10Rβ) or αTGF-β could partly 
reverse these effects of ESCs and macrophages on NK cells in vitro These results 
suggest that the interaction between macrophages and ESCs downregulates 
cytotoxicity of NK cells possibly by stimulating the secretion of IL-10 and 
TGF-β, and may further trigger the immune escape of ectopic fragments and 
promote the occurrence and the development of EMS.

© 2017 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

DOI: 10.1530/REP-17-0342
PMID: 28971893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]