---
reference_id: "PMID:38044766"
title: Prevalence of Doppler-Derived Left Ventricular Diastolic Dysfunction Among Newly Diagnosed Hypertensive Patients.
authors:
- Abubakar IG
- Buba F
- Oyati AI
- Talle MA
- Anjorin CO
journal: Niger J Clin Pract
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4103/njcp.njcp_227_23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of Doppler-Derived Left Ventricular Diastolic Dysfunction Among Newly Diagnosed Hypertensive Patients.
**Authors:** Abubakar IG, Buba F, Oyati AI, Talle MA, Anjorin CO
**Journal:** Niger J Clin Pract (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4103/njcp.njcp_227_23](https://doi.org/10.4103/njcp.njcp_227_23)

## Content

1. Niger J Clin Pract. 2023 Nov 1;26(11):1630-1636. doi:
10.4103/njcp.njcp_227_23.  Epub 2023 Dec 4.

Prevalence of Doppler-Derived Left Ventricular Diastolic Dysfunction Among Newly 
Diagnosed Hypertensive Patients.

Abubakar IG(1), Buba F(1)(2), Oyati AI(3)(4), Talle MA(1)(2), Anjorin CO(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Cardiology Unit, University of Maiduguri Teaching 
Hospital, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Clinical Sciences, College of Medical 
Sciences, University of Maiduguri, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Clinical Sciences, College of Medical 
Sciences, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Medicine, Cardiology Unit, Ahmadu Bello University Teaching 
Hospital, Shika, Nigeria.

BACKGROUND: The initial sign of hypertensive heart disease (HHD) is left 
ventricular diastolic dysfunction (LVDD), which is caused by remodeling of the 
left ventricle and left atrium, resulting in impaired relaxation of the left 
ventricle. LVDD is also partly due to left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). If 
left untreated, LVDD can progress to diastolic heart failure and systolic heart 
failure. In Western countries, the prevalence of LVDD in long-term hypertensive 
patients ranges from 40.3% to 60%, but it is more common among hypertensive 
Nigerians. Since systemic hypertension can be asymptomatic in the early stages, 
it is important to evaluate LVDD early and control blood pressure to slow down 
its progression.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: The study aims to highlight the prevalence of LVDD and to 
determine the stages of LVDD among newly diagnosed hypertensive patients at the 
University of Maiduguri Teaching Hospital (UMTH).
METHOD: The study design is a hospital-based, cross-sectional, observational 
study. The study population consists of 352 consecutive treatment Naïve 
hypertensive adult patients aged 18 years and above who presented to the 
Cardiology Clinic of UMTH from June 2019 to June 2021. The study used the 
diagnostic criteria for LVDD and LVH which were based on the American Society of 
Echocardiography and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging.
RESULTS: A total of 352 newly diagnosed hypertensive patients were recruited, 
with a mean age of 50.9 ± 11.8 years, and 54.3% were female. The majority of 
patients (63.6%) were overweight or obese, with a mean body mass index (BMI) of 
28.5 ± 4.6 kg/m2. The mean systolic blood pressure (SBP) was 155.7 ± 16.9 mmHg, 
and the mean diastolic blood pressure (DBP) was 92.8 ± 10.8 mmHg. LVDD was found 
in 58.5% of the patients, with stage 1 LVDD being the most common (42.6%), 
followed by stage 2 LVDD (15.9%). The prevalence of LVDD was significantly 
higher in females compared to males. Patients with LVDD were significantly older 
and had higher BMI, higher systolic and DBP, higher pulse pressure, higher LAVI, 
and higher LVMI compared to those without LVDD (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: LVDD is highly prevalent among newly diagnosed hypertensive 
patients, with stage 1 being the most common. Female gender, older age, higher 
BMI, higher blood pressure, higher LAVI, and higher LVMI were significant 
predictors of LVDD. Early detection and appropriate management of LVDD may help 
to prevent adverse cardiovascular outcomes in hypertensive patients.

Copyright © 2023 Copyright: © 2023 Nigerian Journal of Clinical Practice.

DOI: 10.4103/njcp.njcp_227_23
PMID: 38044766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]