---
reference_id: "PMID:25877722"
title: CNS vasculitis in children.
authors:
- Twilt M
- Benseler SM
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2012.11.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CNS vasculitis in children.
**Authors:** Twilt M, Benseler SM
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2012.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2012.11.002)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2013 Jul;2(3):162-71. doi:
10.1016/j.msard.2012.11.002.  Epub 2013 Jan 10.

CNS vasculitis in children.

Twilt M(1), Benseler SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Child Health Evaluative Science, Research Institute, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Child Health Evaluative Science, Research Institute, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. Electronic address: Susanne.benseler@sickkids.ca.

Inflammatory brain diseases in childhood are underrecognized and lead to 
life-threatening neurological deficits. Early recognition and diagnosis of 
inflammatory brain diseases is critical, as the reversibility of the 
neurological deficits is closely related to early initiation of treatment and 
prevention of secondary brain tissue damage. Primary childhood CNS vasculitis is 
the most common cause of inflammatory brain disease in childhood. Clinical 
features, laboratory tests and imaging can be non-conclusive and overlap with 
other inflammatory brain diseases, such as demyelinating diseases. This review 
focuses on recent publications on epidemiology, pathogenesis, and treatment in 
childhood CNS vasculitis and relevant publications from the rapidly expanding 
differential diagnosis for the subtypes of CNS vasculitis, particularly the 
demyelinating brain diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2012.11.002
PMID: 25877722