---
reference_id: "PMID:38183136"
title: Dysregulation of extracellular matrix and Lysyl Oxidase in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV skin fibroblasts.
authors:
- Foehr R
- Anderson K
- Dombrowski O
- Foehr A
- Foehr ED
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-03007-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysregulation of extracellular matrix and Lysyl Oxidase in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV skin fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Foehr R, Anderson K, Dombrowski O, Foehr A, Foehr ED
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-03007-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-03007-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Jan 5;19(1):9. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-03007-7.

Dysregulation of extracellular matrix and Lysyl Oxidase in Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome type IV skin fibroblasts.

Foehr R(1), Anderson K(1), Dombrowski O(1), Foehr A(1), Foehr ED(2).

Author information:
(1)Kin Therapeutics, 300 Professional Center Drive, Suite #311, Novato, CA, 
94947, USA.
(2)Kin Therapeutics, 300 Professional Center Drive, Suite #311, Novato, CA, 
94947, USA. efoehr@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Type IV (aka Vascular Ehlers Danlos, or vEDS) 
is a dominantly inherited mutation in the Collagen 3A1 gene (COL3A1). The 
disease is characterized by tissue friability and age-related susceptibility to 
arterial aneurysm, dissection and rupture as well as uterine and bowl tears. 
These clinical manifestations result in major surgical intervention and 
decreased life expectancy. Understanding how mutations in COL3A1 impact the 
structure and function of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is important to 
managing the disease and finding treatments.
RESULTS: Skin fibroblasts from vEDS subjects heterozygous for the p.G588S 
pathogenic variant in the COL3A1 gene and a normal individual were cultured and 
studied. Proteomics analysis identified dozens of upregulated proteins related 
to extracellular matrix dysregulation that is characteristic of fibrosis. Gene 
expression libraries from cultured primary fibroblasts were screened for 
messenger RNA (mRNA) markers of ECM degradation. The proteomics and targeted 
gene expression array results were largely consistent with dysregulation of the 
extracellular matrix in vEDS. The data show upregulation of multiple Collagen 
proteins and genes, other ECM components, and enzymes related to ECM processing 
and turn-over. vEDS fibroblasts expressed significantly more cross linked 
C-Telopeptide of Collagen III (CTXIII) than normal fibroblasts, indicative of 
Collagen III degradation and turn-over. Further, the expression and activity of 
Lysyl Oxidase (LOX), an enzyme that initiates covalent cross-linking of soluble 
collagen and elastin into protease resistant fibers, is elevated in vEDS 
fibroblasts compared to normal fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: Together, these findings suggest dysregulated ECM deposition and 
processing, reminiscent of a state of fibrosis. Therapeutics that target the 
dysregulated ECM proteins or help replace damaged tissue may improve clinical 
outcomes.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-03007-7
PMCID: PMC10768281
PMID: 38183136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.