---
reference_id: "PMID:27064148"
title: Zika virus impairs growth in human neurospheres and brain organoids.
authors:
- Garcez PP
- Loiola EC
- Madeiro da Costa R
- Higa LM
- Trindade P
- Delvecchio R
- Nascimento JM
- Brindeiro R
- Tanuri A
- Rehen SK
journal: Science
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1126/science.aaf6116
keywords:
- "Brain/abnormalities, virology"
- Brazil
- Cell Death
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Humans
- "Microcephaly/pathology, virology"
- "Neural Stem Cells/pathology, virology"
- Neurogenesis
- "Organoids/abnormalities, virology"
- Zika Virus/pathogenicity
- "Zika Virus Infection/complications, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zika virus impairs growth in human neurospheres and brain organoids.
**Authors:** Garcez PP, Loiola EC, Madeiro da Costa R, Higa LM, Trindade P, Delvecchio R, Nascimento JM, Brindeiro R, Tanuri A, Rehen SK
**Journal:** Science (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aaf6116](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf6116)

## Content

1. Science. 2016 May 13;352(6287):816-8. doi: 10.1126/science.aaf6116. Epub 2016 
Apr 10.

Zika virus impairs growth in human neurospheres and brain organoids.

Garcez PP(1), Loiola EC(2), Madeiro da Costa R(2), Higa LM(3), Trindade P(2), 
Delvecchio R(3), Nascimento JM(4), Brindeiro R(3), Tanuri A(3), Rehen SK(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil. D'Or Institute for Research and Education (IDOR), Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)D'Or Institute for Research and Education (IDOR), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Institute of Biology, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(4)D'Or Institute for Research and Education (IDOR), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
Institute of Biology, State University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil.
(5)D'Or Institute for Research and Education (IDOR), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2016 May 19;17(6):334-5. doi: 10.1038/nrn.2016.66.

Since the emergence of Zika virus (ZIKV), reports of microcephaly have increased 
considerably in Brazil; however, causality between the viral epidemic and 
malformations in fetal brains needs further confirmation. We examined the 
effects of ZIKV infection in human neural stem cells growing as neurospheres and 
brain organoids. Using immunocytochemistry and electron microscopy, we showed 
that ZIKV targets human brain cells, reducing their viability and growth as 
neurospheres and brain organoids. These results suggest that ZIKV abrogates 
neurogenesis during human brain development.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aaf6116
PMID: 27064148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]