---
reference_id: "PMID:40594772"
title: Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of mouse carotid artery under disturbed flow and human carotid plaques identifies key cell populations in atherosclerosis development.
authors:
- Liu X
- Li X
- Wang X
- Zhao J
- Liu C
- Wang S
- Xia Z
- Xu Y
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-07395-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of mouse carotid artery under disturbed flow and human carotid plaques identifies key cell populations in atherosclerosis development.
**Authors:** Liu X, Li X, Wang X, Zhao J, Liu C, Wang S, Xia Z, Xu Y
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-025-07395-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-07395-7)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2025 Jul 1;15(1):20747. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-07395-7.

Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of mouse carotid artery under disturbed flow and 
human carotid plaques identifies key cell populations in atherosclerosis 
development.

Liu X(1), Li X(2), Wang X(3), Zhao J(3), Liu C(3), Wang S(4), Xia Z(3)(4), Xu 
Y(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China. liuxuyang_yjy@126.com.
(2)Department of Endovascular Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(4)Clinical Systems Biology Laboratories, Translational Medicine Center, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China. xuyuming@zzu.edu.cn.
(6)Henan Key Laboratory of Cerebrovascular Diseases, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China. xuyuming@zzu.edu.cn.

Atherosclerosis tends to occur in regions of disturbed blood flow. This study 
explored how disturbed flow aggravates atherosclerosis using single-cell RNA-seq 
(scRNA-seq) datasets from mouse carotid arteries under disturbed flow and human 
carotid artery plaques. The scRNA-seq datasets were obtained from the GEO 
(GSE159677, GSE43292, GSE163154, and GSE41571) and SRA (PRJNA722117) databases 
and were processed using Seurat. Functional enrichment analysis was conducted 
using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and Gene Ontology (GO). Single-cell 
Flux Estimation Analysis (scFEA) was used to analyze cell type-specific changes 
in metabolism and "transcriptomic noise analysis" to examine senescence. 
GWAS-significant cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk genes were used to calculate 
risk gene scores for main cell populations. CellChat and Cytosig were used to 
analyze cell communication and cytokines. scRNA-seq identified seven cell 
clusters in mouse arteries: endothelial cells (ECs), vascular smooth muscle 
cells (VSMCs), fibroblasts, pericytes, macrophages, neutrophils, and T cells. 
Fibroblasts showed the most pronounced changes, particularly in inflammation and 
TGF-β signaling pathways. ECs, VSMCs, and fibroblasts had the highest enrichment 
of CVD risk gene scores, with fibroblasts showing most significant increases in 
gene risk scores after disturbed flow stimulation. A distinct fibroblast 
subgroup displayed high enrichment in inflammation and ossification-related 
pathways. CD36 + positive ECs exhibited significant senescence phenotypes 
following disturbed flow stimulation. Notable increases in VEGFA+ macrophages 
were discovered in the disturbed flow stimulation group, displaying a pronounced 
M1 pro-inflammatory phenotype associated with the severity of atherosclerosis 
and plaque stability. This study systematically elucidated functional changes of 
cell populations under disturbed flow. CD36+ ECs, VEGFA+ macrophages, and 
adventitial fibroblasts play critical roles in atherosclerosis.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-07395-7
PMCID: PMC12214537
PMID: 40594772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.