---
reference_id: "PMID:34235889"
title: 2021 American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis Foundation Guideline for the Management of Polyarteritis Nodosa.
authors:
- Chung SA
- Gorelik M
- Langford CA
- Maz M
- Abril A
- Guyatt G
- Archer AM
- Conn DL
- Full KA
- Grayson PC
- Ibarra MF
- Imundo LF
- Kim S
- Merkel PA
- Rhee RL
- Seo P
- Stone JH
- Sule S
- Sundel RP
- Vitobaldi OI
- Warner A
- Byram K
- Dua AB
- Husainat N
- James KE
- Kalot M
- Lin YC
- Springer JM
- Turgunbaev M
- Villa-Forte A
- Turner AS
- Mustafa RA
journal: Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/acr.24633
keywords:
- Clinical Decision-Making
- Consensus
- "Cyclophosphamide/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Decision Support Techniques
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Evidence-Based Medicine/standards
- "Glucocorticoids/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Polyarteritis Nodosa/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- Rheumatology/standards
- Severity of Illness Index
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2021 American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis Foundation Guideline for the Management of Polyarteritis Nodosa.
**Authors:** Chung SA, Gorelik M, Langford CA, Maz M, Abril A, Guyatt G, Archer AM, Conn DL, Full KA, Grayson PC, Ibarra MF, Imundo LF, Kim S, Merkel PA, Rhee RL, Seo P, Stone JH, Sule S, Sundel RP, Vitobaldi OI, Warner A, Byram K, Dua AB, Husainat N, James KE, Kalot M, Lin YC, Springer JM, Turgunbaev M, Villa-Forte A, Turner AS, Mustafa RA
**Journal:** Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acr.24633](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.24633)

## Content

1. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2021 Aug;73(8):1061-1070. doi:
10.1002/acr.24633.  Epub 2021 Jul 8.

2021 American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis Foundation Guideline for the 
Management of Polyarteritis Nodosa.

Chung SA(1), Gorelik M(2), Langford CA(3), Maz M(4), Abril A(5), Guyatt G(6), 
Archer AM(7), Conn DL(8), Full KA(9), Grayson PC(10), Ibarra MF(11), Imundo 
LF(2), Kim S(1), Merkel PA(12), Rhee RL(12), Seo P(13), Stone JH(14), Sule 
S(15), Sundel RP(16), Vitobaldi OI(17), Warner A(18), Byram K(19), Dua AB(7), 
Husainat N(20), James KE(21), Kalot M(22), Lin YC(23), Springer JM(4), 
Turgunbaev M(24), Villa-Forte A(3), Turner AS(24), Mustafa RA(25).

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Francisco.
(2)Columbia University, New York, New York.
(3)Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio.
(4)University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City.
(5)Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.
(6)McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.
(8)Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(9)Springfield, Illinois.
(10)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, NIH, 
Bethesda, Maryland.
(11)Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, Missouri.
(12)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(13)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(14)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston.
(15)Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC.
(16)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(17)Chicago, Illinois.
(18)Saint Luke's Health System, Kansas City, Missouri.
(19)Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee.
(20)SSM Health-St. Mary's Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri.
(21)University of Utah, Salt Lake City.
(22)State University of New York at Buffalo.
(23)University of South Florida, Tampa.
(24)American College of Rheumatology, Atlanta, Georgia.
(25)University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, and McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To provide evidence-based recommendations and expert guidance for the 
management of systemic polyarteritis nodosa (PAN).
METHODS: Twenty-one clinical questions regarding diagnostic testing, treatment, 
and management were developed in the population, intervention, comparator, and 
outcome (PICO) format for systemic, non-hepatitis B-related PAN. Systematic 
literature reviews were conducted for each PICO question. The Grading of 
Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation methodology was used to 
assess the quality of evidence and formulate recommendations. Each 
recommendation required ≥70% consensus among the Voting Panel.
RESULTS: We present 16 recommendations and 1 ungraded position statement for 
PAN. Most recommendations were graded as conditional due to the paucity of 
evidence. These recommendations support early treatment of severe PAN with 
cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids, limiting toxicity through minimizing 
long-term exposure to both treatments, and the use of imaging and tissue biopsy 
for disease diagnosis. These recommendations endorse minimizing risk to the 
patient by using established therapy at disease onset and identify new areas 
where adjunctive therapy may be warranted.
CONCLUSION: These recommendations provide guidance regarding diagnostic 
strategies, use of pharmacologic agents, and imaging for patients with PAN.

© 2021 American College of Rheumatology. This article has been contributed to by 
US Government employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.24633
PMCID: PMC12326507
PMID: 34235889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial Conflict: Forms submitted as required.