---
reference_id: "PMID:26351447"
title: Pediatric Acute Longitudinal Extensive Transverse Myelitis Secondary to Neuroborreliosis.
authors:
- Khan S
- Singh N
- Dow A
- Ramirez-Zamora A
journal: Case Rep Neurol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1159/000438696
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Acute Longitudinal Extensive Transverse Myelitis Secondary to Neuroborreliosis.
**Authors:** Khan S, Singh N, Dow A, Ramirez-Zamora A
**Journal:** Case Rep Neurol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000438696](https://doi.org/10.1159/000438696)

## Content

1. Case Rep Neurol. 2015 Jul 29;7(2):162-6. doi: 10.1159/000438696. eCollection 
2015 May-Aug.

Pediatric Acute Longitudinal Extensive Transverse Myelitis Secondary to 
Neuroborreliosis.

Khan S(1), Singh N(2), Dow A(2), Ramirez-Zamora A(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Osteopathic Medicine, New York Institute of Technology, Old 
Westbury, N.Y., USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Albany Medical College, Albany, N.Y., USA.

Lyme neuroborreliosis has several different clinical manifestations in children, 
of which facial nerve palsies, meningitis and radiculopathies are the most 
common. Transverse myelitis (TM) secondary to Lyme disease has been reported in 
rare occasions, typically presenting with severe weakness, sensory abnormalities 
and autonomic dysfunction. We present the case of a 16-year-old male who 
developed acute left peripheral facial palsy and longitudinal extensive TM 
secondary to Lyme disease. Remarkably, the patient reported only mild symptoms 
with severe back pain in the absence of profound signs of myelopathy. We 
reviewed the medical literature and analyzed the clinical features of pediatric 
patients with Borrelia burgdorferi-related TM.

DOI: 10.1159/000438696
PMCID: PMC4560316
PMID: 26351447