---
reference_id: "PMID:20932824"
title: "A de novo mutation in NKX2.5 associated with atrial septal defects, ventricular noncompaction, syncope and sudden death."
authors:
- Ouyang P
- Saarel E
- Bai Y
- Luo C
- Lv Q
- Xu Y
- Wang F
- Fan C
- Younoszai A
- Chen Q
- Tu X
- Wang QK
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.09.035
keywords:
- Adult
- Base Sequence
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Death, Sudden"
- Female
- HeLa Cells
- "Heart Septal Defects, Atrial/genetics"
- Homeobox Protein Nkx-2.5
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Isolated Noncompaction of the Ventricular Myocardium/genetics
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Nucleic Acid Conformation
- Syncope/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A de novo mutation in NKX2.5 associated with atrial septal defects, ventricular noncompaction, syncope and sudden death.
**Authors:** Ouyang P, Saarel E, Bai Y, Luo C, Lv Q, Xu Y, Wang F, Fan C, Younoszai A, Chen Q, Tu X, Wang QK
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2010.09.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2010.09.035)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2011 Jan 14;412(1-2):170-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.09.035.
Epub  2010 Oct 4.

A de novo mutation in NKX2.5 associated with atrial septal defects, ventricular 
noncompaction, syncope and sudden death.

Ouyang P(1), Saarel E, Bai Y, Luo C, Lv Q, Xu Y, Wang F, Fan C, Younoszai A, 
Chen Q, Tu X, Wang QK.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, College 
of Life Science and Technology, and Center for Human Genome Research, Cardio-X 
Institute, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in transcription factor NKX2.5 cause congenital heart 
disease (CHD). We identified a CHD family with atrial septal defects (ASDs), 
atrioventricular block, ventricular noncompaction, syncope and sudden death. Our 
objective is to identify the disease-causing mutation in the CHD family.
METHODS: Direct DNA sequence analysis was used to identify the CHD mutation. The 
functional effects of the mutation were characterized by a luciferase reporter 
assay and immunostaining.
RESULTS: A novel, de novo 2-bp insertion (c.512insGC) was identified in exon 2 
of NKX2.5. Mutation c.512insGC co-segregates with CHD in the family, and is not 
present in 200 controls. Functional studies indicate that the c.512insGC 
mutation impedes nuclear localization of NKX2.5 and causes a total loss of 
transactivation activity of NKX2.5. Furthermore, no NKX2.5 mutation was 
identified in 125 sporadic Chinese CHD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: (1) NKX2.5 mutation c.512insGC is associated with ASDs, syncope and 
sudden death. It is the second de novo mutation identified in NKX2.5. (2) NKX2.5 
mutations are rare in sporadic CHD patients. (3) This study for the first time 
identifies association between a NKX2.5 mutation and ventricular noncompaction. 
Our results significantly expand the phenotypic spectrum of NKX2.5 mutations.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.09.035
PMCID: PMC2998397
PMID: 20932824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]