---
reference_id: "PMID:38927735"
title: "Blau Syndrome: Challenging Molecular Genetic Diagnostics of Autoinflammatory Disease."
authors:
- Brichova M
- Klimova A
- Heissigerova J
- Svozilkova P
- Vaneckova M
- Dolezalova P
- Nemcova D
- Michalickova M
- Jedlickova J
- Dudakova L
- Liskova P
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/genes15060799
keywords:
- Humans
- "Arthritis/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Arthropathy, Neurogenic/genetics, diagnosis"
- Central Nervous System Diseases
- Exome Sequencing
- Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases
- "Lymphedema/genetics, diagnosis"
- Mutation
- Nod2 Signaling Adaptor Protein/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Sarcoidosis/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Synovitis/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Uveitis/genetics, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blau Syndrome: Challenging Molecular Genetic Diagnostics of Autoinflammatory Disease.
**Authors:** Brichova M, Klimova A, Heissigerova J, Svozilkova P, Vaneckova M, Dolezalova P, Nemcova D, Michalickova M, Jedlickova J, Dudakova L, Liskova P
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes15060799](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes15060799)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Jun 18;15(6):799. doi: 10.3390/genes15060799.

Blau Syndrome: Challenging Molecular Genetic Diagnostics of Autoinflammatory 
Disease.

Brichova M(1), Klimova A(1), Heissigerova J(1), Svozilkova P(1), Vaneckova M(2), 
Dolezalova P(3), Nemcova D(3), Michalickova M(1), Jedlickova J(3), Dudakova 
L(3), Liskova P(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University 
and General University Hospital in Prague, U Nemocnice 2, 128 08 Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(2)Department of Radiology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and 
General University Hospital in Prague, Katerinska 30, 128 21 Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Department of Paediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Ke 
Karlovu 2, 128 08 Prague, Czech Republic.

The aim of this study was to describe the clinical and molecular genetic 
findings in seven individuals from three unrelated families with Blau syndrome. 
A complex ophthalmic and general health examination including diagnostic imaging 
was performed. The NOD2 mutational hot spot located in exon 4 was Sanger 
sequenced in all three probands. Two individuals also underwent autoinflammatory 
disorder gene panel screening, and in one subject, exome sequencing was 
performed. Blau syndrome presenting as uveitis, skin rush or arthritis was 
diagnosed in four cases from three families. In two individuals from one family, 
only camptodactyly was noted, while another member had camptodactyly in 
combination with non-active uveitis and angioid streaks. One proband developed 
two attacks of meningoencephalitis attributed to presumed neurosarcoidosis, 
which is a rare finding in Blau syndrome. The probands from families 1 and 2 
carried pathogenic variants in NOD2 (NM_022162.3): c.1001G>A p.(Arg334Gln) and 
c.1000C>T p.(Arg334Trp), respectively. In family 3, two variants of unknown 
significance in a heterozygous state were found: c.1412G>T p.(Arg471Leu) in NOD2 
and c.928C>T p.(Arg310*) in NLRC4 (NM_001199139.1). In conclusion, Blau syndrome 
is a phenotypically highly variable, and there is a need to raise awareness 
about all clinical manifestations, including neurosarcoidosis. Variants of 
unknown significance pose a significant challenge regarding their contribution 
to etiopathogenesis of autoinflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15060799
PMCID: PMC11203189
PMID: 38927735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.