---
reference_id: "PMID:36810318"
title: "Newborn Screening of Primary Carnitine Deficiency: An Overview of Worldwide Practices and Pitfalls to Define an Algorithm before Expansion of Newborn Screening in France."
authors:
- Lefèvre CR
- Labarthe F
- Dufour D
- Moreau C
- Faoucher M
- Rollier P
- Arnoux JB
- Tardieu M
- Damaj L
- Bendavid C
- Dessein AF
- Acquaviva-Bourdain C
- Cheillan D
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijns9010006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Newborn Screening of Primary Carnitine Deficiency: An Overview of Worldwide Practices and Pitfalls to Define an Algorithm before Expansion of Newborn Screening in France.
**Authors:** Lefèvre CR, Labarthe F, Dufour D, Moreau C, Faoucher M, Rollier P, Arnoux JB, Tardieu M, Damaj L, Bendavid C, Dessein AF, Acquaviva-Bourdain C, Cheillan D
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns9010006](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns9010006)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2023 Feb 1;9(1):6. doi: 10.3390/ijns9010006.

Newborn Screening of Primary Carnitine Deficiency: An Overview of Worldwide 
Practices and Pitfalls to Define an Algorithm before Expansion of Newborn 
Screening in France.

Lefèvre CR(1), Labarthe F(2), Dufour D(2), Moreau C(1), Faoucher M(1), Rollier 
P(1), Arnoux JB(3), Tardieu M(2), Damaj L(1), Bendavid C(1), Dessein AF(4), 
Acquaviva-Bourdain C(5), Cheillan D(5).

Author information:
(1)Rennes University Hospital Center, 35033 Rennes, France.
(2)Reference Center of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Clocheville Hospital, 
37000 Tours, France.
(3)Reference Center for Inborn Error of Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, 
Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, APHP, 75015 Paris, France.
(4)Metabolism and Rare Disease Unit, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, Center of Biology and Pathology, Lille University Hospital Center, 
59000 Lille, France.
(5)Center for Inherited Metabolic Disorders and Neonatal Screening, East Biology 
and Pathology Department, Groupement Hospitalier Est (GHE), Hospices Civils de 
Lyon, 69500 Bron, France.

Primary Carnitine Deficiency (PCD) is a fatty acid oxidation disorder that will 
be included in the expansion of the French newborn screening (NBS) program at 
the beginning of 2023. This disease is of high complexity to screen, due to its 
pathophysiology and wide clinical spectrum. To date, few countries screen 
newborns for PCD and struggle with high false positive rates. Some have even 
removed PCD from their screening programs. To understand the risks and pitfalls 
of implementing PCD to the newborn screening program, we reviewed and analyzed 
the literature to identify hurdles and benefits from the experiences of 
countries already screening this inborn error of metabolism. In this study, we 
therefore, present the main pitfalls encountered and a worldwide overview of 
current practices in PCD newborn screening. In addition, we address the 
optimized screening algorithm that has been determined in France for the 
implementation of this new condition.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns9010006
PMCID: PMC9944086
PMID: 36810318

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.