---
reference_id: "PMID:35177335"
title: "Worldwide prevalence of Lynch syndrome in patients with colorectal cancer: Systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Abu-Ghazaleh N
- Kaushik V
- Gorelik A
- Jenkins M
- Macrae F
journal: Genet Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.01.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Worldwide prevalence of Lynch syndrome in patients with colorectal cancer: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Abu-Ghazaleh N, Kaushik V, Gorelik A, Jenkins M, Macrae F
**Journal:** Genet Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gim.2022.01.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gim.2022.01.014)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2022 May;24(5):971-985. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.01.014. Epub 2022
Feb  15.

Worldwide prevalence of Lynch syndrome in patients with colorectal cancer: 
Systematic review and meta-analysis.

Abu-Ghazaleh N(1), Kaushik V(2), Gorelik A(3), Jenkins M(4), Macrae F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia; Department of Colorectal Cancer and Genetics, Royal Melbourne 
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address: 
nabughazaleh@student.unimelb.edu.au.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia; Department of Colorectal Cancer and Genetics, Royal Melbourne 
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Department of Colorectal Cancer and Genetics, Royal Melbourne Hospital, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Monash Department of Clinical Epidemiology, 
Cabrini Institute, Malvern, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia; School of Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

PURPOSE: Lynch syndrome (LS) is the most common hereditary colorectal cancer 
(CRC) syndrome, with an estimated prevalence of 2% to 3% of CRC. A prevalence 
study is needed to provide accurate estimates of the true prevalence of LS.
METHODS: MEDLINE (Ovid), Embase, and Web of Science were searched. Prevalence 
was calculated by random effects meta-analysis models. I2 score was used to 
assess heterogeneity across studies. Meta-regression was performed for 
between-study variance.
RESULTS: A total of 51 studies were included in this review. The overall pooled 
yield of LS screening was 2.2% based on all methods of detection. Studies 
performing germline tests on all participants with CRC reported higher 
prevalence (5.1%) as opposed to studies only performing germline tests on 
participants with tumors with mismatch repair deficiency (1.6%) or 
microsatellite instability (1.1%). Selected cohorts of CRC had a higher 
prevalence of germline LS diagnoses.
CONCLUSION: LS prevalence across multiple ethnic, geographic, and clinical 
populations is remarkably similar. Universal germline testing of patients 
presenting with cancer identifies that most CRCs are attributed to LS. Young 
patients presenting with CRC and those who fulfill criteria for a familial risk 
provide the highest returns for LS identification. Our study supports the 
universal germline CRC screening for LS.

Copyright © 2022 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.01.014
PMID: 35177335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.