---
reference_id: PMID:38743626
title: Dark continuous noise from mutant G90D-rhodopsin predominantly underlies congenital stationary night blindness.
authors:
- Chai Z
- Ye Y
- Silverman D
- Rose K
- Madura A
- Reed RR
- Chen J
- Yau KW
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2404763121
keywords:
- Animals
- "Night Blindness/genetics, metabolism"
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Rhodopsin/genetics, metabolism"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics, metabolism"
- "Myopia/genetics, metabolism"
- "Retinal Rod Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Darkness
- "Transducin/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dark continuous noise from mutant G90D-rhodopsin predominantly underlies congenital stationary night blindness.
**Authors:** Chai Z, Ye Y, Silverman D, Rose K, Madura A, Reed RR, Chen J, Yau KW
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2404763121](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2404763121)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2024 May 21;121(21):e2404763121. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2404763121. Epub 2024 May 14.

Dark continuous noise from mutant G90D-rhodopsin predominantly underlies 
congenital stationary night blindness.

Chai Z(#)(1), Ye Y(#)(1), Silverman D(1)(2), Rose K(3), Madura A(3), Reed RR(4), 
Chen J(3), Yau KW(1).

Author information:
(1)Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205.
(2)Biochemistry, Cellular and Molecular Biology Graduate Program, Department of 
Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205.
(3)Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics (Emeritus), Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2024 May 28;121(22):e2408254121. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2408254121.

Congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) is an inherited retinal disease 
that causes a profound loss of rod sensitivity without severe retinal 
degeneration. One well-studied rhodopsin point mutant, G90D-Rho, is thought to 
cause CSNB because of its constitutive activity in darkness causing rod 
desensitization. However, the nature of this constitutive activity and its 
precise molecular source have not been resolved for almost 30 y. In this study, 
we made a knock-in (KI) mouse line with a very low expression of G90D-Rho (equal 
in amount to ~0.1% of normal rhodopsin, WT-Rho, in WT rods), with the remaining 
WT-Rho replaced by REY-Rho, a mutant with a very low efficiency of activating 
transducin due to a charge reversal of the highly conserved ERY motif to REY. We 
observed two kinds of constitutive noise: one being spontaneous isomerization 
(R*) of G90D-Rho at a molecular rate (R* s-1) 175-fold higher than WT-Rho and 
the other being G90D-Rho-generated dark continuous noise comprising 
low-amplitude unitary events occurring at a very high molecular rate equivalent 
in effect to ~40,000-fold of R* s-1 from WT-Rho. Neither noise type originated 
from G90D-Opsin because exogenous 11-cis-retinal had no effect. Extrapolating 
the above observations at low (0.1%) expression of G90D-Rho to normal disease 
exhibited by a KI mouse model with RhoG90D/WTand RhoG90D/G90D genotypes predicts 
the disease condition very well quantitatively. Overall, the continuous noise 
from G90D-Rho therefore predominates, constituting the major equivalent 
background light causing rod desensitization in CSNB.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2404763121
PMCID: PMC11127052
PMID: 38743626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:The authors 
declare no competing interest.