---
reference_id: "PMID:41014602"
title: "Haemodynamic monitoring and management of the hypotensive out-of-hospital cardiac arrest patient in the adult intensive care unit: a clinical consensus statement of the Association for Acute CardioVascular Care of the ESC."
authors:
- Grand J
- Sionis A
- Hassager C
- Perez PJ
- Poess J
- Schaubroeck H
- Desch S
- Krychtiuk KA
- Belohlavek J
- Mebazaa A
- Huber K
- van Diepen S
- Vandenbriele C
- Morrow D
- Tavazzi G
journal: Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1093/ehjacc/zuaf125
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation/methods
- Critical Care/methods
- Disease Management
- Hemodynamic Monitoring/methods
- Hemodynamics
- "Hypotension/therapy, etiology, physiopathology, diagnosis"
- Intensive Care Units
- "Out-of-Hospital Cardiac Arrest/therapy, complications, physiopathology"
- "Societies, Medical"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haemodynamic monitoring and management of the hypotensive out-of-hospital cardiac arrest patient in the adult intensive care unit: a clinical consensus statement of the Association for Acute CardioVascular Care of the ESC.
**Authors:** Grand J, Sionis A, Hassager C, Perez PJ, Poess J, Schaubroeck H, Desch S, Krychtiuk KA, Belohlavek J, Mebazaa A, Huber K, van Diepen S, Vandenbriele C, Morrow D, Tavazzi G
**Journal:** Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ehjacc/zuaf125](https://doi.org/10.1093/ehjacc/zuaf125)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2026 Mar 10;15(1):63-71. doi:
10.1093/ehjacc/zuaf125.

Haemodynamic monitoring and management of the hypotensive out-of-hospital
cardiac arrest patient in the adult intensive care unit: a clinical consensus
statement of the Association for Acute CardioVascular Care of the ESC.

Grand J(1)(2), Sionis A(3), Hassager C(1), Perez PJ(4), Poess J(5), Schaubroeck
H(6), Desch S(7), Krychtiuk KA(8), Belohlavek J(9), Mebazaa A(10), Huber K(11),
van Diepen S(12), Vandenbriele C(13)(14)(15), Morrow D(16), Tavazzi G(17).

Author information:
(1)Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9b, 2100
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Copenhagen University Hospital, Amager-Hvidovre, Kettegårds Alle 36, 2650
Hvidovre, Denmark.
(3)Hospital de la Santa Creu I Sant Pau, Carrer de Sant Quintí 89, 08041
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)University Hospital of the Canaries, Ctra. Ofra s/n, 38320 La Cuesta, Santa
Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.
(5)Heart Center of Leipzig, Strümpellstraße 39, 04289 Leipzig, Germany.
(6)University Hospital Ghent, C. Heymanslaan 10, 9000 Gent, Belgium.
(7)Heart Center Leipzig, Strümpellstraße 39, 04289 Leipzig, Germany.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine II-Division of Cardiology, Medical University
of Vienna, WähringerGürtel 18-20, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(9)Charles University of Prague, Karlovo náměstí 40, 120 00 Praha 2, Czechia.
(10)Hospital Lariboisiere, 2 RueAmbroise Paré, 75010 Paris, France.
(11)Sigmund Freud University Vienna, Faculty of Medicine, Freudplatz 1, 1020
Vienna, Austria.
(12)University of Alberta, 116 St & 85 Ave, Edmonton AB T6G 2R3, Canada.
(13)Royal Brompton and Harefield Hospitals, Guy's & St. Thomas' NHS Foundation
Trust, Sydney Street, London SW3 6NP, UK.
(14)Heart Centre Aalst, OLV Hospitals, Moorselbaan 164, 9300 Aalst, Belgium.
(15)Department of Cancer and Surgery, Imperial College, Du Cane Road, London W12
0HS, UK.
(16)Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(17)University of Pavia, Corso Strada Nuova 65, 27100 Pavia, Italy.

AIMS: Out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA) represents a major public health
challenge, with high mortality and significant neurological impairments among
survivors. Haemodynamic instability, particularly hypotension (a mean arterial
blood pressure <65 mmHg), may be a key contributor to post-resuscitation
morbidity and mortality.
METHODS AND RESULTS: After return of spontaneous circulation, hypotension can
result from various causes, including arrhythmias, mechanical complications,
thromboembolism, or different types of shock, as well as sedation, temperature
control and positive pressure ventilation. Differentiating between hypotension
with vs. without hypoperfusion is critical to avoid unnecessary interventions
while ensuring adequate cerebral and myocardial perfusion. Clinical assessment
and repeated echocardiography should be routine in all patients. Therapeutic
targets should include evidence of preserved end-organ function, including urine
output, and normal or decreasing lactate. In selected cases, advanced
haemodynamic monitoring with pulmonary artery catheters may be necessary to
diagnose the shock-type and monitor treatment effects. Causal treatment of the
precipitating cause of hypotension is crucial as well as symptomatic treatment
with fluids, vasopressors and inotropes if needed. Mechanical circulatory
support may be employed for refractory shock unresponsive to other treatment.
CONCLUSION: This clinical consensus statement by the Association for Acute
CardioVascular Care (ACVC) of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) provides
clinical guidance for the haemodynamic monitoring and management of hypotension
in OHCA patients in intensive care. The document advocates for a
multidisciplinary approach that integrates clinical assessment, imaging, and
haemodynamic parameters to guide treatment, with the overarching goal of
improving survival rates and neurological outcomes.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use,
please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ehjacc/zuaf125
PMID: 41014602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Dr M.W. is a member of the
TIMI Study Group which has received institutional research grant support through
Brigham and Women’s Hospital from: Abbott, Abiomed, Amgen, Anthos Therapeutics,
AstraZeneca, Daiichi-Sankyo, Intarcia, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Quark
Pharmaceuticals, Regeneron, Roche, Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, Inc., and
Zora Biosciences. He has received consulting fees from Abbott Laboratories,
4TEEN4, InCarda, Merck & Co, Novartis, Regeneron, Roche. K.A.K.: related to the
contents of this manuscript: Speaker Fees Zoll Medical (past). Unrelated to the
contents of this manuscript: Speaker fees: Daiichi Sankyo, Amarin; Consulting
Fees: Amarin, Novartis, Sanofi; Travel Support: Amgen, Sanofi, Daiichi Sankyo,
Christophe Vandenbriele: speaking, consultancy and research fees from Abiomed.
