---
reference_id: "PMID:24204001"
title: Mutations in PCBD1 cause hypomagnesemia and renal magnesium wasting.
authors:
- Ferrè S
- de Baaij JH
- Ferreira P
- Germann R
- de Klerk JB
- Lavrijsen M
- van Zeeland F
- Venselaar H
- Kluijtmans LA
- Hoenderop JG
- Bindels RJ
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013040337
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/etiology"
- Female
- HEK293 Cells
- Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta/metabolism
- Humans
- "Hydro-Lyases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Hypercalciuria/genetics, metabolism"
- Infant
- "Kidney Tubules, Distal/metabolism"
- Magnesium/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Nephrocalcinosis/genetics, metabolism"
- Phenylketonurias/genetics
- "Renal Tubular Transport, Inborn Errors/genetics, metabolism"
- Sodium-Potassium-Exchanging ATPase/metabolism
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in PCBD1 cause hypomagnesemia and renal magnesium wasting.
**Authors:** Ferrè S, de Baaij JH, Ferreira P, Germann R, de Klerk JB, Lavrijsen M, van Zeeland F, Venselaar H, Kluijtmans LA, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2013040337](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2013040337)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Mar;25(3):574-86. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013040337. Epub
2013  Nov 7.

Mutations in PCBD1 cause hypomagnesemia and renal magnesium wasting.

Ferrè S(1), de Baaij JH, Ferreira P, Germann R, de Klerk JB, Lavrijsen M, van 
Zeeland F, Venselaar H, Kluijtmans LA, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences.

Mutations in PCBD1 are causative for transient neonatal hyperphenylalaninemia 
and primapterinuria (HPABH4D). Until now, HPABH4D has been regarded as a 
transient and benign neonatal syndrome without complications in adulthood. In 
our study of three adult patients with homozygous mutations in the PCBD1 gene, 
two patients were diagnosed with hypomagnesemia and renal Mg(2+) loss, and two 
patients developed diabetes with characteristics of maturity onset diabetes of 
the young (MODY), regardless of serum Mg(2+) levels. Our results suggest that 
these clinical findings are related to the function of PCBD1 as a dimerization 
cofactor for the transcription factor HNF1B. Mutations in the HNF1B gene have 
been shown to cause renal malformations, hypomagnesemia, and MODY. Gene 
expression studies combined with immunohistochemical analysis in the kidney 
showed that Pcbd1 is expressed in the distal convoluted tubule (DCT), where 
Pcbd1 transcript levels are upregulated by a low Mg(2+)-containing diet. 
Overexpression in a human kidney cell line showed that wild-type PCBD1 binds 
HNF1B to costimulate the FXYD2 promoter, the activity of which is instrumental 
in Mg(2+) reabsorption in the DCT. Of seven PCBD1 mutations previously reported 
in HPABH4D patients, five mutations caused proteolytic instability, leading to 
reduced FXYD2 promoter activity. Furthermore, cytosolic localization of PCBD1 
increased when coexpressed with HNF1B mutants. Overall, our findings establish 
PCBD1 as a coactivator of the HNF1B-mediated transcription necessary for fine 
tuning FXYD2 transcription in the DCT and suggest that patients with HPABH4D 
should be monitored for previously unrecognized late complications, such as 
hypomagnesemia and MODY diabetes.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2013040337
PMCID: PMC3935582
PMID: 24204001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]