---
reference_id: "PMID:23339108"
title: "Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia: clinical and molecular review of 39 families."
authors:
- Baujat G
- Huber C
- El Hokayem J
- Caumes R
- Do Ngoc Thanh C
- David A
- Delezoide AL
- Dieux-Coeslier A
- Estournet B
- Francannet C
- Kayirangwa H
- Lacaille F
- Le Bourgeois M
- Martinovic J
- Salomon R
- Sigaudy S
- Malan V
- Munnich A
- Le Merrer M
- Le Quan Sang KH
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101282
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia: clinical and molecular review of 39 families.
**Authors:** Baujat G, Huber C, El Hokayem J, Caumes R, Do Ngoc Thanh C, David A, Delezoide AL, Dieux-Coeslier A, Estournet B, Francannet C, Kayirangwa H, Lacaille F, Le Bourgeois M, Martinovic J, Salomon R, Sigaudy S, Malan V, Munnich A, Le Merrer M, Le Quan Sang KH, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101282](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101282)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2013 Feb;50(2):91-8. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101282.

Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia: clinical and molecular review of 39 families.

Baujat G(1), Huber C, El Hokayem J, Caumes R, Do Ngoc Thanh C, David A, 
Delezoide AL, Dieux-Coeslier A, Estournet B, Francannet C, Kayirangwa H, 
Lacaille F, Le Bourgeois M, Martinovic J, Salomon R, Sigaudy S, Malan V, Munnich 
A, Le Merrer M, Le Quan Sang KH, Cormier-Daire V.

Author information:
(1)Département de Génétique et INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne 
Paris Cité, Fondation Imagine, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, AP-HP, Paris, 
France.

BACKGROUND: Asphyxiating Thoracic Dysplasia (ATD) belongs to the short rib 
polydactyly group and is characterized by a narrow thorax, short long bones and 
trident acetabular roof. Other reported features include polydactyly, renal, 
liver and retinal involvement. To date, mutations in IFT80, DYNC2H1, TTC21B and 
WDR19 have been reported in ATD. The clinical and molecular heterogeneity leads 
to difficulties in the evaluation of the long-term prognosis.
METHODS: We investigated 53 ATD cases (23 living cases and 30 fetuses) from 39 
families. They benefited from a combined approach of deep phenotyping and IFT80 
and DYNC2H1 molecular screening.
RESULTS: Among the 23 postnatal cases, pulmonary insufficiency was noted in 60% 
of cases, with tracheotomy requirement in five cases. Renal and liver diseases 
occurred respectively in 17% and 22% of cases, whereas retinal alteration was 
present in 50% of cases aged more than 5 years. We identified DYNC2H1 mutations 
in 23 families (59%) and IFT80 mutations in two families (5%). However, in six 
families, only one heterozygote mutation in either IFT80 or DYNC2H1 was 
identified. Finally, the two genes were excluded in 14 families (36%).
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that DYNC2H1 is a major gene responsible for ATD, while 
IFT80 is rarely involved. The presence of only one mutation in six families and 
the exclusion of the two genes in 14 families support the involvement of other 
causal cilia genes. The long-term follow up emphasizes that the pulmonary 
prognosis is probably less pejorative and retinal involvement more frequent than 
previously thought.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101282
PMID: 23339108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]