---
reference_id: "PMID:31155282"
title: Gain-of-Function Mutations in KCNN3 Encoding the Small-Conductance Ca(2+)-Activated K(+) Channel SK3 Cause Zimmermann-Laband Syndrome.
authors:
- Bauer CK
- Schneeberger PE
- Kortüm F
- Altmüller J
- Santos-Simarro F
- Baker L
- Keller-Ramey J
- White SM
- Campeau PM
- Gripp KW
- Kutsche K
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.04.012
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/etiology, pathology"
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- CHO Cells
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/etiology, pathology"
- Cricetinae
- Cricetulus
- Female
- "Fibromatosis, Gingival/etiology, pathology"
- Gain of Function Mutation
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/etiology, pathology"
- Humans
- Ion Channel Gating
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Protein Conformation
- Sequence Homology
- "Small-Conductance Calcium-Activated Potassium Channels/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gain-of-Function Mutations in KCNN3 Encoding the Small-Conductance Ca(2+)-Activated K(+) Channel SK3 Cause Zimmermann-Laband Syndrome.
**Authors:** Bauer CK, Schneeberger PE, Kortüm F, Altmüller J, Santos-Simarro F, Baker L, Keller-Ramey J, White SM, Campeau PM, Gripp KW, Kutsche K
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.04.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.04.012)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2019 Jun 6;104(6):1139-1157. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.04.012.
Epub 2019 May 30.

Gain-of-Function Mutations in KCNN3 Encoding the Small-Conductance
Ca(2+)-Activated K(+) Channel SK3 Cause Zimmermann-Laband Syndrome.

Bauer CK(1), Schneeberger PE(2), Kortüm F(2), Altmüller J(3), Santos-Simarro
F(4), Baker L(5), Keller-Ramey J(6), White SM(7), Campeau PM(8), Gripp KW(5),
Kutsche K(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, Germany. Electronic address: cbauer@uke.de.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
20246 Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Cologne Center for Genomics University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany;
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, 50931
Cologne, Germany.
(4)Sección de Genética Clínica, Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular
(INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, CIBERER, ISCIII, 28046 Madrid,
Spain.
(5)Division of Medical Genetics, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children,
Wilmington, DE 19803, USA.
(6)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD 20877, USA.
(7)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia; Department of
Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Sainte-Justine Hospital, University of Montreal,
Montréal, QC H3T 1C5, Canada.
(9)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
20246 Hamburg, Germany. Electronic address: kkutsche@uke.de.

Zimmermann-Laband syndrome (ZLS) is characterized by coarse facial features with
gingival enlargement, intellectual disability (ID), hypertrichosis, and
hypoplasia or aplasia of nails and terminal phalanges. De novo missense
mutations in KCNH1 and KCNK4, encoding K+ channels, have been identified in
subjects with ZLS and ZLS-like phenotype, respectively. We report de novo
missense variants in KCNN3 in three individuals with typical clinical features
of ZLS. KCNN3 (SK3/KCa2.3) constitutes one of three members of the
small-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ (SK) channels that are part of a
multiprotein complex consisting of the pore-forming channel subunits, the
constitutively bound Ca2+ sensor calmodulin, protein kinase CK2, and protein
phosphatase 2A. CK2 modulates Ca2+ sensitivity of the channels by
phosphorylating SK-bound calmodulin. Patch-clamp whole-cell recordings of KCNN3
channel-expressing CHO cells demonstrated that disease-associated mutations
result in gain of function of the mutant channels, characterized by increased
Ca2+ sensitivity leading to faster and more complete activation of KCNN3 mutant
channels. Pretreatment of cells with the CK2 inhibitor
4,5,6,7-tetrabromobenzotriazole revealed basal inhibition of wild-type and
mutant KCNN3 channels by CK2. Analogous experiments with the KCNN3 p.Val450Leu
mutant previously identified in a family with portal hypertension indicated
basal constitutive channel activity and thus a different gain-of-function
mechanism compared to the ZLS-associated mutant channels. With the report on
de novo KCNK4 mutations in subjects with facial dysmorphism, hypertrichosis,
epilepsy, ID, and gingival overgrowth, we propose to combine the phenotypes
caused by mutations in KCNH1, KCNK4, and KCNN3 in a group of neurological
potassium channelopathies caused by an increase in K+ conductance.

Copyright © 2019 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.04.012
PMCID: PMC6562147
PMID: 31155282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
