---
reference_id: "PMID:33634279"
title: Tourette syndrome in children.
authors:
- Eapen V
- Usherwood T
journal: Aust J Gen Pract
year: '2021'
doi: 10.31128/AJGP-10-20-5700
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Child
- Comorbidity
- Humans
- "Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Quality of Life
- "Tourette Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tourette syndrome in children.
**Authors:** Eapen V, Usherwood T
**Journal:** Aust J Gen Pract (2021)
**DOI:** [10.31128/AJGP-10-20-5700](https://doi.org/10.31128/AJGP-10-20-5700)

## Content

1. Aust J Gen Pract. 2021 Mar;50(3):120-125. doi: 10.31128/AJGP-10-20-5700.

Tourette syndrome in children.

Eapen V(1), Usherwood T(2).

Author information:
(1)MBBS, PhD, FRCPsych, FRANZCP, Chair, Infant Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
University of New South Wales, NSW; Head, Academic Unit of Child Psychiatry,
South West Sydney (AUCS), NSW; Stream Director, Early Life Determinants of
Health, Sydney Partnership for Health, Education, Research and Enterprise
(SPHERE), NSW; Director, Program 1, Co-operative Research Centre for Autism
(CRC), Qld; Director, BestSTART-SW (Systems Transformation and Research
Translation @ South West Sydney) Academic Unit, NSW.
(2)Tim Usherwood BSc, MBBS, MD (Res), DMS, FRCP, FRCGP, FRACGP, FAICD, Head,
Westmead Clinical School, The University Of Sydney, NSW; Professor of General
Practice, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, NSW;
Honorary Professorial Fellow, The George Institute for Global Health, Sydney,
NSW.

BACKGROUND: Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (GTS), characterised by motor and
vocal tics, has a prevalence of approximately 1% in school-aged children.
Commonly encountered comorbidities of GTS include attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and obsessive-compulsive behaviour/disorder
(OCB/OCD). Genetic factors play an important part in the aetiology of GTS, and
family members may exhibit tics or related disorders such as ADHD, OCB or OCD.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this article is to present a summary of the current
evidence to assist the assessment and management of GTS in primary care.
DISCUSSION: A comprehensive assessment should include exploration of not only
tics but also associated features and comorbidities. The stigmatising and
impairing nature of tics can have a significant impact on the quality of life
of the young person and their parents/carers, as well as on family functioning.
Management includes education and explanation, behavioural treatments
and (sometimes) medication.

DOI: 10.31128/AJGP-10-20-5700
PMID: 33634279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
