---
reference_id: "PMID:27053340"
title: Progress in therapies for cystic fibrosis.
authors:
- De Boeck K
- Amaral MD
journal: Lancet Respir Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00023-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progress in therapies for cystic fibrosis.
**Authors:** De Boeck K, Amaral MD
**Journal:** Lancet Respir Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00023-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00023-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Respir Med. 2016 Aug;4(8):662-674. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00023-0. 
Epub 2016 Apr 1.

Progress in therapies for cystic fibrosis.

De Boeck K(1), Amaral MD(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Pulmonology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: christiane.deboeck@uzleuven.be.
(2)Faculty of Sciences, Biosystems and Integrative Sciences Institute (BioISI), 
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2016 Aug;4(8):e36. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)30147-3.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2016 Aug;4(8):e39. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)30189-8.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2016 Aug;4(8):e37-e38. doi: 
10.1016/S2213-2600(16)30188-6.

Standard follow-up and symptomatic treatment have allowed most patients with 
cystic fibrosis to live to young adulthood. However, many patients still die 
prematurely from respiratory insufficiency. Hence, further investigations to 
improve these therapies are important and might have relevance for other 
diseases-eg, exploring how to increase airway hydration, how to safely downscale 
the increased inflammatory response in the lung, and how to better combat lung 
infections associated with cystic fibrosis. In parallel, development of 
modulators that target the underlying dysfunction in the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is fast moving forward. Existing 
treatments are specific to certain mutations, or mutation class, in CFTR. An 
effective, although not yet entirely corrective, treatment is available for 
patients with class III mutations, and a treatment with modest effectiveness is 
available for patients who are homozygous for Phe508del, albeit at a very high 
cost. Corrective treatments that are non-specific to mutation class and thus 
applicable to all patients-eg, gene therapy, cell-based therapies, and 
activation of alternative ion channels that bypass CFTR-are being explored, but 
they are still in early stages of development. In view of the large number of 
patients with very rare mutations, a plan to advance personalised biomarkers to 
predict treatment effect is also being investigated and validated.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00023-0
PMID: 27053340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]