---
reference_id: "PMID:39963694"
title: "Shigellosis in an Urban Slum in Kenya: Risk Factors and Antimicrobial Resistance."
authors:
- Ongadi BA
- Aziz AB
- Mbae CK
- Mwangi M
- Kering K
- Khan AI
- Nasrin D
- Ngugi B
- Bundi MM
- Park SE
- Islam MT
- Rickett NY
- Ahmmed F
- Chowdhury F
- Khanam F
- Firoj MG
- Im J
- Haile K
- Ara SI
- Behute MG
- Agampodi S
- Akter A
- Kanungo S
- Zaman K
- Qadri F
- Clemens JD
- Kariuki S
journal: Open Forum Infect Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofaf026
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Shigellosis in an Urban Slum in Kenya: Risk Factors and Antimicrobial Resistance.
**Authors:** Ongadi BA, Aziz AB, Mbae CK, Mwangi M, Kering K, Khan AI, Nasrin D, Ngugi B, Bundi MM, Park SE, Islam MT, Rickett NY, Ahmmed F, Chowdhury F, Khanam F, Firoj MG, Im J, Haile K, Ara SI, Behute MG, Agampodi S, Akter A, Kanungo S, Zaman K, Qadri F, Clemens JD, Kariuki S
**Journal:** Open Forum Infect Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ofid/ofaf026](https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofaf026)

## Content

1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2025 Jan 18;12(2):ofaf026. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofaf026. 
eCollection 2025 Feb.

Shigellosis in an Urban Slum in Kenya: Risk Factors and Antimicrobial 
Resistance.

Ongadi BA(1), Aziz AB(2), Mbae CK(1), Mwangi M(1), Kering K(1), Khan AI(3), 
Nasrin D(4), Ngugi B(1), Bundi MM(1), Park SE(2), Islam MT(3), Rickett NY(2), 
Ahmmed F(3), Chowdhury F(3), Khanam F(3), Firoj MG(3), Im J(5), Haile K(6), Ara 
SI(3), Behute MG(6), Agampodi S(2), Akter A(3), Kanungo S(7), Zaman K(3), Qadri 
F(3), Clemens JD(2), Kariuki S(1).

Author information:
(1)Kenya Medical Research Institute, Nairobi, Kenya.
(2)International Vaccine Institute, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh.
(4)Department of Medicine, Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health, 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(5)Research Investment for Global Health Technology (RIGHT) Foundation, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(6)Armauer Hansen Research Institute, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(7)ICMR-National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases, Kolkata, West 
Bengal, India.

BACKGROUND: Shigella spp are among the notable causes of global diarrheal 
disease and death, accounting for 13.2% of deaths in 2016. Antimicrobial 
resistance complicates shigellosis management. Understanding local disease 
epidemiology is crucial for developing effective preventive strategies, 
including vaccine use.
METHODS: We investigated antimicrobial resistance, risk factors (socioeconomic, 
behavioral, and water, sanitation and hygiene (WaSH), and clinical 
characteristics of Shigella diarrhea in Mukuru informal settlement and 
surrounding villages in Nairobi, Kenya. Patients presenting with diarrhea, 
fever, or both in treatment centers had stool or rectal swab samples cultured, 
and bacteria was identified through biochemical and serologic tests.
RESULTS: The rate of Shigella isolation among the 4689 individuals presenting 
with diarrhea was 1.4% across all ages, with a similar isolation rate (1.5%) 
among children <5 years of age. The majority of the Shigella spp (40 [59.7%]) 
were Shigella flexneri, and the majority of S flexneri (34 of 40 [85%]) were 
resistant to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; however, all were sensitive to 
amoxicillin-clavulanate, ceftazidime, ceftriaxone, and cefpodoxime. The rate of 
multidrug resistance was higher in Shigella sonnei (13 [48.1%]) than in S 
flexneri (3 [7.5%]). Shigella positivity was associated with bloody diarrhea, 
severe/moderate dehydration, coated tongue, and high fever. Consumption of 
street food was also associated with Shigella diarrhea.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite low prevalence, shigellosis still poses a significant 
burden of diarrheal disease, warranting future incidence studies. First-line 
antibiotics against Shigella remain effective, but intermediate resistance to 
azithromycin and ciprofloxacin is a concerning trend. Improving household food 
preparation and handling could potentially reduce Shigella infections.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofaf026
PMCID: PMC11832040
PMID: 39963694

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. The authors 
declare no competing interests.