---
reference_id: "PMID:38452609"
title: "ClinGen variant curation expert panel recommendations for classification of variants in GAMT, GATM and SLC6A8 for cerebral creatine deficiency syndromes."
authors:
- Goldstein J
- Thomas-Wilson A
- Groopman E
- Aggarwal V
- Bianconi S
- Fernandez R
- Hart K
- Longo N
- Liang N
- Reich D
- Wallis H
- Weaver M
- Young S
- Mercimek-Andrews S
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108362
keywords:
- Humans
- "Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Creatine/deficiency, metabolism"
- "Plasma Membrane Neurotransmitter Transport Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- "Amidinotransferases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/genetics, diagnosis"
- Mutation
- "Brain Diseases, Metabolic, Inborn/genetics, diagnosis"
- Phenotype
- Data Curation
- Language Development Disorders
- Movement Disorders/congenital
- Intellectual Disability
- Developmental Disabilities
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins
- Speech Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ClinGen variant curation expert panel recommendations for classification of variants in GAMT, GATM and SLC6A8 for cerebral creatine deficiency syndromes.
**Authors:** Goldstein J, Thomas-Wilson A, Groopman E, Aggarwal V, Bianconi S, Fernandez R, Hart K, Longo N, Liang N, Reich D, Wallis H, Weaver M, Young S, Mercimek-Andrews S
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108362](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108362)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2024 May;142(1):108362. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108362.
Epub  2024 Mar 2.

ClinGen variant curation expert panel recommendations for classification of
variants in GAMT, GATM and SLC6A8 for cerebral creatine deficiency syndromes.

Goldstein J(1), Thomas-Wilson A(2), Groopman E(3), Aggarwal V(4), Bianconi S(5),
Fernandez R(6), Hart K(7), Longo N(8), Liang N(9), Reich D(7), Wallis H(10),
Weaver M(6), Young S(11), Mercimek-Andrews S(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(2)New York Genome Center, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Children's National Hospital, 111 Michigan Ave NW, Washington, DC, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Irving Medical
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Kaiser Permanente, Southern California Permanente Group, CA, USA.
(6)American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)Newborn Screening Program, Utah Public Health Laboratory, Department of
Health and Human Services, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(8)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(9)The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(10)Association for Creatine Deficiencies, Carlsbad, CA, USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC,
USA.
(12)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada. Electronic address: saadet@ualberta.ca.

Cerebral creatine deficiency syndromes (CCDS) are inherited metabolic phenotypes
of creatine synthesis and transport. There are two enzyme deficiencies,
guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT), encoded by GAMT and arginine-glycine
amidinotransferase (AGAT), encoded by GATM, which are involved in the synthesis
of creatine. After synthesis, creatine is taken up by a sodium-dependent
membrane bound creatine transporter (CRTR), encoded by SLC6A8, into all organs.
Creatine uptake is very important especially in high energy demanding organs
such as the brain, and muscle. To classify the pathogenicity of variants in
GAMT, GATM, and SLC6A8, we developed the CCDS Variant Curation Expert Panel
(VCEP) in 2018, supported by The Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen), a National
Institutes of Health (NIH)-funded resource. We developed disease-specific
variant classification guidelines for GAMT-, GATM-, and SLC6A8-related CCDS,
adapted from the American College of Medical Genetics/Association of Molecular
Pathology (ACMG/AMP) variant interpretation guidelines. We applied specific
variant classification guidelines to 30 pilot variants in each of the three
genes that have variants associated with CCDS. Our CCDS VCEP was approved by the
ClinGen Sequence Variant Interpretation Working Group (SVI WG) and Clinical
Domain Oversight Committee in July 2022. We curated 181 variants including 72
variants in GAMT, 45 variants in GATM, and 64 variants in SLC6A8 and submitted
these classifications to ClinVar, a public variant database supported by the
National Center for Biotechnology Information. Missense variants were the most
common variant type in all three genes. We submitted 32 new variants and
reclassified 34 variants with conflicting interpretations. We report specific
phenotype (PP4) using a points system based on the urine and plasma
guanidinoacetate and creatine levels, brain magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS) creatine level, and enzyme activity or creatine uptake in fibroblasts
ranging from PP4, PP4_Moderate and PP4_Strong. Our CCDS VCEP is one of the first
panels applying disease specific variant classification algorithms for an
X-linked disease. The availability of these guidelines and classifications can
guide molecular genetics and genomic laboratories and health care providers to
assess the molecular diagnosis of individuals with a CCDS phenotype.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108362
PMCID: PMC11874059
PMID: 38452609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.
