---
reference_id: "PMID:38437854"
title: Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Dolinger M
- Torres J
- Vermeire S
journal: Lancet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02586-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Dolinger M, Torres J, Vermeire S
**Journal:** Lancet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02586-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02586-2)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2024 Mar 23;403(10432):1177-1191. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02586-2. 
Epub 2024 Mar 1.

Crohn's disease.

Dolinger M(1), Torres J(2), Vermeire S(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York City, NY, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Hospital da Luz, Lisbon, Portugal; Hospital 
Beatriz Ângelo, Loures, Portugal; Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, 
Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospitals Leuven 
and KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
severine.vermeire@uzleuven.be.

Crohn's disease is a chronic inflammatory disease of the gastrointestinal tract 
that might lead to progressive bowel damage and disability. The exact cause of 
Crohn's disease is unknown, but evidence points towards multifactorial events 
causing dysregulation of the innate immune system in genetically susceptible 
people. Commonly affecting the terminal ileum and proximal colon, Crohn's 
disease inflammation is often discontinuous and patchy, segmental, and 
transmural. Identification of characteristic findings on ileocolonoscopy and 
histology remains the diagnostic gold standard, but complete assessment involves 
laboratory abnormalities, including micronutrient deficiencies, cross-sectional 
imaging to identify transmural disease extent, severity and complications, and a 
psychosocial assessment. Treatment strategies for patients with Crohn's disease 
now go beyond achieving clinical remission to include deeper targets of 
endoscopic healing and consideration of adjunctive histological and transmural 
targets to alter disease progression potentially further. The use of early 
effective advanced therapies and development of therapies targeting alternative 
novel pathways with improved safety profiles have resulted in a new era of 
healing in Crohn's disease management. Future combination of advanced therapies 
with diet or other biological drugs and small molecules, together with 
improvements in tight control monitoring tools and predictive biomarkers might 
continue to improve outcomes for patients with Crohn's disease.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02586-2
PMID: 38437854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests MD is a consultant for 
Neurologica, a subsidiary of Samsung Electronics, and Pfizer. He has received 
grant funding from the Helmsley Charitable Trust. JT has received grant support 
from AbbVie and Janssen; payments or honoraria from AbbVie, Janssen, and Pfizer; 
advisory board fees from for AbbVie, Pfizer, and Janssen; and support for 
meetings or travel, or both, from AbbVie. SV has received research support from 
AbbVie, Johnson & Johnson, Pfizer, Galapagos, and Takeda; lecture fees from 
AbbVie, Alimentiv, Arena Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Ferring, Galapagos, Genentech-Roche, Gilead, Janssen, Johnson & Johnson, Lilly, 
Materia Prima, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Pfizer, Takeda, Tillotts Pharma, and Zealand 
Pharma; and consulting fees from AbbVie, AbolerIS Pharma, AgomAb, Alimentiv, 
Arena Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, Avaxia, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, 
CVasThera, Dr Falk Pharma, Ferring, Galapagos, Genentech-Roche, Gilead, GSK, 
Hospira, Imidomics, Janssen, Johnson & Johnson, Lilly, Materia Prima, MiroBio, 
Morphic, MrMHealth, Mundipharma Merck, Pfizer, Prodigest, Progenity, Prometheus, 
Robarts Clinical Trials, Second Genome, Shire, Surrozen, Takeda, Theravance, 
Tillots Pharma, and Zealand Pharma.