---
reference_id: "PMID:26095523"
title: "MELAS syndrome: Clinical manifestations, pathogenesis, and treatment options."
authors:
- El-Hattab AW
- Adesina AM
- Jones J
- Scaglia F
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.06.004
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/genetics, metabolism"
- Arginine/therapeutic use
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/metabolism, therapy"
- Carnitine/therapeutic use
- "Endocrine System Diseases/metabolism, therapy"
- Energy Transfer
- "Gastrointestinal Diseases/metabolism, therapy"
- Humans
- "MELAS Syndrome/pathology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Mitochondria/metabolism, pathology"
- "Muscular Diseases/metabolism, therapy"
- "Nervous System Diseases/metabolism, therapy"
- Nitric Oxide/metabolism
- "RNA, Transfer, Leu/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ubiquinone/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MELAS syndrome: Clinical manifestations, pathogenesis, and treatment options.
**Authors:** El-Hattab AW, Adesina AM, Jones J, Scaglia F
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.06.004)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2015 Sep-Oct;116(1-2):4-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.06.004.
 Epub 2015 Jun 15.

MELAS syndrome: Clinical manifestations, pathogenesis, and treatment options.

El-Hattab AW(1), Adesina AM(2), Jones J(3), Scaglia F(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Genetics and Metabolic Disorders, Department of 
Pediatrics, Tawam Hospital, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX, USA.
(3)Singleton Department of Radiology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, 
USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: fscaglia@bcm.edu.

Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes 
(MELAS) syndrome is one of the most frequent maternally inherited mitochondrial 
disorders. MELAS syndrome is a multi-organ disease with broad manifestations 
including stroke-like episodes, dementia, epilepsy, lactic acidemia, myopathy, 
recurrent headaches, hearing impairment, diabetes, and short stature. The most 
common mutation associated with MELAS syndrome is the m.3243A>G mutation in the 
MT-TL1 gene encoding the mitochondrial tRNA(Leu(UUR)). The m.3243A>G mutation 
results in impaired mitochondrial translation and protein synthesis including 
the mitochondrial electron transport chain complex subunits leading to impaired 
mitochondrial energy production. The inability of dysfunctional mitochondria to 
generate sufficient energy to meet the needs of various organs results in the 
multi-organ dysfunction observed in MELAS syndrome. Energy deficiency can also 
stimulate mitochondrial proliferation in the smooth muscle and endothelial cells 
of small blood vessels leading to angiopathy and impaired blood perfusion in the 
microvasculature of several organs. These events will contribute to the 
complications observed in MELAS syndrome particularly the stroke-like episodes. 
In addition, nitric oxide deficiency occurs in MELAS syndrome and can contribute 
to its complications. There is no specific consensus approach for treating MELAS 
syndrome. Management is largely symptomatic and should involve a 
multidisciplinary team. Unblinded studies showed that l-arginine therapy 
improves stroke-like episode symptoms and decreases the frequency and severity 
of these episodes. Additionally, carnitine and coenzyme Q10 are commonly used in 
MELAS syndrome without proven efficacy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.06.004
PMID: 26095523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]