---
reference_id: "PMID:32374962"
title: Emapalumab in Children with Primary Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis.
authors:
- Locatelli F
- Jordan MB
- Allen C
- Cesaro S
- Rizzari C
- Rao A
- Degar B
- Garrington TP
- Sevilla J
- Putti MC
- Fagioli F
- Ahlmann M
- Dapena Diaz JL
- Henry M
- De Benedetti F
- Grom A
- Lapeyre G
- Jacqmin P
- Ballabio M
- de Min C
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1911326
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age of Onset
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Antibodies, Neutralizing/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Chemokine CXCL9/blood
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Dexamethasone/administration & dosage"
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Infant
- Infections/etiology
- "Interferon-gamma/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Lymphohistiocytosis, Hemophagocytic/complications, drug therapy, mortality, therapy"
- Male
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emapalumab in Children with Primary Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis.
**Authors:** Locatelli F, Jordan MB, Allen C, Cesaro S, Rizzari C, Rao A, Degar B, Garrington TP, Sevilla J, Putti MC, Fagioli F, Ahlmann M, Dapena Diaz JL, Henry M, De Benedetti F, Grom A, Lapeyre G, Jacqmin P, Ballabio M, de Min C
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1911326](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1911326)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2020 May 7;382(19):1811-1822. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1911326.

Emapalumab in Children with Primary Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis.

Locatelli F(1), Jordan MB(1), Allen C(1), Cesaro S(1), Rizzari C(1), Rao A(1), 
Degar B(1), Garrington TP(1), Sevilla J(1), Putti MC(1), Fagioli F(1), Ahlmann 
M(1), Dapena Diaz JL(1), Henry M(1), De Benedetti F(1), Grom A(1), Lapeyre G(1), 
Jacqmin P(1), Ballabio M(1), de Min C(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatrics, Sapienza, University of Rome (F.L.), and 
the Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology (F.L.) and Division of 
Rheumatology (F.D.B.), IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Pediatric 
Hematology-Oncology, Woman and Child Hospital, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria 
Integrata, Verona (S.C.), the Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Unit, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza Brianza per il Bambino e la sua 
Mamma Foundation, Monza (C.R.), the Clinic of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, 
University Hospital of Padova, Padua (M.-C.P.), and the Division of Pediatric 
Onco-Hematology, Regina Margherita Hospital, Turin (F.F.) - all in Italy; the 
Divisions of Immunobiology and Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immune 
Deficiency, Department of Pediatrics (M.B.J.), and the Division of Rheumatology 
(A.G.), Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, and the University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine (M.B.J.) - all in Cincinnati; the Department of 
Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston 
(C.A.); the Department of Hematology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, 
London (A.R.); the Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, 
Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston (B.D.); 
the Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora 
(T.P.G.); the Departments of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology and Hematology and 
Oncology, Fundación para la Investigación Biomédica Hospital Infantil 
Universitario Niño Jesús, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Enfermedades Raras, Madrid (J.S.), and the Department of Pediatric Hematology 
and Oncology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona (J.-L.D.D.); the 
Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Children's Hospital, 
Muenster, Germany (M.A.); the Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Phoenix 
Children's Hospital, Phoenix, AZ (M.H.); NovImmune, Plan-les-Ouates, Switzerland 
(G.L., M.B., C.M.); and MnS Modelling and Simulation, Dinant, Belgium (P.J.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2020 Aug 6;383(6):596-598. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2020754.
    Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2021 Mar;68(3):e28886. doi: 10.1002/pbc.28886.

BACKGROUND: Primary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis is a rare syndrome 
characterized by immune dysregulation and hyperinflammation. It typically 
manifests in infancy and is associated with high mortality.
METHODS: We investigated the efficacy and safety of emapalumab (a human 
anti-interferon-γ antibody), administered with dexamethasone, in an open-label, 
single-group, phase 2-3 study involving patients who had received conventional 
therapy before enrollment (previously treated patients) and previously untreated 
patients who were 18 years of age or younger and had primary hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis. The patients could enter a long-term follow-up study until 
1 year after allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation or until 1 year 
after the last dose of emapalumab, if transplantation was not performed. The 
planned 8-week treatment period could be shortened or extended if needed 
according to the timing of transplantation. The primary efficacy end point was 
the overall response, which was assessed in the previously treated patients 
according to objective clinical and laboratory criteria.
RESULTS: At the cutoff date of July 20, 2017, a total of 34 patients (27 
previously treated patients and 7 previously untreated patients) had received 
emapalumab; 26 patients completed the study. A total of 63% of the previously 
treated patients and 65% of the patients who received an emapalumab infusion had 
a response; these percentages were significantly higher than the prespecified 
null hypothesis of 40% (P = 0.02 and P = 0.005, respectively). In the previously 
treated group, 70% of the patients were able to proceed to transplantation, as 
were 65% of the patients who received emapalumab. At the last observation, 74% 
of the previously treated patients and 71% of the patients who received 
emapalumab were alive. Emapalumab was not associated with any organ toxicity. 
Severe infections developed in 10 patients during emapalumab treatment. 
Emapalumab was discontinued in 1 patient because of disseminated histoplasmosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Emapalumab was an efficacious targeted therapy for patients with 
primary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. (Funded by NovImmune and the 
European Commission; NI-0501-04 and NI-0501-05 ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, 
NCT01818492 and NCT02069899.).

Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1911326
PMID: 32374962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]