---
reference_id: "PMID:40585468"
title: "Immunodeficiency, centromeric instability, and facial anomalies (ICF) syndrome identified by whole-exome sequencing (WES): a case report from a developing country."
authors:
- Joma R
- Radwan S
- Hannoun S
- Hasson J
- Aiesh BM
journal: Oxf Med Case Reports
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/omcr/omaf079
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunodeficiency, centromeric instability, and facial anomalies (ICF) syndrome identified by whole-exome sequencing (WES): a case report from a developing country.
**Authors:** Joma R, Radwan S, Hannoun S, Hasson J, Aiesh BM
**Journal:** Oxf Med Case Reports (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/omcr/omaf079](https://doi.org/10.1093/omcr/omaf079)

## Content

1. Oxf Med Case Reports. 2025 Jun 27;2025(6):omaf079. doi: 10.1093/omcr/omaf079.
eCollection 2025 Jun.

Immunodeficiency, centromeric instability, and facial anomalies (ICF) syndrome
identified by whole-exome sequencing (WES): a case report from a developing
country.

Joma R(1), Radwan S(1), Hannoun S(2), Hasson J(3), Aiesh BM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, An-Najah
National University, Nablus 44839, Palestine.
(2)Department of Pediatric Medicine, PGY2, Pediatric Residency Program, Rafidia
Surgical Hospital, Nablus 44839, Palestine.
(3)Department of Pediatric Medicine, Rafidia Surgical Hospital, Nablus 44839,
Palestine.
(4)Department of Infection Prevention and Control, An-Najah National University
Hospital, Nablus 44839, Palestine.

BACKGROUND: Immunodeficiency, centromeric instability, and facial anomalies
(ICF) syndrome is a rare genetic autosomal recessive disorder that results in
impaired immune system function, instability of the centromeric region of
chromosomes, and distinct facial features. This is the first case report of ICF
in Palestine.
CASE PRESENTATION: A male child with recurrent respiratory tract infections, ear
discharge and facial anomalies. Whole-exome sequencing was performed. A
homozygous missense variant DNMT3B was identified, and the patient was diagnosed
with ICF and was managed successfully with intravenous immunoglobulins.
CONCLUSION: ICF syndrome is a rare genetic disorder that affects the immune
system. It has three common symptoms which are present in most cases. Treatments
like immunoglobulin supplementation or allogeneic stem cell transplantation can
improve the chances of survival and enhance the quality of life.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/omcr/omaf079
PMCID: PMC12202303
PMID: 40585468

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
