---
reference_id: "PMID:27662312"
title: "Stress-Induced Synaptic Dysfunction and Neurotransmitter Release in Alzheimer's Disease: Can Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators be Potential Therapeutic Targets?"
authors:
- Jha SK
- Jha NK
- Kumar D
- Sharma R
- Shrivastava A
- Ambasta RK
- Kumar P
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3233/JAD-160623
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stress-Induced Synaptic Dysfunction and Neurotransmitter Release in Alzheimer's Disease: Can Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators be Potential Therapeutic Targets?
**Authors:** Jha SK, Jha NK, Kumar D, Sharma R, Shrivastava A, Ambasta RK, Kumar P
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-160623](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-160623)

## Content

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;57(4):1017-1039. doi: 10.3233/JAD-160623.

Stress-Induced Synaptic Dysfunction and Neurotransmitter Release in Alzheimer's 
Disease: Can Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators be Potential Therapeutic 
Targets?

Jha SK, Jha NK, Kumar D, Sharma R, Shrivastava A, Ambasta RK, Kumar P.

The communication between neurons at synaptic junctions is an intriguing process 
that monitors the transmission of various electro-chemical signals in the 
central nervous system. Albeit any aberration in the mechanisms associated with 
transmission of these signals leads to loss of synaptic contacts in both the 
neocortex and hippocampus thereby causing insidious cognitive decline and memory 
dysfunction. Compelling evidence suggests that soluble amyloid-β (Aβ) and 
hyperphosphorylated tau serve as toxins in the dysfunction of synaptic 
plasticity and aberrant neurotransmitter (NT) release at synapses consequently 
causing a cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Further, an imbalance 
between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission systems induced by impaired 
redox signaling and altered mitochondrial integrity is also amenable for such 
abnormalities. Defective NT release at the synaptic junction causes several 
detrimental effects associated with altered activity of synaptic proteins, 
transcription factors, Ca2+ homeostasis, and other molecules critical for 
neuronal plasticity. These detrimental effects further disrupt the normal 
homeostasis of neuronal cells and thereby causing synaptic loss. Moreover, the 
precise mechanistic role played by impaired NTs and neuromodulators (NMs) and 
altered redox signaling in synaptic dysfunction remains mysterious, and their 
possible interlink still needs to be investigated. Therefore, this review 
elucidates the intricate role played by both defective NTs/NMs and altered redox 
signaling in synaptopathy. Further, the involvement of numerous pharmacological 
approaches to compensate neurotransmission imbalance has also been discussed, 
which may be considered as a potential therapeutic approach in synaptopathy 
associated with AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-160623
PMID: 27662312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]