---
reference_id: "PMID:38532575"
title: "Long-term outcome of peripheral T-cell lymphomas: Ten-year follow-up of the International Prospective T-cell Project."
authors:
- Civallero M
- Schroers-Martin JG
- Horwitz S
- Manni M
- Stepanishyna Y
- Cabrera ME
- Vose J
- Spina M
- Hitz F
- Nagler A
- Montoto S
- Chiattone C
- Skrypets T
- Perez Saenz MA
- Priolo G
- Luminari S
- Lymboussaki A
- Pavlovsky A
- Marino D
- Liberati M
- Trotman J
- Mannina D
- Federico M
- Advani R
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/bjh.19433
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Peripheral/mortality, therapy, drug therapy"
- Middle Aged
- Male
- Female
- Aged
- Follow-Up Studies
- Adult
- Prospective Studies
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Treatment Outcome
- Prognosis
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term outcome of peripheral T-cell lymphomas: Ten-year follow-up of the International Prospective T-cell Project.
**Authors:** Civallero M, Schroers-Martin JG, Horwitz S, Manni M, Stepanishyna Y, Cabrera ME, Vose J, Spina M, Hitz F, Nagler A, Montoto S, Chiattone C, Skrypets T, Perez Saenz MA, Priolo G, Luminari S, Lymboussaki A, Pavlovsky A, Marino D, Liberati M, Trotman J, Mannina D, Federico M, Advani R
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjh.19433](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjh.19433)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 2024 Jul;205(1):166-174. doi: 10.1111/bjh.19433. Epub 2024 Mar
26.

Long-term outcome of peripheral T-cell lymphomas: Ten-year follow-up of the
International Prospective T-cell Project.

Civallero M(1), Schroers-Martin JG(2), Horwitz S(3), Manni M(4), Stepanishyna
Y(5), Cabrera ME(6), Vose J(7), Spina M(8), Hitz F(9), Nagler A(10), Montoto
S(11), Chiattone C(12), Skrypets T(13), Perez Saenz MA(14), Priolo G(15),
Luminari S(16), Lymboussaki A(1), Pavlovsky A(17), Marino D(18), Liberati M(19),
Trotman J(20), Mannina D(21), Federico M(1), Advani R(2).

Author information:
(1)CHIMOMO Department, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(2)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York, USA.
(4)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences for Children and Adults,
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(5)Department of Bone Marrow Transplant, National Cancer Institute, Kyiv,
Ukraine.
(6)Sección Hematología, Hospital del Salvador, Universidad de Chile, Santiago,
Chile.
(7)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(8)Division of Medical Oncology and Immune-Related Tumors, Centro di Riferimento
Oncologico di Aviano (CRO), IRCCS, Aviano, Italy.
(9)Department of Oncology/Haematology, The Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer
Research, Cantonal Hospital, St Gallen, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv,
Israel.
(11)Department of Haemato-Oncology, St Bartholomew's Hospital, Barts Health NHS
Trust, London, UK.
(12)Higienopolis and Santa Casa Medical School of Sao Paulo, Samaritano
Hospital, São Paulo, Brazil.
(13)Hematology and Cell Therapy Department, IRCCS Istituto Tumori Giovanni Paolo
II, Bari, Italy.
(14)Department of Hematology, Health Research Institute IIS-FJD, Fundacion
Jimenez Diaz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(15)Hematology 2, San Giovanni Battista Hospital and University, Turin, Italy.
(16)Hematology Unit, Azienda USL-IRCCS Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(17)Fundación para Combatir la Leucemia (FUNDALEU), Centro de Hematología
Pavlovsky, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(18)Department of Oncology, Oncology 1 Unit, Veneto Institute of Oncology
IOV-IRCCS, Padova, Italy.
(19)A.O. Santa Maria, S.C. di Oncoematologia di Terni, Università Degli Studi di
Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(20)Concord Repatriation General Hospital, University of Sydney, Concord, New
South Wales, Australia.
(21)Hematology Unit, AO Papardo, Messina, Italy.

Peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) are a heterogeneous group of haematological
cancers with generally poor clinical outcomes. However, a subset of patients
experience durable disease control, and little is known regarding long-term
outcomes. The International T-cell Lymphoma Project (ITCLP) is the largest
prospectively collected cohort of patients with PTCLs, providing insight into
clinical outcomes at academic medical centres globally. We performed a long-term
outcome analysis on patients from the ITCLP with available 10-year follow-up
data (n = 735). The overall response rate to first-line therapy was 68%, while
5- and 10-year overall survival estimates were 49% and 40% respectively. Most
deaths occurred prior to 5 years, and for patients alive at 5 years, the chance
of surviving to 10 years was 84%. However, lymphoma remained the leading cause
of death in the 5- to 10-year period (67%). Low-risk International Prognostic
Index and Prognostic Index for T-cell lymphoma scores both identified patients
with improved survival, while in multivariate analysis, age >60 years and
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 2-4 were associated with
inferior outcomes. The favourable survival seen in patients achieving durable
initial disease control emphasizes the unmet need for optimal front-line
therapeutic approaches in PTCLs.

© 2024 British Society for Haematology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bjh.19433
PMCID: PMC11931637
PMID: 38532575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: S.M.H. has
received research support from ADC Therapeutics, Affimed, Aileron, Celgene,
Daiichi Sankyo, Forty Seven, Inc, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, Millennium/Takeda, Seattle
Genetics, Trillium Therapeutics, and Verastem/SecuraBio; and has been a
consultant for Acrotech Biopharma, ADC Therapeutics, Astex, C4 Therapeutics,
Celgene, Janssen, Kura Oncology, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, Myeloid Therapeutics, ONO
Pharmaceuticals, Seattle Genetics, SecuraBio, Shoreline Biosciences, Inc,
Takeda, Trillium Therapeutics, Tubulis, Verastem, and Vividion Therapeutics. The
remaining authors declare no competing financial interests.
