---
reference_id: "PMID:39001623"
title: "Autosomal Recessive Guanosine Triphosphate Cyclohydrolase I Deficiency: Redefining the Phenotypic Spectrum and Outcomes."
authors:
- Novelli M
- Tolve M
- Quiroz V
- Carducci C
- Bove R
- Ricciardi G
- Yang K
- Manti F
- Pisani F
- Ebrahimi-Fakhari D
- Galosi S
- Leuzzi V
journal: Mov Disord Clin Pract
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/mdc3.14157
keywords:
- Humans
- "Dystonic Disorders/genetics, diagnosis, congenital"
- "GTP Cyclohydrolase/genetics, deficiency, metabolism"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal Recessive Guanosine Triphosphate Cyclohydrolase I Deficiency: Redefining the Phenotypic Spectrum and Outcomes.
**Authors:** Novelli M, Tolve M, Quiroz V, Carducci C, Bove R, Ricciardi G, Yang K, Manti F, Pisani F, Ebrahimi-Fakhari D, Galosi S, Leuzzi V
**Journal:** Mov Disord Clin Pract (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mdc3.14157](https://doi.org/10.1002/mdc3.14157)

## Content

1. Mov Disord Clin Pract. 2024 Sep;11(9):1072-1084. doi: 10.1002/mdc3.14157. Epub
 2024 Jul 12.

Autosomal Recessive Guanosine Triphosphate Cyclohydrolase I Deficiency: 
Redefining the Phenotypic Spectrum and Outcomes.

Novelli M(1), Tolve M(2), Quiroz V(3), Carducci C(2), Bove R(1), Ricciardi G(1), 
Yang K(3), Manti F(1), Pisani F(1), Ebrahimi-Fakhari D(3), Galosi S(1), Leuzzi 
V(1).

Author information:
(1)Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Department of Human Neurosciences, 
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Clinical Pathology Unit, Department of Experimental Medicine, AOU Policlinico 
Umberto I-Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
(3)Movement Disorders Program, Department of Neurology, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: The GCH1 gene encodes the enzyme guanosine triphosphate 
cyclohydrolase I (GTPCH), which catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the 
biosynthesis of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), a critical cofactor in the production 
of monoamine neurotransmitters. Autosomal dominant GTPCH (adGTPCH) deficiency is 
the most common cause of dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD), whereas the recessive 
form (arGTPCH) is an ultrarare and poorly characterized disorder with earlier 
and more complex presentation that may disrupt neurodevelopmental processes. 
Here, we delineated the phenotypic spectrum of ARGTPCHD and investigated the 
predictive value of biochemical and genetic correlates for disease outcome.
OBJECTIVES: The aim was to study 4 new cases of arGTPCH deficiency and 
systematically review patients reported in the literature.
METHODS: Clinical, biochemical, and genetic data and treatment response of 45 
patients are presented.
RESULTS: Three phenotypes were outlined: (1) early-infantile encephalopathic 
phenotype with profound disability (24 of 45 patients), (2) 
dystonia-parkinsonism phenotype with infantile/early-childhood onset of 
developmental stagnation/regression preceding the emergence of movement disorder 
(7 of 45), and (3) late-onset DRD phenotype (14 of 45). All 3 phenotypes were 
responsive to pharmacological treatment, which for the first 2 must be initiated 
early to prevent disabling neurodevelopmental outcomes. A gradient of BH4 defect 
and genetic variant severity characterizes the 3 clinical subgroups. 
Hyperphenylalaninemia was not observed in the second and third groups and was 
associated with a higher likelihood of intellectual disability.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical spectrum of arGTPCH deficiency is a continuum from 
early-onset encephalopathies to classical DRD. Genotype and biochemical 
alterations may allow early diagnosis and predict clinical severity. Early 
treatment remains critical, especially for the most severe patients.

© 2024 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mdc3.14157
PMCID: PMC11452796
PMID: 39001623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]