---
reference_id: "PMID:18243771"
title: A prospective study on malnutrition and quality of life in patients with head and neck cancer.
authors:
- van den Berg MG
- Rasmussen-Conrad EL
- van Nispen L
- van Binsbergen JJ
- Merkx MA
journal: Oral Oncol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2007.11.002
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/therapy"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Female
- Head and Neck Neoplasms/therapy
- Health Status
- Humans
- Male
- Malnutrition/etiology
- Middle Aged
- Nutritional Support/methods
- Prospective Studies
- Quality of Life
- Sickness Impact Profile
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Weight Loss
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A prospective study on malnutrition and quality of life in patients with head and neck cancer.
**Authors:** van den Berg MG, Rasmussen-Conrad EL, van Nispen L, van Binsbergen JJ, Merkx MA
**Journal:** Oral Oncol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.oraloncology.2007.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oraloncology.2007.11.002)

## Content

1. Oral Oncol. 2008 Sep;44(9):830-7. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2007.11.002.
Epub  2008 Feb 20.

A prospective study on malnutrition and quality of life in patients with head 
and neck cancer.

van den Berg MG(1), Rasmussen-Conrad EL, van Nispen L, van Binsbergen JJ, Merkx 
MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dietetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. M.vandenBerg@dieet.umcn.nl

The objective of this observational prospective study in patients with squamous 
cell carcinoma (SCC) of the oral, oropharyngeal and hypopharyngeal cavity was to 
look into the relation between malnutrition (>or=10% unintended weight loss 
within 6 months) and specific quality of life (QoL) parameters longitudinally. 
Bodyweight and QoL were monitored in 47 patients with SCC at diagnosis, end of 
treatment and six months after treatment. EORTC QoLQ-C30 and H&N 35 
questionnaires were used to assess QoL. Significantly lower scores on the global 
QoL during treatment (p=0.01) and revalidation (p=0.02) were found for patients 
who had lost >or=10% compared to patients with <10% loss of weight within 6 
month. Patients with radiotherapy and a treatment modality of radiotherapy with 
surgery or chemotherapy kept their unintended weight loss until the end of 
treatment. Patients with head and neck cancer treated with radiotherapy are 
specifically susceptible to malnutrition during treatment with no improvement in 
body weight or QoL. Professional preventive nutritional support is therefore 
already required on diagnoses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2007.11.002
PMID: 18243771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]