---
reference_id: "PMID:39334579"
title: "Advances in Juvenile Dermatomyositis: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, Treatment and Interstitial Lung Diseases-A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Kobayashi I
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/children11091046
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in Juvenile Dermatomyositis: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, Treatment and Interstitial Lung Diseases-A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Kobayashi I
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children11091046](https://doi.org/10.3390/children11091046)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2024 Aug 27;11(9):1046. doi: 10.3390/children11091046.

Advances in Juvenile Dermatomyositis: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, Treatment and 
Interstitial Lung Diseases-A Narrative Review.

Kobayashi I(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Pediatric Allergy and Rheumatology, KKR Sapporo Medical Center, 
3-40 Hiragishi 1-6, Toyohira-ku, Sapporo 060-0931, Japan.

Juvenile idiopathic inflammatory myopathy (JIIM) is a rare systemic autoimmune 
disease characterized by skeletal muscle weakness with or without a skin rash. 
Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM) is the most common subtype of JIIM, accounting 
for 80% of JIIM. Recent studies identified several myositis-specific 
autoantibodies (MSAs) and myositis-associated autoantibodies (MAAs). Each MSA or 
MAA is associated with distinct clinical features and outcomes, although there 
are several differences in the prevalence of MSA/MAA and autoantibody-phenotype 
relationships between age and ethnic groups. Histopathological studies have 
revealed critical roles of type I interferons and vasculopathy in the 
development of JDM. Serological classification mostly corresponds to 
clinicopathological classification. Novel therapeutic agents, such as biologics 
and Janus kinase inhibitors (JAKi), have been developed; however, to date, there 
is a lack of high-level evidence. As advances in treatment have reduced the 
mortality rate of JIIM, recent studies have focused on medium- and long-term 
outcomes. However, rapidly progressive interstitial lung disease (RP-ILD) 
remains a major cause of death in anti-melanoma differentiation gene 5 
autoantibody-positive JDM. Early diagnosis and intervention using a multi-drug 
regimen is critical for the treatment of RP-ILD. Rituximab and JAKi may reduce 
mortality in patients with JDM-associated RP-ILD refractory to conventional 
therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/children11091046
PMCID: PMC11430821
PMID: 39334579

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflicts of interest.