---
reference_id: "PMID:36720509"
title: "Extrarenal rhabdoid tumour of axillary soft tissue: a diagnostic challenge resolved by immunohistochemistry."
authors:
- Buch AC
- Bhuibhar G
- Londhe M
- Dhaliwal S
- Gurwale S
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2022-254438
keywords:
- Infant
- Child
- Humans
- Female
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- SMARCB1 Protein/genetics
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- Immunohistochemistry
- Sarcoma/pathology
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extrarenal rhabdoid tumour of axillary soft tissue: a diagnostic challenge resolved by immunohistochemistry.
**Authors:** Buch AC, Bhuibhar G, Londhe M, Dhaliwal S, Gurwale S
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2022-254438](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2022-254438)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2023 Jan 31;16(1):e254438. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2022-254438.

Extrarenal rhabdoid tumour of axillary soft tissue: a diagnostic challenge 
resolved by immunohistochemistry.

Buch AC(1), Bhuibhar G(1), Londhe M(1), Dhaliwal S(2), Gurwale S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Dr D Y Patil Medical College Hospital and Research 
Centre, Dr D Y Patil Vidyapeeth, Pune, Maharashtra, India.
(2)Department of Pathology, Dr D Y Patil Medical College Hospital and Research 
Centre, Dr D Y Patil Vidyapeeth, Pune, Maharashtra, India 
sargam.dhaliwal@gmail.com.

Extrarenal rhabdoid tumour of soft tissue in children is a rare tumour 
associated with poor prognosis. It is a heterogeneous group of aggressive 
tumours with distinct histopathological and immunohistochemistry findings. The 
tumour is characterised by diffuse proliferation of rhabdoid cells with hyaline 
like inclusion bodies. Defining feature is aberration of INI1/SMARCB1 gene 
located at chromosome 22q11.2. We report one such rare case in a female infant 
presenting as left axillary mass.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2022-254438
PMCID: PMC9890742
PMID: 36720509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.