---
reference_id: "PMID:38159274"
title: ATM-deficiency-induced microglial activation promotes neurodegeneration in ataxia-telangiectasia.
authors:
- Lai J
- Demirbas D
- Kim J
- Jeffries AM
- Tolles A
- Park J
- Chittenden TW
- Buckley PG
- Yu TW
- Lodato MA
- Lee EA
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113622
keywords:
- Humans
- Ataxia Telangiectasia/genetics
- Microglia/metabolism
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurons/metabolism
- Cytokines/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ATM-deficiency-induced microglial activation promotes neurodegeneration in ataxia-telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Lai J, Demirbas D, Kim J, Jeffries AM, Tolles A, Park J, Chittenden TW, Buckley PG, Yu TW, Lodato MA, Lee EA
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113622](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113622)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2024 Jan 23;43(1):113622. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113622. Epub
2023  Dec 29.

ATM-deficiency-induced microglial activation promotes neurodegeneration in
ataxia-telangiectasia.

Lai J(1), Demirbas D(2), Kim J(2), Jeffries AM(3), Tolles A(3), Park J(2),
Chittenden TW(4), Buckley PG(5), Yu TW(2), Lodato MA(6), Lee EA(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; The Manton Center for Orphan Disease
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Program in Neuroscience, Harvard
University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; The Manton Center for Orphan Disease
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Cancer Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(4)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Computational Statistics and
Bioinformatics Group, Genuity AI Research Institute, Genuity Science, Boston, MA
02114, USA.
(5)Genuity Genomics Centre, Genuity Science, D18 K7W4 Dublin, Ireland.
(6)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Cancer Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. Electronic address:
michael.lodato@umassmed.edu.
(7)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; The Manton Center for Orphan Disease
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address:
ealee@childrens.harvard.edu.

While ATM loss of function has long been identified as the genetic cause of
ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), how it leads to selective and progressive
degeneration of cerebellar Purkinje and granule neurons remains unclear. ATM
expression is enriched in microglia throughout cerebellar development and
adulthood. Here, we find evidence of microglial inflammation in the cerebellum
of patients with A-T using single-nucleus RNA sequencing. Pseudotime analysis
revealed that activation of A-T microglia preceded upregulation of
apoptosis-related genes in granule and Purkinje neurons and that microglia
exhibited increased neurotoxic cytokine signaling to granule and Purkinje
neurons in A-T. To confirm these findings experimentally, we performed
transcriptomic profiling of A-T induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived
microglia, which revealed cell-intrinsic microglial activation of cytokine
production and innate immune response pathways compared to controls.
Furthermore, A-T microglia co-culture with either control or A-T iPSC-derived
neurons was sufficient to induce cytotoxicity. Taken together, these studies
reveal that cell-intrinsic microglial activation may promote neurodegeneration
in A-T.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113622
PMCID: PMC10908398
PMID: 38159274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
