---
reference_id: "PMID:23132696"
title: "Novel H6PDH mutations in two girls with premature adrenarche: 'apparent' and 'true' CRD can be differentiated by urinary steroid profiling."
authors:
- Lavery GG
- Idkowiak J
- Sherlock M
- Bujalska I
- Ride JP
- Saqib K
- Hartmann MF
- Hughes B
- Wudy SA
- De Schepper J
- Arlt W
- Krone N
- Shackleton CH
- Walker EA
- Stewart PM
journal: Eur J Endocrinol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1530/EJE-12-0628
keywords:
- "11-beta-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenases/deficiency, genetics, urine"
- "46, XX Disorders of Sex Development/diagnosis, genetics, urine"
- Adolescent
- "Adrenarche/genetics, urine"
- Adult
- Carbohydrate Dehydrogenases/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- "Hirsutism/congenital, diagnosis, genetics, urine"
- Humans
- Hypothalamo-Hypophyseal System/metabolism
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pituitary-Adrenal System/metabolism
- "Steroid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics, urine"
- Steroids/urine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel H6PDH mutations in two girls with premature adrenarche: 'apparent' and 'true' CRD can be differentiated by urinary steroid profiling.
**Authors:** Lavery GG, Idkowiak J, Sherlock M, Bujalska I, Ride JP, Saqib K, Hartmann MF, Hughes B, Wudy SA, De Schepper J, Arlt W, Krone N, Shackleton CH, Walker EA, Stewart PM
**Journal:** Eur J Endocrinol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EJE-12-0628](https://doi.org/10.1530/EJE-12-0628)

## Content

1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013 Feb 1;168(2):K19-26. doi: 10.1530/EJE-12-0628. Print
2013  Feb.

Novel H6PDH mutations in two girls with premature adrenarche: 'apparent' and
'true' CRD can be differentiated by urinary steroid profiling.

Lavery GG(1), Idkowiak J, Sherlock M, Bujalska I, Ride JP, Saqib K, Hartmann MF,
Hughes B, Wudy SA, De Schepper J, Arlt W, Krone N, Shackleton CH, Walker EA,
Stewart PM.

Author information:
(1)CEDAM Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Institute of
Biomedical Research, School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

CONTEXT: Inactivating mutations in the enzyme hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(H6PDH, encoded by H6PD) cause apparent cortisone reductase deficiency (ACRD).
H6PDH generates cofactor NADPH for 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1
(11β-HSD1, encoded by HSD11B1) oxo-reductase activity, converting cortisone to
cortisol. Inactivating mutations in HSD11B1 cause true cortisone reductase
deficiency (CRD). Both ACRD and CRD present with hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis activation and adrenal hyperandrogenism.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the clinical, biochemical and molecular characteristics
of two additional female children with ACRD and to illustrate the diagnostic
value of urinary steroid profiling in identifying and differentiating a total of
six ACRD and four CRD cases.
DESIGN: Clinical, biochemical and genetic assessment of two female patients
presenting during childhood. In addition, results of urinary steroid profiling
in a total of ten ACRD/CRD patients were compared to identify distinguishing
characteristics.
RESULTS: Case 1 was compound heterozygous for R109AfsX3 and a novel P146L
missense mutation in H6PD. Case 2 was compound heterozygous for novel nonsense
mutations Q325X and Y446X in H6PD. Mutant expression studies confirmed loss of
H6PDH activity in both cases. Urinary steroid metabolite profiling by gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry suggested ACRD in both cases. In addition, we
were able to establish a steroid metabolite signature differentiating ACRD and
CRD, providing a basis for genetic diagnosis and future individualised
management.
CONCLUSIONS: Steroid profile analysis of a 24-h urine collection provides a
diagnostic method for discriminating between ACRD and CRD. This will provide a
useful tool in stratifying unresolved adrenal hyperandrogenism in children with
premature adrenarche and adult females with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).

DOI: 10.1530/EJE-12-0628
PMCID: PMC3547489
PMID: 23132696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
