---
reference_id: "PMID:20224883"
title: "Alcohol drinking, cigarette smoking, and the development of squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: molecular mechanisms of carcinogenesis."
authors:
- Toh Y
- Oki E
- Ohgaki K
- Sakamoto Y
- Ito S
- Egashira A
- Saeki H
- Kakeji Y
- Morita M
- Sakaguchi Y
- Okamura T
- Maehara Y
journal: Int J Clin Oncol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s10147-010-0057-6
keywords:
- "Alcohol Drinking/adverse effects, epidemiology"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/epidemiology, etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/chemically induced, genetics, metabolism"
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- "Smoking/adverse effects, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alcohol drinking, cigarette smoking, and the development of squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: molecular mechanisms of carcinogenesis.
**Authors:** Toh Y, Oki E, Ohgaki K, Sakamoto Y, Ito S, Egashira A, Saeki H, Kakeji Y, Morita M, Sakaguchi Y, Okamura T, Maehara Y
**Journal:** Int J Clin Oncol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10147-010-0057-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10147-010-0057-6)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr;15(2):135-44. doi: 10.1007/s10147-010-0057-6. Epub
2010 Mar 12.

Alcohol drinking, cigarette smoking, and the development of squamous cell
carcinoma of the esophagus: molecular mechanisms of carcinogenesis.

Toh Y(1), Oki E, Ohgaki K, Sakamoto Y, Ito S, Egashira A, Saeki H, Kakeji Y,
Morita M, Sakaguchi Y, Okamura T, Maehara Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, National Kyushu Cancer Center,
3-1-1 Notame, Minami-ku, Fukuoka 811-1395, Japan. ytoh@nk-cc.go.jp

Esophageal cancer is the eighth most common incident cancer in the world and
ranks sixth among all cancers in mortality. Esophageal cancers are classified
into two histological types; esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), and
adenocarcinoma, and the incidences of these types show a striking variety of
geographic distribution, possibly reflecting differences in exposure to specific
environmental factors. Both alcohol consumption and cigarette smoking are major
risk factors for the development of ESCC. Acetaldehyde is the most toxic ethanol
metabolite in alcohol-associated carcinogenesis, while ethanol itself stimulates
carcinogenesis by inhibiting DNA methylation and by interacting with retinoid
metabolism. Cigarette smoke contains more than 60 carcinogens and there are
strong links between some of these carcinogens and various smoking-induced
cancers; these mechanisms are well established. Synergistic effects of cigarette
smoking and alcohol consumption are also observed in carcinogenesis of the upper
aerodigestive tract. Of note, intensive molecular biological studies have
revealed the molecular mechanisms involved in the development of ESCC, including
genetic and epigenetic alterations. However, a wide range of molecular changes
is associated with ESCC, possibly because the esophagus is exposed to many kinds
of carcinogens including alcohol and cigarette smoke, and it remains unclear
which alterations are the most critical for esophageal carcinogenesis. This
brief review summarizes the general mechanisms of alcohol- and smoking-induced
carcinogenesis and then discusses the mechanisms of the development of ESCC,
with special attention to alcohol consumption and cigarette smoking.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-010-0057-6
PMID: 20224883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
