---
reference_id: PMID:20507938
title: Plasticity of xyloglucan composition in bean (Phaseolus vulgaris)-cultured cells during habituation and dehabituation to lethal concentrations of dichlobenil.
authors:
- Alonso-Simón A
- Neumetzler L
- García-Angulo P
- Encina AE
- Acebes JL
- Álvarez JM
- Hayashi T
journal: Mol Plant
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/mp/ssq011
keywords:
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Chromatography, Gel"
- Glucans/metabolism
- Nitriles/pharmacology
- "Phaseolus/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- Xylans/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plasticity of xyloglucan composition in bean (Phaseolus vulgaris)-cultured cells during habituation and dehabituation to lethal concentrations of dichlobenil.
**Authors:** Alonso-Simón A, Neumetzler L, García-Angulo P, Encina AE, Acebes JL, Álvarez JM, Hayashi T
**Journal:** Mol Plant (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/mp/ssq011](https://doi.org/10.1093/mp/ssq011)

## Content

1. Mol Plant. 2010 May;3(3):603-9. doi: 10.1093/mp/ssq011.

Plasticity of xyloglucan composition in bean (Phaseolus vulgaris)-cultured cells 
during habituation and dehabituation to lethal concentrations of dichlobenil.

Alonso-Simón A(1), Neumetzler L, García-Angulo P, Encina AE, Acebes JL, Álvarez 
JM, Hayashi T.

Author information:
(1)Área de Fisiología Vegetal, Universidad de León, E-24071, León, Spain.

Bean cells that have been habituated to grow in a lethal concentration (12 μM) 
of 2,6-dichlorobenzonitrile (dichlobenil or DCB, a cellulose biosynthesis 
inhibitor) are known to have decreased cellulose content in their cell walls. 
Xyloglucan, which is bound to cellulose and together with it forms the main 
loading network of plant cell walls, has also been described to decrease in 
habituated cells, but whether the change on cellulose affects the xyloglucan 
structure besides its abundance has not been analyzed. Fragmentation analysis 
with xyloglucan-specific endoglucanase (XEG) and endocellulase revealed that 
habituation to DCB caused a change in the fine structure of xyloglucan, namely a 
decrease in fucosyl residues attached to the galactosyl-xylosyl residues along 
the glucan backbone. After the removal of herbicide from the medium 
(dehabituated cells), xyloglucan recovered its fucosyl residues. In addition, 
some cello-oligosaccharides could be detected only in habituated cells' 
xyloglucan digested by XEG and endocellulase, corresponding to a glucan 
covalently bound or co-precipitated with the hemicelluloses. These results show 
that structural flexibility of cell walls relies in part on the plasticity of 
xyloglucan composition and opens up new perspectives to further research in this 
field.

DOI: 10.1093/mp/ssq011
PMID: 20507938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]