---
reference_id: "PMID:40240062"
title: "Cellular and molecular mechanisms in the pathogenesis of pouchitis: more than just the microbiota."
authors:
- Braga-Neto MB
- Qazi T
- Fulmer C
- Holubar SD
- Fiocchi C
- Ivanov AI
- Rieder F
journal: Gut
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2024-334445
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular and molecular mechanisms in the pathogenesis of pouchitis: more than just the microbiota.
**Authors:** Braga-Neto MB, Qazi T, Fulmer C, Holubar SD, Fiocchi C, Ivanov AI, Rieder F
**Journal:** Gut (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gutjnl-2024-334445](https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2024-334445)

## Content

1. Gut. 2025 Oct 8;74(11):1905-1915. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2024-334445.

Cellular and molecular mechanisms in the pathogenesis of pouchitis: more than 
just the microbiota.

Braga-Neto MB(1)(2), Qazi T(3), Fulmer C(4), Holubar SD(5), Fiocchi C(2), Ivanov 
AI(2), Rieder F(3)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, Digestive Disease 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA braganm@ccf.org.
(2)Department of Inflammation and Immunity, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, Digestive Disease 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Robert J. Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory Medicine 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Digestive Disease Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(6)Program for Global Translational Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Pouchitis, defined as inflammation of the ileal pouch, is the most common 
complication following restorative proctocolectomy for refractory ulcerative 
colitis. Antibiotics remain the first line of therapy for pouchitis, but the 
majority of patients develop subsequent episodes and some are refractory to 
antibiotic therapy. This highlights the need for more effective treatment 
options and points to a more complex pathophysiology beyond the role of th pouch 
microbiome, similar to what is seen in inflammatory bowel disease. In this 
review, we outline the putative mechanisms of pouchitis, including genetic 
predisposition, microbiome alterations, dysfunction of the intestinal barrier 
and the immune system and review the available animal models of pouchitis. In 
addition, we introduce the concept of pouchitis as a possible transmural disease 
and discuss the potential role of non-immune cells, including stromal cells, in 
perpetuating inflammation and intestinal barrier dysfunction. We discuss future 
directions, implications for novel therapies and propose novel multicellular 
disease models that can better capture the complexity of pouchitis pathogenesis.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2025. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2024-334445
PMCID: PMC12240151
PMID: 40240062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: MBBN, CF and AI: none; TQ: 
consultant for AbbVie, Celgene/Bristol Myers Squibb, Prometheus Biosciences and 
Janssen. SH: consultant to Takeda. FR: Advisory board or consulting: Adiso, 
Adnovate, Agomab, Allergan, AbbVie, Arena, Astra Zeneca, Bausch & Lomb, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Celgene/BMS, Celltrion, CDISC, Celsius, Cowen, 89Bio, 
Eugit, Ferring, Galapagos, Galmed, Genentech, Gilead, Gossamer, Granite, 
Guidepoint, Helmsley, Horizon Therapeutics, Image Analysis, Index Pharma, 
Landos, Jannsen, Koutif, Mestag, Metacrine, Mirum, Mobius, Mopac, Morphic, Myka 
Labs, Organovo, Origo, Palisade, Pfizer, Pliant, Prometheus Biosciences, 
Receptos, RedX, Roche, Samsung, Sanofi, Surmodics, Surrozen, Takeda, Techlab, 
Teva, Theravance, Thetis, Tr1x Bio, UCB, Ysios.