---
reference_id: "PMID:10190819"
title: Mutational analysis and genotype-phenotype correlation of 29 unrelated Japanese patients with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
authors:
- Takano H
- Koike R
- Onodera O
- Sasaki R
- Tsuji S
journal: Arch Neurol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1001/archneur.56.3.295
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/genetics, pathology"
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Blotting, Southern"
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- X Chromosome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutational analysis and genotype-phenotype correlation of 29 unrelated Japanese patients with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Takano H, Koike R, Onodera O, Sasaki R, Tsuji S
**Journal:** Arch Neurol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archneur.56.3.295](https://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.56.3.295)

## Content

1. Arch Neurol. 1999 Mar;56(3):295-300. doi: 10.1001/archneur.56.3.295.

Mutational analysis and genotype-phenotype correlation of 29 unrelated Japanese
patients with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.

Takano H(1), Koike R, Onodera O, Sasaki R, Tsuji S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, Japan.

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 1999 Mar;56(3):273-5. doi: 10.1001/archneur.56.3.273.

BACKGROUND: X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is an inherited disease
characterized by progressive neurologic dysfunction, occasionally associated
with adrenal insufficiency. The classic form of ALD usually has onset in
childhood (childhood cerebral ALD), with rapid neurologic deterioration leading
to a vegetative state. Adult-onset cerebral ALD also presents with rapidly
progressive neurologic dysfunction. Milder phenotypes such as
adrenomyeloneuropathy and Addison disease only also have been recognized.
Despite discovery of the causative gene, a molecular basis for the diverse
clinical presentations remains to be elucidated.
OBJECTIVES: To conduct mutational analyses in 29 Japanese patients with ALD from
29 unrelated families, to obtain knowledge of the spectrum of mutations in this
gene, and to study genotype-phenotype correlations in Japanese patients.
METHODS: The 29 patients comprised 13 patients with childhood cerebral ALD, 11
patients with adult-onset cerebral ALD, and 5 patients with
adrenomyeloneuropathy. We conducted detailed mutational analyses of 29 unrelated
Japanese patients with ALD by genomic Southern blot analysis and direct
nucleotide sequence analysis of reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
products derived from total RNA that was extracted from cultured skin
fibroblasts, lymphoblastoid cells, or peripheral blood leukocytes.
RESULTS: Three patients with adult-onset cerebral ALD were identified as having
large genomic rearrangements. The remaining 26 patients were identified as
having 21 independent mutations, including 12 novel mutations resulting in small
nucleotide alterations in the ALD gene. Eighteen (69%) of 26 mutations were
missense mutations. Most missense mutations involved amino acids conserved in
homologous gene products, including PMP70, mALDRP, and Pxa1p. The AG
dinucleotide deletion at position 1081-1082, which has been reported previously
to be the most common mutation in white patients (12%-17%), was also identified
as the most common mutation in Japanese patients (12%). All phenotypes were
associated with mutations resulting in protein truncation or subtle amino acid
changes. There were no differences in phenotypic expressions between missense
mutations involving conserved amino acids and those involving nonconserved amino
acids.
CONCLUSIONS: There are no obvious correlations between the phenotypes of
patients with ALD and their genotypes, suggesting that other genetic or
environmental factors modify the phenotypic expressions of ALD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.56.3.295
PMID: 10190819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
