---
reference_id: "PMID:35235282"
title: "Thyroid and Parathyroid Conditions: Hypothyroidism."
authors:
- Christian N
- Rhodes MA
- Adams CS
- Bragg S
journal: FP Essent
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thyroid and Parathyroid Conditions: Hypothyroidism.
**Authors:** Christian N, Rhodes MA, Adams CS, Bragg S
**Journal:** FP Essent (2022)

## Content

1. FP Essent. 2022 Mar;514:18-23.

Thyroid and Parathyroid Conditions: Hypothyroidism.

Christian N(1), Rhodes MA(2), Adams CS(1), Bragg S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine - College of Medicine - Medical University of 
South Carolina, 135 Cannon St Suite 405 MSC 192, Charleston, SC 29425.
(2)Department of Family and Preventive Medicine - School of Medicine Columbia - 
University of South Carolina, 6311 Garners Ferry Road, Columbia, SC 29209.

Hypothyroidism is caused by deficient thyroid hormone production secondary to 
autoimmune disease or insufficient iodine consumption or as a complication of 
hyperthyroidism management. Signs and symptoms include fatigue, weight gain, dry 
skin, constipation, and cold intolerance. The U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force found insufficient evidence to recommend for or against screening for 
hypothyroidism, but some organizations support screening in special populations. 
If hypothyroidism is suspected, initial laboratory evaluation consists of a 
serum thyrotropin (TSH) measurement with reflex testing of free thyroxine (T4). 
Thyroid function tests must be interpreted carefully because acute illness, 
diet, and drugs may alter values. Overt hypothyroidism occurs when a patient has 
an elevated TSH level and a low free T4 level with symptoms of hypothyroidism. 
Management includes thyroid hormone replacement, ideally levothyroxine. 
Subclinical hypothyroidism is characterized by an elevated TSH level with a 
normal T4 value. The decision to treat subclinical hypothyroidism should be 
based on patient characteristics and shared decision-making discussions. Special 
consideration should be taken in treating patients with high-risk conditions, 
including heart disease, pregnancy, and myxedema coma, and in patients requiring 
high-dose levothyroxine. Thyroid hormone should be titrated based on goal TSH 
values, symptoms, and potential treatment adverse effects.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required 
for reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.

PMID: 35235282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]