---
reference_id: "PMID:35820244"
title: "Differential activity of avapritinib in patients with metastases from mucosal melanoma and thymic carcinoma harbouring KIT exon 17 mutations: Initial experience from a Compassionate Use Program in Italy."
authors:
- Corti C
- Conforti F
- Pala L
- Catania C
- Cocorocchio E
- Ferrucci PF
- Curigliano G
- Queirolo P
- de Pas T
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2022.06.015
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Compassionate Use Trials
- Exons
- Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors/drug therapy
- Humans
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics"
- Mutation
- Precision Medicine
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/genetics, metabolism"
- Pyrazoles
- Pyrroles
- Thymoma/drug therapy
- Thymus Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Triazines
- Avapritinib
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential activity of avapritinib in patients with metastases from mucosal melanoma and thymic carcinoma harbouring KIT exon 17 mutations: Initial experience from a Compassionate Use Program in Italy.
**Authors:** Corti C, Conforti F, Pala L, Catania C, Cocorocchio E, Ferrucci PF, Curigliano G, Queirolo P, de Pas T
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2022.06.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2022.06.015)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2022 Sep;172:332-339. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2022.06.015. Epub 2022
 Jul 9.

Differential activity of avapritinib in patients with metastases from mucosal 
melanoma and thymic carcinoma harbouring KIT exon 17 mutations: Initial 
experience from a Compassionate Use Program in Italy.

Corti C(1), Conforti F(2), Pala L(2), Catania C(3), Cocorocchio E(4), Ferrucci 
PF(5), Curigliano G(1), Queirolo P(2), de Pas T(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of New Drugs and Early Drug Development for Innovative Therapies, 
European Institute of Oncology, IRCCS, Milan, Italy; Department of Oncology and 
Haematology (DIPO), University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(2)Division of Melanoma, Sarcomas and Rare Tumors, European Institute of 
Oncology, IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(3)Division of Thoracic Oncology, IEO, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, 
Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Hemato-Oncology, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, 20141 
Milan, Italy.
(5)Cancer Biotherapy Unit, Department of Experimental Oncology, European 
Institute of Oncology IRCCS, 20141 Milan, Italy.
(6)Division of Melanoma, Sarcomas and Rare Tumors, European Institute of 
Oncology, IRCCS, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: tommaso.depas@ieo.it.

INTRODUCTION: Proto-oncogene KIT is the gene encoding the receptor tyrosine 
kinase protein KIT. Activating mutations are found in 2.9% of neoplasms, with 
the highest prevalence in gastrointestinal stromal tumour. Exon 17 mutations 
typically alter the kinase activation loop and are relatively rare, representing 
11.7% of all activating KIT mutations. Recently, KIT exon 17 mutants turned out 
to be a potential molecular target for the type 1 kinase inhibitor avapritinib 
(BLU-285).
OBJECTIVE: In this framework, we aimed at investigating the potential activity 
of avapritinib in mucosal melanoma and thymic carcinoma, two disease histologies 
with dismal prognosis, currently lacking evidence-based second line treatment 
options and in which KIT exon 17 activating mutations could represent a relevant 
therapeutic target.
RESULTS: In this series, we report the only four cases of patients affected by 
exon 17 mutant mucosal melanoma and thymic carcinoma that have been treated in 
Italy with avapritinib within a Compassionate Use Program. Two patients 
harboured mucosal melanoma and the other two were diagnosed with thymic 
carcinoma. We describe a differential activity of avapritinib (3/4 patients 
responded, 1/4 did not respond), along with possible hypotheses to justify such 
differences and potential implications for precision oncology.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, the inactivity of imatinib on KIT exon 17 
mutations, the general low clinical efficacy of immunotherapy, as well as the 
consequent formal lack of standard available and active second line systemic 
treatments in both mucosal melanoma and thymic carcinoma, support the 
implementation of avapritinib in the therapeutic armamentarium, even though 
further prospective evidence is warranted.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2022.06.015
PMID: 35820244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]