---
reference_id: "PMID:25465824"
title: Cardiac manifestations of primary mitochondrial disorders.
authors:
- Finsterer J
- Kothari S
journal: Int J Cardiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.11.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac manifestations of primary mitochondrial disorders.
**Authors:** Finsterer J, Kothari S
**Journal:** Int J Cardiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.11.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.11.014)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiol. 2014 Dec 20;177(3):754-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.11.014. 
Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Cardiac manifestations of primary mitochondrial disorders.

Finsterer J(1), Kothari S(2).

Author information:
(1)Krankenanstalt Rudolfstiftung, Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: 
fifigs1@yahoo.de.
(2)NIMHANS, Bangalore, India.

OBJECTIVES: One of the most frequently affected organs in mitochondrial 
disorders (MIDs), defined as hereditary diseases due to affection of the 
mitochondrial energy metabolism, is the heart. Cardiac involvement (CI) in MIDs 
has therapeutic and prognostic implications. This review aims at summarizing and 
discussing the various cardiac manifestations in MIDs.
METHODS: Data for this review were identified by searches of MEDLINE, Current 
Contents, and PubMed using appropriate search terms.
RESULTS: CI in MIDs may be classified according to various different criteria. 
In the present review cardiac abnormalities in MIDs are discussed according to 
their frequency with which they occur. CI in MIDs includes cardiomyopathy, 
arrhythmias, heart failure, pulmonary hypertension, dilation of the aortic root, 
pericardial effusion, coronary heart disease, autonomous nervous system 
dysfunction, congenital heart defects, or sudden cardiac death. The most 
frequent among the cardiomyopathies is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, followed by 
dilated cardiomyopathy, and noncompaction.
CONCLUSIONS: CI in MID is more variable and prevalent than previously thought. 
All tissues of the heart may be variably affected. The most frequently affected 
tissue is the myocardium. MIDs should be included in the differential diagnoses 
of cardiac disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.11.014
PMID: 25465824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]