---
reference_id: "PMID:19026621"
title: New dengue antibody assay with unique differential detection of IgG and IgM antibodies.
authors:
- Rivetz B
- Siman-Tov D
- Ambal E
- Jaramillo AC
- Ben-Zvi A
- Tartakovsky B
- Fish F
journal: Clin Biochem
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2008.10.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New dengue antibody assay with unique differential detection of IgG and IgM antibodies.
**Authors:** Rivetz B, Siman-Tov D, Ambal E, Jaramillo AC, Ben-Zvi A, Tartakovsky B, Fish F
**Journal:** Clin Biochem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2008.10.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2008.10.017)

## Content

1. Clin Biochem. 2009 Feb;42(3):180-4. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2008.10.017.
Epub  2008 Nov 6.

New dengue antibody assay with unique differential detection of IgG and IgM 
antibodies.

Rivetz B(1), Siman-Tov D, Ambal E, Jaramillo AC, Ben-Zvi A, Tartakovsky B, Fish 
F.

Author information:
(1)Orgenics Ltd., 5 Dan St., Yavne 70650, Israel. baruch@orgenics.co.il

Comment in
    Clin Biochem. 2010 Mar;43(4-5):537; author reply 538. doi: 
10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.08.008.

OBJECTIVES: Most of the serological methods, traditional and recent, that have 
been developed to assess laboratory confirmation of dengue infection, suffer 
from the need to use separate tests for IgM and for IgG and the need for paired 
serum specimens in order to establish a clinical interpretation. Moreover, most 
of the IgG tests ignore early convalescence as well as past exposure. The 
objectives of this study is to demonstrate the advantages of the ImmunoComb 
Dengue BiSpot, a new dengue antibody assay, that detects simultaneously both 
dengue-specific IgM and IgG, in determining type and status of infection in a 
single test.
DESIGNS AND METHODS: Single and paired positive and negative specimens obtained 
from various dengue-high prevalent regions and from dengue-free areas were used. 
The specimens were comprised of admission samples of suspected patients and 
secondary dengue infection individuals, a group of hospital patients, 
asymptomatic to dengue who originated from dengue high prevalence areas and 
dengue-negative volunteers. All samples were tested by the ImmunoComb Dengue 
BiSpot kit along with the gold standard assays of Hemagglutination-inhibition 
(HAI) and MAC ELISA.
RESULTS: Testing 365 gold standard positive specimens from different regions, 
the ImmunoComb Dengue BiSpot kit revealed sensitivity for IgM of 97.5% and 99.1% 
for IgG. The IgG was segregated into 2 groups: 86.6% for high titer and 12.5% 
for low titer of IgG. The overall sensitivity was 98.9%. The overall specificity 
of the kit, testing 657 samples, mostly from dengue-free area was 97.9%. The 
higher diagnostic resolution of the Dengue BiSpot test was demonstrated when the 
performance of the kit on the various groups was compared to the gold standard 
tests and the dengue status was determined in paired specimens by the new assay.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present studies demonstrate the advantages of 
ImmunoComb Dengue BiSpot assay as an alternate strategy for the determination of 
dengue infection status. The combined use of IgM and IgG to discriminate between 
primary and secondary infections, on one hand, and providing high resolution in 
distinction of convalescence stage and past infection, on the other hand, endow 
the kit with improved capacity in assessing the clinical status of a tested 
individual in a single test.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2008.10.017
PMID: 19026621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]