---
reference_id: "PMID:20301364"
title: DCX-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Geis T
- Uyanik G
- Aigner L
- Couillard-Despres S
- Winkler J
- Hehr U
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DCX-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Geis T, Uyanik G, Aigner L, Couillard-Despres S, Winkler J, Hehr U

## Content

1. DCX-Related Disorders.

Geis T(1), Uyanik G(2), Aigner L(3), Couillard-Despres S(3), Winkler J(4), Hehr 
U(5).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2007 Oct 19 [updated 2025 Jun 5].

Author information:
(1)University Children's Hospital Regensburg (KUNO), Hospital St Hedwig of the 
Order of St John, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany
(2)Center for Medical Genetics, Hanusch Hospital;, Medical Faculty, Sigmund 
Freud Private University, Vienna, Austria
(3)Institute of Molecular Regenerative Medicine, Paracelsus Medical University 
Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria
(4)Division of Molecular Neurology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, 
Germany
(5)Center for Human Genetics, Regensburg, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: DCX-related disorders include the following neuronal 
migration disorders: classic thick lissencephaly (more severe anteriorly), 
usually in males, and subcortical band heterotopia (SBH), primarily in females. 
Males with DCX-related classic lissencephaly typically have early and profound 
cognitive and language impairment, tone abnormalities, and seizures. The 
clinical phenotype in females with DCX-related SBH varies widely, with cognitive 
abilities that range from average or mild cognitive impairment to severe 
intellectual disability and language impairment. Seizures, which frequently are 
refractory to anti-seizure medications (ASMs), may be either focal or 
generalized, and behavioral problems may also be observed. In DCX-related 
lissencephaly and DCX-related SBH, severity of the clinical manifestations 
correlates roughly with the degree of the underlying brain malformation as 
observed on brain imaging.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a DCX-related disorder is established in a 
proband with a DCX pathogenic variant identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: ASMs for seizures; deep brain 
stimulation may improve the seizure disorder in individuals with SBH; feeding 
strategies in newborns with poor suck and swallow; physical therapy to promote 
mobility and prevent contractures; special adaptive chairs or positioners as 
needed; occupational therapy to improve fine motor skills and oral motor 
control; participation in speech therapy, educational training, and enrichment 
programs. Surveillance: Regular neurologic examination and monitoring of seizure 
activity, EEG, and ASM levels; regular measurement of height, weight, and head 
circumference; evaluation of feeding and nutritional status; assessment of 
psychomotor, speech, and cognitive development; prompt consultation in the event 
of new neurologic findings or deterioration, aspiration, or infections; 
monitoring for orthopedic complications such as foot deformities or scoliosis.
GENETIC COUNSELING: DCX-related disorders are inherited in an X-linked manner. A 
male proband may have the disorder as the result of a de novo DCX pathogenic 
variant or a pathogenic variant inherited from an asymptomatic or only mildly 
affected mother. A female proband may have the disorder as the result of a de 
novo pathogenic variant, a pathogenic variant inherited from an asymptomatic or 
only mildly affected mother, or a pathogenic variant inherited from an 
asymptomatic or mildly affected mosaic father. The risk to sibs depends on the 
clinical/genetic status of the parents. If the mother of the proband is affected 
and/or heterozygous for a DCX pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting the 
pathogenic variant in each pregnancy is 50%. Males who inherit the pathogenic 
variant will usually be affected with DCX-related classic lissencephaly. Females 
who inherit the pathogenic variant will be heterozygous and at high risk of 
developing the variable phenotype associated with DCX-related SBH. If a proband 
has a non-mosaic DCX pathogenic variant and represents a simplex case and the 
pathogenic variant cannot be detected in maternal leukocyte DNA, recurrence risk 
to sibs of the proband has been estimated to be 5%-10% because of the 
possibility of parental gonadal mosaicism, mainly in the mother. Once the DCX 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal 
and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301364