---
reference_id: "PMID:34791386"
title: "Evolutionary Processes in the Emergence and Recent Spread of the Syphilis Agent, Treponema pallidum."
authors:
- Pla-Díaz M
- Sánchez-Busó L
- Giacani L
- Šmajs D
- Bosshard PP
- Bagheri HC
- Schuenemann VJ
- Nieselt K
- Arora N
- González-Candelas F
journal: Mol Biol Evol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab318
keywords:
- Humans
- Phylogeny
- "Syphilis/epidemiology, microbiology"
- Treponema pallidum/genetics
- Treponemal Infections/microbiology
- Yaws/microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evolutionary Processes in the Emergence and Recent Spread of the Syphilis Agent, Treponema pallidum.
**Authors:** Pla-Díaz M, Sánchez-Busó L, Giacani L, Šmajs D, Bosshard PP, Bagheri HC, Schuenemann VJ, Nieselt K, Arora N, González-Candelas F
**Journal:** Mol Biol Evol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/molbev/msab318](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msab318)

## Content

1. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab318. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab318.

Evolutionary Processes in the Emergence and Recent Spread of the Syphilis Agent,
Treponema pallidum.

Pla-Díaz M(1)(2), Sánchez-Busó L(3), Giacani L(4)(5), Šmajs D(6), Bosshard
PP(7), Bagheri HC(8), Schuenemann VJ(9), Nieselt K(10), Arora N(11)(12),
González-Candelas F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Unidad Mixta Infección y Salud Pública FISABIO, Universidad de
Valencia-I2SysBio, Valencia, Spain.
(2)CIBER in Epidemiology and Public Health, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Genomics and Health Area, Foundation for the Promotion of Health and
Biomedical Research in the Valencian Community (FISABIO-Public Health),
Valencia, Spain.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech
Republic.
(7)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.
(8)Repsol Technology Center, Móstoles, Spain.
(9)Institute of Evolutionary Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(10)Center for Bioinformatics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(11)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(12)Zurich Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

The incidence of syphilis has risen worldwide in the last decade in spite of
being an easily treated infection. The causative agent of this sexually
transmitted disease is the bacterium Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum
(TPA), very closely related to subsp. pertenue (TPE) and endemicum (TEN),
responsible for the human treponematoses yaws and bejel, respectively. Although
much focus has been placed on the question of the spatial and temporary origins
of TPA, the processes driving the evolution and epidemiological spread of TPA
since its divergence from TPE and TEN are not well understood. Here, we
investigate the effects of recombination and selection as forces of genetic
diversity and differentiation acting during the evolution of T. pallidum
subspecies. Using a custom-tailored procedure, named phylogenetic incongruence
method, with 75 complete genome sequences, we found strong evidence for
recombination among the T. pallidum subspecies, involving 12 genes and 21
events. In most cases, only one recombination event per gene was detected and
all but one event corresponded to intersubspecies transfers, from TPE/TEN to
TPA. We found a clear signal of natural selection acting on the recombinant
genes, which is more intense in their recombinant regions. The phylogenetic
location of the recombination events detected and the functional role of the
genes with signals of positive selection suggest that these evolutionary
processes had a key role in the evolution and recent expansion of the syphilis
bacteria and significant implications for the selection of vaccine candidates
and the design of a broadly protective syphilis vaccine.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab318
PMCID: PMC8789261
PMID: 34791386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
