---
reference_id: "PMID:39630935"
title: "Reverse transcriptase inhibitors in Aicardi-Goutières syndrome: A crossover clinical trial."
authors:
- Crow YJ
- Briggs TA
- Eleftheriou D
- Parida A
- Battison C
- Giddings A
- Kennel T
- Parker RA
- AGS‐RTIs Study Group
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/dmcn.16199
keywords:
- Humans
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/drug therapy, genetics, blood"
- Male
- Female
- Child
- Adolescent
- "Nervous System Malformations/drug therapy, genetics, blood"
- Cross-Over Studies
- "Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology, administration & dosage"
- "Zidovudine/therapeutic use, pharmacology, administration & dosage"
- "Lamivudine/therapeutic use, pharmacology, administration & dosage"
- "Dideoxynucleosides/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Interferon-alpha/blood
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Treatment Outcome
- Cyclopropanes
- Dideoxyadenosine
- Abacavir
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reverse transcriptase inhibitors in Aicardi-Goutières syndrome: A crossover clinical trial.
**Authors:** Crow YJ, Briggs TA, Eleftheriou D, Parida A, Battison C, Giddings A, Kennel T, Parker RA, AGS‐RTIs Study Group
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dmcn.16199](https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.16199)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2025 Jun;67(6):750-757. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.16199. Epub
2024  Dec 4.

Reverse transcriptase inhibitors in Aicardi-Goutières syndrome: A crossover
clinical trial.

Crow YJ(1)(2), Briggs TA(3)(4)(5), Eleftheriou D(6)(7), Parida A(8), Battison
C(9), Giddings A(9), Kennel T(9), Parker RA(9); AGS‐RTIs Study Group.

Collaborators: Donald A, Mcmaster P, Shetty J, Jack K, Quigley AJ, Burleigh A,
D'Arco F, Hemingway C, Hong Y, Moraitis E, Price-Kuehne F, Sudarsanam A, Wassmer
E, Livingstone K, Sutherland FJ, El-Daher MT, Norrie J, Ensor H, Munro AF,
Murphy L, Maclean A, Reid KR, Forbes D, Bondet V, Duffy D, Hunt DP, Rice GI.

Author information:
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Neuroinflammation, Imagine Institute, INSERM
UMR1163, Paris, France.
(3)Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, Faculty of Biology,
Medicine and Health, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University
of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(4)Department of Genomic Medicine, St Marys Hospital, Manchester Foundation
Trust, Manchester, UK.
(5)Division of Evolution, Infection and Genomics, School of Biological Sciences,
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK.
(6)Infection, Immunity and Inflammation Department, University College London
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(7)Paediatric Rheumatology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(8)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Birmingham Children's Hospital,
Birmingham Women and Children's Hospital Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(9)Edinburgh Clinical Trials Unit, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK.

AIM: To extend the findings of a previous clinical trial suggesting combined
abacavir (ABC), lamivudine (3TC), and zidovudine (AZT) reduces type I interferon
(IFN) signalling in Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS).
METHOD: This was an open label, non-placebo-controlled phase II clinical trial
(NCT04731103) in patients less than 16 years with any of five AGS genotypes. The
effect of ABC or 3TC individually, or of combined ABC + 3TC + AZT, on
IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) expression (primary outcome) and IFN-alpha protein
(secondary outcome) in blood was assessed.
RESULTS: Thirteen patients were recruited. Compliance was poor in the
ABC + 3TC + AZT arm. No statistically significant effects were observed with ABC
or 3TC, or with ABC + 3TC + AZT over 6 weeks. A statistically significant
reduction of ISG expression was recorded after 3 weeks of ABC + 3TC + AZT, which
was not mirrored by changes in IFN-alpha protein.
INTERPRETATION: There is insufficient evidence that ABC or 3TC is either
effective or ineffective in reducing type I IFN signalling in AGS over 6 weeks.
The effect of ABC + 3TC + AZT at 3 weeks supports data from a previous clinical
trial of the effect of ABC + 3TC + AZT in reducing type I IFN signalling,
although there was insufficient evidence of an effect at 6 weeks. Time to local
research and development (R&D) approval, and to sponsor authorization after R&D
approval, severely limited patient recruitment.

© 2024 The Author(s). Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Mac Keith Press.

DOI: 10.1111/dmcn.16199
PMCID: PMC7617231
PMID: 39630935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the absence of any conflicts
of interest, financial or otherwise.
