---
reference_id: "PMID:16543230"
title: "Altered folding, turnover, and polarized sorting act in concert to define a novel pathomechanism of congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency."
authors:
- Keiser M
- Alfalah M
- Pröpsting MJ
- Castelletti D
- Naim HY
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M513631200
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics"
- "Detergents/chemistry, pharmacology"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Epitope Mapping
- Humans
- Intestines
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Octoxynol/pharmacology
- Protein Folding
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Sucrase-Isomaltase Complex/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered folding, turnover, and polarized sorting act in concert to define a novel pathomechanism of congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency.
**Authors:** Keiser M, Alfalah M, Pröpsting MJ, Castelletti D, Naim HY
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M513631200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M513631200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 19;281(20):14393-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M513631200. Epub
2006  Mar 16.

Altered folding, turnover, and polarized sorting act in concert to define a 
novel pathomechanism of congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency.

Keiser M(1), Alfalah M, Pröpsting MJ, Castelletti D, Naim HY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, University of Veterinary Medicine 
Hannover, D-30559 Hannover, Germany.

Naturally occurring mutants of membrane and secretory proteins are often 
associated with the pathogenesis of human diseases. Here, we describe the 
molecular basis of a novel phenotype of congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency 
(CSID), a disaccharide malabsorption disorder of the human intestine in which 
several structural features and functional capacities of the brush-border enzyme 
complex sucrase-isomaltase (SI) are affected. The cDNA encoding SI from a 
patient with CSID reveals a mutation in the isomaltase subunit of SI that 
results in the substitution of a cysteine by an arginine at amino acid residue 
635 (C635R). When this mutation is introduced into the wild type cDNA of SI a 
mutant enzyme, SI(C635R), is generated that shows a predominant localization in 
the endoplasmic reticulum. Nevertheless, a definite localization of SI(C635R) in 
the Golgi apparatus and at the cell surface could be also observed. Epitope 
mapping with conformation-specific mAbs protease sensitivity assays, and 
enzymatic activity measurements demonstrate an altered folding pattern of 
SI(C635R) that is responsible for a substantially increased turnover rate and an 
aberrant sorting profile. Thus, SI(C635R) becomes distributed also at the 
basolateral membrane in contrast to wild type SI. Concomitant with the altered 
sorting pattern, the partial detergent extractability of wild type SI shifts to 
a complete detergent solubility with Triton X-100. The mutation has therefore 
affected an epitope responsible for the apical targeting fidelity of SI. 
Altogether, the combined effects of the C635R mutation on the turnover rate, 
function, polarized sorting, and detergent solubility of SI constitute a unique 
and novel pathomechanism of CSID.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M513631200
PMID: 16543230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]