---
reference_id: "PMID:7700721"
title: "Kniest dysplasia is caused by dominant collagen II (COL2A1) mutations: parental somatic mosaicism manifesting as Stickler phenotype and mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia."
authors:
- Spranger J
- Menger H
- Mundlos S
- Winterpacht A
- Zabel B
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1007/BF02011911
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kniest dysplasia is caused by dominant collagen II (COL2A1) mutations: parental somatic mosaicism manifesting as Stickler phenotype and mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Spranger J, Menger H, Mundlos S, Winterpacht A, Zabel B
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02011911](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02011911)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 1994;24(6):431-5. doi: 10.1007/BF02011911.

Kniest dysplasia is caused by dominant collagen II (COL2A1) mutations: parental 
somatic mosaicism manifesting as Stickler phenotype and mild spondyloepiphyseal 
dysplasia.

Spranger J(1), Menger H, Mundlos S, Winterpacht A, Zabel B.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Mainz, Germany.

We describe two unrelated children with Kniest dysplasia, a severe autosomal 
dominant form of chondrodysplastic dwarfism associated with cleft palate, 
progressive arthropathy, myopia and retinal detachment. In the first patient the 
disorder was caused by a 28 base pair exon 12/intron 12 deletion in the gene 
coding for type II collagen. Her mother had mild abnormalities of the vertebral 
bodies and long bones compatible with abnormalities seen in Stickler 
arthro-ophthalmopathy. The second child had a transition of AG to GG at the 3' 
splice site of intron 20 of the COL2A1 gene. Her father had premature 
polvarthrosis interpreted as a sequela of mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. 
Molecular studies revealed that the mother of the first and the father of the 
second child each had somatic mosaicism of the same mutation as their children. 
Heterozygous mutations of the gene coding for type II collagen can cause Kniest 
dysplasia, and somatic mosaicism for the same mutations can result in the 
Stickler phenotype or in mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia leading to premature 
polyarthrosis.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02011911
PMID: 7700721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]