---
reference_id: "PMID:28900675"
title: Bone Disease in Connective Tissue Disease/Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
authors:
- Bultink IEM
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00223-017-0322-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone Disease in Connective Tissue Disease/Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
**Authors:** Bultink IEM
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00223-017-0322-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-017-0322-z)

## Content

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2018 May;102(5):575-591. doi: 10.1007/s00223-017-0322-z.
Epub  2017 Sep 12.

Bone Disease in Connective Tissue Disease/Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.

Bultink IEM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Amsterdam Rheumatology and immunology Center, VU 
University Medical Center, De Boelelaan 1117, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. iem.bultink@vumc.nl.

This article reviews recent advances in the research of the mechanisms of bone 
loss, as well as clinical features, economic impact and therapeutic implications 
of osteoporosis and fractures in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE) as an illustration of bone disease in a complex systemic autoimmune 
connective tissue disease. Recent studies demonstrated an increased incidence of 
osteoporosis and peripheral and vertebral fractures in patients with SLE. The 
aetiology of bone loss in SLE is multifactorial, including clinical osteoporosis 
risk factors, systemic inflammation, serological factors, metabolic factors, 
hormonal factors, possibly genetic factors and medication-induced adverse 
effects. The incidence of symptomatic fractures in patients with SLE is 
increased 1.2-4.7-fold and age, disease duration, glucocorticoid use, previous 
cyclophosphamide use, seizures and a prior cerebrovascular event have been 
identified as important risk factors. Moreover, a high prevalence of 
morphometric vertebral fractures was demonstrated, while one in three of these 
patients has normal bone density, which finding points to the multifactorial 
aetiology of fractures in SLE. The clinical consequences and economic burden of 
osteoporosis and fractures as glucocorticoid treatment-related adverse events 
and the high frequency of glucocorticoid therapy underline the importance of 
reducing glucocorticoid treatment and prescribing steroid-sparing agents. No 
data on fall risk and its determinants and the relationship with the occurrence 
of fractures in patients with SLE are currently available. Fall risk might be 
increased in lupus patients for several reasons. In addition, the recently 
reported high prevalence (20%) of frailty in SLE patients may contribute to the 
increased fracture incidence. Therefore, the relationships between fall risk, 
frailty and fracture occurrence in SLE might be interesting subjects for future 
studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-017-0322-z
PMCID: PMC5904226
PMID: 28900675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: IEMB received speaker fees from Eli Lilly and 
Company Netherlands, Merck Sharp and Dohme Corp, Amgen BV, UCB Pharma BV and 
Roche Netherlands BV.