---
reference_id: "PMID:1357595"
title: "Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency: clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of a new inborn error of neurotransmitter amine synthesis."
authors:
- Hyland K
- Surtees RA
- Rodeck C
- Clayton PT
journal: Neurology
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.42.10.1980
keywords:
- Amniotic Fluid/chemistry
- Aromatic-L-Amino-Acid Decarboxylases/deficiency
- Biogenic Amines/biosynthesis
- Bromocriptine/therapeutic use
- Cerebrospinal Fluid/chemistry
- Diseases in Twins
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, metabolism, therapy"
- Neurotransmitter Agents/biosynthesis
- "Pregnancy/blood, urine"
- Pyridoxine/therapeutic use
- Tranylcypromine/therapeutic use
- "Twins, Monozygotic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency: clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of a new inborn error of neurotransmitter amine synthesis.
**Authors:** Hyland K, Surtees RA, Rodeck C, Clayton PT
**Journal:** Neurology (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.42.10.1980](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.42.10.1980)

## Content

1. Neurology. 1992 Oct;42(10):1980-8. doi: 10.1212/wnl.42.10.1980.

Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency: clinical features, diagnosis,
and treatment of a new inborn error of neurotransmitter amine synthesis.

Hyland K(1), Surtees RA, Rodeck C, Clayton PT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Health, Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

We report the clinical features, biochemical details, and treatment of the first
detected cases of an inborn error of aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase. Male
monozygotic twins presented with extreme hypotonia and oculogyric crises.
Concentrations of biogenic amines and their metabolites were reduced
considerably both centrally and peripherally. Pterin and phenylalanine
metabolism were normal. Activity of aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase was
virtually absent in a liver biopsy sample and greatly reduced in plasma.
Concentrations of L-dopa, 3-methoxytyrosine, and 5-hydroxytryptophan were
elevated in CSF, plasma, and urine. CSF S-adenosylmethionine concentrations were
reduced. Pyridoxine treatment had no clinical effect but led to a fall in CSF
L-dopa and 3-methoxytyrosine and a rise in S-adenosylmethionine. Treatment with
either bromocriptine or tranylcypromine stopped the abnormal eye movements;
tranylcypromine treatment also improved muscle tone and led to a rise in plasma
norepinephrine and whole blood serotonin. Combined treatment with pyridoxine,
bromocriptine, and tranylcypromine produced sustained improvement in tone and
voluntary movements. The twins' parents were asymptomatic but had reduced plasma
aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase activity, consistent with heterozygosity. We
monitored a subsequent pregnancy through biochemical analyses of a fetal liver
biopsy sample and of amniotic fluid. We predicted an unaffected fetus, which was
confirmed clinically and biochemically after birth.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.42.10.1980
PMID: 1357595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
