---
reference_id: "PMID:38317096"
title: "A systematic review of inherited retinal dystrophies in Pakistan: updates from 1999 to April 2023."
authors:
- Munir A
- Afsar S
- Rehman AU
journal: BMC Ophthalmol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12886-024-03319-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Pakistan/epidemiology
- Retrospective Studies
- "Retinal Dystrophies/epidemiology, genetics"
- Retina/pathology
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- "Cyclic Nucleotide Phosphodiesterases, Type 6/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review of inherited retinal dystrophies in Pakistan: updates from 1999 to April 2023.
**Authors:** Munir A, Afsar S, Rehman AU
**Journal:** BMC Ophthalmol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12886-024-03319-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12886-024-03319-7)

## Content

1. BMC Ophthalmol. 2024 Feb 5;24(1):55. doi: 10.1186/s12886-024-03319-7.

A systematic review of inherited retinal dystrophies in Pakistan: updates from 
1999 to April 2023.

Munir A(1), Afsar S(1), Rehman AU(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Biological and Health Sciences, Hazara 
University, Mansehra, 21300, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Biological and Health Sciences, Hazara 
University, Mansehra, 21300, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan. 
atta.rehman@hu.edu.pk.

BACKGROUND: Inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs) are a group of rare genetic 
conditions affecting retina of the eye that range in prevalence from 1 in 2000 
to 1 in 4000 people globally. This review is based on a retrospective analysis 
of research articles reporting IRDs associated genetic findings in Pakistani 
families between 1999 and April 2023.
METHODS: Articles were retrieved through survey of online sources, notably, 
PubMed, Google Scholar, and Web of Science. Following a stringent selection 
criterion, a total of 126 research articles and conference abstracts were 
considered. All reported variants were cross-checked and validated for their 
correct genomic nomenclature using different online resources/databases, and 
their pathogenicity scores were explained as per ACMG guidelines.
RESULTS: A total of 277 unique sequence variants in 87 distinct genes, 
previously known to cause IRDs, were uncovered. In around 70% cases, parents of 
the index patient were consanguineously married, and approximately 88.81% of the 
detected variants were found in a homozygous state. Overall, more than 95% of 
the IRDs cases were recessively inherited. Missense variants were predominant 
(41.88%), followed by Indels/frameshift (26.35%), nonsense (19.13%), splice site 
(12.27%) and synonymous change (0.36%). Non-syndromic IRDs were significantly 
higher than syndromic IRDs (77.32% vs. 22.68%). Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) was 
the most frequently observed IRD followed by Leber's congenital amaurosis (LCA). 
Altogether, mutations in PDE6A gene was the leading cause of IRDs in Pakistani 
families followed by mutations in TULP1 gene.
CONCLUSION: In summary, Pakistani families are notable in expressing recessively 
inherited monogenic disorders including IRDs likely due to the highest 
prevalence of consanguinity in the country that leads to expression of rare 
pathogenic variants in homozygous state.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12886-024-03319-7
PMCID: PMC10840256
PMID: 38317096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.