---
reference_id: "PMID:30575425"
title: "Symptomatic treatment of dengue: should the NSAID contraindication be reconsidered?"
authors:
- Kellstein D
- Fernandes L
journal: Postgrad Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/00325481.2019.1561916
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Symptomatic treatment of dengue: should the NSAID contraindication be reconsidered?
**Authors:** Kellstein D, Fernandes L
**Journal:** Postgrad Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00325481.2019.1561916](https://doi.org/10.1080/00325481.2019.1561916)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med. 2019 Mar;131(2):109-116. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2019.1561916.
Epub  2019 Jan 16.

Symptomatic treatment of dengue: should the NSAID contraindication be 
reconsidered?

Kellstein D(1), Fernandes L(2).

Author information:
(1)a Pain Management Team , Pfizer Consumer Healthcare , Madison , NJ , USA.
(2)b Global Medical Affairs , Pfizer Consumer Healthcare , Sao Paulo , Brazil.

Consensus guidelines for treatment of dengue fever from the World Health 
Organization and US Centers for Disease Control recommend acetaminophen to 
manage pain and fever but contraindicate nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents 
(NSAIDs) because of potentially increased bleeding risk, with thrombocytopenia 
as a complication. Neither acetaminophen nor ibuprofen (the NSAID with lowest 
bleeding risk) have been evaluated for dengue treatment in randomized, 
controlled clinical trials. Epidemiologic and cohort studies and case series 
describing NSAID use in dengue generally point to minimal or no significant 
increase in bleeding risk, except for aspirin. Given the lack of data on use of 
NSAIDs in dengue, we assessed the literature for the risk of postoperative 
bleeding with NSAID use, with a particular focus on ibuprofen, as a potential 
surrogate marker of bleeding risk in dengue. Ibuprofen at over-the-counter doses 
used to treat pain and fever (i.e. up to 1,200 mg/d for up to 10 days) is 
associated with zero to minimally increased risk for postoperative bleeding 
events. Where detected, statistically significant increases in bleeding 
incidence and/or bleed volume were not clinically meaningful. Because hepatitis 
is also a frequent dengue complication, acetaminophen-associated hepatotoxicity 
(the most common cause of drug-induced liver disease and acute liver failure in 
the United States and Europe) raises the possibility of severe hepatic injury 
with acetaminophen treatment. Data suggesting that conditions associated with 
chronic liver damage reduce the dosing threshold for induction of liver failure 
are of particular concern. Meta-analyses of clinical studies across a range of 
clinical settings consistently conclude that ibuprofen, at non-prescription 
doses, provides equivalent or superior analgesic and antipyretic activity 
compared with acetaminophen, with comparable safety. These data suggest that the 
consensus guideline recommendations for acetaminophen and against NSAID use in 
dengue treatment should be reconsidered in light of current evidence regarding 
the risks and benefits of each agent.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2019.1561916
PMID: 30575425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]