---
reference_id: "PMID:33098225"
title: "Support for increased cardiovascular risk in non-segmental vitiligo among Egyptians: A hospital-based, case-control study."
authors:
- Azzazi Y
- Mostafa WZ
- Sayed KS
- Alhelf M
- Safwat M
- Mahrous A
- El Lawindi M
- Ragab N
journal: Pigment Cell Melanoma Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12941
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Support for increased cardiovascular risk in non-segmental vitiligo among Egyptians: A hospital-based, case-control study.
**Authors:** Azzazi Y, Mostafa WZ, Sayed KS, Alhelf M, Safwat M, Mahrous A, El Lawindi M, Ragab N
**Journal:** Pigment Cell Melanoma Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pcmr.12941](https://doi.org/10.1111/pcmr.12941)

## Content

1. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2021 May;34(3):598-604. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12941.
Epub  2020 Nov 3.

Support for increased cardiovascular risk in non-segmental vitiligo among 
Egyptians: A hospital-based, case-control study.

Azzazi Y(1), Mostafa WZ(1), Sayed KS(1), Alhelf M(2)(3), Safwat M(2), Mahrous 
A(4), El Lawindi M(5), Ragab N(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Faculty of Medicine, 
Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Biotechnology School, Nile University, Giza, Egypt.
(4)Radiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(5)Public Health Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, 
Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Data have been accumulating in the past few years that identify 
vitiligo as a disorder with systemic implications.
RESULTS AND METHODS: In this hospital-based, cross-sectional, case-control 
study, 50 patients with non-segmental vitiligo and 50 age- and sex-matched 
controls underwent analysis of serum lipid profile, oxidative stress biomarkers 
and carotid duplex. Hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) and malondialdehyde (MDA) were 
significantly higher in patients than controls (p-value < .001, <.001, 
respectively); on the other hand, total antioxidant capacity (TAC) was 
significantly lower in patients than controls (p-value = .001). A significantly 
higher percentage of patients had hypercholesterolemia and borderline high, high 
or very high levels of LDL-C, compared to controls (p-value = .001 and .001, 
respectively). Atherosclerotic plaques and increased common carotid intima media 
thickness were significantly detected in patients versus controls.
DISCUSSION: Results of the present study suggest that a subset of patients with 
vitiligo are at a higher risk of developing dyslipidemia and atherosclerosis, 
which might increase their future risk for the development of cardiovascular 
disease. Confirmation of these findings would subsequently influence 
investigative and the treatment strategies in the management plan of vitiligo 
patients in the near future.
SIGNIFICANCE: Vitiligo patients might be at a higher risk of developing 
dyslipidemia and atherosclerosis, which might increase their risk for the 
development of cardiovascular disease necessitating prophylactic measures to 
improve prognosis. Our results might influence the investigative and treatment 
strategies in the management plan of vitiligo patients in the near future.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pcmr.12941
PMID: 33098225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]