---
reference_id: "PMID:28457522"
title: Lung Transplantation for FLNA-Associated Progressive Lung Disease.
authors:
- Burrage LC
- Guillerman RP
- Das S
- Singh S
- Schady DA
- Morris SA
- Walkiewicz M
- Schecter MG
- Heinle JS
- Lotze TE
- Lalani SR
- Mallory GB
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.03.045
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Filamins/genetics
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/etiology, surgery"
- Infant
- "Lung Diseases/genetics, surgery"
- Lung Transplantation
- "Respiratory Insufficiency/etiology, surgery"
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lung Transplantation for FLNA-Associated Progressive Lung Disease.
**Authors:** Burrage LC, Guillerman RP, Das S, Singh S, Schady DA, Morris SA, Walkiewicz M, Schecter MG, Heinle JS, Lotze TE, Lalani SR, Mallory GB
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.03.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.03.045)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2017 Jul;186:118-123.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.03.045. Epub
2017  Apr 28.

Lung Transplantation for FLNA-Associated Progressive Lung Disease.

Burrage LC(1), Guillerman RP(2), Das S(3), Singh S(4), Schady DA(5), Morris 
SA(6), Walkiewicz M(7), Schecter MG(8), Heinle JS(9), Lotze TE(10), Lalani 
SR(1), Mallory GB(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX.
(2)Department of Radiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(3)Section of Pediatric Pulmonology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX.
(4)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Pediatrics, State University of New 
York-Buffalo, Buffalo, NY.
(5)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX.
(6)Section of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX.
(7)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX.
(8)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Cincinnati School of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH.
(9)Division of Congenital Heart Surgery, Department of Surgery, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(10)Section of Neurology and Developmental Neuroscience, Department of 
Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(11)Section of Pediatric Pulmonology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, TX. Electronic address: gbmallor@texaschildrens.org.

OBJECTIVE: To describe a series of patients with pathogenic variants in FLNA and 
progressive lung disease necessitating lung transplantation.
STUDY DESIGN: We conducted a retrospective chart review of 6 female infants with 
heterozygous presumed loss-of-function pathogenic variants in FLNA whose initial 
presentation was early and progressive respiratory failure.
RESULTS: Each patient received lung transplantation at an average age of 11 
months (range, 5-15 months). All patients had pulmonary arterial hypertension 
and chronic respiratory failure requiring tracheostomy and escalating levels of 
ventilator support before transplantation. All 6 patients survived initial lung 
transplantation; however, 1 patient died after a subsequent heart-lung 
transplant. The remaining 5 patients are living unrestricted lives on chronic 
immunosuppression at most recent follow-up (range, 19 months to 11.3 years 
post-transplantation). However, in all patients, severe ascending aortic 
dilation has been observed with aortic regurgitation.
CONCLUSIONS: Respiratory failure secondary to progressive obstructive lung 
disease during infancy may be the presenting phenotype of FLNA-associated 
periventricular nodular heterotopia. We describe a cohort of patients with 
progressive respiratory failure related to a pathogenic variant in FLNA and 
present lung transplantation as a viable therapeutic option for this group of 
patients.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.03.045
PMCID: PMC5534178
PMID: 28457522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors have 
no conflicts of interest to declare.