---
reference_id: "PMID:19217903"
title: "G1961E mutant allele in the Stargardt disease gene ABCA4 causes bull's eye maculopathy."
authors:
- Cella W
- Greenstein VC
- Zernant-Rajang J
- Smith TR
- Barile G
- Allikmets R
- Tsang SH
journal: Exp Eye Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2009.02.001
keywords:
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Alleles
- Electroretinography/methods
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Macular Degeneration/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Visual Field Tests/methods
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# G1961E mutant allele in the Stargardt disease gene ABCA4 causes bull's eye maculopathy.
**Authors:** Cella W, Greenstein VC, Zernant-Rajang J, Smith TR, Barile G, Allikmets R, Tsang SH
**Journal:** Exp Eye Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exer.2009.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2009.02.001)

## Content

1. Exp Eye Res. 2009 Jun 15;89(1):16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2009.02.001. Epub
2009  Feb 13.

G1961E mutant allele in the Stargardt disease gene ABCA4 causes bull's eye 
maculopathy.

Cella W(1), Greenstein VC, Zernant-Rajang J, Smith TR, Barile G, Allikmets R, 
Tsang SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Bernard and Shirlee Brown Glaucoma Laboratory, 
Edward S. Harkness Eye Institute, Columbia University, 160 Fort Washington 
Avenue, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The aim of this study was to characterize the pathological and functional 
consequences of the G1961E mutant allele in the Stargardt disease gene ABCA4. 
Data from 15 patients were retrospectively reviewed and all the patients had at 
least one G1961E mutation. Comprehensive ophthalmic examination, full-field and 
pattern electroretinograms, and fundus autofluorescence (FAF) imaging were 
performed on all patients. Microperimetry, spectral-domain optical coherence 
tomography (OCT), and fluorescein angiography were performed in selected cases. 
Genetic screening was performed using the ABCR400 micro-array that currently 
detects 496 distinct ABCA4 variants. All patients had normal full-field scotopic 
and photopic electroretinograms (ERGs) and abnormal pattern electroretinograms 
(PERGs) performed on both eyes, and all the fundi had bull's eye maculopathy 
without retinal flecks on FAF. On OCT, 1 patient had disorganization of 
photoreceptor outer segment, 2 had outer nuclear layer (ONL) thinning likely due 
to photoreceptor atrophy proximal to the foveal center, and 3 had additional 
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) atrophy. On microperimetry, 6 patients had 
eccentric superior fixation and amongst this group, 5 had an absolute scotoma in 
the foveal area. DNA analysis revealed that 3 patients were homozygous 
G1961E/G1961E and the rest were compound heterozygotes for G1961E and other 
ABCA4 mutations. The G1961E allele in either homozygosity or heterozygosity is 
associated with anatomical and functional pathologies limited to the parafoveal 
region and a trend to delayed onset of symptoms, relative to other 
manifestations of ABCA4 mutations. Our observations support the hypothesis that 
the G1961E allele contributes to localized macular changes rather than 
generalized retinal dysfunction, and is a cause of bull's eye maculopathy in 
either the homozygosity or heterozygosity state. In addition, genetic testing 
provides precise diagnosis of the underlying maculopathy, and current 
non-invasive imaging techniques could be used to detect photoreceptor damage at 
the earliest clinical onset of the disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2009.02.001
PMCID: PMC2742677
PMID: 19217903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]