---
reference_id: "PMID:28148298"
title: "TBK1: a new player in ALS linking autophagy and neuroinflammation."
authors:
- Oakes JA
- Davies MC
- Collins MO
journal: Mol Brain
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13041-017-0287-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TBK1: a new player in ALS linking autophagy and neuroinflammation.
**Authors:** Oakes JA, Davies MC, Collins MO
**Journal:** Mol Brain (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13041-017-0287-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13041-017-0287-x)

## Content

1. Mol Brain. 2017 Feb 2;10(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s13041-017-0287-x.

TBK1: a new player in ALS linking autophagy and neuroinflammation.

Oakes JA(1)(2), Davies MC(2), Collins MO(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Firth Court, 
Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK.
(3)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Firth Court, 
Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK. mark.collins@sheffield.ac.uk.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an adult-onset neurodegenerative disorder 
affecting motor neurons, resulting in progressive muscle weakness and death by 
respiratory failure. Protein and RNA aggregates are a hallmark of ALS pathology 
and are thought to contribute to ALS by impairing axonal transport. Mutations in 
several genes known to contribute to ALS result in deposition of their protein 
products as aggregates; these include TARDBP, C9ORF72, and SOD1. In motor 
neurons, this can disrupt transport of mitochondria to areas of metabolic need, 
resulting in damage to cells and can elicit a neuroinflammatory response leading 
to further neuronal damage. Recently, eight independent human genetics studies 
have uncovered a link between TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) mutations and ALS. 
TBK1 belongs to the IKK-kinase family of kinases that are involved in innate 
immunity signaling pathways; specifically, TBK1 is an inducer of type-1 
interferons. TBK1 also has a major role in autophagy and mitophagy, chiefly the 
phosphorylation of autophagy adaptors. Several other ALS genes are also involved 
in autophagy, including p62 and OPTN. TBK1 is required for efficient cargo 
recruitment in autophagy; mutations in TBK1 may result in impaired autophagy and 
contribute to the accumulation of protein aggregates and ALS pathology. In this 
review, we focus on the role of TBK1 in autophagy and the contributions of this 
process to the pathophysiology of ALS.

DOI: 10.1186/s13041-017-0287-x
PMCID: PMC5288885
PMID: 28148298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]