---
reference_id: "PMID:35803701"
title: Endocrine and behavioural features of Lowe syndrome and their potential molecular mechanisms.
authors:
- Sena C
- Iannello G
- Skowronski AA
- Dannheim K
- Cheung L
- Agrawal PB
- Hirschhorn JN
- Zeitler P
- LeDuc CA
- Stratigopoulos G
- Thaker VV
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2022-108490
keywords:
- Child
- Male
- Animals
- Mice
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- "Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- "Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- Cataract/genetics
- Brain/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endocrine and behavioural features of Lowe syndrome and their potential molecular mechanisms.
**Authors:** Sena C, Iannello G, Skowronski AA, Dannheim K, Cheung L, Agrawal PB, Hirschhorn JN, Zeitler P, LeDuc CA, Stratigopoulos G, Thaker VV
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2022-108490](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2022-108490)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2022 Dec;59(12):1171-1178. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2022-108490.
Epub  2022 Jul 8.

Endocrine and behavioural features of Lowe syndrome and their potential
molecular mechanisms.

Sena C(1)(2), Iannello G(3), Skowronski AA(1)(2), Dannheim K(4), Cheung L(5),
Agrawal PB(6), Hirschhorn JN(7), Zeitler P(8), LeDuc CA(1)(2), Stratigopoulos
G(1)(2), Thaker VV(9)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New
York, New York, USA.
(3)Columbia Stem Cell Initiative, Stem Cell Core, Columbia University Irving
Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Rhode Island and Hasbro
Children's Hospitals and the Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University,
Providence, Rhode Island, USA.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(6)Division of Neonatology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(7)Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(8)Department of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado,
USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, New York, USA vvt2114@cumc.columbia.edu.

BACKGROUND: Lowe syndrome (LS) is an X linked disease caused by pathogenic
variants in the OCRL gene that impacts approximately 1 in 500 000 children.
Classic features include congenital cataract, cognitive/behavioural impairment
and renal tubulopathy.
METHODS: This study is a retrospective review of clinical features reported by
family based survey conducted by Lowe Syndrome Association. Frequency of
non-ocular clinical feature(s) of LS and their age of onset was summarised. An
LS-specific therapy effectiveness scale was used to assess the response to the
administered treatment. Expression of OCRL and relevant neuropeptides was
measured in postmortem human brain by qPCR. Gene expression in the mouse brain
was determined by reanalysis of publicly available bulk and single cell RNA
sequencing.
RESULTS: A total of 137 individuals (1 female, 89.1% white, median age 14 years
(range 0.8-56)) were included in the study. Short stature (height <3rd
percentile) was noted in 81% (n=111) individuals, and 15% (n=20) received growth
hormone therapy. Undescended testis was reported in 47% (n=64), and median age
of onset of puberty was 15 years. Additional features were dental problems
(n=77, 56%), bone fractures (n=63, 46%), hypophosphataemia (n=60, 44%),
developmental delay and behavioural issues. OCRL is expressed in human and mouse
hypothalami, and in hypothalamic cell clusters expressing Ghrh, Sst, Oxt, Pomc
and pituitary cells expressing Gh and Prl.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a wide spectrum of the clinical phenotype of LS. Some of
the features may be partly driven by the loss of function of OCRL in the
hypothalamus and the pituitary.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2022-108490
PMCID: PMC10186212
PMID: 35803701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
