---
reference_id: "PMID:36939707"
title: "ILAE Genetic Literacy Series: Self-limited familial epilepsy syndromes with onset in neonatal age and infancy."
authors:
- Millevert C
- Weckhuysen S
- ILAE Genetics Commission
journal: Epileptic Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/epd2.20026
keywords:
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Infant
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Literacy
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, genetics"
- Seizures/genetics
- Genetic Testing
- "Epileptic Syndromes/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Epilepsy, Benign Neonatal/genetics"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ILAE Genetic Literacy Series: Self-limited familial epilepsy syndromes with onset in neonatal age and infancy.
**Authors:** Millevert C, Weckhuysen S, ILAE Genetics Commission
**Journal:** Epileptic Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/epd2.20026](https://doi.org/10.1002/epd2.20026)

## Content

1. Epileptic Disord. 2023 Aug;25(4):445-453. doi: 10.1002/epd2.20026. Epub 2023
Jun  22.

ILAE Genetic Literacy Series: Self-limited familial epilepsy syndromes with 
onset in neonatal age and infancy.

Millevert C(1)(2), Weckhuysen S(1)(2)(3)(4); ILAE Genetics Commission.

Collaborators: Perucca P, Cross JH, Lerche H, Esterhuizen AI, Lopes-Cendes I, 
Tsai MH, Berkovic SF, Lowenstein DH, Tan NCK, Helbig I, Mefford HC, Brunklaus A, 
Lesca G.

Author information:
(1)Applied & Translational Neurogenomics Group, VIB Center for Molecular 
Neurology, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)μNEURO Research Centre of Excellence, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, 
Belgium.
(4)Translational Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

The self-limited (familial) epilepsies with onset in neonates or infants, 
formerly called benign familial neonatal and/or infantile epilepsies, are 
autosomal dominant disorders characterized by neonatal- or infantile-onset focal 
motor seizures and the absence of neurodevelopmental complications. Seizures 
tend to remit during infancy or early childhood and are therefore called 
"self-limited". A positive family history for epilepsy usually suggests the 
genetic etiology, but incomplete penetrance and de novo inheritance occur. Here, 
we review the phenotypic spectrum and the genetic architecture of self-limited 
(familial) epilepsies with onset in neonates or infants. Using an illustrative 
case study, we describe important clues in recognition of these syndromes, 
diagnostic steps including genetic testing, management, and genetic counseling.

© 2023 The Authors. Epileptic Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1002/epd2.20026
PMID: 36939707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]