---
reference_id: "PMID:9185506"
title: Glucocorticoid-mediated repression of cytokine gene transcription in human arteritis-SCID chimeras.
authors:
- Brack A
- Rittner HL
- Younge BR
- Kaltschmidt C
- Weyand CM
- Goronzy JJ
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1172/JCI119477
keywords:
- Animals
- Chimera
- Cytokines/genetics
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, pharmacology"
- Dexamethasone/pharmacology
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- "Glucocorticoids/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- I-kappa B Proteins
- Interferon-gamma/genetics
- Interleukin-1/genetics
- Interleukin-2/genetics
- Interleukin-6/genetics
- "Macrophages/drug effects, pathology, physiology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "Mice, SCID"
- NF-KappaB Inhibitor alpha
- "NF-kappa B/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Nitric Oxide Synthase/genetics
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "T-Lymphocytes/drug effects, pathology, physiology"
- Temporal Arteries/transplantation
- "Transcription, Genetic/drug effects"
- "Transforming Growth Factor beta/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Transplantation, Heterologous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucocorticoid-mediated repression of cytokine gene transcription in human arteritis-SCID chimeras.
**Authors:** Brack A, Rittner HL, Younge BR, Kaltschmidt C, Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI119477](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI119477)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1997 Jun 15;99(12):2842-50. doi: 10.1172/JCI119477.

Glucocorticoid-mediated repression of cytokine gene transcription in human
arteritis-SCID chimeras.

Brack A(1), Rittner HL, Younge BR, Kaltschmidt C, Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Giant cell arteritis (GCA) is a vasculitic syndrome that preferentially affects
medium and large-sized arteries. Glucocorticoid therapy resolves clinical
symptoms within hours to days, but therapy has to be continued over several
years to prevent disease relapses. It is not known whether and how
glucocorticoids affect the function of the inflammatory infiltrate or why the
disease persists subclinically despite chronic treatment. GCA is self-sustained
in temporal arteries engrafted into SCID mice, providing a model in which the
mechanisms of action and limitations of glucocorticoid therapy can be examined
in vivo. Administration of dexamethasone to temporal artery-SCID chimeras for 1
wk induced a partial suppression of T cell and macrophage function as indicated
by the reduced tissue concentrations of IL-2, IL-1beta, and IL-6 mRNA, and by
the diminished expression of inducible NO synthase. In contrast, synthesis of
IFN-gamma mRNA was only slightly decreased, and expression of TGF-beta1 was
unaffected. These findings correlated with activation of the IkappaBalpha gene
and blockade of the nuclear translocation of NFkappaB in the xenotransplanted
tissue. Dose-response experiments suggested that steroid doses currently used in
clinical medicine are suboptimal in repressing NFkappaB-mediated cytokine
production in the inflammatory lesions. Chronic steroid therapy was able to
deplete the T cell products IL-2 and IFN-gamma, whereas the activation of
tissue-infiltrating macrophages was only partially affected. IL-1beta
transcription was abrogated; in contrast, TGF-beta1 mRNA synthesis was steroid
resistant. The persistence of TGF-beta1-transcribing macrophages, despite
paralysis of T cell function, may provide an explanation for the chronicity of
the disease, and may identify a novel therapeutic target in this inflammatory
vasculopathy.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI119477
PMCID: PMC508134
PMID: 9185506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
