---
reference_id: "PMID:37657630"
title: "B3GALT6-linkeropathy: Three illustrative patients spanning the disease spectrum."
authors:
- Coetzer KC
- Dieckerhoff J
- Wollnik B
- Moosa S
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104829
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Galactosyltransferases/genetics
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, pathology, diagnostic imaging"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# B3GALT6-linkeropathy: Three illustrative patients spanning the disease spectrum.
**Authors:** Coetzer KC, Dieckerhoff J, Wollnik B, Moosa S
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104829](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104829)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2023 Oct;66(10):104829. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104829. Epub
 2023 Aug 30.

B3GALT6-linkeropathy: Three illustrative patients spanning the disease spectrum.

Coetzer KC(1), Dieckerhoff J(2), Wollnik B(3), Moosa S(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Stellenbosch University, 
Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Kinderarztpraxis Dieckerhoff, Rosenheim, Germany.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(4)Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Stellenbosch University, 
Cape Town, South Africa; Medical Genetics, Tygerberg Hospital, Cape Town, South 
Africa. Electronic address: shahidamoosa@sun.ac.za.

The linkeropathies are a group of rare disorders, characterized by overlapping 
clinical features involving the skeletal and connective tissues. Each "linker" 
gene encodes an enzyme responsible for the addition of glycosaminoglycan chains 
to proteoglycans via a common tertrasaccharine linker region. The original 
descriptions of the autosomal recessive B3GALT6-related disorder showed that the 
associated clinical features are pleiotropic, spanning the skeletal dysplasia 
(Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with joint laxity) (SEMD-JL1) and connective 
tissue disorder (Ehlers-Danlos syndrome) (EDS spondylodysplastic Type 2) 
spectrum. Here, we describe three patients with biallelic B3GALT6 variants: each 
had different clinical presentations, and the two older patients initially 
received alternative clinical diagnoses (Larsen syndrome and Osteogenesis 
imperfecta, respectively). We describe the clinico-radiological features of 
these patients to highlight the spectrum of disease associated with the 
B3GALT6-linkeropathy.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104829
PMID: 37657630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Authors 
declare no conflict of interest.