---
reference_id: "PMID:22698698"
title: Androgen insensitivity syndrome.
authors:
- Hughes IA
- Davies JD
- Bunch TI
- Pasterski V
- Mastroyannopoulou K
- MacDougall J
journal: Lancet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60071-3
keywords:
- "Androgen-Insensitivity Syndrome/classification, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Androgens/physiology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Zinc Fingers/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Androgen insensitivity syndrome.
**Authors:** Hughes IA, Davies JD, Bunch TI, Pasterski V, Mastroyannopoulou K, MacDougall J
**Journal:** Lancet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60071-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60071-3)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2012 Oct 20;380(9851):1419-28. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60071-3.
Epub  2012 Jun 13.

Androgen insensitivity syndrome.

Hughes IA(1), Davies JD, Bunch TI, Pasterski V, Mastroyannopoulou K, MacDougall
J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
iah1000@cam.ac.uk

Androgen insensitivity syndrome in its complete form is a disorder of hormone
resistance characterised by a female phenotype in an individual with an XY
karyotype and testes producing age-appropriate normal concentrations of
androgens. Pathogenesis is the result of mutations in the X-linked androgen
receptor gene, which encodes for the ligand-activated androgen receptor--a
transcription factor and member of the nuclear receptor superfamily. This
Seminar describes the clinical manifestations of androgen insensitivity syndrome
from infancy to adulthood, reviews the mechanism of androgen action, and shows
examples of how mutations of the androgen receptor gene cause the syndrome.
Management of androgen insensitivity syndrome should be undertaken by a
multidisciplinary team and include gonadectomy to avoid gonad tumours in later
life, appropriate sex-hormone replacement at puberty and beyond, and an emphasis
on openness in disclosure.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60071-3
PMID: 22698698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
