---
reference_id: "PMID:19716112"
title: Mutations of the FHL1 gene cause Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Gueneau L
- Bertrand AT
- Jais JP
- Salih MA
- Stojkovic T
- Wehnert M
- Hoeltzenbein M
- Spuler S
- Saitoh S
- Verschueren A
- Tranchant C
- Beuvin M
- Lacene E
- Romero NB
- Heath S
- Zelenika D
- Voit T
- Eymard B
- Ben Yaou R
- Bonne G
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.07.015
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Cardiovascular Diseases/complications
- Cell Differentiation
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, X/genetics"
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- "Genes, X-Linked"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- LIM Domain Proteins
- Lod Score
- Lung Diseases/complications
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss/complications, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Myoblasts/pathology
- Pedigree
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
- Sarcomeres/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of the FHL1 gene cause Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Gueneau L, Bertrand AT, Jais JP, Salih MA, Stojkovic T, Wehnert M, Hoeltzenbein M, Spuler S, Saitoh S, Verschueren A, Tranchant C, Beuvin M, Lacene E, Romero NB, Heath S, Zelenika D, Voit T, Eymard B, Ben Yaou R, Bonne G
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.07.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.07.015)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Sep;85(3):338-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.07.015. Epub 
2009 Aug 27.

Mutations of the FHL1 gene cause Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.

Gueneau L(1), Bertrand AT, Jais JP, Salih MA, Stojkovic T, Wehnert M, 
Hoeltzenbein M, Spuler S, Saitoh S, Verschueren A, Tranchant C, Beuvin M, Lacene 
E, Romero NB, Heath S, Zelenika D, Voit T, Eymard B, Ben Yaou R, Bonne G.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U974, Paris, France.

Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is a rare disorder characterized by 
early joint contractures, muscular dystrophy, and cardiac involvement with 
conduction defects and arrhythmias. So far, only 35% of EDMD cases are 
genetically elucidated and associated with EMD or LMNA gene mutations, 
suggesting the existence of additional major genes. By whole-genome scan, we 
identified linkage to the Xq26.3 locus containing the FHL1 gene in three 
informative families belonging to our EMD- and LMNA-negative cohort. Analysis of 
the FHL1 gene identified seven mutations, in the distal exons of FHL1 in these 
families, three additional families, and one isolated case, which differently 
affect the three FHL1 protein isoforms: two missense mutations affecting highly 
conserved cysteines, one abolishing the termination codon, and four out-of-frame 
insertions or deletions. The predominant phenotype was characterized by myopathy 
with scapulo-peroneal and/or axial distribution, as well as joint contractures, 
and associated with a peculiar cardiac disease characterized by conduction 
defects, arrhythmias, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in all index cases of the 
seven families. Heterozygous female carriers were either asymptomatic or had 
cardiac disease and/or mild myopathy. Interestingly, four of the FHL1-mutated 
male relatives had isolated cardiac disease, and an overt hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy was present in two. Expression and functional studies 
demonstrated that the FHL1 proteins were severely reduced in all tested patients 
and that this was associated with a severe delay in myotube formation in the two 
patients for whom myoblasts were available. In conclusion, FHL1 should be 
considered as a gene associated with the X-linked EDMD phenotype, as well as 
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.07.015
PMCID: PMC2771595
PMID: 19716112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]