---
reference_id: "PMID:39298146"
title: "Risk Stratification in Nonischemic Dilated Cardiomyopathy Using CMR Imaging: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Eichhorn C
- Koeckerling D
- Reddy RK
- Ardissino M
- Rogowski M
- Coles B
- Hunziker L
- Greulich S
- Shiri I
- Frey N
- Eckstein J
- Windecker S
- Kwong RY
- Siontis GCM
- Gräni C
journal: JAMA
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2024.13946
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk Stratification in Nonischemic Dilated Cardiomyopathy Using CMR Imaging: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Eichhorn C, Koeckerling D, Reddy RK, Ardissino M, Rogowski M, Coles B, Hunziker L, Greulich S, Shiri I, Frey N, Eckstein J, Windecker S, Kwong RY, Siontis GCM, Gräni C
**Journal:** JAMA (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2024.13946](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2024.13946)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2024 Sep 19;332(18):1535-50. doi: 10.1001/jama.2024.13946. Online ahead
of  print.

Risk Stratification in Nonischemic Dilated Cardiomyopathy Using CMR Imaging: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Eichhorn C(1)(2)(3), Koeckerling D(4), Reddy RK(5)(6), Ardissino M(5)(6)(7), 
Rogowski M(2)(8), Coles B(9), Hunziker L(10), Greulich S(11), Shiri I(10), Frey 
N(4), Eckstein J(1), Windecker S(10), Kwong RY(12), Siontis GCM(10), Gräni 
C(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Acute Medicine, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Private University in the Principality of Liechtenstein, Triesen.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, See-Spital, Horgen, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Angiology and Respiratory Medicine, University 
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(6)Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(7)British Heart Foundation Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit, Department of 
Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(8)Agaplesion General Hospital, Hagen, Germany.
(9)Velindre University NHS Trust Library & Knowledge Service, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, Wales.
(10)Department of Cardiology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University 
of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(11)Department of Cardiology and Angiology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(12)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Comment in
    AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2025 Aug;225(2):e2432414. doi: 10.2214/AJR.24.32414.

IMPORTANCE: Accurate risk stratification of nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy 
(NIDCM) remains challenging.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association of cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) 
imaging-derived measurements with clinical outcomes in NIDCM.
DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane Library, and Web of Science Core 
Collection databases were systematically searched for articles from January 2005 
to April 2023.
STUDY SELECTION: Prospective and retrospective nonrandomized diagnostic studies 
reporting on the association between CMR imaging-derived measurements and 
adverse clinical outcomes in NIDCM were deemed eligible.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Prespecified items related to patient population, 
CMR imaging measurements, and clinical outcomes were extracted at the study 
level by 2 independent reviewers. Random-effects models were fitted using 
restricted maximum likelihood estimation and the method of Hartung, Knapp, 
Sidik, and Jonkman.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: All-cause mortality, cardiovascular mortality, 
arrhythmic events, heart failure events, and major adverse cardiac events 
(MACE).
RESULTS: A total of 103 studies including 29 687 patients with NIDCM were 
analyzed. Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) presence and extent (per 1%) were 
associated with higher all-cause mortality (hazard ratio [HR], 1.81 [95% CI, 
1.60-2.04]; P < .001 and HR, 1.07 [95% CI, 1.02-1.12]; P = .02, respectively), 
cardiovascular mortality (HR, 2.43 [95% CI, 2.13-2.78]; P < .001 and HR, 1.15 
[95% CI, 1.07-1.24]; P = .01), arrhythmic events (HR, 2.69 [95% CI, 2.20-3.30]; 
P < .001 and HR, 1.07 [95% CI, 1.03-1.12]; P = .004) and heart failure events 
(HR, 1.98 [95% CI, 1.73-2.27]; P < .001 and HR, 1.06 [95% CI, 1.01-1.10]; 
P = .02). Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) (per 1%) was not associated 
with all-cause mortality (HR, 0.99 [95% CI, 0.97-1.02]; P = .47), cardiovascular 
mortality (HR, 0.97 [95% CI, 0.94-1.00]; P = .05), or arrhythmic outcomes (HR, 
0.99 [95% CI, 0.97-1.01]; P = .34). Lower risks for heart failure events (HR, 
0.97 [95% CI, 0.95-0.98]; P = .002) and MACE (HR, 0.98 [95% CI, 0.96-0.99]; 
P < .001) were observed with higher LVEF. Higher native T1 relaxation times (per 
10 ms) were associated with arrhythmic events (HR, 1.07 [95% CI, 1.01-1.14]; 
P = .04) and MACE (HR, 1.06 [95% CI, 1.01-1.11]; P = .03). Global longitudinal 
strain (GLS) (per 1%) was not associated with heart failure events (HR, 1.06 
[95% CI, 0.95-1.18]; P = .15) or MACE (HR, 1.03 [95% CI, 0.94-1.14]; P = .43). 
Limited data precluded definitive analysis for native T1 relaxation times, GLS, 
and extracellular volume fraction (ECV) with respect to mortality outcomes.
CONCLUSION: The presence and extent of LGE were associated with various adverse 
clinical outcomes, whereas LVEF was not significantly associated with mortality 
and arrhythmic end points in NIDCM. Risk stratification using native T1 
relaxation times, extracellular volume fraction, and global longitudinal strain 
requires further evaluation.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2024.13946
PMCID: PMC11413760
PMID: 39298146

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Ardissino 
reported receiving funding from the National Institute for Health and Care 
Research Academic Clinical Fellowship program. Dr Frey reported receiving 
personal fees from Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and Pfizer outside the 
submitted work. Dr Eckstein reported receiving personal fees from PulseOn for 
serving as a board member outside the submitted work. Dr Windecker reported 
receiving grants from Abbott, Abiomed, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, B. Braun, 
Biotronik, Boehringer Ingelheim, Boston Scientific, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Cardinal Health, Cardiovalve, Cordis Medical, Corflow Therapeutics, CSL Behring, 
Daiichi Sankyo, Edwards Lifesciences, Farapulse Inc, Fumedica, Guerbet, Idorsia, 
Inari Medical, Infraredx, Janssen-Cilag, Johnson & Johnson, MedAlliance, 
Medicure, Medtronic, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Miracor Medical, Novartis, Novo 
Nordisk, Organon, OrPha, Pharming Tech, Pfizer, Polares, Regeneron, Sanofi 
Aventis, Servier, Sinomed, Terumo, Vifor, and V-Wave for research, travel, or 
education to their institution outside the submitted work; serving as an 
advisory board member and/or member of the steering/executive group of trials 
funded by Abbott, Abiomed, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boston Scientific, 
Biotronik, Bristol Myers Squibb, Edwards Lifesciences, MedAlliance, Medtronic, 
Novartis, Polares, Recardio, Sinomed, Terumo, and V-Wave with payments to their 
institution; and serving as a member of the steering/executive committee group 
of several investigator-initiated trials that received industry funding outside 
the submitted work. Dr Gräni reported receiving funding from the Swiss National 
Science Foundation, InnoSuisse, Center for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 
(University of Bern), GAMBIT Foundation, Novartis Foundation for 
Medical-Biological Research, and Swiss Heart Foundation outside the submitted 
work; and serving as Editor in Chief of The International Journal of 
Cardiovascular Imaging. No other disclosures were reported.