---
reference_id: "PMID:31308545"
title: Genome-wide association study identifies eight risk loci and implicates metabo-psychiatric origins for anorexia nervosa.
authors:
- Watson HJ
- Yilmaz Z
- Thornton LM
- Hübel C
- Coleman JRI
- Gaspar HA
- Bryois J
- Hinney A
- Leppä VM
- Mattheisen M
- Medland SE
- Ripke S
- Yao S
- Giusti-Rodríguez P
- Anorexia Nervosa Genetics Initiative
- Hanscombe KB
- Purves KL
- Eating Disorders Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium
- Adan RAH
- Alfredsson L
- Ando T
- Andreassen OA
- Baker JH
- Berrettini WH
- Boehm I
- Boni C
- Perica VB
- Buehren K
- Burghardt R
- Cassina M
- Cichon S
- Clementi M
- Cone RD
- Courtet P
- Crow S
- Crowley JJ
- Danner UN
- Davis OSP
- de Zwaan M
- Dedoussis G
- Degortes D
- DeSocio JE
- Dick DM
- Dikeos D
- Dina C
- Dmitrzak-Weglarz M
- Docampo E
- Duncan LE
- Egberts K
- Ehrlich S
- Escaramís G
- Esko T
- Estivill X
- Farmer A
- Favaro A
- Fernández-Aranda F
- Fichter MM
- Fischer K
- Föcker M
- Foretova L
- Forstner AJ
- Forzan M
- Franklin CS
- Gallinger S
- Giegling I
- Giuranna J
- Gonidakis F
- Gorwood P
- Mayora MG
- Guillaume S
- Guo Y
- Hakonarson H
- Hatzikotoulas K
- Hauser J
- Hebebrand J
- Helder SG
- Herms S
- Herpertz-Dahlmann B
- Herzog W
- Huckins LM
- Hudson JI
- Imgart H
- Inoko H
- Janout V
- Jiménez-Murcia S
- Julià A
- Kalsi G
- Kaminská D
- Kaprio J
- Karhunen L
- Karwautz A
- Kas MJH
- Kennedy JL
- Keski-Rahkonen A
- Kiezebrink K
- Kim YR
- Klareskog L
- Klump KL
- Knudsen GPS
- La Via MC
- Le Hellard S
- Levitan RD
- Li D
- Lilenfeld L
- Lin BD
- Lissowska J
- Luykx J
- Magistretti PJ
- Maj M
- Mannik K
- Marsal S
- Marshall CR
- Mattingsdal M
- McDevitt S
- McGuffin P
- Metspalu A
- Meulenbelt I
- Micali N
- Mitchell K
- Monteleone AM
- Monteleone P
- Munn-Chernoff MA
- Nacmias B
- Navratilova M
- Ntalla I
- "O'Toole JK"
- Ophoff RA
- Padyukov L
- Palotie A
- Pantel J
- Papezova H
- Pinto D
- Rabionet R
- Raevuori A
- Ramoz N
- Reichborn-Kjennerud T
- Ricca V
- Ripatti S
- Ritschel F
- Roberts M
- Rotondo A
- Rujescu D
- Rybakowski F
- Santonastaso P
- Scherag A
- Scherer SW
- Schmidt U
- Schork NJ
- Schosser A
- Seitz J
- Slachtova L
- Slagboom PE
- "Slof-Op 't Landt MCT"
- Slopien A
- Sorbi S
- Świątkowska B
- Szatkiewicz JP
- Tachmazidou I
- Tenconi E
- Tortorella A
- Tozzi F
- Treasure J
- Tsitsika A
- Tyszkiewicz-Nwafor M
- Tziouvas K
- van Elburg AA
- van Furth EF
- Wagner G
- Walton E
- Widen E
- Zeggini E
- Zerwas S
- Zipfel S
- Bergen AW
- Boden JM
- Brandt H
- Crawford S
- Halmi KA
- Horwood LJ
- Johnson C
- Kaplan AS
- Kaye WH
- Mitchell JE
- Olsen CM
- Pearson JF
- Pedersen NL
- Strober M
- Werge T
- Whiteman DC
- Woodside DB
- Stuber GD
- Gordon S
- Grove J
- Henders AK
- Juréus A
- Kirk KM
- Larsen JT
- Parker R
- Petersen L
- Jordan J
- Kennedy M
- Montgomery GW
- Wade TD
- Birgegård A
- Lichtenstein P
- Norring C
- Landén M
- Martin NG
- Mortensen PB
- Sullivan PF
- Breen G
- Bulik CM
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41588-019-0439-2
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anorexia Nervosa/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Body Mass Index
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genomics/methods
- Humans
- Male
- "Mental Disorders/complications, genetics"
- "Metabolic Diseases/complications, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- Quantitative Trait Loci
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association study identifies eight risk loci and implicates metabo-psychiatric origins for anorexia nervosa.
**Authors:** Watson HJ, Yilmaz Z, Thornton LM, Hübel C, Coleman JRI, Gaspar HA, Bryois J, Hinney A, Leppä VM, Mattheisen M, Medland SE, Ripke S, Yao S, Giusti-Rodríguez P, Anorexia Nervosa Genetics Initiative, Hanscombe KB, Purves KL, Eating Disorders Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, Adan RAH, Alfredsson L, Ando T, Andreassen OA, Baker JH, Berrettini WH, Boehm I, Boni C, Perica VB, Buehren K, Burghardt R, Cassina M, Cichon S, Clementi M, Cone RD, Courtet P, Crow S, Crowley JJ, Danner UN, Davis OSP, de Zwaan M, Dedoussis G, Degortes D, DeSocio JE, Dick DM, Dikeos D, Dina C, Dmitrzak-Weglarz M, Docampo E, Duncan LE, Egberts K, Ehrlich S, Escaramís G, Esko T, Estivill X, Farmer A, Favaro A, Fernández-Aranda F, Fichter MM, Fischer K, Föcker M, Foretova L, Forstner AJ, Forzan M, Franklin CS, Gallinger S, Giegling I, Giuranna J, Gonidakis F, Gorwood P, Mayora MG, Guillaume S, Guo Y, Hakonarson H, Hatzikotoulas K, Hauser J, Hebebrand J, Helder SG, Herms S, Herpertz-Dahlmann B, Herzog W, Huckins LM, Hudson JI, Imgart H, Inoko H, Janout V, Jiménez-Murcia S, Julià A, Kalsi G, Kaminská D, Kaprio J, Karhunen L, Karwautz A, Kas MJH, Kennedy JL, Keski-Rahkonen A, Kiezebrink K, Kim YR, Klareskog L, Klump KL, Knudsen GPS, La Via MC, Le Hellard S, Levitan RD, Li D, Lilenfeld L, Lin BD, Lissowska J, Luykx J, Magistretti PJ, Maj M, Mannik K, Marsal S, Marshall CR, Mattingsdal M, McDevitt S, McGuffin P, Metspalu A, Meulenbelt I, Micali N, Mitchell K, Monteleone AM, Monteleone P, Munn-Chernoff MA, Nacmias B, Navratilova M, Ntalla I, O'Toole JK, Ophoff RA, Padyukov L, Palotie A, Pantel J, Papezova H, Pinto D, Rabionet R, Raevuori A, Ramoz N, Reichborn-Kjennerud T, Ricca V, Ripatti S, Ritschel F, Roberts M, Rotondo A, Rujescu D, Rybakowski F, Santonastaso P, Scherag A, Scherer SW, Schmidt U, Schork NJ, Schosser A, Seitz J, Slachtova L, Slagboom PE, Slof-Op 't Landt MCT, Slopien A, Sorbi S, Świątkowska B, Szatkiewicz JP, Tachmazidou I, Tenconi E, Tortorella A, Tozzi F, Treasure J, Tsitsika A, Tyszkiewicz-Nwafor M, Tziouvas K, van Elburg AA, van Furth EF, Wagner G, Walton E, Widen E, Zeggini E, Zerwas S, Zipfel S, Bergen AW, Boden JM, Brandt H, Crawford S, Halmi KA, Horwood LJ, Johnson C, Kaplan AS, Kaye WH, Mitchell JE, Olsen CM, Pearson JF, Pedersen NL, Strober M, Werge T, Whiteman DC, Woodside DB, Stuber GD, Gordon S, Grove J, Henders AK, Juréus A, Kirk KM, Larsen JT, Parker R, Petersen L, Jordan J, Kennedy M, Montgomery GW, Wade TD, Birgegård A, Lichtenstein P, Norring C, Landén M, Martin NG, Mortensen PB, Sullivan PF, Breen G, Bulik CM
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41588-019-0439-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-019-0439-2)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2019 Aug;51(8):1207-1214. doi: 10.1038/s41588-019-0439-2. Epub 2019
 Jul 15.

Genome-wide association study identifies eight risk loci and implicates
metabo-psychiatric origins for anorexia nervosa.

Watson HJ(1)(2)(3), Yilmaz Z(1)(4), Thornton LM(1), Hübel C(5)(6), Coleman
JRI(5)(7), Gaspar HA(5)(7), Bryois J(6), Hinney A(8), Leppä VM(6), Mattheisen
M(9)(10)(11)(12), Medland SE(13), Ripke S(14)(15)(16), Yao S(6),
Giusti-Rodríguez P(4); Anorexia Nervosa Genetics Initiative; Hanscombe KB(17),
Purves KL(5); Eating Disorders Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics
Consortium; Adan RAH(18)(19)(20), Alfredsson L(21), Ando T(22), Andreassen
OA(23), Baker JH(1), Berrettini WH(24), Boehm I(25), Boni C(26), Perica
VB(27)(28), Buehren K(29), Burghardt R(30), Cassina M(31), Cichon S(32),
Clementi M(31), Cone RD(33), Courtet P(34), Crow S(35), Crowley JJ(4)(10),
Danner UN(19), Davis OSP(36)(37), de Zwaan M(38), Dedoussis G(39), Degortes
D(40), DeSocio JE(41), Dick DM(42), Dikeos D(43), Dina C(44), Dmitrzak-Weglarz
M(45), Docampo E(46)(47)(48), Duncan LE(49), Egberts K(50), Ehrlich S(25),
Escaramís G(46)(47)(48), Esko T(51)(52), Estivill X(46)(47)(48)(53), Farmer
A(5), Favaro A(40), Fernández-Aranda F(54)(55), Fichter MM(56)(57), Fischer
K(51), Föcker M(8), Foretova L(58), Forstner AJ(32)(59)(60)(61)(62), Forzan
M(31), Franklin CS(27), Gallinger S(63), Giegling I(64), Giuranna J(8),
Gonidakis F(65), Gorwood P(26)(66), Mayora MG(46)(47)(48), Guillaume S(34), Guo
Y(67), Hakonarson H(67)(68), Hatzikotoulas K(27)(69), Hauser J(70), Hebebrand
J(8), Helder SG(5)(71), Herms S(32)(60)(62), Herpertz-Dahlmann B(29), Herzog
W(72), Huckins LM(27)(73), Hudson JI(74), Imgart H(75), Inoko H(76), Janout
V(77), Jiménez-Murcia S(54)(55), Julià A(78), Kalsi G(5), Kaminská D(79), Kaprio
J(80)(81), Karhunen L(82), Karwautz A(83), Kas MJH(18)(84), Kennedy
JL(85)(86)(87), Keski-Rahkonen A(80), Kiezebrink K(88), Kim YR(89), Klareskog
L(90), Klump KL(91), Knudsen GPS(92), La Via MC(1), Le Hellard S(93)(94)(95),
Levitan RD(85)(86)(87), Li D(67), Lilenfeld L(96), Lin BD(18), Lissowska J(97),
Luykx J(18), Magistretti PJ(98)(99), Maj M(100), Mannik K(51)(101), Marsal
S(78), Marshall CR(102), Mattingsdal M(23), McDevitt S(103)(104), McGuffin P(5),
Metspalu A(51)(105), Meulenbelt I(106), Micali N(107)(108)(109), Mitchell
K(110), Monteleone AM(100), Monteleone P(111), Munn-Chernoff MA(1), Nacmias
B(112), Navratilova M(58), Ntalla I(39), O'Toole JK(113), Ophoff RA(18)(114),
Padyukov L(90), Palotie A(52)(81)(115), Pantel J(26), Papezova H(79), Pinto
D(73), Rabionet R(116)(117)(118), Raevuori A(80), Ramoz N(26),
Reichborn-Kjennerud T(92)(119), Ricca V(112)(120), Ripatti S(52)(80)(121),
Ritschel F(25)(122), Roberts M(5)(123)(124), Rotondo A(125), Rujescu D(56)(64),
Rybakowski F(126), Santonastaso P(127), Scherag A(128), Scherer SW(129), Schmidt
U(7)(130), Schork NJ(131), Schosser A(132), Seitz J(29), Slachtova L(133),
Slagboom PE(106), Slof-Op 't Landt MCT(134)(135), Slopien A(136), Sorbi
S(112)(137), Świątkowska B(138), Szatkiewicz JP(4), Tachmazidou I(27), Tenconi
E(40), Tortorella A(139)(140), Tozzi F(141), Treasure J(7)(130), Tsitsika
A(142), Tyszkiewicz-Nwafor M(136), Tziouvas K(143), van Elburg AA(19)(144), van
Furth EF(134)(135), Wagner G(83), Walton E(25), Widen E(81), Zeggini E(27)(69),
Zerwas S(1), Zipfel S(145), Bergen AW(146)(147), Boden JM(148), Brandt H(149),
Crawford S(149), Halmi KA(150), Horwood LJ(148), Johnson C(151), Kaplan
AS(85)(86)(87), Kaye WH(152), Mitchell JE(153), Olsen CM(13), Pearson JF(154),
Pedersen NL(6), Strober M(155)(156), Werge T(157), Whiteman DC(13), Woodside
DB(86)(87)(158)(159), Stuber GD(1)(160), Gordon S(13), Grove
J(9)(161)(162)(163), Henders AK(164), Juréus A(6), Kirk KM(13), Larsen
JT(161)(165)(166), Parker R(13), Petersen L(161)(165)(166), Jordan J(123)(167),
Kennedy M(168), Montgomery GW(13)(164)(169), Wade TD(170), Birgegård A(10)(11),
Lichtenstein P(6), Norring C(10)(11), Landén M(6)(171), Martin NG(13), Mortensen
PB(161)(165)(166), Sullivan PF(1)(4)(6), Breen G(5)(7), Bulik CM(172)(173)(174).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(2)School of Psychology, Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
(3)School of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Western Australia,
Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(5)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Social, Genetic and
Developmental Psychiatry (SGDP) Centre, King's College London, London, UK.
(6)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, King's
College London and South London and Maudsley National Health Service Foundation
Trust, London, UK.
(8)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University Hospital Essen,
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(9)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(10)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(11)Center for Psychiatry Research, Stockholm Health Care Services, Stockholm
City Council, Stockholm, Sweden.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, University of
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(13)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(14)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA.
(15)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA,
USA.
(16)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin,
Berlin, Germany.
(17)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, Guy's
Hospital, London, UK.
(18)Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, Department of Translational Neuroscience,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(19)Center for Eating Disorders Rintveld, Altrecht Mental Health Institute,
Zeist, the Netherlands.
(20)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy at the
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(21)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(22)Department of Behavioral Medicine, National Institute of Mental Health,
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(23)NORMENT KG Jebsen Centre, Division of Mental Health and Addiction,
University of Oslo, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(24)Department of Psychiatry, Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Perelman
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(25)Division of Psychological and Social Medicine and Developmental
Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden,
Germany.
(26)INSERM 1266, Institute of Psychiatry and Neuroscience of Paris, Paris,
France.
(27)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK.
(28)Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine, University of Split,
Split, Croatia.
(29)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and
Psychotherapy, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(30)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Klinikum Frankfurt/Oder,
Frankfurt, Germany.
(31)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Woman and Child Health, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy.
(32)Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University Hospital Basel,
Basel, Switzerland.
(33)Life Sciences Institute and Department of Molecular and Integrative
Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(34)Department of Emergency Psychiatry and Post-Acute Care, CHRU Montpellier,
University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(35)Department of Psychiatry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(36)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(37)School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(38)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.
(39)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Harokopio University, Athens, Greece.
(40)Department of Neurosciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(41)College of Nursing, Seattle University, Seattle, WA, USA.
(42)Department of Psychology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA,
USA.
(43)Department of Psychiatry, Athens University Medical School, Athens
University, Athens, Greece.
(44)L'institut du thorax, INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France.
(45)Department of Psychiatric Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan, Poland.
(46)Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(47)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(48)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en Epidemiología y Salud Pública
(CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain.
(49)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA.
(50)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and
Psychotherapy, University Hospital of Würzburg, Centre for Mental Health,
Würzburg, Germany.
(51)Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(52)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA,
USA.
(53)Genomics and Disease, Bioinformatics and Genomics Programme, Centre for
Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain.
(54)Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital of Bellvitge -IDIBELL and
CIBERobn, Barcelona, Spain.
(55)Department of Clinical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(56)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Ludwig-Maximilians-University
(LMU), Munich, Germany.
(57)Schön Klinik Roseneck affiliated with the Medical Faculty of the University
of Munich (LMU), Munich, Germany.
(58)Department of Cancer, Epidemiology and Genetics, Masaryk Memorial Cancer
Institute, Brno, Czech Republic.
(59)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine &
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(60)Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany.
(61)Department of Psychiatry (UPK), University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(62)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(63)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(64)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, Martin Luther
University of Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany.
(65)First Psychiatric Department, National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, Medical School, Eginition Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(66)CMME, Hôpital Sainte-Anne (GHU Paris Psychiatrie et Neurosciences), Paris
Descartes University, Paris, France.
(67)Center for Applied Genomics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(68)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(69)Institute of Translational Genomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg,
Germany.
(70)Department of Adult Psychiatry, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan, Poland.
(71)Zorg op Orde, Leidschendam, the Netherlands.
(72)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, Heidelberg
University Hospital, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(73)Department of Psychiatry, and Genetics and Genomics Sciences, Division of
Psychiatric Genomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY,
USA.
(74)Biological Psychiatry Laboratory, McLean Hospital/Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.
(75)Eating Disorders Unit, Parklandklinik, Bad Wildungen, Germany.
(76)Department of Molecular Life Science, Division of Basic Medical Science and
Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, Tokai University, Isehara, Japan.
(77)Faculty of Health Sciences, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(78)Rheumatology Research Group, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute, Barcelona,
Spain.
(79)Department of Psychiatry, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic.
(80)Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(81)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki Institute of Life
Science, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(82)Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition, Department of Clinical
Nutrition, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(83)Eating Disorders Unit, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(84)Groningen Institute for Evolutionary Life Sciences, University of Groningen,
Groningen, the Netherlands.
(85)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(86)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(87)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(88)Institute of Applied Health Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
(89)Department of Psychiatry, Seoul Paik Hospital, Inje University, Seoul,
Korea.
(90)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(91)Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(92)Department of Mental Disorders, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo,
Norway.
(93)Department of Clinical Science, K.G. Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research,
Norwegian Centre for Mental Disorders Research (NORMENT), University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway.
(94)Dr. Einar Martens Research Group for Biological Psychiatry, Center for
Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen,
Norway.
(95)Department of Clinical Medicine, Laboratory Building, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(96)American School of Professional Psychology, Argosy University, Northern
Virginia, Arlington, VA, USA.
(97)Department of Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention, M Skłodowska-Curie Cancer
Center - Oncology Center, Warsaw, Poland.
(98)BESE Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal,
Saudi Arabia.
(99)Department of Psychiatry, University of Lausanne-University Hospital of
Lausanne (UNIL-CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(100)Department of Psychiatry, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli",
Naples, Italy.
(101)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
(102)Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(103)Department of Psychiatry, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(104)HSE National Clinical Programme for Eating Disorders, Cork, Ireland.
(105)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia.
(106)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Leiden University Medical Centre,
Leiden, the Netherlands.
(107)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva,
Geneva, Switzerland.
(108)Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Geneva University Hospital,
Geneva, Switzerland.
(109)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London, UK.
(110)National Center for PTSD, VA Boston Healthcare System, Department of
Psychiatry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(111)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry "Scuola Medica Salernitana",
University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy.
(112)Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health
(NEUROFARBA), University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(113)Kartini Clinic, Portland, OR, USA.
(114)Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and
Human Behavior, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(115)Center for Human Genome Research at the Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA.
(116)Saint Joan de Déu Research Institute, Saint Joan de Déu Barcelona
Children's Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.
(117)Institute of Biomedicine (IBUB), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(118)Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(119)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(120)Department of Health Science, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(121)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), HiLIFE Unit, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(122)Eating Disorders Research and Treatment Center, Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany.
(123)Department of Psychological Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch,
New Zealand.
(124)Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, University of Aukland, Aukland, New
Zealand.
(125)Department of Psychiatry, Neurobiology, Pharmacology, and Biotechnologies,
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(126)Department of Psychiatry, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan,
Poland.
(127)Department of Neurosciences, Padua Neuroscience Center, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy.
(128)Institute of Medical Statistics, Computer and Data Sciences, Jena
University Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(129)Department of Genetics and Genomic Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(130)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Department of
Psychological Medicine, King's College London, London, UK.
(131)J. Craig Venter Institute (JCVI), La Jolla, CA, USA.
(132)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.
(133)Department of Pediatrics and Center of Applied Genomics, First Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(134)Center for Eating Disorders Ursula, Rivierduinen, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(135)Department of Psychiatry, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, the
Netherlands.
(136)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(137)IRCSS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi, Florence, Italy.
(138)Department of Environmental Epidemiology, Nofer Institute of Occupational
Medicine, Lodz, Poland.
(139)Department of Psychiatry, University of Naples SUN, Naples, Italy.
(140)Department of Psychiatry, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(141)Brain Sciences Department, Stremble Ventures, Limassol, Cyprus.
(142)Adolescent Health Unit, Second Department of Pediatrics, "P. & A. Kyriakou"
Children's Hospital, University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(143)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, "P. & A. Kyriakou" Children's Hospital,
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(144)Faculty of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the
Netherlands.
(145)Department of Internal Medicine VI, Psychosomatic Medicine and
Psychotherapy, University Medical Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(146)BioRealm, LLC, Walnut, CA, USA.
(147)Oregon Research Institute, Eugene, OR, USA.
(148)Christchurch Health and Development Study, University of Otago,
Christchurch, New Zealand.
(149)The Center for Eating Disorders at Sheppard Pratt, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(150)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.
(151)Eating Recovery Center, Denver, CO, USA.
(152)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
CA, USA.
(153)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, University of North Dakota
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Fargo, ND, USA.
(154)Biostatistics and Computational Biology Unit, University of Otago,
Christchurch, New Zealand.
(155)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Science, Semel Institute for
Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.
(156)David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.
(157)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(158)Centre for Mental Health, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(159)Program for Eating Disorders, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(160)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(161)The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research
(iPSYCH), Aarhus, Denmark.
(162)Centre for Integrative Sequencing, iSEQ, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(163)Bioinformatics Research Centre, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(164)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.
(165)National Centre for Register-Based Research, Aarhus BSS, Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark.
(166)Centre for Integrated Register-based Research (CIRRAU), Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark.
(167)Canterbury District Health Board, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(168)Department of Pathology and Biomedical Science, University of Otago,
Christchurch, New Zealand.
(169)Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia.
(170)School of Psychology, Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia.
(171)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg,
Sweden.
(172)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA. cynthia_bulik@med.unc.edu.
(173)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. cynthia_bulik@med.unc.edu.
(174)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA. cynthia_bulik@med.unc.edu.

Characterized primarily by a low body-mass index, anorexia nervosa is a complex
and serious illness1, affecting 0.9-4% of women and 0.3% of men2-4, with
twin-based heritability estimates of 50-60%5. Mortality rates are higher than
those in other psychiatric disorders6, and outcomes are unacceptably poor7. Here
we combine data from the Anorexia Nervosa Genetics Initiative (ANGI)8,9 and the
Eating Disorders Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC-ED)
and conduct a genome-wide association study of 16,992 cases of anorexia nervosa
and 55,525 controls, identifying eight significant loci. The genetic
architecture of anorexia nervosa mirrors its clinical presentation, showing
significant genetic correlations with psychiatric disorders, physical activity,
and metabolic (including glycemic), lipid and anthropometric traits, independent
of the effects of common variants associated with body-mass index. These results
further encourage a reconceptualization of anorexia nervosa as a
metabo-psychiatric disorder. Elucidating the metabolic component is a critical
direction for future research, and paying attention to both psychiatric and
metabolic components may be key to improving outcomes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41588-019-0439-2
PMCID: PMC6779477
PMID: 31308545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors report the
following potential competing interests. O.A.A. received a speaker’s honorarium
from Lundbeck. G.B. received grant funding and consultancy fees in preclinical
genetics from Eli Lilly, consultancy fees from Otsuka and has received honoraria
from Illumina. C.M.B. is a grant recipient from Shire Pharmaceuticals and served
on Shire Scientific Advisory Board; she receives author royalties from Pearson.
D.D. served as a speaker and on advisory boards, and has received consultancy
fees for participation in research from various pharmaceutical industry
companies including: AstraZeneca, Boehringer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly,
Genesis Pharma, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Lundbeck, Organon, Sanofi, UniPharma,
and Wyeth; he has received unrestricted grants from Lilly and AstraZeneca as
director of the Sleep Research Unit of Eginition Hospital (National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece). J.I.H. has received grant support
from Shire and Sunovion, and has received consulting fees from DiaMentis, Shire,
and Sunovion. A.S.K. is a member of the Shire Canadian BED Advisory Board and is
on the steering committee for the Shire B/educated Educational Symposium: June
15-16, 2018. J.L.K. served as an unpaid member of the scientific advisory board
of AssurexHealth Inc. M.L. declares that, over the past 36 months, he has
received lecture honoraria from Lundbeck and served as scientific consultant for
EPID Research Oy. No other equity ownership, profit-sharing agreements,
royalties, or patent. P.F.S. is on the Lundbeck advisory committee and is a
Lundbeck grant recipient; he has served on the scientific advisory board for
Pfizer, has received a consultation fee from Element Genomics, and a speaker
reimbursement fee from Roche. J.T. has received an honorarium for participation
in an EAP meeting and has received royalties from several books from Routledge,
Wiley, and Oxford University press. T.W. has acted as a lecturer and scientific
advisor to H. Lundbeck A/S. All other authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
