---
reference_id: "PMID:33170870"
title: "Vitiligo and anxiety: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Kussainova A
- Kassym L
- Akhmetova A
- Glushkova N
- Sabirov U
- Adilgozhina S
- Tuleutayeva R
- Semenova Y
journal: PLoS One
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0241445
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anxiety/epidemiology, psychology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Prevalence
- "Vitiligo/epidemiology, psychology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitiligo and anxiety: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Kussainova A, Kassym L, Akhmetova A, Glushkova N, Sabirov U, Adilgozhina S, Tuleutayeva R, Semenova Y
**Journal:** PLoS One (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0241445](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0241445)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2020 Nov 10;15(11):e0241445. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0241445. 
eCollection 2020.

Vitiligo and anxiety: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Kussainova A(1), Kassym L(2), Akhmetova A(1), Glushkova N(3), Sabirov U(4), 
Adilgozhina S(5), Tuleutayeva R(6), Semenova Y(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatovenerology and Cosmetology, NJSC "Semey Medical 
University", Semey, Republic of Kazakhstan.
(2)Nazarbayev University School of Medicine, Nur-Sultan, Republic of Kazakhstan.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Evidence-Based Medicine and Biostatistics, 
Kazakhstan Medical University Higher School of Public Health, Almaty, Republic 
of Kazakhstan.
(4)Republican Specialized Scientific and Practical Medical Center of 
Dermatovenerology and Cosmetology, Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan.
(5)Department of Family Medicine, NJSC "Semey Medical University", Semey, 
Republic of Kazakhstan.
(6)Department of Pharmacology Department, NJSC "Semey Medical University", 
Semey, Republic of Kazakhstan.
(7)Department of Neurology, Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology, NJSC "Semey 
Medical University", Semey, Republic of Kazakhstan.

BACKGROUND: Vitiligo is an acquired depigmenting skin disease which is often 
accompanied by mental distress. There are numerous studies dedicated to local 
and global prevalence of depression in patients with vitiligo but anxiety has 
not been recognized as a major mental problem within named population. We aimed 
to evaluate the prevalence of anxiety among patients with vitiligo from 
different countries and to compare it with patients suffering from eczema, 
psoriasis, and acne.
METHODS: In November 2019, we conducted a systematic search for observational 
studies that examined the prevalence of anxiety in vitiligo patients. Fifteen 
studies comprising 1176 patients with vitiligo were included to our systematic 
review.
RESULTS: The general prevalence of anxiety among vitiligo patients was equal to 
35.8%. Statistically significant difference in anxiety rates was found among 
female and male patients (47.32% vs 42.4%) (P = 0.03), but the clinical 
relevance of this issue remains arguable. In addition, the pooled odds ratio 
among vitiligo and non-vitiligo patients did not indicate a statistical 
significance among patients coming from different continents.
CONCLUSIONS: The pooled prevalence of anxiety among vitiligo patients worldwide 
was comparable to other severe skin disorders. This finding accentuates the 
necessity of anxiety awareness in management of patients with skin diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0241445
PMCID: PMC7654800
PMID: 33170870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.