---
reference_id: "PMID:20308616"
title: "Evaluation of bromocriptine in the treatment of acute severe peripartum cardiomyopathy: a proof-of-concept pilot study."
authors:
- Sliwa K
- Blauwet L
- Tibazarwa K
- Libhaber E
- Smedema JP
- Becker A
- McMurray J
- Yamac H
- Labidi S
- Struman I
- Hilfiker-Kleiner D
journal: Circulation
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.901496
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Blood Pressure/drug effects
- "Bromocriptine/administration & dosage"
- "Cardiomyopathies/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Cathepsin D/blood
- Female
- "Heart Failure/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- "Hormone Antagonists/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Middle Aged
- Parturition
- Pilot Projects
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications, Cardiovascular/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Pregnancy Outcome
- Prolactin/blood
- Thromboembolism/diagnosis
- Treatment Outcome
- Ultrasonography
- "Ventricular Function, Left/drug effects"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of bromocriptine in the treatment of acute severe peripartum cardiomyopathy: a proof-of-concept pilot study.
**Authors:** Sliwa K, Blauwet L, Tibazarwa K, Libhaber E, Smedema JP, Becker A, McMurray J, Yamac H, Labidi S, Struman I, Hilfiker-Kleiner D
**Journal:** Circulation (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.901496](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.901496)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2010 Apr 6;121(13):1465-73. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.901496.  Epub 2010 Mar 22.

Evaluation of bromocriptine in the treatment of acute severe peripartum 
cardiomyopathy: a proof-of-concept pilot study.

Sliwa K(1), Blauwet L, Tibazarwa K, Libhaber E, Smedema JP, Becker A, McMurray 
J, Yamac H, Labidi S, Struman I, Hilfiker-Kleiner D.

Author information:
(1)Hatter Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Medicine, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Anzio Rd, Observatory, Cape Town 7925, 
South Africa. sliwa-hahnlek@mdh-africa.org

Erratum in
    Circulation. 2010 Jun 1;121(21):e425. Struhman, Ingrid [corrected to 
Struman, Ingrid].

Comment in
    Circulation. 2010 Apr 6;121(13):1463-4. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3181db2f07.

BACKGROUND: Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) is a potentially life-threatening 
heart disease that occurs in previously healthy women. We identified prolactin, 
mainly its 16-kDa angiostatic and proapoptotic form, as a key factor in PPCM 
pathophysiology. Previous reports suggest that bromocriptine may have beneficial 
effects in women with acute onset of PPCM.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A prospective, single-center, randomized, open-label, 
proof-of-concept pilot study of women with newly diagnosed PPCM receiving 
standard care (PPCM-Std; n=10) versus standard care plus bromocriptine for 8 
weeks (PPCM-Br, n=10) was conducted. Because mothers receiving bromocriptine 
could not breast-feed, the 6-month outcome of their children (n=21) was studied 
as a secondary end point. Blinded clinical, hemodynamic, and echocardiographic 
assessments were performed at baseline and 6 months after diagnosis. Cardiac 
magnetic resonance imaging was performed 4 to 6 weeks after diagnosis in PPCM-Br 
patients. There were no significant differences in baseline characteristics, 
including serum 16-kDa prolactin levels and cathepsin D activity, between the 2 
study groups. PPCM-Br patients displayed greater recovery of left ventricular 
ejection fraction (27% to 58%; P=0.012) compared with PPCM-Std patients (27% to 
36%) at 6 months. One patient in the PPCM-Br group died compared with 4 patients 
in the PPCM-Std group. Significantly fewer PPCM-Br patients (n=1, 10%) 
experienced the composite end point of poor outcome defined as death, New York 
Heart Association functional class III/IV, or left ventricular ejection fraction 
<35% at 6 months compared with the PPCM-Std patients (n=8, 80%; P=0.006). 
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed no intracavitary thrombi. Infants of 
mothers in both groups showed normal growth and survival.
CONCLUSIONS: In this trial, the addition of bromocriptine to standard heart 
failure therapy appeared to improve left ventricular ejection fraction and a 
composite clinical outcome in women with acute severe PPCM, although the number 
of patients studied was small and the results cannot be considered definitive. 
Larger-scale multicenter and blinded studies are in progress to test this 
strategy more robustly.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.901496
PMID: 20308616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]