---
reference_id: PMID:37072472
title: "Spaceflight associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS): an update on potential microgravity-based pathophysiology and mitigation development."
authors:
- Ong J
- Mader TH
- Gibson CR
- Mason SS
- Lee AG
journal: Eye (Lond)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41433-023-02522-y
keywords:
- Intracranial Pressure/physiology
- Astronauts
- Humans
- Papilledema
- Space Flight
- Weightlessness/adverse effects
- Vision Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spaceflight associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS): an update on potential microgravity-based pathophysiology and mitigation development.
**Authors:** Ong J, Mader TH, Gibson CR, Mason SS, Lee AG
**Journal:** Eye (Lond) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41433-023-02522-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433-023-02522-y)

## Content

1. Eye (Lond). 2023 Aug;37(12):2409-2415. doi: 10.1038/s41433-023-02522-y. Epub 
2023 Apr 18.

Spaceflight associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS): an update on potential 
microgravity-based pathophysiology and mitigation development.

Ong J(1), Mader TH(2), Gibson CR(3)(4), Mason SS(5), Lee 
AG(6)(7)(8)(9)(10)(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Michigan Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)NASA Ophthalmology Consultant, Moab, UT, USA.
(3)KBR, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)South Shore Eye Center, League City, TX, USA.
(5)Aegis Aerospace, Houston, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Blanton Eye Institute, Houston Methodist 
Hospital, Houston, TX, USA. aglee@houstonmethodist.org.
(7)Center for Space Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. 
aglee@houstonmethodist.org.
(8)The Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston Methodist Hospital, 
Houston, TX, USA. aglee@houstonmethodist.org.
(9)Departments of Ophthalmology, Neurology, and Neurosurgery, Weill Cornell 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA. aglee@houstonmethodist.org.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
TX, USA. aglee@houstonmethodist.org.
(11)University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. 
aglee@houstonmethodist.org.
(12)Texas A&M College of Medicine, Bryan, TX, USA. aglee@houstonmethodist.org.
(13)Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, 
Iowa City, IA, USA. aglee@houstonmethodist.org.

Long-duration spaceflight is associated with neurologic and ophthalmic clinical 
and imaging findings in astronauts termed spaceflight associated neuro-ocular 
syndrome (SANS). These microgravity-induced findings have been well documented 
by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and are clearly a 
potential risk for future human space exploration. The underlying pathogenesis 
of SANS is not well understood, although multiple hypotheses have emerged. 
Terrestrial analogues and potential countermeasures have also been studied to 
further understand and potentially mitigate SANS. In this manuscript, we review 
the current understanding of SANS, discuss the prevailing hypotheses for 
pathogenesis, and describe current developments in terrestrial analogues and 
potential countermeasures for SANS.

Publisher: 摘要 摘要: 太空飞行相关神经视觉综合征 (Spaceflight associated neuro-ocular syndrome, 
SANS) 是指长时间的太空飞行与宇航员的神经和眼科临床和影像的病理性改变。美国国家航空航天局 (National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, NASA) 已经详细记录了这些由微重力引起的病理性改变, 这显然是未来人类探索太空的一个潜在风险。尽管出现了多种假设, 
但SANS的潜在发病机制仍不清楚。为了进一步了解和缓解SANS, 同时研究了陆地上的类似物与潜在的应对措施。本文回顾了目前对SANS的理解, 
讨论了发病机制的假说, 并描述了目前陆地上的类似物与SANS的潜在对策的发展。.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Royal College of 
Ophthalmologists.

DOI: 10.1038/s41433-023-02522-y
PMCID: PMC10397180
PMID: 37072472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.