---
reference_id: "PMID:35836432"
title: "Rare Angina: A Case Report of Ludwig's Angina."
authors:
- Sakhuja A
- Shrestha DB
- Aryal BB
- Mir WAY
- Verda L
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.25873
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare Angina: A Case Report of Ludwig's Angina.
**Authors:** Sakhuja A, Shrestha DB, Aryal BB, Mir WAY, Verda L
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.25873](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.25873)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 Jun 12;14(6):e25873. doi: 10.7759/cureus.25873. eCollection 2022 
Jun.

Rare Angina: A Case Report of Ludwig's Angina.

Sakhuja A(1), Shrestha DB(1), Aryal BB(2), Mir WAY(1), Verda L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Chicago, USA.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, B.P. Smriti Hospital, Kathmandu, NPL.

Ludwig's angina is the rapidly progressive cellulitis of the soft tissue of the 
neck and the floor of the mouth. Airway compromise is a frequent and potentially 
fatal sequela of Ludwig's angina. Here we present a case of a 54-year-old 
African American male who presented with fever associated with painful swelling 
of the mouth and anterior neck. He was febrile and hypoxic on presentation. 
Imaging showed extensive involvement of the neck and mediastinum to the level of 
the clavicles. The diagnosis of Ludwig's angina of periodontal origin was made, 
and intubation was performed for airway protection. Management was done by 
surgical debridement along with a course of broad-spectrum antibiotics. The 
patient's condition improved, and he was discharged on oral antibiotics with a 
referral to a dentist. Our case demonstrates that early diagnosis, airway 
management, treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics, and surgical intervention 
are vital for the successful management of severe cases of Ludwig's angina.

Copyright © 2022, Sakhuja et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.25873
PMCID: PMC9275530
PMID: 35836432

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.