---
reference_id: "PMID:34239882"
title: The Impact of Body Mass Index Upon the Efficacy of Adalimumab in Hidradenitis Suppurativa.
authors:
- Frew JW
- Singh N
- Jiang CS
- Vaughan R
- Krueger JG
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.603281
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Impact of Body Mass Index Upon the Efficacy of Adalimumab in Hidradenitis Suppurativa.
**Authors:** Frew JW, Singh N, Jiang CS, Vaughan R, Krueger JG
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2021.603281](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2021.603281)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Jun 22;8:603281. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.603281. 
eCollection 2021.

The Impact of Body Mass Index Upon the Efficacy of Adalimumab in Hidradenitis 
Suppurativa.

Frew JW(1), Singh N(2), Jiang CS(2), Vaughan R(2), Krueger JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Investigative Dermatology, The Rockefeller University, New 
York, NY, United States.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, United 
States.

Elevated BMI in Hidradenitis Suppurativa is associated with decreased response 
to Adalimumab therapy. BMI is proposed to segregate distinct disease subtypes. 
It remains unresolved whether a threshold BMI exists above which increased 
dosages may provide clinical benefit. Individual patient data from 578 PIONEER 
Phase 3 participants were analyzed. Descriptive, multivariable regression 
analysis and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were calculated to 
assess the relationship between BMI and clinical outcome measures using R 
v3.5.3. Participants in the overweight and obese BMI category had reduced odds 
(58 and 67%, respectively) of achieving HiSCR [OR = 0.42 (95%CI -0.19, 0.91) p = 
0.03], [OR = 0.33 (95%CI 0.16, 0.67) p = 0.002] compared to participants with 
BMI < 25. Reduction in AN count and IHS4 score was not significantly associated. 
ROC analysis did not reveal any cut off value predictive of treatment outcome. 
No correlation between BMI and baseline disease activity or covariate 
interactions were identified. These findings suggest BMI is a significant 
covariate in the setting of lower baseline disease activity, supporting the 
concept of disease heterogeneity and differential therapeutic response to 
Adalimumab.

Copyright © 2021 Frew, Singh, Jiang, Vaughan and Krueger.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.603281
PMCID: PMC8257943
PMID: 34239882

Conflict of interest statement: JK has received research support (grants paid to 
institution) from AbbVie, Amgen, BMS, Boehringer, EMD Serono, Innovaderm, 
Kineta, LEO Pharma, Novan, Novartis, Paraxel, Pfizer, Regeneron, and Vitae and 
personal fees from AbbVie, Acros, Allergan, Aurigne, BiogenIdec, Boehringer, 
Escalier, Janssen, Lilly, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, and Valeant. The remaining 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.