---
reference_id: "PMID:32805920"
title: Encapsulating Well-Dispersed Carbon Nanoparticles for Applications in the Autonomous Restoration of Electronic Circuits.
authors:
- Hsieh TL
- Li CC
- Lin PC
- Hsu YC
journal: ACS Appl Mater Interfaces
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1021/acsami.0c11235
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Encapsulating Well-Dispersed Carbon Nanoparticles for Applications in the Autonomous Restoration of Electronic Circuits.
**Authors:** Hsieh TL, Li CC, Lin PC, Hsu YC
**Journal:** ACS Appl Mater Interfaces (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acsami.0c11235](https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c11235)

## Content

1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2020 Aug 26;12(34):38690-38699. doi:
10.1021/acsami.0c11235. Epub 2020 Aug 14.

Encapsulating Well-Dispersed Carbon Nanoparticles for Applications in the
Autonomous Restoration of Electronic Circuits.

Hsieh TL(1), Li CC(1)(2), Lin PC(3), Hsu YC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Materials & Mineral Resources Engineering, National Taipei
University of Technology, No. 1, Sec. 3, Zhongxiao E. Rd., Taipei 10608, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua
University, No. 101, Sec. 2, Kuang-Fu Rd., Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan.
(3)Advanced Material and Process Development Department, General Interface
Solution Holding Ltd., No. 16, Kedong 3rd Rd., Zhunan Science Park, Miaoli
County 35053, Taiwan.

Two types of conductive microcapsules with a median size of less than 5 μm are
proposed, and their high potential as a key functional material for
self-restorable conductive pastes for applications in printed electronic
circuits is verified. A well-dispersed suspension of carbon nanoparticles in
toluene is prepared as the core material of the microcapsules. The restoration
capabilities of the microcapsules for the physical structure and electrical
conductivity of silver-based electronic circuit lines are compared. In the
assessment of the microcapsule restoration efficiency, the two conductive
microcapsules exhibit distinct capabilities for the restoration of damages
caused by different mechanical fracturing. That is, the smaller microcapsule is
more effective than the larger one to restore circuit lines from a tensile test,
whereas the opposite result is obtained from a scratching test, demonstrating
the significance of microcapsule size for the restoration of dissimilar
fractures that may occur in various applications.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.0c11235
PMID: 32805920
