---
reference_id: "PMID:39347927"
title: Patient and Healthcare Provider Perspectives on the Pathway to Diagnosis of Seborrheic Dermatitis in the United States.
authors:
- Chovatiya R
- Polaskey MT
- Aldredge L
- Heath C
- Acevedo M
- Chu DH
- Hanna D
- Seal MS
- Zirwas M
journal: Adv Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12325-024-02986-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Dermatitis, Seborrheic/diagnosis"
- Female
- Male
- United States
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Health Personnel/psychology
- Quality of Life
- Aged
- Attitude of Health Personnel
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patient and Healthcare Provider Perspectives on the Pathway to Diagnosis of Seborrheic Dermatitis in the United States.
**Authors:** Chovatiya R, Polaskey MT, Aldredge L, Heath C, Acevedo M, Chu DH, Hanna D, Seal MS, Zirwas M
**Journal:** Adv Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12325-024-02986-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-024-02986-8)

## Content

1. Adv Ther. 2024 Dec;41(12):4433-4445. doi: 10.1007/s12325-024-02986-8. Epub
2024  Sep 30.

Patient and Healthcare Provider Perspectives on the Pathway to Diagnosis of 
Seborrheic Dermatitis in the United States.

Chovatiya R(1)(2)(3), Polaskey MT(4), Aldredge L(5), Heath C(6), Acevedo M(7), 
Chu DH(8), Hanna D(8), Seal MS(8), Zirwas M(9).

Author information:
(1)Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, 
North Chicago, IL, USA. raj.chovatiya@gmail.com.
(2)Center for Medical Dermatology + Immunology Research, Chicago, IL, USA. 
raj.chovatiya@gmail.com.
(3), 3000 N Halsted Suite 301, Chicago, IL, 60657, USA. raj.chovatiya@gmail.com.
(4)Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, 
North Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Veterans Administration Portland Health Care System, Portland, OR, USA.
(6)Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Infinity Dermatology, New York, NY, USA.
(8)Arcutis Biotherapeutics, Inc., Westlake Village, CA, USA.
(9)Dermatologists of Central States, Probity Medical Research, and Ohio 
University, Bexley, OH, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Seborrheic dermatitis (SD) is a common, chronic inflammatory skin 
condition associated with significant impact on quality of life, yet its 
etiology and pathophysiology are not well understood. With significant impact on 
patients' quality of life, understanding the diagnostic pathway from the 
perspectives of patient and healthcare providers (HCPs) is crucial.
METHODS: An online survey was developed and administered in conjunction with the 
Harris Poll to gain insight into patient and HCP perspectives about SD diagnosis 
and management from December 2021 to January 2022.
RESULTS: Most patients were unaware of SD before their diagnosis (71%) and 
experienced difficulty finding information online (56%). Patients delayed 
seeking medical attention for SD by an average of 3.6 years, with most patients 
feeling their symptoms did not require medical attention (63%), a perception 
that HCPs correctly anticipated. Additionally, most patients (58%) reported 
embarrassment discussing their SD symptoms with HCPs, a factor HCPs 
underestimated. HCPs also underestimated the percentage of patients 
self-reporting moderate-severity SD. Patients preferred dermatology HCPs for SD 
treatment (79%), and reported visiting an average of 2.3 different HCPs, with 
75% of patients seeing more than one provider.
CONCLUSION: These insights highlight the complexities in the diagnostic and 
management pathways of SD and underscore the need for a more nuanced 
understanding and approach in addressing the condition. Infographic available 
for this article. INFOGRAPHIC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-024-02986-8
PMCID: PMC11550289
PMID: 39347927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Raj Chovatiya, Lakshi Aldredge, Candrice 
Heath, Moises Acevedo, and Matthew Zirwas are investigators and/or consultants 
for Arcutis Biotherapeutics, Inc. and received grants/research funding and/or 
honoraria. David H. Chu, Diane Hanna, and Melissa S. Seal are employees of 
Arcutis Biotherapeutics, Inc. Meredith Tyree Polaskey has no disclosures to 
report.