---
reference_id: "PMID:38132165"
title: Epithelial Barrier Dysfunction in Diarrhea-Predominant Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS-D) via Downregulation of Claudin-1.
authors:
- Awad K
- Barmeyer C
- Bojarski C
- Nagel O
- Lee IM
- Schweiger MR
- Schulzke JD
- Bücker R
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12242846
keywords:
- Humans
- Irritable Bowel Syndrome/metabolism
- "Claudin-1/genetics, metabolism"
- Down-Regulation
- Intestinal Mucosa/pathology
- Diarrhea/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epithelial Barrier Dysfunction in Diarrhea-Predominant Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS-D) via Downregulation of Claudin-1.
**Authors:** Awad K, Barmeyer C, Bojarski C, Nagel O, Lee IM, Schweiger MR, Schulzke JD, Bücker R
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12242846](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12242846)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Dec 15;12(24):2846. doi: 10.3390/cells12242846.

Epithelial Barrier Dysfunction in Diarrhea-Predominant Irritable Bowel Syndrome
(IBS-D) via Downregulation of Claudin-1.

Awad K(1), Barmeyer C(1), Bojarski C(1), Nagel O(1), Lee IM(1), Schweiger MR(2),
Schulzke JD(1), Bücker R(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Physiology/Nutritional Medicine, Department of Gastroenterology,
Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus
Benjamin Franklin, 12203 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Institute for Translational Epigenetics, Medical Faculty, University of
Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany.

BACKGROUND: In patients with diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome
(IBS-D), the diarrheal mechanisms are largely unknown, and they were examined in
this study on colon biopsies.
METHODS: Electrophysiological measurements were used for monitoring functional
changes in the diarrheic colon specimens. In parallel, tight junction protein
expression was analyzed by Western blot and confocal laser-scanning microscopy,
and signaling pathway analysis was performed using RNA sequencing and
bioinformatics.
RESULTS: Epithelial resistance was decreased, indicating an epithelial leak flux
diarrheal mechanism with a molecular correlate of decreased claudin-1
expression, while induction of active anion secretion and impairment of active
sodium absorption via the epithelial sodium channel, ENaC, were not detected.
The pathway analysis revealed activation of barrier-affecting cytokines TNF-α,
IFN-γ, IL-1β and IL-4.
CONCLUSIONS: Barrier dysfunction as a result of epithelial tight junction
changes plays a role in IBS-D as a pathomechanism inducing a leak flux type of
diarrhea.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12242846
PMCID: PMC10741936
PMID: 38132165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to
publish the results.
