---
reference_id: "PMID:38812055"
title: "A multicenter, matched case-control analysis comparing burden of illness among patients with tuberous sclerosis complex related epilepsy, generalized idiopathic epilepsy, and focal epilepsy in Germany."
authors:
- Lappe L
- Hertzberg C
- Knake S
- Knuf M
- von Podewils F
- Willems LM
- Kovac S
- Zöllner JP
- Sauter M
- Kurlemann G
- Mayer T
- Bertsche A
- Marquard K
- Meyer S
- Schäfer H
- Thiels C
- Zukunft B
- Schubert-Bast S
- Reese JP
- Rosenow F
- Strzelczyk A
journal: Neurol Res Pract
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s42466-024-00323-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A multicenter, matched case-control analysis comparing burden of illness among patients with tuberous sclerosis complex related epilepsy, generalized idiopathic epilepsy, and focal epilepsy in Germany.
**Authors:** Lappe L, Hertzberg C, Knake S, Knuf M, von Podewils F, Willems LM, Kovac S, Zöllner JP, Sauter M, Kurlemann G, Mayer T, Bertsche A, Marquard K, Meyer S, Schäfer H, Thiels C, Zukunft B, Schubert-Bast S, Reese JP, Rosenow F, Strzelczyk A
**Journal:** Neurol Res Pract (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s42466-024-00323-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s42466-024-00323-6)

## Content

1. Neurol Res Pract. 2024 May 30;6(1):29. doi: 10.1186/s42466-024-00323-6.

A multicenter, matched case-control analysis comparing burden of illness among
patients with tuberous sclerosis complex related epilepsy, generalized
idiopathic epilepsy, and focal epilepsy in Germany.

Lappe L(1)(2), Hertzberg C(3), Knake S(4), Knuf M(5)(6), von Podewils F(7),
Willems LM(1)(2), Kovac S(8), Zöllner JP(1)(2), Sauter M(9), Kurlemann G(10),
Mayer T(11), Bertsche A(12), Marquard K(13), Meyer S(14), Schäfer H(15), Thiels
C(16)(17), Zukunft B(18), Schubert-Bast S(1)(2)(19), Reese JP(20), Rosenow
F(1)(2), Strzelczyk A(21)(22)(23).

Author information:
(1)Goethe-University Frankfurt, Epilepsy Center Frankfurt Rhine-Main, Department
of Neurology, University Hospital Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60596,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Center for Personalized Translational Epilepsy Research (CePTER),
Goethe-University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(3)Department of Neuropediatrics, Vivantes Klinikum Neukölln, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Epilepsy Center Hessen and Department of Neurology, Philipps-University
Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum Worms, Worms, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University Medicine Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Center, University Medicine Greifswald,
Greifswald, Germany.
(8)Department of Neurology with Institute of Translational Neurology, University
Münster, Münster, Germany.
(9)Klinikum Kempten, Klinikverbund Allgäu, Kempten/Allgäu, Germany.
(10)St. Bonifatius Hospital, Lingen, Germany.
(11)Epilepsy Center Kleinwachau, Radeberg, Germany.
(12)Department of Neuropediatrics, University Hospital for Children and
Adolescents, Greifswald, Germany.
(13)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Psychosomatics and Pain Management,
Klinikum Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.
(14)Department of General Pediatrics and Neonatology, Franz-Lust Klinik für
Kinder und Jugendliche, Karlsruhe, Germany.
(15)Department of Nephrology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany.
(16)Division of Nephrology, Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der
LMU München - Innenstadt, Munich, Germany.
(17)Department of Neuropediatrics and Pediatric Epileptology, University
Hospital of Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(18)Department of Nephrology and Internal Intensive Care, Charité - University
Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(19)Goethe-University Frankfurt, Department of Neuropediatrics, University
Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(20)Institute of Clinical Epidemiology and Biometry, University of Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany.
(21)Goethe-University Frankfurt, Epilepsy Center Frankfurt Rhine-Main,
Department of Neurology, University Hospital Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7,
60596, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. strzelczyk@med.uni-frankfurt.de.
(22)Center for Personalized Translational Epilepsy Research (CePTER),
Goethe-University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
strzelczyk@med.uni-frankfurt.de.
(23)Epilepsy Center Hessen and Department of Neurology, Philipps-University
Marburg, Marburg, Germany. strzelczyk@med.uni-frankfurt.de.

BACKGROUND: Depending on the underlying etiology and epilepsy type, the burden
of disease for patients with seizures can vary significantly. This analysis
aimed to compare direct and indirect costs and quality of life (QoL) among
adults with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) related with epilepsy, idiopathic
generalized epilepsy (IGE), and focal epilepsy (FE) in Germany.
METHODS: Questionnaire responses from 92 patients with TSC and epilepsy were
matched by age and gender, with responses from 92 patients with IGE and 92
patients with FE collected in independent studies. Comparisons were made across
the main QoL components, direct costs (patient visits, medication usage, medical
equipment, diagnostic procedures, ancillary treatments, and transport costs),
indirect costs (employment, reduced working hours, missed days), and care level
costs.
RESULTS: Across all three cohorts, mean total direct costs (TSC: €7602 [median
€2620]; IGE: €1919 [median €446], P < 0.001; FE: €2598 [median €892], P < 0.001)
and mean total indirect costs due to lost productivity over 3 months (TSC: €7185
[median €11,925]; IGE: €3599 [median €0], P < 0.001; FE: €5082 [median €2981],
P = 0.03) were highest among patients with TSC. The proportion of patients with
TSC who were unemployed (60%) was significantly larger than the proportions of
patients with IGE (23%, P < 0.001) or FE (34%, P = P < 0.001) who were
unemployed. Index scores for the EuroQuol Scale with 5 dimensions and 3 levels
were significantly lower for patients with TSC (time-trade-off [TTO]: 0.705,
visual analog scale [VAS]: 0.577) than for patients with IGE (TTO: 0.897, VAS:
0.813; P < 0.001) or FE (TTO: 0.879, VAS: 0.769; P < 0.001). Revised Epilepsy
Stigma Scale scores were also significantly higher for patients with TSC (3.97)
than for patients with IGE (1.48, P < 0.001) or FE (2.45, P < 0.001). Overall
Quality of Life in Epilepsy Inventory-31 items scores was significantly lower
among patients with TSC (57.7) and FE (57.6) than among patients with IGE (66.6,
P = 0.004 in both comparisons). Significant differences between patients with
TSC and IGE were also determined for Neurological Disorder Depression Inventory
for Epilepsy (TSC: 13.1; IGE: 11.2, P = 0.009) and Liverpool Adverse Events
Profile scores (TSC: 42.7; IGE: 37.5, P = 0.017) with higher score and worse
results for TSC patients in both questionnaires.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to compare patients with TSC, IGE, and FE
in Germany and underlines the excessive QoL burden and both direct and indirect
cost burdens experienced by patients with TSC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s42466-024-00323-6
PMCID: PMC11138101
PMID: 38812055

Conflict of interest statement: LL and none of the other authors report
conflicts of interest related to this study. CH reports personal fees from
Desitin Arzneimittel, Eisai, GW Pharmaceuticals companies, Novartis, Shire, and
Zogenix. SKn received speaker´s honoraria from Angelini Pharma, Bial, Desitin
Arzneimittel, Eisai, Epliog, GW Pharmaceuticals, Kanso, UCB Pharma, and Zogenix.
MK does not have any COI. He receives no honoraria from pharmaceutical
companies. FvP reports personal fees and grants from Bial, Desitin Arzneimittel,
Eisai, GW Pharmaceutical companies, Arvelle Therapeutics, Zogenix, and UCB
Pharma. LW does not have any COI. He receives no honoraria from pharmaceutical
companies. SKo reports speakers honoraria from Eisai, UCB and Jazz Pharma, and
research funding from Biogen. JPZ does not have any COI. He receives no
honoraria from pharmaceutical companies. MS reports personal fees from Novartis
and GW Pharmaceuticals companies. GKu reports honoraria for speaking engagements
from Desitin Arzneimittel, Eisai, UCB Pharma, Takeda, Shire, Zogenix,
Neuraxpharm, Stada, and GW Pharmaceuticals. TM does not have any COI. He
receives no honoraria from pharmaceutical companies. AB reports grants from UCB
Pharma and honoraria for speaking engagements from Biogen, Desitin Arzneimittel,
Eisai GmbH, GW Pharmaceuticals, Neuraxpharm, Shire/Takeda GmbH, UCB Pharma, and
ViroPharma. KM does not have any COI. He receives no honoraria from
pharmaceutical companies. SM reports grants from Novartis, UCB, Shire, Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft und Epilepsiestiftung Dr. Wolf. HS does not have any COI.
She receives no honoraria from pharmaceutical companies. CT does not have any
COI. She receives no honoraria from pharmaceutical companies. BZ does not have
any COI. She receives no honoraria from pharmaceutical companies. SSB reports
personal fees from Eisai, Desitin Pharma, GW Pharmaceuticals, Zogenix, UCB
Pharma, and Marinus Pharma. JPR does not have any COI. He receives no honoraria
from pharmaceutical companies. FR reports personal fees from Angelini Pharma,
Eisai, Jazz Pharma, and UCB Pharma and grants from the Detlev-Wrobel-Fonds for
Epilepsy Research, the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), the Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), the LOEWE Programme of the State of
Hesse, and the European Union. FR reports that he is part of the editorial board
of Neurological Research and Practice. AS reports personal fees and grants from
Angelini Pharma, Biocodex, Desitin Arzneimittel, Eisai, Jazz Pharmaceuticals,
Marinus Pharma, Precisis, Takeda, UCB Pharma, and UNEEG Medical. AS reports that
he is part of the editorial board of Neurological Research and Practice.
