---
reference_id: "PMID:26376720"
title: "Impaired survival of regulatory T cells in pulmonary sarcoidosis."
authors:
- Broos CE
- van Nimwegen M
- Kleinjan A
- ten Berge B
- Muskens F
- in 't Veen JC
- Annema JT
- Lambrecht BN
- Hoogsteden HC
- Hendriks RW
- Kool M
- van den Blink B
journal: Respir Res
year: "2015"
doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0265-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired survival of regulatory T cells in pulmonary sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Broos CE, van Nimwegen M, Kleinjan A, ten Berge B, Muskens F, in 't Veen JC, Annema JT, Lambrecht BN, Hoogsteden HC, Hendriks RW, Kool M, van den Blink B
**Journal:** Respir Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12931-015-0265-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12931-015-0265-8)

## Content

1. Respir Res. 2015 Sep 16;16(1):108. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0265-8.

Impaired survival of regulatory T cells in pulmonary sarcoidosis.

Broos CE(1), van Nimwegen M(1), Kleinjan A(1), ten Berge B(1), Muskens F(1), in
't Veen JC(2), Annema JT(3), Lambrecht BN(1)(4)(5), Hoogsteden HC(1), Hendriks
RW(1), Kool M(1), van den Blink B(6).

BACKGROUND: Impaired regulatory T cell (Treg) function is thought to contribute
to ongoing inflammatory responses in sarcoidosis, but underlying mechanisms
remain unclear. Moreover, it is not known if increased apoptotic susceptibility
of Tregs may contribute to an impaired immunosuppressive function in
sarcoidosis. Therefore, the aim of this study is to analyze proportions,
phenotype, survival, and apoptotic susceptibility of Tregs in sarcoidosis.
METHODS: Patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis (n = 58) were included at time of
diagnosis. Tregs were analyzed in broncho-alveolar lavage fluid and peripheral
blood of patients and healthy controls (HC).
RESULTS: In sarcoidosis patients no evidence was found for a relative deficit of
Tregs, neither locally nor systemically. Rather, increased proportions of
circulating Tregs were observed, most prominently in patients developing chronic
disease. Sarcoidosis circulating Tregs displayed adequate expression of FoxP3,
CD25 and CTLA4. Remarkably, in sarcoidosis enhanced CD95 expression on
circulating activated CD45RO(+) Tregs was observed compared with HC, and
proportions of these cells were significantly increased. Specifically
sarcoidosis Tregs--but not Th cells--showed impaired survival compared with HC.
Finally, CD95L-mediated apoptosis was enhanced in sarcoidosis Tregs.
CONCLUSION: In untreated patients with active pulmonary sarcoidosis, Tregs show
impaired survival and enhanced apoptotic susceptibility towards CD95L. Increased
apoptosis likely contributes to the insufficient immunosuppressive function of
sarcoidosis Tregs. Further research into this field will help determine whether
improvement of Treg survival holds a promising new therapeutic approach for
chronic sarcoidosis patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0265-8
PMCID: PMC4574219
PMID: 26376720
