---
reference_id: "PMID:15355445"
title: Medullary thyroid carcinoma.
authors:
- Leboulleux S
- Baudin E
- Travagli JP
- Schlumberger M
journal: Clin Endocrinol (Oxf)
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.2004.02037.x
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/blood"
- Calcitonin/blood
- Carcinoembryonic Antigen/blood
- "Carcinoma, Medullary/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Humans
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Thyroidectomy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medullary thyroid carcinoma.
**Authors:** Leboulleux S, Baudin E, Travagli JP, Schlumberger M
**Journal:** Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2265.2004.02037.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2265.2004.02037.x)

## Content

1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2004 Sep;61(3):299-310. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2004.02037.x.

Medullary thyroid carcinoma.

Leboulleux S(1), Baudin E, Travagli JP, Schlumberger M.

Author information:
(1)Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) arises from parafollicular or C cells that
produce calcitonin (CT), and accounts for 5-10% of all thyroid cancers. MTC is
hereditary in about 25% of cases. The discovery of a MTC in a patient has
several implications: disease extent should be evaluated, phaeochromocytoma and
hyperparathyroidism should be screened for and whether the MTC is sporadic or
hereditary should be determined by a direct analysis of the RET proto-oncogene.
In this review, pathological characteristics, tumour markers and genetic
abnormalities in MTC are discussed. The diagnostic and therapeutic modalities
applied to patients with clinical MTC and those identified with preclinical
disease through familial screening are also described. Progresses concerning
genetics, initial treatment, follow-up, screening and treatment of
pheochromocytoma have permitted an improvement in the long-term outcome.
However, there is no effective treatment for distant metastases, and new
therapeutic modalities are urgently needed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.2004.02037.x
PMID: 15355445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
