---
reference_id: "PMID:37372675"
title: Clinical Challenges in the Management of Malignant Ovarian Germ Cell Tumours.
authors:
- Saani I
- Raj N
- Sood R
- Ansari S
- Mandviwala HA
- Sanchez E
- Boussios S
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph20126089
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Humans
- Female
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Teratoma/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Challenges in the Management of Malignant Ovarian Germ Cell Tumours.
**Authors:** Saani I, Raj N, Sood R, Ansari S, Mandviwala HA, Sanchez E, Boussios S
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph20126089](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20126089)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2023 Jun 9;20(12):6089. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph20126089.

Clinical Challenges in the Management of Malignant Ovarian Germ Cell Tumours.

Saani I(1), Raj N(2), Sood R(3), Ansari S(4), Mandviwala HA(5), Sanchez E(6), 
Boussios S(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Medway NHS Foundation Trust, Windmill Road, 
Gillingham ME7 5NY, UK.
(2)Department of Radiology, University Hospitals Plymouth NHS Trust, Plymouth 
PL6 8DH, UK.
(3)Department of Clinical Medical Education, Epsom and St Helier University 
Hospitals NHS Trust, Epsom KT18 7EG, UK.
(4)Department of Medicine, Glan Clwyd Hospital, NHS Wales, Denbighshire LL18 
5UJ, UK.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, Ziauddin Medical University, Karachi 75000, Sindh, Pakistan.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Medway NHS Foundation Trust, Windmill Road, 
Gillingham ME7 5NY, UK.
(7)Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine, School of Cancer & Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, King's College London, London SE1 9RT, UK.
(8)Kent Medway Medical School, University of Kent, Canterbury CT2 7LX, UK.
(9)AELIA Organization, 9th Km Thessaloniki-Thermi, 57001 Thessaloniki, Greece.

Nonepithelial ovarian cancers (NEOC) are a group of rare malignancies, including 
germ cell tumours (GCT) and sex cord-stromal tumours (SCST), along with 
small-cell carcinomas and sarcomas. GCTs represent 2-5% of ovarian cancers, with 
a yearly incidence of 4:100,000, and they usually affect young women and 
adolescents. Precursory germ cells of the ovary form the basis of GCT. They are 
histologically classified into primitive GCT, teratomas, and monodermal and 
somatic-type tumours associated with dermoid cysts. A primitive GCT can be 
either a yolk sac tumour (YST), dysgerminoma, or mixed germ cell neoplasm. 
Teratomas are either mature (benign) or immature (malignant). Given that 
malignant GCTs occur rarely compared to epithelial ovarian tumours (EOC), 
greater focus is required in their diagnosis and treatment. In this article, we 
review the epidemiology, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and molecular 
biology, along with the management and therapeutic challenges.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph20126089
PMCID: PMC10298722
PMID: 37372675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.