---
reference_id: "PMID:28615421"
title: Outcomes of Colorado children with acute flaccid myelitis at 1 year.
authors:
- Martin JA
- Messacar K
- Yang ML
- Maloney JA
- Lindwall J
- Carry T
- Kenyon P
- Sillau SH
- Oleszek J
- Tyler KL
- Dominguez SR
- Schreiner TL
journal: Neurology
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004081
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Atrophy/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Colorado
- "Cranial Nerve Diseases/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology"
- Electromyography
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Movement Disorders/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/physiopathology"
- "Muscular Diseases/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology"
- "Myelitis/complications, diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Neural Conduction/physiology
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care/methods"
- Patient Reported Outcome Measures
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes of Colorado children with acute flaccid myelitis at 1 year.
**Authors:** Martin JA, Messacar K, Yang ML, Maloney JA, Lindwall J, Carry T, Kenyon P, Sillau SH, Oleszek J, Tyler KL, Dominguez SR, Schreiner TL
**Journal:** Neurology (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000004081](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000004081)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2017 Jul 11;89(2):129-137. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004081. Epub
2017 Jun 14.

Outcomes of Colorado children with acute flaccid myelitis at 1 year.

Martin JA(1), Messacar K(1), Yang ML(1), Maloney JA(1), Lindwall J(1), Carry
T(1), Kenyon P(1), Sillau SH(1), Oleszek J(1), Tyler KL(1), Dominguez SR(1),
Schreiner TL(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Pediatrics (J.A. Martin, M.L.Y., T.L.S.), Infectious
Diseases (K.M., S.R.D.), Hospital Medicine (K.M.), Radiology (J.A. Maloney),
Child Psychiatry (J.L.), and Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (T.C., P.K.,
J.O.), Section of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital Colorado/University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora; and Departments of Neurology, Medicine, and
Immunology-Microbiology and Neurology Service at the Denver Veterans Affairs
Medical Center (S.H.S., K.L.T.), University of Colorado School of Medicine.
(2)From the Departments of Pediatrics (J.A. Martin, M.L.Y., T.L.S.), Infectious
Diseases (K.M., S.R.D.), Hospital Medicine (K.M.), Radiology (J.A. Maloney),
Child Psychiatry (J.L.), and Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (T.C., P.K.,
J.O.), Section of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital Colorado/University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora; and Departments of Neurology, Medicine, and
Immunology-Microbiology and Neurology Service at the Denver Veterans Affairs
Medical Center (S.H.S., K.L.T.), University of Colorado School of Medicine.
Teri.Schreiner@ucdenver.edu.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2017 Jul 11;89(2):112-113. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004096.

OBJECTIVE: We describe long-term functional, neurodiagnostic, and psychosocial
outcomes of a cohort of 12 children from Colorado diagnosed with acute flaccid
myelitis (AFM) in 2014.
METHODS: Children were assessed every 3 months for 1 year or until clinical
resolution. Assessments included neurologic examination, MRI, EMG/nerve
conduction studies (NCS), functional measures (Assisting Hand Assessment,
Hammersmith Functional Motor Scale), and Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement
Information System questionnaires.
RESULTS: Eight of 12 children completed the study. Six of 8 had persistent motor
deficits at 1 year; 2 demonstrated full recovery. Four were not enrolled, 2 of
whom reported full recovery. The 6 affected were weakest in proximal muscles,
showing minimal to no improvement and significant atrophy at 1 year. All
patients improved in distal muscle groups. Cranial nerve dysfunction resolved in
2 of 5 and improved in all. Four of 5 showed progressive functional improvement
at 6 and 12 months. Two of 8 reported pain at 1 year. Three of 8 reported
depressive symptoms. Repeat MRI was performed in 7 of 8 children a median of 7
months after onset and showed significant improvement or normalization in all
but one child. Repeat EMG/NCS was performed on 4 children a median of 8 months
after onset and showed ongoing denervation and chronic reinnervation in 3
children with persistent deficits.
CONCLUSIONS: At 1 year, children with AFM demonstrated functional gains but
weakness persisted. EMG changes correlated with persistent deficits better than
imaging. Despite improvements, AFM had substantial long-term functional effects
on affected children.

© 2017 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004081
PMCID: PMC5501931
PMID: 28615421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
