---
reference_id: "PMID:33634515"
title: "Matrix metalloproteinases in the pathogenesis of dengue viral disease: Involvement of immune system and newer therapeutic strategies."
authors:
- Niranjan R
- Kishor S
- Kumar A
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.26903
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Matrix metalloproteinases in the pathogenesis of dengue viral disease: Involvement of immune system and newer therapeutic strategies.
**Authors:** Niranjan R, Kishor S, Kumar A
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.26903](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.26903)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2021 Aug;93(8):4629-4637. doi: 10.1002/jmv.26903. Epub 2021 Apr
6.

Matrix metalloproteinases in the pathogenesis of dengue viral disease: 
Involvement of immune system and newer therapeutic strategies.

Niranjan R(1), Kishor S(1), Kumar A(1).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Laboratory, ICMR-Vector Control Research Center, Puducherry, 
India.

Globally, the burden due to dengue infection is increasing with a recent 
estimate of 96 million progressing to the disease every year. Dengue 
pathogenesis and the factors influencing it are not completely known. It is now 
widely speculated that there is an important role of matrix metalloproteinases 
(MMPs) in the initiation and progression of dengue pathogenesis; however, their 
exact roles are not fully understood. Overactivation of matrix 
metalloproteinases may contribute to the severity of dengue pathogenesis. 
Cytokines and various other mediators of inflammation interact with the vascular 
endothelium and matrix metalloproteinases may be one of the components among 
them. Extensive plasma leakage into tissue spaces may result in a shock. It is 
evident in the literature that MMP2 and MMP9 increase in dengue patients is 
correlated with the severity of the disease; however, the underlying mechanism 
is still unknown. Activation of innate cells and adaptive immune cells which 
include, B and T cells, macrophages or monocytes and dendritic cells also 
contribute to the dengue pathology. Newer therapeutic strategies include 
microRNAs, such as miR-134 (targets MMP3 and MMP1) and MicroRNA-320d, (targets 
MMP/TIMP proteolytic system). The use of antibodies-based therapeutics like 
(Andecaliximab; anti-matrix metalloproteinase-9 antibody) is also suggested 
against MMPs in dengue. In this review, we summarize some recent developments 
associated with the involvement of immune cells and their mediators associated 
with the matrix metalloproteinases mediated dengue pathogenesis. We highlight 
that, there is still very little knowledge about the MMPs in dengue pathogenesis 
which needs attention and extensive investigations.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.26903
PMID: 33634515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]