---
reference_id: "PMID:34226255"
title: Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome presenting in the ICU as aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage.
authors:
- Pimenta I
- Varudo R
- Castelao F
- Gonzalez FA
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2021-243132
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome presenting in the ICU as aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage.
**Authors:** Pimenta I, Varudo R, Castelao F, Gonzalez FA
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2021-243132](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2021-243132)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2021 Jul 5;14(7):e243132. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2021-243132.

Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome presenting in the ICU as aneurysmal subarachnoid 
haemorrhage.

Pimenta I(1), Varudo R(1), Castelao F(2), Gonzalez FA(3).

Author information:
(1)Intensive Care Department, Hospital Garcia de Orta EPE, Almada, Portugal.
(2)Neuroradiology, Hospital Garcia de Orta EPE, Almada, Portugal.
(3)Intensive Care Department, Hospital Garcia de Orta EPE, Almada, Portugal 
filipeandregonzalez@gmail.com.

Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is caused by mutations of COL3A1 gene coding for 
type III collagen. The main clinical features involve a propensity to arterial 
tears leading to several life-threatening conditions and intensive care unit 
admission. We, herein, report the case of a 34-year-old woman presenting with an 
aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage. Endovascular coil treatment was attempted; 
however, the procedure was complicated by dissection of the left iliac artery 
and abdominal aorta. Hospital management was marked by a series of vascular and 
haemorrhagic complications. These events, together with some distinctive 
physical features and medical history, raised the suspicion of vascular type of 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Neurological evolution was not favourable, and the 
patient evolved to brain death. Genetic testing was available postmortem and 
identified a mutation in the COL3A1 gene. This case illustrates the importance 
of medical history and clinical suspicion for diagnosis, which often goes 
unnoticed until major complications occur.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2021-243132
PMCID: PMC8258562
PMID: 34226255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.