---
reference_id: "PMID:35011621"
title: "Clinical Features, Histopathology and Differential Diagnosis of Sarcoidosis."
authors:
- Tana C
- Donatiello I
- Caputo A
- Tana M
- Naccarelli T
- Mantini C
- Ricci F
- Ticinesi A
- Meschi T
- Cipollone F
- Giamberardino MA
journal: Cells
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cells11010059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Features, Histopathology and Differential Diagnosis of Sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Tana C, Donatiello I, Caputo A, Tana M, Naccarelli T, Mantini C, Ricci F, Ticinesi A, Meschi T, Cipollone F, Giamberardino MA
**Journal:** Cells (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells11010059](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11010059)

## Content

1. Cells. 2021 Dec 26;11(1):59. doi: 10.3390/cells11010059.

Clinical Features, Histopathology and Differential Diagnosis of Sarcoidosis.

Tana C(1), Donatiello I(2), Caputo A(3), Tana M(4), Naccarelli T(5), Mantini 
C(6), Ricci F(6), Ticinesi A(7), Meschi T(7), Cipollone F(8), Giamberardino 
MA(9).

Author information:
(1)Geriatrics Clinic, SS. Medical Department, SS. Annunziata Hospital of Chieti, 
66100 Chieti, Italy.
(2)Internal Medicine Unit, Medical Department, University Hospital of Salerno, 
84121 Salerno, Italy.
(3)Anatomical Pathology Unit, Department of Anatomical Pathology, University 
Hospital of Salerno, 84121 Salerno, Italy.
(4)2nd Internal Medicine Unit, SS. Medical Department, SS. Annunziata Hospital 
of Chieti, 66100 Chieti, Italy.
(5)Oncoematology Unit, Oncoematology Department, Tor Vergata Hospital of Rome, 
00133 Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Imaging and Clinical Sciences, Institute of 
Radiology, SS. Annunziata Hospital of Chieti, 66100 Chieti, Italy.
(7)Internal Medicine Unit, Geriatric-Rehabilitation Department and Department of 
Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Via Antonio Gramsci 14, 43126 Parma, 
Italy.
(8)Department of Medicine and Science of Aging, Medical Clinic, SS Annunziata 
Hospital of Chieti, G. D'Annunzio University of Chieti, 66100 Chieti, Italy.
(9)Department of Medicine and Science of Aging and CAST, Geriatrics Clinic, SS. 
Annunziata Hospital of Chieti, G. D'Annunzio University of Chieti, 66100 Chieti, 
Italy.

Sarcoidosis is a chameleon disease of unknown etiology, characterized by the 
growth of non-necrotizing and non-caseating granulomas and manifesting with 
clinical pictures that vary on the basis of the organs that are mainly affected. 
Lungs and intrathoracic lymph nodes are the sites that are most often involved, 
but virtually no organ is spared from this disease. Histopathology is 
distinctive but not pathognomonic, since the findings can be found also in other 
granulomatous disorders. The knowledge of these findings is important because it 
could be helpful to differentiate sarcoidosis from the other 
granulomatous-related diseases. This review aims at illustrating the main 
clinical and histopathological findings that could help clinicians in their 
routine clinical practice.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11010059
PMCID: PMC8750978
PMID: 35011621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.