---
reference_id: "PMID:9359047"
title: Endothelin-3 gene mutations in isolated and syndromic Hirschsprung disease.
authors:
- Bidaud C
- Salomon R
- Van Camp G
- Pelet A
- Attié T
- Eng C
- Bonduelle M
- Amiel J
- Nihoul-Fékété C
- Willems PJ
- Munnich A
- Lyonnet S
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '1997'
keywords:
- Endothelin-3/genetics
- Exons
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Hirschsprung Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- Syndrome
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endothelin-3 gene mutations in isolated and syndromic Hirschsprung disease.
**Authors:** Bidaud C, Salomon R, Van Camp G, Pelet A, Attié T, Eng C, Bonduelle M, Amiel J, Nihoul-Fékété C, Willems PJ, Munnich A, Lyonnet S
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (1997)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 1997 Jul-Aug;5(4):247-51.

Endothelin-3 gene mutations in isolated and syndromic Hirschsprung disease.

Bidaud C(1), Salomon R, Van Camp G, Pelet A, Attié T, Eng C, Bonduelle M, Amiel
J, Nihoul-Fékété C, Willems PJ, Munnich A, Lyonnet S.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U-393, Département de Gńétique, and Clinique Chirurgicale Infantile,
Hôpital des Enfants-Malades, Paris, France.

Hirschsprung disease (HSCR, aganglionic megacolon) is a frequent congenital
malformation regarded as a multigenic neurocristopathy. Four susceptibility
genes have recently been identified in HSCR, namely the RET proto-oncogene, the
glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), the endothelin B receptor
(EDNRB) and the endothelin-3 genes (EDN3). Homozygosity for EDN3 mutations has
been previously shown to cause the Shah-Waardenburg syndrome, a combination of
HSCR with features of the Waardenburg syndrome. Here, we report on heterozygous
EDN3 missense mutations in isolatec HSCR. The present data give further support
to the role of the endothelin signaling pathway in the development of neural
crest-derived enteric neurons. They also suggest the possibility that either
recessive or weakly penetrant dominant alleles could occur at the EDN3 locus,
depending on the nature of the mutation.

PMID: 9359047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
