---
reference_id: "PMID:21290706"
title: "Nervous system manifestations of Fabry disease: data from FOS – the Fabry Outcome Survey."
authors:
- Mehta A
- Beck M
- Sunder-Plassmann G
- Ginsberg L
year: '2006'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nervous system manifestations of Fabry disease: data from FOS – the Fabry Outcome Survey.
**Authors:** Mehta A, Beck M, Sunder-Plassmann G, Ginsberg L

## Content

1. Nervous system manifestations of Fabry disease: data from FOS – the Fabry
Outcome Survey.

Ginsberg L(1).

In: Mehta A(2), Beck M(3), Sunder-Plassmann G(4), editors. Fabry Disease:
Perspectives from 5 Years of FOS. Oxford: Oxford PharmaGenesis; 2006. Chapter
23.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Royal Free Hospital, Pond Street, London, NW3 2QG,
UK1On behalf of the FOS CNS Working Group, comprising Lionel Ginsberg (Chair),
Alessandro P Burlina (University Hospital of Padua, Padua, Italy), Renzo Manara
(University Hospital of Padua, Padua, Italy), and Alan R Valentine, Brian
Kendall and Atul Mehta (Royal Free Hospital, London, UK).
(2)Department of Academic Haematology, Royal Free and University College Medical
School, London, UK
(3)Universitäts-Kinderklinik, Mainz, Germany
(4)Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Department of Medicine III, Medical
University Vienna, Vienna, Austria

FOS – the Fabry Outcome Survey – is the world's most comprehensive database of
patients with Fabry disease (688 patients in total, as of March 2005; 330 males,
358 females). As would be predicted from smaller demographic studies, a high
proportion of patients in FOS have developed neurological complications of Fabry
disease. Thus, 13.2% (15.1% males, 11.5% females) have suffered an ischaemic
stroke or transient ischaemic attack, usually at an early age. Patients in FOS
who have experienced a cerebrovascular event are more likely to have advanced
Fabry disease, with a significantly higher frequency of hypertension, renal
insufficiency and cardiac disease than other patients in FOS. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) has proved a useful tool for studying the cerebrovascular
complications of Fabry disease. To date, the MRI scans of 84 patients in FOS
have been reviewed by a central panel of neuroradiologists and neurologists –
the world's largest series subjected to such analysis. The most common abnormal
finding was the presence of non-specific white matter lesions. These lesions
increased with patient age, and their frequency and severity were similar in
males and females. Regarding other neurological manifestations of Fabry disease,
FOS has confirmed a very high frequency of neuropathic pain (76% males, 64%
females), beginning in childhood or adolescence. A previously less well
characterized association between epilepsy and Fabry disease has also been
shown. In future, strategies will need to be developed to move from these
demographic analyses to using FOS to study the pathogenesis of the neurological
manifestations of Fabry disease, and the effects of treatment.

Copyright © 2006, Oxford PharmaGenesis™.

PMID: 21290706
