---
reference_id: "PMID:39719956"
title: "Surface mold brachytherapy for head and neck non-melanoma skin cancer - local control rates and survival: A retrospective analysis."
authors:
- Esmati E
- Abyaneh R
- Jaberi R
- Naderinasab S
- Gholami S
- Payandeh M
- Salarvand F
- Khalilian A
- Seiri M
- Lashkari M
- Babaei M
- Aghili M
- Kazemian A
- Kamrava M
- Ghalehtaki R
journal: J Contemp Brachytherapy
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5114/jcb.2024.144703
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surface mold brachytherapy for head and neck non-melanoma skin cancer - local control rates and survival: A retrospective analysis.
**Authors:** Esmati E, Abyaneh R, Jaberi R, Naderinasab S, Gholami S, Payandeh M, Salarvand F, Khalilian A, Seiri M, Lashkari M, Babaei M, Aghili M, Kazemian A, Kamrava M, Ghalehtaki R
**Journal:** J Contemp Brachytherapy (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5114/jcb.2024.144703](https://doi.org/10.5114/jcb.2024.144703)

## Content

1. J Contemp Brachytherapy. 2024 Oct;16(5):323-334. doi: 10.5114/jcb.2024.144703.
 Epub 2024 Oct 28.

Surface mold brachytherapy for head and neck non-melanoma skin cancer - local
control rates and survival: A retrospective analysis.

Esmati E(1), Abyaneh R(2), Jaberi R(1), Naderinasab S(1), Gholami S(1), Payandeh
M(1), Salarvand F(3), Khalilian A(1), Seiri M(4), Lashkari M(2), Babaei M(2),
Aghili M(2), Kazemian A(2), Kamrava M(5), Ghalehtaki R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital
Complex, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran.
(2)Radiation Oncology Research Center, Cancer Research Institute, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Razi Hospital, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Radiotherapy Ward, Payambaran Hospital, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
USA.

PURPOSE: Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) is the most prevalent cancer worldwide,
particularly affecting head and neck region. Surgical excision, especially Moh's
microsurgery, is the gold standard for treatment. However, certain patients'
factors, such as age, comorbidities, and tumor location, require alternative
therapies. Radiotherapy, particularly surface mold brachytherapy, offers a
viable option for these inoperable or high-risk surgical candidates.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This retrospective cohort study included 22 patients with
histologically confirmed NMSC, treated with high-dose-rate (HDR) surface mold
brachytherapy at the Cancer Institute of Iran between 2019 and 2021. The study
focused on primary outcomes, including local control and overall survival, with
follow-up assessments for acute and late toxicities, treatment response, and
cosmetic outcomes.
RESULTS: Twenty-two patients (mean age, 70.94 years) with NMSC were treated. The
median lesion size was 2.46 cm. The basal cell carcinoma (BCC) to squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) ratio was 14 : 8. The median maximum depth of clinical target
volume was 10 (IQR: 9-15). The median dose was 39 Gy in 13 fractions, with a D90
of 3.04 Gy. Lesions were mainly located on the nose, scalp, and cheek. The
2-year local control rates were 92.9% for BCC and 87.5% for SCC. The 2-year
overall survival rate was 71%, with 80% for BCC and 55% for SCC. Eight patients
died during the follow-up period, of these, five were due to cancer. Recurrence
occurred in one BCC patient (7.1%) and one SCC (12.5%) case. Acute toxicities
were mild, and no severe late complications were observed, indicating good
tolerance and favorable cosmetic outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Surface mold brachytherapy using cobalt-60 source is an effective
and safe treatment for head and neck NMSC, even in thicker than 5 mm lesions,
offering high local control rates and favorable cosmetic outcomes. This
technique presents a valuable alternative for patients unsuitable for surgery,
warranting further research with larger cohorts for confirmation and treatment
protocol optimization.

Copyright © 2024 Termedia.

DOI: 10.5114/jcb.2024.144703
PMCID: PMC11664796
PMID: 39719956

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
