---
reference_id: "PMID:35733937"
title: Dysregulation of Astrocytic Glutamine Transport in Acute Hyperammonemic Brain Edema.
authors:
- Zielińska M
- Albrecht J
- Popek M
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.874750
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysregulation of Astrocytic Glutamine Transport in Acute Hyperammonemic Brain Edema.
**Authors:** Zielińska M, Albrecht J, Popek M
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2022.874750](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2022.874750)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2022 Jun 6;16:874750. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.874750. 
eCollection 2022.

Dysregulation of Astrocytic Glutamine Transport in Acute Hyperammonemic Brain 
Edema.

Zielińska M(1), Albrecht J(1), Popek M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurotoxicology, Mossakowski Medical Research Institute-Polish 
Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

Acute liver failure (ALF) impairs ammonia clearance from blood, which gives rise 
to acute hyperammonemia and increased ammonia accumulation in the brain. Since 
in brain glutamine synthesis is the only route of ammonia detoxification, 
hyperammonemia is as a rule associated with increased brain glutamine content 
(glutaminosis) which correlates with and contributes along with ammonia itself 
to hyperammonemic brain edema-associated with ALF. This review focuses on the 
effects of hyperammonemia on the two glutamine carriers located in the 
astrocytic membrane: Slc38a3 (SN1, SNAT3) and Slc7a6 (y + LAT2). We emphasize 
the contribution of the dysfunction of either of the two carriers to 
glutaminosis- related aspects of brain edema: retention of osmotically obligated 
water (Slc38a3) and induction of oxidative/nitrosative stress (Slc7a6). The 
changes in glutamine transport link glutaminosis- evoked mitochondrial 
dysfunction to oxidative-nitrosative stress as formulated in the "Trojan Horse" 
hypothesis.

Copyright © 2022 Zielińska, Albrecht and Popek.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2022.874750
PMCID: PMC9207324
PMID: 35733937

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.