---
reference_id: "PMID:1739240"
title: "Wegener granulomatosis: an analysis of 158 patients."
authors:
- Hoffman GS
- Kerr GS
- Leavitt RY
- Hallahan CW
- Lebovics RS
- Travis WD
- Rottem M
- Fauci AS
journal: Ann Intern Med
year: '1992'
doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-116-6-488
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Biopsy
- Child
- "Cyclophosphamide/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, mortality"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Morbidity
- Opportunistic Infections/epidemiology
- "Prednisone/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Recurrence
- Remission Induction
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wegener granulomatosis: an analysis of 158 patients.
**Authors:** Hoffman GS, Kerr GS, Leavitt RY, Hallahan CW, Lebovics RS, Travis WD, Rottem M, Fauci AS
**Journal:** Ann Intern Med (1992)
**DOI:** [10.7326/0003-4819-116-6-488](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-116-6-488)

## Content

1. Ann Intern Med. 1992 Mar 15;116(6):488-98. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-116-6-488.

Wegener granulomatosis: an analysis of 158 patients.

Hoffman GS(1), Kerr GS, Leavitt RY, Hallahan CW, Lebovics RS, Travis WD, Rottem 
M, Fauci AS.

Author information:
(1)National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 1992 Oct 1;117(7):620; author reply 620-1.
    Ann Intern Med. 1992 Oct 1;117(7):619; author reply 620-1. doi: 
10.7326/0003-4819-117-7-619_2.
    Ann Intern Med. 1992 Oct 1;117(7):619-20; author reply 620-1.
    Ann Intern Med. 1992 Oct 1;117(7):620; author reply 620-1.

OBJECTIVE: To prospectively study the clinical features, pathophysiology, 
treatment and prognosis of Wegener granulomatosis.
DESIGN: Of the 180 patients with Wegener granulomatosis referred to the National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases during the past 24 years, 158 have 
been followed for 6 months to 24 years (a total of 1229 patient-years).
MEASUREMENTS: Characteristics of clinical presentation, surgical pathology, 
course of illness, laboratory and radiographic findings, and the results of 
medical and surgical treatment have been recorded in a computer-based 
information retrieval system.
SETTING: The Warren Magnuson Clinical Center of the National Institutes of 
Health.
MAIN RESULTS: Men and women were equally represented; 97% of patients were 
white, and 85% were more than 19 years of age. The mean period of follow-up was 
8 years. One hundred and thirty-three patients (84%) received "standard" therapy 
with daily low-dose cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids. Eight (5.0%) received 
only low-dose cyclophosphamide. Six (4.0%) never received cyclophosphamide and 
were treated with other cytotoxic agents and glucocorticoids. Ten patients 
(6.0%) were treated with only glucocorticoids. Ninety-one percent of patients 
experienced marked improvement, and 75% achieved complete remission. Fifty 
percent of remissions were associated with one or more relapses. Of 99 patients 
followed for greater than 5 years, 44% had remissions of greater than 5 years 
duration. Thirteen percent of patients died of Wegener granulomatosis, 
treatment-related causes, or both. Almost all patients had serious morbidity 
from irreversible features of their disease (86%) or side effects of treatment 
(42%).
CONCLUSIONS: The course of Wegener granulomatosis has been dramatically improved 
by daily treatment with cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids. Nonetheless, 
disease- and treatment-related morbidity is often profound. Alternative forms of 
therapy have not yet achieved the high rates of remission induction and 
successful maintenance that have been reported with daily cyclophosphamide 
treatment. Despite continued therapeutic success with cyclophosphamide, our 
long-term follow-up of patients with Wegener granulomatosis has led to 
increasing concerns about toxicity resulting from prolonged cyclophosphamide 
therapy and has encouraged investigation of other therapeutic regimens.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-116-6-488
PMID: 1739240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]