---
reference_id: "PMID:35063500"
title: Disease-associated mutations in topoisomerase IIβ result in defective NK cells.
authors:
- Broderick L
- Clay GM
- Blum RH
- Liu Y
- McVicar R
- Papes F
- Booshehri LM
- Cowell IG
- Austin CA
- Putnam CD
- Kaufman DS
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2021.12.792
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease-associated mutations in topoisomerase IIβ result in defective NK cells.
**Authors:** Broderick L, Clay GM, Blum RH, Liu Y, McVicar R, Papes F, Booshehri LM, Cowell IG, Austin CA, Putnam CD, Kaufman DS
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2021.12.792](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2021.12.792)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2022 Jun;149(6):2171-2176.e3. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2021.12.792. Epub 2022 Jan 19.

Disease-associated mutations in topoisomerase IIβ result in defective NK cells.

Broderick L(1), Clay GM(2), Blum RH(3), Liu Y(4), McVicar R(4), Papes F(2), 
Booshehri LM(2), Cowell IG(5), Austin CA(5), Putnam CD(6), Kaufman DS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, 
Calif; Rady Children's Foundation, Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, Calif. 
Electronic address: lbroderick@ucsd.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, 
Calif.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, Calif.
(4)Sanford Burnham Prebys (SBP) Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, Calif.
(5)Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United 
Kingdom.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, Calif; 
San Diego Branch, Ludwig Institute of Cancer Research, La Jolla, Calif.

BACKGROUND: Hoffman syndrome is a syndromic, inborn error of immunity due to 
autosomal-dominant mutations in TOP2B, an essential gene required to alleviate 
topological stress during DNA replication and gene transcription. Although 
mutations identified in patients lead to a block in B-cell development and the 
absence of circulating B cells, an effect on natural killer (NK) cells was not 
previously examined.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine whether disease-associated mutations in TOP2B 
impact NK-cell development and function.
METHODS: Using a knockin murine model and patient-derived induced pluripotent 
stem cells (iPSCs), we investigated NK-cell development in mouse bone marrow and 
spleen, and performed immunophenotyping by flow cytometry, gene expression, and 
functional assessment of cytotoxic activity in murine NK cells, and human 
IPSC-derived NK cells.
RESULTS: Mature NK cells were reduced in the periphery of TOP2B knockin mice 
consistent with patient reports, with reduced cytotoxicity toward target cell 
lines. IPSCs were successfully derived from patients with Hoffman syndrome, but 
under optimal conditions showed reduced cytotoxicity compared with iPSC-derived 
NK cells from healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Hoffman syndrome-associated mutations in TOP2B impact NK-cell 
development and function in murine and human models.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2021.12.792
PMID: 35063500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]