---
reference_id: "PMID:29016766"
title: "Temporal pattern/episode duration-based classification of atrial fibrillation as paroxysmal vs. persistent: is it time to develop a more integrated prognostic score to optimize management?"
authors:
- Hammond-Haley M
- Providência R
- Lambiase PD
journal: Europace
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/europace/eux178
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Temporal pattern/episode duration-based classification of atrial fibrillation as paroxysmal vs. persistent: is it time to develop a more integrated prognostic score to optimize management?
**Authors:** Hammond-Haley M, Providência R, Lambiase PD
**Journal:** Europace (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/europace/eux178](https://doi.org/10.1093/europace/eux178)

## Content

1. Europace. 2018 Nov 1;20(FI_3):f288-f298. doi: 10.1093/europace/eux178.

Temporal pattern/episode duration-based classification of atrial fibrillation as 
paroxysmal vs. persistent: is it time to develop a more integrated prognostic 
score to optimize management?

Hammond-Haley M(1), Providência R(2), Lambiase PD(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Brighton and Sussex Medical School, Brighton, UK.
(2)Bart's Heart Centre, Bart's Health NHS Trust, St. Bartholomew's Hospital, 
West Smithfield, London, UK.
(3)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College & Barts Heart Centre, 
Paul O'Gorman Building, Huntley St, London, UK.

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a clinically heterogeneous arrhythmia that is 
currently classified according to the variety of temporal rhythm based 
manifestations observed clinically, including 'first detected episode', 
'paroxysmal', 'persistent', or 'permanent' AF. Despite being widely adopted by 
the most recent consensus guidelines, the utility of this classification system 
to stratify patients into distinct and clinically useful groups that have 
different outcomes including mortality, morbidity, specific cardiovascular 
outcomes, and quality of life (QoL), remains questionable. This is particularly 
true regarding the distinction between paroxysmal and persistent AF. Here, we 
demonstrate there is limited and conflicting evidence that this distinction is 
useful in predicting mortality, morbidity (including stroke and heart failure), 
symptom burden and QoL, although there is convincing evidence that patients with 
paroxysmal AF have favourable outcomes following electrical cardioversion and 
have better ablation procedural outcomes. Risk stratification schemes including 
the CHA2DS2VASc score are widely used to help clinicians stratify patients at 
high risk of stroke, whilst a number of newer, potentially superior, competitors 
have also recently been developed. A range of parameters including left atrial 
(LA) size, LA morphology, LA fibrosis [assessed by magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI)] LA appendage morphology and LA function (assessed by echo) have all been 
recently suggested to identify higher risk patients and may, perhaps in 
combination with validated risk stratification scores and emerging genetic data, 
provide clinicians with the information necessary to more accurately stratify 
patients to ensure better outcomes of specific AF treatments and prevent adverse 
events.

DOI: 10.1093/europace/eux178
PMID: 29016766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]