---
reference_id: "PMID:1346152"
title: "CD4+ lymphocyte cell enumeration for prediction of clinical course of human immunodeficiency virus disease: a review."
authors:
- Stein DS
- Korvick JA
- Vermund SH
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/165.2.352
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD4+ lymphocyte cell enumeration for prediction of clinical course of human immunodeficiency virus disease: a review.
**Authors:** Stein DS, Korvick JA, Vermund SH
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/165.2.352](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/165.2.352)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 1992 Feb;165(2):352-63. doi: 10.1093/infdis/165.2.352.

CD4+ lymphocyte cell enumeration for prediction of clinical course of human 
immunodeficiency virus disease: a review.

Stein DS(1), Korvick JA, Vermund SH.

Author information:
(1)Medical Branche, Division of AIDS, National Institutes of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 1992 Nov;166(5):1198-9. doi: 10.1093/infdis/166.5.1198.

Over the last 10 years the appreciation of the full breadth of the spectrum of 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection has gradually increased; it is now 
known that AIDS represents merely the end stage of this progressive infectious 
process. The surrogate marker that most closely correlates with the stage of HIV 
infection is the CD4+, or T helper, cell count. Because this count is relied on 
in making important therapeutic decisions, it is of paramount importance that 
clinicians be cognizant of and fully understand the multiple factors that can 
influence this parameter: the variability of the count from day to day and from 
morning to night, the influence of intercurrent viral infections, the influence 
of drugs. In this AIDS Commentary, Sten H. Vermund and his colleagues at the 
National Institutes of Health discuss these issues and put the CD4+ cell count 
into a lucid and practical clinical perspective.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/165.2.352
PMID: 1346152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]