---
reference_id: "PMID:28133001"
title: A Review of the Pathogenesis of Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.
authors:
- Kinoshita Y
- Saeki H
journal: J Nippon Med Sch
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1272/jnms.83.216
keywords:
- Alleles
- Annexins
- "Antigens, Differentiation, T-Lymphocyte"
- Apoptosis
- Dermis/pathology
- Epidermis/pathology
- Granzymes
- HLA Antigens/genetics
- Humans
- Keratinocytes/pathology
- Macrophages/immunology
- MicroRNAs
- Necrosis
- Perforin
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/etiology, pathology"
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Review of the Pathogenesis of Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.
**Authors:** Kinoshita Y, Saeki H
**Journal:** J Nippon Med Sch (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1272/jnms.83.216](https://doi.org/10.1272/jnms.83.216)

## Content

1. J Nippon Med Sch. 2016;83(6):216-222. doi: 10.1272/jnms.83.216.

A Review of the Pathogenesis of Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.

Kinoshita Y(1), Saeki H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nippon Medical School.

Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is a rare skin condition, most often 
drug-induced, known for its skin detachment and high mortality. In general, 
acute TEN is considered a T-cell mediated, type IV hypersensitivity disorder. It 
mostly results from a cumulative effect of risks from the drug structure, drug 
metabolism, HLA alleles and T cell clonotypes. However, the precise mechanism of 
TEN is still unknown. Apoptosis or necroptosis causes keratinocytes to lose 
their shape and adhesion, and necrosis predominates within a few days. Total 
epidermal necrosis separates the epidermis from the dermis. TEN is regarded as 
an immune reaction with predominantly CD8+ T lymphocytes, monocytes/macrophages, 
and natural killer cells. Impaired regulatory T-cells, T-helper 17 cells, 
cytotoxic granules such as perforin-granzyme and granulysin, tumor necrosis 
factor α, annexin, microRNA-18a-5p, and drug metabolites are all thought to be 
involved. From what is known, it can be assumed their mechanism is complex, and 
there is still much to be investigated. New findings will contribute to the 
identification of effective active methods of intervention.

DOI: 10.1272/jnms.83.216
PMID: 28133001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]