---
reference_id: PMID:23143442
title: BBS1 mutations in a wide spectrum of phenotypes ranging from nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa to Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Estrada-Cuzcano A
- Koenekoop RK
- Senechal A
- De Baere EB
- de Ravel T
- Banfi S
- Kohl S
- Ayuso C
- Sharon D
- Hoyng CB
- Hamel CP
- Leroy BP
- Ziviello C
- Lopez I
- Bazinet A
- Wissinger B
- Sliesoraityte I
- Avila-Fernandez A
- Littink KW
- Vingolo EM
- Signorini S
- Banin E
- Mizrahi-Meissonnier L
- Zrenner E
- Kellner U
- Collin RW
- den Hollander AI
- Cremers FP
- Klevering BJ
journal: Arch Ophthalmol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1001/archophthalmol.2012.2434
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- "Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/diagnosis, ethnology, genetics"
- Canada/epidemiology
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electroretinography
- Ethnicity
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Israel/epidemiology
- Male
- "Microscopy, Acoustic"
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Ophthalmoscopy
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Prevalence
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/diagnosis, ethnology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BBS1 mutations in a wide spectrum of phenotypes ranging from nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa to Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Estrada-Cuzcano A, Koenekoop RK, Senechal A, De Baere EB, de Ravel T, Banfi S, Kohl S, Ayuso C, Sharon D, Hoyng CB, Hamel CP, Leroy BP, Ziviello C, Lopez I, Bazinet A, Wissinger B, Sliesoraityte I, Avila-Fernandez A, Littink KW, Vingolo EM, Signorini S, Banin E, Mizrahi-Meissonnier L, Zrenner E, Kellner U, Collin RW, den Hollander AI, Cremers FP, Klevering BJ
**Journal:** Arch Ophthalmol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archophthalmol.2012.2434](https://doi.org/10.1001/archophthalmol.2012.2434)

## Content

1. Arch Ophthalmol. 2012 Nov;130(11):1425-32. doi: 
10.1001/archophthalmol.2012.2434.

BBS1 mutations in a wide spectrum of phenotypes ranging from nonsyndromic 
retinitis pigmentosa to Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Estrada-Cuzcano A(1), Koenekoop RK, Senechal A, De Baere EB, de Ravel T, Banfi 
S, Kohl S, Ayuso C, Sharon D, Hoyng CB, Hamel CP, Leroy BP, Ziviello C, Lopez I, 
Bazinet A, Wissinger B, Sliesoraityte I, Avila-Fernandez A, Littink KW, Vingolo 
EM, Signorini S, Banin E, Mizrahi-Meissonnier L, Zrenner E, Kellner U, Collin 
RW, den Hollander AI, Cremers FP, Klevering BJ.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, PO 
Box 9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the involvement of the Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) 
gene BBS1 p.M390R variant in nonsyndromic autosomal recessive retinitis 
pigmentosa (RP).
METHODS: Homozygosity mapping of a patient with isolated RP was followed by BBS1 
sequence analysis. We performed restriction fragment length polymorphism 
analysis of the p.M390R allele in 2007 patients with isolated RP or autosomal 
recessive RP and in 1824 ethnically matched controls. Patients with 2 BBS1 
variants underwent extensive clinical and ophthalmologic assessment.
RESULTS: In an RP proband who did not fulfill the clinical criteria for BBS, we 
identified a large homozygous region encompassing the BBS1 gene, which carried 
the p.M390R variant. In addition, this variant was detected homozygously in 10 
RP patients and 1 control, compound heterozygously in 3 patients, and 
heterozygously in 5 patients and 6 controls. The 14 patients with 2 BBS1 
variants showed the entire clinical spectrum, from nonsyndromic RP to full-blown 
BBS. In 8 of 14 patients, visual acuity was significantly reduced. In patients 
with electroretinographic responses, a rod-cone pattern of photoreceptor 
degeneration was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants in BBS1 are significantly associated with nonsyndromic 
autosomal recessive RP and relatively mild forms of BBS. As exemplified in this 
study by the identification of a homozygous p.M390R variant in a control 
individual and in unaffected parents of BBS patients in other studies, cis - or 
trans -acting modifiers may influence the disease phenotype.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: It is important to monitor patients with an early diagnosis 
of mild BBS phenotypes for possible life-threatening conditions.

DOI: 10.1001/archophthalmol.2012.2434
PMID: 23143442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]