---
reference_id: "PMID:29655822"
title: Clinical Spectrum and Management of Heart Failure in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Maron BJ
- Rowin EJ
- Udelson JE
- Maron MS
journal: JACC Heart Fail
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2017.09.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Spectrum and Management of Heart Failure in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Maron BJ, Rowin EJ, Udelson JE, Maron MS
**Journal:** JACC Heart Fail (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jchf.2017.09.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jchf.2017.09.011)

## Content

1. JACC Heart Fail. 2018 May;6(5):353-363. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2017.09.011. Epub 
2018 Apr 11.

Clinical Spectrum and Management of Heart Failure 
in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.

Maron BJ(1), Rowin EJ(1), Udelson JE(1), Maron MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Institute, Division of Cardiology, Tufts Medical 
Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Institute, Division of Cardiology, Tufts Medical 
Center, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address: 
mmaron@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.

Comment in
    JACC Heart Fail. 2018 Sep;6(9):807. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2018.05.013.
    JACC Heart Fail. 2018 Sep;6(9):807-808. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2018.06.009.

Heart failure (HF), characterized by excessive exertional dyspnea, is a common 
complication within the broad clinical spectrum of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
(HCM). HF has become an increasingly prominent management issue with the 
reduction in sudden deaths due to use of implantable defibrillators in this 
disease. Exertional dyspnea ranges in severity from mild to severe (New York 
Heart Association functional classes II to IV) and not uncommonly becomes 
refractory to medical management, leading to progressive disability, but largely 
in the absence of pulmonary congestion and volume overload requiring 
hospitalization. HCM-related HF is most commonly due to dynamic mechanical 
impedance to left ventricular outflow produced by mitral valve systolic anterior 
motion, leading to high intracavity pressures. Surgical septal myectomy with low 
operative mortality (<1%) produces HF reversal and symptom relief in 90% to 95% 
of patients, while also conveying a survival benefit. Exercise echocardiography 
has assumed an important role in the evaluation of patients with HCM, i.e., by 
identifying candidates for septal reduction therapy with refractory HF when 
outflow gradients are present only with physiological exercise, distinguishing 
highly symptomatic nonobstructive patients as heart transplant candidates, and 
predicting future development of progressive HF. Notably, mortality directly 
attributable to HF has become exceedingly uncommon in HCM (<0.5%/year) in 
contrast with HF in non-HCM diseases (by 20-fold). In conclusion, HF in HCM is 
associated with diverse and complex pathophysiology, but a substantially 
more favorable prognosis than conventional non-HCM HF, and highly 
amenable to effective treatment options in the vast majority of patients.

Copyright © 2018 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchf.2017.09.011
PMID: 29655822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]