---
reference_id: "PMID:33441402"
title: "Sodium-glucose cotransporter protein-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists for type 2 diabetes: systematic review and network meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials."
authors:
- Palmer SC
- Tendal B
- Mustafa RA
- Vandvik PO
- Li S
- Hao Q
- Tunnicliffe D
- Ruospo M
- Natale P
- Saglimbene V
- Nicolucci A
- Johnson DW
- Tonelli M
- Rossi MC
- Badve SV
- Cho Y
- Nadeau-Fredette AC
- Burke M
- Faruque LI
- Lloyd A
- Ahmad N
- Liu Y
- Tiv S
- Millard T
- Gagliardi L
- Kolanu N
- Barmanray RD
- McMorrow R
- Raygoza Cortez AK
- White H
- Chen X
- Zhou X
- Liu J
- Rodríguez AF
- González-Colmenero AD
- Wang Y
- Li L
- Sutanto S
- Solis RC
- Díaz González-Colmenero F
- Rodriguez-Gutierrez R
- Walsh M
- Guyatt G
- Strippoli GFM
journal: BMJ
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1136/bmj.m4573
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sodium-glucose cotransporter protein-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists for type 2 diabetes: systematic review and network meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.
**Authors:** Palmer SC, Tendal B, Mustafa RA, Vandvik PO, Li S, Hao Q, Tunnicliffe D, Ruospo M, Natale P, Saglimbene V, Nicolucci A, Johnson DW, Tonelli M, Rossi MC, Badve SV, Cho Y, Nadeau-Fredette AC, Burke M, Faruque LI, Lloyd A, Ahmad N, Liu Y, Tiv S, Millard T, Gagliardi L, Kolanu N, Barmanray RD, McMorrow R, Raygoza Cortez AK, White H, Chen X, Zhou X, Liu J, Rodríguez AF, González-Colmenero AD, Wang Y, Li L, Sutanto S, Solis RC, Díaz González-Colmenero F, Rodriguez-Gutierrez R, Walsh M, Guyatt G, Strippoli GFM
**Journal:** BMJ (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmj.m4573](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m4573)

## Content

1. BMJ. 2021 Jan 13;372:m4573. doi: 10.1136/bmj.m4573.

Sodium-glucose cotransporter protein-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors and glucagon-like 
peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists for type 2 diabetes: systematic review and 
network meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.

Palmer SC(1), Tendal B(2), Mustafa RA(3)(4), Vandvik PO(5), Li S(6)(7), Hao 
Q(8), Tunnicliffe D(9), Ruospo M(10), Natale P(9)(10), Saglimbene V(10), 
Nicolucci A(11), Johnson DW(12), Tonelli M(13), Rossi MC(11), Badve SV(14), Cho 
Y(12), Nadeau-Fredette AC(15), Burke M(16), Faruque LI(17), Lloyd A(17), Ahmad 
N(17), Liu Y(17), Tiv S(17), Millard T(2), Gagliardi L(18)(19), Kolanu N(20), 
Barmanray RD(21), McMorrow R(22), Raygoza Cortez AK(23), White H(2), Chen X(6), 
Zhou X(24), Liu J(25), Rodríguez AF(23), González-Colmenero AD(23), Wang Y(26), 
Li L(25), Sutanto S(27), Solis RC(23), Díaz González-Colmenero F(23), 
Rodriguez-Gutierrez R(23), Walsh M(28)(29), Guyatt G(4), Strippoli GFM(30)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(2)School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, 
University of Kansas, Kansas City, KS, USA.
(4)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and Impact, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(5)Institute of Health and Society, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, China.
(7)Division of Population Health and Genomics, Ninewells Hospital, University of 
Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(8)Centre for Gerontology and Geriatrics, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, China.
(9)Sydney School of Public Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(10)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, University of Bari, 
Piazza Giulio CESARE, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(11)Centre for Outcomes Research and Clinical Epidemiology (CORESEARCH), 
Pescara, Italy.
(12)Department of Nephrology, Division of Medicine, University of Queensland at 
Princess Alexandra Hospital, Woolloongabba, QLD, Australia.
(13)Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(14)George Institute for Global Health, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(15)Division of Nephrology, Hôpital Maisonneuve-Rosemont, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(16)Mater Private Clinic, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(17)Department of Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(18)Endocrine and Diabetes Unit, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Woodville, SA, 
Australia.
(19)Endocrine and Metabolic Unit, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, SA, 
Australia.
(20)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(21)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(22)Department of General Practice and Primary Health Care, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(23)Plataforma INVEST Medicina UANL-KER Unit Mayo Clinic (KER Unit Mexico), 
Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo Leon, Monterrey, Mexico.
(24)Evidence-based Medicine Research Centre, Jiangxi University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Nanchang, China.
(25)Chinese Evidence-based Medicine Centre, Cochrane China Centre.
(26)West China School of Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(27)Faculty of Medicine and Health, Charles Perkins Centre, University of 
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(28)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(29)Population Health Research Institute, Hamilton Health Sciences, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(30)Sydney School of Public Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia 
gfmstrippoli@gmail.com.

Erratum in
    BMJ. 2022 Jan 18;376:o109. doi: 10.1136/bmj.o109.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2021 Jun;174(6):JC67. doi: 10.7326/ACPJ202106150-067.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors and 
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists in patients with type 2 
diabetes at varying cardiovascular and renal risk.
DESIGN: Network meta-analysis.
DATA SOURCES: Medline, Embase, and Cochrane CENTRAL up to 11 August 2020.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR SELECTING STUDIES: Randomised controlled trials 
comparing SGLT-2 inhibitors or GLP-1 receptor agonists with placebo, standard 
care, or other glucose lowering treatment in adults with type 2 diabetes with 
follow up of 24 weeks or longer. Studies were screened independently by two 
reviewers for eligibility, extracted data, and assessed risk of bias.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Frequentist random effects network meta-analysis was 
carried out and GRADE (grading of recommendations assessment, development, and 
evaluation) used to assess evidence certainty. Results included estimated 
absolute effects of treatment per 1000 patients treated for five years for 
patients at very low risk (no cardiovascular risk factors), low risk (three or 
more cardiovascular risk factors), moderate risk (cardiovascular disease), high 
risk (chronic kidney disease), and very high risk (cardiovascular disease and 
kidney disease). A guideline panel provided oversight of the systematic review.
RESULTS: 764 trials including 421 346 patients proved eligible. All results 
refer to the addition of SGLT-2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor agonists to 
existing diabetes treatment. Both classes of drugs lowered all cause mortality, 
cardiovascular mortality, non-fatal myocardial infarction, and kidney failure 
(high certainty evidence). Notable differences were found between the two 
agents: SGLT-2 inhibitors reduced admission to hospital for heart failure more 
than GLP-1 receptor agonists, and GLP-1 receptor agonists reduced non-fatal 
stroke more than SGLT-2 inhibitors (which appeared to have no effect). SGLT-2 
inhibitors caused genital infection (high certainty), whereas GLP-1 receptor 
agonists might cause severe gastrointestinal events (low certainty). Low 
certainty evidence suggested that SGLT-2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor agonists 
might lower body weight. Little or no evidence was found for the effect of 
SGLT-2 inhibitors or GLP-1 receptor agonists on limb amputation, blindness, eye 
disease, neuropathic pain, or health related quality of life. The absolute 
benefits of these drugs vary substantially across patients from low to very high 
risk of cardiovascular and renal outcomes (eg, SGLT-2 inhibitors resulted in 3 
to 40 fewer deaths in 1000 patients over five years; see interactive decision 
support tool (https://magicevidence.org/match-it/200820dist/#!/) for all 
outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with type 2 diabetes, SGLT-2 inhibitors and GLP-1 
receptor agonists reduced cardiovascular and renal outcomes, with some 
differences in benefits and harms. Absolute benefits are determined by 
individual risk profiles of patients, with clear implications for clinical 
practice, as reflected in the BMJ Rapid Recommendations directly informed by 
this systematic review.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42019153180.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.m4573
PMCID: PMC7804890
PMID: 33441402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed 
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and 
declare: SCP, BT, RAM, POV, SL, QH, DT, MR, PN, VS, YC, ACNF, MB, LIF, AL, NA, 
YL, ST, TM, NK, RDB, RM, AKRC, HW, XC, XZ, JL, AFR, ADGC, YW, LL, SS, RCS, FDG, 
RRG, MW, GG, GFMS: no support from any organisation for the submitted work; no 
financial relationships with any organisations that might have an interest in 
the submitted work in the previous three years. SL was supported by grants from 
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant number 21534008), 
Sichuan Science and Technology Programme (grant number 2019YFH0150), and 1.3.5 
Project for Disciplines of Excellence, West China Hospital, Sichuan University 
(grant numbers ZYGD18022 and 2020HXF011). None of these grants contribute to 
this work. AN reports grants and personal fees from Novo Nordisk, grants from 
Sanofi, grants and personal fees from Astra Zeneca, grants from Pikdare, grants 
from AlfaSigma, outside the submitted work. DWJ reports grants and personal fees 
from Baxter Healthcare, grants and personal fees from Fresenius Medical Care, 
other from Amgen, personal fees from Astra Zeneca, personal fees from AWAK, 
grants from National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia, personal 
fees from Ono, outside the submitted work. MT reports a grant to the institution 
by Daichi Sankyo in lieu of a personal honorarium. MCR reports grants from 
Sanofi, grants from NovoNordisk, grants from AstraZeneca, grants from Pikdare, 
during the conduct of the study. SVB reports advisory board membership to Bayer 
Australia and AstraZeneca, speaking honoraria from Bayer Australia and Pfizer 
Australia; non-financial research support from Bayer AG. LG reports personal 
fees from Boehringer-Engelheim, personal fees from Lilly, personal fees from 
Astra Zeneca, non-financial support from Novo Nordisk, outside the submitted 
work.