---
reference_id: "PMID:20301540"
title: Thanatophoric Dysplasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- French T
- Savarirayan R
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thanatophoric Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, French T, Savarirayan R

## Content

1. Thanatophoric Dysplasia.

French T(1), Savarirayan R(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2004 May 21 [updated 2023 May 18].

Author information:
(1)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia
(2)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Royal Children's Hospital;, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) is a short-limb skeletal 
dysplasia that is usually lethal in the perinatal period. TD is divided into 
subtypes: TD type 1 is characterized by micromelia with bowed femurs and, 
uncommonly, the presence of craniosynostosis of varying severity. TD type 2 is 
characterized by micromelia with straight femurs and uniform presence of 
moderate-to-severe craniosynostosis with cloverleaf skull deformity. Other 
features common to type 1 and type 2 include: short ribs, narrow thorax, 
relative macrocephaly, distinctive facial features, brachydactyly, hypotonia, 
and redundant skin folds along the limbs. Most affected infants die of 
respiratory insufficiency shortly after birth. Rare long-term survivors have 
been reported.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of TD is established in a proband with 
characteristic clinical and/or radiologic features and/or a heterozygous 
pathogenic variant in FGFR3 identified on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Most individuals with TD die in the 
perinatal period because of the multisystem complications of the disorder. 
Management goals should be established with the family and may focus on 
provision of comfort care. Newborns require long-term respiratory support 
(typically with tracheostomy and ventilation) to survive. Anesthetic management 
guidelines for skeletal dysplasias are applicable to individuals with TD. Other 
treatment measures may include shunt placement for hydrocephalus, suboccipital 
decompression for relief of craniocervical junction constriction, anti-seizure 
medication to control seizures, and hearing aids. Surveillance: Long-term 
survivors need neuroimaging to monitor for craniocervical constriction, 
assessment of neurologic status, and EEG to monitor for seizure activity, as 
well as developmental, orthopedic, and audiology evaluations. Pregnancy 
management: When TD is diagnosed prenatally, treatment goals are to avoid 
potential pregnancy complications including prematurity, polyhydramnios, 
malpresentation, and delivery complications from macrocephaly and/or a flexed 
and rigid neck; cephalocentesis and cesarean section may be considered to avoid 
maternal complications.
GENETIC COUNSELING: TD is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner; the 
majority of probands have a de novo FGFR3 pathogenic variant. Risk of sib 
recurrence for parents who have had one affected child is not significantly 
increased over that of the general population. Germline mosaicism in healthy 
parents, although not reported to date, remains a theoretic possibility. 
Prenatal diagnosis is possible by ultrasound examination and molecular genetic 
testing.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301540