---
reference_id: "PMID:34928720"
title: "Small bowel intussusception and concurrent jejunal polyp with neoplastic transformation: a new diagnosis of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome."
authors:
- Hudson VE
- Rooney S
- Pursglove S
- Bhojwani D
- Gourgiotis S
journal: Ann R Coll Surg Engl
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1308/rcsann.2021.0142
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small bowel intussusception and concurrent jejunal polyp with neoplastic transformation: a new diagnosis of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
**Authors:** Hudson VE, Rooney S, Pursglove S, Bhojwani D, Gourgiotis S
**Journal:** Ann R Coll Surg Engl (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1308/rcsann.2021.0142](https://doi.org/10.1308/rcsann.2021.0142)

## Content

1. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2022 Mar;104(3):e84-e86. doi: 10.1308/rcsann.2021.0142. 
Epub 2021 Dec 20.

Small bowel intussusception and concurrent jejunal polyp with neoplastic 
transformation: a new diagnosis of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.

Hudson VE(1), Rooney S(1), Pursglove S(1), Bhojwani D(1), Gourgiotis S(1).

Author information:
(1)Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare hereditary disease characterised by 
hyperpigmentation of the oral mucosa and gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyps. 
We report a case of a 27-year-old man who presented with a 5-day history of 
epigastric pain and rectal bleeding. Computed tomography suggested small bowel 
obstruction secondary to ileocolic intussusception and an incidental polyp in 
the mid jejunum. The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy during which right 
hemicolectomy and small bowel resection were performed. Histology from surgical 
specimens revealed Peutz-Jeghers polyps, one of which had low-grade dysplasia. 
This case emphasises that although rare, adults with PJS can present with 
intussusception. Also illustrated is the extremely rare possibility of 
concurrent polyps occurring in different parts of the bowel with neoplastic 
transformation. Intussusception is a challenge to diagnose because the 
presentation is often non-specific. Clinical history-taking and physical 
examination along with prompt axial imaging is important for the diagnosis. 
Careful examination of the bowel and polypectomy during laparotomy may prevent 
neoplastic transformation and short bowel syndrome.

DOI: 10.1308/rcsann.2021.0142
PMCID: PMC10335009
PMID: 34928720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]