---
reference_id: "PMID:31924415"
title: A comprehensive analysis of the clinical characteristics and laboratory features in 179 patients with autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.
authors:
- Nakane S
- Mukaino A
- Higuchi O
- Yasuhiro M
- Takamatsu K
- Yamakawa M
- Watari M
- Tawara N
- Nakahara KI
- Kawakami A
- Matsuo H
- Ando Y
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102403
keywords:
- "Autoantibodies/blood, immunology"
- Autoantigens/immunology
- "Autoimmune Diseases/blood, diagnosis, immunology"
- Autoimmunity
- "Autonomic Nervous System Diseases/blood, diagnosis, immunology"
- Biomarkers
- "Ganglia, Autonomic/immunology"
- Humans
- Japan
- Myocardial Perfusion Imaging
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, Cholinergic/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A comprehensive analysis of the clinical characteristics and laboratory features in 179 patients with autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.
**Authors:** Nakane S, Mukaino A, Higuchi O, Yasuhiro M, Takamatsu K, Yamakawa M, Watari M, Tawara N, Nakahara KI, Kawakami A, Matsuo H, Ando Y
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102403](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102403)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2020 Mar;108:102403. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102403. Epub 2020
Jan  8.

A comprehensive analysis of the clinical characteristics and laboratory features 
in 179 patients with autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.

Nakane S(1), Mukaino A(2), Higuchi O(3), Yasuhiro M(4), Takamatsu K(5), Yamakawa 
M(6), Watari M(7), Tawara N(8), Nakahara KI(9), Kawakami A(10), Matsuo H(11), 
Ando Y(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, Kumamoto, Japan; Department of Molecular Neurology and Therapeutics, 
Kumamoto University Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address: 
nakaneshunya@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, Kumamoto, Japan; Department of Molecular Neurology and Therapeutics, 
Kumamoto University Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address: 
a.mukaino@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Clinical Research, National Hospital Organization Nagasaki 
Kawatana Medical Center, Nagasaki, Japan; Department of Neuroimmunology, 
Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan. 
Electronic address: osmhgc@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Clinical Research, National Hospital Organization Nagasaki 
Kawatana Medical Center, Nagasaki, Japan; Department of Neuroimmunology, 
Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan; 
Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Nagasaki Kawatana 
Medical Center, Nagasaki, Japan. Electronic address: yas.maeda@hotmail.co.jp.
(5)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address: takamakt@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address: makoto.kumadai@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address: learsky_heaven@hotmail.com.
(8)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address: nozomonist@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address: 97056kn@gmail.com.
(10)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, Unit of Translational Medicine, 
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan. 
Electronic address: atsushik@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.
(11)Department of Clinical Research, National Hospital Organization Nagasaki 
Kawatana Medical Center, Nagasaki, Japan; Department of Neurology, National 
Hospital Organization Nagasaki Kawatana Medical Center, Nagasaki, Japan. 
Electronic address: matsuo.hidenori.wa@mail.hosp.go.jp.
(12)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address: andoy709@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

The clinical importance of autoantibodies against the ganglionic acetylcholine 
receptor (gAChR) remains to be fully elucidated. We aimed to identify the 
clinical characteristics of autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy (AAG) in 
patients with gAChR autoantibodies. For this cohort investigation, serum samples 
were obtained from patients with AAG between 2012 and 2018 in Japan. We measured 
the levels of autoantibodies against gAChRα3 and gAChRβ4 and evaluated clinical 
features, as well as assessing the laboratory investigation results among the 
included patients. A total of 179 patients tested positive for antibodies, 
including 116 gAChRα3-positive, 13 gAChRβ4-positive, and 50 double 
antibody-positive patients. Seropositive AAG patients exhibited widespread 
autonomic dysfunction. Extra-autonomic manifestations including sensory 
disturbance, central nervous system involvement, endocrine disorders, autoimmune 
diseases, and tumours were present in 118 patients (83%). We observed 
significant differences in the frequencies of several autonomic and 
extra-autonomic symptoms among the three groups. Our 
123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine myocardial scintigraphy analysis of the entire 
cohort revealed that the heart-to-mediastinum ratio had decreased by 80%. The 
present study is the first to demonstrate that patients with AAG who are 
seropositive for anti-gAChRβ4 autoantibodies exhibit unique autonomic and 
extra-autonomic signs. Decreased cardiac uptake occurred in most cases, 
indicating that 123I- metaiodobenzylguanidine myocardial scintigraphy may be 
useful for monitoring AAG. Therefore, our findings indicate that gAChRα3 and 
gAChRβ4 autoantibodies cause functional changes in postganglionic fibres in the 
autonomic nervous system and extra-autonomic manifestations in seropositive 
patients with AAG.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102403
PMID: 31924415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None of the 
authors have any conflicts of interest to disclose.