---
reference_id: "PMID:22385883"
title: Seasonal variations of systemic lupus erythematosus flares in southern France.
authors:
- Chiche L
- Jourde N
- Ulmann C
- Mancini J
- Darque A
- Bardin N
- Dicostanzo MP
- Thomas G
- Harlé JR
- Vienne J
- Loukos H
- Bornet C
journal: Eur J Intern Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2011.12.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seasonal variations of systemic lupus erythematosus flares in southern France.
**Authors:** Chiche L, Jourde N, Ulmann C, Mancini J, Darque A, Bardin N, Dicostanzo MP, Thomas G, Harlé JR, Vienne J, Loukos H, Bornet C
**Journal:** Eur J Intern Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejim.2011.12.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2011.12.006)

## Content

1. Eur J Intern Med. 2012 Apr;23(3):250-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2011.12.006. Epub 
2012 Jan 9.

Seasonal variations of systemic lupus erythematosus flares in southern France.

Chiche L(1), Jourde N, Ulmann C, Mancini J, Darque A, Bardin N, Dicostanzo MP, 
Thomas G, Harlé JR, Vienne J, Loukos H, Bornet C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hôpital de la Conception, Marseille, France. 
laurent.chiche@ap-hm.fr

OBJECTIVE: Exposure to sunlight is one of the environmental factors involved in 
the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus. We investigated whether there 
is seasonal variation in the incidence of cutaneous and noncutaneous severe 
lupus flares in southern France.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed clinical and biological data from all SLE 
patients hospitalized for a flare of the disease during a two year period in our 
centre and collected corresponding meteorological data from the official website 
of MeteoFrance.
RESULTS: Forty one patients, mean age 36.7 ± 13.8 years, were included. 
Twenty-six patients (63.4%) had kidney biopsy performed, showing in all cases 
proliferative nephritis, associated with membranous nephritis in 9 (22%). We 
found a clear seasonal pattern for overall lupus flares with 39% of flares 
occurred in Spring. Among patients without any cutaneous involvement, this 
seasonal pattern was still observed (p=0.024). Patients under antimalarials 
presented flares significantly later in the sunny season than those without 
(respectively median in July versus May, p=0.044). There were strong positive 
correlations between occurrence of lupus flares and maximum temperature increase 
(ρ=0.87, p<0.001), minimum temperature increase (ρ=0.87, p<0.001), and duration 
of sunshine increase (ρ=0.78, p=0.003). These correlations were also observed in 
patients with renal flares.
CONCLUSION: We confirmed a seasonal pattern for lupus flares among patients 
living in Southern France, with most flares in spring, in correlation with an 
increase in temperature and duration of sunshine. A similar seasonal pattern was 
observed in patients with no cutaneous involvement and with visceral 
involvement.

Copyright Â© 2011 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2011.12.006
PMID: 22385883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]