---
reference_id: "PMID:28320296"
title: Biological Basis for Amyloidogenesis in Alzheimer's Disease.
authors:
- Andreeva TV
- Lukiw WJ
- Rogaev EI
journal: Biochemistry (Mosc)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1134/S0006297917020043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biological Basis for Amyloidogenesis in Alzheimer's Disease.
**Authors:** Andreeva TV, Lukiw WJ, Rogaev EI
**Journal:** Biochemistry (Mosc) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1134/S0006297917020043](https://doi.org/10.1134/S0006297917020043)

## Content

1. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2017 Feb;82(2):122-139. doi: 10.1134/S0006297917020043.

Biological Basis for Amyloidogenesis in Alzheimer's Disease.

Andreeva TV(1), Lukiw WJ, Rogaev EI.

Author information:
(1)Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 
119991, Russia. andreeva@rogaevlab.ru.

Certain cellular proteins normally soluble in the living organism under certain 
conditions form aggregates with a specific cross-β sheet structure called 
amyloid. These intra- or extracellular insoluble aggregates (fibers or plaques) 
are hallmarks of many neurodegenerative pathologies including Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease, prion disease, and 
other progressive neurological diseases that develop in the aging human central 
nervous system. Amyloid diseases (amyloidoses) are widespread in the elderly 
human population, a rapidly expanding demographic in many global populations. 
Increasing age is the most significant risk factor for neurodegenerative 
diseases associated with amyloid plaques. To date, nearly three dozen different 
misfolded proteins targeting brain and other organs have been identified in 
amyloid diseases and AD, the most prevalent neurodegenerative amyloid disease 
affecting over 15 million people worldwide. Here we (i) highlight the latest 
data on mechanisms of amyloid formation and further discuss a hypothesis on the 
amyloid cascade as a primary mechanism of AD pathogenesis and (ii) review the 
evolutionary aspects of amyloidosis, which allow new insight on human-specific 
mechanisms of dementia development.

DOI: 10.1134/S0006297917020043
PMID: 28320296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]