---
reference_id: "PMID:35456468"
title: Phenotype Expansion for Atypical Gaucher Disease Due to Homozygous Missense PSAP Variant in a Large Consanguineous Pakistani Family.
authors:
- Liaqat K
- Hussain S
- Acharya A
- Nasir A
- Bharadwaj T
- Ansar M
- Basit S
- Schrauwen I
- Ahmad W
- Leal SM
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13040662
keywords:
- Consanguinity
- "Gaucher Disease/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Pakistan
- Phenotype
- "Saposins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotype Expansion for Atypical Gaucher Disease Due to Homozygous Missense PSAP Variant in a Large Consanguineous Pakistani Family.
**Authors:** Liaqat K, Hussain S, Acharya A, Nasir A, Bharadwaj T, Ansar M, Basit S, Schrauwen I, Ahmad W, Leal SM
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13040662](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13040662)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Apr 9;13(4):662. doi: 10.3390/genes13040662.

Phenotype Expansion for Atypical Gaucher Disease Due to Homozygous Missense PSAP 
Variant in a Large Consanguineous Pakistani Family.

Liaqat K(1)(2), Hussain S(3), Acharya A(1), Nasir A(4), Bharadwaj T(1), Ansar 
M(3), Basit S(5), Schrauwen I(1), Ahmad W(3), Leal SM(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Statistical Genetics, Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, The 
Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, 
USA.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam 
University, Islamabad 45320, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam 
University, Islamabad 45320, Pakistan.
(4)Synthetic Protein Engineering Lab (SPEL), Department of Molecular Science and 
Technology, Ajou University, Suwon 443-749, Korea.
(5)Center for Genetics and Inherited Diseases, Taibah University, Almadinah 
Almunawarah, Medina 42318, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Taub Institute for Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Atypical Gaucher disease is caused by variants in the PSAP gene. Saposin C is 
one of four homologous proteins derived from sequential cleavage of the saposin 
precursor protein, prosaposin. It is an essential activator for 
glucocerebrosidase, which is deficient in Gaucher disease. Although atypical 
Gaucher disease due to deficiency of saposin C is rare, it exhibits vast 
phenotypic heterogeneity. Here, we report on a Pakistani family that exhibits 
features of Gaucher disease, i.e., prelingual profound sensorineural hearing 
impairment, vestibular dysfunction, hepatosplenomegaly, kyphosis, and 
thrombocytopenia. The family was investigated using exome and Sanger sequencing. 
A homozygous missense variant c.1076A>C: p.(Glu359Ala) in exon 10 of the PSAP 
gene was observed in all affected family members. In conclusion, we identified a 
new likely pathogenic missense variant in PSAP in a large consanguineous 
Pakistani family with atypical Gaucher disease. Gaucher disease due to a 
deficiency of saposin C has not been previously reported within the Pakistani 
population. Genetic screening of patients with the aforementioned phenotypes 
could ensure adequate follow-up and the prevention of further complications. Our 
finding expands the genetic and phenotypic spectrum of atypical Gaucher disease 
due to a saposin C deficiency.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13040662
PMCID: PMC9028228
PMID: 35456468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.