---
reference_id: "PMID:16822174"
title: The cellular basis of kidney development.
authors:
- Dressler GR
journal: Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1146/annurev.cellbio.22.010305.104340
keywords:
- Animals
- Body Patterning
- Cell Survival
- Genomics
- Humans
- "Kidney Glomerulus/cytology, embryology"
- Mesoderm/cytology
- "Nephrons/cytology, embryology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The cellular basis of kidney development.
**Authors:** Dressler GR
**Journal:** Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.cellbio.22.010305.104340](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.cellbio.22.010305.104340)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2006;22:509-29. doi: 
10.1146/annurev.cellbio.22.010305.104340.

The cellular basis of kidney development.

Dressler GR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, 
USA. dressler@umich.edu

Mammalian kidney development has helped elucidate the general concepts of 
mesenchymal-epithelial interactions, inductive signaling, epithelial cell 
polarization, and branching morphogenesis. Through the use of genetically 
engineered mouse models, the manipulation of Xenopus and chick embryos, and the 
identification of human renal disease genes, the molecular bases for many of the 
early events in the developing kidney are becoming increasingly clear. Early 
patterning of the kidney region depends on interactions between Pax/Eya/Six 
genes, with essential roles for lim1 and Odd1. Ureteric bud outgrowth and 
branching morphogenesis are controlled by the Ret/Gdnf pathway, which is subject 
to positive and negative regulation by a variety of factors. A clear role for 
Wnt proteins in induction of the kidney mesenchyme is now well established and 
complements the classic literature nicely. Patterning along the proximal distal 
axis as the nephron develops is now being investigated and must involve aspects 
of Notch signaling. The development of a glomerulus requires interactions 
between epithelial cells and infiltrating endothelial cells to generate a unique 
basement membrane. The integrity of the glomerular filter depends in large part 
on the proteins of the nephrin complex, localized to the slit diaphragm. Despite 
the kidney's architectural complexity, with the advent of genomics and 
expression arrays, it is becoming one of the best-characterized organ systems in 
developmental biology.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.cellbio.22.010305.104340
PMID: 16822174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]