---
reference_id: "PMID:14681893"
title: Pathogenesis of clinical signs in recessive ataxia with saccadic intrusions.
authors:
- Swartz BE
- Li S
- Bespalova I
- Burmeister M
- Dulaney E
- Robinson FR
- Leigh RJ
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1002/ana.10758
keywords:
- Adult
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1/genetics"
- Confidence Intervals
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Ocular Motility Disorders/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Spinocerebellar Degenerations/complications, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of clinical signs in recessive ataxia with saccadic intrusions.
**Authors:** Swartz BE, Li S, Bespalova I, Burmeister M, Dulaney E, Robinson FR, Leigh RJ
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.10758](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.10758)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2003 Dec;54(6):824-8. doi: 10.1002/ana.10758.

Pathogenesis of clinical signs in recessive ataxia with saccadic intrusions.

Swartz BE(1), Li S, Bespalova I, Burmeister M, Dulaney E, Robinson FR, Leigh RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, and University 
Hospitals, Case Western Reserve University, 11100 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 
44106-5040, USA.

We describe a family of Slovenian descent with progressive ataxia, corticospinal 
signs, axonal sensorimotor neuropathy, and disruption of visual fixation by 
saccadic intrusions. Chromosome mapping indicated a mutation on 1p36, and this 
recessive disorder has been designated spinocerebellar ataxia with saccadic 
intrusions. Affected patients showed overshooting horizontal saccades, 
macrosaccadic oscillations, and increased velocity of larger saccades; other eye 
movements were normal. Slowed conduction in axons that are selectively 
vulnerable to the molecular defect could explain both the sensorimotor 
neuropathy and the saccadic disorder, which would be caused by delayed feedback 
control because of slow conduction in cerebellar parallel fibers.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.10758
PMID: 14681893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]