---
reference_id: "PMID:12542834"
title: Immunohistochemical and genetic analysis of mandibular cysts in heterozygous ptc knockout mice.
authors:
- Kimi K
- Ohki K
- Kumamoto H
- Kondo M
- Taniguchi Y
- Tanigami A
- Ooya K
journal: J Oral Pathol Med
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0714.2003.00152.x
keywords:
- Animals
- Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/genetics
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Hedgehog Proteins
- Heterozygote
- Immunohistochemistry
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Loss of Heterozygosity
- Male
- "Mandibular Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Membrane Proteins/biosynthesis
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Models, Animal"
- "Odontogenic Cysts/genetics, metabolism"
- Patched Receptors
- Patched-1 Receptor
- Periodontium/metabolism
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/biosynthesis"
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled"
- Smoothened Receptor
- Tooth Germ/metabolism
- Trans-Activators/biosynthesis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunohistochemical and genetic analysis of mandibular cysts in heterozygous ptc knockout mice.
**Authors:** Kimi K, Ohki K, Kumamoto H, Kondo M, Taniguchi Y, Tanigami A, Ooya K
**Journal:** J Oral Pathol Med (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1034/j.1600-0714.2003.00152.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0714.2003.00152.x)

## Content

1. J Oral Pathol Med. 2003 Feb;32(2):108-13. doi:
10.1034/j.1600-0714.2003.00152.x.

Immunohistochemical and genetic analysis of mandibular cysts in heterozygous ptc
knockout mice.

Kimi K(1), Ohki K, Kumamoto H, Kondo M, Taniguchi Y, Tanigami A, Ooya K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Bioregulation, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Dentistry, Sendai, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Oral Pathol Med. 2003 May;32(5):314. Kimi, Kenji [added].

BACKGROUND: Alterations of human patched (ptc) homolog have been proven to be
responsible for basal cell nevus syndrome (BCNS). Mandibular cysts in
heterozygous ptc knockout mouse (ptc+/- mouse) were microradiologically,
histologically, immunohistochemically, and genetically examined to investigate
the possible role of the ptc gene and its associates in the jaw cysts.
METHODS: The mandibular bones were prepared from 63 ptc+/- mice and 6 ptc+/+
mice. Soft X-ray radiographs and histological sections were examined for
detection of the presence of mandibular cysts. The mandibular cysts were
immunohistochemically investigated using anti-ptc, shh, and smo antibodies. PCR
analysis of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of ptc was performed in genomic DNA
from the mandibular cysts.
RESULTS: Six ptc+/+ mice showed no pathologic change in any examinations.
Microradiologically, ptc+/- mice did not show any apparent lesion. Mandibular
cysts were often multiple, and were histologically detected in the alveolar
bones or periodontal ligaments of the molars in 16 (25.4%) ptc+/- mice. The
mandibular cysts were lined by thin parakeratotic stratified squamous epithelium
and contained keratinized materials. Immunohistochemical examination showed
sonic hedgehog (shh) protein mainly in cyst lining epithelium, and ptc and
smoothened (smo) proteins in cyst lining epithelium, and surrounding fibrous
connective tissue. Expression of ptc protein in the cyst lining epithelium
tended to be weak as compared with incisor enamel organs and gingival stratified
squamous epithelium. LOH of the ptc gene couldn't be found in lining epithelium
of mandibular cysts in any ptc+/- mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Ptc+/- mouse is a useful model of BCNS from the standpoint of
occurrence of jaw cysts, and downregulation of ptc protein in cyst lining
epithelium caused by gene targeting would be associated with formation of jaw
cysts in ptc+/- mice.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0714.2003.00152.x
PMID: 12542834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
