---
reference_id: "PMID:9278185"
title: "Cortical dopamine in schizophrenia: strategies for postmortem studies."
authors:
- Lewis DA
- Akil M
journal: J Psychiatr Res
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3956(96)00057-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cortical dopamine in schizophrenia: strategies for postmortem studies.
**Authors:** Lewis DA, Akil M
**Journal:** J Psychiatr Res (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3956(96)00057-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3956(96)00057-x)

## Content

1. J Psychiatr Res. 1997 Mar-Apr;31(2):175-95. doi:
10.1016/s0022-3956(96)00057-x.

Cortical dopamine in schizophrenia: strategies for postmortem studies.

Lewis DA(1), Akil M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Many of the symptoms of schizophrenia appear to involve dysfunction of the 
cognitive processes mediated by the neural circuitry of the cerebral cortex. The 
application of modern neuroscience techniques to the study of postmortem human 
brain specimens provides a powerful approach for exploring the manner in which 
cortical circuitry may be disrupted in schizophrenia. In this paper, we describe 
a strategy for the conduct of postmortem investigations of schizophrenia that 
involves (1) the use of a nonhuman primate model to guide the design and 
interpretation of studies in humans; (2) the detailed characterization of the 
normal organization of neural systems in the human cerebral cortex, and the 
range of inter-individual variations in that organization; and (3) the testing 
of specific hypotheses about the disruption of that organization in 
schizophrenia. The application of this strategy, and its value in overcoming 
some of the potential pitfalls of postmortem studies, is demonstrated in a 
series of investigations designed to test the hypothesis that dopamine 
neurotransmission is impaired in the entorhinal cortex in schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3956(96)00057-x
PMID: 9278185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]