---
reference_id: "PMID:38140327"
title: "Nutritional Management of Oncological Symptoms: A Comprehensive Review."
authors:
- Garutti M
- Noto C
- Pastò B
- Cucciniello L
- Alajmo M
- Casirati A
- Pedrazzoli P
- Caccialanza R
- Puglisi F
journal: Nutrients
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/nu15245068
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nutritional Management of Oncological Symptoms: A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Garutti M, Noto C, Pastò B, Cucciniello L, Alajmo M, Casirati A, Pedrazzoli P, Caccialanza R, Puglisi F
**Journal:** Nutrients (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/nu15245068](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15245068)

## Content

1. Nutrients. 2023 Dec 11;15(24):5068. doi: 10.3390/nu15245068.

Nutritional Management of Oncological Symptoms: A Comprehensive Review.

Garutti M(1), Noto C(1)(2), Pastò B(1)(2), Cucciniello L(1)(2), Alajmo M(3), 
Casirati A(4), Pedrazzoli P(5)(6), Caccialanza R(4)(5), Puglisi F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CRO Aviano, National Cancer Institute, IRCCS, 33081 Aviano, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Udine, 33100 Udine, Italy.
(3)Le Calandre Restaurant, Alajmo Group, 35030 Sarmeola, Italy.
(4)Clinical Nutrition and Dietetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Therapy, University of Pavia, 
27100 Pavia, Italy.
(6)Medical Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 27100 Pavia, 
Italy.

Throughout their experience of illness and during the course of treatment, a 
substantial proportion of cancer patients are prone to develop nutritional 
and/or metabolic disturbances. Additionally, cancer patients often encounter 
long-term side effects from therapies, which may lead to impaired digestion, 
nutrient absorption or bowel motility. Therefore, the preservation and 
maintenance of an optimal and balanced nutritional status are pivotal to 
achieving a better prognosis, increasing the tolerance and adherence to cancer 
therapies and improving the overall quality of life. In this context, 
personalized nutritional programs are essential for addressing conditions 
predisposing to weight loss, feeding difficulties, digestion problems and 
intestinal irregularity, with the goal of promoting adequate nutrient absorption 
and minimizing the detrimental effects of treatment regimens. The focus of this 
research is to examine the most common clinical conditions and metabolic changes 
that cancer patients may experience, including stomatitis, xerostomia, diarrhea, 
nausea, vomiting, dysphagia, sub-occlusion, dysgeusia, dysosmia, anorexia, and 
cachexia. Furthermore, we present a pragmatic example of a multidisciplinary 
workflow that incorporates customized recipes tailored to individual clinical 
scenarios, all while maintaining the hedonic value of the meals.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15245068
PMCID: PMC10745914
PMID: 38140327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.G. reports receipts of honoraria or 
consultation fees from Novartis, Eli Lilly, PierreFabre, Roche, and Organon and 
travel fees from Daichii Sankyo, all outside the submitted work. F.P. reports 
the receipt of grants/research support from AstraZeneca, Eisai, and Roche, and 
receipts of honoraria or consultation fees from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Daichii 
Sankyo, Celgene, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Gilead, GSK, Ipsen, MSD, Novartis, 
Pierre-Fabre, Pfizer, Roche, Seagen, Takeda, Menarini, and Viatris.