---
reference_id: "PMID:24401050"
title: "Mistargeting of peroxisomal EHHADH and inherited renal Fanconi's syndrome."
authors:
- Klootwijk ED
- Reichold M
- Helip-Wooley A
- Tolaymat A
- Broeker C
- Robinette SL
- Reinders J
- Peindl D
- Renner K
- Eberhart K
- Assmann N
- Oefner PJ
- Dettmer K
- Sterner C
- Schroeder J
- Zorger N
- Witzgall R
- Reinhold SW
- Stanescu HC
- Bockenhauer D
- Jaureguiberry G
- Courtneidge H
- Hall AM
- Wijeyesekera AD
- Holmes E
- Nicholson JK
- "O'Brien K"
- Bernardini I
- Krasnewich DM
- Arcos-Burgos M
- Izumi Y
- Nonoguchi H
- Jia Y
- Reddy JK
- Ilyas M
- Unwin RJ
- Gahl WA
- Warth R
- Kleta R
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1307581
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Black People
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 3"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Fanconi Syndrome/ethnology, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- "Kidney Tubules, Proximal/metabolism"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Peroxisomal Bifunctional Enzyme/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mistargeting of peroxisomal EHHADH and inherited renal Fanconi's syndrome.
**Authors:** Klootwijk ED, Reichold M, Helip-Wooley A, Tolaymat A, Broeker C, Robinette SL, Reinders J, Peindl D, Renner K, Eberhart K, Assmann N, Oefner PJ, Dettmer K, Sterner C, Schroeder J, Zorger N, Witzgall R, Reinhold SW, Stanescu HC, Bockenhauer D, Jaureguiberry G, Courtneidge H, Hall AM, Wijeyesekera AD, Holmes E, Nicholson JK, O'Brien K, Bernardini I, Krasnewich DM, Arcos-Burgos M, Izumi Y, Nonoguchi H, Jia Y, Reddy JK, Ilyas M, Unwin RJ, Gahl WA, Warth R, Kleta R
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1307581](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1307581)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2014 Jan 9;370(2):129-38. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1307581.

Mistargeting of peroxisomal EHHADH and inherited renal Fanconi's syndrome.

Klootwijk ED(1), Reichold M, Helip-Wooley A, Tolaymat A, Broeker C, Robinette 
SL, Reinders J, Peindl D, Renner K, Eberhart K, Assmann N, Oefner PJ, Dettmer K, 
Sterner C, Schroeder J, Zorger N, Witzgall R, Reinhold SW, Stanescu HC, 
Bockenhauer D, Jaureguiberry G, Courtneidge H, Hall AM, Wijeyesekera AD, Holmes 
E, Nicholson JK, O'Brien K, Bernardini I, Krasnewich DM, Arcos-Burgos M, Izumi 
Y, Nonoguchi H, Jia Y, Reddy JK, Ilyas M, Unwin RJ, Gahl WA, Warth R, Kleta R.

Author information:
(1)From the Centre for Nephrology (E.D.K., H.C.S., D.B., G.J., H.C., A.M.H., 
R.J.U., R.K.) and Institute of Child Health (D.B., R.K.), University College 
London, and Biomolecular Medicine, Imperial College London (S.L.R., A.D.W., 
E.H., J.K.N.) - both in London; the Departments of Medical Cell Biology (M.R., 
C.B., D.P., C.S., R. Warth), Internal Medicine III (K.R.), Internal Medicine II 
(S.W.R.), and Molecular and Cellular Anatomy (R. Witzgall) and the Institutes of 
Functional Genomics (J.R., K.E., N.A., P.J.O., K.D.) and Pathology (J.S.), 
University of Regensburg, and the Department of Radiology, Barmherzige Brueder 
Hospital (N.Z.) - all in Regensburg, Germany; the National Human Genome Research 
Institute (A.H.-W., S.L.R., H.C.S., K.O., I.B., D.M.K., W.A.G., R.K.) and 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (Y.I.), National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD; the Division of Pediatric Nephrology, University of Florida, 
Jacksonville (A.T., M.I.); the Genome Biology Department, Australian National 
University, Canberra, ACT, Australia (M.A.-B.); Kitasato University Medical 
Center, Saitama, Japan (H.N.); and the Department of Pathology, Northwestern 
University, Chicago (Y.J., J.K.R.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2014 Mar;10(3):125. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2014.6.

BACKGROUND: In renal Fanconi's syndrome, dysfunction in proximal tubular cells 
leads to renal losses of water, electrolytes, and low-molecular-weight 
nutrients. For most types of isolated Fanconi's syndrome, the genetic cause and 
underlying defect remain unknown.
METHODS: We clinically and genetically characterized members of a 
five-generation black family with isolated autosomal dominant Fanconi's 
syndrome. We performed genomewide linkage analysis, gene sequencing, biochemical 
and cell-biologic investigations of renal proximal tubular cells, studies in 
knockout mice, and functional evaluations of mitochondria. Urine was studied 
with the use of proton nuclear magnetic resonance ((1)H-NMR) spectroscopy.
RESULTS: We linked the phenotype of this family's Fanconi's syndrome to a single 
locus on chromosome 3q27, where a heterozygous missense mutation in EHHADH 
segregated with the disease. The p.E3K mutation created a new mitochondrial 
targeting motif in the N-terminal portion of EHHADH, an enzyme that is involved 
in peroxisomal oxidation of fatty acids and is expressed in the proximal tubule. 
Immunocytofluorescence studies showed mistargeting of the mutant EHHADH to 
mitochondria. Studies of proximal tubular cells revealed impaired mitochondrial 
oxidative phosphorylation and defects in the transport of fluids and a glucose 
analogue across the epithelium. (1)H-NMR spectroscopy showed elevated levels of 
mitochondrial metabolites in urine from affected family members. Ehhadh knockout 
mice showed no abnormalities in renal tubular cells, a finding that indicates a 
dominant negative nature of the mutation rather than haploinsufficiency.
CONCLUSIONS: Mistargeting of peroxisomal EHHADH disrupts mitochondrial 
metabolism and leads to renal Fanconi's syndrome; this indicates a central role 
of mitochondria in proximal tubular function. The dominant negative effect of 
the mistargeted protein adds to the spectrum of monogenic mechanisms of 
Fanconi's syndrome. (Funded by the European Commission Seventh Framework 
Programme and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1307581
PMID: 24401050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]