---
reference_id: "PMID:31669645"
title: The roles and regulation of TBX3 in development and disease.
authors:
- Khan SF
- Damerell V
- Omar R
- Du Toit M
- Khan M
- Maranyane HM
- Mlaza M
- Bleloch J
- Bellis C
- Sahm BDB
- Peres J
- ArulJothi KN
- Prince S
journal: Gene
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.144223
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, pathology"
- Disease/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/genetics"
- Humans
- T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The roles and regulation of TBX3 in development and disease.
**Authors:** Khan SF, Damerell V, Omar R, Du Toit M, Khan M, Maranyane HM, Mlaza M, Bleloch J, Bellis C, Sahm BDB, Peres J, ArulJothi KN, Prince S
**Journal:** Gene (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gene.2019.144223](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2019.144223)

## Content

1. Gene. 2020 Feb 5;726:144223. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.144223. Epub 2019 Oct
26.

The roles and regulation of TBX3 in development and disease.

Khan SF(1), Damerell V(1), Omar R(1), Du Toit M(1), Khan M(1), Maranyane HM(1), 
Mlaza M(1), Bleloch J(1), Bellis C(1), Sahm BDB(2), Peres J(1), ArulJothi KN(1), 
Prince S(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa; 
Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Biomedical Science, University of São 
Paulo, São Paulo, SP 11030-400, Brazil.
(3)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa. 
Electronic address: sharon.prince@uct.ac.za.

TBX3, a member of the ancient and evolutionary conserved T-box transcription 
factor family, is a critical developmental regulator of several structures 
including the heart, mammary glands, limbs and lungs. Indeed, mutations in the 
human TBX3 lead to ulnar mammary syndrome which is characterized by several 
clinical malformations including hypoplasia of the mammary and apocrine glands, 
defects of the upper limb, areola, dental structures, heart and genitalia. In 
contrast, TBX3 has no known function in adult tissues but is frequently 
overexpressed in a wide range of epithelial and mesenchymal derived cancers. 
This overexpression greatly impacts several hallmarks of cancer including bypass 
of senescence, apoptosis and anoikis, promotion of proliferation, tumour 
formation, angiogenesis, invasion and metastatic capabilities as well as cancer 
stem cell expansion. The debilitating consequences of having too little or too 
much TBX3 suggest that its expression levels need to be tightly regulated. While 
we have a reasonable understanding of the mutations that result in low levels of 
functional TBX3 during development, very little is known about the factors 
responsible for the overexpression of TBX3 in cancer. Furthermore, given the 
plethora of oncogenic processes that TBX3 impacts, it must be regulating several 
target genes but to date only a few have been identified and characterised. 
Interestingly, while there is compelling evidence to support oncogenic roles for 
TBX3, a few studies have indicated that it may also have tumour suppressor 
functions in certain contexts. Together, the diverse functional elasticity of 
TBX3 in development and cancer is thought to involve, in part, the protein 
partners that it interacts with and this area of research has recently received 
some attention. This review provides an insight into the significance of TBX3 in 
development and cancer and identifies research gaps that need to be explored to 
shed more light on this transcription factor.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.144223
PMCID: PMC7108957
PMID: 31669645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.