---
reference_id: "PMID:27905264"
title: "Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease: catastrophic consequences of delay in diagnosis and treatment."
authors:
- Algahtani H
- Ghamdi S
- Shirah B
- Alharbi B
- Algahtani R
- Bazaid A
journal: Neurol Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/01616412.2016.1263176
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Basal Ganglia/diagnostic imaging
- "Basal Ganglia Diseases/diagnostic imaging, genetics, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Databases, Bibliographic/statistics & numerical data"
- Family Health
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease: catastrophic consequences of delay in diagnosis and treatment.
**Authors:** Algahtani H, Ghamdi S, Shirah B, Alharbi B, Algahtani R, Bazaid A
**Journal:** Neurol Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/01616412.2016.1263176](https://doi.org/10.1080/01616412.2016.1263176)

## Content

1. Neurol Res. 2017 Feb;39(2):117-125. doi: 10.1080/01616412.2016.1263176. Epub
2016 Dec 1.

Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease: catastrophic consequences of
delay in diagnosis and treatment.

Algahtani H(1), Ghamdi S(1), Shirah B(2), Alharbi B(3), Algahtani R(3), Bazaid
A(4).

Author information:
(1)a King Abdulaziz Medical City/King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health
Sciences , Jeddah , Saudi Arabia.
(2)b King Abdullah International Medical Research Center/King Saud bin Abdulaziz
University for Health Sciences , Jeddah , Saudi Arabia.
(3)c King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences , Jeddah , Saudi
Arabia.
(4)d Batterjee Medical College , Jeddah , Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease (BTBGD) is an
autosomal recessive neurometabolic disorder caused by mutations in the SLC19A3
gene. The disease is characterized by subacute encephalopathy with confusion,
dysphagia, dysarthria, and seizures.
METHODS: We diagnosed a family affected by BTBGD and studied them including
prognosis of cases when diagnosed and treated early in the disease process. We
also review the literature comprehensively and summarize all published data
about this disorder.
RESULTS: Since its first description, a total of 89 cases (46 females and 43
males) have been published in the literature. We studied six patients in this
article in which three died before a diagnosis was established, one was
diagnosed lately and is currently severely affected, and two were diagnosed
early and are currently stable on treatment. The clinical phenotype of each
family member was studied in details. In addition, a genetic testing was
performed using whole exome sequencing and Sanger sequencing which demonstrated
a previously reported homozygous mutation in exon 5 of the SLC19A3 gene
c.1264A>G (p.Thr422Ala).
CONCLUSION: BTBGD is a treatable condition if recognized early and managed
appropriately. The recognition of this disorder is important to avoid incorrect
diagnosis and mismanagement. Children presenting with unexplained encephalopathy
and MRI abnormalities including bilateral signal alteration of caudate nucleus
and putamen should raise the suspicion for BTBGD and be started immediately on
biotin and thiamine regimen since the prognosis of the disease is affected by
the timing of treatment initiation. We present a large family affected with this
disorder with severe interfamilial variability and different prognosis despite
having the same mutation and same environment. A clear genotype-phenotype
correlation and the clinical heterogeneity remain to be elucidated. Bad
prognostic factors observed in our review include early onset of the disease,
missed or delayed diagnosis, systemic involvements including respiratory failure
and rhabdomyolysis, and severe neurological deficit or radiological changes at
the time of diagnosis and treatment initiation. We observed during our
literature review that all patients who presented since birth died despite
aggressive treatment. This observation may illustrate that early presentation
and disease process leads to a more catastrophic outcome.

DOI: 10.1080/01616412.2016.1263176
PMID: 27905264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
