---
reference_id: "PMID:33445799"
title: Pluripotent Stem Cells for Disease Modeling and Drug Discovery in Niemann-Pick Type C1.
authors:
- Völkner C
- Liedtke M
- Hermann A
- Frech MJ
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms22020710
keywords:
- Animals
- Drug Discovery/methods
- Hepatocytes/pathology
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/pathology
- "Models, Biological"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Niemann-Pick Disease, Type C/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pluripotent Stem Cells for Disease Modeling and Drug Discovery in Niemann-Pick Type C1.
**Authors:** Völkner C, Liedtke M, Hermann A, Frech MJ
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22020710](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22020710)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jan 12;22(2):710. doi: 10.3390/ijms22020710.

Pluripotent Stem Cells for Disease Modeling and Drug Discovery in Niemann-Pick 
Type C1.

Völkner C(1), Liedtke M(1), Hermann A(1)(2)(3), Frech MJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Translational Neurodegeneration Section "Albrecht Kossel", Department of 
Neurology, University Medical Center Rostock, 18147 Rostock, Germany.
(2)Center for Transdisciplinary Neurosciences Rostock (CTNR), University Medical 
Center Rostock, 18147 Rostock, Germany.
(3)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Rostock/Greifswald, 18147 
Rostock, Germany.

The lysosomal storage disorders Niemann-Pick disease Type C1 (NPC1) and Type C2 
(NPC2) are rare diseases caused by mutations in the NPC1 or NPC2 gene. Both NPC1 
and NPC2 are proteins responsible for the exit of cholesterol from late 
endosomes and lysosomes (LE/LY). Consequently, mutations in one of the two 
proteins lead to the accumulation of unesterified cholesterol and 
glycosphingolipids in LE/LY, displaying a disease hallmark. A total of 95% of 
cases are due to a deficiency of NPC1 and only 5% are caused by NPC2 deficiency. 
Clinical manifestations include neurological symptoms and systemic symptoms, 
such as hepatosplenomegaly and pulmonary manifestations, the latter being 
particularly pronounced in NPC2 patients. NPC1 and NPC2 are rare diseases with 
the described neurovisceral clinical picture, but studies with human primary 
patient-derived neurons and hepatocytes are hardly feasible. Obviously, induced 
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and their derivatives are an excellent 
alternative for indispensable studies with these affected cell types to study 
the multisystemic disease NPC1. Here, we present a review focusing on studies 
that have used iPSCs for disease modeling and drug discovery in NPC1 and draw a 
comparison to commonly used NPC1 models.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22020710
PMCID: PMC7828283
PMID: 33445799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.