---
reference_id: "PMID:22237428"
title: Prader-Willi syndrome.
authors:
- Cassidy SB
- Schwartz S
- Miller JL
- Driscoll DJ
journal: Genet Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/gim.0b013e31822bead0
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Counseling
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Morbidity
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prader-Willi syndrome.
**Authors:** Cassidy SB, Schwartz S, Miller JL, Driscoll DJ
**Journal:** Genet Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.0b013e31822bead0](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.0b013e31822bead0)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2012 Jan;14(1):10-26. doi: 10.1038/gim.0b013e31822bead0. Epub 2011
Sep 26.

Prader-Willi syndrome.

Cassidy SB(1), Schwartz S, Miller JL, Driscoll DJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
suzannecassidy@comcast.net

Prader-Willi syndrome is characterized by severe infantile hypotonia with poor
suck and failure to thrive; hypogonadism causing genital hypoplasia and pubertal
insufficiency; characteristic facial features; early-childhood onset obesity and
hyperphagia; developmental delay/mild intellectual disability; short stature;
and a distinctive behavioral phenotype. Sleep abnormalities and scoliosis are
common. Growth hormone insufficiency is frequent, and replacement therapy
provides improvement in growth, body composition, and physical attributes.
Management is otherwise largely supportive. Consensus clinical diagnostic
criteria exist, but diagnosis should be confirmed through genetic testing.
Prader-Willi syndrome is due to absence of paternally expressed imprinted genes
at 15q11.2-q13 through paternal deletion of this region (65-75% of individuals),
maternal uniparental disomy 15 (20-30%), or an imprinting defect (1-3%).
Parent-specific DNA methylation analysis will detect >99% of individuals.
However, additional genetic studies are necessary to identify the molecular
class. There are multiple imprinted genes in this region, the loss of which
contribute to the complete phenotype of Prader-Willi syndrome. However, absence
of a small nucleolar organizing RNA gene, SNORD116, seems to reproduce many of
the clinical features. Sibling recurrence risk is typically <1%, but higher
risks may pertain in certain cases. Prenatal diagnosis is available.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.0b013e31822bead0
PMID: 22237428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
