---
reference_id: "PMID:16033917"
title: Mutation of COL11A2 causes autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss at the DFNB53 locus.
authors:
- Chen W
- Kahrizi K
- Meyer NC
- Riazalhosseini Y
- Van Camp G
- Najmabadi H
- Smith RJ
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.032615
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Collagen Type XI/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Linkage
- Genetic Variation
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Iran
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of COL11A2 causes autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss at the DFNB53 locus.
**Authors:** Chen W, Kahrizi K, Meyer NC, Riazalhosseini Y, Van Camp G, Najmabadi H, Smith RJ
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2005.032615](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2005.032615)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2005 Oct;42(10):e61. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.032615. Epub 2005 Jul
20.

Mutation of COL11A2 causes autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss at the
DFNB53 locus.

Chen W, Kahrizi K, Meyer NC, Riazalhosseini Y, Van Camp G, Najmabadi H, Smith
RJ.

BACKGROUND: Allele variants of COL11A2, encoding collagen type XI alpha2, cause
autosomal dominant non-syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) at the DFNA13 locus (MIM
601868) and various syndromes that include a deafness phenotype.
OBJECTIVE: To describe a genome-wide scan carried out on a consanguineous
Iranian family segregating ARNSHL.
RESULTS: Genotyping data identified a novel locus for ARNSHL on chromosome
6p21.3, which was designated DFNB53. Homozygosity for the P621T mutation of
COL11A2 was present in all deaf persons in this family; this same variation was
absent in 269 Iranian controls. Sequence comparison of collagen type XI alpha1
and alpha2 peptides across species shows that the replaced proline is an
evolutionarily conserved amino acid.
CONCLUSIONS: The P621T mutation of COL11A2 affects the Y position of the
canonical -Gly-X-Y- repeat in collagens. It lies near the amino-terminus of the
triple helical region and causes ARNSHL. This finding suggests that mutation
type and location are critical determinants in defining the phenotype of COL11A2
associated diseases.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2005.032615
PMCID: PMC1735925
PMID: 16033917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
