---
reference_id: "PMID:37569648"
title: "Migraine Treatment: Towards New Pharmacological Targets."
authors:
- Silvestro M
- Iannone LF
- Orologio I
- Tessitore A
- Tedeschi G
- Geppetti P
- Russo A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241512268
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Migraine Treatment: Towards New Pharmacological Targets.
**Authors:** Silvestro M, Iannone LF, Orologio I, Tessitore A, Tedeschi G, Geppetti P, Russo A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241512268](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241512268)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jul 31;24(15):12268. doi: 10.3390/ijms241512268.

Migraine Treatment: Towards New Pharmacological Targets.

Silvestro M(1)(2), Iannone LF(3), Orologio I(1), Tessitore A(1)(2), Tedeschi 
G(1)(2), Geppetti P(3), Russo A(2).

Author information:
(1)Headache Centre, Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical Sciences, 
University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 80138 Naples, Italy.
(2)Advanced MRI Neuroimaging Centre, Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical 
Sciences, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 80138 Naples, Italy.
(3)Headache Centre and Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Careggi University Hospital 
Florence, 50134 Florence, Italy.

Migraine is a debilitating neurological condition affecting millions of people 
worldwide. Until a few years ago, preventive migraine treatments were based on 
molecules with pleiotropic targets, developed for other indications, and 
discovered by serendipity to be effective in migraine prevention, although often 
burdened by tolerability issues leading to low adherence. However, the 
progresses in unravelling the migraine pathophysiology allowed identifying novel 
putative targets as calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). Nevertheless, 
despite the revolution brought by CGRP monoclonal antibodies and gepants, a 
significant percentage of patients still remains burdened by an unsatisfactory 
response, suggesting that other pathways may play a critical role, with an 
extent of involvement varying among different migraine patients. Specifically, 
neuropeptides of the CGRP family, such as adrenomedullin and amylin; molecules 
of the secretin family, such as pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide 
(PACAP) and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP); receptors, such as transient 
receptor potential (TRP) channels; intracellular downstream determinants, such 
as potassium channels, but also the opioid system and the purinergic pathway, 
have been suggested to be involved in migraine pathophysiology. The present 
review provides an overview of these pathways, highlighting, based on 
preclinical and clinical evidence, as well as provocative studies, their 
potential role as future targets for migraine preventive treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241512268
PMCID: PMC10418850
PMID: 37569648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following potential 
conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article: M.S. has received speaker honoraria from Novartis, 
Teva, and Lilly. L.F.I. has received speaker honoraria from Teva and Lilly. A.T. 
has received speaker honoraria from Novartis, Schwarz Pharma/UCB, Lundbeck, 
Abbvie, and Glaxo and serves as associate editor of European Journal of 
Neurology. G.T. has received speaker honoraria from Sanofi-Aventis, Merck 
Serono, Bayer Schering Pharma, Novartis, Biogen-Dompe’ AG, Teva, and Lilly; has 
received funding for travel from Bayer Schering Pharma, Biogen-Dompe’ AG, Merck 
Serono, Novartis, and Sanofi Aventis; and serves as an associate editor of 
Neurological Sciences. A.R. has received speaker honoraria from Allergan, Lilly, 
Novartis, Biogen, and Teva and serves as an associate editor of Frontiers in 
Neurology (Headache Medicine and Facial Pain session). The other authors have 
nothing to declare.