---
reference_id: "PMID:32051189"
title: "Risk of Leukemia after Dengue Virus Infection: A Population-Based Cohort Study."
authors:
- Chien YW
- Wang CC
- Wang YP
- Lee CY
- Perng GC
journal: Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-19-1214
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk of Leukemia after Dengue Virus Infection: A Population-Based Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Chien YW, Wang CC, Wang YP, Lee CY, Perng GC
**Journal:** Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-19-1214](https://doi.org/10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-19-1214)

## Content

1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2020 Mar;29(3):558-564. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-19-1214. Epub 2020 Feb 12.

Risk of Leukemia after Dengue Virus Infection: A Population-Based Cohort Study.

Chien YW(1)(2), Wang CC(3), Wang YP(1), Lee CY(4)(5), Perng GC(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, National Taiwan 
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan. gperng@mail.ncku.edu.tw choyin.lee@ym.edu.tw.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Taoyuan General Hospital, Ministry of 
Health and Welfare, Taoyuan City, Taiwan.
(6)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan. gperng@mail.ncku.edu.tw choyin.lee@ym.edu.tw.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, National 
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(8)Center of Infectious Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Infections account for about 15% of human cancers globally. Although 
abnormal hematologic profiles and bone marrow suppression are common in patients 
with dengue, whether dengue is associated with a higher risk of leukemia has not 
been investigated.
METHODS: We conducted a nationwide population-based cohort study by analyzing 
the National Health Insurance Research Databases in Taiwan. Laboratory-confirmed 
dengue patients between 2002 and 2011 were identified; five matched non-dengue 
controls were randomly selected for each patient. Follow-up ended on December 
31, 2015. Multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression models were used to 
evaluate the effect of dengue virus infection on the risk of leukemia. Cancers 
other than leukemia were used as falsification endpoints to evaluate the 
validity of this study.
RESULTS: We identified 12,573 patients with dengue and 62,865 non-dengue 
controls. Patients with dengue had a higher risk of leukemia [adjusted HR, 2.03; 
95% confidence interval (CI), 1.16-3.53]. Stratified analyses by different 
follow-up periods showed that dengue virus infection was significantly 
associated with a higher risk of leukemia only between 3 and 6 years after 
infection (adjusted HR, 3.22; 95% CI, 1.25-8.32). There was no significant 
association between dengue and the risk of other cancers.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first epidemiologic evidence for the 
association between dengue virus infection and leukemia.
IMPACT: Considering the rapidly increasing global incidence of dengue and the 
burden of leukemia, further studies are required to verify this association and 
to unravel the potential mechanisms of pathogenesis.

©2020 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-19-1214
PMID: 32051189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]