---
reference_id: "PMID:39581763"
title: Analysis of Germline and Somatic Mutation in Patients With Developmental Odontogenic Cysts Using Targeted Gene Panel.
authors:
- Hideshima I
- Nakamura Y
- Onodera S
- Akashi Y
- Matsuzaka K
- Takano M
- Nomura T
- Katakura A
- Azuma T
journal: J Oral Pathol Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/jop.13586
keywords:
- Humans
- Odontogenic Cysts/genetics
- Male
- Female
- Patched-1 Receptor/genetics
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Adult
- Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/genetics
- Adolescent
- Mutation
- Smoothened Receptor/genetics
- Young Adult
- Child
- Patched-2 Receptor/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Repressor Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of Germline and Somatic Mutation in Patients With Developmental Odontogenic Cysts Using Targeted Gene Panel.
**Authors:** Hideshima I, Nakamura Y, Onodera S, Akashi Y, Matsuzaka K, Takano M, Nomura T, Katakura A, Azuma T
**Journal:** J Oral Pathol Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jop.13586](https://doi.org/10.1111/jop.13586)

## Content

1. J Oral Pathol Med. 2025 Jan;54(1):12-21. doi: 10.1111/jop.13586. Epub 2024 Nov
 24.

Analysis of Germline and Somatic Mutation in Patients With Developmental
Odontogenic Cysts Using Targeted Gene Panel.

Hideshima I(1), Nakamura Y(2), Onodera S(3), Akashi Y(4), Matsuzaka K(4), Takano
M(5), Nomura T(2), Katakura A(1), Azuma T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Pathobiological Science and Surgery, Tokyo Dental College,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Oral Oncology, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Tokyo Dental
College, Ichikawa, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Tokyo Dental College, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Tokyo Dental College, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Tokyo Dental College,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Odontogenic keratocyst (OKC) is a partial manifestation of Gorlin
syndrome (GS), resulting from the abnormal activation of the hedgehog signaling
pathway. OKC predominantly occurs in young adults and is mostly asymptomatic at
the time of initial diagnosis. As OKC is asymptomatic, GS can be challenging to
diagnose in certain instances. In this study, we attempted to identify
asymptomatic GS from sporadic OKC cases using a previously developed gene panel
for GS.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from patient samples. These DNA samples were
analyzed using the AmpliSeq Custom DNA Panel (Illumina), which was specifically
designed to target four previously established genes (PTCH1, PTCH2, SMO, and
SUFU). Mutations from patients were predicted using tools, such as
MutationTaster, CADD, and Polyphen-2.
RESULTS: Thirty-one patients with OKC were included: 22 sporadic, 9 syndromic,
14 cases with dentigerous cysts, and 3 patients with orthokeratinized
odontogenic cysts. One patient with sporadic OKC carried 50% genetic mutation in
the cyst and blood, indicative of GS. PTCH1 mutations were found in one of the
14 patients with dentigerous cysts, 3 of the 17 first-time sporadic cases, and
all four recurrent cases. Resected OKC tissues revealed a PTCH1 mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: We found one patient with GS from those diagnosed with sporadic
OKC. Our findings suggest that PTCH1 mutations are associated with postoperative
recurrence of OKC, implying that hedgehog-related gene variations may contribute
to jaw cyst development and improve the prognosis of OKC.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jop.13586
PMID: 39581763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
