---
reference_id: "PMID:31466978"
title: Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome with coeliac and allergic diseases.
authors:
- Martins JA
- Azenha A
- Almeida R
- Pinheiro JP
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2019-229857
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome with coeliac and allergic diseases.
**Authors:** Martins JA, Azenha A, Almeida R, Pinheiro JP
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2019-229857](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2019-229857)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2019 Aug 28;12(8):e229857. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2019-229857.

Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome with coeliac and allergic diseases.

Martins JA(#)(1)(2), Azenha A(#)(1)(2), Almeida R(3), Pinheiro JP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine Department, Centro Hospitalar e 
Universitario de Coimbra EPE, Coimbra, Portugal.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)Department of Pathology, Centro Hospitalar e Universitario de Coimbra EPE, 
Coimbra, Portugal.
(#)Contributed equally

A 45-year-old man presented with a 10-year history of relapsing oedema of the 
lips. Moreover, he exhibited recurrent facial nerve palsy since the age of 10 
years, coeliac disease since the age of 12 years, atopic eczema, allergic 
rhinitis and asthma. Physical examination revealed lip swelling and lingua 
plicata. Thus, he presented the classic triad of Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome 
which includes recurrent orofacial oedema, facial nerve palsy and fissured 
tongue. A lip biopsy confirmed our clinical diagnosis.This case is particularly 
rare, as the classic triad is seen only in a minority of the cases. Moreover, 
allergic and coeliac diseases were observed concomitantly. This paper 
illustrates a potential pathophysiological interconnection between these 
pathologies in which interferon gamma could play a key role. To our knowledge, 
this is the first case report in which Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome has been 
observed concurrently with coeliac disease.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2019. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2019-229857
PMCID: PMC6721715
PMID: 31466978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.