---
reference_id: "PMID:38320940"
title: "Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome: A review."
authors:
- Messina C
journal: Rev Neurol (Paris)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2023.11.008
keywords:
- Humans
- "Basal Ganglia Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, therapy, epidemiology"
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, therapy, epidemiology, pathology"
- "Hypogonadism/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Iron Metabolism Disorders/diagnosis, genetics, therapy, epidemiology"
- "Alopecia/diagnosis, therapy, genetics"
- "Endocrine System Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac"
- Diabetes Mellitus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome: A review.
**Authors:** Messina C
**Journal:** Rev Neurol (Paris) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurol.2023.11.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurol.2023.11.008)

## Content

1. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2025 Jan-Feb;181(1-2):21-30. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurol.2023.11.008. Epub 2024 Feb 5.

Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome: A review.

Messina C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, and Advanced Technologies, 
"G.F. Ingrassia", Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria "G. Rodolico-San Marco", 
University of Catania, Catania, Italy. Electronic address: 
chry.messina@gmail.com.

Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a rare and inherited 
spectrum of movement disorders caused by mutations affecting the function of 
proteins that participate in the homeostasis of tissue metals such as iron or 
copper and other metabolic pathways, although the precise function of the 
proteins encoded are not always known. Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome (WSS) is one of 
the rarest NBIAs. Patients with WSS are characterized by endocrinological and 
neurological manifestations and neuroradiological findings. However, diagnostic 
criteria have not been published yet. This article reviews updates on the 
genetic, clinical, biological and imaging findings of WSS and provides a 
practical guide to recognize this extremely rare disorder.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2023.11.008
PMID: 38320940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]