---
reference_id: "PMID:7540125"
title: New therapeutic strategies involving radiation therapy for patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Curran WJ Jr
journal: Chest
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1378/chest.107.6_supplement.302s
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New therapeutic strategies involving radiation therapy for patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Curran WJ Jr
**Journal:** Chest (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1378/chest.107.6_supplement.302s](https://doi.org/10.1378/chest.107.6_supplement.302s)

## Content

1. Chest. 1995 Jun;107(6 Suppl):302S-305S. doi: 
10.1378/chest.107.6_supplement.302s.

New therapeutic strategies involving radiation therapy for patients with 
non-small cell lung cancer.

Curran WJ Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
USA.

Recent notable developments have occurred involving radiation therapy (RT) for 
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). For patients with good 
performance status with unresected thoracic tumors, induction cisplatin-based 
chemotherapy followed by RT has resulted in a significant survival advantage 
over RT alone in two North American trials. However, the best sequence of 
administration of these two modalities in NSCLC remains to be determined. For 
palliation of tumor-related symptoms, efforts under way to improve control of 
brain metastases include the use of twice-daily cranial RT to a higher total 
dose, the use of focused radiation boost techniques like stereotactic 
radiosurgery to small metastatic deposits, and increased use of neurosurgical 
extirpation. For patients with NSCLC with symptomatic bone metastases, use of 
wider-field irradiation may benefit selected patients. Metastases to the adrenal 
gland, liver, and subcutaneous tissues can be palliated successfully by brief 
courses of RT. Intrathoracic tumor symptoms are well palliated by brief courses 
of thoracic RT. As adjuvant therapy following curative surgery, RT reduces the 
intrathoracic tumor recurrence rate among patients with metastatic tumor foci in 
hilar or mediastinal lymph nodes.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.107.6_supplement.302s
PMID: 7540125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]