---
reference_id: "PMID:24988226"
title: New splice site acceptor mutation in AIRE gene in autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1.
authors:
- Mora M
- Hanzu FA
- Pradas-Juni M
- Aranda GB
- Halperin I
- Puig-Domingo M
- Aguiló S
- Fernández-Rebollo E
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101616
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New splice site acceptor mutation in AIRE gene in autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1.
**Authors:** Mora M, Hanzu FA, Pradas-Juni M, Aranda GB, Halperin I, Puig-Domingo M, Aguiló S, Fernández-Rebollo E
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0101616](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0101616)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 2;9(7):e101616. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101616. 
eCollection 2014.

New splice site acceptor mutation in AIRE gene in autoimmune polyendocrine 
syndrome type 1.

Mora M(1), Hanzu FA(1), Pradas-Juni M(2), Aranda GB(1), Halperin I(3), 
Puig-Domingo M(4), Aguiló S(5), Fernández-Rebollo E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; 
Laboratory of Endocrine Disorders, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August 
Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain; Spanish Biomedical Research Centre in 
Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Disorders (CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Spanish Biomedical Research Centre in Diabetes and Associated Metabolic 
Disorders (CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain; Diabetes and Obesity Research Laboratory 
- Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; 
Laboratory of Endocrine Disorders, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August 
Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol 
Research Institut and Hospital, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Badalona, 
Spain.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS-1, OMIM 240300) is a rare 
autosomal recessive disorder, characterized by the presence of at least two of 
three major diseases: hypoparathyroidism, Addison's disease, and chronic 
mucocutaneous candidiasis. We aim to identify the molecular defects and 
investigate the clinical and mutational characteristics in an index case and 
other members of a consanguineous family. We identified a novel homozygous 
mutation in the splice site acceptor (SSA) of intron 5 (c.653-1G>A) in two 
siblings with different clinical outcomes of APS-1. Coding DNA sequencing 
revealed that this AIRE mutation potentially compromised the recognition of the 
constitutive SSA of intron 5, splicing upstream onto a nearby cryptic SSA in 
intron 5. Surprisingly, the use of an alternative SSA entails the uncovering of 
a cryptic donor splice site in exon 5. This new transcript generates a truncated 
protein (p.A214fs67X) containing the first 213 amino acids and followed by 68 
aberrant amino acids. The mutation affects the proper splicing, not only at the 
acceptor but also at the donor splice site, highlighting the complexity of 
recognizing suitable splicing sites and the importance of sequencing the 
intron-exon junctions for a more precise molecular diagnosis and correct genetic 
counseling. As both siblings were carrying the same mutation but exhibited a 
different APS-1 onset, and one of the brothers was not clinically diagnosed, our 
finding highlights the possibility to suspect mutations in the AIRE gene in 
cases of childhood chronic candidiasis and/or hypoparathyroidism otherwise 
unexplained, especially when the phenotype is associated with other autoimmune 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101616
PMCID: PMC4079332
PMID: 24988226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.