---
reference_id: "PMID:16336577"
title: "Systemic and glomerular hypertension and progression of chronic renal disease: the dilemma of nephrosclerosis."
authors:
- Marín R
- Gorostidi M
- Fernández-Vega F
- Alvarez-Navascués R
journal: Kidney Int Suppl
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2005.09910.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic and glomerular hypertension and progression of chronic renal disease: the dilemma of nephrosclerosis.
**Authors:** Marín R, Gorostidi M, Fernández-Vega F, Alvarez-Navascués R
**Journal:** Kidney Int Suppl (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1523-1755.2005.09910.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1523-1755.2005.09910.x)

## Content

1. Kidney Int Suppl. 2005 Dec;(99):S52-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2005.09910.x.

Systemic and glomerular hypertension and progression of chronic renal disease: 
the dilemma of nephrosclerosis.

Marín R(1), Gorostidi M, Fernández-Vega F, Alvarez-Navascués R.

Author information:
(1)Nephrology Service, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, 
Asturias, Spain. rmarini@hca.es

The link between the kidney and hypertension has been considered a 
villain-victim relationship. High blood pressure levels are a well-recognized 
feature in chronic renal disease, but the ability of mild-to-moderate 
hypertension to produce renal insufficiency has been questioned. 
Nephrosclerosis, benign nephrosclerosis, and hypertensive kidney disease are 
terms that clinicians use when renal damage is thought to be secondary to 
essential hypertension. Many cases of end-stage renal disease are ascribed to 
so-called benign nephrosclerosis. This entity could actually be a primary renal 
disease affecting the preglomerular microvasculature, perhaps genetically 
mediated and ethnically influenced, and showing a heterogeneous clinical 
expression. African Americans suffer from nephrosclerosis more frequently than 
Caucasians. Nephrosclerosis affecting Caucasians seems to show a less aggressive 
pattern and could represent early age-related renal sclerosis. The risk of 
end-stage renal disease is increased when atherosclerotic lesions in large renal 
arteries coexist. Age, systolic blood pressure, proteinuria, and concomitant 
cardiovascular disease are well-known promoters of renal failure. A 
multifactorial strategy, including antihypertensive and antiproteinuric drugs, 
and lipid-lowering and anti-platelet agents, could improve cardiovascular and 
renal outcomes in patients with nephrosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2005.09910.x
PMID: 16336577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]