---
reference_id: "PMID:39539991"
title: "Safety and tolerability of losartan to treat recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in children (REFLECT): an open-label, single-arm, phase 1/2 trial."
authors:
- Kiritsi D
- Schauer F
- Gewert S
- Reineker K
- Reimer-Taschenbrecker A
- Schwieger-Briel A
- Ott H
- Schmoor C
- Grishina O
- Murrell D
- Stiller B
- Zahn T
- Nyström A
- Bruckner-Tuderman L
journal: EClinicalMedicine
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102900
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and tolerability of losartan to treat recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in children (REFLECT): an open-label, single-arm, phase 1/2 trial.
**Authors:** Kiritsi D, Schauer F, Gewert S, Reineker K, Reimer-Taschenbrecker A, Schwieger-Briel A, Ott H, Schmoor C, Grishina O, Murrell D, Stiller B, Zahn T, Nyström A, Bruckner-Tuderman L
**Journal:** EClinicalMedicine (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102900](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102900)

## Content

1. EClinicalMedicine. 2024 Oct 30;77:102900. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102900. 
eCollection 2024 Nov.

Safety and tolerability of losartan to treat recessive dystrophic epidermolysis 
bullosa in children (REFLECT): an open-label, single-arm, phase 1/2 trial.

Kiritsi D(1)(2), Schauer F(1), Gewert S(1), Reineker K(3), Reimer-Taschenbrecker 
A(1), Schwieger-Briel A(4), Ott H(5), Schmoor C(6), Grishina O(6), Murrell D(7), 
Stiller B(3), Zahn T(8), Nyström A(1), Bruckner-Tuderman L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical Center- University of Freiburg, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)First Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Department of Congenital Heart Disease and Pediatric Cardiology, University 
Heart Center Freiburg - Bad Krozingen, Medical Centre - University of Freiburg, 
Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Pediatric Skin Center, Division of Dermatology, University Children's 
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Pediatric Dermatology and Allergology, Children's Hospital Auf 
der Bult, Hannover, Germany.
(6)Clinical Trials Unit, Faculty of Medicine, and Medical Center, University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Dermatology, St. George Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of NSW, UNSW Faculty of Medicine, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(8)Crowd Pharma GmbH, Pforzheim, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB) is a skin 
fragility disorder characterised by life-long mechanically induced skin 
blistering, fibrosis-driven pseudosyndactyly, and multi-organ involvement. 
Preclinical studies have suggested mitigated progression by angiotensin II type 
I receptor blockade through losartan. We aimed to determine the safety and 
tolerability of systemic losartan treatment among children with RDEB, and to 
obtain initial data on its clinical benefit.
METHODS: We conducted an open-label, single-arm, phase 1/2 trial at the Medical 
Center-University of Freiburg, Germany. Children with molecularly-confirmed 
RDEB, aged 2-16 years (starting from the 25th month of life) were eligible. Key 
exclusion criteria comprised anaemia with haemoglobin <8 g/dl; hypotension 
(defined as age-related systolic blood pressure under the 5th percentile); 
cardiologic contraindications, requirement for any medications that are likely 
to cause interactions with losartan; renal artery stenosis or renal 
insufficiency with creatinine clearance <30 ml/min; severe liver failure; 
severe, untreated electrolyte disturbances; history of cancer or chronic viral 
infections; hypersensitivity to losartan or any of the excipients and known or 
persistent abuse of medication, drugs, or alcohol. Treatment duration with 
losartan comprised 10 months, encompassing 16 weeks up-dosing of losartan, 24 
weeks full dose losartan (final target dose of 1.4 mg/kg), and 4 weeks losartan 
tapering, followed by 12 weeks follow-up without losartan. The primary endpoint 
was occurrence of a serious safety concern, defined as one of the following side 
effects of losartan: clinically relevant severe hypotension, immediate 
hypersensitivity reactions to the drug or clinical relevant severe hypo- and 
hyperkalaemia. EB-specific scores (the EBDASI activity and damage score, 
Birmingham Epidermolysis Bullosa Severity Score (BEBS)) and other clinical 
outcome parameters were evaluated at five clinical visits as secondary outcomes: 
pain (Wong-Baker FACES Scale for pain), quality of life (Quality Of Life in EB 
[QOLEB] questionnaire and Children's Dermatology Life Quality Index [CDLQI]), 
itch (Itch Assessment Scale for the Paediatric Burn Patients), dysphagia (Mayo 
Dysphagia Questionnaire-day 30 [MDQ-30]), pseudosyndactyly progression (our own 
morphometric scoring instrument), and hand function (Score of Colville and 
Terrill). All analyses (safety and efficacy) were performed in the safety 
population, defined as participants who received at least one dose of trial 
medication with losartan. This trial is registered with EudraCT, 2015-003670-32.
FINDINGS: Between Jul 28, 2017, and Feb 12, 2021, 29 children were enrolled. Of 
those 27 received the full treatment. Losartan was well tolerated, no 
treatment-related severe complications leading to a serious safety concern 
occurred. The patients revealed improvement in the RDEB clinical scores, namely 
a mean reduction at week 40 of -7.36 points (95%-CI: -16.13 to 1.41) in the 
EBDASI activity score and -10.50 points (95%-CI: -20.81 to -0.19) in the EBDASI 
damage score, while the Children's Dermatology Life Quality Index rose by 2.64 
points (95%-CI: -4.55 to -0.90). Similar to the EBDASI score, the BEBS showed a 
mean reduction of -3 points, 95%-CI: -0.21 to -5,79, P = 0.036). In the 
Wong-Baker FACES Scale for Pain an improvement of at least one level was 
identified for 9 of 28 patients between baseline and at month 9 (95%-CI: 
15.9%-52.4%; P = 0.57). Regarding the Quality of Life in EB Score, five of 28 
patients showed an improvement in the total scale of at least one level at month 
9 (95%-CI: 6.1%-36.9%; P = 0.71). With the Itch assessment scale for the 
paediatric burn patients an improvement of at least one level could be observed 
in 12 of 28 patients (95%-CI: 24.5%-62.8%; P = 0.24). The MDQ-30 showed no 
relevant difference at 9 months after treatment start, as compared to baseline. 
We observed improvement of finger span with our own morphometric scoring 
instrument of pseudosyndactyly progression, revealing an increase of the maximal 
distance between thumb and index finger at month 9 by 6.92 mm, 95%-CI [3.48, 
10.37] P = 0.0009. With the Hand function assessment score of Colville and 
Terrill, an improvement of at least one level was documented for 3 of 28 
patients, i.e., 10.7% (95%-CI: 2.3%-28.2%; P = 0.63).
INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that losartan was well tolerated by children 
with RDEB, and provide preliminary evidence that it may reduce disease burden. 
Further research with larger sample sizes and longer durations is needed to 
establish the treatment's long-term efficacy and safety.
FUNDING: Debra International, the Department of Dermatology, Medical 
Center-University of Freiburg (Berta-Ottenstein Advanced Clinician Scientist 
Program of the Medical Faculty), and the German Research Foundation.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102900
PMCID: PMC11558043
PMID: 39539991

Conflict of interest statement: DK, TZ and LBT are founders of Crowd Pharma 
Losartan GmbH & Co. KG, a company established in 2021 to pursue development of 
losartan for epidermolysis bullosa. AN has received payments for invited talks 
by Amryt Pharma. AN, BS, DK and LBT have filed a patent for the use of losartan 
for the treatment of fibrotic diseases, in particular epidermolysis bullosa (EP 
4 081 300 B1). All other authors declare no competing interests.