---
reference_id: "PMID:35514310"
title: TBX5 variant with the novel phenotype of mixed‑type total anomalous pulmonary venous return in Holt‑Oram Syndrome and variable intrafamilial heart defects.
authors:
- Azab B
- Aburizeg D
- Ji W
- Jeffries L
- Isbeih NJ
- Al-Akily AS
- Mohammad H
- Osba YA
- Shahin MA
- Dardas Z
- Hatmal MM
- Al-Ammouri I
- Lakhani S
journal: Mol Med Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12726
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Female
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Heart Septal Defects, Atrial/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Lower Extremity Deformities, Congenital"
- Phenotype
- Scimitar Syndrome/genetics
- T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics
- "Upper Extremity Deformities, Congenital"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TBX5 variant with the novel phenotype of mixed‑type total anomalous pulmonary venous return in Holt‑Oram Syndrome and variable intrafamilial heart defects.
**Authors:** Azab B, Aburizeg D, Ji W, Jeffries L, Isbeih NJ, Al-Akily AS, Mohammad H, Osba YA, Shahin MA, Dardas Z, Hatmal MM, Al-Ammouri I, Lakhani S
**Journal:** Mol Med Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3892/mmr.2022.12726](https://doi.org/10.3892/mmr.2022.12726)

## Content

1. Mol Med Rep. 2022 Jun;25(6):210. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12726. Epub 2022 May 6.

TBX5 variant with the novel phenotype of mixed‑type total anomalous pulmonary 
venous return in Holt‑Oram Syndrome and variable intrafamilial heart defects.

Azab B(#)(1), Aburizeg D(#)(2), Ji W(3), Jeffries L(3), Isbeih NJ(2), Al-Akily 
AS(2), Mohammad H(2), Osba YA(2), Shahin MA(2), Dardas Z(4), Hatmal MM(5), 
Al-Ammouri I(6), Lakhani S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Microbiology and Forensic Medicine, School of 
Medicine, The University of Jordan, Amman 11942, Jordan.
(3)Pediatric Genomics Discovery Program, Department of Pediatrics, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06504, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Applied Medical 
Sciences, The Hashemite University, Zarqa 13133, Jordan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, The University of Jordan, Amman 
11942, Jordan.
(#)Contributed equally

Variants in T‑box transcription factor 5 (TBX5) can result in a wide phenotypic 
spectrum, specifically in the heart and the limbs. TBX5 has been implicated in 
causing non‑syndromic cardiac defects and Holt‑Oram syndrome (HOS). The present 
study investigated the underlying molecular etiology of a family with 
heterogeneous heart defects. The proband had mixed‑type total anomalous 
pulmonary venous return (mixed‑type TAPVR), whereas her mother had an atrial 
septal defect. Genetic testing through trio‑based whole‑exome sequencing was 
used to reveal the molecular etiology. A nonsense variant was identified in TBX5 
(c.577G>T; p.Gly193*) initially showing co‑segregation with a presumably 
non‑syndromic presentation of congenital heart disease. Subsequent genetic 
investigations and more complete phenotyping led to the correct diagnosis of 
HOS, documenting the novel association of mixed‑type TAPVR with HOS. Finally, 
protein modeling of the mutant TBX5 protein that harbored this pathogenic 
nonsense variant (p.Gly193*) revealed a substantial drop in the quantity of 
non‑covalent bonds. The decrease in the number of non‑covalent bonds suggested 
that the resultant mutant dimer was less stable compared with the wild‑type 
protein, consequently affecting the protein's ability to bind DNA. The present 
findings extended the phenotypic cardiac defects associated with HOS; to the 
best of our knowledge, this is the first association of mixed‑type TAPVR with 
TBX5. Prior to the current analysis, the molecular association of TAPVR with HOS 
had never been documented; hence, this is the first genetic investigation to 
report the association between TAPVR and HOS. Furthermore, it was demonstrated 
that the null‑variants reported in the T‑box domain of TBX5 were associated with 
a wide range of cardiac and/or skeletal anomalies on both the inter‑and 
intrafamilial levels. In conclusion, genetic testing was highlighted as a 
potentially powerful approach in the prognostication of the proper diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12726
PMCID: PMC9133962
PMID: 35514310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.