---
reference_id: "PMID:37805563"
title: "Challenges in the care of individuals with severe primary insulin-like growth factor-I deficiency (SPIGFD): an international, multi-stakeholder perspective."
authors:
- Backeljauw PF
- Andrews M
- Bang P
- Dalle Molle L
- Deal CL
- Harvey J
- Langham S
- Petriczko E
- Polak M
- Storr HL
- Dattani MT
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02928-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/therapeutic use
- Quality of Life
- "Laron Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Dwarfism/drug therapy
- Growth Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Challenges in the care of individuals with severe primary insulin-like growth factor-I deficiency (SPIGFD): an international, multi-stakeholder perspective.
**Authors:** Backeljauw PF, Andrews M, Bang P, Dalle Molle L, Deal CL, Harvey J, Langham S, Petriczko E, Polak M, Storr HL, Dattani MT
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02928-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02928-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Oct 7;18(1):312. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02928-7.

Challenges in the care of individuals with severe primary insulin-like growth 
factor-I deficiency (SPIGFD): an international, multi-stakeholder perspective.

Backeljauw PF(1), Andrews M(2)(3), Bang P(4), Dalle Molle L(5), Deal CL(6)(7), 
Harvey J(2)(3), Langham S(8), Petriczko E(9), Polak M(10), Storr HL(11), Dattani 
MT(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA. Philippe.Backeljauw@cchmc.org.
(2)The Major Aspects of Growth in Children (MAGIC) Foundation, Warrenville, IL, 
USA.
(3)The MAGIC Foundation International Coalition for Organizations Supporting 
Endocrine Patients (MAGIC-ICOSEP), Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Division of Children's and Women's Health, Department of Biomedical and 
Clinical Sciences (BKV), Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University, 
Linköping, Sweden.
(5)Caregiver Representative, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(6)Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(7)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) Sainte-Justine, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(8)Paediatric Endocrinology, Great Ormond Street Hospital UCL Hospitals, London, 
UK.
(9)Department of Paediatrics, Endocrinology, Diabetology, Metabolic Disorders, 
and Cardiology of Developmental Age, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, 
Poland.
(10)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Gynecology and Diabetology, Hôpital 
Universitaire Necker Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, 
Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(11)Centre for Endocrinology, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK.
(12)Paediatric Endocrinology, Great Ormond Street Hospital UCL Hospitals, 
London, UK. m.dattani@ucl.ac.uk.
(13)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK. 
m.dattani@ucl.ac.uk.
(14)Adolescent Endocrinology, UCL Hospitals, London, UK. m.dattani@ucl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Severe primary insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) deficiency 
(SPIGFD) is a rare growth disorder characterized by short stature (standard 
deviation score [SDS] ≤ 3.0), low circulating concentrations of IGF-I 
(SDS ≤ 3.0), and normal or elevated concentrations of growth hormone (GH). Laron 
syndrome is the best characterized form of SPIGFD, caused by a defect in the GH 
receptor (GHR) gene. However, awareness of SPIGFD remains low, and individuals 
living with SPIGFD continue to face challenges associated with diagnosis, 
treatment and care.
OBJECTIVE: To gather perspectives on the key challenges for individuals and 
families living with SPIGFD through a multi-stakeholder approach. By 
highlighting critical gaps in the awareness, diagnosis, and management of 
SPIGFD, this report aims to provide recommendations to improve care for people 
affected by SPIGFD globally.
METHODS: An international group of clinical experts, researchers, and patient 
and caregiver representatives from the SPIGFD community participated in a 
virtual, half-day meeting to discuss key unmet needs and opportunities to 
improve the care of people living with SPIGFD.
RESULTS: As a rare disorder, limited awareness and understanding of SPIGFD 
amongst healthcare professionals (HCPs) poses significant challenges in the 
diagnosis and treatment of those affected. Patients often face difficulties 
associated with receiving a formal diagnosis, delayed treatment initiation and 
limited access to appropriate therapy. This has a considerable impact on the 
physical health and quality of life for patients, highlighting a need for more 
education and clearer guidance for HCPs. Support from patient advocacy groups is 
valuable in helping patients and their families to find appropriate care. 
However, there remains a need to better understand the burden that SPIGFD has on 
individuals beyond height, including the impact on physical, emotional, and 
social wellbeing.
CONCLUSIONS: To address the challenges faced by individuals and families 
affected by SPIGFD, greater awareness of SPIGFD is needed within the healthcare 
community, and a consensus on best practice in the care of individuals affected 
by this condition. Continued efforts are also needed at a global level to 
challenge existing perceptions around SPIGFD, and identify solutions that 
promote equitable access to appropriate care. Medical writing support was 
industry-sponsored.

© 2023. Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02928-7
PMCID: PMC10559630
PMID: 37805563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Backeljauw has been a consultant for Novo 
Nordisk, Novartis/Sandoz, Tolmar Pharmaceuticals, Ascendis Pharma, BioMarin 
Pharmaceutical, Cavalry Bioventures, and Ipsen, and currently receives research 
support from Novo Nordisk and Novartis. Dr Bang has been a consultant for 
Sanofi-Aventis, Novo Nordisk, Merck Serono, Lilly, Ipsen, Sandoz, Versartis and 
Pfizer. Dr Deal has been a consultant for Pfizer, Merck/EMD-Serono, Eli Lilly, 
Ipsen, Lumos, Levo Therapeutics, GLWL Research Inc, Millendo, Versartis, 
Ferring, Bayer and Radius Pharmaceuticals. Dr Petriczko has been a consultant 
for Ipsen. Professor Storr has been a consultant for Sandoz, NovoNordisk, Ipsen 
and Springer. Professor Dattani has been a consultant for Ferring, Ipsen, Novo 
Nordisk, Pfizer and Sandoz. Mrs Andrews, Mr Dalle Molle, Mrs Harvey, Mrs Langham 
and Professor Polak declare no conflicts of interest.