---
reference_id: "PMID:8855829"
title: Clinical features of primary ovarian failure caused by a point mutation in the follicle-stimulating hormone receptor gene.
authors:
- Aittomäki K
- Herva R
- Stenman UH
- Juntunen K
- Ylöstalo P
- Hovatta O
- de la Chapelle A
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1210/jcem.81.10.8855829
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amenorrhea
- Body Height
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Follicle Stimulating Hormone/blood
- Humans
- Luteinizing Hormone/blood
- Ovary/diagnostic imaging
- Point Mutation
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Receptors, FSH/genetics"
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features of primary ovarian failure caused by a point mutation in the follicle-stimulating hormone receptor gene.
**Authors:** Aittomäki K, Herva R, Stenman UH, Juntunen K, Ylöstalo P, Hovatta O, de la Chapelle A
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.81.10.8855829](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.81.10.8855829)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1996 Oct;81(10):3722-6. doi:
10.1210/jcem.81.10.8855829.

Clinical features of primary ovarian failure caused by a point mutation in the
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor gene.

Aittomäki K(1), Herva R, Stenman UH, Juntunen K, Ylöstalo P, Hovatta O, de la
Chapelle A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Finland.
kristiina.aittomaki@helsinki.fi

The recent finding that a mutation in the FSH receptor gene causes ovarian
dysgenesis prompted the present study to determine the phenotype caused by this
mutation. Twenty-two patients with ovarian dysgenesis and a 566C-->T mutation in
the FSH receptor gene (designated FSH-resistant ovaries or FSHRO) were compared
with 30 clinically similar patients with ovarian dysgenesis (designated ODG) who
did not have this mutation. The genealogical studies suggested a founder effect
of the FSH receptor gene mutation in Finland. Clinically, both groups of
patients were characterized by primary or early secondary amenorrhea, variable
development of secondary sex characteristics, and high serum levels of FSH and
LH. Notable differences were observed in median adult height (FSHRO patients
were shorter) and the occurrence of follicles judged by transvaginal sonography
(observed in 6 of 8 FSHRO vs. 1 of 11 ODG) and ovarian histology (present in all
9 FSHRO vs. 1 of 4 ODG). These findings suggest that a subset of ovarian
dysgenesis patients with the FSH receptor mutation 566C-->T is pathogenetically
distinct, possibly due to residual receptor activity, and that these patients
can be tentatively identified by demonstrating the presence of ovarian follicles
and confirmed by mutation analysis.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.81.10.8855829
PMID: 8855829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
