---
reference_id: "PMID:24613568"
title: "Surgical pathology of pleural coccidioidomycosis: a clinicopathological study of 36 cases."
authors:
- Shekhel TA
- Ricciotti RW
- Blair JE
- Colby TV
- Sobonya RE
- Larsen BT
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical pathology of pleural coccidioidomycosis: a clinicopathological study of 36 cases.
**Authors:** Shekhel TA, Ricciotti RW, Blair JE, Colby TV, Sobonya RE, Larsen BT
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.009)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2014 May;45(5):961-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.009. Epub
2014  Jan 8.

Surgical pathology of pleural coccidioidomycosis: a clinicopathological study of 
36 cases.

Shekhel TA(1), Ricciotti RW(2), Blair JE(3), Colby TV(4), Sobonya RE(2), Larsen 
BT(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85741, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85741, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ 85252, USA.
(4)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ 85252, USA.
(5)Division of Anatomic Pathology Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. 
Electronic address: larsen.brandon@mayo.edu.

Most pulmonary coccidioidal infections are intraparenchymal; the pleurae are 
rarely involved. Pleuritis is a recognized complication of ruptured cavitary 
infections and occasionally occurs in other settings but has not been fully 
characterized. To define the clinical and histopathologic characteristics of 
pleural coccidioidomycosis as encountered by surgical pathologists, we reviewed 
the clinical history, imaging, and histology of 36 biopsy-, resection-, or 
autopsy-confirmed cases (with coccidioidal spherules present in pleural tissue; 
median age, 39 years; 22 men). These represented 7% of all pulmonary 
coccidioidal infections and showed 2 modes of presentation, including ruptured 
cavitary infection (26) and pleural-predominant disease with milder parenchymal 
involvement (10). Risk factors included immunodeficiency, smoking, and 
occupational exposure to soil. Common symptoms (median, 5 weeks) included cough 
(47%), chest pain (44%), and dyspnea (39%). Imaging often showed pleural 
adhesions (64%) and effusions (61%). Treatment included lobectomy or 
decortication, with antifungal medications. All cases showed granulomatous 
pleuritis. Both modes of presentation showed similar histologic features, 
including the composition of inflammatory infiltrates, degree of fibrosis, and 
extent of necrosis. Spherules were usually few (mean density, <1/10 high-power 
field). Three deaths occurred (all with ruptured cavities); the remaining 
patients recovered. Differential diagnosis of pleural effusions should include 
coccidioidomycosis, particularly in endemic areas, even without significant 
intrapulmonary disease. Most cases of coccidioidomycotic pleuritis are 
encountered by pathologists after resection of ruptured cavities with 
decortication, but pleural-predominant infections may be biopsied for diagnostic 
purposes. Spherules are usually rare in pleural tissue, and liberal sampling, 
cultures, or serologic studies may be required to confirm the diagnosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.009
PMID: 24613568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]