---
reference_id: "PMID:1948276"
title: G6PD deficiency and fava bean consumption do not produce hemolysis in Thailand.
authors:
- Kitayaporn D
- Charoenlarp P
- Pattaraarechachai J
- Pholpoti T
journal: Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health
year: '1991'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# G6PD deficiency and fava bean consumption do not produce hemolysis in Thailand.
**Authors:** Kitayaporn D, Charoenlarp P, Pattaraarechachai J, Pholpoti T
**Journal:** Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health (1991)

## Content

1. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 1991 Jun;22(2):176-82.

G6PD deficiency and fava bean consumption do not produce hemolysis in Thailand.

Kitayaporn D(1), Charoenlarp P, Pattaraarechachai J, Pholpoti T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Favism, a hemolytic condition associated with fava bean consumption among the 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficient persons, is well described in 
the Middle East and Mediterranean areas. However, it is not well documented 
among the Thais or other Southeast Asians. It is possible that it does exist but 
that hemolysis which develops is of very minor degree and thus escapes clinical 
detection. This cross-sectional study hypothesizes that if the fava bean and 
G6PD deficiency interact in the Thai population, they should cause a significant 
difference in hematocrit level. The study was carried out in a community 
hospital in a malaria endemic area. We found that there was a trivial difference 
of the hematocrit (approximately 1%) which was too small to warrant any clinical 
significance after controlling for the extraneous effects of age, sex, use of 
malaria chemoprophylaxis, falciparum infection, use of analgesics/antipyretics 
and admission status of the patients (p = 0.668). This may be due to the 
presence of different G6PD mutants to those found elsewhere or due to different 
consumption patterns of fava beans among the Thais compared to people in other 
areas with high prevalence of G6PD deficiency.

PMID: 1948276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]