---
reference_id: "PMID:37231829"
title: Relationship between Chemotherapy-Induced Diarrhea and Intestinal Microbiome Composition.
authors:
- Kawasaki Y
- Kakimoto K
- Tanaka Y
- Shimizu H
- Nishida K
- Numa K
- Kinoshita N
- Tatsumi Y
- Nakazawa K
- Koshiba R
- Hirata Y
- Ota K
- Sakiyama N
- Terazawa T
- Takeuchi T
- Miyazaki T
- Goto M
- Yokota H
- Makizaki Y
- Tanaka Y
- Nakajima S
- Ohno H
- Higuchi K
- Nakamura S
- Nishikawa H
journal: Digestion
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000528282
keywords:
- Humans
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Dysbiosis/chemically induced
- Diarrhea/drug therapy
- Bacteria
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "RNA, Ribosomal, 16S"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship between Chemotherapy-Induced Diarrhea and Intestinal Microbiome Composition.
**Authors:** Kawasaki Y, Kakimoto K, Tanaka Y, Shimizu H, Nishida K, Numa K, Kinoshita N, Tatsumi Y, Nakazawa K, Koshiba R, Hirata Y, Ota K, Sakiyama N, Terazawa T, Takeuchi T, Miyazaki T, Goto M, Yokota H, Makizaki Y, Tanaka Y, Nakajima S, Ohno H, Higuchi K, Nakamura S, Nishikawa H
**Journal:** Digestion (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000528282](https://doi.org/10.1159/000528282)

## Content

1. Digestion. 2023;104(5):357-369. doi: 10.1159/000528282. Epub 2023 May 11.

Relationship between Chemotherapy-Induced Diarrhea and Intestinal Microbiome
Composition.

Kawasaki Y(1), Kakimoto K(1), Tanaka Y(1), Shimizu H(1), Nishida K(1), Numa
K(1), Kinoshita N(1), Tatsumi Y(1), Nakazawa K(1), Koshiba R(1), Hirata Y(1),
Ota K(1), Sakiyama N(1), Terazawa T(1), Takeuchi T(1), Miyazaki T(1), Goto M(1),
Yokota H(2), Makizaki Y(2), Tanaka Y(2), Nakajima S(2), Ohno H(2), Higuchi K(1),
Nakamura S(1), Nishikawa H(1).

Author information:
(1)2nd Department of Internal Medicine, Osaka Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, Osaka, Japan.
(2)R&D Center, Biofermin Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Kobe, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Fluoropyrimidines (FPs) are key drugs in many chemotherapy
regimens; however, recipients are often prone to diarrhea due to
gastrointestinal toxicity. Disruption of the intestinal epithelial barrier
function by FPs leads to dysbiosis, which may exacerbate intestinal epithelial
cell damage as a secondary effect and trigger diarrhea. However, despite studies
on chemotherapy-induced changes in the intestinal microbiome of humans, the
relationship between dysbiosis and diarrhea is unclear. In this study, we aimed
to investigate the relationship between chemotherapy-induced diarrhea and the
intestinal microbiome.
METHODS: We conducted a single-center prospective observational study.
Twenty-three patients who received chemotherapy, including FPs as first-line
chemotherapy for colorectal cancer, were included. Stool samples were collected
before the start of chemotherapy and after one cycle of treatment to analyze
intestinal microbiome composition and perform PICRUSt predictive metagenomic
analysis.
RESULTS: Gastrointestinal toxicity was observed in 7 of 23 patients (30.4%),
diarrhea was observed in 4 (17.4%), and nausea and anorexia were observed in 3
(13.0%). In 19 patients treated with oral FPs, the α diversity of the microbial
community decreased significantly following chemotherapy only in the diarrheal
group. At the phylum level, the diarrheal group showed a significant decrease in
the abundance of Firmicutes and a significant increase in the abundance of
Bacteroidetes with chemotherapy (p = 0.013 and 0.011, respectively). In the same
groups, at the genus level, Bifidobacterium abundance was significantly
decreased (p = 0.019). In contrast, in the non-diarrheal group, Actinobacteria
abundance increased significantly with chemotherapy at the phylum level (p =
0.011). Further, Bifidobacterium, Fusicatenibacter, and Dorea abundance
significantly increased at the genus level (p = 0.006, 0.019, and 0.011,
respectively). The PICRUSt predictive metagenomic analysis revealed that
chemotherapy caused significant differences in membrane transport in KEGG
pathway level 2 and in 8 KEGG pathway level 3, including transporters and
oxidative phosphorylation in the diarrhea group.
CONCLUSION: Organic-acid-producing bacteria seem to be involved in diarrhea
associated with chemotherapy, including FPs.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000528282
PMCID: PMC10614279
PMID: 37231829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Shiro Nakamura reports receiving speaking fees
from AbbVie GK, EA Pharma Co., Ltd., Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation,
Mochida Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., and Janssen
Pharmaceutical K.K. Dr. Shinya Fukunishi is an associate editor of Digestion.
