---
reference_id: "PMID:17701900"
title: "Mutations in PRPS1, which encodes the phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase enzyme critical for nucleotide biosynthesis, cause hereditary peripheral neuropathy with hearing loss and optic neuropathy (cmtx5)."
authors:
- Kim HJ
- Sohn KM
- Shy ME
- Krajewski KM
- Hwang M
- Park JH
- Jang SY
- Won HH
- Choi BO
- Hong SH
- Kim BJ
- Suh YL
- Ki CS
- Lee SY
- Kim SH
- Kim JW
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/519529
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Asian People/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, X/genetics"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Nucleotides/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Optic Nerve Diseases/genetics
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Ribose-Phosphate Pyrophosphokinase/analysis, genetics, metabolism"
- Syndrome
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in PRPS1, which encodes the phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase enzyme critical for nucleotide biosynthesis, cause hereditary peripheral neuropathy with hearing loss and optic neuropathy (cmtx5).
**Authors:** Kim HJ, Sohn KM, Shy ME, Krajewski KM, Hwang M, Park JH, Jang SY, Won HH, Choi BO, Hong SH, Kim BJ, Suh YL, Ki CS, Lee SY, Kim SH, Kim JW
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/519529](https://doi.org/10.1086/519529)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Sep;81(3):552-8. doi: 10.1086/519529. Epub 2007 Jun 29.

Mutations in PRPS1, which encodes the phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase
enzyme critical for nucleotide biosynthesis, cause hereditary peripheral
neuropathy with hearing loss and optic neuropathy (cmtx5).

Kim HJ(1), Sohn KM, Shy ME, Krajewski KM, Hwang M, Park JH, Jang SY, Won HH,
Choi BO, Hong SH, Kim BJ, Suh YL, Ki CS, Lee SY, Kim SH, Kim JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Genetics, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, Korea.

We have identified missense mutations at conserved amino acids in the PRPS1 gene
on Xq22.3 in two families with a syndromic form of inherited peripheral
neuropathy, one of Asian and one of European descent. The disease is inherited
in an X-linked recessive manner, and the affected male patients invariably
develop sensorineural hearing loss of prelingual type followed by gating
disturbance and visual loss. The family of European descent was reported in 1967
as having Rosenberg-Chutorian syndrome, and recently a Korean family with the
same symptom triad was identified with a novel disease locus CMTX5 on the
chromosome band Xq21.32-q24. PRPS1 (phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase 1)
is an isoform of the PRPS gene family and is ubiquitously expressed in human
tissues, including cochlea. The enzyme mediates the biochemical step critical
for purine metabolism and nucleotide biosynthesis. The mutations identified were
E43D, in patients with Rosenberg-Chutorian syndrome, and M115T, in the Korean
patients with CMTX5. We also showed decreased enzyme activity in patients with
M115T. PRPS1 is the first CMT gene that encodes a metabolic enzyme, shedding a
new light on the understanding of peripheral nerve-specific metabolism and also
suggesting the potential of PRPS1 as a target for drugs in prevention and
treatment of peripheral neuropathy by antimetabolite therapy.

DOI: 10.1086/519529
PMCID: PMC1950833
PMID: 17701900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
