---
reference_id: "PMID:39344692"
title: "Neonatal diabetes mellitus around the world: Update 2024."
authors:
- Barbetti F
- Deeb A
- Suzuki S
journal: J Diabetes Investig
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/jdi.14312
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal diabetes mellitus around the world: Update 2024.
**Authors:** Barbetti F, Deeb A, Suzuki S
**Journal:** J Diabetes Investig (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdi.14312](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdi.14312)

## Content

1. J Diabetes Investig. 2024 Dec;15(12):1711-1724. doi: 10.1111/jdi.14312. Epub 
2024 Sep 30.

Neonatal diabetes mellitus around the world: Update 2024.

Barbetti F(1), Deeb A(2), Suzuki S(3).

Author information:
(1)Monogenic Diabetes Clinic, Endocrinology and Diabetes Unit, Bambino Gesù 
Children's Hospital IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Endocrine Division, Sheikh Shakhbout Medical City and College of 
Medicine and Health Science, Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi, UAE.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa, Japan.

Neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM), defined as diabetes with an onset during the 
first 6 months of life, is a rare form of monogenic diabetes. The initial 
publications on this condition began appearing in the second half of the 1990s 
and quite surprisingly, the search for new NDM genes is still ongoing with great 
vigor. Between 2018 and early 2024, six brand new NDM-genes have been discovered 
(CNOT1, FICD, ONECUT1, PDIA6, YIPF5, ZNF808) and three genes known to cause 
different diseases were identified as NDM-genes (EIF2B1, NARS2, KCNMA1). In 
addition, NDM cases carrying mutations in three other genes known to give rise 
to diabetes during childhood have been also identified (AGPAT2, BSCL2, PIK3R1). 
As a consequence, the list of NDM genes now exceeds 40. This genetic 
heterogeneity translates into many different mechanism(s) of disease that are 
being investigated with state-of-the-art methodologies, such as induced 
pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) and human embryonic stem cells (hESC) manipulated 
with the CRISPR technique of genome editing. This diversity in genetic causes 
and the pathophysiology of diabetes dictate the need for a variety of 
therapeutic approaches. The aim of this paper is to provide an overview on 
recent achievements in all aspects of this area of research.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Diabetes Investigation published by Asian 
Association for the Study of Diabetes (AASD) and John Wiley & Sons Australia, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jdi.14312
PMCID: PMC11615689
PMID: 39344692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial conflict of 
interest to declare. Approval of the research protocol: N/A. Informed consent: 
N/A. Registry and the registration no. of the study/trial: N/A. Animal studies: 
N/A.