---
reference_id: "PMID:37579209"
title: "Controlled Human Infection Model for Hepatitis C Virus Vaccine Development: Trial Design Considerations."
authors:
- Feld JJ
- Bruneau J
- Dore GJ
- Ghany MG
- Hansen B
- Sulkowski M
- Thomas DL
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciad362
keywords:
- Humans
- Hepacivirus
- Sample Size
- "Hepatitis C/prevention & control, drug therapy"
- Vaccines
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/prevention & control, drug therapy"
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Controlled Human Infection Model for Hepatitis C Virus Vaccine Development: Trial Design Considerations.
**Authors:** Feld JJ, Bruneau J, Dore GJ, Ghany MG, Hansen B, Sulkowski M, Thomas DL
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciad362](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciad362)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2023 Aug 14;77(Suppl 3):S262-S269. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciad362.

Controlled Human Infection Model for Hepatitis C Virus Vaccine Development:
Trial Design Considerations.

Feld JJ(1), Bruneau J(2), Dore GJ(3), Ghany MG(4), Hansen B(5), Sulkowski M(6),
Thomas DL(6).

Author information:
(1)Toronto Centre for Liver Disease, University Health Network, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(2)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal
(CRCHUM), Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.
(3)Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institutes of Diabetes, Digestive, and Kidney
Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA.

The design of a clinical trial for a controlled human infection model (CHIM) to
accelerate hepatitis C virus (HCV) vaccine development requires careful
consideration. The design of a potential approach to HCV CHIM is outlined,
involving initial sentinel cohorts to establish the safety and curability of the
viral inoculum followed by larger cohorts to establish the spontaneous clearance
rate for each inoculum. The primary endpoint would be HCV clearance by 24 weeks
post-inoculation, recognizing that the prevention of chronic infection would be
the primary goal of HCV vaccine candidates. Additional considerations are
discussed, including the populations to be enrolled, the required monitoring
approach, indications for antiviral therapy, and the required sample size for
different CHIM approaches. Finally, safety considerations for CHIM participants
are discussed.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciad362
PMCID: PMC10425135
PMID: 37579209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest . J. B. reports
funding through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and Gilead Sciences.
They also report honoraria payment for giving a presentation from Gilead
Sciences. They report participation in a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)
with AbbVie, Gilead Sciences, and Cepheid Sciences and a board role with the
International Network on Hepatitis and Health for Substance Abusers. D. L. T.
reports research funding support from the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
and National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA); royalties or licenses with
UpToDate; consulting fees from Merck and Co, Excision Bio, and Evrys; honoraria
payments from Masur et al Infectious Diseases Board Review; and participation on
a DSMB with Merck and Co; and holds a leadership role with the Conference on
Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections (CROI) Program Committee and the
African Mission Healthcare. G. J. D. reports clinical trial grants from Gilead
Sciences, AbbVie, and Merck. They also report being an associate editor with the
Journal of Hepatology. J. J. F. reports receiving a Canadian Institutes of
Health Research Planning and Dissemination Grant (1183426). They report
receiving grants and consulting fees from AbbVie and Gilead and is the past
president of the Canadian Association for the Study of the Liver. M. S. reports
receiving the NIH midcareer mentoring award, K24DA034621. They report receiving
research grants to Johns Hopkins University from Janssen, Vir, Assembly Bio, and
AbbVie, and also received consulting fee payments from AbbVie, Assembly Bio,
Aligos Antios, Arbutus, Gilead, Precision Bio, and GSK for participation in a
Scientific Advisory Board related to hepatitis V virus (HBV) and HCV. They also
participated in a DSMB related to HIV and HBV with Gilead and Immunocore and is
the American editor for the Journal of Viral Hepatitis. B. H. and M. G. G.
report no potential conflicts. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors
consider relevant to the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.
