---
reference_id: "PMID:37338178"
title: "Why has plasma exchange failed in TRACK syndrome? Lessons from a new variant of the atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome."
authors:
- Durak C
- Sahin EG
- Yusuf Can Y
- Varol F
- Cam H
journal: J Clin Apher
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jca.22070
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/genetics, therapy, complications"
- Plasma Exchange
- Plasmapheresis
- "Anemia, Hemolytic/therapy"
- Thrombotic Microangiopathies/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Why has plasma exchange failed in TRACK syndrome? Lessons from a new variant of the atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
**Authors:** Durak C, Sahin EG, Yusuf Can Y, Varol F, Cam H
**Journal:** J Clin Apher (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jca.22070](https://doi.org/10.1002/jca.22070)

## Content

1. J Clin Apher. 2023 Oct;38(5):647-650. doi: 10.1002/jca.22070. Epub 2023 Jun
20.

Why has plasma exchange failed in TRACK syndrome? Lessons from a new variant of 
the atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.

Durak C(1), Sahin EG(1), Yusuf Can Y(1), Varol F(1), Cam H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, 
Sancaktepe Sehit Prof. Dr. Ilhan Varank Training and Research Hospital, 
University of Health Science, Istanbul, Turkey.

Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a rare and life-threatening form of 
thrombotic microangiopathy, associated with high mortality and morbidity. Most 
cases present with hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and renal insufficiency. 
However, it can have unusual multiple end-organ injuries including extrarenal 
organ and system involvements such as neurologic, cardiac, gastrointestinal, and 
respiratory systems. We describe a 4-year-old girl who developed aHUS due to the 
TSEN2 mutation and had cardiac involvement. She did not benefit from plasma 
exchange, as stated in previous cases. It should be kept in mind that 
therapeutic plasma exchange may not be beneficial in some cases of aHUS, 
especially due to genetic mutations.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jca.22070
PMID: 37338178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]