---
reference_id: "PMID:30514647"
title: "Porphyria cutanea tarda and hepatoerythropoietic porphyria: Identification of 19 novel uroporphyrinogen III decarboxylase mutations."
authors:
- Weiss Y
- Chen B
- Yasuda M
- Nazarenko I
- Anderson KE
- Desnick RJ
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.11.013
keywords:
- Child
- Family
- Genetic Carrier Screening
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heme/biosynthesis
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Diagnostic Techniques
- Mutation
- Porphyria Cutanea Tarda/genetics
- "Porphyria, Hepatoerythropoietic/genetics"
- Uroporphyrinogen Decarboxylase/genetics
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Porphyria cutanea tarda and hepatoerythropoietic porphyria: Identification of 19 novel uroporphyrinogen III decarboxylase mutations.
**Authors:** Weiss Y, Chen B, Yasuda M, Nazarenko I, Anderson KE, Desnick RJ
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.11.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.11.013)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2019 Nov;128(3):363-366. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.11.013.
Epub  2018 Nov 28.

Porphyria cutanea tarda and hepatoerythropoietic porphyria: Identification of 19 
novel uroporphyrinogen III decarboxylase mutations.

Weiss Y(1), Chen B(2), Yasuda M(3), Nazarenko I(4), Anderson KE(5), Desnick 
RJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: yedidyah.weiss@mssm.edu.
(2)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA; Department of Preventive Medicine and Community 
Health, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. Electronic 
address: brenden.chen@mssm.edu.
(3)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA; Department of Preventive Medicine and Community 
Health, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. Electronic 
address: makiko.yasuda@mssm.edu.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA; Department of Preventive Medicine and Community 
Health, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. Electronic 
address: irina.nazarenko@mssm.edu.
(5)Department of Preventive Medicine and Community Health, University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. Electronic address: kanderso@utmb.edu.
(6)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: robert.desnick@mssm.edu.

Porphyria Cutanea Tarda (PCT) is a cutaneous porphyria that results from the 
hepatic inhibition of the heme biosynthetic enzyme uroporphyrinogen 
decarboxylase (UROD), and can occur either in the absence or presence of an 
inherited heterozygous UROD mutation (PCT subtypes 1 and 2, respectively). A 
heterozygous UROD mutation causes half-normal levels of UROD activity 
systemically, which is a susceptibility factor but is not sufficient alone to 
cause type 2 PCT. In both Types 1 and 2 PCT, the cutaneous manifestations are 
precipitated by additional factors that lead to generation of an inhibitor that 
more profoundly reduces hepatic UROD activity. PCT is an iron-related disorder, 
and many of its known susceptibility factors, which include infections (e.g. 
hepatitis C virus, HIV), high alcohol consumption, smoking, estrogens, and 
genetic traits (e.g. hemochromatosis mutations) can increase hepatic iron 
accumulation. Hepatoerythropoietic Porphyria (HEP) is a rare autosomal recessive 
disease that results from homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for UROD 
mutations and often causes infantile or childhood onset of both erythropoietic 
and cutaneous manifestations. During the 11-year period from 01/01/2007 through 
12/31/2017, the Mount Sinai Porphyrias Diagnostic Laboratory provided molecular 
diagnostic testing for 387 unrelated patients with PCT and four unrelated 
patients with HEP. Of the 387 unrelated individuals tested for Type 2 PCT, 79 
(20%) were heterozygous for UROD mutations. Among 26 family members of 
mutation-positive PCT patients, eight (31%) had the respective family mutation. 
Additionally, of the four unrelated HEP patients referred for UROD mutation 
analyses, all had homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for UROD mutations, 
and all eight asymptomatic family members were heterozygotes for UROD mutations. 
Of the UROD mutations identified, 19 were novel, including nine missense, two 
nonsense, one consensus splice-site, and seven insertions and deletions. These 
results expand the molecular heterogeneity of PCT and HEP by adding a total of 
19 novel UROD mutations. Moreover, the results document the usefulness of 
molecular testing to confirm a genetic susceptibility trait in Type 2 PCT, 
confirm a diagnosis in HEP, and identify heterozygous family members.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.11.013
PMCID: PMC8132452
PMID: 30514647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interest Statement All authors declare 
no conflicts of interest for PCT or HEP diagnosis or treatment.

Porphyria Cutanea Tarda (PCT) is a hepatic porphyria with prominent, chronic cutaneous manifestations that develops after UROD is reduced to less than about 20% of normal activity in the liver [1]. Hepatic UROD activity is reduced by a possible inhibitor identified as a uroporphomethene that is generated from uroporphyrinogen probably by one or more cytochrome P450 enzymes in the presence of iron and oxidative stress [2, 3]. About 80% of patients have no mutation of UROD and are classified as Type 1 (sporadic) PCT. Another 20% of patients are heterozygous for UROD mutations and are classified as Type 2 (familial) PCT [1, 4]. Type 2 PCT is a genetic disease with low penetrance, in that the great majority of those who inherit heterozygous UROD mutations never develop symptoms. These types of PCT are clinically indistinguishable, except that some Type 2 patients may experience earlier onset of symptoms or occasionally have relatives with overt PCT. Susceptibility factors that contribute in both types of PCT include excessive alcohol consumption, hepatitis C or HIV infection, estrogens, smoking, and common HFE-related familial hemochromatosis mutations p.C282Y and p.H63D [1, 4–7].

Hepatoerythropoietic Porphyria (HEP) is a rare disorder resulting from homozygosity or compound heterozygosity of UROD mutations. HEP can cause hematologic and severe photosensitive cutaneous manifestations in infancy or childhood, but mild cases may become manifest in adult life [1, 8].

PCT is initially diagnosed clinically by prominent cutaneous friability and blistering on sun exposed areas, as well as milia, hypertrichosis, and areas of hyper- and hypopigmentation. A biochemical diagnosis is made by urinary or plasma porphyrin analyses, which demonstrate the accumulation of porphyrins that are mostly highly carboxylated in urine and plasma, including uroporphyrin and heptacarboxylporphyrin. Fecal total porphyrins may be normal or elevated with a predominance of isocoproporphyrin. Management includes removal of disease-inducing susceptibility factors and effective and specific treatment either by phlebotomy to reduce hepatic iron levels or a low-dose regiment of hydroxychloroquine (or chloroquine) to deplete excess porphyrins in the liver [1, 4, 9]. In PCT patients with hepatitis C, direct acting antiviral agents may also be effective in treating PCT [9, 10], but whether this leads to PCT remission as quickly as treatment by phlebotomy or low dose hydroxychloroquine is under study.

The Mount Sinai Porphyrias Diagnostic Laboratory specializes in molecular testing for the diagnosis of all the porphyrias. PCT patient samples are often submitted for molecular testing for UROD mutations to identify patients with the Type 2 familial subtype. The identification of Type 2 patients permits the genetic testing of relatives to detect those with the family mutation who are at increased risk for PCT, if they also have or acquire additional susceptibility factors that can lead to inhibition and further lowering of hepatic UROD activity. Here, we report results of testing for UROD mutations in the Mount Sinai porphyria laboratory over the 11-year period from January 1, 2007 through December 31, 2017. Resulting from this effort we now describe previously reported UROD mutations and 19 novel mutations which have not been reported previously or listed in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD), version 2018.2 [11]. These newly identified mutations expand the molecular heterogeneity of Type 2 PCT and HEP.

Patients with PCT were initially diagnosed by characteristic friability and blistering lesions affecting sun exposed areas of skin, especially on the dorsal hands, and by characteristic elevations in urinary or plasma porphyrins.

For UROD mutation analyses, genomic DNA was isolated from blood samples or saliva using QIA Symphony Technology or the PureGeneTM® Genomic DNA purification kit. Full gene analysis was performed by PCR amplification of the isolated DNA followed by exon-specific primer extension analysis of all exons, exon-intron boundaries (20–30 base pairs from both boundaries), and promoter regions, essentially as previously described [12]. All sequencing was done bi-directionally. Variant nomenclature and exon numbering used reference transcript NM_00374.3. The DNA was amplified by PCR using the Bio-Rad C1000 Touch Thermal Cycler. All PCR primers and sequencing primers were designed in the Mount Sinai Genetics Diagnostic Laboratory using the MacVector program and checked for common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) by the SNPCheck program (ngrl.org.uk/Manchester/projects/snpcheck). Takara PrimeSTAR® GXL DNA Polymerase from Clontech Laboratories was used for PCR amplification. Sanger sequencing of the PCR products was then performed. Sequencher (Gene Codes Corporation) software was used for alignment and analysis of the sequences. Once a specific mutation was identified in a proband, at-risk family members could be diagnosed by targeted mutation testing for the specific family mutation.

During the 11-year period from January 1, 2007 through December 31, 2017, samples from 413 PCT patients and 12 HEP patients were referred by physicians to the Mount Sinai Porphyrias Diagnostic Laboratory for UROD molecular diagnostic testing. These included 387 unrelated PCT-manifesting individuals whose UROD genes were sequenced as described in the Methods section (Table 1). Among these 387 patients, 79 (20%) had UROD mutations and were classified as having Type 2 PCT. Of their 26 family members, eight (31%) had the respective family mutation. The four unrelated HEP patients were homozygous or compound heterozygous for UROD mutations while eight of their asymptomatic parents or siblings were heterozygous for the UROD family mutation, as expected. In the remaining 308 unrelated PCT-manifesting patients, no pathogenic mutations or benign variants of UROD were detected, indicating the diagnosis of sporadic Type I PCT.

In addition to previously published mutations recorded in HGMD (version 2018.2), 19 novel UROD mutations were identified, including nine missense [c.27G>C (p.Q9H), c.50A>G (p.D17G), c.55T>C (p.F19L), c.131C>T (p.P44L), c.284G>C (p.G95A), c.616C>A (p.Q206K), c.629G>A (p.G210D), c.766G>A (p.V256M), and c.994C>T (p.R332C)], two nonsense [c.430C>T (p.R144X), c.1082C>G (p.S361X)], one consensus splice-site (c.20+2T>G), and seven insertions or deletions [c.118_119del (p.G40Pfs*7), c.186dup (p.E63X), c.327_328delinsC (p.E110Sfs*3), c.645_646del (p.N215Hfs*3), c.655_656delinsAA (p.S219N), c. 819_828del (p.Q274Mfs *23), and c.1020del (p.L341Ffs*42)] (Figure 1). Notably, one six-year-old male from India was homozygous for a novel mutation, c.766G>A (p.V256M), and had a porphyrin profile and symptoms compatible with HEP [1]. His parents were both asymptomatic heterozygotes.

These findings have increased the number of UROD mutations reported by HGMD by 15.6% (Table 2).

UROD mutation analyses of 387 unrelated patients with PCT documented both clinically and biochemically identified 79 (20%) with familial (type 2) disease, a prevalence similar to that reported by other investigators [4]. This enabled detection and counseling of asymptomatic family members found to be heterozygous for the familial mutations. These individuals could then be counseled to avoid PCT precipitating factors and to request diagnostic biochemical confirmation should symptoms occur in the future. Mutation analysis in the four HEP patients confirmed the diagnosis of a disease that is often misdiagnosed as Congenital Erythropoietic Porphyria (CEP) and led to the identification of family members with heterozygosity for pathogenic UROD mutations. These results confirm the molecular heterogeneity of PCT and HEP and add an additional 19 novel pathogenic UROD mutations, which included nine missense, one nonsense, one consensus splice-site, and seven insertion and deletion mutations.

Among 79 unrelated PCT probands, 52 UROD mutations were identified, including 33 that were previously published. Among them, the most common were c.952G>A (p.G318R) in five unrelated probands, c.238G>T (p.A80S) in four unrelated probands, and c.399_401delinsCCA (p.V134Q) in four unrelated probands (Table 4). The complex rearrangement g.645del1053ins10 GATCGCCAGA was identified in three unrelated probands of Hispanic ancestry. Furthermore, the same rearrangement was identified in two other unrelated probands of Hispanic ancestry at the Mount Sinai Porphyria Diagnostic Laboratory in 2006 and 2018, before and after the study period reported here. This mutation was also previously identified in a Spanish patient [13], for a total of six patients, presumably unrelated, all of Hispanic origin, suggesting a possible founder effect.

Three of the four HEP patients and their UROD mutations have been previously reported [14–16]. The fourth case, reported here for the first time, was a six-year-old male from India and was homozygous for a novel UROD mutation, c.766G>A (p.V256M). He experienced typical early onset of disease manifestations, including anemia, marked photosensitivity, and severe cutaneous damage [8]. He was initially thought to have CEP, but had no UROS mutations, and his biochemical findings and molecular studies that identified homozygous UROD mutations document that he had HEP.

Demonstrating a marked elevation in urinary or plasma porphyrin levels, with a predominance of highly carboxylated porphyrins, remains essential for the diagnosis of active PCT, and also for monitoring improvement during treatment. As in this series, heterozygous UROD mutations are found in only a portion of PCT patients (about 20% of cases in most series), so their presence is not essential in causing PCT. These mutations are additional susceptibility factors in Type 2 patients, but other factors must be present to generate inhibition of hepatic UROD activity. Furthermore, as in other porphyrias, the biochemical data are essential for validating that novel mutations are pathogenic, particularly for missense mutations. The biochemical confirmation of elevated urinary, plasma and fecal porphyrin profiles, which are diagnostic “gold standards” for PCT and HEP, establishes that all the new mutations described here are pathogenic. For HEP, UROD mutations are found in all cases, and given the rarity of this porphyria and its close resemblance to CEP, molecular analyses are essential for the accurate diagnosis of HEP [1]. Patients with CEP have uroporphyrinogen synthase mutations and different patterns of porphyrins in erythrocytes, plasma, urine and feces that include marked accumulation of the I isomers of uroporphyrin and coproporphyrins [17].

In summary, the Mount Sinai Porphyria Diagnostic Laboratory has identified 19 novel UROD mutations in the past 11 years in 19 affected individuals with marked elevations of porphyrins, including uroporphyrin and heptacarboxylporphyrin, documenting their diagnoses of PCT or HEP. These molecular findings identified individuals with the Type 2 PCT, confirmed the diagnosis of HEP, and enabled identification of relatives who carry UROD mutations who were counseled to avoid environmental and behavioral susceptibility risk factors for overt PCT. In addition, the identification of the UROD mutations in HEP patients allows the parents to accurately prenatally diagnose subsequent pregnancies at risk for HEP as well as prenatal diagnosis for future pregnancies in HEP families.