---
reference_id: "PMID:23830646"
title: "Severe meningococcal infection: a review of epidemiology, diagnosis, and management."
authors:
- Campsall PA
- Laupland KB
- Niven DJ
journal: Crit Care Clin
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccc.2013.03.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe meningococcal infection: a review of epidemiology, diagnosis, and management.
**Authors:** Campsall PA, Laupland KB, Niven DJ
**Journal:** Crit Care Clin (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccc.2013.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccc.2013.03.001)

## Content

1. Crit Care Clin. 2013 Jul;29(3):393-409. doi: 10.1016/j.ccc.2013.03.001.

Severe meningococcal infection: a review of epidemiology, diagnosis, and 
management.

Campsall PA(1), Laupland KB, Niven DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Calgary and Alberta 
Health Services, 3500 26th Avenue Northeast, Calgary, Alberta T1Y 6J4, Canada.

Neisseria meningitidis, also known as meningococcus, is a relatively uncommon 
cause of invasive infection, but when it occurs it is frequently severe and 
potentially life threatening. Meningococcus should be considered and 
investigated promptly as a potentially etiologic pathogen in any patient with 
meningitis, or sepsis accompanied by a petechial rash. Suspected patients should 
receive early appropriate antimicrobial therapy concomitantly with confirmatory 
invasive diagnostic tests. Vaccines have reduced the incidence of infection with 
certain non-B meningococcal serogroups, and new serotype B vaccines are on the 
horizon. This article reviews the epidemiology, diagnosis, and management of 
severe meningococcal infections.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccc.2013.03.001
PMID: 23830646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]