---
reference_id: "PMID:19575764"
title: "Review article: cellular and molecular mechanisms of NSAID-induced peptic ulcers."
authors:
- Musumba C
- Pritchard DM
- Pirmohamed M
journal: Aliment Pharmacol Ther
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2036.2009.04086.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review article: cellular and molecular mechanisms of NSAID-induced peptic ulcers.
**Authors:** Musumba C, Pritchard DM, Pirmohamed M
**Journal:** Aliment Pharmacol Ther (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2036.2009.04086.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2036.2009.04086.x)

## Content

1. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2009 Sep 15;30(6):517-31. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2036.2009.04086.x. Epub 2009 Jul 3.

Review article: cellular and molecular mechanisms of NSAID-induced peptic 
ulcers.

Musumba C(1), Pritchard DM, Pirmohamed M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, School of Biomedical Sciences, 
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

BACKGROUND: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are some of the most 
prescribed drugs worldwide and have now probably overtaken Helicobacter pylori 
as the most common cause of gastrointestinal injury in Western countries. 
Further understanding of the pathogenesis of NSAID-induced ulcers is important 
to enable the development of novel and effective preventive strategies.
AIMS: To provide an update on recent advances in our understanding of the 
cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in the development of NSAID-induced 
ulcers.
METHODS: A Medline search was performed to identify relevant literature using 
search terms including 'nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, aspirin, gastric 
ulcer, duodenal ulcer, pathogenesis, pharmacogenetics'.
RESULTS: The mechanisms of NSAID-induced ulcers can be divided into topical and 
systemic effects and the latter may be prostaglandin-dependent (through COX 
inhibition) or prostaglandin-independent. Genetic factors may play an important 
role in determining individual predisposition.
CONCLUSIONS: The pathogenesis of NSAID-induced peptic ulcers is complex and 
multifactorial. Recent advances in cellular and molecular biology have 
highlighted the importance of various prostaglandin-independent mechanisms. 
Pharmacogenetic studies may provide further insights into the pathogenetic 
mechanisms of NSAID-induced ulcers and help identify patients at increased risk.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2036.2009.04086.x
PMID: 19575764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]