---
reference_id: "PMID:27538377"
title: "Integration of 60,000 exomes and ACMG guidelines question the role of Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia-associated variants."
authors:
- Paludan-Müller C
- Ahlberg G
- Ghouse J
- Herfelt C
- Svendsen JH
- Haunsø S
- Kanters JK
- Olesen MS
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12847
keywords:
- Alleles
- American Medical Association
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Exome/genetics
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- "Genetics, Medical"
- Genomics
- Genotype
- Guidelines as Topic
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Tachycardia, Ventricular/genetics"
- United States
- Polymorphic Catecholaminergic Ventricular Tachycardia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integration of 60,000 exomes and ACMG guidelines question the role of Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia-associated variants.
**Authors:** Paludan-Müller C, Ahlberg G, Ghouse J, Herfelt C, Svendsen JH, Haunsø S, Kanters JK, Olesen MS
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12847](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12847)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2017 Jan;91(1):63-72. doi: 10.1111/cge.12847. Epub 2016 Sep 26.

Integration of 60,000 exomes and ACMG guidelines question the role of
Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia-associated variants.

Paludan-Müller C(1)(2), Ahlberg G(1)(2), Ghouse J(1)(2), Herfelt C(1)(2),
Svendsen JH(1)(2)(3), Haunsø S(1)(2)(3), Kanters JK(4)(5), Olesen MS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Danish National Research Foundation Centre for Cardiac Arrhythmia, Department
of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Laboratory for Molecular Cardiology, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(4)Laboratory of Experimental Cardiology, Department of Biomedicine, University
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Herlev and Gentofte University Hospitals,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia (CPVT) is a highly lethal
cardiac arrhythmia disease occurring during exercise or psychological stress.
CPVT has an estimated prevalence of 1:10,000 and has mainly been associated with
variants in calcium-regulating genes. Identification of potential false-positive
pathogenic variants was conducted by searching the Exome Aggregation Consortium
(ExAC) database (n = 60,706) for variants reported to be associated with CPVT.
The pathogenicity of the interrogated variants was assessed using guidelines
from the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) and in silico
prediction tools. Of 246 variants 38 (15%) variants previously associated with
CPVT were identified in the ExAC database. We predicted the CPVT prevalence to
be 1:132. The ACMG standards classified 29% of ExAC variants as pathogenic or
likely pathogenic. The in silico predictions showed a reduced probability of
disease-causing effect for the variants identified in the exome database (p <
0.001). We have observed a large overrepresentation of previously
CPVT-associated variants in a large exome database. Based on the frequency of
CPVT in the general population, it is less likely that the previously proposed
variants are associated with a highly penetrant monogenic form of the disease.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12847
PMID: 27538377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
