---
reference_id: "PMID:30515826"
title: Long-term outcomes in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
authors:
- Ojanguren I
- Morell F
- Ramón MA
- Villar A
- Romero C
- Cruz MJ
- Muñoz X
journal: Allergy
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/all.13692
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Alveolitis, Extrinsic Allergic/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- Biomarkers
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chronic Disease
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Patient Outcome Assessment
- Prognosis
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Public Health Surveillance
- Quality of Life
- Respiratory Function Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term outcomes in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
**Authors:** Ojanguren I, Morell F, Ramón MA, Villar A, Romero C, Cruz MJ, Muñoz X
**Journal:** Allergy (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/all.13692](https://doi.org/10.1111/all.13692)

## Content

1. Allergy. 2019 May;74(5):944-952. doi: 10.1111/all.13692. Epub 2019 Jan 13.

Long-term outcomes in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Ojanguren I(1)(2), Morell F(1)(2), Ramón MA(1), Villar A(1)(2), Romero C(1), 
Cruz MJ(1)(2), Muñoz X(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Departamento de Medicina, Hospital Universitario Vall 
d'Hebron, Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Cataluña, España.
(2)CIBER Enfermedades Respiratorias (Ciberes), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Biología Celular, Fisiología e inmunología, Universidad 
Autónoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Cataluña, España.

INTRODUCTION: The objective of this study was to analyze mortality, possible 
predictors of long-term survival, and health-related quality of life of a large 
chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (CHP) patient sample.
METHODS: Longitudinal study in patients diagnosed with CHP during 2004-2013, 
followed for at least 1 year. Patients remaining alive and consenting to 
participate had a follow-up visit during 2015, including a complete pulmonary 
function study and the EuroQol-5D and Beck Depression and Anxiety Inventories.
RESULTS: Out of the 160 patients finally included, 87 remained alive. 
Seventy-three had died or underwent lung transplantation at the time of the 
study with a median survival of 7.0 (4.4-14.5) years. A Cox proportional risk 
model showed that factors associated with lower survival were as follows: 
increased age, a low percentage of lymphocytes in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), 
a decreased transfer factor of the lung for carbonmonoxide (DLCO), presence of 
honeycomb in the high-resolution chest scan (HRCT), and the usual interstitial 
pneumonia (UIP) histologic pattern. At follow-up, all patients presented an 
EuroQol-5D score <0.8 and 21(50%) and 9(28.6%) subjects presented a probable 
anxiety and depressive syndrome, respectively.
CONCLUSION: CHP is a severe disease with a bad mid-term prognosis. Lymphocyte 
values in BAL and DLCO values at baseline, presence of honeycomb in HRCT, and 
UIP histologic pattern were found to be predictors of survival. Early accurate 
diagnosis of the disease is fundamental for prompt initiation of antigen 
avoidance.

© 2018 EAACI and John Wiley and Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley and Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/all.13692
PMID: 30515826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]