---
reference_id: "PMID:22500781"
title: A review of augmentation therapy for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
authors:
- Mohanka M
- Khemasuwan D
- Stoller JK
journal: Expert Opin Biol Ther
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1517/14712598.2012.676638
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of augmentation therapy for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
**Authors:** Mohanka M, Khemasuwan D, Stoller JK
**Journal:** Expert Opin Biol Ther (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1517/14712598.2012.676638](https://doi.org/10.1517/14712598.2012.676638)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2012 Jun;12(6):685-700. doi: 
10.1517/14712598.2012.676638. Epub 2012 Apr 14.

A review of augmentation therapy for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.

Mohanka M(1), Khemasuwan D, Stoller JK.

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, A90, Cleveland, 
OH 44195, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a relatively common, but 
under-recognized condition which manifests commonly with liver cirrhosis and 
emphysema. Specific therapy for lung-affected individuals with AATD is 
augmentation therapy, which consists of intravenous infusion of purified human 
plasma-derived alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT). Augmentation therapy was first 
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1987 for 
emphysema associated with severe AATD and today, six augmentation therapy 
preparations, all of which derive from pooled human plasma, have received FDA 
approval.
AREAS COVERED: This paper reviews augmentation therapy for AATD, including the 
various available commercial preparations, their processing and biochemical 
differences, evidence regarding biochemical and clinical efficacy, patterns of 
clinical use, adverse effect profiles, cost-effectiveness and potential uses in 
conditions other than emphysema associated with AATD. Novel and emerging 
strategies for treating AATD are briefly discussed next, including alternative 
dosing and administration strategies, recombinant preparations, small molecule 
inhibitors of neutrophil elastase and of AAT polymerization, autophagy-enhancing 
drugs and gene therapy approaches.
EXPERT OPINION: We conclude with a discussion of our approach to managing 
patients with AATD and use of augmentation therapy.

DOI: 10.1517/14712598.2012.676638
PMID: 22500781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]