---
reference_id: "PMID:12505313"
title: Mechanisms of arsenic biotransformation.
authors:
- Vahter M
journal: Toxicology
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0300-483x(02)00285-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of arsenic biotransformation.
**Authors:** Vahter M
**Journal:** Toxicology (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0300-483x(02)00285-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0300-483x(02)00285-8)

## Content

1. Toxicology. 2002 Dec 27;181-182:211-7. doi: 10.1016/s0300-483x(02)00285-8.

Mechanisms of arsenic biotransformation.

Vahter M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Box 210, 171 777 
Stockholm, Sweden. marie.vhter@imm.ki.se

Inorganic arsenic, a documented human carcinogen, is methylated in the body by 
alternating reduction of pentavalent arsenic to trivalent and addition of a 
methyl group from S-adenosylmethionine. Glutathione, and possibly other thiols, 
serve as reducing agents. The liver is the most important site of arsenic 
methylation, but most organs show arsenic methylating activity. The end 
metabolites are methylarsonic acid (MMA) and dimethylarsinic acid (DMA). These 
are less reactive with tissue constituents than inorganic arsenic and readily 
excreted in the urine. However, reactive intermediates may be formed. Absorbed 
arsenate (As(V)) is fairly rapidly reduced in blood to As(III), which implies 
increased toxicity. Also, intermediate reduced forms of the methylated 
metabolites, MMA(III) and DMA(III), have been detected in human urine. In 
particular MMA(III) is highly toxic. To what extent MMA(III) and DMA(III) 
contribute to the observed toxicity following exposure to inorganic arsenic 
remains to be elucidated. There are marked differences in the metabolism of 
arsenic between mammalian species, population groups and individuals. There are 
indications that subjects with low MMA in urine have faster elimination of 
ingested arsenic, compared to those with more MMA in urine.

DOI: 10.1016/s0300-483x(02)00285-8
PMID: 12505313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]