---
reference_id: "PMID:40141211"
title: Correlation of Anti-TULP1 Autoantibodies with Breast Cancer and Autoimmune Retinopathy.
authors:
- Kaster C
- Yang S
- Adamus G
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijms26062569
keywords:
- Humans
- "Breast Neoplasms/immunology, blood, complications"
- "Autoantibodies/blood, immunology"
- Female
- Autoantigens/immunology
- "Autoimmune Diseases/immunology, blood"
- Middle Aged
- Eye Proteins/immunology
- Adult
- Aged
- "Retinal Diseases/immunology, blood"
- Epitope Mapping
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correlation of Anti-TULP1 Autoantibodies with Breast Cancer and Autoimmune Retinopathy.
**Authors:** Kaster C, Yang S, Adamus G
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms26062569](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms26062569)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2025 Mar 13;26(6):2569. doi: 10.3390/ijms26062569.

Correlation of Anti-TULP1 Autoantibodies with Breast Cancer and Autoimmune
Retinopathy.

Kaster C(1), Yang S(1), Adamus G(1).

Author information:
(1)Ocular Immunology Laboratory, Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Autoantibodies have been implicated in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases,
including autoimmune retinopathies. Our study aimed to identify retinal
autoantigens recognized by serum autoantibodies (AAbs) in patients with visual
disturbance. We evaluated 2453 serum samples for anti-retinal AAbs from patients
with or without cancer and complaints of visual loss. Anti-TULP1 AAbs were more
prevalent in the subset of women with breast cancer and vision loss. Epitope
mapping was determined by ELISA using peptides covering the conservative carboxy
terminal of TULP1, revealing major lineal epitopes within the sequences 334-341
and 480-488. We found no significant difference in the main epitope recognition
between sera from patients with or without breast cancer. Although we show a
correlation of anti-TULP1 AAbs with breast cancer, we found no TULP1 protein
expression in breast cells, making this association unclear. In the retina,
anti-TULP1 AAbs can disrupt the transport of proteins to outer segments and be
involved in the degeneration of photoreceptors in a similar fashion to the
degeneration induced by TULP1 gene mutation. Nevertheless, the strong
association of detectable anti-TULP1 AAbs in breast cancer patients with vision
problems indicates its potential as a biomarker for cancer-associated autoimmune
retinopathy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms26062569
PMCID: PMC11942007
PMID: 40141211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
