---
reference_id: "PMID:31337596"
title: "AKR1D1 and CYP7B1 mutations in patients with inborn errors of bile acid metabolism: Possibly underdiagnosed diseases."
authors:
- Chen JY
- Wu JF
- Kimura A
- Nittono H
- Liou BY
- Lee CS
- Chen HS
- Chiu YC
- Ni YH
- Peng SS
- Lee WT
- Tsai IJ
- Chang MH
- Chen HL
journal: Pediatr Neonatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.pedneo.2019.06.009
keywords:
- Bile Acids and Salts/metabolism
- Cytochrome P450 Family 7/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Oxidoreductases/genetics
- Steroid Hydroxylases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AKR1D1 and CYP7B1 mutations in patients with inborn errors of bile acid metabolism: Possibly underdiagnosed diseases.
**Authors:** Chen JY, Wu JF, Kimura A, Nittono H, Liou BY, Lee CS, Chen HS, Chiu YC, Ni YH, Peng SS, Lee WT, Tsai IJ, Chang MH, Chen HL
**Journal:** Pediatr Neonatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pedneo.2019.06.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pedneo.2019.06.009)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neonatol. 2020 Feb;61(1):75-83. doi: 10.1016/j.pedneo.2019.06.009.
Epub  2019 Jul 4.

AKR1D1 and CYP7B1 mutations in patients with inborn errors of bile acid 
metabolism: Possibly underdiagnosed diseases.

Chen JY(1), Wu JF(2), Kimura A(3), Nittono H(4), Liou BY(5), Lee CS(6), Chen 
HS(7), Chiu YC(8), Ni YH(9), Peng SS(10), Lee WT(2), Tsai IJ(2), Chang MH(9), 
Chen HL(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital Yunlin 
Branch, Yunlin, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Kurume University School of 
Medicine, Kurume, Japan.
(4)Junshin Clinic Bile Acid Institute, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Hepatitis Research Centre, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Taipei Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical 
Foundation, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital Hsin-Chu 
Branch, Hsin-Chu, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Department of Medical Education, National Taiwan University Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Hepatitis Research Centre, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(10)Department of Radiology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Hepatitis Research Centre, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Department of Medical Education and Bioethics, Graduate Institute of 
Medical Education and Bioethics, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, 
Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: hueyling@ntu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Inborn errors of bile acid metabolism (IEBAM) cause rare but 
treatable genetic disorders that can present as neonatal cholestasis or 
neurological diseases. Without timely primary bile acid treatment, patients may 
develop liver failure early in life. This study aimed to analyze the types and 
treatment outcomes of IEBAM in Taiwanese infants and document the allele 
frequency of CYP7B1 hot spot mutations in the population.
METHODS: Urine samples from patients with infantile intrahepatic cholestasis and 
suspected IEBAM were subjected to urinary bile acid analysis by gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC/MS). Genetic diagnoses were made using 
direct sequencing or next-generation sequencing. We also tested healthy control 
subjects for a probable hot spot point mutation of CYP7B1.
RESULTS: Among the 75 patients with infantile intrahepatic cholestasis tested 
during 2000 -2016, three had ∆4-3-oxosteroid 5β-reductase deficiency with AKR1D1 
mutations, and three had oxysterol-7α-hydroxylase deficiency with CYP7B1 
mutation. Two patients with ∆4-3-oxosteroid 5β-reductase deficiency were 
successfully treated with cholic acid. The three unrelated infants with 
oxysterol 7α-hydroxylase deficiencies had the same p.R112X homozygous CYP7B1 
mutation. Two had mild renal or neurological involvement. Among 608 healthy 
control subjects, the allele frequency of the heterozygous mutation for p.R112X 
was 2/1216 (0.16%). The only surviving patient with oxysterol 7α-hydroxylase 
deficiency recovered from liver failure after chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) 
treatment beginning at 3 months of age.
CONCLUSION: Distinct types of IEBAM disease were found in the Taiwanese 
population. Patients with early diagnosis and early treatment had a favorable 
outcome. IEBAM prevalence rates may be higher than expected due to the presence 
of heterozygous mutations in the general population.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pedneo.2019.06.009
PMID: 31337596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]