---
reference_id: "PMID:8874241"
title: Effects of 12-week administration of dornase alfa in patients with advanced cystic fibrosis lung disease. Pulmozyme Study Group.
authors:
- McCoy K
- Hamilton S
- Johnson C
journal: Chest
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1378/chest.110.4.889
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of 12-week administration of dornase alfa in patients with advanced cystic fibrosis lung disease. Pulmozyme Study Group.
**Authors:** McCoy K, Hamilton S, Johnson C
**Journal:** Chest (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1378/chest.110.4.889](https://doi.org/10.1378/chest.110.4.889)

## Content

1. Chest. 1996 Oct;110(4):889-95. doi: 10.1378/chest.110.4.889.

Effects of 12-week administration of dornase alfa in patients with advanced 
cystic fibrosis lung disease. Pulmozyme Study Group.

McCoy K(1), Hamilton S, Johnson C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: The 12-week efficacy and safety of aerosolized recombinant 
human DNase (dornase alfa) were evaluated in previously untreated patients with 
cystic fibrosis (CF) with advanced lung disease.
DESIGN: In this multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, CF patients 
with advanced lung disease were randomized to receive either dornase alfa or 
placebo once a day for 12 weeks.
PATIENTS: A total of 320 patients in clinically stable condition with documented 
CF and an FVC less than 40% of predicted were recruited from 65 CF Foundation 
care centers in the United States. The dornase alfa and placebo groups were 
comparable with respect to age (range, 7 to 57 years), height, and weight. Male 
subjects outnumbered female subjects (55% vs 45%) and few subjects were younger 
than 17 years of age (15%). The percentages of predicted FEV1 and FVC were 
significantly lower in the dornase alfa group at baseline (p < or = 0.05).
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomly assigned to receive either 2.5 mg dornase 
alfa once daily (n = 158) or placebo once daily (n = 162). All patients 
continued to receive standard medications and treatments administered for CF.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Dornase alfa improved the mean percent change in FEV1 
from baseline by 9.4% compared with 2.1% for placebo (p < 0.001). The actively 
treated group showed a 12.4% improvement in FVC compared with 7.3% for placebo 
(p < 0.01). There were no differences between the treatment groups in dyspnea 
score number of days receiving i.v. antibiotics, or length of hospital stay; the 
overall incidence of adverse events was comparable between treatment groups. 
Fifteen patients died: 9 in the dornase alfa group and 6 in the placebo group; 
no differentiating clinical characteristics were demonstrated.
CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary function as measured by FEV1 and FVC improved 
significantly in the dornase alfa-treated patients. Dornase alfa was found to be 
safe and well tolerated over the 12-week study period.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.110.4.889
PMID: 8874241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]