---
reference_id: "PMID:15148656"
title: "Identification and functional analysis of a defect in the human ALG9 gene: definition of congenital disorder of glycosylation type IL."
authors:
- Frank CG
- Grubenmann CE
- Eyaid W
- Berger EG
- Aebi M
- Hennet T
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1086/422367
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Complementation Test
- Glycosylation
- Hepatomegaly/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Lipopolysaccharides/metabolism
- "Mannosyltransferases/deficiency, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Muscle Hypotonia/genetics
- Point Mutation
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/genetics
- Seizures/genetics
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification and functional analysis of a defect in the human ALG9 gene: definition of congenital disorder of glycosylation type IL.
**Authors:** Frank CG, Grubenmann CE, Eyaid W, Berger EG, Aebi M, Hennet T
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1086/422367](https://doi.org/10.1086/422367)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Jul;75(1):146-50. doi: 10.1086/422367. Epub 2004 May 17.

Identification and functional analysis of a defect in the human ALG9 gene: 
definition of congenital disorder of glycosylation type IL.

Frank CG(1), Grubenmann CE, Eyaid W, Berger EG, Aebi M, Hennet T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

Defects of lipid-linked oligosaccharide assembly lead to alterations of N-linked 
glycosylation known as "type I congenital disorders of glycosylation" (CDG). 
Dysfunctions along this stepwise assembly pathway are characterized by 
intracellular accumulation of intermediate lipid-linked oligosaccharides, the 
detection of which contributes to the identification of underlying enzymatic 
defects. Using this approach, we have found, in a patient with CDG, a deficiency 
of the ALG9 alpha 1,2 mannosyltransferase enzyme, which causes an accumulation 
of lipid-linked-GlcNAc(2)Man(6) and -GlcNAc(2)Man(8) structures, which was 
paralleled by the transfer of incomplete oligosaccharides precursors to protein. 
A homozygous point-mutation 1567G-->A (amino acid substitution E523K) was 
detected in the ALG9 gene. The functional homology between the human ALG9 and 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae ALG9, as well as the deleterious effect of the E523K 
mutation detected in the patient with CDG, were confirmed by a yeast 
complementation assay lacking the ALG9 gene. The ALG9 defect found in the 
patient with CDG--who presented with developmental delay, hypotonia, seizures, 
and hepatomegaly--shows that efficient lipid-linked oligosaccharide synthesis is 
required for proper human development and physiology. The ALG9 defect presented 
here defines a novel form of CDG named "CDG-IL."

DOI: 10.1086/422367
PMCID: PMC1181998
PMID: 15148656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]