---
reference_id: "PMID:30973967"
title: A hexanucleotide repeat modifies expressivity of X-linked dystonia parkinsonism.
authors:
- Westenberger A
- Reyes CJ
- Saranza G
- Dobricic V
- Hanssen H
- Domingo A
- Laabs BH
- Schaake S
- Pozojevic J
- Rakovic A
- Grütz K
- Begemann K
- Walter U
- Dressler D
- Bauer P
- Rolfs A
- Münchau A
- Kaiser FJ
- Ozelius LJ
- Jamora RD
- Rosales RL
- Diesta CCE
- Lohmann K
- König IR
- Brüggemann N
- Klein C
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ana.25488
keywords:
- Adult
- DNA Repeat Expansion/genetics
- "Dystonic Disorders/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Gene Expression
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Histone Acetyltransferases/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- "Repetitive Sequences, Nucleic Acid/genetics"
- "TATA-Binding Protein Associated Factors/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Transcription Factor TFIID/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A hexanucleotide repeat modifies expressivity of X-linked dystonia parkinsonism.
**Authors:** Westenberger A, Reyes CJ, Saranza G, Dobricic V, Hanssen H, Domingo A, Laabs BH, Schaake S, Pozojevic J, Rakovic A, Grütz K, Begemann K, Walter U, Dressler D, Bauer P, Rolfs A, Münchau A, Kaiser FJ, Ozelius LJ, Jamora RD, Rosales RL, Diesta CCE, Lohmann K, König IR, Brüggemann N, Klein C
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.25488](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.25488)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2019 Jun;85(6):812-822. doi: 10.1002/ana.25488. Epub 2019 May 3.

A hexanucleotide repeat modifies expressivity of X-linked dystonia parkinsonism.

Westenberger A(1), Reyes CJ(1), Saranza G(2), Dobricic V(1)(3), Hanssen H(1)(4), 
Domingo A(1)(5), Laabs BH(6), Schaake S(1), Pozojevic J(7), Rakovic A(1), Grütz 
K(1), Begemann K(1), Walter U(8), Dressler D(9), Bauer P(10), Rolfs A(10), 
Münchau A(1), Kaiser FJ(7), Ozelius LJ(11), Jamora RD(2), Rosales RL(12), Diesta 
CCE(13), Lohmann K(1), König IR(6), Brüggemann N(1)(4), Klein C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, College of Medicine-Philippine General Hospital, 
University of the Philippines, Manila, Philippines.
(3)Lübeck Interdisciplinary Platform for Genome Analytics, Institutes of 
Neurogenetics and Cardiogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(5)Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.
(6)Institute of Medical Biometry and Statistics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, 
Germany.
(7)Section for Functional Genetics, Institute for Human Genetics, University of 
Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany.
(9)Movement Disorders Section, Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.
(10)Centogene, Rostock, Germany.
(11)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA.
(12)University of Santo Tomas Hospital, Manila, Philippines.
(13)Department of Neurosciences, Movement Disorders Clinic, Makati Medical 
Center, Makati City, Philippines.

OBJECTIVE: X-linked dystonia parkinsonism (XDP) is a neurodegenerative movement 
disorder caused by a single mutation: SINE-VNTR-Alu (SVA) retrotransposon 
insertion in TAF1. Recently, a (CCCTCT)n repeat within the SVA insertion has 
been reported as an age-at-onset (AAO) modifier in XDP. Here we investigate the 
role of this hexanucleotide repeat in modifying expressivity of XDP.
METHODS: We genotyped the hexanucleotide repeat in 355 XDP patients and 
correlated the repeat number (RN) with AAO (n = 295), initial clinical 
manifestation (n = 294), site of dystonia onset (n = 238), disease severity (n = 
28), and cognitive function (n = 15). Furthermore, we investigated i) repeat 
instability by segregation analysis and Southern blotting using postmortem brain 
samples from two affected individuals and ii) relative TAF1 expression in blood 
RNA from 31 XDP patients.
RESULTS: RN showed significant inverse correlations with AAO and with TAF1 
expression and a positive correlation with disease severity and cognitive 
dysfunction. Importantly, AAO (and not RN) was directly associated with whether 
dystonia or parkinsonism will manifest at onset. RN was lower in patients 
affected by mouth/tongue dystonia compared with blepharospasm. RN was unstable 
across germline transmissions with an overall tendency to increase in length and 
exhibited somatic mosaicism in brain.
INTERPRETATION: The hexanucleotide repeat within the SVA insertion acts as a 
genetic modifier of disease expressivity in XDP. RN-dependent TAF1 repression 
and subsequent differences in TAF1 mRNA levels in patients may be potentiated in 
the brain through somatic variability leading to the neurological phenotype. ANN 
NEUROL 2019;85:812-822.

© 2019 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.25488
PMID: 30973967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]