---
reference_id: "PMID:23255827"
title: Mutation of the PDGFRB gene as a cause of idiopathic basal ganglia calcification.
authors:
- Nicolas G
- Pottier C
- Maltête D
- Coutant S
- Rovelet-Lecrux A
- Legallic S
- Rousseau S
- Vaschalde Y
- Guyant-Maréchal L
- Augustin J
- Martinaud O
- Defebvre L
- Krystkowiak P
- Pariente J
- Clanet M
- Labauge P
- Ayrignac X
- Lefaucheur R
- Le Ber I
- Frébourg T
- Hannequin D
- Campion D
journal: Neurology
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827ccf34
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Arginine
- "Basal Ganglia Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Calcinosis/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Exome
- Female
- Humans
- Leucine
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Neurologic Examination
- Parkinson Disease/complications
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Proline
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor beta/genetics"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Tryptophan
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of the PDGFRB gene as a cause of idiopathic basal ganglia calcification.
**Authors:** Nicolas G, Pottier C, Maltête D, Coutant S, Rovelet-Lecrux A, Legallic S, Rousseau S, Vaschalde Y, Guyant-Maréchal L, Augustin J, Martinaud O, Defebvre L, Krystkowiak P, Pariente J, Clanet M, Labauge P, Ayrignac X, Lefaucheur R, Le Ber I, Frébourg T, Hannequin D, Campion D
**Journal:** Neurology (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827ccf34](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827ccf34)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2013 Jan 8;80(2):181-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827ccf34. Epub
2012  Dec 19.

Mutation of the PDGFRB gene as a cause of idiopathic basal ganglia 
calcification.

Nicolas G(1), Pottier C, Maltête D, Coutant S, Rovelet-Lecrux A, Legallic S, 
Rousseau S, Vaschalde Y, Guyant-Maréchal L, Augustin J, Martinaud O, Defebvre L, 
Krystkowiak P, Pariente J, Clanet M, Labauge P, Ayrignac X, Lefaucheur R, Le Ber 
I, Frébourg T, Hannequin D, Campion D.

Author information:
(1)Inserm U1079, University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine, Rouen.

OBJECTIVES: To identify a new idiopathic basal ganglia calcification 
(IBGC)-causing gene.
METHODS: In a 3-generation family with no SLC20A2 mutation, we performed whole 
exome sequencing in 2 affected first cousins, once removed. Nonsynonymous coding 
variants, splice acceptor and donor site variants, and frameshift coding indels 
(NS/SS/I) were filtered against dbSNP131, the HapMap Project, 1000 Genomes 
Project, and our in-house database including 72 exomes.
RESULTS: Seventeen genes were affected by identical unknown NS/SS/I variations 
in the 2 patients. After screening the relatives, the p.Leu658Pro substitution 
within the PDGFRB gene remained the sole unknown mutation segregating with the 
disease in the family. This variation, which is predicted to be highly damaging, 
was present in 13 of 13 affected subjects and absent in 8 relatives without 
calcifications. Sequencing PDGFRB of 19 other unrelated IBGC cases allowed us to 
detect another potentially pathogenic substitution within PDGFRB, p.Arg987Trp, 
also predicted to be highly damaging. PDGFRB encodes a protein involved in 
angiogenesis and in the regulation of inorganic phosphate (Pi) transport in 
vascular smooth muscle cells via Pit-1, a Pi transporter encoded by SLC20A1.
CONCLUSION: Mutations of PDGFRB further support the involvement of this 
biological pathway in IBGC pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827ccf34
PMID: 23255827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]