---
reference_id: "PMID:37108325"
title: "A Causal Treatment for X-Linked Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia: Long-Term Results of Short-Term Perinatal Ectodysplasin A1 Replacement."
authors:
- Schneider H
- Schweikl C
- Faschingbauer F
- Hadj-Rabia S
- Schneider P
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24087155
keywords:
- Child
- Pregnancy
- Female
- Infant
- Humans
- Male
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic/genetics, therapy"
- Ectodysplasins/genetics
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Sweating
- Hair
- Recombinant Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Causal Treatment for X-Linked Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia: Long-Term Results of Short-Term Perinatal Ectodysplasin A1 Replacement.
**Authors:** Schneider H, Schweikl C, Faschingbauer F, Hadj-Rabia S, Schneider P
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24087155](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24087155)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 12;24(8):7155. doi: 10.3390/ijms24087155.

A Causal Treatment for X-Linked Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia: Long-Term 
Results of Short-Term Perinatal Ectodysplasin A1 Replacement.

Schneider H(1), Schweikl C(1), Faschingbauer F(2), Hadj-Rabia S(3), Schneider 
P(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Ectodermal Dysplasias & Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital Erlangen, Loschgestr. 15, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital Erlangen, 
Universitätsstraße 21-23, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Reference Center for Rare Skin Diseases 
(MAGEC), Institut Imagine, Université de Paris-Centre, Hôpital Necker-Enfants 
Malades, 149 Rue de Sèvres, 75743 Paris, France.
(4)Department of Immunobiology, University of Lausanne, Chemin des Boveresses 
155, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland.

X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED), caused by a genetic 
deficiency of ectodysplasin A1 (EDA1), is a rare developmental disorder of 
ectodermal derivatives such as hair, sweat glands, and teeth. The absence of 
sweat glands and perspiration can evoke life-threatening hyperthermia. As 
molecular genetic findings are not always conclusive, the concentrations of 
circulating EDA1 may help to distinguish between total and partial EDA1 
deficiencies. We previously treated nine male patients with obvious signs of 
XLHED with a recombinant EDA1 replacement protein, Fc-EDA, either shortly after 
birth (n = 3) or by prenatal administration in gestational week 26 and beyond (n 
= 6). Here, we present the long-term follow-up for up to six years. In patients 
who had received Fc-EDA after birth, neither sweat glands nor sweating ability 
were detected at the age of 12-60 months. In contrast, prenatal EDA1 replacement 
resulted in ample sweat gland development and pilocarpine-inducible sweating in 
all treated subjects, who also attained more permanent teeth than their 
untreated affected relatives. Normal perspiration has persisted for six years in 
the two oldest boys treated repeatedly with Fc-EDA in utero. When they had a 
sauna, adequate thermoregulation was evidenced. Lower sweat production after 
single prenatal dosing may indicate a dose-response relationship. The absence of 
circulating EDA1 in five prenatally treated subjects proved that these children 
would have been unable to perspire if they had been left untreated. The sixth 
infant was shown to produce an EDA1 molecule that, albeit interacting with its 
cognate receptor, cannot activate EDA1 signaling. In conclusion, a causal 
treatment of XLHED before birth is feasible.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24087155
PMCID: PMC10138843
PMID: 37108325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.S. and P.S. are holding patents related to the 
topic of this work and received research funding. The funders had no role in the 
design of the study, in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data, in 
the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.