---
reference_id: "PMID:21471202"
title: Bone overgrowth-associated mutations in the LRP4 gene impair sclerostin facilitator function.
authors:
- Leupin O
- Piters E
- Halleux C
- Hu S
- Kramer I
- Morvan F
- Bouwmeester T
- Schirle M
- Bueno-Lozano M
- Fuentes FJ
- Itin PH
- Boudin E
- de Freitas F
- Jennes K
- Brannetti B
- Charara N
- Ebersbach H
- Geisse S
- Lu CX
- Bauer A
- Van Hul W
- Kneissel M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.190330
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- "Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Genetic Markers/genetics
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "LDL-Receptor Related Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Osteocytes/metabolism
- Osteogenesis
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Wnt1 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "beta Catenin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone overgrowth-associated mutations in the LRP4 gene impair sclerostin facilitator function.
**Authors:** Leupin O, Piters E, Halleux C, Hu S, Kramer I, Morvan F, Bouwmeester T, Schirle M, Bueno-Lozano M, Fuentes FJ, Itin PH, Boudin E, de Freitas F, Jennes K, Brannetti B, Charara N, Ebersbach H, Geisse S, Lu CX, Bauer A, Van Hul W, Kneissel M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.190330](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.190330)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 3;286(22):19489-500. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.190330. Epub
2011 Apr 6.

Bone overgrowth-associated mutations in the LRP4 gene impair sclerostin
facilitator function.

Leupin O(1), Piters E, Halleux C, Hu S, Kramer I, Morvan F, Bouwmeester T,
Schirle M, Bueno-Lozano M, Fuentes FJ, Itin PH, Boudin E, de Freitas F, Jennes
K, Brannetti B, Charara N, Ebersbach H, Geisse S, Lu CX, Bauer A, Van Hul W,
Kneissel M.

Author information:
(1)Musculoskeletal Disease Area, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research,
Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. olivier.leupin@novartis.com

Humans lacking sclerostin display progressive bone overgrowth due to increased
bone formation. Although it is well established that sclerostin is an
osteocyte-secreted bone formation inhibitor, the underlying molecular mechanisms
are not fully elucidated. We identified in tandem affinity purification
proteomics screens LRP4 (low density lipoprotein-related protein 4) as a
sclerostin interaction partner. Biochemical assays with recombinant proteins
confirmed that sclerostin LRP4 interaction is direct. Interestingly, in vitro
overexpression and RNAi-mediated knockdown experiments revealed that LRP4
specifically facilitates the previously described inhibitory action of
sclerostin on Wnt1/β-catenin signaling. We found the extracellular β-propeller
structured domain of LRP4 to be required for this sclerostin facilitator
activity. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that LRP4 protein is present in
human and rodent osteoblasts and osteocytes, both presumed target cells of
sclerostin action. Silencing of LRP4 by lentivirus-mediated shRNA delivery
blocked sclerostin inhibitory action on in vitro bone mineralization. Notably,
we identified two mutations in LRP4 (R1170W and W1186S) in patients suffering
from bone overgrowth. We found that these mutations impair LRP4 interaction with
sclerostin and its concomitant sclerostin facilitator effect. Together these
data indicate that the interaction of sclerostin with LRP4 is required to
mediate the inhibitory function of sclerostin on bone formation, thus
identifying a novel role for LRP4 in bone.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.190330
PMCID: PMC3103328
PMID: 21471202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
