---
reference_id: "PMID:26252639"
title: Norepinephrine and Epinephrine Enhanced the Infectivity of Enterovirus 71.
authors:
- Liao YT
- Wang SM
- Wang JR
- Yu CK
- Liu CC
journal: PLoS One
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135154
keywords:
- "Autonomic Nervous System/drug effects, virology"
- "Brain Stem/drug effects, virology"
- Cell Line
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cytokines/metabolism
- "Encephalitis/blood, drug therapy, virology"
- Enterovirus/pathogenicity
- "Enterovirus Infections/blood, drug therapy, virology"
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Epinephrine/blood
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Jurkat Cells
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear/cytology"
- Male
- Norepinephrine/blood
- "Pulmonary Edema/drug therapy, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Norepinephrine and Epinephrine Enhanced the Infectivity of Enterovirus 71.
**Authors:** Liao YT, Wang SM, Wang JR, Yu CK, Liu CC
**Journal:** PLoS One (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0135154](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0135154)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 7;10(8):e0135154. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135154. 
eCollection 2015.

Norepinephrine and Epinephrine Enhanced the Infectivity of Enterovirus 71.

Liao YT(1), Wang SM(2), Wang JR(3), Yu CK(1), Liu CC(4).

Author information:
(1)Center of Infectious Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan; Department of Microbiology & Immunology, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Center of Infectious Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan; Department of Emergency Medicine, National Cheng 
Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 
Tainan, Taiwan; Department of Pediatrics, National Cheng Kung University 
Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Center of Infectious Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan; Department of Medical Laboratory Science and 
Biotechnology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 
Taiwan.
(4)Center of Infectious Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan; Department of Pediatrics, National Cheng Kung 
University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 
Tainan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Enterovirus 71 (EV71) infections may be associated with neurological 
complications, including brainstem encephalitis (BE). Severe EV71 BE may be 
complicated with autonomic nervous system (ANS) dysregulation and/or pulmonary 
edema (PE). ANS dysregulation is related to the overactivation of the 
sympathetic nervous system, which results from catecholamine release.
OBJECTIVE: The aims of this study were to explore the effects of catecholamines 
on severe EV71 infection and to investigate the changes in the percentages of 
EV71-infected cells, virus titer, and cytokine production on the involvement of 
catecholamines.
STUDY DESIGN: Plasma levels of norepinephrine (NE) and epinephrine (EP) in 
EV71-infected patients were measured using an enzyme-linked immunoassay. The 
expression of adrenergic receptors (ADRs) on RD, A549, SK-N-SH, THP-1, Jurkat 
and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (hPBMCs) were detected using flow 
cytometry. The percentages of EV71-infected cells, virus titer, and cytokine 
production were investigated after treatment with NE and EP.
RESULTS: The plasma levels of NE and EP were significantly higher in 
EV71-infected patients with ANS dysregulation and PE than in controls. Both α1A- 
and β2-ADRs were expressed on A549, RD, SK-N-SH, HL-60, THP-1, Jurkat cells and 
hPBMCs. NE treatment elevated the percentages of EV71-infected cells to 62.9% 
and 22.7% in THP-1 and Jurkat cells, respectively. Via treatment with EP, the 
percentages of EV71-infected cells were increased to 64.6% and 26.9% in THP-1 
and Jurkat cells. The percentage of EV71-infected cells increased upon NE or EP 
treatment while the α- and β-blockers reduced the percentages of EV71-infected 
cells with NE or EP treatment. At least two-fold increase in virus titer was 
observed in EV71-infected A549, SK-N-SH and hPBMCs after treatment with NE or 
EP. IL-6 production was enhanced in EV71-infected hPBMCs at a concentration of 
102 pg/mL NE.
CONCLUSION: The plasma levels of NE and EP elevated in EV71-infected patients 
with ANS dysregulation and PE. Both NE and EP enhanced the percentages of 
infected cells and virus titers in EV71 infection in vitro. NE and EP may play a 
role in the pathogenesis of EV71 BE complicated with ANS dysregulation and PE.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135154
PMCID: PMC4529162
PMID: 26252639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.