---
reference_id: "PMID:26964878"
title: Odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia in a patient homozygous for a WNT10A nonsense mutation and mild manifestations of ectodermal dysplasia in carriers of the mutation.
authors:
- Krøigård AB
- Clemmensen O
- Gjørup H
- Hertz JM
- Bygum A
journal: BMC Dermatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s12895-016-0040-7
keywords:
- Adult
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Odontodysplasia/genetics
- Wnt Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia in a patient homozygous for a WNT10A nonsense mutation and mild manifestations of ectodermal dysplasia in carriers of the mutation.
**Authors:** Krøigård AB, Clemmensen O, Gjørup H, Hertz JM, Bygum A
**Journal:** BMC Dermatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12895-016-0040-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12895-016-0040-7)

## Content

1. BMC Dermatol. 2016 Mar 10;16:3. doi: 10.1186/s12895-016-0040-7.

Odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia in a patient homozygous for a WNT10A nonsense 
mutation and mild manifestations of ectodermal dysplasia in carriers of the 
mutation.

Krøigård AB(1)(2), Clemmensen O(3), Gjørup H(4), Hertz JM(5)(6), Bygum A(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Sdr. Boulevard 
29, DK-5000, Odense, Denmark. anne.kroeigaard@rsyd.dk.
(2)Department of Clinical Pathology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, 
Denmark. anne.kroeigaard@rsyd.dk.
(3)Department of Clinical Pathology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, 
Denmark.
(4)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Center for Oral Health in Rare Diseases, 
Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Sdr. Boulevard 
29, DK-5000, Odense, Denmark.
(6)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(7)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia (OODD) is a rare form of ectodermal 
dysplasia characterized by severe oligodontia, onychodysplasia, palmoplantar 
hyperkeratosis, dry skin, hypotrichosis, and hyperhidrosis of the palms and 
soles. The ectodermal dysplasias resulting from biallelic mutations in the 
WNT10A gene result in highly variable phenotypes, ranging from isolated tooth 
agenesis to OODD and Schöpf-Schulz-Passarge syndrome (SSPS).
CASE PRESENTATION: We identified a female patient, with consanguineous parents, 
who was clinically diagnosed with OODD. Genetic testing showed that she was 
homozygous for a previously reported pathogenic mutation in the WNT10A gene, 
c.321C > A, p.Cys107*. The skin and nail abnormalities were for many years 
interpreted as psoriasis and treated accordingly. A thorough clinical 
examination revealed hypotrichosis and hyperhidrosis of the soles and dental 
examination revealed agenesis of permanent teeth except the two maxillary 
central incisors. Skin biopsies from the hyperkeratotic palms and soles showed 
the characteristic changes of eccrine syringofibroadenomatosis, which has been 
described in patients with ectodermal dysplasias. Together with a family history 
of tooth anomalies, this lead to the clinical suspicion of a hereditary 
ectodermal dysplasia.
CONCLUSION: This case illustrates the challenges of diagnosing ectodermal 
dysplasia like OODD and highlights the relevance of interdisciplinary 
cooperation in the diagnosis of rare conditions.

DOI: 10.1186/s12895-016-0040-7
PMCID: PMC4785680
PMID: 26964878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]