---
reference_id: PMID:38736851
title: "Treatment of Acne Keloidalis Nuchae by Simply Combining Two Conventionally Available Modalities: Ablation with Carbon Dioxide Laser and Intralesional Triamcinolone Acetonide."
authors:
- Bhingradia YM
- Salunke T
journal: J Cutan Aesthet Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4103/JCAS.JCAS_112_23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Acne Keloidalis Nuchae by Simply Combining Two Conventionally Available Modalities: Ablation with Carbon Dioxide Laser and Intralesional Triamcinolone Acetonide.
**Authors:** Bhingradia YM, Salunke T
**Journal:** J Cutan Aesthet Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4103/JCAS.JCAS_112_23](https://doi.org/10.4103/JCAS.JCAS_112_23)

## Content

1. J Cutan Aesthet Surg. 2024 Jan-Mar;17(1):25-28. doi: 10.4103/JCAS.JCAS_112_23.

Treatment of Acne Keloidalis Nuchae by Simply Combining Two Conventionally 
Available Modalities: Ablation with Carbon Dioxide Laser and Intralesional 
Triamcinolone Acetonide.

Bhingradia YM(1), Salunke T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Shivani Skin Care and Cosmetic Clinic, Surat, 
Gujarat, India.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital and Research Center, 
Pune, Maharashtra, India.

Acne keloidalis nuchae is a chronic inflammatory condition affecting the 
occipital area or nape of the neck characterized by fibrotic papules, firm 
pustules, and nodules that coalesce into keloid like mass or plaques. It was 
first described by Kaposi in 1969. It is also known as lichen keloidalis nuchae, 
dermatitis papillaris capillitia, and folliculitis nuchae scleroticans. If not 
treated in the early stages of the disease it tends to be refractory to 
conventional methods like topical, intralesional steroids with antibiotics or 
retinoids. Surgical interventions remain the only choice in such cases. Various 
surgical modalities including surgical excision with primary or secondary 
closure, split-thickness skin grafts, and laser-assisted treatments have been 
tried. Most surgical methods have longer downtime with a higher chance of 
relapse. We studied the results of a combined treatment option carbon dioxide 
laser ablation followed by intralesional triamcinolone injection in the same 
sitting. This outpatient procedure has shown good results with no relapse and 
less downtime.

Copyright: © 2024 Journal of Cutaneous and Aesthetic Surgery.

DOI: 10.4103/JCAS.JCAS_112_23
PMCID: PMC11086940
PMID: 38736851

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.