---
reference_id: "PMID:35812385"
title: "Case Report: Refractory Cytopenia With a Switch From a Transient Monosomy 7 to a Disease-Ameliorating del(20q) in a NHEJ1-Deficient Long-term Survivor."
authors:
- Poyer F
- Jimenez Heredia R
- Novak W
- Zeitlhofer P
- Nebral K
- Dworzak MN
- Haas OA
- Boztug K
- Kager L
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.869047
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7"
- DNA Repair Enzymes/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Male
- Myelodysplastic Syndromes/genetics
- Survivors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: Refractory Cytopenia With a Switch From a Transient Monosomy 7 to a Disease-Ameliorating del(20q) in a NHEJ1-Deficient Long-term Survivor.
**Authors:** Poyer F, Jimenez Heredia R, Novak W, Zeitlhofer P, Nebral K, Dworzak MN, Haas OA, Boztug K, Kager L
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.869047](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.869047)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jun 24;13:869047. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.869047.
eCollection 2022.

Case Report: Refractory Cytopenia With a Switch From a Transient Monosomy 7 to a
Disease-Ameliorating del(20q) in a NHEJ1-Deficient Long-term Survivor.

Poyer F(1), Jimenez Heredia R(2)(3)(4), Novak W(1), Zeitlhofer P(2)(5), Nebral
K(2)(5), Dworzak MN(1)(2), Haas OA(1)(2)(5), Boztug K(1)(2)(3)(4), Kager
L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)St. Anna Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent
Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)St. Anna Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), Vienna, Austria.
(3)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases, Vienna,
Austria.
(4)Center for Molecular Medicine Center for Molecular Medicine (CeMM) Research
Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna,
Austria.
(5)Labdia, Labordiagnostik, Vienna, Austria.

We report the case of a male Pakistani patient with a pathogenic homozygous loss
of function variant in the non-homologous end-joining factor 1 (NHEJ1) gene. The
growth retarded and microcephalic boy with clinodactyly of both hands and
hyperpigmentation of the skin suffered from recurrent respiratory infections. He
was five and a half years old when he came to our attention with refractory
cytopenia and monosomy 7. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation was considered
but not feasible because there was no suitable donor available. Monosomy 7 was
not detected anymore in subsequent bone marrow biopsies that were repeated in
yearly intervals. Instead, seven and a half years later, a novel clone with a
del(20q) appeared and steadily increased thereafter. In parallel, the patient's
blood count, which had remained stable for over 20 years without necessitating
any specific therapeutic interventions, improved gradually and the
erythropoiesis-associated dysplasia resolved.

Copyright © 2022 Poyer, Jimenez Heredia, Novak, Zeitlhofer, Nebral, Dworzak,
Haas, Boztug and Kager.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.869047
PMCID: PMC9263211
PMID: 35812385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors PZ, KN and OAH were employed by company
Labdia, Labordiagnostik. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
