---
reference_id: "PMID:38729159"
title: "Intratumoral delivery of the chitin-derived C100 adjuvant promotes robust STING, IFNAR, and CD8(+) T cell-dependent anti-tumor immunity."
authors:
- Turley JL
- Ward RW
- Huete-Carrasco J
- Muñoz-Wolf N
- Roche K
- Jin L
- Bowie A
- Andersson M
- Lavelle EC
journal: Cell Rep Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101560
keywords:
- Animals
- "Membrane Proteins/metabolism, immunology, genetics"
- "CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- "Receptor, Interferon alpha-beta/metabolism, genetics"
- Chitin
- Mice
- "Adjuvants, Immunologic/pharmacology, administration & dosage"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Humans
- "Cancer Vaccines/immunology, administration & dosage"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Female
- "Nucleotidyltransferases/metabolism, genetics"
- "Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/metabolism, immunology"
- "Neoplasms/immunology, therapy"
- STING Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intratumoral delivery of the chitin-derived C100 adjuvant promotes robust STING, IFNAR, and CD8(+) T cell-dependent anti-tumor immunity.
**Authors:** Turley JL, Ward RW, Huete-Carrasco J, Muñoz-Wolf N, Roche K, Jin L, Bowie A, Andersson M, Lavelle EC
**Journal:** Cell Rep Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101560](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101560)

## Content

1. Cell Rep Med. 2024 May 21;5(5):101560. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101560. Epub
2024 May 9.

Intratumoral delivery of the chitin-derived C100 adjuvant promotes robust STING,
IFNAR, and CD8(+) T cell-dependent anti-tumor immunity.

Turley JL(1), Ward RW(1), Huete-Carrasco J(1), Muñoz-Wolf N(1), Roche K(1), Jin
L(2), Bowie A(3), Andersson M(4), Lavelle EC(5).

Author information:
(1)Adjuvant Research Group, School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity
Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, D02 R590 Dublin 2,
Ireland.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(3)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Science Institute
(TBSI), Trinity College Dublin, D02 R590 Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Division Bioscience and Materials, RISE (Research Institutes of Sweden),
Forskargatan 18, 151 36 Södertälje, Sweden.
(5)Adjuvant Research Group, School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity
Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, D02 R590 Dublin 2,
Ireland; Centre for Research on Adaptive Nanostructures and Nanodevices (CRANN)
& Advanced Materials Bio-Engineering Research Centre (AMBER), Trinity College
Dublin, D02 PN40 Dublin 2, Ireland. Electronic address: lavellee@tcd.i.e.

Stimulator of IFN genes (STING) is a promising target for adjuvants utilized in
in situ cancer vaccination approaches. However, key barriers remain for clinical
translation, including low cellular uptake and accessibility, STING variability
necessitating personalized STING agonists, and interferon (IFN)-independent
signals that can promote tumor growth. Here, we identify C100, a highly
deacetylated chitin-derived polymer (HDCP), as an attractive alternative to
conventional STING agonists. C100 promotes potent anti-tumor immune responses,
outperforming less deacetylated HDCPs, with therapeutic efficacy dependent on
STING and IFN alpha/beta receptor (IFNAR) signaling and CD8+ T cell mediators.
Additionally, C100 injection synergizes with systemic checkpoint blockade
targeting PD-1. Mechanistically, C100 triggers mitochondrial stress and DNA
damage to exclusively activate the IFN arm of the cGAS-STING signaling pathway
and elicit sustained IFNAR signaling. Altogether, these results reveal an
effective STING- and IFNAR-dependent adjuvant for in situ cancer vaccines with a
defined mechanism and distinct properties that overcome common limitations of
existing STING therapeutics.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101560
PMCID: PMC11148802
PMID: 38729159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests E.C.L. is a co-founder
and equity holder of AilseVax that aims to develop adjuvants for cancer
vaccination. R.W.W., J.L.T., and N.M.W. are equity holders of AilseVax. E.C.L.,
R.W.W., and J.L.T. are inventors on patent WO 2022/113022 A1 – Use of C100:
Immunotherapy for cancer.
