---
reference_id: "PMID:35662071"
title: Repeated lumbar puncture in search of oligoclonal bands - What is the yield?
authors:
- Mermelstein M
- Naftali J
- Wilf-Yarkoni A
- Lotan I
- Hellmann MA
- Steiner I
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2022.120298
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Repeated lumbar puncture in search of oligoclonal bands - What is the yield?
**Authors:** Mermelstein M, Naftali J, Wilf-Yarkoni A, Lotan I, Hellmann MA, Steiner I
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2022.120298](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2022.120298)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2022 Aug 15;439:120298. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2022.120298. Epub
2022  May 26.

Repeated lumbar puncture in search of oligoclonal bands - What is the yield?

Mermelstein M(1), Naftali J(2), Wilf-Yarkoni A(3), Lotan I(3), Hellmann MA(3), 
Steiner I(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Rabin Medical Center, Petah-Tikva, Israel. 
Electronic address: merm.maor@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, Rabin Medical Center, Petah-Tikva, Israel.
(3)Department of Neurology, Rabin Medical Center, Petah-Tikva, Israel; Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) oligoclonal bands (OCBs) are 
immunoglobulins that represent intrathecal synthesis during central nervous 
system infection or inflammation. As repeated lumbar puncture (LP) is usually 
not performed unless clinically indicated, there is very limited data on the 
natural history and course of OCBs status in the CSF, its relation to disease 
activity, duration of persistence, and the rate of either CSF conversion of OCBs 
or disappearance.
METHODS: We retrospectively collected data from adult patients with various 
neurological syndromes who had repeated CSF samplings. OCBs were analyzed by 
agarose gel electrophoresis or by isoelectric focusing.
RESULTS: During the years 2010-2020, we identified 48 patients with at least two 
CSF OCBs results in Rabin Medical Center. These included 11 patients with 
Multiple Sclerosis, ADEM and NMOSD (one patient each), 7 patients with 
unspecified demyelinating disease, 4 with optic neuropathy, 15 patients with 
unknown diagnosis. Overall, 6/48 (12.5%) patients had change in OCBs status 
between first and second LP's. Four (8.33%) patients changed OCBs from positive 
to negative, and two patients (4.2%) from negative to positive. There was no 
significant difference in demographic, disease category, CSF constituents or 
time interval to second LP between patients who changed their OCBs status to 
those who did not.
CONCLUSION: Repeated LP for OCBs analysis in our cohort did not yield a 
practical benefit. The conversion rate of OCBs status was low (12.5%) and in 
most cases did not lead to a change in the final diagnosis or patient's clinical 
management.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2022.120298
PMID: 35662071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]