---
reference_id: "PMID:9248835"
title: Histopathologic and electron-microscopic features of corneal and scleral collagen fibers in osteogenesis imperfecta type III.
authors:
- Mietz H
- Kasner L
- Green WR
journal: Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1007/BF00947058
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Basement Membrane/abnormalities, ultrastructure"
- Collagen/ultrastructure
- Corneal Diseases/pathology
- Corneal Stroma/ultrastructure
- Humans
- Male
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/pathology
- Sclera/ultrastructure
- Scleral Diseases/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histopathologic and electron-microscopic features of corneal and scleral collagen fibers in osteogenesis imperfecta type III.
**Authors:** Mietz H, Kasner L, Green WR
**Journal:** Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00947058](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00947058)

## Content

1. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 1997 Jul;235(7):405-10. doi: 
10.1007/BF00947058.

Histopathologic and electron-microscopic features of corneal and scleral 
collagen fibers in osteogenesis imperfecta type III.

Mietz H(1), Kasner L, Green WR.

Author information:
(1)Wilmer Ophthalmological Institute, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. h.mietz@uni-koeln.de

BACKGROUND: This report describes the histopathologic and electron-microscopic 
features of an eye from a patient with osteogenesis imperfecta type III. In 
particular, the diameters of corneal stromal and scleral collagen fibers were 
determined.
METHODS: The eyes of an 18-year-old white male with osteogenesis imperfecta type 
III were examined by light and electron microscopy and the pathological features 
were compared with an age-matched control eye.
RESULTS: The cornea was clear. The sclera had a blue color and was moderately 
thinned, especially at the equator. Light microscopy revealed absence of 
Bowman's layer. Transmission electron microscopy confirmed complete absence of 
Bowman's layer without evidence of scarring or inflammation. The collagen fibers 
of the corneal stromal lamellae were about 25% narrower than in the control, but 
the cornea was otherwise unremarkable ultrastructurally. The collagen fibers of 
the sclera were approximately 50% narrower than in the control and were much 
more uniform in size. Prominent portions of elastic fibers, which are usually 
only present in a small number in the inner portion of the sclera, were present 
throughout the sclera.
CONCLUSION: We propose that it is the uniformity of the scleral collagen fibers 
which gives the sclera translucence, producing the blue color often observed 
clinically in osteogenesis imperfecta. Absence of Bowman's layer of the cornea 
did not interfere with the stability of the cornea in this case. This appears to 
be the first published pathological examination of the eye in osteogenesis 
imperfecta type III.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00947058
PMID: 9248835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]