---
reference_id: "PMID:33146894"
title: "Clinical characteristics and outcomes of children with WAGR syndrome and Wilms tumor and/or nephroblastomatosis: The 30-year SIOP-RTSG experience."
authors:
- Hol JA
- Jongmans MCJ
- Sudour-Bonnange H
- Ramírez-Villar GL
- Chowdhury T
- Rechnitzer C
- Pal N
- Schleiermacher G
- Karow A
- Kuiper RP
- de Camargo B
- Avcin S
- Redzic D
- Wachtel A
- Segers H
- Vujanic GM
- van Tinteren H
- Bergeron C
- Pritchard-Jones K
- Graf N
- van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM
- International Society of Pediatric Oncology Renal Tumor Study Group (SIOP-RTSG)
journal: Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.33304
keywords:
- "Anaplasia/chemically induced, pathology"
- Antineoplastic Protocols
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions/epidemiology, pathology"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Infant
- "Kidney/drug effects, pathology"
- "Liver/drug effects, pathology"
- Male
- Progression-Free Survival
- Risk Factors
- "WAGR Syndrome/complications, drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Wilms Tumor/complications, drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics and outcomes of children with WAGR syndrome and Wilms tumor and/or nephroblastomatosis: The 30-year SIOP-RTSG experience.
**Authors:** Hol JA, Jongmans MCJ, Sudour-Bonnange H, Ramírez-Villar GL, Chowdhury T, Rechnitzer C, Pal N, Schleiermacher G, Karow A, Kuiper RP, de Camargo B, Avcin S, Redzic D, Wachtel A, Segers H, Vujanic GM, van Tinteren H, Bergeron C, Pritchard-Jones K, Graf N, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, International Society of Pediatric Oncology Renal Tumor Study Group (SIOP-RTSG)
**Journal:** Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.33304](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.33304)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2021 Feb 15;127(4):628-638. doi: 10.1002/cncr.33304. Epub 2020 Nov 4.

Clinical characteristics and outcomes of children with WAGR syndrome and Wilms 
tumor and/or nephroblastomatosis: The 30-year SIOP-RTSG experience.

Hol JA(1), Jongmans MCJ(1)(2), Sudour-Bonnange H(3), Ramírez-Villar GL(4), 
Chowdhury T(5), Rechnitzer C(6), Pal N(7), Schleiermacher G(8), Karow A(9), 
Kuiper RP(1), de Camargo B(10), Avcin S(11), Redzic D(12), Wachtel A(13), Segers 
H(14), Vujanic GM(15), van Tinteren H(16), Bergeron C(17), Pritchard-Jones K(5), 
Graf N(18), van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(1); International Society of Pediatric 
Oncology Renal Tumor Study Group (SIOP-RTSG).

Collaborators: von der Weid N, de Maricourt CD, Proust S, Plantaz D, Perret C, 
Thomas C, Thebaud E, Boulanger C, Couteau N, Verschuur AC, Vaidya SJ, Oostveen 
RM, Al-Saadi R, Maes P, van der Werff-Ten Bosch J, Behrentz M, Vujić D, Hasle H.

Author information:
(1)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht/Wilhelmina 
Children's Hospital, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France.
(4)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, 
Seville, Spain.
(5)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, 
Sweden.
(8)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Institut Curie Hospital, Paris, France.
(9)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Friedrich-Alexander 
University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(10)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Program, Instituto Nacional de Cancer, Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil.
(11)Department of Pediatric Oncology, University Children's Hospital, Ljubljana, 
Slovenia.
(12)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Mother and Child Health Care Institute of 
Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(13)Pediatric Oncology, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Neoplásicas, Lima, 
Peru.
(14)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(15)Department of Pathology, Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar.
(16)Department of Biometrics, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(17)Institut d'Hematologie et d'Oncologie Pédiatrique, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, 
France.
(18)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, Saarland University, 
Homburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and 
range of developmental delays) is a rare contiguous gene deletion syndrome with 
a 45% to 60% risk of developing Wilms tumor (WT). Currently, surveillance and 
treatment recommendations are based on limited evidence.
METHODS: Clinical characteristics, treatments, and outcomes were analyzed for 
patients with WAGR and WT/nephroblastomatosis who were identified through 
International Society of Pediatric Oncology Renal Tumor Study Group (SIOP-RTSG) 
registries and the SIOP-RTSG network (1989-2019). Events were defined as 
relapse, metachronous tumors, or death.
RESULTS: Forty-three patients were identified. The median age at 
WT/nephroblastomatosis diagnosis was 22 months (range, 6-44 months). The overall 
stage was available for 40 patients, including 15 (37.5%) with bilateral disease 
and none with metastatic disease. Histology was available for 42 patients; 6 
nephroblastomatosis without further WT and 36 WT, including 19 stromal WT 
(52.8%), 12 mixed WT (33.3%), 1 regressive WT (2.8%) and 2 other/indeterminable 
WT (5.6%). Blastemal type WT occurred in 2 patients (5.6%) after prolonged 
treatment for nephroblastomatosis; anaplasia was not reported. Nephrogenic rests 
were present in 78.9%. Among patients with WT, the 5-year event-free survival 
rate was 84.3% (95% confidence interval, 72.4%-98.1%), and the overall survival 
rate was 91.2% (95% confidence interval, 82.1%-100%). Events (n = 6) did not 
include relapse, but contralateral tumor development (n = 3) occurred up to 7 
years after the initial diagnosis, and 3 deaths were related to hepatotoxicity 
(n = 2) and obstructive ileus (n = 1).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with WAGR have a high rate of bilateral disease and no 
metastatic or anaplastic tumors. Although they can be treated according to 
existing WT protocols, intensive monitoring of toxicity and surveillance of the 
remaining kidney(s) are advised.
LAY SUMMARY: WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and 
range of developmental delays) is a rare genetic condition with an increased 
risk of developing Wilms tumor. In this study, 43 patients with WAGR and Wilms 
tumor (or Wilms tumor precursor lesions/nephroblastomatosis) were identified 
through the international registry of the International Society of Pediatric 
Oncology Renal Tumor Study Group (SIOP-RTSG) and the SIOP-RTSG network. In many 
patients (37.5%), both kidneys were affected. Disease spread to other organs 
(metastases) did not occur. Overall, this study demonstrates that patients with 
WAGR syndrome and Wilms tumor can be treated according to existing protocols. 
However, intensive monitoring of treatment complications and surveillance of the 
remaining kidney(s) are advised.

© 2020 The Authors. Cancer published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.33304
PMCID: PMC7894534
PMID: 33146894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors made no disclosures.