---
reference_id: "PMID:30447469"
title: A Novel Mutation of Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Interacting Protein Gene Associated with Familial Isolated Pituitary Adenoma Mediates Tumor Invasion and Growth Hormone Hypersecretion.
authors:
- Cai F
- Hong Y
- Xu J
- Wu Q
- Reis C
- Yan W
- Wang W
- Zhang J
journal: World Neurosurg
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2018.11.021
keywords:
- "Adenoma/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Adult
- Animals
- Cell Line
- Cell Proliferation/physiology
- Child
- Computational Biology
- Female
- Growth Hormone/metabolism
- "Growth Hormone-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Neoplasm Invasiveness/genetics, physiopathology"
- Rats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel Mutation of Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Interacting Protein Gene Associated with Familial Isolated Pituitary Adenoma Mediates Tumor Invasion and Growth Hormone Hypersecretion.
**Authors:** Cai F, Hong Y, Xu J, Wu Q, Reis C, Yan W, Wang W, Zhang J
**Journal:** World Neurosurg (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.wneu.2018.11.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2018.11.021)

## Content

1. World Neurosurg. 2019 Mar;123:e45-e59. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2018.11.021. Epub 
2018 Nov 15.

A Novel Mutation of Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Interacting Protein Gene 
Associated with Familial Isolated Pituitary Adenoma Mediates Tumor Invasion and 
Growth Hormone Hypersecretion.

Cai F(1), Hong Y(1), Xu J(2), Wu Q(1), Reis C(3), Yan W(1), Wang W(1), Zhang 
J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, 
Loma Linda, California, USA; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Loma 
Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, California, USA.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address: 
zjm135@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Germline mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting 
protein (AIP) gene were identified in nearly 20% of families with familial 
isolated pituitary adenoma. Some variants of AIP have been confirmed to induce 
tumor cell proliferation and invasiveness; however, the mechanism is still 
unclear.
METHODS: A novel missense mutation (c.512C>T, p.T171I) was discovered in 3 
patients from a Chinese family with familial isolated pituitary adenoma. In 
silico and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis predicted 
the mutation to be pathogenic. GH3 and 293FT cell lines were used to verify the 
variant's effect on cell proliferation (Cell Counting Kit-8), invasiveness 
(Transwell) and growth hormone (GH) secretion (enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay) by transfection with different vectors: control, blank vector, wild-type 
AIP, p.T171I variant (experimental group), p.Q315* variant, and AIP small 
interfering RNA. Furthermore, Zac1, Sstr2, interleukin (IL)-6, and 
Stat3/phosphorylation-Stat3 expression (reverse transcription polymerase chain 
reaction, Western blot) in each group was also evaluated.
RESULTS: The experimental group, p.Q315* variant group, and AIP small 
interfering RNA-overexpressing group promoted cell proliferation at 24 and 48 
hours, respectively (compared with the control group; P < 0.01 for both). 
Similarly, the cells in the experimental group manifested more invasion and GH 
secretion compared with the control group (P < 0.01 and P < 0.05, respectively). 
Furthermore, the experimental group cells expressed less Sstr2 (a prerequisite 
for the responsiveness to somatostatin analogues) and Zac1 (tumor suppressor 
gene), but more IL-6 and phosphorylated-Stat3 (GH-secretion related).
CONCLUSIONS: The novel AIP mutation c.512C>T (p.T171I) is a pathogenic variant 
that promoted cell proliferation, invasiveness, and GH secretion through 
regulation of Sstr2, Zac1, and IL-6/phosphorylated-Stat3 expression.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2018.11.021
PMID: 30447469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]