---
reference_id: "PMID:37033188"
title: "A new era for optic pathway glioma: A developmental brain tumor with life-long health consequences."
authors:
- Walker DA
- Aquilina K
- Spoudeas H
- Pilotto C
- Gan HW
- Meijer L
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1038937
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new era for optic pathway glioma: A developmental brain tumor with life-long health consequences.
**Authors:** Walker DA, Aquilina K, Spoudeas H, Pilotto C, Gan HW, Meijer L
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2023.1038937](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2023.1038937)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2023 Mar 24;11:1038937. doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1038937.
eCollection 2023.

A new era for optic pathway glioma: A developmental brain tumor with life-long
health consequences.

Walker DA(1), Aquilina K(2), Spoudeas H(2), Pilotto C(3), Gan HW(2), Meijer
L(4).

Author information:
(1)Emeritus Professor Paediatric Oncology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham,
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of NeuroEndocrinology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London,
United Kingdom.
(3)Pediatric Clinic, ASUFC Santa Maria Della Misericordia, Udine, Italy.
(4)Kinderoncologie, Prinses Máxima Centrum Voor Kinderoncologie BV, Utrecht,
Netherlands.

Optic pathway and hypothalamic glioma (OPHG) are low-grade brain tumors that
arise from any part of the visual pathways frequently involving the
hypothalamus. The tumors grow slowly and present with features driven by their
precise anatomical site, their age at presentation and the stage of growth and
development of the host neural and orbital bony tissues. Up to 50% of optic
pathway glioma arise in association with Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), which
affects 1 in 3,000 births and is a cancer predisposition syndrome. As low-grade
tumors, they almost never transform to malignant glioma yet they can threaten
life when they present under two years of age. The main risks are to threaten
vision loss by progressive tumor damage to optic pathways; furthermore, invasion
of the hypothalamus can lead to diencephalic syndrome in infancy and
hypopituitarism later in life. Progressive cognitive and behavioural dysfunction
can occur, as part of NF1 syndromic features and in sporadic cases where large
bulky tumors compress adjacent structures and disrupt neuro-hypothalamic
pathways. Persistently progressive tumors require repeated treatments to attempt
to control vision loss, other focal brain injury or endocrine dysfunction. In
contrast tumors presenting later in childhood can be seen to spontaneously
arrest in growth and subsequently progress after periods of stability. These
patterns are influenced by NF status as well as stages of growth and development
of host tissues. The past two decades has seen an expansion in our understanding
and knowledge of the clinical and scientific features of these tumors, their
modes of presentation, the need for careful visual and endocrine assessment.
This influences the decision-making surrounding clinical management with
surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and most recently, the potential benefit of
molecularly targeted drug therapy. This article, based upon the authors'
clinical and research experience and the published literature will highlight
advances in approach to diagnosis, the established role of vision loss as
justification of treatments and the emerging evidence of endocrine and
neurological consequences that need to be incorporated into judgements for case
selection for therapy or observation. Consideration is given to the current
state of biological evidence justifying current trials of new therapies, the
genetic studies of the NF1 gene and the potential for new approaches to OPHG
detection and treatment. The outstanding health system priorities from the
perspective of children, their parents and health system commissioners or
insurers are discussed.

© 2023 Walker, Aquilina, Spoudeas, Pilotto, Gan and Meijer.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2023.1038937
PMCID: PMC10080591
PMID: 37033188

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
