---
reference_id: "PMID:34986174"
title: Prognostic indicators associated with progresses of severe dengue.
authors:
- Huy BV
- Toàn NV
journal: PLoS One
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0262096
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic indicators associated with progresses of severe dengue.
**Authors:** Huy BV, Toàn NV
**Journal:** PLoS One (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0262096](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0262096)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2022 Jan 5;17(1):e0262096. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0262096. 
eCollection 2022.

Prognostic indicators associated with progresses of severe dengue.

Huy BV(1)(2), Toàn NV(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hanoi Medical University, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Hanoi, 
Vietnam.
(3)Department of Environmental Health, Hanoi Medical University, Hanoi, Vietnam.

BACKGROUND: Dengue usually progress abnormally, especially in the critical 
phase. The main causes of death were shock, severe bleeding and organ failure. 
The aim of our study was to evaluate prognostic indicators of severe dengue 
according to the phases of the disease progression.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted from July to December 2017 at the 
National Hospital for Tropical Diseases and the Hospital for Tropical Diseases 
of Ho Chi Minh City. 326 patients, aged 6 years and over, including 99/326 
patients with severe dengue and 227/326 patients with non-severe dengue, 
hospitalized in the first 3 days of illness, confirmed Dengue virus by the 
RT-PCR assay have been registered for the study. Clinical manifestations were 
monitored daily. The hematocrit, white blood cells, platelet, serum albumin, 
ALT, AST, bilirubin, prothrombin time (PT%, PTs), fibrinogen, aPTT, INR and 
creatinine were evaluated at two times: febrile phase and critical phase.
RESULTS: Independent factors associated with severe dengue were identified on 
multivariate logistic regression models. During the first 3 days of the disease, 
the prognostic indicators were platelet count ≤ 100 G/L (OR = 2.2; 95%CI: 
1.2-3.9), or serum albumin < 35 g/L (OR = 3.3; 95%CI: 1.8-6.1). From day 4-6, 
the indicator were AST > 400 U/L (OR = 3.0; 95%CI: 1.1-7.9), ALT > 400 U/L (OR = 
6.6; 95%CI: 1.7-24.6), albumin < 35 g/L (OR = 3.0; 95%CI: 1.5-5.9), and 
bilirubin total >17 μmol/L (OR = 4.6; 95%CI: 2.0-10.4).
CONCLUSION: To predict the risk of patients with severe dengue, prognostic 
laboratory indicators should be indicated consistent with the progression of the 
disease. During the first 3 days of illness, prognostic indicators should be 
platelet count, or serum albumin. From the 4th - 6th day of illness, prognostic 
indicators should be AST, ALT, albumin, or bilirubin total.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0262096
PMCID: PMC8730386
PMID: 34986174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors do not have any possible 
conflicts of interest.