---
reference_id: "PMID:35104244"
title: Ferret models of alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency develop lung and liver disease.
authors:
- He N
- Liu X
- Vegter AR
- Evans TIA
- Gray JS
- Guo J
- Moll SR
- Guo LJ
- Luo M
- Ma N
- Sun X
- Liang B
- Yan Z
- Feng Z
- Qi L
- Joshi AS
- Shahin W
- Yi Y
- Gibson-Corley KN
- Hoffman EA
- Wang K
- Mueller C
- Engelhardt JF
- Rosen BH
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.143004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ferret models of alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency develop lung and liver disease.
**Authors:** He N, Liu X, Vegter AR, Evans TIA, Gray JS, Guo J, Moll SR, Guo LJ, Luo M, Ma N, Sun X, Liang B, Yan Z, Feng Z, Qi L, Joshi AS, Shahin W, Yi Y, Gibson-Corley KN, Hoffman EA, Wang K, Mueller C, Engelhardt JF, Rosen BH
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.143004](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.143004)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2022 Mar 8;7(5):e143004. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.143004.

Ferret models of alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency develop lung and liver disease.

He N(1), Liu X(1), Vegter AR(1), Evans TIA(1), Gray JS(1), Guo J(2), Moll SR(1), 
Guo LJ(1), Luo M(1), Ma N(1), Sun X(1), Liang B(1), Yan Z(1), Feng Z(1), Qi 
L(1), Joshi AS(3), Shahin W(1), Yi Y(1), Gibson-Corley KN(4), Hoffman EA(2), 
Wang K(5), Mueller C(6), Engelhardt JF(1)(7), Rosen BH(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology.
(2)Department of Radiology.
(3)Department of Surgery.
(4)Department of Pathology, and.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, 
Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Massachusetts Medical Center, 
Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa Carver College of 
Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is the most common genetic cause and risk 
factor for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but the field lacks a 
large-animal model that allows for longitudinal assessment of pulmonary 
function. We hypothesized that ferrets would model human AATD-related lung and 
hepatic disease. AAT-knockout (AAT-KO) and PiZZ (E342K, the most common mutation 
in humans) ferrets were generated and compared with matched controls using 
custom-designed flexiVent modules to perform pulmonary function tests, 
quantitative computed tomography (QCT), bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) proteomics, 
and alveolar morphometry. Complete loss of AAT (AAT-KO) led to increased 
pulmonary compliance and expiratory airflow limitation, consistent with 
obstructive lung disease. QCT and morphometry confirmed emphysema and airspace 
enlargement, respectively. Pathway analysis of BAL proteomics data revealed 
inflammatory lung disease and impaired cellular migration. The PiZ mutation 
resulted in altered AAT protein folding in the liver, hepatic injury, and 
reduced plasma concentrations of AAT, and PiZZ ferrets developed obstructive 
lung disease. In summary, AAT-KO and PiZZ ferrets model the progressive 
obstructive pulmonary disease seen in AAT-deficient patients and may serve as a 
platform for preclinical testing of therapeutics including gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.143004
PMCID: PMC8983124
PMID: 35104244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]