---
reference_id: "PMID:29222573"
title: Incidence and Causes of Overdiagnosis of Optic Neuritis.
authors:
- Stunkel L
- Kung NH
- Wilson B
- McClelland CM
- Van Stavern GP
journal: JAMA Ophthalmol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2017.5470
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- "Medical Overuse/statistics & numerical data"
- Middle Aged
- Optic Nerve/pathology
- "Optic Neuritis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- United States/epidemiology
- Visual Field Tests/methods
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and Causes of Overdiagnosis of Optic Neuritis.
**Authors:** Stunkel L, Kung NH, Wilson B, McClelland CM, Van Stavern GP
**Journal:** JAMA Ophthalmol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2017.5470](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2017.5470)

## Content

1. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2018 Jan 1;136(1):76-81. doi:
10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2017.5470.

Incidence and Causes of Overdiagnosis of Optic Neuritis.

Stunkel L(1), Kung NH(2), Wilson B(2), McClelland CM(3), Van Stavern GP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
Missouri.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Neurosciences, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis.

Comment in
    JAMA Ophthalmol. 2018 Nov 1;136(11):1312-1313. doi: 
10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2018.3485.
    JAMA Ophthalmol. 2018 Nov 1;136(11):1312. doi: 
10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2018.3482.

IMPORTANCE: Diagnostic error is an important source of medical error. 
Overdiagnosis of optic neuritis may prompt unnecessary and costly diagnostic 
tests, procedures, and treatments.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the incidence of and characterize factors contributing to 
overdiagnosis of acute optic neuritis.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In this retrospective clinic-based 
cross-sectional study of new patient encounters, 122 patients referred for acute 
optic neuritis at a university-based Midwestern neuro-ophthalmology clinic 
between January 2014 and October 2016 were studied. Data were analyzed from 
September 2016 to July 2017.
INTERVENTIONS: Definite diagnosis was determined by neuro-ophthalmologists. For 
patients with alterative diagnoses, the Diagnosis Error Evaluation and Research 
taxonomy tool was applied to categorize the type of diagnostic error.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was the primary type of 
diagnostic error in patients erroneously diagnosed as having optic neuritis. 
Secondary outcomes included final diagnosis and interventions undergone prior to 
referral.
RESULTS: A total of 122 patients were referred with acute optic neuritis during 
the study period; 88 (72.1%) were female, and the mean (SD) age was 42.6 (14.0) 
years. Of these, 49 patients (40.2%; 95% CI, 31.4-49.4) were confirmed to have 
optic neuritis, and 73 (59.8%; 95% CI, 50.6-68.6) had an alternative diagnosis. 
The most common alternative diagnoses were headache and eye pain, functional 
visual loss, and other optic neuropathies, particularly nonarteritic anterior 
ischemic optic neuropathy. The most common diagnostic error was eliciting or 
interpreting critical elements of history, which occurred in 24 of 73 patients 
(33%) with alternative diagnoses. Other common errors included errors weighing 
or considering alternative diagnoses (23 patients [32%]), errors weighing or 
interpreting physical examination findings (15 patients [21%]), and 
misinterpreting diagnostic test results (11 patients [15%]). In patients with 
alterative diagnoses, 12 (16%) had normal magnetic resonance imaging findings 
preceding the referral, 12 (16%) had received a lumbar puncture, and 8 (11%) had 
received unnecessary treatment with intravenous steroids.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These data suggest that nearly 60% (95% CI, 
50.6-68.6) of patients referred for optic neuritis have an alternative 
diagnosis, with the most common errors being overreliance on a single item of 
history and failure to consider alternative diagnoses. Understanding pitfalls 
leading to overdiagnosis of optic neuritis may improve clinicians' diagnostic 
process.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2017.5470
PMCID: PMC5833602
PMID: 29222573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors 
have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential 
Conflicts of Interest and none were reported.