---
reference_id: "PMID:15880314"
title: "Natural history of chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudo-obstruction in adults: a single center study."
authors:
- Stanghellini V
- Cogliandro RF
- De Giorgio R
- Barbara G
- Morselli-Labate AM
- Cogliandro L
- Corinaldesi R
journal: Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/s1542-3565(04)00675-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Autonomic Nervous System Diseases/pathology
- Biopsy
- Chronic Disease
- Colon/pathology
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Ganglia, Autonomic/pathology"
- Humans
- "Intestinal Pseudo-Obstruction/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Intestine, Small/pathology, physiopathology, transplantation"
- Male
- Manometry
- Middle Aged
- Myenteric Plexus/pathology
- Nutritional Status
- Prospective Studies
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudo-obstruction in adults: a single center study.
**Authors:** Stanghellini V, Cogliandro RF, De Giorgio R, Barbara G, Morselli-Labate AM, Cogliandro L, Corinaldesi R
**Journal:** Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1542-3565(04)00675-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1542-3565(04)00675-5)

## Content

1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2005 May;3(5):449-58. doi: 
10.1016/s1542-3565(04)00675-5.

Natural history of chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudo-obstruction in adults: a 
single center study.

Stanghellini V(1), Cogliandro RF, De Giorgio R, Barbara G, Morselli-Labate AM, 
Cogliandro L, Corinaldesi R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology, University of Bologna, 
Italy. v.stanghellini@unibo.it

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudo-obstruction (CIIP) is a 
rare disease characterized by episodes resembling mechanical obstruction in the 
absence of organic, systemic, or metabolic disorders. Intestinal motor 
abnormalities have long been identified in CIIP patients. Little is known of the 
natural history of the disease in adults. This study evaluated the clinical 
course of CIIP over time.
METHODS: Fifty-nine consecutive CIIP patients without underlying collagen, 
vascular diseases, or mitochondrial cytopathies were evaluated between 1985 and 
2001. Family history, onset of digestive symptoms, previous surgeries, episodes 
suggestive of subacute intestinal obstruction, digestive symptoms, body mass 
index, and feeding habits were recorded. Small bowel manometry was performed by 
a perfusion technique, and abnormal motor patterns were visually identified. 
Full-thickness biopsies were available in 11 cases and were processed for 
immunohistochemical analysis of myogenic and neurogenic components of the gut 
wall.
RESULTS: Patients were prospectively followed up for a median of 4.6 years 
(range, 1-13 years). Diagnosis was often made several years after symptom onset 
(median, 8 years). Thus, the majority of patients (88%) underwent useless and 
potentially dangerous surgeries (mean, 2.96 per patient). Manometry invariably 
showed abnormal motor patterns. Pathologic findings included neuropathies in all 
investigated cases and abnormalities of interstitial cells of Cajal in 5 of 11 
cases. Long-term outcome was generally poor despite surgical and medical 
therapies; 4 patients died of disease-related complications, 4 underwent small 
bowel transplantation, almost one third required long-term home parenteral 
nutrition, and two thirds had some sort of nutritional limitations.
CONCLUSIONS: CIIP is a severe, often unrecognized disease characterized by 
disabling and potentially life-threatening complications over time.

DOI: 10.1016/s1542-3565(04)00675-5
PMID: 15880314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]