---
reference_id: "PMID:38961103"
title: An evaluation of inflammatory and endothelial dysfunction markers as determinants of peripheral arterial disease in those with diabetes mellitus.
authors:
- Zaib S
- Ahmad S
- Khan I
- Bin Jardan YA
- Fentahun Wondmie G
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-65188-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An evaluation of inflammatory and endothelial dysfunction markers as determinants of peripheral arterial disease in those with diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Zaib S, Ahmad S, Khan I, Bin Jardan YA, Fentahun Wondmie G
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-65188-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-65188-w)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jul 3;14(1):15348. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-65188-w.

An evaluation of inflammatory and endothelial dysfunction markers as 
determinants of peripheral arterial disease in those with diabetes mellitus.

Zaib S(1), Ahmad S(2), Khan I(3), Bin Jardan YA(4), Fentahun Wondmie G(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic and Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
University of Central Punjab, Lahore, 54590, Pakistan. sumera.zaib@ucp.edu.pk.
(2)Department of Basic and Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
University of Central Punjab, Lahore, 54590, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, The 
University of Manchester, 131 Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK. 
kimtiaz@hotmail.co.uk.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, P.O. 
Box 11451, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Biology, Bahir Dar University, P.O.Box 79, Bahir Dar, Ethiopia. 
resercherfent@gmail.com.

The most serious long-term effects of diabetes is peripheral artery disease 
(PAD) which increases the chance of developing diabetic foot ulcers, gangrene 
and even lower limb amputation. The clinical manifestations of PAD which are 
typically not revealed until symptoms like intermittent claudication, rest pain 
and ischemic gangrene develop, are not present in majority of diabetes mellitus 
patients with PAD due to diabetic peripheral neuropathy. Therefore, current 
study is aimed to evaluate the inflammatory and endothelial dysfunction markers 
with their correlation to biomarkers that can help for in-time diagnosis and 
efficient prognosis of developing diabetes-associated PAD. Enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay was used to evaluate the interlukin-6, interlukin-8, 
intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) and vascular cell adhesion molecule 
(VCAM) in PAD with diabetes group, diabetic group and healthy individual group 
while biomarkers were measured by kit method. It was observed that serum IL-6, 
IL-8, ICAM and VCAM levels in type II diabetes mellitus (T2DM) with PAD patients 
were increased significantly (85.93, 597.08, 94.80 and 80.66) as compared to 
T2DM patients (59.52, 231.34, 56.88 and 50.19) and healthy individuals (4.81, 
16.93, 5.55 and 5.16). The overall means for the parameters, IL-6, IL-8, ICAM, 
VCAM, urea, S/creatinine, CK-MB, AST, ALT, cholesterol, triglyceride, HDL, LDL, 
PT, aPTT, INR, HbA1C, and CRP within all groups were significantly (P < 0.05) 
different from each other. Therefore, it was concluded that the change in IL-6, 
IL-8, ICAM and VCAM can serve as an accurate diagnostic indicator and successful 
treatment.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-65188-w
PMCID: PMC11222457
PMID: 38961103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.