---
reference_id: "PMID:29770800"
title: Current and future circulating biomarkers for cardiac amyloidosis.
authors:
- Luciani M
- Troncone L
- Monte FD
journal: Acta Pharmacol Sin
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/aps.2018.38
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current and future circulating biomarkers for cardiac amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Luciani M, Troncone L, Monte FD
**Journal:** Acta Pharmacol Sin (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/aps.2018.38](https://doi.org/10.1038/aps.2018.38)

## Content

1. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2018 Jul;39(7):1133-1141. doi: 10.1038/aps.2018.38. Epub 
2018 May 17.

Current and future circulating biomarkers for cardiac amyloidosis.

Luciani M(1), Troncone L(2), Monte FD(3).

Author information:
(1)Herzzentrum, University Hospital of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. 
marco.luciani@usz.ch.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital - Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, 
USA. delmonte@musc.edu.

Cardiac amyloidosis (CA) comprises a heterogeneous group of medical conditions 
affecting the myocardium. It presents with proteinaceous infiltration with 
variable degrees of severity, prevalence and evolution. Despite this 
heterogeneity, erroneous protein folding is the common pathophysiologic process, 
yielding the formation of a single misfolded protein (monomer) that 
progressively evolves and ultimately forms amyloid fibers. Additionally, by 
seeding out from the organs of origin, intermediates called oligomers 
metastasize and restart the process. Such self-echoing behavior makes the 
secondary affected organs as important as the primary ones. Unfortunately, CA 
can be clinically challenging and only suggestive in a late stage of its natural 
history, leaving a narrow therapeutic time window available. In light of the 
evolutionary nature of amyloidosis, here, we propose a new classification of the 
currently used biomarkers based on time stages with different specificity and 
applicability across CA subtypes. Early markers (free light chains, serum 
amyloid A, β2-microglobulin, osteopontin and osteoprotegerin) can be employed 
for disease detection. Intermediate markers [soluble suppression of 
tumorigenicity 2 (sST-2), midregional proadrenomedullin (MR-proADM), von 
Willebrand factor (vWF), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitor metalloproteinases (TIMPs)] can 
provide information on the biological mechanisms of myocardial damage. As in 
heart failure, late-stage biomarkers (troponins and natriuretic peptides) can 
help clinicians with prognosis and therapeutic response evaluation in CA. Such 
findings have generated a remarkable foundation for our current knowledge on CA. 
Nevertheless, we envision a future class of biomarkers targeted at upstream 
events capable of detecting folding defects, which will ultimately expand the 
therapeutic window.

DOI: 10.1038/aps.2018.38
PMCID: PMC6289372
PMID: 29770800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]