---
reference_id: "PMID:37137806"
title: "The global, regional, and national burden of inflammatory bowel diseases, 1990-2019: A systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2019."
authors:
- Park J
- Jeong GH
- Song M
- Yon DK
- Lee SW
- Koyanagi A
- Jacob L
- Kostev K
- Dragioti E
- Radua J
- Cheon JH
- Shin JI
- Smith L
journal: Dig Liver Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2023.04.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The global, regional, and national burden of inflammatory bowel diseases, 1990-2019: A systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2019.
**Authors:** Park J, Jeong GH, Song M, Yon DK, Lee SW, Koyanagi A, Jacob L, Kostev K, Dragioti E, Radua J, Cheon JH, Shin JI, Smith L
**Journal:** Dig Liver Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.dld.2023.04.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dld.2023.04.003)

## Content

1. Dig Liver Dis. 2023 Oct;55(10):1352-1359. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2023.04.003. Epub
 2023 May 2.

The global, regional, and national burden of inflammatory bowel diseases, 
1990-2019: A systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2019.

Park J(1), Jeong GH(2), Song M(3), Yon DK(4), Lee SW(5), Koyanagi A(6), Jacob 
L(7), Kostev K(8), Dragioti E(9), Radua J(10), Cheon JH(11), Shin JI(12), Smith 
L(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Institute of Gastroenterology, Yonsei 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)College of Medicine, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Kyung Hee University Medical Center, Kyung Hee 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Precision Medicine, Sungkyunkwan University School of medicine, 
Suwon, Republic of Korea.
(6)Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu/CIBERSAM, Universitat de Barcelona, Fundació 
Sant Joan de Déu, Sant Boi de Llobregat, 08830 Barcelona, Spain; ICREA, Pg. 
Lluis Companys 23, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu/CIBERSAM, Universitat de Barcelona, Fundació 
Sant Joan de Déu, Sant Boi de Llobregat, 08830 Barcelona, Spain; Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, 78180 
Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France.
(8)University Hospital of Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(9)Pain and Rehabilitation Centre, and Department of Health, Medicine and Caring 
Sciences, Linkoping University, SE-581 85 Linkoping, Sweden.
(10)Early Psychosis: Interventions and Clinical-Detection (EPIC) Lab, Department 
of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology, King's College 
London, London, UK; Imaging of Mood- and Anxiety-Related Disorders (IMARD) 
Group, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Barcelona, 
Spain; Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Centre for Psychiatric Research and 
Education, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine and Institute of Gastroenterology, Yonsei 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
geniushee@yuhs.ac.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: shinji@yuhs.ac.
(13)Centre for Health, Performance, and Wellbeing, Anglia Ruskin University, CB1 
1PT Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, the global epidemiology of inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD) has changed rapidly.
AIMS: We described the updated global IBD epidemiology results based on the 2019 
Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study (GBD).
METHODS: We estimated the prevalence rate, death rate, years of life lost 
(YLLs), years lived with disability (YLDs), and disability-adjusted life-years 
(DALYs) from GBD 2019 in 195 countries and territories between 1990 and 2019.
RESULTS: The crude prevalence of IBD increased by 47% in 2019 globally. 
Accordingly, the age-standardized prevalence rate showed 19% decrease. The 
age-standardized death rates, YLDs, YLLs, and DALYs of IBD in 2019 decreased 
compared to those in 1990. The annual percentage change in age-standardized 
prevalence rate decreased most in United States and increased in East Asia and 
high-income Asia Pacific from 1990 to 2019. Continents with high socioeconomic 
index (SDI) had higher age-standardized prevalence rates compared to continents 
with low SDI. The 2019 age-standardized prevalence rate of high latitudes was 
higher than that of low latitudes in Asia, Europe, and North America.
CONCLUSION: The observed trends and geographic variations in IBD documented in 
the 2019 GBD study will aid policymakers in policy, research, and investment 
development.

Copyright © 2023 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dld.2023.04.003
PMID: 37137806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None.