---
reference_id: "PMID:11007540"
title: Variation in the vitreous phenotype of Stickler syndrome can be caused by different amino acid substitutions in the X position of the type II collagen Gly-X-Y triple helix.
authors:
- Richards AJ
- Baguley DM
- Yates JR
- Lane C
- Nicol M
- Harper PS
- Scott JD
- Snead MP
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62938-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variation in the vitreous phenotype of Stickler syndrome can be caused by different amino acid substitutions in the X position of the type II collagen Gly-X-Y triple helix.
**Authors:** Richards AJ, Baguley DM, Yates JR, Lane C, Nicol M, Harper PS, Scott JD, Snead MP
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62938-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62938-3)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Nov;67(5):1083-94. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62938-3.
Epub  2000 Sep 25.

Variation in the vitreous phenotype of Stickler syndrome can be caused by 
different amino acid substitutions in the X position of the type II collagen 
Gly-X-Y triple helix.

Richards AJ(1), Baguley DM, Yates JR, Lane C, Nicol M, Harper PS, Scott JD, 
Snead MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Stickler syndrome is a dominantly inherited disorder characterized by 
arthropathy, midline clefting, hearing loss, midfacial hypoplasia, myopia, and 
retinal detachment. These features are highly variable both between and within 
families. Mutations causing the disorder have been found in the COL2A1 and 
COL11A1 genes. Premature termination codons in COL2A1 that result in 
haploinsufficiency of type II collagen are a common finding. These produce a 
characteristic congenital "membranous" anomaly of the vitreous of all affected 
individuals. Experience has shown that vitreous slit-lamp biomicroscopy can 
distinguish between patients with COL2A1 mutations and those with dominant 
negative mutations in COL11A1, who produce a different "beaded" vitreous 
phenotype. Here we characterize novel dominant negative mutations in COL2A1 that 
result in Stickler syndrome. Both alter amino acids in the X position of the 
Gly-X-Y triple-helical region. A recurrent R365C mutation occurred in two 
unrelated sporadic cases and resulted in the membranous vitreous anomaly 
associated with haploinsufficiency. In a large family with linkage to COL2A1, 
with a LOD score of 2.8, a unique L467F mutation produced a novel "afibrillar" 
vitreous gel devoid of all normal lamella structure. These data extend the 
mutation spectrum of the COL2A1 gene and help explain the basis for the 
different vitreous phenotypes seen in Stickler syndrome.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62938-3
PMCID: PMC1288550
PMID: 11007540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]