---
reference_id: "PMID:11767290"
title: Pathology of pineal region tumors.
authors:
- Hirato J
- Nakazato Y
journal: J Neurooncol
year: '2001'
doi: "10.1023/a:1012721723387"
keywords:
- "Brain Neoplasms/pathology, secondary"
- Germinoma/pathology
- Humans
- Meningeal Neoplasms/pathology
- Neuroectodermal Tumors/pathology
- Pineal Gland
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathology of pineal region tumors.
**Authors:** Hirato J, Nakazato Y
**Journal:** J Neurooncol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1012721723387](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1012721723387)

## Content

1. J Neurooncol. 2001 Sep;54(3):239-49. doi: 10.1023/a:1012721723387.

Pathology of pineal region tumors.

Hirato J(1), Nakazato Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Gunma University School of Medicine, Maebashi,
Japan. jhirato@med.gunma-u.ac.jp

Various histological types of tumors arise in the pineal region. The most common
tumors are pineal parenchymal tumors and germ cell tumors. Pineal parenchymal
tumors are divided into pineocytoma, pineal parenchymal tumor with intermediate
differentiation and pineoblastoma. Pineocytomas are well-differentiated tumors
and retain the morphological and immunohistochemical features of pineal
parenchymal cells. Lobular architectures and pineocytomatous rosettes are also
typical features. In contrast, pineoblastomas are embryonal tumors resembling
primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET). However, pineoblastomas are distinct
from PNET in other sites due to their exhibiting photosensory differentiation
including Flexner-Wintersteiner rosettes and fleurettes. Although pineal cysts
are tumor-like lesions, and not true neoplasms, they are occasionally difficult
to distinguish from pineocytoma and astrocytoma. From the therapeutic aspect, a
precise differential diagnosis is critical. The pineal region is the most common
site of the brain in which germ cell tumors occur. Germinoma, teratoma,
embryonal carcinoma, yolk sac tumor and choriocarcinoma are encountered, and the
latter three types of tumors usually constitute elements of mixed germ cell
tumors. The morphological and immunohistochemical features of intracranial germ
cell tumors are very similar to those of gonadal germ cell tumors, although
there are some differences in germinoma. Pineal germinoma may exhibit
carcinomatous differentiation. Other types of tumors are occasionally observed,
including fibrillary and pilocytic astrocytoma, glioblastoma, ependymoma,
melanoma, meningioma and so on. Metastatic pineal tumors are also rare. The most
common site of origin for pineal metastasis is the lung.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1012721723387
PMID: 11767290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
