---
reference_id: "PMID:27070064"
title: "Understanding Bacterial Isolates in Blood Culture and Approaches Used to Define Bacteria as Contaminants: A Literature Review."
authors:
- Hossain B
- Islam MS
- Rahman A
- Marzan M
- Rafiqullah I
- Connor NE
- Hasanuzzaman M
- Islam M
- Hamer DH
- Hibberd PL
- Saha SK
journal: Pediatr Infect Dis J
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000001106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding Bacterial Isolates in Blood Culture and Approaches Used to Define Bacteria as Contaminants: A Literature Review.
**Authors:** Hossain B, Islam MS, Rahman A, Marzan M, Rafiqullah I, Connor NE, Hasanuzzaman M, Islam M, Hamer DH, Hibberd PL, Saha SK
**Journal:** Pediatr Infect Dis J (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/INF.0000000000001106](https://doi.org/10.1097/INF.0000000000001106)

## Content

1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2016 May;35(5 Suppl 1):S45-51. doi: 
10.1097/INF.0000000000001106.

Understanding Bacterial Isolates in Blood Culture and Approaches Used to Define 
Bacteria as Contaminants: A Literature Review.

Hossain B(1), Islam MS, Rahman A, Marzan M, Rafiqullah I, Connor NE, 
Hasanuzzaman M, Islam M, Hamer DH, Hibberd PL, Saha SK.

Author information:
(1)From the *Child Health Research Foundation, Dhaka, Bangladesh; †Centre for 
Child and Adolescent Health, International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease 
Research, Dhaka, Bangladesh; ‡Department of Global Health and Center for Global 
Health and Development, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, 
Massachusetts; and §Division of Global Health, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Interpretation of blood culture isolates is challenging due to a 
lack of standard methodologies for identifying contaminants. This problem 
becomes more complex when the specimens are from sick young infants, as a wide 
range of bacteria can cause illness among this group.
METHODS: We used 43 key words to find articles published between 1970 and 2011 
on blood culture isolates and possible contaminants in the PubMed database. 
Experts were also consulted to obtain other relevant articles. Selection of 
articles followed systematic methods considering opinions from more than 1 
reviewer.
RESULTS: After reviewing the titles of 3869 articles extracted from the 
database, we found 307 relevant to our objective. Based on the abstracts, 42 
articles were selected for the literature review. In addition, we included 7 
more articles based on cross-references and expert advice. The most common 
methods for differentiating blood culture isolates were multiple blood cultures 
from the same subject, antibiograms and molecular testing. Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, Hemophilus influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis and group A and B 
streptococcus were always considered as pathogens, whereas Bacillus sp., 
Diphtheroids, Propionibacterium and Micrococcus were commonly regarded as 
contaminants. Coagulase-negative staphylococci were the most frequent isolates 
and usually reported as contaminants unless the patient had a specific 
condition, such as long-term hospitalization or use of invasive devices 
(catheters).
CONCLUSIONS: Inaccurate interpretation of blood culture may falsely guide 
treatment and also has long-term policy implications. The combination of 
clinical and microbiological knowledge, patient's clinical history and 
laboratory findings are essential for appropriate interpretation of blood 
culture.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0000000000001106
PMID: 27070064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]