---
reference_id: "PMID:32187546"
title: β-Amyloid Clustering around ASC Fibrils Boosts Its Toxicity in Microglia.
authors:
- Friker LL
- Scheiblich H
- Hochheiser IV
- Brinkschulte R
- Riedel D
- Latz E
- Geyer M
- Heneka MT
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.025
keywords:
- "Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism, toxicity, ultrastructure"
- Animals
- CARD Signaling Adaptor Proteins/metabolism
- Caspase 1/metabolism
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Humans
- Inflammasomes/metabolism
- Interleukin-1beta/metabolism
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Microglia/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Models, Biological"
- "NLR Family, Pyrin Domain-Containing 3 Protein/metabolism"
- Proteolysis/drug effects
- Pyroptosis/drug effects
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Toll-Like Receptor 2/metabolism
- Toll-Like Receptor 4/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# β-Amyloid Clustering around ASC Fibrils Boosts Its Toxicity in Microglia.
**Authors:** Friker LL, Scheiblich H, Hochheiser IV, Brinkschulte R, Riedel D, Latz E, Geyer M, Heneka MT
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.025)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2020 Mar 17;30(11):3743-3754.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.025.

β-Amyloid Clustering around ASC Fibrils Boosts Its Toxicity in Microglia.

Friker LL(1), Scheiblich H(1), Hochheiser IV(2), Brinkschulte R(2), Riedel D(3), 
Latz E(4), Geyer M(2), Heneka MT(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease and Gerontopsychiatry/Neurology, 
University of Bonn Medical Center, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(2)Institute of Structural Biology, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Structural 
Dynamics, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Institute of Innate Immunity, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease and Gerontopsychiatry/Neurology, 
University of Bonn Medical Center, 53127 Bonn, Germany; German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 53127 Bonn, Germany; Department of Infectious 
Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, 
MA 01655, USA. Electronic address: michael.heneka@ukbonn.de.

Alzheimer's disease is the world's most common neurodegenerative disorder. It is 
associated with neuroinflammation involving activation of microglia by β-amyloid 
(Aβ) deposits. Based on previous studies showing apoptosis-associated speck-like 
protein containing a CARD (ASC) binding and cross-seeding extracellular Aβ, we 
investigate the propagation of ASC between primary microglia and the effects of 
ASC-Aβ composites on microglial inflammasomes and function. Indeed, ASC released 
by a pyroptotic cell can be functionally built into the neighboring microglia 
NOD-like receptor protein (NLRP3) inflammasome. Compared with protein-only 
application, exposure to ASC-Aβ composites amplifies the proinflammatory 
response, resulting in pyroptotic cell death, setting free functional ASC and 
inducing a feedforward stimulating vicious cycle. Clustering around ASC fibrils 
also compromises clearance of Aβ by microglia. Together, these data enable a 
closer look at the turning point from acute to chronic Aβ-related 
neuroinflammation through formation of ASC-Aβ composites.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.025
PMCID: PMC8729885
PMID: 32187546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests Michael T. Heneka 
serves as an advisory board member at IFM Therapeutics, Alector, and Tiaki. He 
received honoraria for oral presentations from Novartis, Roche, and Biogen. The 
authors declare that there is no conflict of interest with regard to the 
experimental part of this study.