---
reference_id: "PMID:29083593"
title: Hydatidiform Mole.
authors:
- Cue L
- Farci F
- Ghassemzadeh S
- Kang M
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hydatidiform Mole.
**Authors:** Cue L, Farci F, Ghassemzadeh S, Kang M

## Content

1. Hydatidiform Mole.

Cue L(1), Farci F(2), Ghassemzadeh S(3), Kang M(4).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2024 Dec 11.

Author information:
(1)Jersey City Medical Center, Rutgers Barnabas Health
(2)Pisa University
(3)Riverside Comm Hosp, UC Riverside
(4)University of California Riverside School of Medicine

A hydatidiform mole, commonly referred to as a molar pregnancy, is a rare 
abnormality in pregnancy classified under gestational trophoblastic diseases 
(GTD), which stem from the placenta and may metastasize. Hydatidiform moles are 
characterized by abnormal fertilization, resulting in villous hydrops and 
trophoblastic hyperplasia with or without embryonic development. Other forms of 
GTD include gestational choriocarcinoma—which can be aggressively malignant and 
invasive—and placental site trophoblastic tumors. Please see StatPearls' 
companion reference, "Gestational Trophoblastic Disease," for more 
information. Although described as early as Hippocrates’ era, who explained 
their formation through the consumption of dirty water by pregnant women, the 
condition was more accurately characterized in 1752 by William Smelie, who 
likened its appearance to a “bunch of grapes,” a hallmark feature of molar 
pregnancies resulting from swollen, hydropic villi. Hydatidiform moles are 
categorized as complete or partial and are usually noninvasive forms of GTD. 
Overrepresentation of the paternal genome in sporadic hydatidiform moles is a 
fundamental genetic event leading to overall alteration of imprinting gene 
expression in the molar trophoblast, being completely androgenetic in complete 
hydatidiform moles and diandric triploid in partial hydatidiform moles. However, 
although hydatidiform moles are considered benign, they are premalignant lesions 
and can potentially become malignant and invasive.  Complete molar pregnancies 
present with symptoms such as first-trimester vaginal bleeding, severe nausea, 
and high β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) levels. Partial moles may 
present similarly but often resemble a spontaneous abortion and may include 
detectable fetal heart tones. Both molar types are detectable via 
ultrasonography, which typically reveals distinct patterns; complete moles 
demonstrate anechoic cystic clusters (“grape clusters”) and partial moles 
demonstrate fetal parts. Histopathological examination postevacuation confirms 
the diagnosis with visualization of characteristic villous changes. Treatment 
typically involves dilation and curettage (D&C), and hysterectomy may be 
considered for patients not desiring future pregnancies. Posttreatment, regular 
β-hCG monitoring is essential to detect potential progression to gestational 
trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN).

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 29083593

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Lauren Cue declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Fabiola Farci 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Sassan Ghassemzadeh declares no relevant financial relationships 
with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Michael Kang declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies.