---
reference_id: "PMID:12493610"
title: Transport of 5-aminolevulinic acid between blood and brain.
authors:
- Ennis SR
- Novotny A
- Xiang J
- Shakui P
- Masada T
- Stummer W
- Smith DE
- Keep RF
journal: Brain Res
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)03749-6
keywords:
- "Aminolevulinic Acid/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, metabolism"
- Animals
- Biological Transport/physiology
- Blood-Brain Barrier/physiology
- Cerebral Cortex/metabolism
- Kidney/metabolism
- Rats
- "Rats, Inbred F344"
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transport of 5-aminolevulinic acid between blood and brain.
**Authors:** Ennis SR, Novotny A, Xiang J, Shakui P, Masada T, Stummer W, Smith DE, Keep RF
**Journal:** Brain Res (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0006-8993(02)03749-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-8993(02)03749-6)

## Content

1. Brain Res. 2003 Jan 10;959(2):226-34. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)03749-6.

Transport of 5-aminolevulinic acid between blood and brain.

Ennis SR(1), Novotny A, Xiang J, Shakui P, Masada T, Stummer W, Smith DE, Keep
RF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery (Neurosurgery), University of Michigan, R5550 Kresge I,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0532, USA.

Little is known about the movement of 5-aminolevulinic acid
(delta-aminolevulinic acid; ALA) between blood and brain. This is despite the
fact that increases in brain ALA may be involved in generating the
neuropsychiatric symptoms in porphyrias and that systemic administration of ALA
is currently being used to delineate the borders of malignant gliomas. The
current study examines the mechanisms involved in the movement of [(14)C]ALA
across the blood-brain and blood-CSF barriers in the rat. In the adult rat, the
influx rate constant (K(i)) for [(14)C]ALA movement into brain was low (
approximately 0.2 microl/g per min), was unaffected by increasing plasma
concentrations of non-radioactive ALA or probenecid (an organic anion transport
inhibitor) and, therefore, appears to be a diffusional process. The K(i) for
[(14)C]ALA was 3-fold less than that for [(14)C]mannitol, a molecule of similar
size. This difference appears to result from a lower lipid solubility rather
than saturable [(14)C]ALA transport from brain to blood. The K(i) for [(14)C]ALA
for uptake into the neonatal brain was 7-fold higher than in the adult. However,
again, this was unaffected by increasing plasma ALA concentrations suggesting a
diffusional process. In contrast, at the blood-CSF barrier, there was evidence
of carrier-mediated [(14)C]ALA transport from blood to choroid plexus and blood
to CSF. Both processes were inhibited by administration of non-radioactive ALA
and probenecid. However, experiments in choroid plexus epithelial cell primary
cultures indicated that transport in these cells was polarized with [(14)C]ALA
uptake from the apical (CSF) side being about 7-fold greater than uptake from
the basolateral (blood) side. In total, these results suggest that the brain is
normally fairly well protected from changes in plasma ALA concentration by the
very low blood-brain barrier permeability of this compound and by a saturable
efflux mechanism present at the choroid plexus.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)03749-6
PMID: 12493610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
