---
reference_id: "PMID:34576017"
title: The Role of Sonic Hedgehog in Human Holoprosencephaly and Short-Rib Polydactyly Syndromes.
authors:
- Loo CKC
- Pearen MA
- Ramm GA
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms22189854
keywords:
- Animals
- Cilia/metabolism
- "Ciliopathies/etiology, metabolism"
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- "Holoprosencephaly/etiology, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Short Rib-Polydactyly Syndrome/etiology, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Sonic Hedgehog in Human Holoprosencephaly and Short-Rib Polydactyly Syndromes.
**Authors:** Loo CKC, Pearen MA, Ramm GA
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22189854](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22189854)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Sep 12;22(18):9854. doi: 10.3390/ijms22189854.

The Role of Sonic Hedgehog in Human Holoprosencephaly and Short-Rib Polydactyly 
Syndromes.

Loo CKC(1), Pearen MA(2), Ramm GA(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)South Eastern Area Laboratory Services, Department of Anatomical Pathology, 
NSW Health Pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, NSW 2031, Australia.
(2)Hepatic Fibrosis Group, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, QIMR 
Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD 4006, Australia.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4006, 
Australia.

The Hedgehog (HH) signalling pathway is one of the major pathways controlling 
cell differentiation and proliferation during human development. This pathway is 
complex, with HH function influenced by inhibitors, promotors, interactions with 
other signalling pathways, and non-genetic and cellular factors. Many aspects of 
this pathway are not yet clarified. The main features of Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) 
signalling are discussed in relation to its function in human development. The 
possible role of SHH will be considered using examples of holoprosencephaly and 
short-rib polydactyly (SRP) syndromes. In these syndromes, there is wide 
variability in phenotype even with the same genetic mutation, so that other 
factors must influence the outcome. SHH mutations were the first identified 
genetic causes of holoprosencephaly, but many other genes and environmental 
factors can cause malformations in the holoprosencephaly spectrum. Many patients 
with SRP have genetic defects affecting primary cilia, structures found on most 
mammalian cells which are thought to be necessary for canonical HH signal 
transduction. Although SHH signalling is affected in both these genetic 
conditions, there is little overlap in phenotype. Possible explanations will be 
canvassed, using data from published human and animal studies. Implications for 
the understanding of SHH signalling in humans will be discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22189854
PMCID: PMC8468456
PMID: 34576017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.