---
reference_id: "PMID:38247853"
title: Desmin and Plectin Recruitment to the Nucleus and Nuclei Orientation Are Lost in Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy Myoblasts Subjected to Mechanical Stimulation.
authors:
- Cenni V
- Evangelisti C
- Santi S
- Sabatelli P
- Neri S
- Cavallo M
- Lattanzi G
- Mattioli E
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13020162
keywords:
- Humans
- Desmin/metabolism
- Lamin Type A
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss/genetics"
- Myoblasts
- Plectin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Desmin and Plectin Recruitment to the Nucleus and Nuclei Orientation Are Lost in Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy Myoblasts Subjected to Mechanical Stimulation.
**Authors:** Cenni V, Evangelisti C, Santi S, Sabatelli P, Neri S, Cavallo M, Lattanzi G, Mattioli E
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13020162](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13020162)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 Jan 16;13(2):162. doi: 10.3390/cells13020162.

Desmin and Plectin Recruitment to the Nucleus and Nuclei Orientation Are Lost in 
Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy Myoblasts Subjected to Mechanical Stimulation.

Cenni V(1)(2), Evangelisti C(3), Santi S(1)(2), Sabatelli P(1)(2), Neri S(4), 
Cavallo M(5), Lattanzi G(1)(2), Mattioli E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CNR Institute of Molecular Genetics "Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza", Unit of 
Bologna, 40136 Bologna, Italy.
(2)IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 Bologna, Italy.
(3)Cellular Signalling Laboratory, Department of Biochemical and Neuromotor 
Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum, University of Bologna, 40138 Bologna, Italy.
(4)Medicine and Rheumatology Unit, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 
Bologna, Italy.
(5)Shoulder-Elbow Surgery Unit, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 
Bologna, Italy.

In muscle cells subjected to mechanical stimulation, LINC complex and 
cytoskeletal proteins are basic to preserve cellular architecture and maintain 
nuclei orientation and positioning. In this context, the role of lamin A/C 
remains mostly elusive. This study demonstrates that in human myoblasts 
subjected to mechanical stretching, lamin A/C recruits desmin and plectin to the 
nuclear periphery, allowing a proper spatial orientation of the nuclei. 
Interestingly, in Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy (EDMD2) myoblasts exposed to 
mechanical stretching, the recruitment of desmin and plectin to the nucleus and 
nuclear orientation were impaired, suggesting that a functional lamin A/C is 
crucial for the response to mechanical strain. While describing a new mechanism 
of action headed by lamin A/C, these findings show a structural alteration that 
could be involved in the onset of the muscle defects observed in muscular 
laminopathies.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13020162
PMCID: PMC10814836
PMID: 38247853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.