---
reference_id: "PMID:14643377"
title: "Amyloid deposition precedes tangle formation in a triple transgenic model of Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- Oddo S
- Caccamo A
- Kitazawa M
- Tseng BP
- LaFerla FM
journal: Neurobiol Aging
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2003.08.012
keywords:
- "Alzheimer Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Amyloid beta-Protein Precursor/genetics
- Animals
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Neurofibrillary Tangles/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Plaque, Amyloid/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Presenilin-1
- tau Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyloid deposition precedes tangle formation in a triple transgenic model of Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Oddo S, Caccamo A, Kitazawa M, Tseng BP, LaFerla FM
**Journal:** Neurobiol Aging (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2003.08.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2003.08.012)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Aging. 2003 Dec;24(8):1063-70. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2003.08.012.

Amyloid deposition precedes tangle formation in a triple transgenic model of
Alzheimer's disease.

Oddo S(1), Caccamo A, Kitazawa M, Tseng BP, LaFerla FM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, 1109
Gillespie Neuroscience Research Facility, Irvine, CA 92697-4545, USA.

Amyloid-beta (Abeta) containing plaques and tau-laden neurofibrillary tangles
are the defining neuropathological features of Alzheimer's disease (AD). To
better mimic this neuropathology, we generated a novel triple transgenic model
of AD (3xTg-AD) harboring three mutant genes: beta-amyloid precursor protein
(betaAPPSwe), presenilin-1 (PS1M146V), and tauP301L. The 3xTg-AD mice
progressively develop Abeta and tau pathology, with a temporal- and
regional-specific profile that closely mimics their development in the human AD
brain. We find that Abeta deposits initiate in the cortex and progress to the
hippocampus with aging, whereas tau pathology is first apparent in the
hippocampus and then progresses to the cortex. Despite equivalent overexpression
of the human betaAPP and human tau transgenes, Abeta deposition develops prior
to the tangle pathology, consistent with the amyloid cascade hypothesis. As
these 3xTg-AD mice phenocopy critical aspects of AD neuropathology, this model
will be useful in pre-clinical intervention trials, particularly because the
efficacy of anti-AD compounds in mitigating the neurodegenerative effects
mediated by both signature lesions can be evaluated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2003.08.012
PMID: 14643377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
