---
reference_id: "PMID:39196376"
title: "Light chain deposition disease: pathogenesis, clinical characteristics and treatment strategies."
authors:
- Cassano Cassano R
- Bonadio AG
- Del Giudice ML
- Giannese D
- Galimberti S
- Buda G
journal: Ann Hematol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00277-024-05911-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Bortezomib/therapeutic use
- Multiple Myeloma/therapy
- Immunoglobulin Light Chains/metabolism
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Immunoglobulin Light-chain Amyloidosis/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Light chain deposition disease: pathogenesis, clinical characteristics and treatment strategies.
**Authors:** Cassano Cassano R, Bonadio AG, Del Giudice ML, Giannese D, Galimberti S, Buda G
**Journal:** Ann Hematol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00277-024-05911-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00277-024-05911-9)

## Content

1. Ann Hematol. 2025 Apr;104(4):2083-2093. doi: 10.1007/s00277-024-05911-9. Epub 
2024 Aug 28.

Light chain deposition disease: pathogenesis, clinical characteristics and 
treatment strategies.

Cassano Cassano R(1), Bonadio AG(2), Del Giudice ML(3), Giannese D(4), 
Galimberti S(3), Buda G(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Hematology, University of 
Pisa, 56126, Pisa, Italy. cassano462@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Surgical, Medical, Molecular Pathology and Critical Area, 
Division of Surgical Pathology II, University of Pisa, Via Paradisa 2, 56124, 
Pisa, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Hematology, University of 
Pisa, 56126, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Nephrology Unit, University 
of Pisa, 56126, Pisa, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Hematology, University of 
Pisa, 56126, Pisa, Italy. gabriele.buda@unipi.it.

Light chain deposition disease (LCDD) is a rare hematologic disorder 
characterized by the deposition of non-amyloid monoclonal light chains in 
several organs. Together with renal impairment is being the primary morbidity 
associated with this disease. Due to its rarity, randomized clinical trials lack 
to explore treatment strategies and there are no approved or universally 
accepted standard of care treatment options. We aimed to provide a systematic 
summary of histological and clinical aspects of LCDD and treatment options of 
available literature therapies strategies. Currently, drugs used to treat 
multiple myeloma are recommended when LCDD patients also presented multiple 
myeloma. Anyway, in patients with LCDD that is not associated to multiple 
myeloma, haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (ASCT) and chemotherapy with 
thalidomide, dexamethasone, bortezomib are also recommended. In eligible 
patients, bortezomib-based chemotherapy followed by ASCT appears to be an 
effective treatment option with durable hematologic remission and organ 
responses. Although it appears that the patients undergoing ASCT seem to achieve 
deeper and durable hematologic remissions and organ responses, no statistically 
significant superiority can be demonstrated over non-transplant or standard 
chemotherapy-based approaches. As retrieved by our review, bortezomib-based 
therapy appears to be favorable strategy as long as no dose modification is 
required for renal impairment, and early hematologic responses as a recovery of 
renal function. Encouraging data were also demonstrated by treatment 
lenalidomide or melpalan based. Moreover, new myeloma treatment strategies, as 
monoclonal antibody Daratumumab, seem to be effective in LCDD. Instead, renal 
allograft is not recommended, due to high incidence of relapse.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-024-05911-9
PMCID: PMC12052853
PMID: 39196376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.