---
reference_id: "PMID:11283791"
title: Linkage and association analysis of angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE)-gene polymorphisms with ACE concentration and blood pressure.
authors:
- Zhu X
- Bouzekri N
- Southam L
- Cooper RS
- Adeyemo A
- McKenzie CA
- Luke A
- Chen G
- Elston RC
- Ward R
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/320104
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Linkage and association analysis of angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE)-gene polymorphisms with ACE concentration and blood pressure.
**Authors:** Zhu X, Bouzekri N, Southam L, Cooper RS, Adeyemo A, McKenzie CA, Luke A, Chen G, Elston RC, Ward R
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/320104](https://doi.org/10.1086/320104)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 May;68(5):1139-48. doi: 10.1086/320104. Epub 2001 Mar 27.

Linkage and association analysis of angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE)-gene 
polymorphisms with ACE concentration and blood pressure.

Zhu X(1), Bouzekri N, Southam L, Cooper RS, Adeyemo A, McKenzie CA, Luke A, Chen 
G, Elston RC, Ward R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Epidemiology, Loyola University Medical 
Center, Maywood, IL 60153, USA. xzhu1@luc.edu

Considerable effort has been expended to determine whether the gene for 
angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) confers susceptibility to cardiovascular 
disease. In this study, we genotyped 13 polymorphisms in the ACE gene in 1,343 
Nigerians from 332 families. To localize the genetic effect, we first performed 
linkage and association analysis of all the markers with ACE concentration. In 
multipoint variance-component analysis, this region was strongly linked to ACE 
concentration (maximum LOD score 7.5). Likewise, most of the polymorphisms in 
the ACE gene were significantly associated with ACE (P<.0013). The two most 
highly associated polymorphisms, ACE4 and ACE8, accounted for 6% and 19% of the 
variance in ACE, respectively. A two-locus additive model with an additive x 
additive interaction of these polymorphisms explained most of the ACE variation 
associated with this region. We next analyzed the relationship between these two 
polymorphisms (ACE4 and ACE8) and blood pressure (BP). Although no evidence of 
linkage was detected, significant association was found for both systolic and 
diastolic BP when a two-locus additive model developed for ACE concentration was 
used. Further analyses demonstrated that an epistasis model provided the best 
fit to the BP variation. In conclusion, we found that the two polymorphisms 
explaining the greatest variation in ACE concentration are significantly 
associated with BP, through interaction, in this African population sample. Our 
study also demonstrates that greater statistical power can be anticipated with 
association analysis versus linkage, when markers in strong linkage 
disequilibrium with a trait locus have been identified. Furthermore, allelic 
interaction may play an important role in the dissection of complex traits such 
as BP.

DOI: 10.1086/320104
PMCID: PMC1226095
PMID: 11283791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]