---
reference_id: "PMID:22094129"
title: Familial amyloid polyneuropathy.
authors:
- Planté-Bordeneuve V
- Said G
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70246-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial amyloid polyneuropathy.
**Authors:** Planté-Bordeneuve V, Said G
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70246-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70246-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2011 Dec;10(12):1086-97. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70246-0.

Familial amyloid polyneuropathy.

Planté-Bordeneuve V(1), Said G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Henri-Mondor, 
Créteil, France.

Familial amyloid polyneuropathies (FAPs) are a group of life-threatening 
multisystem disorders transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. Nerve lesions 
are induced by deposits of amyloid fibrils, most commonly due to mutated 
transthyretin (TTR). Less often the precursor of amyloidosis is mutant 
apolipoprotein A-1 or gelsolin. The first identified cause of FAP-the TTR 
Val30Met mutation-is still the most common of more than 100 amyloidogenic point 
mutations identified worldwide. The penetrance and age at onset of FAP among 
people carrying the same mutation vary between countries. The symptomatology and 
clinical course of FAP can be highly variable. TTR FAP typically causes a nerve 
length-dependent polyneuropathy that starts in the feet with loss of temperature 
and pain sensations, along with life-threatening autonomic dysfunction leading 
to cachexia and death within 10 years on average. TTR is synthesised mainly in 
the liver, and liver transplantation seems to have a favourable effect on the 
course of neuropathy, but not on cardiac or eye lesions. Oral administration of 
tafamidis meglumine, which prevents misfolding and deposition of mutated TTR, is 
under evaluation in patients with TTR FAP. In future, patients with FAP might 
benefit from gene therapy; however, genetic counselling is recommended for the 
prevention of all types of FAP.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70246-0
PMID: 22094129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]