---
reference_id: "PMID:33179803"
title: Parasite burden and red blood cell exchange transfusion for babesiosis.
authors:
- "O'Bryan J"
- Gokhale A
- Hendrickson JE
- Krause PJ
journal: J Clin Apher
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jca.21853
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Babesiosis/mortality, parasitology, therapy"
- Erythrocyte Transfusion/methods
- Female
- Humans
- Length of Stay
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Parasitemia/therapy
- Retrospective Studies
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parasite burden and red blood cell exchange transfusion for babesiosis.
**Authors:** O'Bryan J, Gokhale A, Hendrickson JE, Krause PJ
**Journal:** J Clin Apher (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jca.21853](https://doi.org/10.1002/jca.21853)

## Content

1. J Clin Apher. 2021 Feb;36(1):127-134. doi: 10.1002/jca.21853. Epub 2020 Nov
12.

Parasite burden and red blood cell exchange transfusion for babesiosis.

O'Bryan J(1), Gokhale A(2), Hendrickson JE(2)(3), Krause PJ(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public
Health, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

BACKGROUND: The association between parasite burden and end-organ dysfunction in
subjects with Babesia microti infection has not been extensively studied, nor
has the optimal role of red blood cell exchange (RCE) transfusion in babesiosis
treatment. This retrospective chart review evaluates the associations between
parasitemia, end-organ dysfunction, and outcomes in babesiosis patients treated
with antimicrobial agents and RCE compared to those treated with antimicrobial
agents alone.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We evaluated adults (≥18 years of age) with
laboratory-confirmed babesiosis who were admitted between 2011 and 2017 to Yale
New Haven Hospital, located in a Babesia-endemic region of the Northeastern
United States. Patient demographics, parasitemia levels, clinical and laboratory
indicators of end-organ dysfunction, and outcomes were examined.
RESULTS: Ninety-one subjects (mean age 65.1 years, 69.2% male) were studied.
Subjects were stratified according to peak parasitemia: <1% (n = 34), 1-5% (n =
24), 5-10% (n = 15), and >10% (n = 18). Laboratory measures indicating degrees
of hemolysis, coagulopathy, and pulmonary, renal and hepatic dysfunction
differed significantly across peak parasitemia levels. Median length of hospital
stay increased with each successive peak parasitemia level (P < .001). These
results indicate a strong association between peak parasitemia level and disease
severity. Nineteen subjects underwent RCE, all with peak parasitemia ≥9% and
some degree of end-organ dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: Babesia microti parasitemia is closely associated with disease
severity, though not all subjects with end-organ dysfunction had high-grade
parasitemia. Our data suggest that the use of parasitemia >10%, coupled with
clinical status, is a reasonable indicator for RCE in babesiosis patients.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jca.21853
PMCID: PMC9517950
PMID: 33179803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no
conflict of interest.
