---
reference_id: PMID:36602656
title: Effects of Biliary Phospholipids on Cholesterol Crystallization and Growth in Gallstone Formation.
authors:
- Wang HH
- Portincasa P
- Liu M
- Wang DQ
journal: Adv Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12325-022-02407-8
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Gallstones/metabolism, pathology"
- Phospholipids/chemistry
- Crystallization
- Bile Acids and Salts
- Cholesterol
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of Biliary Phospholipids on Cholesterol Crystallization and Growth in Gallstone Formation.
**Authors:** Wang HH, Portincasa P, Liu M, Wang DQ
**Journal:** Adv Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12325-022-02407-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-022-02407-8)

## Content

1. Adv Ther. 2023 Mar;40(3):743-768. doi: 10.1007/s12325-022-02407-8. Epub 2023
Jan  5.

Effects of Biliary Phospholipids on Cholesterol Crystallization and Growth in 
Gallstone Formation.

Wang HH(1), Portincasa P(2), Liu M(3), Wang DQ(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine and 
Genetics, Marion Bessin Liver Research Center, Einstein-Mount Sinai Diabetes 
Research Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, Clinica Medica "A. 
Murri", University of Bari Medical School, Bari, Italy.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, 45237, USA.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine and 
Genetics, Marion Bessin Liver Research Center, Einstein-Mount Sinai Diabetes 
Research Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA. 
david.wang@einsteinmed.edu.

The prevalence of cholesterol gallstone disease is increasing, primarily due to 
the global epidemic of obesity associated with insulin resistance, and this 
trend leads to a considerable healthcare, financial, and social burden 
worldwide. Although phospholipids play an essential role in maintaining 
cholesterol solubility in bile through both mixed micelles and vesicles, little 
attention has been paid to the impact of biliary phospholipids on the 
pathogenesis of cholesterol gallstone formation. A reduction or deficiency of 
biliary phospholipids results in a distinctly abnormal metastable 
physical-chemical state of bile predisposing to supersaturation with 
cholesterol. Changes in biliary phospholipid concentrations influence 
cholesterol crystallization by yielding both liquid crystalline and "anhydrous" 
crystalline metastable intermediates, evolving into classical 
parallelogram-shaped cholesterol monohydrate crystals in supersaturated bile. As 
a result, five distinct crystallization pathways, A-E, have been defined, mainly 
based on the prime habits of liquid and solid crystals in the physiological or 
pathophysiological cholesterol saturation of gallbladder and hepatic bile. This 
review concisely summarizes the chemical structures and physical-chemical 
properties of biliary phospholipids and their physiological functions in bile 
formation and cholesterol solubility in bile, as well as comprehensively 
discusses the latest advances in the role of biliary phospholipids in 
cholesterol crystallization and growth in gallstone formation, largely based on 
the findings from clinical and animal studies and in vitro experiments. The 
insights gleaned from uncovering the cholelithogenic mechanisms are expected to 
form a fundamental framework for investigating the hitherto elusive events in 
the earliest stage of cholesterol nucleation and crystallization. This may help 
to identify better measures for early diagnosis and prevention in susceptible 
subjects and effective treatment of patients with gallstones.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Healthcare Ltd., part 
of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-022-02407-8
PMID: 36602656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]