---
reference_id: "PMID:16537395"
title: A mouse model for human short-stature syndromes identifies Shox2 as an upstream regulator of Runx2 during long-bone development.
authors:
- Cobb J
- Dierich A
- Huss-Garcia Y
- Duboule D
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0510544103
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Development/genetics
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- "Chondrocytes/chemistry, metabolism"
- Chondrogenesis/genetics
- "Core Binding Factor Alpha 1 Subunit/analysis, genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- "Growth Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Mice/genetics
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Phenotype
- Sequence Deletion
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mouse model for human short-stature syndromes identifies Shox2 as an upstream regulator of Runx2 during long-bone development.
**Authors:** Cobb J, Dierich A, Huss-Garcia Y, Duboule D
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0510544103](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0510544103)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 21;103(12):4511-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0510544103. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

A mouse model for human short-stature syndromes identifies Shox2 as an upstream 
regulator of Runx2 during long-bone development.

Cobb J(1), Dierich A, Huss-Garcia Y, Duboule D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology and National Research Center 
Frontiers in Genetics, Sciences III, University of Geneva, Quai Ernest Ansermet 
30, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Deficiencies or mutations in the human pseudoautosomal SHOX gene are associated 
with a series of short-stature conditions, including Turner syndrome, Leri-Weill 
dyschondrosteosis, and Langer mesomelic dysplasia. Although this gene is absent 
from the mouse genome, the closely related paralogous gene Shox2 displays a 
similar expression pattern in developing limbs. Here, we report that the 
conditional inactivation of Shox2 in developing appendages leads to a strong 
phenotype, similar to the human conditions, although it affects a different 
proximodistal limb segment. Furthermore, using this mouse model, we establish 
the cellular etiology of these defects and show that Shox2 acts upstream the 
Runx2 gene, a key regulator of chondrogenesis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0510544103
PMCID: PMC1450202
PMID: 16537395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts 
declared.