---
reference_id: "PMID:24420722"
title: "Distinct antibody profile: a clue to primary antiphospholipid syndrome evolving into systemic lupus erythematosus?"
authors:
- Freire PV
- Watanabe E
- dos Santos NR
- Bueno C
- Bonfá E
- de Carvalho JF
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s10067-013-2472-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct antibody profile: a clue to primary antiphospholipid syndrome evolving into systemic lupus erythematosus?
**Authors:** Freire PV, Watanabe E, dos Santos NR, Bueno C, Bonfá E, de Carvalho JF
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10067-013-2472-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-013-2472-3)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 2014 Mar;33(3):349-53. doi: 10.1007/s10067-013-2472-3. Epub
2014  Jan 14.

Distinct antibody profile: a clue to primary antiphospholipid syndrome evolving 
into systemic lupus erythematosus?

Freire PV(1), Watanabe E, dos Santos NR, Bueno C, Bonfá E, de Carvalho JF.

Author information:
(1)Medical School, University of Santo Amaro, São Paulo, Brazil.

Comment in
    Clin Rheumatol. 2014 Mar;33(3):293-5. doi: 10.1007/s10067-014-2486-5.

We have performed a retrospective study to determine if patients with 
antiphospholipid syndrome that developed systemic lupus erythematosus (APS/SLE) 
had distinct clinical and/or serological features. All 80 primary APS (PAPS) 
patients followed up at our APS unit were included in the study and divided into 
two groups: 14 APS/SLE and 66 PAPS. Prior or at onset of lupus manifestations, 
six patients were uniformly negative for lupus and Sjögren autoantibodies, and 
the other eight patients had persistent positive. In the first year after 
diagnosis of SLE, three patients remained with negative antibodies, the other 
seven patients maintained the same antibodies, and four patients developed other 
antibodies. APS/SLE group had a significant lower mean age at PAPS diagnosis 
(26.0 ± 8.0 vs. 34.2 ± 11.9 years, p = 0.03) and a longer disease duration (14.0 
± 7.0 vs. 6.0 ± 5.0 years, p < 0.0001). The mean time for PAPS to develop SLE 
was 5.2 ± 4.3 years. The typical clinical and laboratorial findings of APS did 
not discriminate both groups of patients. At lupus onset, antinuclear antibodies 
were more frequently observed in those who evolved to SLE (100 vs. 51.5%, p = 
0.0005). Anti-double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), anti-ribosomal P, anti-Ro/SS-A, 
anti-La/SS-B, and anti-U1RNP antibodies were exclusively found in the APS/SLE 
patients, whereas anti-Smith (Sm) antibodies were not detected in both groups. 
The detection of a distinct subgroup of lupus-associated autoantibody in PAPS 
patients seems to be a hint to overt SLE disease, particularly in those patients 
with young age at diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-013-2472-3
PMID: 24420722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]