---
reference_id: "PMID:33162302"
title: "E.U. paediatric MOG consortium consensus: Part 1 - Classification of clinical phenotypes of paediatric myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disorders."
authors:
- Bruijstens AL
- Lechner C
- Flet-Berliac L
- Deiva K
- Neuteboom RF
- Hemingway C
- Wassmer E
- E.U. paediatric MOG consortium
- Baumann M
- Bartels F
- Finke C
- Adamsbaum C
- Hacohen Y
- Rostasy K
journal: Eur J Paediatr Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2020.10.006
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Autoantigens/immunology
- Child
- "Demyelinating Autoimmune Diseases, CNS/classification, diagnosis, immunology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein/immunology
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# E.U. paediatric MOG consortium consensus: Part 1 - Classification of clinical phenotypes of paediatric myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disorders.
**Authors:** Bruijstens AL, Lechner C, Flet-Berliac L, Deiva K, Neuteboom RF, Hemingway C, Wassmer E, E.U. paediatric MOG consortium, Baumann M, Bartels F, Finke C, Adamsbaum C, Hacohen Y, Rostasy K
**Journal:** Eur J Paediatr Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejpn.2020.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpn.2020.10.006)

## Content

1. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2020 Nov;29:2-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2020.10.006. Epub
 2020 Nov 4.

E.U. paediatric MOG consortium consensus: Part 1 - Classification of clinical
phenotypes of paediatric myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated
disorders.

Bruijstens AL(1), Lechner C(2), Flet-Berliac L(3), Deiva K(4), Neuteboom RF(5),
Hemingway C(6), Wassmer E(7); E.U. paediatric MOG consortium; Baumann M, Bartels
F, Finke C, Adamsbaum C, Hacohen Y, Rostasy K.

Collaborators: Mog Consortium EUP, Bruijstens AL, Wendel EM, Lechner C, Breu M,
Flet-Berliac L, de Chalus A, Capobianco M, Laetitia G, Hemingway C, Wassmer E,
Lim M, Wickström R, Armangue T, Deiva K, Neuteboom RF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Electronic address: a.bruijstens@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Paediatric Neurology, Medical
University of Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
University Hospitals Paris-Saclay, Bicêtre Hospital and Faculty of Medicine,
Paris-Saclay University, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(4)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
University Hospitals Paris-Saclay, Bicêtre Hospital and Faculty of Medicine,
Paris-Saclay University, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France; French Reference Network of
Rare Inflammatory Brain and Spinal Diseases, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, European
Reference Network-RITA, France.
(5)Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children, London, UK.
(7)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Birmingham Children's Hospital,
Birmingham, UK.

Over the past few years, increasing interest in the role of autoantibodies
against myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG-abs) as a new candidate
biomarker in demyelinating central nervous system diseases has arisen. MOG-abs
have now consistently been identified in a variety of demyelinating syndromes,
with a predominance in paediatric patients. The clinical spectrum of these
MOG-ab-associated disorders (MOGAD) is still expanding and differs between
paediatric and adult patients. This first part of the Paediatric European
Collaborative Consensus emphasises the diversity in clinical phenotypes
associated with MOG-abs in paediatric patients and discusses these associated
clinical phenotypes in detail. Typical MOGAD presentations consist of
demyelinating syndromes, including acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
in younger, and optic neuritis (ON) and/or transverse myelitis (TM) in older
children. A proportion of patients experience a relapsing disease course,
presenting as ADEM followed by one or multiple episode(s) of ON (ADEM-ON),
multiphasic disseminated encephalomyelitis (MDEM), relapsing ON (RON) or
relapsing neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders (NMOSD)-like syndromes. More
recently, the disease spectrum has been expanded with clinical and radiological
phenotypes including encephalitis-like, leukodystrophy-like, and other
non-classifiable presentations. This review concludes with recommendations
following expert consensus on serologic testing for MOG-abs in paediatric
patients, the presence of which has consequences for long-term monitoring,
relapse risk, treatments, and for counselling of patient and families.
Furthermore, we propose a clinical classification of paediatric MOGAD with
clinical definitions and key features. These are operational and need to be
tested, however essential for future paediatric MOGAD studies.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2020.10.006
PMID: 33162302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Arlette L.
Bruijstens and Lorraine Flet-Berliac have no conflict of interest to declare.
Christian Lechner has served as a consultant for Roche, but has no conflict of
interest with this manuscript. Kumaran Deiva has received speaker/consultant
honoraria from Novartis and Biogen, but has no conflict of interest with this
manuscript. Rinze F. Neuteboom participates in trials by Sanofi and Novartis and
has received honoraria from Novartis and Zogenix. Cheryl Hemingway serves as
consultant for MS treatment for Biogen, Novartis and AQP4 treatment for Roche.
She is an investigator in trials with Biogen, Roche and Novartis, but has no
conflict of interest with this manuscript. Evangeline Wassmer has served as a
consultant for Novartis and Biogen, PTC therapeutics, GMP-Orphan and Alexion.
She is an investigator in trials with Alexion, Biogen Idec, Sanofi and Novartis.
Her MS research projects have been funded by the UK MS Society, Action Medical
Research and Birmingham Children's Hospital Research Foundation.
