---
reference_id: "PMID:36521896"
title: "Micronutrient deficiencies and anaemia associated with body mass index in Australian adults: a cross-sectional study."
authors:
- Seifu CN
- Fahey PP
- Atlantis E
journal: BMJ Open
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-061442
keywords:
- Male
- Pregnancy
- Female
- Adult
- Humans
- Adolescent
- Body Mass Index
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Micronutrients
- Australia/epidemiology
- Malnutrition
- Anemia/epidemiology
- Vitamin B 12
- "Obesity/complications, epidemiology"
- Iron Deficiencies
- Prevalence
- "Vitamin D Deficiency/complications, epidemiology"
- Vitamins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Micronutrient deficiencies and anaemia associated with body mass index in Australian adults: a cross-sectional study.
**Authors:** Seifu CN, Fahey PP, Atlantis E
**Journal:** BMJ Open (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjopen-2022-061442](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2022-061442)

## Content

1. BMJ Open. 2022 Dec 15;12(12):e061442. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-061442.

Micronutrient deficiencies and anaemia associated with body mass index in 
Australian adults: a cross-sectional study.

Seifu CN(1), Fahey PP(2)(3), Atlantis E(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Health Sciences, Western Sydney University, Penrith, New South 
Wales, Australia c.seifu@westernsydney.edu.au.
(2)School of Health Sciences, Western Sydney University, Penrith, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(3)Translational Health Research Institute, Western Sydney University, Penrith, 
New South Wales, Australia.
(4)Discipline of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Nepean Clinical 
School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

AIM: To estimate the prevalence of micronutrient deficiencies and anaemia, and 
their association with body mass index (BMI) categories among Australian adults.
METHOD: We analysed data from the 2011-2013 Australian Health Survey from 3539 
participants aged 18 years and over (without known pregnancy) with measured 
weight and height, and nutrient biomarkers. To address complex sampling, survey 
weights were used when estimating the prevalence of micronutrient deficiencies 
(vitamin B12 deficiency; serum vitamin B12<145 pmol/L; iron deficiency; 
ferritin<30 µg/L and vitamin D deficiency; 25-hydroxyvitamin D<50 nmol/L) and 
anaemia (haemoglobin <120 g/L for females and <130 g/L for males) and when 
assessing associations with logistic regression models with adjusted ORs (AORs) 
for BMI categories: healthy weight (BMI 18.5 to <25.0 kg/m2), reference; 
overweight (BMI 25.0 to <30.0 kg/m2), obesity class I (BMI 30.0 to <35.0 kg/m2), 
obesity class II/III (BMI 35.0 kg/m2 or more).
RESULT: The prevalence of vitamin B12 deficiency (range 0.9%─2.8%) and anaemia 
(range 3.9%─6.7%) were variable across BMI groups. The prevalence of iron 
deficiency in the obesity class I group was 12.0 percentage points lower than 
healthy weight group with an AOR of 0.50 (95% CI 0.30 to 0.83). The prevalence 
of vitamin D deficiency in the obesity class II/III group was 7.9 percentage 
points higher than the healthy weight group with an AOR of 1.62 (95% CI 1.01 to 
2.60). Vitamin B12 deficiency and anaemia were not consistently associated with 
BMI groups.
CONCLUSION: We found a consistent association between severe obesity and vitamin 
D deficiency in Australian adults. We also found obesity class I was negatively 
associated with iron deficiency, whereas there was no consistent association 
between BMI groups and vitamin B12 deficiency and anaemia. Public health 
strategies are needed to prevent vitamin D deficiency in this high-risk 
population.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-061442
PMCID: PMC9809261
PMID: 36521896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: EA was the Founding 
President, and now serves as the Secretary, of the National Association of 
Clinical Obesity Services (NACOS). He has received honoraria from Novo Nordisk 
for speaking and participating at meetings. He has received unrestricted 
research funding from Novo Nordisk and iNova on behalf of National Association 
of Clinical Obesity Services.