---
reference_id: "PMID:20950882"
title: "Adding external beam to intra-luminal brachytherapy improves palliation in obstructive squamous cell oesophageal cancer: a prospective multi-centre randomized trial of the International Atomic Energy Agency."
authors:
- Rosenblatt E
- Jones G
- Sur RK
- Donde B
- Salvajoli JV
- Ghosh-Laskar S
- Frobe A
- Suleiman A
- Xiao Z
- Nag S
journal: Radiother Oncol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2010.09.001
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Brachytherapy
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/complications, mortality, radiotherapy"
- Deglutition Disorders/etiology
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/complications, mortality, radiotherapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Palliative Care
- Quality of Life
- Radiation Injuries/etiology
- Survival Rate
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adding external beam to intra-luminal brachytherapy improves palliation in obstructive squamous cell oesophageal cancer: a prospective multi-centre randomized trial of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
**Authors:** Rosenblatt E, Jones G, Sur RK, Donde B, Salvajoli JV, Ghosh-Laskar S, Frobe A, Suleiman A, Xiao Z, Nag S
**Journal:** Radiother Oncol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.radonc.2010.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2010.09.001)

## Content

1. Radiother Oncol. 2010 Dec;97(3):488-94. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2010.09.001.
Epub  2010 Oct 13.

Adding external beam to intra-luminal brachytherapy improves palliation in
obstructive squamous cell oesophageal cancer: a prospective multi-centre
randomized trial of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

Rosenblatt E(1), Jones G, Sur RK, Donde B, Salvajoli JV, Ghosh-Laskar S, Frobe
A, Suleiman A, Xiao Z, Nag S.

Author information:
(1)International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria. e.rosenblatt@iaea.org

BACKGROUND: Whether the combination of high dose-rate brachytherapy (HDRBT) and
External Beam Radiation Therapy (EBRT) is superior to HDRBT alone for the
palliation of oesophageal cancer has only been explored in a previous IAEA pilot
randomized trial.
METHODS: Two hundred and nineteen patients were randomized to adding EBRT or
not, after receiving two fractions of HDRBT within 1 week. Each HDRBT consisted
of 8 Gy prescribed at 1cm from source centre. Patients randomized to EBRT
received 30 Gy in 10 fractions. The primary outcome was dysphagia-relief
experience (DRE). Additional outcomes included various scores, performance
status, weight and adverse events. A majority of charts, imaging and
radiotherapy plans were externally audited.
RESULTS: Median follow-up was 197 days, with a median OS of 188 days and an 18%
survival rate at 1 year. DRE was significantly improved with combined therapy,
for an absolute benefit of +18% at 200 days from randomization (p=0.019). In
longitudinal regression analyses, scores for dysphagia (p=0.00005), odynophagia
(p=0.006), regurgitation (p=0.00005), chest pain (p=0.0038) and performance
status (p=0.0015) were all significantly improved. In contrast, weight,
toxicities and overall survival were not different between study arms.
CONCLUSION: Symptom improvement occurs with the addition of EBRT to standard
HDRBT. The combination is well tolerated and relatively safe.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2010.09.001
PMID: 20950882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
