---
reference_id: "PMID:20395930"
title: Wilms tumor in adult.
authors:
- Karim ME
- Momen MA
- Akhter S
- Haque Z
- Islam T
- Haque MM
- Hossain M
journal: Mymensingh Med J
year: '2010'
keywords:
- Aged
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Kidney Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology, surgery"
- Lymphatic Metastasis
- Male
- Nephrectomy
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Wilms Tumor/diagnosis, pathology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilms tumor in adult.
**Authors:** Karim ME, Momen MA, Akhter S, Haque Z, Islam T, Haque MM, Hossain M
**Journal:** Mymensingh Med J (2010)

## Content

1. Mymensingh Med J. 2010 Apr;19(2):299-302.

Wilms tumor in adult.

Karim ME(1), Momen MA, Akhter S, Haque Z, Islam T, Haque MM, Hossain M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology & Imaging, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical 
University (BSMMU), Shahbagh, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Wilms Tumor (WT) is a very rare malignancy in adults representing 1% of all 
renal neoplasms. It is however the most common renal tumor of children and adult 
patients are treated like pediatric cases. Bilateral tumors occur in 5% of adult 
cases. The typical presenting features are asymptomatic abdominal mass (most 
common), hematuria, pain, fever, and hypertension. As clinical presentation of 
WT is similar to that of renal cell carcinoma (RCC), it tends to be an 
unsuspected pathological diagnosis in most cases. The diagnosis of the tumor 
needs positive sonographic and computed tomography (CT) findings with 
histopathological confirmation. Prognosis of adult WT is relatively poor and 
resistant to chemotherapy. We present a case of wilms tumor in a 68 years old 
male patient with right sided non tender abdominal mass and occasional flank 
pain. The patient was normotensive but hematuric and radiological findings 
suggested right renal mass with enlarged lymph node and histopathological 
analysis revealed nephroblastoma associated with lymph node metastases.

PMID: 20395930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]