---
reference_id: "PMID:37024667"
title: Genome-scale CRISPR screen reveals neddylation to contribute to cisplatin resistance of testicular germ cell tumours.
authors:
- Funke K
- Einsfelder U
- Hansen A
- Arévalo L
- Schneider S
- Nettersheim D
- Stein V
- Schorle H
journal: Br J Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41416-023-02247-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-scale CRISPR screen reveals neddylation to contribute to cisplatin resistance of testicular germ cell tumours.
**Authors:** Funke K, Einsfelder U, Hansen A, Arévalo L, Schneider S, Nettersheim D, Stein V, Schorle H
**Journal:** Br J Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41416-023-02247-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-023-02247-5)

## Content

1. Br J Cancer. 2023 Jun;128(12):2270-2282. doi: 10.1038/s41416-023-02247-5. Epub
 2023 Apr 6.

Genome-scale CRISPR screen reveals neddylation to contribute to cisplatin 
resistance of testicular germ cell tumours.

Funke K(1), Einsfelder U(2), Hansen A(1), Arévalo L(1), Schneider S(1), 
Nettersheim D(3), Stein V(2), Schorle H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University 
Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(2)Institute of Physiology II, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Department of Urology, Urological Research Laboratory, Translational 
UroOncology, Medical Faculty and University Hospital Düsseldorf, Heinrich Heine 
University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University 
Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany. hubert.schorle@ukbonn.de.

BACKGROUND: Type II testicular germ cell tumours (TGCT) are the most prevalent 
tumours in young men. Patients suffering from cisplatin-resistant TGCTs are 
facing very poor prognosis demanding novel therapeutic options. Neddylation is a 
known posttranslational modification mediating many important biological 
processes, including tumorigenesis. Overactivation of the neddylation pathway 
promotes carcinogenesis and tumour progression in various entities by inducing 
proteasomal degradation of tumour suppressors (e.g., p21, p27).
METHODS: We used a genome-scale CRISPR/Cas9 activation screen to identify 
cisplatin resistance factors. TGCT cell lines were treated with the neddylation 
inhibitor (MLN4924)/cisplatin/combination and investigated for changes in 
viability (XTT assay), apoptosis/cell cycle (flow cytometry) as well as in the 
transcriptome (3'mRNA sequencing).
RESULTS: NAE1 overexpression was detected in cisplatin-resistant colonies from 
the CRISPR screen. Inhibition of neddylation using MLN4924 increased cisplatin 
cytotoxicity in TGCT cell lines and sensitised cisplatin-resistant cells towards 
cisplatin. Apoptosis, G2/M-phase cell cycle arrest, γH2A.X/P27 accumulation and 
mesoderm/endoderm differentiation were observed in TGCT cells, while fibroblast 
cells were unaffected.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified overactivation of neddylation as a factor for 
cisplatin resistance in TGCTs and highlighted the additive effect of NAE1 
inhibition by MLN4924 in combination with cisplatin as a novel treatment option 
for TGCTs.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41416-023-02247-5
PMCID: PMC10241889
PMID: 37024667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.