---
reference_id: "PMID:23524344"
title: Defective glucose metabolism in polycystic kidney disease identifies a new therapeutic strategy.
authors:
- Rowe I
- Chiaravalli M
- Mannella V
- Ulisse V
- Quilici G
- Pema M
- Song XW
- Xu H
- Mari S
- Qian F
- Pei Y
- Musco G
- Boletta A
journal: Nat Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/nm.3092
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Defective glucose metabolism in polycystic kidney disease identifies a new therapeutic strategy.
**Authors:** Rowe I, Chiaravalli M, Mannella V, Ulisse V, Quilici G, Pema M, Song XW, Xu H, Mari S, Qian F, Pei Y, Musco G, Boletta A
**Journal:** Nat Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.3092](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3092)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2013 Apr;19(4):488-93. doi: 10.1038/nm.3092. Epub 2013 Mar 24.

Defective glucose metabolism in polycystic kidney disease identifies a new 
therapeutic strategy.

Rowe I(1), Chiaravalli M, Mannella V, Ulisse V, Quilici G, Pema M, Song XW, Xu 
H, Mari S, Qian F, Pei Y, Musco G, Boletta A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, Dulbecco Telethon Institute at Dibit, 
San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2013 Apr;19(4):407-9. doi: 10.1038/nm.3140.

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a common genetic 
disorder characterized by bilateral renal cyst formation. Recent identification 
of signaling cascades deregulated in ADPKD has led to the initiation of several 
clinical trials, but an approved therapy is still lacking. Using a metabolomic 
approach, we identify a pathogenic pathway in this disease that can be safely 
targeted for therapy. We show that mutation of PKD1 results in enhanced 
glycolysis in cells in a mouse model of PKD and in kidneys from humans with 
ADPKD. Glucose deprivation resulted in lower proliferation and higher apoptotic 
rates in PKD1-mutant cells than in nondeprived cells. Notably, two distinct PKD 
mouse models treated with 2-deoxyglucose (2DG), to inhibit glycolysis, had lower 
kidney weight, volume, cystic index and proliferation rates as compared to 
nontreated mice. These metabolic alterations depend on the extracellular 
signal-related kinase (ERK) pathway acting in a dual manner by inhibiting the 
liver kinase B1 (LKB1)-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) axis on the one hand 
while activating the mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1)-glycolytic cascade on the other. 
Enhanced metabolic rates further inhibit AMPK. Forced activation of AMPK acts in 
a negative feedback loop, restoring normal ERK activity. Taken together, these 
data indicate that defective glucose metabolism is intimately involved in the 
pathobiology of ADPKD. Our findings provide a strong rationale for a new 
therapeutic strategy using existing drugs, either individually or in 
combination.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.3092
PMCID: PMC4944011
PMID: 23524344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

ADPKD is a chronic progressive disease1. Cysts originate from any segment of the renal tubule in only 1-5% of the nephrons, a condition that should be compatible with a normal renal function1,4. However, the gradual expansion of cysts compresses and eventually replaces the normal tissue, causing end-stage renal disease in a majority of affected individuals1,4. Thus, therapeutic interventions targeting cyst expansion is currently being tested in multiple clinical trials to delay renal disease progression2,5,3.

The disease is caused by loss-of-function mutations in either PKD1 or PKD21,2. To study alterations caused by defective PKD1 function we isolated Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from littermate Pkd1+/+ or Pkd1−/− embryos6, and using these cells we serendipitously identified a novel pathogenic process. During routine culture, we noticed that Pkd1−/− cells acidified the medium faster than the wild-type while the opposite was observed in cells over-expressing PKD1 (Supplementary Fig.1). This was also replicated in growth-arrested cells (100% density) suggesting an intrinsic, proliferation-independent metabolic increase in Pkd1−/− cells. Indeed, Pkd1−/− cells had much higher ATP content as compared to wild-type (Fig. 1a). To determine which metabolic pathways were altered in these cells, we performed a metabolomic profiling of the conditioned extracellular medium of wild-type and Pkd1−/− cells using NMR spectroscopy7,8 (Fig. 1b). An unsupervised statistical analysis revealed that the metabolomic profile of Pkd1−/− cells differed significantly from that of wild-type cells (Supplementary Fig.2 and Supplementary Table 1), the most prominent alteration being reduced glucose and increased lactate concentrations (Fig. 1c, d and Supplementary Fig. 2). These data suggest that Pkd1−/− cells use aerobic glycolysis as a source of energy. Indeed, glucose deprivation abrogated the increased ATP content of Pkd1−/− cells (Fig. 1e). Similar results were generated using a MEF cell line carrying conditional inactivation of a Pkd1 floxable allele upon treatment with a Cre (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 1). Since glucose metabolism is also the main source of energy through oxidative phosphorylation occurring in the mitochondria9, we analyzed the mitochondrial membrane potential in wild-type and Pkd1−/− cells using two independent assays and demonstrated no significant difference between the two cell lines (Fig. 1f, g). In line with this, treatment with oligomycin, an inhibitor of the mitochondrial ATP-synthase, decreased the ATP content in wild-type cells, but only had a minor effect in Pkd1−/− cells (Fig. 1h). These data suggest that an alternative metabolic pathway that is glucose-dependent is the source of the differential ATP content between the two cell lines. Previous studies demonstrated that transcriptional changes can regulate the glycolytic response in cells10,11. In line with this, real-time PCR analysis revealed that Pkd1−/− cells displayed a transcriptional signature of glycolytic enzymes10 (Fig. 1i). We conclude that Pkd1−/− cells preferentially use aerobic glycolysis, in a process similar to the Warburg’s effect observed in cancer12,9.

A defective balance between proliferation and apoptosis has been observed in ADPKD tissues and PKD1 mutant cells4,13,14. We thus tested if increased glucose metabolism contributes to de-regulation of this balance. Indeed, glucose deprivation restored the proliferation index of Pkd1−/− and Pkd1flox/flox:Cre cells similar to that of Pkd1+/+ or Pkd1flox/flox cells, respectively (Fig. 2a). In addition, while the Pkd1+/+ cells deprived of glucose activated cell autophagy to survive, Pkd1−/− cells failed to activate this response (Fig. 2b, c and Supplementary Fig. 3) but instead displayed increased apoptotic rates (Fig. 2d, e). Similar results were observed in the Pkd1flox/flox:Cre cells (Fig. 2b, c and Supplementary Fig. 1). Consistent with previous studies we also found that this effect is in part dependent on mTORC115,10. Treatment of Pkd1−/− cells with rapamycin partially restored autophagy (Fig. 2c), cell survival under glucose deprivation (Fig. 2e), and downregulated metabolic rates (Supplementary Fig. 4). Furthermore, we observed a mTORC1-dependent upregulation of HIF1-α in Pkd1−/− cells as compared to wild-type, likely responsible for the transcriptional changes observed (Supplementary Fig. 4)10,11.

Consistent with the high ATP content we also found reduced levels of AMPK phosphorylation in Pkd1−/− cells as compared to wild-type (Fig. 2f). In a previous study we have shown that the enhanced mTORC1 activity in Pkd1−/− cells is mostly driven by ERKs upregulation6. In line with this ERKs inhibitors restored the phosphoAMPK levels (Fig. 2g). Furthermore, a recent study reported that B-raf regulates AMPK activity via ERK-dependent phosphorylation of LKB116. We therefore tested if a similar mechanism might be involved here. Indeed, LKB1 was strongly phosphorylated at ERK-specific sites in Pkd1−/− cells compared to Pkd1+/+ and ERKs inhibitors reverted this (Fig. 2h). Thus, we propose a dual role for ERKs here: on the one hand they regulate LKB1 causing inhibition of AMPK16, on the other, they affect mTORC1 activity which in turn switches on aerobic glycolysis, increases ATP and further inhibits AMPK. Of great interest but unexpectedly, treatment of Pkd1−/− cells with metformin or AICAR (5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside), both of which increased AMPK activity, also inhibited ERKs (Fig. 2i). These data suggest the existence of a negative feed-back loop whereby AMPK can down-regulate ERKs activity towards the basal conditions (Fig. 2j).

We next asked if the glycolytic switch observed in cells occurs in vivo, upon inactivation of the Pkd1 gene in the kidney. To test this, we used Ksp-Cre:Pkd1flox/− mice which develop early and severe PKD17 (Fig. 3a). Compared to non-cystic controls, we found that the cystic kidneys displayed higher ATP levels (Fig. 3b), biochemical alterations similar to those observed in vitro (Fig. 3c) and a transcriptional de-regulation of key glycolytic enzymes (Fig. 3d) consistent with a switch to glycolysis in vivo10. To experimentally test if enhanced glycolysis could be observed in these kidneys we injected subcutaneously uniformly-labelled 13C-glucose in Ksp-Cre:Pkd1flox/− or littermate controls (Ksp-Cre:Pkd1flox/+) and followed the levels of 13C-glucose or 13C-lactate using 13C-NMR spectroscopy (Fig. 3e). 40 minutes post-injection the cystic kidneys displayed a significantly higher uptake of 13C-glucose, which was more efficiently converted to 13C-lactate as compared to non-cystic control kidneys (Fig. 3e, n = 5). These data demonstrate that the cystic kidneys are characterized by aerobic glycolysis in vivo.

We next asked if this is a general feature of the cystic kidneys from subjects with ADPKD. Thus, we examined the gene expression profile of both gluconeogenesis and glycolytic pathways using a previously established microarray database derived from PKD1 human renal cysts (compared to minimally cystic cortical tissues from the same kidneys as control)18. We found that many enzymes involved in gluconeogenesis and glycolysis were differentially expressed in the renal cysts. Detailed analysis revealed that most of the genes encoding enzymes involved in gluconeogenesis were down-regulated while several genes encoding enzymes involved in glycolysis were up-regulated in renal cysts as compared to minimally cystic or normal tissue (Fig. 3f, g and Supplementary Table 2). Overall, these data suggest that increased glucose consumption and enhanced glycolysis are likely features of human PKD1, as further supported by the presence of lactate in the ADPKD cyst fluid19.

Based on the above data we hypothesized that interfering with glucose metabolism might present a novel strategy to retard cyst expansion. To test this, we treated the Ksp-Cre:Pkd1flox/− mice with a glucose analogue that cannot be metabolized (2-deoxyglucose, 2DG) and compared the results with littermate Ksp-Cre:Pkd1flox/− treated with vehicle only (NaCl) and with littermate controls (Ksp-Cre:Pkd1flox/+ or Pkd1flox/+ interchangeably) treated with NaCl or 2DG. We found that 2DG reduced the kidney/body weight (Fig. 4a-c) only in mutants and had no effect on the weight of other organs or on the total body weight (Supplementary Fig. 5). Histological evaluation of the kidneys revealed that 2DG reduced the cystic index in these kidneys (Fig. 4d), likely by interfering with the cellular proliferation rates of the cystic kidneys (Fig. 4e). Analysis of key metabolic parameters (insulin and glucose blood concentrations as well as glycogen levels in the liver) showed that the effect of 2DG is not secondary to a general effect on metabolism (Fig. 4f). Importantly, using the uniformly-labelled 13C-glucose strategy described above, we demonstrated that 2DG acts indeed by reducing glycolysis in Ksp-Cre:Pkd1flox/− kidneys (Fig. 4g, n = 3). Finally, to determine the efficacy of 2DG treatment in a second, less aggressive model of PKD, we used the previously described Pkd1v/v model20 and found that 2DG reduced the kidney/body weight and ameliorated the histology and cystic index of Pkd1v/v kidneys as well (Fig. 4h-j).

Thus, our study shows that the use of glucose analogues, such as 2DG, may be a promising therapeutic approach. The kidney is an organ with a great functional redundancy and loss of a small percentage of nephrons is not sufficient to cause its functional loss. As outlined above, renal failure in ADPKD is caused by the progressive renal cyst expansion affecting only a minority of nephrons1,4. Therefore, the use of a molecule able to selectively reduce the viability or proliferation of cells lining the cysts would most likely be an effective therapy. 2DG might serve this purpose as it is a well tolerated molecule already in use in humans for some forms of cancer21,12.

Experimental treatment with rapamycin reduces renal cyst expansion in murine ADPKD22,23. However, the results in human beings are more controversial for reasons possibly related to the side-effects of this drug24,25,26. Our data (Fig. 3f) highlight the possibility of combination therapy with several drugs to exploit their synergistic effects while reducing potential side-effects5. For example, metformin is a well-tolerated drug used for treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus12 and was shown to effectively reduce cyst expansion in a PKD mouse model27,28. Our current study provides the mechanistic explanation for this finding and further suggests that the use of metformin or AICAR (enhancing AMPK activity) in combination with 2DG might provide an effective combination therapy, as suggested for cancer29.

In summary, our finding of a metabolic switch to glycolysis in the absence of functional polycystin-1 signaling provides the rationale for a novel therapeutic approach in ADPKD. We also speculate that this might represent a paradigm whereby several drugs that are expected to work synergistically can be exploited to enhance both efficacy and tolerance in the treatment of ADPKD.

We used antibodies to pAkt (Ser473) #9271, Akt #9272, pAMPK (Thr172) 40H9 #2535, AMPK #2532, pS6RP (Ser235 and Ser236) #2211, S6RP #2217, pERK (Thr202 and Tyr204) #9101, ERK #9102, p4EBP1 (Ser65) #9451, 4EBP1 #9452, pLKB1 (Ser428) #3051 and pP70S6K (Thr389) #9205 from Cell Signaling Technology at 1:1,000; antibodies to LKB1 (N-19) #sc-8185 from Santa Cruz at 1:1,000; to pACC (Ser 79) #07-303 and ACC #05-1098 from Millipore at 1:500 and 1:300, respectively; antibodies to LC3 NB100 #2331 from Novus Biologicals at 1:300; antibodies to actin #A5441 and tubulin #T5168 from Sigma Aldrich at 1:5,000; and antibodies to Ki67 #NCL-L-Ki67-MM1 from Novocastra at 1:400.

We employed: U0126 and rapamycin (Cell Signaling Technologies) at final concentrations of 30 μM and 20 or 50 nM, respectively; AICAR and Metfomin (Sigma Aldrich) at the final concentration of 2 mM; Oligomycin (Sigma Aldrich) at the final concentration of 30 μg/ml.

For experiments of glucose starvation the composition of the medium is: basic DMEM (Gibco) 2,3 g/L, Sodium Bicarbonate (Gibco) 3,7 g/L, L-glutamine 0,584 g/L (Gibco), serum (Euroclone), 10%, pen–strep 1% (Gibco) with high glucose (Sigma) 4,5 g/L (equivalent to 25 mM) or with 1 mM glucose for starvation.

For conditional inactivation of the Pkd1flox/flox lines6, we incubated cells twice in the presence of a recombinant TAT-Cre protein at 1 μM (Excellgen) for 2 h with 100 μM of chloroquine (Sigma Aldrich).

For NMR analysis of the extracellular medium we mixed 530 μl of cell culture medium with 60 μl of deuterated PBS solution containing DSS as chemical shift reference for both proton and carbon dimensions, and 10 μl of 1.2% NaN3 water solution. Final sample volume was 600 μl, containing 50 mM PBS, 0.02% NaN3 and 90 μM DSS. Further details on NMR sample preparation, spectra acquisition, metabolites recognition and statistical analysis are described in Supplementary Methods.

We injected litters of Ksp-cre:Pkd1flox/− and Pkd1flox/+ at P8 intracutaneously with 1000 mg/Kg of 13C- glucose (Cortecnet). After 40 min, we sacrificed the mice, washed the kidneys in PBS and snap-frozed them in liquid nitrogen. For 2DG treatment, we injected litters intracutaneously with 2DG at 500 mg/Kg or NaCl at P7 and P8 and the second injection was followed by an injection with 1000 mg/Kg of 13C- glucose and we collected kidneys as above. Sample preparation and detection of 13C-glucose and 13C-lactate by 13C-NMR spectroscopy are described in Supplementary Methods.

We determined serum glucose levels using the BioVision Glucose Assay Kit, liver glycogen levels with the BioVision Glycogen Assay Kit and serum levels of insulin using the Millipore Rat/Mouse insulin ELISA kit following the manufacturer’s recommendations.

To quantify the rate of cystic kidneys we applied a grid of squares 13.625 μm large to sections of kidneys stained with Hematoxylin-Eosin. We marked each cross with a dot and we counted the number of dots inside the lumen on three litters (2.99 mm2 for each). We determined the degree of dilatation according to criteria previously established in Bastos et al30. Briefly:1 dot: normal tubules; 2 dots: dilatated tubules; >3 dots: Cysts.

For ATP content evaluation, we prepared whole-cell extracts of control and treated MEFs by suspending pellets in lysis buffer as described6. We measured intracellular ATP quantification of lysates on 250 ng of protein by luciferase activity as showed in the standard protocol present in the ATP Determination kit (Invitrogen). We used medium of control and treated MEFs after 24 h at 100% cell density. We determined the concentration of lactate using EnzyChromTM L-lactate Assay Kit (BioAssay Systems) and quantified on the final number of cells.

We assessed the mitochondrial transmembrane potential (Ψm) using the tetramethylrhodamine (TMRM, Invitrogen) and analyzed cells by time-lapse imaging and cytofluorimetrically. For FACS analysis, 24 h after plating, we resuspended the cells in phenol-red free HBSS with 10 mM HEPES with 20 nM TMRM in the presence of multidrug resistance pump inhibitor cyclosporine-H 2 μm and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. In parallel, we incubated the cells with an uncoupling agent FCCP 4 μm to measure the specific mitochondria staining. We measured the TMRM fluorescence by FACS analysis6. For quantitative real-time analysis of mitochondrial transmembrane potential, we incubated the cells for 30 min at 37 °C in phenol-red free HBSS (Gibco) with 10 mM HEPES (Gibco), 20 nM TMRM, cyclosporine-H 2 μM and 2 μg/ml Hoechst 33342. We acquired images with IN CELL Analyser 1000 (LKT laboratories) before and after FCCP 4 μm was injected in a motorized way and sequential images were taken for TMRM and Hoechst in different regions of interest every 3 min. Images were automatically analysed with IN CELL INVESTIGATOR ANALYSIS software (GE Healthcare) to define the TMRM intensity.

For proliferation assays we carried out immunostaining using an antibody directed against Ki67 followed by analysis. For cells, we measured fluorescence on triplicates of 300 cells using the microscope Axioplot (Zeiss). For kidney sections, we took images at 20x using the camera Axio MRc5 (Zeiss) with the microscope Axioplan 2 (Zeiss) and we counted positive cells on 6 sections for each group for each experiment using the ImageJ software.

For apoptosis assays we analyzed the cells using the DeadEnd Flurometric transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) system kit (Promega) following the manifacturer’s instructions.

We previously described the generation of the Ksp-Cre:Pkd1flox/− mice31. Briefly, we crossed Pkd1flox/flox,32 and Pkd1+/−:Ksp-Cre mice33 in pure C57/Bl6 genetic background. For treatments, we injected subcutaneously 2DG (Sigma-Aldrich) or vehicle (NaCl) daily from P6 until P8 at 500 mg/kg. We previously described the generation of Pkd1v/v mice20. For treatments, we injected subcutaneously 2DG (Sigma-Aldrich) or vehicle (NaCl) daily from P5 until P7 at 500 mg/kg. For all animal work the female to male ratio is 1:1. All animal care and experimental protocols were conducted upon approval of a specific protocol (IACUC-401) by the institutional care and use ethical committee (I.A.C.U.C.) at the San Raffaele Scientific Institute. Pkd1V/V animal care and experimental protocols were conducted upon approval of a specific protocol (MO10M387) by the institutional care and use ethical committee (I.A.C.U.C.) at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

After sacrifice, we removed the kidneys, washed them in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), weighed and fixed in 4% Paraformaldehyde (PFA). After incubation in a sucrose in PBS gradient scale from 10% to 30% we incubated the samples in 10% glycerol (Sigma) in a mixture of OCT (BIO-OPTICA) and sucrose 30%, finally we embedded them in OCT. We air-dried criostat sections for 1h, rehydrated in PBS, incubated in Harris Hematoxylin 1:10 (Sigma Aldrich) for 2 min, washed, incubated in Eosin G (BIO-OPTICA) for 7 min, washed deshydrated and mounted in DEPEX (Sigma).

For Immunohistochemistry we washed 10 μm cryosections in Tween-0.1% in PBS (like all washes), we fixed them in 4%PFA, permeabilized in 0.1% TritonX100 in PBS, incubated in 0.3% hydrogen peroxide for 30 min, blocked for 1h at room temperature with 5% Normal Goat Serum (Sigma Aldrich) 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma) in phosphate-buffered saline and incubated them O/N at 4 °C with the antibody (ab) in blocking buffer diluted at 1:500. We finally incubated sections with the Dako EnVision+ System-HRP (Dako). We completed the staining by an incubation with 3, 3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB) DAB+ Substrate Chromogen System (DakoCytomation) and counterstained with Harris Hematoxylin (Sigma Aldrich). Diluted 1 to 10 for 3 min.

For immunofluorescence: we fixed cells in 4% PFA, washed them in PBS, permeabilized in PBS-TritonX100 (0,2%), blocked with 3% BSA in PBS, incubated 45 min at 37 °C with the ab directed against ki67 described above at 1:1000 in blocking solution, washed and incubated with the secondary Ab diluted at 1:1000 for 1 h.

We obtained renal cysts of different sizes from 5 polycystic kidneys. We obtained a minimally cystic tissue (MCT), which might have contained a few microscopic cysts from the renal cortex, as PKD control tissue from the same kidneys. We used non-cancerous renal cortical tissue from 3 nephrectomized kidneys with isolated renal cell carcinoma as normal control tissue. We previously described the surgical technique, RNA extraction, purification, quality control, microarray hybridization, profiling and quality assessments18. In brief, after extraction with Absolutely RNA RT–PCR Miniprep Kit (Stratagene), we labelled 50 to 100 ng total RNA and hybridized onto GeneChip Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array (Affymetrix) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. We processed scanned raw data images with GeneChip Operating Software (GCOS) 1.4. We extracted probe set signal intensities and normalized by the robust multi-array average algorithm, which can be found in the R package affy that can be downloaded from the Bioconductor project website (http://www.bioconductor.org). Microarray data are available at GEO website (accession number: GSE7869).

For western blot analysis, we lysed the cells in lysis buffer [150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Na4HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10% Glycerol, 1% Triton-X 100, pH 7.2, Complete protease inhibitors (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (1 mM final of glycerophosphate, sodium orthovanadate and sodium fluoride)]. We quantified total lysates and added Laemmli buffer. We resolved proteins in a SDS-PAGE gel and transferred onto PVDF membranes. Next, we used 5% milk in TBS-T for blocking and for secondary antibody incubations, while 3% BSA in TBS-T for incubations with primary antibodies. We visualized HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (from Amersham) using the ECL System (Amersham), after mixing with Signal West Femto Maximum sensitivity substrate from Thermo Scientific when necessary.

We isolated total RNA from cells or whole kidneys using the RNAspin kit (GE Healthcare) and obtained complementary DNA using oligo(dT) primers (Invitrogen) and Superscript II Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen). We performed quantitative real-time PCR in duplicates using LightCycler480 (Roche Molecular Diagnostics) using SYBR Green I master mix. The complete sequence of primers that we used is provided in Supplementary Methods.

For statistical analysis of the NMR data we performed PCA analysis using R-statistical open source software (http://www.r-project.org/) using in-house statistical package called MUMA (free available upon request). For further details see Supplementary Methods.

For other in vitro and in vivo sudies we performed statistical analysis by applying either an unpaired T-test or a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Bonferroni’s test. The statistical analysis tool that we employed is in the legends. NS: > 0.05; *: P ≤ 0.05; **: P ≤ 0.01; ***: P ≤ 0.001.

For the microarrays studies, we provide details in the Supplementary Methods. In brief, we defined differentially expressed pathways by a NOM P-value ≤ 0.05 with a false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.25, and used FDR ≤ 0.5% for the individual gene comparisons.