---
reference_id: "PMID:39455595"
title: Deletion upstream of MAB21L2 highlights the importance of evolutionarily conserved non-coding sequences for eye development.
authors:
- Ceroni F
- Cicekdal MB
- Holt R
- Sorokina E
- Chassaing N
- Clokie S
- Naert T
- Talbot LV
- Muheisen S
- Bax DA
- Kesim Y
- Kivuva EC
- Vincent-Delorme C
- Lienkamp SS
- Plaisancié J
- De Baere E
- Calvas P
- Vleminckx K
- Semina EV
- Ragge NK
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-53553-2
keywords:
- Animals
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Anophthalmos/genetics
- Coloboma/genetics
- Conserved Sequence
- "Evolution, Molecular"
- Eye
- Microphthalmos/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Sequence Deletion
- Xenopus/genetics
- Zebrafish/genetics
- Eye Proteins
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Xenopus Proteins
- Homeodomain Proteins
- Zebrafish Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deletion upstream of MAB21L2 highlights the importance of evolutionarily conserved non-coding sequences for eye development.
**Authors:** Ceroni F, Cicekdal MB, Holt R, Sorokina E, Chassaing N, Clokie S, Naert T, Talbot LV, Muheisen S, Bax DA, Kesim Y, Kivuva EC, Vincent-Delorme C, Lienkamp SS, Plaisancié J, De Baere E, Calvas P, Vleminckx K, Semina EV, Ragge NK
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-53553-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53553-2)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Oct 26;15(1):9245. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-53553-2.

Deletion upstream of MAB21L2 highlights the importance of evolutionarily 
conserved non-coding sequences for eye development.

Ceroni F(#)(1)(2), Cicekdal MB(#)(3)(4)(5), Holt R(#)(1), Sorokina E(#)(6), 
Chassaing N(7)(8), Clokie S(1), Naert T(3)(9)(10), Talbot LV(1), Muheisen S(6), 
Bax DA(1), Kesim Y(1)(11)(12), Kivuva EC(13), Vincent-Delorme C(14), Lienkamp 
SS(9)(10), Plaisancié J(7)(8)(15), De Baere E(4)(5), Calvas P(7)(8), Vleminckx 
K(16), Semina EV(17), Ragge NK(18)(19).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK.
(2)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, USA.
(7)Centre de Référence des Affections Rares en Génétique Ophtalmologique CARGO, 
Site Constitutif, CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(8)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Purpan, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, 
France.
(9)Institute of Anatomy, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(10)Zurich Kidney Center, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(11)Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus, Oxford, 
UK.
(12)NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK.
(13)Royal Devon University Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, UK.
(14)Service de Génétique Clinique Guy Fontaine, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, 
Lille, France.
(15)Centre de Biologie Intégrative (CBI), Centre de Biologie du Développement 
(CBD), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(16)Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium. kris.vleminckx@irc.ugent.be.
(17)Department of Ophthalmology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, USA. 
esemina@mcw.edu.
(18)Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK. 
nragge@brookes.ac.uk.
(19)West Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service, Birmingham Women's and 
Children's NHS Foundation Trust and Birmingham Health Partners, Birmingham, UK. 
nragge@brookes.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Anophthalmia, microphthalmia and coloboma (AMC) comprise a spectrum of 
developmental eye disorders, accounting for approximately 20% of childhood 
visual impairment. While non-coding regulatory sequences are increasingly 
recognised as contributing to disease burden, characterising their impact on 
gene function and phenotype remains challenging. Furthermore, little is known of 
the nature and extent of their contribution to AMC phenotypes. We report two 
families with variants in or near MAB21L2, a gene where genetic variants are 
known to cause AMC in humans and animal models. The first proband, presenting 
with microphthalmia and coloboma, has a likely pathogenic missense variant 
(c.338 G > C; p.[Trp113Ser]), segregating within the family. The second 
individual, presenting with microphthalmia, carries an ~ 113.5 kb homozygous 
deletion 19.38 kb upstream of MAB21L2. Modelling of the deletion results in 
transient small lens and coloboma as well as midbrain anomalies in zebrafish, 
and microphthalmia and coloboma in Xenopus tropicalis. Using conservation 
analysis, we identify 15 non-coding conserved elements (CEs) within the deleted 
region, while ChIP-seq data from mouse embryonic stem cells demonstrates that 
two of these (CE13 and 14) bind Otx2, a protein with an established role in eye 
development. Targeted disruption of CE14 in Xenopus tropicalis recapitulates an 
ocular coloboma phenotype, supporting its role in eye development. Together, our 
data provides insights into regulatory mechanisms underlying eye development and 
highlights the importance of non-coding sequences as a source of genetic 
diagnoses in AMC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-53553-2
PMCID: PMC11511899
PMID: 39455595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.