---
reference_id: "PMID:39426967"
title: Effective xanthine oxidase inhibitor urate lowering therapy in gout is linked to an emergent serum protein interactome of complement and inflammation modulators.
authors:
- Sanchez C
- Campeau A
- Liu-Bryan R
- Mikuls TR
- "O'Dell JR"
- Gonzalez DJ
- Terkeltaub R
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-74154-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effective xanthine oxidase inhibitor urate lowering therapy in gout is linked to an emergent serum protein interactome of complement and inflammation modulators.
**Authors:** Sanchez C, Campeau A, Liu-Bryan R, Mikuls TR, O'Dell JR, Gonzalez DJ, Terkeltaub R
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-74154-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-74154-5)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Oct 19;14(1):24598. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-74154-5.

Effective xanthine oxidase inhibitor urate lowering therapy in gout is linked to 
an emergent serum protein interactome of complement and inflammation modulators.

Sanchez C(1)(2), Campeau A(1)(2), Liu-Bryan R(3), Mikuls TR(4)(5), O'Dell 
JR(4)(5), Gonzalez DJ(1)(2), Terkeltaub R(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, and Collaborative 
Center for Multiplexed Proteomics, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Autoimmunity and Inflammation, Department of 
Medicine, University of California, 9500 Gilman Drive, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
92093, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, MSB 
5544, 983331, Omaha, NE, 68198-3331, USA.
(5)Veterans Affairs (VA) Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System, Omaha, NE, 
USA.
(6)Division of Rheumatology, Autoimmunity and Inflammation, Department of 
Medicine, University of California, 9500 Gilman Drive, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
92093, USA. rterkeltaub@health.ucsd.edu.

Update of
    Res Sq. 2024 Jan 02:rs.3.rs-3770277. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-3770277/v1.
    Res Sq. 2024 May 09:rs.3.rs-4278877. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-4278877/v1.

Urate-lowering treatment (ULT) to target with xanthine oxidase inhibitors (XOIs) 
paradoxically causes early increase in gouty arthritis flares. Because delayed 
reduction in flare burden is mechanistically unclear, we tested for ULT 
inflammation responsiveness markers. Unbiased proteomics analyzed blood samples 
(baseline, 48 weeks ULT) in two, independent ULT out trial cohorts (n = 19, 
n = 30). STRING-db and multivariate analyses supplemented determinations of 
altered proteins via Wilcoxon matched pairs signed rank testing in XOI ULT 
responders. Mechanistic studies characterized proteomes of cultured XOI-treated 
murine bone marrow macrophages (BMDMs). At 48 weeks ULT, serum urate normalized 
in all gout patients, and flares declined in association with significantly 
altered proteins (p < 0.05) in clustering and proteome networks in sera and 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Sera demonstrated altered complement 
activation and regulatory gene ontology biologic processes. In both cohorts, a 
treatment-emergent serum interactome included key gouty inflammation mediators 
(C5, IL-1B, CXCL8, IL6). Last, febuxostat treatment decreased complement 
activation biologic process proteins in cultured BMDMs. Reduced gout flares are 
linked with a XOI treatment-emergent serum protein interactome that includes 
inflammation regulators, associated with altered complement activation and 
regulatory biologic processes. Serum and leukocyte proteomics could help 
identify when gouty inflammatory processes begin to subside in response to 
ULT.Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier NCT02579096, posted 
October 19, 2015.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-74154-5
PMCID: PMC11490615
PMID: 39426967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DJG: Grant from Janssen Pharmaceuticals RT: Dr. 
Robert Terkeltaub has recently served, or currently serves, as a consultant for 
Allena, LG Chem, Fortress, Selecta Biosciences, Horizon Therapeutics, Atom 
Bioscience, Acquist Therapeutics, Generate Biomedicines, Astra-Zeneca, and 
Synlogic, and was a previous recipient of a research grant from AstraZeneca. He 
serves as the non-salaried President of the G-CAN (Gout, Hyperuricemia, and 
Crystal-Associated Disease Network) research society, which annually receives 
unrestricted arms-length grant support from pharma donors. The other authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.