---
reference_id: PMID:11781871
title: Mutational spectrum in the PEX7 gene and functional analysis of mutant alleles in 78 patients with rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 1.
authors:
- Motley AM
- Brites P
- Gerez L
- Hogenhout E
- Haasjes J
- Benne R
- Tabak HF
- Wanders RJ
- Waterham HR
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1086/338998
keywords:
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- COS Cells
- "Chondrodysplasia Punctata, Rhizomelic/classification, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Codon/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Fibroblasts
- Frameshift Mutation/genetics
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- "Genes, Reporter/genetics"
- Genetic Complementation Test
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Luciferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Open Reading Frames/genetics
- Peroxisomal Targeting Signal 2 Receptor
- Phenotype
- Protein Folding
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Repetitive Sequences, Amino Acid/genetics"
- Sequence Alignment
- Structure-Activity Relationship
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutational spectrum in the PEX7 gene and functional analysis of mutant alleles in 78 patients with rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 1.
**Authors:** Motley AM, Brites P, Gerez L, Hogenhout E, Haasjes J, Benne R, Tabak HF, Wanders RJ, Waterham HR
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1086/338998](https://doi.org/10.1086/338998)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 Mar;70(3):612-24. doi: 10.1086/338998. Epub 2002 Jan 7.

Mutational spectrum in the PEX7 gene and functional analysis of mutant alleles 
in 78 patients with rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 1.

Motley AM(1), Brites P, Gerez L, Hogenhout E, Haasjes J, Benne R, Tabak HF, 
Wanders RJ, Waterham HR.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) is a genetically heterogeneous, 
autosomal recessive disorder of peroxisomal metabolism that is clinically 
characterized by symmetrical shortening of the proximal long bones, cataracts, 
periarticular calcifications, multiple joint contractures, and psychomotor 
retardation. Most patients with RCDP have mutations in the PEX7 gene encoding 
peroxin 7, the cytosolic PTS2-receptor protein required for targeting a subset 
of enzymes to peroxisomes. These enzymes are deficient in cells of patients with 
RCDP, because of their mislocalization to the cytoplasm. We report the 
mutational spectrum in the PEX7 gene of 78 patients (including five pairs of 
sibs) clinically and biochemically diagnosed with RCDP type I. We found 22 
different mutations, including 18 novel ones. Furthermore, we show by functional 
analysis that disease severity correlates with PEX7 allele activity: expression 
of eight different alleles from patients with severe RCDP failed to restore the 
targeting defect in RCDP fibroblasts, whereas two alleles found only in patients 
with mild disease complemented the targeting defect upon overexpression. 
Surprisingly, one of the mild alleles comprises a duplication of nucleotides 
45-52, which is predicted to lead to a frameshift at codon 17 and an absence of 
functional peroxin 7. The ability of this allele to complement the targeting 
defect in RCDP cells suggests that frame restoration occurs, resulting in 
full-length functional peroxin 7, which leads to amelioration of the predicted 
severe phenotype. This was confirmed in vitro by expression of the 
eight-nucleotide duplication-containing sequence fused in different reading 
frames to the coding sequence of firefly luciferase in COS cells.

DOI: 10.1086/338998
PMCID: PMC384941
PMID: 11781871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]