---
reference_id: "PMID:25772213"
title: "Dravet syndrome in Sweden: a population-based study."
authors:
- Rosander C
- Hallböök T
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12709
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dravet syndrome in Sweden: a population-based study.
**Authors:** Rosander C, Hallböök T
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dmcn.12709](https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.12709)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2015 Jul;57(7):628-633. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12709. Epub
2015  Mar 13.

Dravet syndrome in Sweden: a population-based study.

Rosander C(1), Hallböök T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Institution of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Sweden.

AIM: To assess the prevalence and incidence of Dravet syndrome in children
diagnosed in Sweden between 2007 and 2011, and to describe neurological
comorbidity, disease course, phenotypes, and treatment effects.
METHOD: All neuropaediatricians at university and county hospitals were asked to
supply information for patients that matched the electro-clinical profile of
Dravet syndrome. Genetic laboratories and referral clinicians were also
contacted and requested to supply information.
RESULTS: The estimated incidence was one in 33 000 live births (95% CI
1:20 400-1:56 200) and prevalence on December 31, 2011 was one in 45 700
children aged less than 18 years of age (95% CI 1:33 800-1:63 400). The median
age of the 42 children (18 males, 24 females) was 7 years (range 1-17y), the
median age at seizure onset was 6 months (range 0-12mo), and the median age at
diagnosis was 3 years (range 1-14y). A mutation in the SCN1A gene was found in
37 patients (88%), four were familial. Intellectual disability was diagnosed in
28 (67%) children, and 18 out of 30 patients investigated had autism spectrum
disorder. Thirty participants had neurological deficits. Stiripentol, as an
add-on medication, was used in 18 patients. Among these patients, seven were
seizure free, six had >50% seizure reduction, and five <50% seizure reduction.
INTERPRETATION: This is the first population-based study of Dravet syndrome in
Sweden. Our data confirm international findings of incidence and highlights the
severe and progressive course of this genetic epilepsy syndrome.

© 2015 Mac Keith Press.

DOI: 10.1111/dmcn.12709
PMID: 25772213
