---
reference_id: "PMID:34084683"
title: Heterozygous Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Causing Pulmonary Emboli and Pulmonary Bullae.
authors:
- Tannous T
- Rosso C
- Keating M
journal: Cureus
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.14759
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterozygous Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Causing Pulmonary Emboli and Pulmonary Bullae.
**Authors:** Tannous T, Rosso C, Keating M
**Journal:** Cureus (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.14759](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.14759)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2021 Apr 29;13(4):e14759. doi: 10.7759/cureus.14759.

Heterozygous Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Causing Pulmonary Emboli and 
Pulmonary Bullae.

Tannous T(1), Rosso C(2), Keating M(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Roger Williams Medical Center/Boston University, 
Providence, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, University of California Irvine, Irvine, USA.
(3)Hematology and Oncology, University of California Irvine, Irvine, USA.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency is an autosomal co-dominant disease known for 
different genetic alterations in the serine protease inhibitor enzyme by which 
different disease phenotypes can manifest. The lung and the liver are the most 
common organs involved. The severity of the disease depends on the phenotypes 
involved. However, emerging evidence shows that this disease can impact multiple 
organ systems and may even develop regardless of the phenotype. We describe a 
case of a young man with a known history of the MS phenotype who presented with 
chest pain and was found to have pulmonary emboli and bullae. His past medical 
history was relevant for a gastric ulcer and elevated liver enzymes. Due to this 
young man's age and lack of risk factors for the aforementioned diseases, we 
propose that these findings were manifestations of his MS phenotype. This case 
raises multiple questions challenging the presumed benign nature of the MS 
phenotype. We propose a closer follow-up and lower threshold for diagnostic 
studies in patients with the heterozygous form.

Copyright © 2021, Tannous et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.14759
PMCID: PMC8164444
PMID: 34084683

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.