---
reference_id: "PMID:23300905"
title: "Galactic cosmic radiation leads to cognitive impairment and increased aβ plaque accumulation in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- Cherry JD
- Liu B
- Frost JL
- Lemere CA
- Williams JP
- Olschowka JA
- "O'Banion MK"
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053275
keywords:
- "Alzheimer Disease/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- Amyloid beta-Protein Precursor/metabolism
- Animals
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology, radiation effects"
- "Cognition Disorders/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Cosmic Radiation/adverse effects
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Male
- Mice
- "Plaque, Amyloid/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Presenilin-1/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Galactic cosmic radiation leads to cognitive impairment and increased aβ plaque accumulation in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Cherry JD, Liu B, Frost JL, Lemere CA, Williams JP, Olschowka JA, O'Banion MK
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0053275](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0053275)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e53275. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053275. Epub 2012 Dec 
31.

Galactic cosmic radiation leads to cognitive impairment and increased aβ plaque 
accumulation in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Cherry JD(1), Liu B, Frost JL, Lemere CA, Williams JP, Olschowka JA, O'Banion 
MK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester 
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, United States of America.

Galactic Cosmic Radiation consisting of high-energy, high-charged (HZE) 
particles poses a significant threat to future astronauts in deep space. Aside 
from cancer, concerns have been raised about late degenerative risks, including 
effects on the brain. In this study we examined the effects of (56)Fe particle 
irradiation in an APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease (AD). We 
demonstrated 6 months after exposure to 10 and 100 cGy (56)Fe radiation at 1 
GeV/µ, that APP/PS1 mice show decreased cognitive abilities measured by 
contextual fear conditioning and novel object recognition tests. Furthermore, in 
male mice we saw acceleration of Aβ plaque pathology using Congo red and 6E10 
staining, which was further confirmed by ELISA measures of Aβ isoforms. 
Increases were not due to higher levels of amyloid precursor protein (APP) or 
increased cleavage as measured by levels of the β C-terminal fragment of APP. 
Additionally, we saw no change in microglial activation levels judging by CD68 
and Iba-1 immunoreactivities in and around Aβ plaques or insulin degrading 
enzyme, which has been shown to degrade Aβ. However, immunohistochemical 
analysis of ICAM-1 showed evidence of endothelial activation after 100 cGy 
irradiation in male mice, suggesting possible alterations in Aβ trafficking 
through the blood brain barrier as a possible cause of plaque increase. Overall, 
our results show for the first time that HZE particle radiation can increase Aβ 
plaque pathology in an APP/PS1 mouse model of AD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053275
PMCID: PMC3534034
PMID: 23300905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.