---
reference_id: "PMID:26014711"
title: "[Research advances in diagnosis and therapy of Niemann-Pick disease type C]."
authors:
- Ren SC
- Gao BQ
journal: Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi
year: '2015'
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Niemann-Pick Disease, Type C/diagnosis, etiology, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Research advances in diagnosis and therapy of Niemann-Pick disease type C].
**Authors:** Ren SC, Gao BQ
**Journal:** Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi (2015)

## Content

1. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2015 May;17(5):533-8.

[Research advances in diagnosis and therapy of Niemann-Pick disease type C].

[Article in Chinese]

Ren SC(1), Gao BQ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing 100050, China. bouyren@126.com.

Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal lipid 
storage disease associated with impaired intracellular cholesterol trafficking. 
A wide spectrum of clinical phenotype has been described, with a possible onset 
at all ages of life from the neonatal period to adulthood, more often in 
childhood. Typically, hepatosplenomegaly, dystaxia, dysphagia, dysarthria and 
dementia are presented in NPC patients. Neurologic symptoms vary according to 
the onset age, but prolonged neonatal cholestasis, splenomegaly, cataplexy and 
vertical supranuclear gaze palsy are more specific signs to the diagnosis of the 
disease. Impaired cholesterol trafficking and unesterified cholesterol 
accumulation in the late endosomes and lysosomals, as a results of mutations in 
NPC1 or NPC2 genes, are initial for the disease, and defective cellular 
autophagy, defective lysosomal calcium homeostasis and oxidative stress may all 
play roles in the physiological processes. The definite diagnosis requires 
demonstration of unesterified cholesterol accumulated in fibroblasts cultured 
from skin biopsies or of pathogenic mutation of NPC1/NPC2 genes. Miglustat, the 
only available treatment approved to date, can alleviate neurological symptoms 
and slow disease progression when administered earlier.

PMID: 26014711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]