---
reference_id: "PMID:23633875"
title: Cleidocranial dysplasia with hearing loss.
authors:
- Candamourty R
- Venkatachalam S
- Yuvaraj V
- Kumar GS
journal: J Nat Sci Biol Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.4103/0976-9668.107318
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cleidocranial dysplasia with hearing loss.
**Authors:** Candamourty R, Venkatachalam S, Yuvaraj V, Kumar GS
**Journal:** J Nat Sci Biol Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0976-9668.107318](https://doi.org/10.4103/0976-9668.107318)

## Content

1. J Nat Sci Biol Med. 2013 Jan;4(1):245-9. doi: 10.4103/0976-9668.107318.

Cleidocranial dysplasia with hearing loss.

Candamourty R(1), Venkatachalam S, Yuvaraj V, Kumar GS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Indira Gandhi Institute of 
Dental Sciences, Mahatma Gandhi Medical College and Research Institute Campus, 
Pillaiyarkuppam, Pondicherry, India.

Cleidocranial dysplasia is an inherited skeletal anomaly that affects primarily 
the skull, clavicle, and dentition, which can occur spontaneously, but most are 
inherited in autosomal dominant mode. The skull findings are brachycephaly, 
delayed or failed closure of the fontanelles, presence of open skull sutures and 
multiple wormian bones with pronounced frontal bossing. The syndrome is notable 
for aplasia or hypoplasia of the clavicles. The neck appears long and narrow and 
the shoulders markedly droop. Oral manifestations exhibit a hypoplastic maxilla 
with high-arched palate. Crowding of teeth is produced by retention of deciduous 
teeth, delayed eruption of permanent teeth, and the presence of a large number 
of unerupted supernumerary teeth. We report a case of CCD in a 12-year-old girl 
who presented with an unaesthetic facial appearance, unerupted permanent 
dentition with hearing loss.

DOI: 10.4103/0976-9668.107318
PMCID: PMC3633291
PMID: 23633875

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared