---
reference_id: "PMID:19141161"
title: Familial deficiency of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors.
authors:
- Weston BW
- Monahan PE
journal: Haemophilia
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2008.01853.x
keywords:
- Adult
- "Blood Coagulation Disorders/congenital, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Blood Coagulation Factors/therapeutic use
- "Blood Proteins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Carbon-Carbon Ligases/genetics
- Female
- Hemorrhage/blood
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mixed Function Oxygenases/genetics
- Plasma
- Pregnancy
- "Vitamin K/metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Vitamin K Epoxide Reductases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial deficiency of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors.
**Authors:** Weston BW, Monahan PE
**Journal:** Haemophilia (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2516.2008.01853.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2516.2008.01853.x)

## Content

1. Haemophilia. 2008 Nov;14(6):1209-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2008.01853.x.

Familial deficiency of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors.

Weston BW(1), Monahan PE.

Author information:
(1)The Harold R. Roberts Comprehensive Hemophilia Treatment Center, Department 
of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7220, USA. bwwmd@med.unc.edu

Combined deficiency of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors II, VII, IX and X 
(and proteins C, S, and Z) is usually an acquired clinical problem, often 
resulting from liver disease, malabsorption, or warfarin overdose. A rare 
inherited form of defective gamma-carboxylation resulting in early onset of 
bleeding was first described by McMillan and Roberts in 1966 and subsequently 
has been termed 'vitamin K-dependent clotting factor deficiency' (VKCFD). 
Biochemical and molecular studies identify two variants of this autosomal 
recessive disorder: VKCFD1, which is associated with point mutations in the 
gamma-glutamylcarboxylase gene (GGCX), and VKCFD2, which results from point 
mutations in the vitamin K epoxide reductase gene (VKOR). Bleeding ranges in 
severity from mild to severe. Therapy includes high oral doses of vitamin K for 
prophylaxis, usually resulting in partial correction of factor deficiency, and 
episodic use of plasma infusions or prothrombin complex concentrate. Recent 
molecular studies have the potential to further our understanding of vitamin K 
metabolism, gamma-carboxylation, and the functional role this post-translational 
modification has for other proteins. The results may also provide potential 
targets for molecular therapeutics and pharmacogenetics.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2008.01853.x
PMCID: PMC2643352
PMID: 19141161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]