---
reference_id: "PMID:38451496"
title: Multinational External Validation of Autonomous Retinopathy of Prematurity Screening.
authors:
- Coyner AS
- Murickan T
- Oh MA
- Young BK
- Ostmo SR
- Singh P
- Chan RVP
- Moshfeghi DM
- Shah PK
- Venkatapathy N
- Chiang MF
- Kalpathy-Cramer J
- Campbell JP
journal: JAMA Ophthalmol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2024.0045
keywords:
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Infant
- Child
- Humans
- Retinopathy of Prematurity/diagnosis
- Artificial Intelligence
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Gestational Age
- "Infant, Premature"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multinational External Validation of Autonomous Retinopathy of Prematurity Screening.
**Authors:** Coyner AS, Murickan T, Oh MA, Young BK, Ostmo SR, Singh P, Chan RVP, Moshfeghi DM, Shah PK, Venkatapathy N, Chiang MF, Kalpathy-Cramer J, Campbell JP
**Journal:** JAMA Ophthalmol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2024.0045](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2024.0045)

## Content

1. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2024 Apr 1;142(4):327-335. doi: 
10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2024.0045.

Multinational External Validation of Autonomous Retinopathy of Prematurity 
Screening.

Coyner AS(1), Murickan T(1), Oh MA(1), Young BK(1), Ostmo SR(1), Singh P(2), 
Chan RVP(3), Moshfeghi DM(4), Shah PK(5), Venkatapathy N(5), Chiang MF(6)(7), 
Kalpathy-Cramer J(2), Campbell JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland.
(2)Ophthalmology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora.
(3)Illinois Eye and Ear Infirmary, University of Illinois at Chicago.
(4)Byers Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Palo Alto, California.
(5)Pediatric Retina and Ocular Oncology, Aravind Eye Hospital, Coimbatore, 
India.
(6)National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(7)National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland.

Comment in
    JAMA Ophthalmol. 2024 Apr 1;142(4):335-336. doi: 
10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2024.0218.

IMPORTANCE: Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a leading cause of blindness in 
children, with significant disparities in outcomes between high-income and 
low-income countries, due in part to insufficient access to ROP screening.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate how well autonomous artificial intelligence (AI)-based 
ROP screening can detect more-than-mild ROP (mtmROP) and type 1 ROP.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This diagnostic study evaluated the 
performance of an AI algorithm, trained and calibrated using 2530 examinations 
from 843 infants in the Imaging and Informatics in Retinopathy of Prematurity 
(i-ROP) study, on 2 external datasets (6245 examinations from 1545 infants in 
the Stanford University Network for Diagnosis of ROP [SUNDROP] and 5635 
examinations from 2699 infants in the Aravind Eye Care Systems [AECS] 
telemedicine programs). Data were taken from 11 and 48 neonatal care units in 
the US and India, respectively. Data were collected from January 2012 to July 
2021, and data were analyzed from July to December 2023.
EXPOSURES: An imaging processing pipeline was created using deep learning to 
autonomously identify mtmROP and type 1 ROP in eye examinations performed via 
telemedicine.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The area under the receiver operating 
characteristics curve (AUROC) as well as sensitivity and specificity for 
detection of mtmROP and type 1 ROP at the eye examination and patient levels.
RESULTS: The prevalence of mtmROP and type 1 ROP were 5.9% (91 of 1545) and 1.2% 
(18 of 1545), respectively, in the SUNDROP dataset and 6.2% (168 of 2699) and 
2.5% (68 of 2699) in the AECS dataset. Examination-level AUROCs for mtmROP and 
type 1 ROP were 0.896 and 0.985, respectively, in the SUNDROP dataset and 0.920 
and 0.982 in the AECS dataset. At the cross-sectional examination level, mtmROP 
detection had high sensitivity (SUNDROP: mtmROP, 83.5%; 95% CI, 76.6-87.7; type 
1 ROP, 82.2%; 95% CI, 81.2-83.1; AECS: mtmROP, 80.8%; 95% CI, 76.2-84.9; type 1 
ROP, 87.8%; 95% CI, 86.8-88.7). At the patient level, all infants who developed 
type 1 ROP screened positive (SUNDROP: 100%; 95% CI, 81.4-100; AECS: 100%; 95% 
CI, 94.7-100) prior to diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Where and when ROP telemedicine programs can be 
implemented, autonomous ROP screening may be an effective force multiplier for 
secondary prevention of ROP.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2024.0045
PMCID: PMC10921347
PMID: 38451496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Coyner 
reported grants from the National Eye Institute, Research to Prevent Blindness, 
Malcolm Marquis Innovation Fund, US Agency for International Development, and 
Seva Foundation during the conduct of the study as well as personal fees from 
Siloam Vision outside the submitted work. Dr Chan reported grants from the 
National Institutes of Health and Research to Prevent Blindness during the 
conduct of the study; personal fees from Alcon, Genentech, Ocular Therapeutix, 
and Regeneron; and owns equity in Siloam Vision outside the submitted work. Dr 
Moshfeghi reported grants from Genentech during the conduct of the study; grants 
from Research to Prevent Blindness and the National Eye Institute; personal fees 
from Akebia, Regeneron, Genentech, Alexion, Aspire Pharma, Affamed, Feliqs, Icon 
Clinical Research, Slack, University of Miami, and Vanotech Chengdu; owns equity 
in Visunex, Ainsly, Plenoptika, Pykus, DSENTZ, PROMISIGHT, and PR3VENT; is an 
unpaid advisor for Clinical Trials Research Group and Insite DME; and serves on 
the board of directors for DSENTZ, PROMISIGHT, and PR3VENT outside the submitted 
work. Dr Chiang reported grants from the National Institutes of Health, National 
Science Foundation, and Genentech as well as personal fees from Novartis during 
the conduct of the study. Dr Kalpathy-Cramer reported grants from GE Heathcare 
and Genentech outside the submitted work; has a patent for a retinopathy of 
prematurity deep learning algorithm pending; and consults for Siloam Vision. Dr 
Campbell reported grants from the National Eye Institute and Research to Prevent 
Blindness; personal fees from Boston AI during the conduct of the study; and 
grants from Genentech outside the submitted work; and owns equity in Siloam 
Vision. No other disclosures were reported.