---
reference_id: "PMID:39189802"
title: "Arsenical keratosis in China: A case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Tao R
- Wang R
journal: Skin Res Technol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/srt.13903
keywords:
- Humans
- Acitretin/therapeutic use
- "Arsenic/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Arsenic Poisoning/pathology
- China
- "Keratosis/chemically induced, pathology, therapy"
- "Medicine, Chinese Traditional/adverse effects, methods"
- "Skin Neoplasms/chemically induced, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenical keratosis in China: A case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Tao R, Wang R
**Journal:** Skin Res Technol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/srt.13903](https://doi.org/10.1111/srt.13903)

## Content

1. Skin Res Technol. 2024 Sep;30(9):e13903. doi: 10.1111/srt.13903.

Arsenical keratosis in China: A case report and review of the literature.

Tao R(1)(2), Wang R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Peking University First Hospital, National
Clinical Research Center for Skin and Immune Diseases, Beijing Key Laboratory of
Molecular Diagnosis on Dermatoses, NMPA Key Laboratory for Quality Control and
Evaluation of Cosmetics, Beijing, China.

Erratum in
    Skin Res Technol. 2025 Oct;31(10):e70275. doi: 10.1111/srt.70275.

BACKGROUND: Arsenical keratosis is a precancerous dermatosis which could be
induced by long-term exposure to arsenic poisoning. Arsenic is often added to
traditional Chinese medicine in a non-compliant manner to increase the
effectiveness of psoriasis treatment, which is often the main cause of arsenic
poisoning in Chinese patients with psoriasis.
OBJECTIVES: We performed a systemic review of arsenic keratosis during the past
32 years to better understand the sources, treatment, and prognosis of arsenic
keratosis in China.
METHODS: We searched Medline/PubMed, Embase, CNKI, and Wanfang databases for
research studies published between 1992 and 2024. A total of 64 papers with 78
individual Chinese of arsenical keratosis were included in this analysis.
RESULTS: Of the patients included in the analysis, 92.21% of arsenic poisoning
was due to iatrogenic factors: Chinese traditional medicine. Seventy-six
patients (98.70%) had skin manifestation of hyperkeratotic papules and plaques,
68 patients (88.31%) had hyperpigmentation, 43 cases (55.84%) had
hypopigmentation, and only 4 had a clear indication of Mees' lines in nails. A
total of 52.63% of patients presented with tumors, including squamous cell
carcinoma, Bowen's disease, and basal cell carcinoma. For patients with tumors,
20 opted for surgery, 6 for radiotherapy, and 3 for PDT. All patients with only
cutaneous tumors are currently well-controlled. Death occurred in one patient
with metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. Keratinizing papules improved
significantly in 70.59% of patients treated with Acitretin Capsules.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, arsenic sources in Chinese patients were mainly from
traditional Chinese medicine, and there were no reports of exposure to water
sources or occupational sources in the past 32 years. Most of the patients
showed keratinizing papules and pigmentation, and more than 1/2 of the patients
showed skin tumors, mainly squamous cell carcinoma. The treatments of tumors are
mainly surgical treatment, PDT and radiotherapy can also be selected. The
improvement in keratinizing rash was greater than 70% with acitretin capsules.
Patients with this disease should be regularly followed up for early detection
and timely treatment of potential malignant tumors.

© 2024 The Author(s). Skin Research and Technology published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/srt.13903
PMCID: PMC11348506
PMID: 39189802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
