---
reference_id: "PMID:11528389"
title: Aberrant regulation of insulin receptor alternative splicing is associated with insulin resistance in myotonic dystrophy.
authors:
- Savkur RS
- Philips AV
- Cooper TA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/ng704
keywords:
- Alternative Splicing
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- DNA Primers
- Humans
- Insulin Resistance/genetics
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- "Myotonic Dystrophy/genetics, physiopathology"
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
- RNA/genetics
- "Receptor, Insulin/genetics"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Trinucleotide Repeats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aberrant regulation of insulin receptor alternative splicing is associated with insulin resistance in myotonic dystrophy.
**Authors:** Savkur RS, Philips AV, Cooper TA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng704](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng704)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Sep;29(1):40-7. doi: 10.1038/ng704.

Aberrant regulation of insulin receptor alternative splicing is associated with
insulin resistance in myotonic dystrophy.

Savkur RS(1), Philips AV, Cooper TA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is caused by a CTG trinucleotide expansion in
the 3' untranslated region of the DM protein kinase gene. People with DM1 have
an unusual form of insulin resistance caused by a defect in skeletal muscle.
Here we demonstrate that alternative splicing of the insulin receptor (IR)
pre-mRNA is aberrantly regulated in DM1 skeletal muscle tissue, resulting in
predominant expression of the lower-signaling nonmuscle isoform (IR-A). IR-A
also predominates in DM1 skeletal muscle cultures, which exhibit a decreased
metabolic response to insulin relative to cultures from normal controls.
Steady-state levels of CUG-BP, a regulator of pre-mRNA splicing proposed to
mediate some aspects of DM1 pathogenesis, are increased in DM1 skeletal muscle;
overexpression of CUG-BP in normal cells induces a switch to IR-A. The CUG-BP
protein mediates this switch through an intronic element located upstream of the
alternatively spliced exon 11, and specifically binds within this element in
vitro. These results support a model in which increased expression of a splicing
regulator contributes to insulin resistance in DM1 by affecting IR alternative
splicing.

DOI: 10.1038/ng704
PMID: 11528389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
