---
reference_id: "PMID:19172113"
title: Aggregation of expanded huntingtin in the brains of patients with Huntington disease.
authors:
- Hoffner G
- Souès S
- Djian P
journal: Prion
year: '2007'
doi: 10.4161/pri.1.1.4056
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aggregation of expanded huntingtin in the brains of patients with Huntington disease.
**Authors:** Hoffner G, Souès S, Djian P
**Journal:** Prion (2007)
**DOI:** [10.4161/pri.1.1.4056](https://doi.org/10.4161/pri.1.1.4056)

## Content

1. Prion. 2007 Jan-Mar;1(1):26-31. doi: 10.4161/pri.1.1.4056.

Aggregation of expanded huntingtin in the brains of patients with Huntington 
disease.

Hoffner G(1), Souès S, Djian P.

Author information:
(1)Unité Propre de Recherche 2228 du Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, Institut Interdisciplinaire des Sciences du Vivant des 
Saints-Pères, Université René Descartes, Paris, France.

Huntingtin containing an expanded polyglutamine causes neuronal death and 
Huntington disease. Although expanded huntingtin is found in virtually every 
cell type, its toxicity is limited to neurons of certain areas of the brain, 
such as cortex and caudate/putamen. In affected areas of the brain, expanded 
huntingtin is not found in its intact monomeric form. It is found instead in the 
form of N-terminal fragments, oligomers and polymers, all of which accumulate in 
the cortex. Whereas the oligomer is mostly soluble, the polymers and the 
fragments associate with each other and with other proteins to form the 
insoluble inclusions characteristic of the disease. It is likely that the 
aggregates containing expanded huntingtin are toxic to neurons, but it remains 
to be determined whether the oligomer or the inclusion is the toxic species.

DOI: 10.4161/pri.1.1.4056
PMCID: PMC2633704
PMID: 19172113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]