---
reference_id: "PMID:35085771"
title: EML4-ALK G1202R mutation induces EMT and confers resistance to ceritinib in NSCLC cells via activation of STAT3/Slug signaling.
authors:
- Shen J
- Meng Y
- Wang K
- Gao M
- Du J
- Wang J
- Li Z
- Zuo D
- Wu Y
journal: Cell Signal
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2022.110264
keywords:
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition/genetics
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Pyrimidines
- STAT3 Transcription Factor/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Sulfones
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EML4-ALK G1202R mutation induces EMT and confers resistance to ceritinib in NSCLC cells via activation of STAT3/Slug signaling.
**Authors:** Shen J, Meng Y, Wang K, Gao M, Du J, Wang J, Li Z, Zuo D, Wu Y
**Journal:** Cell Signal (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cellsig.2022.110264](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2022.110264)

## Content

1. Cell Signal. 2022 Apr;92:110264. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2022.110264. Epub 2022
 Jan 24.

EML4-ALK G1202R mutation induces EMT and confers resistance to ceritinib in
NSCLC cells via activation of STAT3/Slug signaling.

Shen J(1), Meng Y(2), Wang K(2), Gao M(2), Du J(2), Wang J(2), Li Z(2), Zuo
D(3), Wu Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, 103 Wenhua
Road, Shenhe District, Shenyang 110016, China; School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Liaoning University, Small Molecular Targeted Drug R&D Engineering
Research Center of Liaoning Province, 66 Chongshan Road, Huanggu District,
Shenyang 110036, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, 103 Wenhua
Road, Shenhe District, Shenyang 110016, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, 103 Wenhua
Road, Shenhe District, Shenyang 110016, China. Electronic address:
zuodaiying@163.com.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, 103 Wenhua
Road, Shenhe District, Shenyang 110016, China. Electronic address:
yingliang_1016@163.com.

The echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4)-anaplastic lymphoma
kinase (ALK) fusion gene occurs in approximately 5% of non-small-cell lung
cancers (NSCLCs). The development of ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors (ALK-TKIs)
is a major advance in treating NSCLC with the ALK fusion gene. Nevertheless,
acquired resistance to ALK-TKIs ultimately limits their use. A prevalent
mechanism of drug resistance in kinases occurs through the mutation of G1202R in
ALK. However, the mechanisms underlying G1202R resistance to ceritinib are not
fully understood. Here, we demonstrated that the expression of EML4-ALK G1202R
mutation in A549 cells induced an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
phenotype and significantly increased the migration and invasion abilities.
These phenomena may be due to the upregulation of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), accompanied by the elevated expression of
Slug in EML4-ALK G1202R mutant cells. Furthermore, the combination of ALK and
STAT3 inhibitors restored the sensitivity of EML4-ALK G1202R mutant cells to
ceritinib. In conclusion, these data indicate that the EML4-ALK G1202R mutation
mediates the EMT phenotype by activating the STAT3/Slug signaling pathway,
resulting in resistance to ceritinib, and that the combination of STAT3 and ALK
inhibitors may overcome ALK mutation-driven drug resistance in the clinic.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2022.110264
PMID: 35085771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
