---
reference_id: "PMID:40675782"
title: "Sleep-disordered breathing in children with achondroplasia assessed by polysomnography: a retrospective chart review."
authors:
- Buciek LH
- Jacobsen JR
- Raj S
- Adams AM
- Vandeleur M
- Hove HB
- Buchwald CV
- Kiaer EK
- Griffiths A
- Savarirayan R
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2025-328595
keywords:
- Humans
- Achondroplasia/complications
- Polysomnography/methods
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- Child
- Male
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- "Sleep Apnea Syndromes/epidemiology, etiology, diagnosis"
- Adolescent
- Prevalence
- Australia/epidemiology
- "Sleep Apnea, Obstructive/epidemiology, etiology"
- "Infant, Newborn"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sleep-disordered breathing in children with achondroplasia assessed by polysomnography: a retrospective chart review.
**Authors:** Buciek LH, Jacobsen JR, Raj S, Adams AM, Vandeleur M, Hove HB, Buchwald CV, Kiaer EK, Griffiths A, Savarirayan R
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/archdischild-2025-328595](https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2025-328595)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 2025 Dec 15;111(1):43-48. doi:
10.1136/archdischild-2025-328595.

Sleep-disordered breathing in children with achondroplasia assessed by 
polysomnography: a retrospective chart review.

Buciek LH(#)(1)(2), Jacobsen JR(#)(1)(2), Raj S(1), Adams AM(3), Vandeleur M(3), 
Hove HB(2), Buchwald CV(4), Kiaer EK(4), Griffiths A(#)(3), Savarirayan R(#)(5).

Author information:
(1)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Rare Diseases, Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, The Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, and Audiology, 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Molecular Therapies, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia ravi.savarirayan@mcri.edu.au.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: Sleep-disordered breathing is a key childhood complication in 
children with achondroplasia. This retrospective study aimed to document the 
prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing in children with achondroplasia 
assessed by polysomnography.
DESIGN: The prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing assessed by polysomnography 
among children aged 0-18 years with achondroplasia from 2013 to 2024 at The 
Royal Children's Hospital, Australia, was retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: The cohort included 80 children with achondroplasia (54% females, 95% 
confirmed molecular diagnosis) with an average number of 3.6 polysomnographies 
collected per child (n=288). A total of 85% (68/80) had sleep-disordered 
breathing and 21% reported no prior symptoms. Sleep-disordered breathing 
subtypes included obstructive sleep apnoea in 81% (55/68), central sleep apnoea 
in 3% (2/68), mixed sleep apnoea in 7% (5/68) and primary snoring in 9% (6/68). 
Among those with obstructive and mixed sleep apnoea, 58% (35/60) had moderate or 
severe obstructive sleep apnoea. In 44 children, a corresponding MRI was 
evaluated for foramen magnum stenosis using the Achondroplasia Foramen Magnum 
Score. No correlation was found with sleep-disordered breathing severity 
(Spearman's coefficient (ρ)=0.03). Among 27 children who received a precision 
therapy for achondroplasia (vosoritide, n=18, infigratinib, n=8 and recifercept, 
n=1), the median respiratory disturbance index/hour improved from 2.7 (25th-75th 
percentile, (0.9-4.8)) to 1.1 (0.3-2.6) after 1 year of treatment compared with 
baseline.
CONCLUSIONS: Sleep-disordered breathing was present in 85% of 80 children with 
achondroplasia, with 21% being asymptomatic. Respiratory parameters did not 
correlate with foramen magnum stenosis severity and improved after 1 year of 
treatment in those treated with a precision therapy.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2026. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2025-328595
PMID: 40675782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.