---
reference_id: "PMID:24429094"
title: "How the airway smooth muscle in cystic fibrosis reacts in proinflammatory conditions: implications for airway hyper-responsiveness and asthma in cystic fibrosis."
authors:
- McCuaig S
- Martin JG
journal: Lancet Respir Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70058-9
keywords:
- "Asthma/diagnosis, etiology, immunology, physiopathology"
- Bronchial Provocation Tests
- Calcium Signaling
- "Cystic Fibrosis/complications, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator/metabolism
- Humans
- Inflammation/immunology
- Interleukins/metabolism
- "Muscle, Smooth/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Respiratory System/metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How the airway smooth muscle in cystic fibrosis reacts in proinflammatory conditions: implications for airway hyper-responsiveness and asthma in cystic fibrosis.
**Authors:** McCuaig S, Martin JG
**Journal:** Lancet Respir Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70058-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70058-9)

## Content

1. Lancet Respir Med. 2013 Apr;1(2):137-47. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70058-9. 
Epub 2013 Jan 30.

How the airway smooth muscle in cystic fibrosis reacts in proinflammatory 
conditions: implications for airway hyper-responsiveness and asthma in cystic 
fibrosis.

McCuaig S(1), Martin JG(2).

Author information:
(1)Meakins Christie Laboratories, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, 
Quebec Canada.
(2)Meakins Christie Laboratories, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, 
Quebec Canada. Electronic address: james.martin@mcgill.ca.

Among patients with cystic fibrosis there is a high prevalence (40-70%) of 
asthma signs and symptoms such as cough and wheezing and airway 
hyper-responsiveness to inhaled histamine or methacholine. Whether these 
abnormal airway responses are due to a primary deficiency in the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) or are secondary to the inflammatory 
environment in the cystic fibrosis lungs is not clear. A role for the CFTR in 
smooth muscle function is emerging, and alterations in contractile signalling 
have been reported in CFTR-deficient airway smooth muscle. Persistent bacterial 
infection, especially with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, stimulates interleukin-8 
release from the airway epithelium, resulting in neutrophilic inflammation. 
Increased neutrophilia and skewing of CFTR-deficient T-helper cells to type 2 
helper T cells creates an inflammatory environment characterised by high 
concentrations of tumour necrosis factor α, interleukin-8, and interleukin-13, 
which might all contribute to increased contractility of airway smooth muscle in 
cystic fibrosis. An emerging role of interleukin-17, which is raised in patients 
with cystic fibrosis, in airway smooth muscle proliferation and 
hyper-responsiveness is apparent. Increased understanding of the molecular 
mechanisms responsible for the altered smooth muscle physiology in patients with 
cystic fibrosis might provide insight into airway dysfunction in this disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(12)70058-9
PMID: 24429094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]