---
reference_id: "PMID:11192464"
title: "Thallium poisoning during pregnancy: a case report and comprehensive literature review."
authors:
- Hoffman RS
journal: J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1081/clt-100102390
keywords:
- Adult
- Embryonic and Fetal Development/drug effects
- Female
- Fetal Viability
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Maternal-Fetal Exchange
- "Milk, Human/metabolism"
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Complications
- Pregnancy Outcome
- Pregnancy Trimesters
- "Thallium/pharmacokinetics, poisoning"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thallium poisoning during pregnancy: a case report and comprehensive literature review.
**Authors:** Hoffman RS
**Journal:** J Toxicol Clin Toxicol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1081/clt-100102390](https://doi.org/10.1081/clt-100102390)

## Content

1. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2000;38(7):767-75. doi: 10.1081/clt-100102390.

Thallium poisoning during pregnancy: a case report and comprehensive literature 
review.

Hoffman RS(1).

Author information:
(1)New York City Poison Center, New York University School of Medicine, New York 
10016, USA. bobhoff@pol.net

BACKGROUND: Thallium salts were once used to treat a variety of disorders such 
as tuberculosis, sexually transmitted diseases, and ringworm of the scalp. 
Although the clinical manifestations and treatment of patients with thallium 
poisoning are well characterized, little information is available on the outcome 
of pregnancy in thallium-poisoned women. A case of thallium poisoning that began 
during the first trimester of pregnancy and resulted in fetal demise is 
reported.
METHODS: An extensive literature search identified reported cases of thallium 
poisoning during pregnancy from 1903 until the present time. All articles were 
obtained, translated, and abstracted using a standardized data collection form. 
References were hand-searched and abstracted to identify additional cases.
RESULTS: From a total of 25 cases identified, only 18 met satisfactory criteria 
for inclusion. Five exposures occurred during the first trimester, 5 during the 
second trimester, and 8 during the third trimester. Mothers developed classic 
signs and symptoms of thallium poisoning. Summary of these cases demonstrates a 
range of fetal effects from severe toxicity with residual sequelae to outwardly 
normal development. Interestingly, some newborns appeared normal despite severe 
maternal toxicity. The only consistent effect identified was a trend toward 
prematurity and low birth weight in children exposed during early gestation.
CONCLUSIONS: These cases document the transfer of thallium both across the 
placenta and in breast milk. Insufficient data are available to evaluate 
prognostic markers of fetal outcome, or the risks and benefits of various 
treatment regimens in pregnant patients with thallium poisoning.

DOI: 10.1081/clt-100102390
PMID: 11192464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]