---
reference_id: "PMID:37008993"
title: "Episodic Ataxias: Primary and Secondary Etiologies, Treatment, and Classification Approaches."
authors:
- Hassan A
journal: Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5334/tohm.747
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ataxia/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics
- Acetazolamide/therapeutic use
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Episodic Ataxias: Primary and Secondary Etiologies, Treatment, and Classification Approaches.
**Authors:** Hassan A
**Journal:** Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5334/tohm.747](https://doi.org/10.5334/tohm.747)

## Content

1. Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y). 2023 Mar 28;13:9. doi: 10.5334/tohm.747. 
eCollection 2023.

Episodic Ataxias: Primary and Secondary Etiologies, Treatment, and 
Classification Approaches.

Hassan A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Beacon Hospital, Sandyford, Dublin 18, Ireland.
(2)Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.

Erratum in
    Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y). 2025 Aug 25;15:40. doi: 
10.5334/tohm.1089.

BACKGROUND: Episodic ataxia (EA), characterized by recurrent attacks of 
cerebellar dysfunction, is the manifestation of a group of rare autosomal 
dominant inherited disorders. EA1 and EA2 are most frequently encountered, 
caused by mutations in KCNA1 and CACNA1A. EA3-8 are reported in rare families. 
Advances in genetic testing have broadened the KCNA1 and CACNA1A phenotypes, and 
detected EA as an unusual presentation of several other genetic disorders. 
Additionally, there are various secondary causes of EA and mimicking disorders. 
Together, these can pose diagnostic challenges for neurologists.
METHODS: A systematic literature review was performed in October 2022 for 
'episodic ataxia' and 'paroxysmal ataxia', restricted to publications in the 
last 10 years to focus on recent clinical advances. Clinical, genetic, and 
treatment characteristics were summarized.
RESULTS: EA1 and EA2 phenotypes have further broadened. In particular, EA2 may 
be accompanied by other paroxysmal disorders of childhood with chronic 
neuropsychiatric features. New treatments for EA2 include dalfampridine and 
fampridine, in addition to 4-aminopyridine and acetazolamide. There are recent 
proposals for EA9-10. EA may also be caused by gene mutations associated with 
chronic ataxias (SCA-14, SCA-27, SCA-42, AOA2, CAPOS), epilepsy syndromes 
(KCNA2, SCN2A, PRRT2), GLUT-1, mitochondrial disorders (PDHA1, PDHX, ACO2), 
metabolic disorders (Maple syrup urine disease, Hartnup disease, type I 
citrullinemia, thiamine and biotin metabolism defects), and others. Secondary 
causes of EA are more commonly encountered than primary EA (vascular, 
inflammatory, toxic-metabolic). EA can be misdiagnosed as migraine, peripheral 
vestibular disorders, anxiety, and functional symptoms. Primary and secondary EA 
are frequently treatable which should prompt a search for the cause.
DISCUSSION: EA may be overlooked or misdiagnosed for a variety of reasons, 
including phenotype-genotype variability and clinical overlap between primary 
and secondary causes. EA is highly treatable, so it is important to consider in 
the differential diagnosis of paroxysmal disorders. Classical EA1 and EA2 
phenotypes prompt single gene test and treatment pathways. For atypical 
phenotypes, next generation genetic testing can aid diagnosis and guide 
treatment. Updated classification systems for EA are discussed which may assist 
diagnosis and management.

Copyright: © 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.5334/tohm.747
PMCID: PMC10064912
PMID: 37008993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author has no competing interests to 
declare.