---
reference_id: "PMID:39384000"
title: Arabidopsis thaliana argininosuccinate lyase structure uncovers the role of serine as the catalytic base.
authors:
- Nielipinski M
- Nielipinska D
- Pietrzyk-Brzezinska AJ
- Sekula B
journal: J Struct Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2024.108130
keywords:
- Arabidopsis/enzymology
- "Argininosuccinate Lyase/chemistry, metabolism, genetics"
- Catalytic Domain
- "Serine/metabolism, chemistry"
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- "Arabidopsis Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Substrate Specificity
- "Argininosuccinic Acid/chemistry, metabolism"
- Catalysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arabidopsis thaliana argininosuccinate lyase structure uncovers the role of serine as the catalytic base.
**Authors:** Nielipinski M, Nielipinska D, Pietrzyk-Brzezinska AJ, Sekula B
**Journal:** J Struct Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jsb.2024.108130](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsb.2024.108130)

## Content

1. J Struct Biol. 2024 Dec;216(4):108130. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2024.108130. Epub
2024  Oct 9.

Arabidopsis thaliana argininosuccinate lyase structure uncovers the role of
serine as the catalytic base.

Nielipinski M(1), Nielipinska D(1), Pietrzyk-Brzezinska AJ(1), Sekula B(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Industrial Biotechnology, Faculty of Biotechnology
and Food Sciences, Lodz University of Technology, Poland.
(2)Institute of Molecular and Industrial Biotechnology, Faculty of Biotechnology
and Food Sciences, Lodz University of Technology, Poland. Electronic address:
bartosz.sekula@p.lodz.pl.

Arginine is an important amino acid in plants, as it not only plays a structural
role and serves as nitrogen storage but is also a precursor for various
molecules, including polyamines and proline. Arginine is produced by
argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) which catalyzes the cleavage of argininosuccinate
to arginine and fumarate. ASL belongs to the fumarate lyase family and while
many members of this family were well-characterized, little is known about plant
ASLs. Here we present the first crystal structures of ASL from the model plant,
Arabidopsis thaliana (AtASL). One of the structures represents the unliganded
form of the AtASL homotetramer. The other structure, obtained from a crystal
soaked in argininosuccinate, accommodates the substrate or the reaction products
in one of four active sites of the AtASL tetramer. Each active site is located
at the interface of three neighboring protomers. The AtASL structure with
ligands allowed us to analyze the enzyme-substrate and the enzyme-product
interactions in detail. Furthermore, based on our analyses, we describe residues
of AtASL crucial for catalysis. The structure of AtASL gives the rationale for
the open-to-close transition of the GSS mobile loop and indicates the importance
of serine 333 from this loop for the enzymatic action of the enzyme. Finally, we
supplemented the structural data with the identification of sequence motifs
characteristic for ASLs.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2024.108130
PMID: 39384000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
