---
reference_id: "PMID:19428039"
title: "[Rhinophyma in a black African male patient]."
authors:
- Allah KC
- Kossoko H
- Yéo S
- Richard Kadio M
- Assi Djè Bi Djè V
journal: Rev Stomatol Chir Maxillofac
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.stomax.2009.03.009
keywords:
- Aged
- Feeding and Eating Disorders/etiology
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Nasal Obstruction/etiology
- "Nose Diseases/diagnosis, surgery"
- "Rhinophyma/diagnosis, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Rhinophyma in a black African male patient].
**Authors:** Allah KC, Kossoko H, Yéo S, Richard Kadio M, Assi Djè Bi Djè V
**Journal:** Rev Stomatol Chir Maxillofac (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.stomax.2009.03.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stomax.2009.03.009)

## Content

1. Rev Stomatol Chir Maxillofac. 2009 Dec;110(6):347-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.stomax.2009.03.009. Epub 2009 May 9.

[Rhinophyma in a black African male patient].

[Article in French]

Allah KC(1), Kossoko H, Yéo S, Richard Kadio M, Assi Djè Bi Djè V.

Author information:
(1)Service de chirurgie plastique, reconstructrice, esthétique, chirurgie de la 
main et de brûlologie, CHU de Treichville, 01 BP V3 Abidjan 01, Côte d'Ivoire. 
allahkchristophe@yahoo.fr

Rhinophyma is an irregular and progressive nasal hypertrophy, due to hyperplasia 
and fibrosis of the sebaceous glands and surrounding soft tissues. Its etiology 
is unknown. Its psychosocial, functional, and esthetic consequences may be 
severe. It is rare in the black African population. We present a case of 
glandular rhinophyma in a 70-year-old black male patient.
OBSERVATION: A 70-year-old male patient consulted for nasal tumors. These 
lesions had appeared 11 years before, after rosacea acnea. The patient had no 
specific history, no alcohol addiction nor any particular treatment. The nose 
was voluminous. The tumors were located on the left nostril ala, the tip of the 
nose, and the tip and right nostril ala junction. The size of the pediculated 
lesions was variable. They covered most of the nostril opening and upper lip. 
Pressure forced out whitish, pasty, and fetid sebum. The lesions were an 
obstacle to nasal ventilation and feeding. This glandular rhinophyma was 
responsible for a severe social and affective handicap. It was treated by 
exeresis and simple closure, under local anesthesia. Operative follow-up was 
uneventful. No sign of relapse was noted at 20 months. The psychosocial, 
functional, and esthetic results were satisfactory.
DISCUSSION: The rhinophyma is a rare presentation in the black African or 
Afro-American population. Three cases have been reported so far.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stomax.2009.03.009
PMID: 19428039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]