---
reference_id: PMID:31073128
title: Dilated cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Schultheiss HP
- Fairweather D
- Caforio ALP
- Escher F
- Hershberger RE
- Lipshultz SE
- Liu PP
- Matsumori A
- Mazzanti A
- McMurray J
- Priori SG
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0084-1
keywords:
- "Autoimmunity/genetics, physiology"
- Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy/methods
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Echocardiography/methods
- Electrocardiography/methods
- Heart Failure/etiology
- Humans
- "Inflammation/complications, physiopathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Prognosis
- Quality of Life/psychology
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dilated cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Schultheiss HP, Fairweather D, Caforio ALP, Escher F, Hershberger RE, Lipshultz SE, Liu PP, Matsumori A, Mazzanti A, McMurray J, Priori SG
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-019-0084-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-019-0084-1)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2019 May 9;5(1):32. doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0084-1.

Dilated cardiomyopathy.

Schultheiss HP(1)(2), Fairweather D(3), Caforio ALP(4), Escher F(5)(6)(7), 
Hershberger RE(8), Lipshultz SE(9)(10)(11), Liu PP(12), Matsumori A(13), 
Mazzanti A(14)(15), McMurray J(16), Priori SG(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cardiac Diagnostics and Therapy (IKDT), Berlin, Germany. 
heinz-peter.schultheiss@charite.de.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Charité-Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany. heinz-peter.schultheiss@charite.de.
(3)Mayo Clinic, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Jacksonville, FL, USA. 
Fairweather.DeLisa@mayo.edu.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Cardiological Thoracic and Vascular 
Sciences and Public Health, University of Padua, Padova, Italy.
(5)Institute for Cardiac Diagnostics and Therapy (IKDT), Berlin, Germany.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Charité-Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.
(7)DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(8)Divisions of Human Genetics and Cardiovascular Medicine in the Department of 
Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, 
USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University at Buffalo Jacobs School of Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(10)Oishei Children's Hospital, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(11)Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(12)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(13)Clinical Research Center, National Hospital Organization Kyoto Medical 
Center, Kyoto, Japan.
(14)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(15)Department of Molecular Cardiology, IRCCS ICS Maugeri, Pavia, Italy.
(16)British Heart Foundation (BHF) Cardiovascular Research Centre, University of 
Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a clinical diagnosis characterized by left 
ventricular or biventricular dilation and impaired contraction that is not 
explained by abnormal loading conditions (for example, hypertension and valvular 
heart disease) or coronary artery disease. Mutations in several genes can cause 
DCM, including genes encoding structural components of the sarcomere and 
desmosome. Nongenetic forms of DCM can result from different aetiologies, 
including inflammation of the myocardium due to an infection (mostly viral); 
exposure to drugs, toxins or allergens; and systemic endocrine or autoimmune 
diseases. The heterogeneous aetiology and clinical presentation of DCM make a 
correct and timely diagnosis challenging. Echocardiography and other imaging 
techniques are required to assess ventricular dysfunction and adverse myocardial 
remodelling, and immunological and histological analyses of an endomyocardial 
biopsy sample are indicated when inflammation or infection is suspected. As DCM 
eventually leads to impaired contractility, standard approaches to prevent or 
treat heart failure are the first-line treatment for patients with DCM. Cardiac 
resynchronization therapy and implantable cardioverter-defibrillators may be 
required to prevent life-threatening arrhythmias. In addition, identifying the 
probable cause of DCM helps tailor specific therapies to improve prognosis. An 
improved aetiology-driven personalized approach to clinical care will benefit 
patients with DCM, as will new diagnostic tools, such as serum biomarkers, that 
enable early diagnosis and treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-019-0084-1
PMCID: PMC7096917
PMID: 31073128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no competing interests.