---
reference_id: "PMID:34324127"
title: "Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation Cures Adenosine Deaminase 2 Deficiency: Report on 30 Patients."
authors:
- Hashem H
- Bucciol G
- Ozen S
- Unal S
- Bozkaya IO
- Akarsu N
- Taskinen M
- Koskenvuo M
- Saarela J
- Dimitrova D
- Hickstein DD
- Hsu AP
- Holland SM
- Krance R
- Sasa G
- Kumar AR
- Müller I
- de Sousa MA
- Delafontaine S
- Moens L
- Babor F
- Barzaghi F
- Cicalese MP
- Bredius R
- van Montfrans J
- Baretta V
- Cesaro S
- Stepensky P
- Benedicte N
- Moshous D
- Le Guenno G
- Boutboul D
- Dalal J
- Brooks JP
- Dokmeci E
- Dara J
- Lucas CL
- Hambleton S
- Wilson K
- Jolles S
- Koc Y
- Güngör T
- Schnider C
- Candotti F
- Steinmann S
- Schulz A
- Chambers C
- Hershfield M
- Ombrello A
- Kanakry JA
- Meyts I
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-021-01098-0
keywords:
- Adenosine Deaminase/deficiency
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Agammaglobulinemia/enzymology, genetics, mortality, therapy"
- "Bone Marrow Failure Disorders/enzymology, genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Graft vs Host Disease/etiology, mortality"
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/adverse effects
- Humans
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/deficiency
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- "Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/enzymology, genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation Cures Adenosine Deaminase 2 Deficiency: Report on 30 Patients.
**Authors:** Hashem H, Bucciol G, Ozen S, Unal S, Bozkaya IO, Akarsu N, Taskinen M, Koskenvuo M, Saarela J, Dimitrova D, Hickstein DD, Hsu AP, Holland SM, Krance R, Sasa G, Kumar AR, Müller I, de Sousa MA, Delafontaine S, Moens L, Babor F, Barzaghi F, Cicalese MP, Bredius R, van Montfrans J, Baretta V, Cesaro S, Stepensky P, Benedicte N, Moshous D, Le Guenno G, Boutboul D, Dalal J, Brooks JP, Dokmeci E, Dara J, Lucas CL, Hambleton S, Wilson K, Jolles S, Koc Y, Güngör T, Schnider C, Candotti F, Steinmann S, Schulz A, Chambers C, Hershfield M, Ombrello A, Kanakry JA, Meyts I
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-021-01098-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-021-01098-0)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2021 Oct;41(7):1633-1647. doi: 10.1007/s10875-021-01098-0.
Epub  2021 Jul 29.

Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation Cures Adenosine Deaminase 2 Deficiency: 
Report on 30 Patients.

Hashem H(1), Bucciol G(2)(3), Ozen S(4)(5), Unal S(6), Bozkaya IO(7), Akarsu 
N(8), Taskinen M(9), Koskenvuo M(10), Saarela J(11)(12), Dimitrova D(13), 
Hickstein DD(14), Hsu AP(15), Holland SM(15), Krance R(16), Sasa G(16), Kumar 
AR(17)(18), Müller I(19), de Sousa MA(19), Delafontaine S(2)(3), Moens L(3), 
Babor F(20), Barzaghi F(21), Cicalese MP(22), Bredius R(23), van Montfrans 
J(24), Baretta V(25), Cesaro S(25), Stepensky P(26), Benedicte N(27), Moshous 
D(27), Le Guenno G(28), Boutboul D(29), Dalal J(30), Brooks JP(31), Dokmeci 
E(32), Dara J(33), Lucas CL(31), Hambleton S(34), Wilson K(35), Jolles S(36), 
Koc Y(37), Güngör T(38), Schnider C(39), Candotti F(40), Steinmann S(41), Schulz 
A(41), Chambers C(42), Hershfield M(43), Ombrello A(44), Kanakry JA(13), Meyts 
I(45)(46).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Bone 
Marrow Transplant Unit, King Hussein Cancer Center (KHCC), P.O Box 1269, Amman, 
11941, Jordan. hh.08847@khcc.jo.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, ERN RITA Core Center, University Hospitals Leuven, 
Herestraat 49, 3000, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Laboratory for 
Inborn Errors of Immunity, University Hospitals Leuven, Herestraat 49, 3000, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Hacettepe University Vasculitis Research Center, Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Research Center for Fanconi Anemia and 
Other Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes, Hacettepe University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(7)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Bone Marrow Transplant Unit, 
University of Health Sciences, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, Hacettepe University, Sihhiye, 06100, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(9)Division of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, 
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(10)Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Children and 
Adolescents, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(11)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, HiLIFE, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(12)Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(13)Experimental Transplantation and Immunotherapy Branch, National Cancer 
Institute of the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(14)Immune Deficiency Cellular Therapy Program, CCR, NCI, MD, Bethesda, USA.
(15)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(16)Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(17)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(18)University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(19)Division of Pediatric Stem Cell Transplantation and Immunology, University 
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(20)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Center 
for Child and Adolescent Health, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(21)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (TIGET), Pediatric 
Immunohematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute Milan, Milan, Italy.
(22)Pediatric Immunohematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(23)Department of Pediatrics, Willem-Alexander Children's Hospital, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(24)Department of Pediatric Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Wilhelmina 
Children's Hospital, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(25)Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Department of Mother and Child, Azienda 
Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata, Verona, Italy.
(26)Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Cancer Immunotherapy, Hadassah 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(27)Pediatric Immunology, Hematology and Rheumatology Unit, Hôpital 
Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France.
(28)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Estaing, CHU 
Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(29)Clinical Immunology Department, Hospital Saint Louis, Université de Paris, 
Paris, France.
(30)Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(31)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
CT, USA.
(32)Department of Pediatrics, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(33)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy, Immunology, Blood and Marrow 
Transplantation, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(34)Newcastle University Translational and Clinical Research Institute and Great 
North Children's Hospital, Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, , 
Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
(35)Department of Hematology, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, UK.
(36)Immunodeficiency Centre for Wales, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, 
UK.
(37)Stem Cell Transplant Unit, Medicana International, Istanbul, Turkey.
(38)Division of Hematology/Oncology/Immunology, Gene Therapy, and Stem Cell 
Transplantation, University Children's Hospital Zurich - Eleonore Foundation & 
Children's Research Center (CRC), Steinwiesstrasse 75, CH-8032, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(39)Pediatric Immuno-Rheumatology of Western Switzerland, Department 
Women-Mother-Child, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(40)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Lausanne University Hospital and 
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(41)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(42)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(43)Department of Medicine and Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, NC, USA.
(44)Metabolic, Cardiovascular, and Inflammatory Disease Genomics Branch, 
National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(45)Department of Pediatrics, ERN RITA Core Center, University Hospitals Leuven, 
Herestraat 49, 3000, Leuven, Belgium. isabelle.meyts@uzleuven.be.
(46)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Laboratory for 
Inborn Errors of Immunity, University Hospitals Leuven, Herestraat 49, 3000, 
Leuven, Belgium. isabelle.meyts@uzleuven.be.

Erratum in
    J Clin Immunol. 2022 Oct;42(7):1580-1581. doi: 10.1007/s10875-022-01280-y.

Comment in
    J Clin Immunol. 2021 Oct;41(7):1443-1445. doi: 10.1007/s10875-021-01121-4.

PURPOSE: Deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2) is an inherited inborn 
error of immunity, characterized by autoinflammation (recurrent fever), 
vasculopathy (livedo racemosa, polyarteritis nodosa, lacunar ischemic strokes, 
and intracranial hemorrhages), immunodeficiency, lymphoproliferation, immune 
cytopenias, and bone marrow failure (BMF). Tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α) 
blockade is the treatment of choice for the vasculopathy, but often fails to 
reverse refractory cytopenia. We aimed to study the outcome of hematopoietic 
cell transplantation (HCT) in patients with DADA2.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective study on the outcome of HCT in patients 
with DADA2. The primary outcome was overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: Thirty DADA2 patients from 12 countries received a total of 38 HCTs. 
The indications for HCT were BMF, immune cytopenia, malignancy, or 
immunodeficiency. Median age at HCT was 9 years (range: 2-28 years). The 
conditioning regimens for the final transplants were myeloablative (n = 20), 
reduced intensity (n = 8), or non-myeloablative (n = 2). Donors were HLA-matched 
related (n = 4), HLA-matched unrelated (n = 16), HLA-haploidentical (n = 2), or 
HLA-mismatched unrelated (n = 8). After a median follow-up of 2 years (range: 
0.5-16 years), 2-year OS was 97%, and 2-year GvHD-free relapse-free survival was 
73%. The hematological and immunological phenotypes resolved, and there were no 
new vascular events. Plasma ADA2 enzyme activity normalized in 16/17 patients 
tested. Six patients required more than one HCT.
CONCLUSION: HCT was an effective treatment for DADA2, successfully reversing the 
refractory cytopenia, as well as the vasculopathy and immunodeficiency.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: HCT is a definitive cure for DADA2 with > 95% survival.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-021-01098-0
PMCID: PMC8452581
PMID: 34324127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing financial 
interests to declare with respect to this work. IM is holder of CSL-Behring 
Chair paid to KU Leuven. ARK is a speaker for SOBI. JVM served on an advisory 
Board for Takeda.