---
reference_id: "PMID:21882399"
title: Kabuki Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Adam MP
- Hannibal M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kabuki Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Adam MP, Hannibal M

## Content

1. Kabuki Syndrome.

Adam MP(1), Hannibal M(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2011 Sep 1 [updated 2026 Apr 23].

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
(2)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, 
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is characterized by typical 
facial features (long palpebral fissures with eversion of the lateral third of 
the lower eyelid; arched and broad eyebrows; short columella with depressed 
nasal tip; large, prominent, or cupped ears), minor skeletal anomalies, 
persistence of fetal fingertip pads, mild-to-moderate intellectual disability, 
and postnatal growth deficiency. Other findings may include: congenital heart 
defects, genitourinary anomalies, cleft lip and/or palate, gastrointestinal 
anomalies including anal atresia, ptosis and strabismus, and widely spaced teeth 
and hypodontia. Functional differences can include: increased susceptibility to 
infections and autoimmune disorders, seizures, endocrinologic abnormalities 
(including isolated premature thelarche in females), feeding problems, and 
hearing loss.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of KS is established in a proband of any age 
with a history of infantile hypotonia, developmental delay, and/or intellectual 
disability AND one or both of the following:(1) Typical dysmorphic features 
(long palpebral fissures with eversion of the lateral third of the lower eyelid, 
and ≥2 of the following: arched and broad eyebrows with the lateral third 
displaying notching or sparseness; short columella with depressed nasal tip; 
large, prominent, or cupped ears; persistent fingertip pads); (2) A heterozygous 
pathogenic variant in KMT2D or a heterozygous or hemizygous pathogenic variant 
in KDM6A.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Thickened feedings and positioning 
after meals to treat gastroesophageal reflux; gastrostomy tube placement if 
feeding difficulties are severe. If cognitive difficulties are evident, 
psychoeducational testing and special education services to address the 
individual child's needs. Evaluation by a developmental pediatrician or 
psychiatrist if behavior suggests autism spectrum disorders. Standard 
anti-seizure treatment. Standard treatment for hyperinsulinism. Prevention of 
secondary complications: Prophylactic antibiotic treatment prior to and during 
any procedure (e.g., dental work) may be indicated for those with specific heart 
defects. Surveillance: Monitor height, weight, and head circumference at each 
well-child visit and, at a minimum, yearly. Developmental milestones should be 
followed with each well-child visit. Monitor vision and hearing on a yearly 
basis.
GENETIC COUNSELING: KMT2D-related KS is inherited in an autosomal dominant 
manner; KDM6A-related KS is inherited in an X-linked manner. Autosomal dominant 
inheritance: The proportion of KS caused by a de novo KMT2D pathogenic variant 
is unknown but is likely high based on clinical experience. In the rare case 
that a parent of the proband is affected, the risk to the sibs is 50%. X-linked 
inheritance: If the mother of the proband has a KDM6A pathogenic variant, the 
chance of transmitting it in each pregnancy is 50%. Males who inherit the 
pathogenic variant will be affected; females who inherit the pathogenic variant 
will be heterozygous and may have features of KS. Once the causative pathogenic 
variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and 
preimplantation genetic testing for KS are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 21882399