---
reference_id: "PMID:17626065"
title: Current progress in computational metabolomics.
authors:
- Wishart DS
journal: Brief Bioinform
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/bib/bbm030
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current progress in computational metabolomics.
**Authors:** Wishart DS
**Journal:** Brief Bioinform (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bib/bbm030](https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbm030)

## Content

1. Brief Bioinform. 2007 Sep;8(5):279-93. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbm030. Epub 2007 Jul 
11.

Current progress in computational metabolomics.

Wishart DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing Science, Department of Biological Sciences and 
National Institute for Nanotechnology (NRC-NINT), University of Alberta, 
Edmonton Alberta, Canada T6G 2E8. david.wishart@ualberta.ca

Being a relatively new addition to the 'omics' field, metabolomics is still 
evolving its own computational infrastructure and assessing its own 
computational needs. Due to its strong emphasis on chemical information and 
because of the importance of linking that chemical data to biological 
consequences, metabolomics must combine elements of traditional bioinformatics 
with traditional cheminformatics. This is a significant challenge as these two 
fields have evolved quite separately and require very different computational 
tools and skill sets. This review is intended to familiarize readers with the 
field of metabolomics and to outline the needs, the challenges and the recent 
progress being made in four areas of computational metabolomics: (i) 
metabolomics databases; (ii) metabolomics LIMS; (iii) spectral analysis tools 
for metabolomics and (iv) metabolic modeling.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbm030
PMID: 17626065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]