---
reference_id: PMID:36594817
title: Antisense oligonucleotide therapy rescues disturbed brain rhythms and sleep in juvenile and adult mouse models of Angelman syndrome.
authors:
- Lee D
- Chen W
- Kaku HN
- Zhuo X
- Chao ES
- Soriano A
- Kuncheria A
- Flores S
- Kim JH
- Rivera A
- Rigo F
- Jafar-Nejad P
- Beaudet AL
- Caudill MS
- Xue M
journal: Elife
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.81892
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- Angelman Syndrome
- Brain/metabolism
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/metabolism, therapeutic use"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Sleep
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antisense oligonucleotide therapy rescues disturbed brain rhythms and sleep in juvenile and adult mouse models of Angelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Lee D, Chen W, Kaku HN, Zhuo X, Chao ES, Soriano A, Kuncheria A, Flores S, Kim JH, Rivera A, Rigo F, Jafar-Nejad P, Beaudet AL, Caudill MS, Xue M
**Journal:** Elife (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.81892](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.81892)

## Content

1. Elife. 2023 Jan 3;12:e81892. doi: 10.7554/eLife.81892.

Antisense oligonucleotide therapy rescues disturbed brain rhythms and sleep in 
juvenile and adult mouse models of Angelman syndrome.

Lee D(#)(1)(2), Chen W(#)(1)(2), Kaku HN(#)(1)(2), Zhuo X(#)(3), Chao ES(1)(2), 
Soriano A(4), Kuncheria A(1), Flores S(1), Kim JH(1)(2), Rivera A(1)(2), Rigo 
F(4), Jafar-Nejad P(4), Beaudet AL(3), Caudill MS(1)(5), Xue M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, United 
States.
(2)The Cain Foundation Laboratories, Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research 
Institute at Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, United States.
(4)Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, United States.
(5)Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute at Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Elife. 2024 Oct 15;13:e104349. doi: 10.7554/eLife.104349.

Comment in
    Elife. 2023 Feb 07;12:e86117. doi: 10.7554/eLife.86117.
    Epilepsy Curr. 2023 Aug 7;23(5):312-314. doi: 10.1177/15357597231191885.

UBE3A encodes ubiquitin protein ligase E3A, and in neurons its expression from 
the paternal allele is repressed by the UBE3A antisense transcript (UBE3A-ATS). 
This leaves neurons susceptible to loss-of-function of maternal UBE3A. Indeed, 
Angelman syndrome, a severe neurodevelopmental disorder, is caused by maternal 
UBE3A deficiency. A promising therapeutic approach to treating Angelman syndrome 
is to reactivate the intact paternal UBE3A by suppressing UBE3A-ATS. Prior 
studies show that many neurological phenotypes of maternal Ube3a knockout mice 
can only be rescued by reinstating Ube3a expression in early development, 
indicating a restricted therapeutic window for Angelman syndrome. Here, we 
report that reducing Ube3a-ATS by antisense oligonucleotides in juvenile or 
adult maternal Ube3a knockout mice rescues the abnormal electroencephalogram 
(EEG) rhythms and sleep disturbance, two prominent clinical features of Angelman 
syndrome. Importantly, the degree of phenotypic improvement correlates with the 
increase of Ube3a protein levels. These results indicate that the therapeutic 
window of genetic therapies for Angelman syndrome is broader than previously 
thought, and EEG power spectrum and sleep architecture should be used to 
evaluate the clinical efficacy of therapies.

© 2023, Lee, Chen, Kaku et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.81892
PMCID: PMC9904759
PMID: 36594817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DL, WC, HK, XZ, EC, AK, SF, JK, AR, MC No 
competing interests declared, AS, FR, PJ is a paid employee of Ionis 
Pharmaceuticals, AB is a paid employee of Luna Genetics, MX is a consultant to 
Capsida Biotherapeutics and receives funds from Capsida Biotherapeutics for 
research not related to this study