---
reference_id: "PMID:34688943"
title: Monitoring Skull Base Abnormalities in Children with Osteogenesis Imperfecta - Review of Current Practice and a Suggested Clinical Pathway.
authors:
- Wadanamby S
- El Garwany S
- Connolly D
- Arundel P
- Bishop NJ
- DeVile CJ
- Calder AD
- Crowe B
- Burren CP
- Saraff V
- "Highly Specialised Service for Severe, Complex and Atypical Osteogenesis Imperfecta (NHS England)"
- Offiah AC
journal: Bone
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2021.116235
keywords:
- Child
- Critical Pathways
- Humans
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnostic imaging
- Prospective Studies
- Retrospective Studies
- Skull Base/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monitoring Skull Base Abnormalities in Children with Osteogenesis Imperfecta - Review of Current Practice and a Suggested Clinical Pathway.
**Authors:** Wadanamby S, El Garwany S, Connolly D, Arundel P, Bishop NJ, DeVile CJ, Calder AD, Crowe B, Burren CP, Saraff V, Highly Specialised Service for Severe, Complex and Atypical Osteogenesis Imperfecta (NHS England), Offiah AC
**Journal:** Bone (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2021.116235](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2021.116235)

## Content

1. Bone. 2022 Jan;154:116235. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2021.116235. Epub 2021 Oct 22.

Monitoring Skull Base Abnormalities in Children with Osteogenesis Imperfecta - 
Review of Current Practice and a Suggested Clinical Pathway.

Wadanamby S(1), El Garwany S(2), Connolly D(3), Arundel P(4), Bishop NJ(5), 
DeVile CJ(6), Calder AD(7), Crowe B(6), Burren CP(8), Saraff V(9); Highly 
Specialised Service for Severe, Complex and Atypical Osteogenesis Imperfecta 
(NHS England)(10); Offiah AC(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Metabolism, University of Sheffield, Damer Street 
Building, Sheffield, S10 2TH, UK. Electronic address: 
shavinthi.wadanamby@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Oncology and Metabolism, University of Sheffield, Damer Street 
Building, Sheffield, S10 2TH, UK; Suez Canal University, Faculty of Medicine, 
Department of Radiology, 4.5 Km Ring Road, Ismailia, Egypt.
(3)Department of Radiology, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Western 
Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TH, UK.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Western 
Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TH, UK; Highly Specialised Service for Severe, Complex and 
Atypical Osteogenesis Imperfecta (NHS England) - Birmingham Women's and 
Children's Hospital, UK; Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, UK; Great Ormond 
Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, UK; Sheffield Children's 
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
(5)Department of Oncology and Metabolism, University of Sheffield, Damer Street 
Building, Sheffield, S10 2TH, UK; Department of Paediatrics, Sheffield 
Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TH, UK; Highly 
Specialised Service for Severe, Complex and Atypical Osteogenesis Imperfecta 
(NHS England) - Birmingham Women's and Children's Hospital, UK; Bristol Royal 
Hospital for Children, UK; Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS 
Foundation Trust, UK; Sheffield Children's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
(6)The Wolfson Neurodisability Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children NHS Foundation Trust, UK; Highly Specialised Service for Severe, 
Complex and Atypical Osteogenesis Imperfecta (NHS England) - Birmingham Women's 
and Children's Hospital, UK; Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, UK; Great 
Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, UK; Sheffield 
Children's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
(7)Department of Radiology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS 
Foundation Trust, UK; Highly Specialised Service for Severe, Complex and 
Atypical Osteogenesis Imperfecta (NHS England) - Birmingham Women's and 
Children's Hospital, UK; Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, UK; Great Ormond 
Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, UK; Sheffield Children's 
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
(8)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, University Hospitals 
Bristol and Weston NHS Foundation Trust, Upper Maudlin St, Bristol BS2 8BJ, UK; 
Highly Specialised Service for Severe, Complex and Atypical Osteogenesis 
Imperfecta (NHS England) - Birmingham Women's and Children's Hospital, UK; 
Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, UK; Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children NHS Foundation Trust, UK; Sheffield Children's Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, UK.
(9)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Birmingham Women's and Children's 
Hospital, UK; Highly Specialised Service for Severe, Complex and Atypical 
Osteogenesis Imperfecta (NHS England) - Birmingham Women's and Children's 
Hospital, UK; Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, UK; Great Ormond Street 
Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, UK; Sheffield Children's Hospital 
NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
(10)Highly Specialised Service for Severe, Complex and Atypical Osteogenesis 
Imperfecta (NHS England) - Birmingham Women's and Children's Hospital, UK; 
Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, UK; Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children NHS Foundation Trust, UK; Sheffield Children's Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, UK.
(11)Department of Oncology and Metabolism, University of Sheffield, Damer Street 
Building, Sheffield, S10 2TH, UK; Department of Radiology, Sheffield Children's 
NHS Foundation Trust, Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TH, UK; Highly Specialised 
Service for Severe, Complex and Atypical Osteogenesis Imperfecta (NHS England) - 
Birmingham Women's and Children's Hospital, UK; Bristol Royal Hospital for 
Children, UK; Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, 
UK; Sheffield Children's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

OBJECTIVES: In the context of a lack of national consensus on the benefits of 
skull base imaging in children with osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), this study 
aims to analyse and correlate the clinical symptoms and radiological images of 
children with severe OI.
METHODS: A retrospective case notes and image analysis was carried out on 
children with complex OI between 2012 and 2018 at a specialist tertiary centre. 
Data were collected on patient demographic factors, clinical data, imaging 
findings (presence of Wormian bones, platybasia, basilar impression (McGregor's 
technique) and basilar invagination (McRae's technique)), and clinical features 
at the time of imaging.
RESULTS: Of the 127 patients in the OI database, 94 were included. A total of 
321 radiographs, 21 CT scans and 39 MRI scans were analysed. Average frequency 
of radiographs was 8 per 10 years. Of the 94 patients, 58 (62%), 10 (11%), 1 
(1%) demonstrated platybasia, basilar impression, and basilar invagination, 
respectively. Of the radiographs analysed, platybasia, basilar impression, 
basilar invagination, and the presence of Wormian bones, could not be evaluated 
in 71 (22.3%), 48 (15.2%), 61 (19.5%) and 28 (9.4%) radiographs respectively 
(due to poor positioning, anatomical abnormalities, and poor image quality). Of 
the 140 radiographs with platybasia, 17 (12%) also demonstrated basilar 
impression compared to only 3 (2.9%) out of the 99 without platybasia 
(p = 0.03). No significant associations were seen between the presence of 
Wormian bones and basilar impression. Of the 39 MRIs, additional information on 
CSF flow rate, spinal cord signal and cerebellar morphology was reported in 14 
(36%). There was a lack of concordance between MRI and matched radiographs in 
7.1% (1/14) and 36% (5/14) for platybasia and basilar impression respectively, 
with full concordance for basilar invagination. Fewer than 5% had positive 
clinical symptoms/signs at the time of imaging; 2% (7/321) had macrocephaly, 
0.6% (2/321) headache, all other neurological features were absent). Clinical 
features were not documented in >85% of patients.
CONCLUSION: The apparent low prevalence of clinical symptoms and signs and of 
radiologically identified cranio-cervical abnormalities, suggests that current 
levels of serial imaging may be excessive. Until larger prospective studies 
clarify these issues, we suggest a clinical pathway for base of skull imaging 
which proposes a risk stratification approach to radiographic frequency and 
suggests parameters for proceeding to MRI.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2021.116235
PMID: 34688943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]