---
reference_id: "PMID:36995447"
title: "Impact of tumor markers on diagnosis, treatment and prognosis in CNS germ cell tumors: correlations with clinical practice and histopathology."
authors:
- Takami H
- Graffeo CS
- Perry A
- Giannini C
- Nakazato Y
- Saito N
- Matsutani M
- Nishikawa R
- Daniels DJ
- Ichimura K
journal: Brain Tumor Pathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10014-023-00460-x
keywords:
- Humans
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- alpha-Fetoproteins
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Central Nervous System Neoplasms/diagnosis, therapy, pathology"
- Prognosis
- "Germinoma/diagnosis, therapy, pathology"
- Chorionic Gonadotropin
- Teratoma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of tumor markers on diagnosis, treatment and prognosis in CNS germ cell tumors: correlations with clinical practice and histopathology.
**Authors:** Takami H, Graffeo CS, Perry A, Giannini C, Nakazato Y, Saito N, Matsutani M, Nishikawa R, Daniels DJ, Ichimura K
**Journal:** Brain Tumor Pathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10014-023-00460-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10014-023-00460-x)

## Content

1. Brain Tumor Pathol. 2023 Apr;40(2):124-132. doi: 10.1007/s10014-023-00460-x. 
Epub 2023 Mar 30.

Impact of tumor markers on diagnosis, treatment and prognosis in CNS germ cell 
tumors: correlations with clinical practice and histopathology.

Takami H(1)(2), Graffeo CS(3), Perry A(3), Giannini C(4), Nakazato Y(5), Saito 
N(6), Matsutani M(7), Nishikawa R(7), Daniels DJ(3), Ichimura K(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1 Hongo, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan. takami-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
takami-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Hidaka Hospital, Gunma, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1 Hongo, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.
(7)Division of Pediatric Neuro-Oncology, Saitama Medical University 
International Medical Center, Saitama, Japan.
(8)Department of Brain Disease Translational Research, Juntendo University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Tumor markers in CNS germ cell tumors (GCTs) include human chorionic 
gonadotropin (HCG) and alpha fetoprotein (AFP), which have significant 
diagnostic implications, as elevation of either one leads to clinical diagnosis 
of non-germinomatous GCTs without histopathological confirmation, justifying 
intensified chemotherapy and irradiation. The current study, based on an 
international cohort of histopathologically verified GCTs that underwent biopsy 
(n = 85) or resection (n = 76), sought to better define the clinical role and 
prognostic significance of tumor markers from serum and CSF in this challenging 
patient population. We found that HCG was elevated only in cases with a 
germinoma or choriocarcinoma component, and there existed a clear cut-off HCG 
value between the two. AFP was often elevated in GCTs without a yolk sac tumor 
component, especially immature teratoma. HCG was elevated only in CSF in 3-of-52 
cases, and AFP was elevated only in serum in 7-of-49 cases, emphasizing the 
potential utilization of both serum and CSF studies. Immature teratoma 
demonstrated unfavorable prognosis independent of tumor marker status, with 56% 
5-year overall survival; however, co-existent germinoma components indicated a 
more favorable prognosis. Taken together, the study findings emphasize the 
importance for routine assessment and guarded interpretation of tumor markers in 
CNS GCTs.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10014-023-00460-x
PMCID: PMC10113344
PMID: 36995447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflict of interest.