---
reference_id: "PMID:15502825"
title: Infantile-onset symptomatic epilepsy syndrome caused by a homozygous loss-of-function mutation of GM3 synthase.
authors:
- Simpson MA
- Cross H
- Proukakis C
- Priestman DA
- Neville DC
- Reinkensmeier G
- Wang H
- Wiznitzer M
- Gurtz K
- Verganelaki A
- Pryde A
- Patton MA
- Dwek RA
- Butters TD
- Platt FM
- Crosby AH
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/ng1460
keywords:
- Blindness
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Female
- Founder Effect
- G(M3) Ganglioside/blood
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Glycosphingolipids/blood
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Pedigree
- "Sialyltransferases/deficiency, genetics"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infantile-onset symptomatic epilepsy syndrome caused by a homozygous loss-of-function mutation of GM3 synthase.
**Authors:** Simpson MA, Cross H, Proukakis C, Priestman DA, Neville DC, Reinkensmeier G, Wang H, Wiznitzer M, Gurtz K, Verganelaki A, Pryde A, Patton MA, Dwek RA, Butters TD, Platt FM, Crosby AH
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1460](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1460)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2004 Nov;36(11):1225-9. doi: 10.1038/ng1460. Epub 2004 Oct 24.

Infantile-onset symptomatic epilepsy syndrome caused by a homozygous
loss-of-function mutation of GM3 synthase.

Simpson MA(1), Cross H, Proukakis C, Priestman DA, Neville DC, Reinkensmeier G,
Wang H, Wiznitzer M, Gurtz K, Verganelaki A, Pryde A, Patton MA, Dwek RA,
Butters TD, Platt FM, Crosby AH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, St. George's Hospital Medical School,
University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2004 Nov;36(11):1147-8. doi: 10.1038/ng1104-1147.

We identified an autosomal recessive infantile-onset symptomatic epilepsy
syndrome associated with developmental stagnation and blindness. Assuming a
founder effect in a large Old Order Amish pedigree, we carried out a genome-wide
screen for linkage and identified a single region of homozygosity on chromosome
2p12-p11.2 spanning 5.1 cM (maximum lod score of 6.84). We sequenced genes in
the region and identified a nonsense mutation in SIAT9, which is predicted to
result in the premature termination of the GM3 synthase enzyme (also called
lactosylceramide alpha-2,3 sialyltransferase). GM3 synthase is a member of the
sialyltransferase family and catalyzes the initial step in the biosynthesis of
most complex gangliosides from lactosylceramide. Biochemical analysis of plasma
glycosphingolipids confirmed that affected individuals lack GM3 synthase
activity, as marked by a complete lack of GM3 ganglioside and its biosynthetic
derivatives and an increase in lactosylceramide and its alternative derivatives.
Although the relationship between defects in ganglioside catabolism and a range
of lysosomal storage diseases is well documented, this is the first report, to
our knowledge, of a disruption of ganglioside biosynthesis associated with human
disease.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1460
PMID: 15502825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
